THE Crafty Lady: OR THE Rival of Himself.

A Gallant Intreague.

Translated out of French into English by F. C. Ph. Gent.

Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Vize, next door but one to Pope's Head Ally, over
against the Royal Exchange, in Cornhil, 1683.

TO ALL FAIR, WITTY, BUT UNPROVIDED LADIES.
Ladies,
I Would believe to have discharged but one part of my Duty, if, after I have
showed the love I bear You, and how highly I concern my self for your interest
by furnishing You in my Translation of the Crafty-Lady, with the means of
revenging against Fortune, who so unjustly and blindly refused you her Favors;
I did not endeavor also to show the great respect and veneration I have for
Ye, by dedicating it to You, as a sacrifice due to your excellent and almost
Divine Parts. Give leave, then, fair Ladies, to Berenice to carry throughout
the English World, under the protection of your illustrious Name, those happy
Trophies, she got, by her Wit and Beauty, over that unjust and capricious
Goddess. Give her leave to go and undeceive men of that extravagant and
altogether unreasonable fancy, that parts both of wit and body are of little
significancy and value without riches. Indeed, before Gold and Silver came out
of the entrails of the Earth, Or, to say better, of Hell, real* and true merit
did make the worth of all Persons* Strength, Courage and Virtue were possessed
alone of the right of commending and preferring men to high Places, to Honors
and Dignities. And as for Women, that finest part of the World, their Beauty,
Breeding and Wit were an honorable portion to them, and opened them the gate
into the Temple of Fortune. But since these Tyrants have corrupted good
Manners, overthrown natural Order, and blinded humane Reason with their false
splendour, we have seen, with amazement, Vice, Deformity, and Dullness, which are
the most heinous Sins of Nature, advanced, courted, preferred; and Virtue, Wit
and Beauty, which are the most glorious and rich sparks of divine fire,
despised, abandoned, and left in the dregs of the people, as precious stones in
the dirt. Berenice, whom I propose you (witty Ladies) as an excellent pattern
and an infallible Guide, found out a rare way to set her self up above those
unjust prejudices of humane folly, against divine and natural right: I hope you
will follow her steps, and thus if, at the same time that she pleases you, she
may instruct you, and will serve your turn, I will account my self
advantageously rewarded for the time I have spent in dressing her up after the
English Fashion; and I shall Glory to have thereby deserved to bear the
Honorable Quality, Ladies, of your

Most humble, obedient and devoted Servant, Fr. Cl. Ph.

THE Crafty Lady: OR THE Rival of Himself.
THE Renowned City of Maestricht did but begin to enjoy the happiness of a
peace, wherewith Heaven ^ad blessed at last, and rewarded ^s heroical
achievements, when a ^ew Enemy, no less turbulent and ^^oublesome than the
former, be^^n to engage the bravest Officers of its Garrison into a pain^^ and
restless exercise. Love mo^^ haughty, more proud and insole^^ than ambition it
self, came in the attended with his ordinary retin^ of Tricks, Subtleties and
Intrigue^ he planted his Colors within (...) compass of those famous Walls, a^
for the better securing of his Co^^quest, seized on a great number generous
hearts, which he handled in such a manner, as (...) thought the fittest for the
mo^^ splendid show of his strength, a^ supreme power. That Tyrant ^^deed, does
not set up his Empi^^^ with so much noise, as Bellona a^ Mars do; but he is no
less dange^^ous and formidable for that, sin^^ through jealousy, disdains,
hatr^^ and dissimulation, he moves thousand Wheels, he manages thousand
Springs, from when come out Sorrow, Anger, despa^^ and sometimes death it self.
(...) ^ovel shall highly witness it, as ^eing the famous Stage, wherein (...)
less than a whole regiment will ^^ay their own parts, and serve for sport to
that cruel and capricious ^overeign.

A Cavalier whom Fortune and ^^avour had lifted up to the place (...) a Colonel
of Horse, dying, left ^^hind him Berenice his only Daugh^^r, a young, brisk,
handsome and ^^itty Maid, but provided with (...) other portion, but a noble
^^ood, and high Spirit, and a great ^^^pe of an alliance answerable to (...)
nobility of her birth. In the (...) time of her mourning, when (...) fair
complexion was like a Sun ^^^ining through a Cloud, many a ^entleman crowded by
her, to wipe (...) her tears. The late Colonel, for (...) weighty reasons, had
been ^^reamly unkind to so tender a ^^uty, strictly and absolutely for^^ding
her to receive visits, or countenance any way the vows (...) any Gallant,
keeping her in complete slavery within the Wa^^ of a House, or rather of a
Clo^ster: so that she no sooner saw he^ self set at liberty, by the death (...)
so cruel a Father, but she begu^ to mend what was amiss, and (...) open the
doors, not only of (...) House, but also of her wit to (...) honest companies,
making in the most refined conversations, an (...) vantagious and surprising
use (...) all Romances and other galla^^ Books, she had read over and ov^^
during the time of her long ca^^tivity. The end she aimed at, (...) to triumph
over all those of (...) Sex in the Country, by the ^^liteness and neatness of
her wi^^ to ensnare the heart of some one (...) the most eminent Gentlemen
amongst her Gallants, and so, (...) be obliged for her Fortune to no b^^dy but
herself. Now the ch^^^ ^ean she made use of for that, was to feign an extreme
sorrow, and affect in her carriage such a ^^nguor, as might easily convince
^^ny body, she was uncomfortable (...) the loss of her Father. She did with so
much grace and eloquence ^^stifie the reasonableness of her ^espair, and the
quickness of her ^epartees did so much amaze the ^ost witty and understanding
of her Courtiers, that they, before their ^^ming into the circle, did curiously
^^epare themselves, and desired (...) most learned and refined of ^^eir Friends
to help them in the ^^nviction of so enlightened and dex^^ous a Wit.

Gallantry being nourished and ^aintained into Maestricht only by ^e well-bred
Officers of the Gar^son, Berenice was courted by none (...) military men;
amongst which (...) certain Major, a witty man in^eed, but vain and proud, was
the first who earnestly and seriou^ly wooed her. As that Gentle man had an high
apprehension (...) his own merit, so his self-lo^^ made him easily believe he
wa^ amiable, and that amongst a^ hundred other Gallants, he would keep an
honorable distance, an^ get at last the better of them. O^ the other side, the
young Lady who had hitherto received no open declaration of love; showed
h^^^self sensible of these approaches although neither the Majors fortune, nor
his wit, good grace^ gallantry, or splendid maintenanc^ could prevail upon her
heart so far, (...) to engage it in his favor. Nay, ^^meer Captain of the same
Regimen^ who had not to the eyes of the world so many excellent parts (...) our
Major, had yet to those of B^renice, that precious, that charmi^^ but nameless,
I know not wha^ which makes the strongest in^agements, through whose
effica^ous influence, he dropped secret^^ into the depth of her Soul, and ^ade
himself the only and absolute ^uler of her tenderest inclinations. ^he bore,
indeed, to that Cavalier (...) true, sincere and passionate love; ^ut ambition
being no less the ty^^ant of her heart, than Cupidon, (...) could not, without
blushing, ^ast in her mind the management (...) an alliance, which she
conceived (...) be far under the degree and con^ition of her birth. The
misfortune was, that the Cavalier having (...) very modest opinion of himself,
and suspecting nothing of his be^^ng so passionately loved, did rather act the
comforter with her, than ^he lover, being careless enough about those external
ornaments which make commonly so great an ^mpression on the tender Sex; his
show and carriage were very mean, ^is retinue but little, and he put himself to
no charges, because being born of one of the most illustrious Families of his
Country, he was sparing his Estate, to carry it higher withal in a better
preferment he aspired to. On the contrary, the Major, whom some extraordinary
parts had made confident, joined to the comeliness o^ the body the luster of
great and sumptuous expenses; he was rich handsome, and settled in a good
employ; he had consequently all tha^ may engage a heart, and according to the
ordinary course of the world, was the most worthy o^ the sacrifice of
Berenice's liberty. But all these advantageous conditions proved to be of no
significancy to her, she felt no spark of true love for him, and she loved out
o^ a natural propensity her dear Captain, who in her judgment wanted nothing
but an higher degree t^ to be the worthy object of her vows.

Thus whilst Love was getting ground more and more in the heart of Berenice for
her truly beloved Lysandre, (such is the name of that fortunate Gentleman) our
Major was very earnest with her about getting a favorable declaration, growing
every day more forward to tell his mind, and fancying, that loves passion
increased as much in that insensible heart, as in his own; Nay, he came to such
a degree of familiarity, that he foolishly acquainted her with some secret
intrigues which some other kind Ladies had trusted to his supposed fidelity and
discretion; so that, through so simple and giddy a carriage, he discovered to
that refined Maid, the weakness of his Soul, making her conceive great hopes of
considerable things, she could get by him, and in effect, it proved not a
mistake, since through the indiscretion of that silly conceited wooer, she
surprised and fixed to her side the fickleness of fortune; all succeeded
according to her desires, and she got benefits far beyond her own expectation.
One day, after he had spent a whole afternoon in a private and pleasant
conversation with her, he took opportunity of the merry humor she was in, to
throw again at her feet both his heart and liberty, being in hope of a
favorable answer: but the crafty Lady not willing, either to put him in a
despair, or to engage herself further than was agreeable to her designs,
keeping still in a merry tune; one will think on it, says she with a jeering
manner, the enjoyment of a heart, that may love sincerely when it has no more
choice, is worth enough some troubles. Such a cold answer was able to satisfy
our Gallant of the little tendency of his Mistress toward him (for how true
and faithful may be that love which is not natural and true) but the great
opinion he had of himself did blind him so much that he was by no means
discountenanced. Nay, he made his court with more exactness than ever, growing
more troublesome and impatient than formerly: In fine, he desired her to take a
final and substantial resolution upon the matter. She who had little or nothing
of the ordinary frailty of her Sex, seeing there was no way to avoid answering
to so formal application, reparteed wittily, she was extremely sensible of his
love, ^ut that how great soever her reciprocal passion for him might be, yet
her being Daughter of a famous Colonel, which quality was almost her only
inheritance did forbid her to follow her own inclination, and yield to a
Gentleman inferior to the degree of her late father: that the place of
Lieutenant Colonel being void, he could easily attain to it, and then she would
stick no longer to reward and second his Vows.

This declaration cast into a strange perplexity of mind our Major, who had
several times made his utmost interest, but always in vain, to get that
preferment. He wanted no access to his Colonel, who was a man near fourscore
years of age, but who being grown gray-haired in the exercise of War, and
having got through a long experience, a deep discernment and a solid
apprehension of true courage, prudent conduct, and other warlike parts, did not
judge his favorite to be able enough to discharge worthily a place of so
important a trust. Nevertheless, he set a good face on a bad matter, and
replied cheerfully, That he was not very far off from that eminent degree,
there being but one step more to be made to it: but if so be her fire were
equal to his flame, she should not stop their common happiness on so small an
account, and for want of an external quality, which could neither increase nor
diminish his real and material merit. Berenice at that onset, stood firm upon a
noble pride, she obstinately bent herself to persuade him, she loved the Major,
and would marry the Lieutenant Colonel; which having repeated several times,
what reasons soever he could allege to move her, he perceived clearly, that
the taking in of such a Fortress was not a matter of one day, nor so easy a
work as he thought; but being gone so far, his love and courage did not permit
him to make retreat: he renews the assault with more vigor and fresh
arguments, sighs, cries, entreats, but is always served with the same answer,
so that giving himself wholly to sorrow, his hope was very near to yield to
despair, when the clear-sighted love of Berenice wisely advised her how to keep
the fool in awe and further her own interest, by the most exquisite and
ingenious trick, that was ever heard of in the whole Kingdom of Cupidon.

She on a sudden fell out of countenance, modesty shut up for a while her
mouth, she offered to speak some words, presently a secret bashfulness forbad
her speaking; holding down her eyes, she seemed to be willing to speak and be
silent at once: but all this was a mere fiction, that the curious Major would
offer a kind and honest violence to her hypocritical repugnancy, and force her
in a manner to open her most secret sentiments, Madam, says he, I see you
extremely thoughtful, I conceive your tongue is not loyal to your heart, no
doubt, he permits her to declare some things that she conceals, and which I
ought to be acquainted with; but if you will right me, I hope of your justice
you will deem me no less discreet than passionate a Lover: stick not to unfold
me your heart, and vex your self no more by keeping a secret that perhaps
cannot be long a mystery to me. Do you love another? let me know that happy
mortal, let me know that fortunate Rival. The vehement passion that made me
your slave, will give place to my respect, and although love does not at all
agree with a concurrent, yet I engage my faith, that I will approve of your
choice, even with the loss of my own life, if my Rival proves not altogether
unworthy of you. Pardon, amable Berenice, pardon, I cannot forbear to entreat
you against your self, and crave of you the opening of a thing, whose
declaration, perhaps, may cast to your virtue a blush, why do you conceal me so
long your heart, to me I say, who trust you mine own with so much forwardness
and candor? have I a rival? let me know him, and it is enough. Must I have a
rival? says he again, softly pushing the knee of Berenice. That fair seeing
her coxcomb just come to the point where she expected him, answered with a deep
sigh, Yes Sir, you have a Rival, but a Rival that can do you no harm; and who
may but little prejudice the possession you are aspiring to. The Major
withstood this storm with an apparent equality of mind, but some brisk motions
of impatience were a going to break out, and betray his superficial and
affected virtue, whe^^ Berenice suddenly rose up to mee^ a great Lady, that
came to pay he^ a ceremonious visit. Our Majo^ retired after the usual
civilities and as one may easily imagine, wa^ not very quiet by night, being
overbusy about the meaning of that Aenigme, that he had a Rival, but a Rival
who could do him no harm, and but little prejudice the enjoyment of his
happiness.

Some extraordinary occasions hindered him the next morning from waiting upon
his Mistress at her Toilett, as he was used to do, and he could not see her but
about night, although his curiosity made him dispatch his businesses with all
speed imaginable.

In the mean time, Berenice who had spent great part of the night in reading a
new Romance, being willing to repair that loss by sleeping some hours by day,
kept her Bed all the morning, having first bidden her waiting Woman to acquaint
her with the names of all those that should present themselves at the door,
before their admittance. Her Gallants in ordinary failed not to wait according
to custom, they were civilly dismissed with an honest, Madam is a little
indisposed. Lysandre the dearly beloved Captain, and sure, the least
troublesome of all, comes about ten a Clock; notice of his coming is given to
Berenice, by whose order he is admitted to the Bed side it self his duty was
to furnish a complement, which he did in proper, but ordinary expressions; yet
they were as many charms to the enchanted Lady (so true it is that a beloved
one pleases any way) some tender thanks paid his civility, and then not a
word, because the Captain, being more serious than gallant, was afraid, too
much speech would perhaps increase Berenices distemper, when she at last broke
off this dull silence with a sigh, that caused Lysandre to ask her whether she
felt any new pain: whereupon she begun to speak, and with a soft and
languishing voice. Sir, says she, why did not Heaven enrich you with benefits
of Fortune answerable to your merit? or else, why did not he make me less proud
and ambitious? alas! I would not sigh now, and my cure should be as quick as
certain: I love you, dear Captain, added she, shedding abundance of tears; if
it be a weakness to own it, the present posture of my affairs excuses me, and
being bereft of the protection of my House as I am, both prudence and necessity
stands to justify the choice I make of a man, that will serve me for a Father,
as well as for a Husband: Yes, I say again, I love you as much for your
modesty, as I hate for their sickleness an hundred others, who dare court me
upon the mere account of Fortune: but if that blind Goddess has so liberally
and with so little discernment favored with her gifts those unworthy fellows;
she will perhaps, sometime do right to Virtue* do not despair. She blushed after
so free a declaration, and sunk briskly into the Bed, the more to persuade
Lysandre, that she was in earnest; she held her peace then, giving place to the
answer of her favorite, who expressed himself after this manner: Could I be
satisfied, Madam, that your discourse is not a pretty trick put upon me for a
trial or a sport, I would go out of a respectful indifference and borrow the
most efficacious and exquisite words of eloquence, to mark you the greatness of
my joy and gratitude: but the certain knowledge I have of all those excellent
parts, wherewith you are endowed, even to admiration; as well as my
consciousness, that in this so numerous Garrison, there is no Cavilier but
surpasses me in merit and value, makes me be silent, not refusing to give
matter to your divertisement, if so be, it could contribute something to the
recovering of a health so dear and so precious to all the World. Lysandre who
had always looked upon her as a proud and ambitious Maid, being eyewitness of
that indifference, wherewith she had received the vows of the most eminent
Officers in the Town, did not flatter himself to such a point, as to fancy,
that before eyes so pierceing, and so much capable to try qualifications and
endowments, he had merit enough to deserve so obliging a preference. Therefore
he pursued as in a jeering manner: Madam, had I temerity and blindness enough
to ground my self upon your charming Speech, I could presently lay open to you
all that is able to engage a heart, that seems already moved; as proud as a
Gascon or a Scotchman, but indeed more true than any of them, I would entertain
you with the greatness and splendour of my Family, I would ^ire your patience
with the History of my Ancestors achievements, both in War and Peace; I would
swear by all the powers of Heaven and Hell, that my noble blood is at least
three hundred years old. You could have in a minute the particulars of all the
notable passages of my own life, wherein you would confess that I never failed
to fortune, but she failed me, and turned against me; you should learn in how
many famous Sieges I have got glory, and reaped Laurels. I would come to that
height of impudence as to offend your modesty by discovering you my wounds: Nay
(...) perhaps in a pedantick humor, I could reckon you, amongst other
improvements and fruits of my wit, that (...) possess five tongues, of which
Latin and Greek are those I speak best; but all this show being made by an
obscur^ man, that shines so little, and make now so small a figure in the World
would prove altogether insignificant and fitter to make me ridiculous tha^
commendable to you. I know -- he was yet speaking, when Berenice being able no
longer to forbear laugh^ng, took opportunity of his merriment to interrupt him,
how! Sir, cried she, you can speak Latin, and dare complain against Fortune; I
have always been told, that Latinism is an infallible spring of goods to them
that attain to it; could not you drop handsomely into a College, and get a
fellowship? He fell himself a laughing heartily. Yes indeed, continued she, a
Cap on your Head, and a Rod in your Hand would fit you marvelously well, you, I
say, whom nature has enriched with a severe countenance, so much gravity and
seriousness. He thought himself engaged ^o nourish the sport, and back the
^est: so alleging the reasons that might take him from so glorious a design,
he said, He was endowed with so tender and mild a nature, that he could never
use the necessary rigor in a Schoolmasters place; that he was too much afraid
to see himself forced to get tears out of tender and innocent eyes. Now if I
assure you, said she, that there is no man in the world, who causes such
abundance of tears to be shed, as you, what will you think, Sir, of that
tenderness and mildness of nature you so confidently boast of? If you could
prove it, reparteed Lysandre, I would take up arms against my humor, put it to
a strict trial, condemn it as an inconstant, and force it by all means to
recover its former sensibility. Well, says she, arm then against it, go on
straight way and fight it, let your attendance be more assiduous, that I may
judge of your amendment, be you from henceforth more neat and curious in
apparel, and be persuaded that one loves you; this very night take so close
measures that you may immediately succeed to a troublesome fellow that leaves
me very late, and prepare seriously to open me the true ^entiments of your
heart about that which my sincerity has opened to you. He rose, upon that,
with his mind ^o prepossessed and flattered with (...) sweet Idea, that he
forgot to ^ake his congy, not daring perhaps ^and the brightness of so charming
^aids eyes which looked him out to ^he very chamber door.

Our Cavalier seeing himself so ^navoidably engaged to make a formal and
positive declaration to a ^erson whose designs were altogether unknown to him,
was mighty ^neasy, his trouble not permitting him to go home straightway, lest
he should meet there with a company that might interrupt his thoughts, ^e ran
to the Rampart which he walked twice round about with such (...) wandering of
mind, that his very ^riends mistook him. An Officer, who was upon duty at
Boldukes ^ate, stopped him on a sudden, and questioned him about the matter
tha^ could make him so dull and melancholic, but not being able to ge^ a word
out of his mouth, he said jestingly, Upon my word, Friend^ you are caught,
some fair eye smo^^ you, be ye aware of being listed among^ those perplexed
Lovers that go every day and talk flourished nonsense to fa^^ Berenice: Faith,
they say, she looks o^ you with a very kind eye, and that you perceived it a
great while ago, but what what one may think on it? should there be any cooling
in her flame, (...) did any humor of hers cast you into the ugly temper? At so
troublesome an^ unlucky questions Lysandre reparted nothing else, but that a
sad accide^^ concerning private affairs had be ^^faln him, which he was
trouble^ for, and called mere trifles all the he said about the design of his
(...) to the Colonels daughter; the^ friendly touching the Officers ha^^ he
went on in his way renewin^ his interrupted meditation. But whiles he is
walking at a good rate, and gets out of our sight, let us come back into
Berenices chamber, and hear how eloquently the Major exaggerates his passion.

This pretended favorite gave attendance upon her about night. He met there a
full and noble company, which purposely he tired with a world of discourses
that smelt nothing at all of a civil and compleasant Gentleman: he affected to
stay the last, and after the Company was out, made a motion concerning that
scurvy matter, that laid so heavy upon his heart, that he had a Rival, but was
so unfortunate as to not know, who. Berenice who was out of measures with him,
because he himself did very freely deal with her, told him as before; He had,
indeed, a Rival, but such a one, as should by no means hurt him, and that it
would be always in his power to get, not only the possession he so passionately
aimed at, but also a great fortune withal. Our Major not being able to stay any
longer, entreated her, one knee upon the ground, to pull off the vail of so
important a Mystery. She getting him up again with a kind manner led him along
with her to the bottom of an Alcove, whose obscurity might do extremely well
for the shadowing of that privacy, wherewith she had a mind to entertain a
while the poor cousened Gallant. This extraordinary carriage put him in a great
hope o^ some private favor, though the foo^ was never so far off in all his
life. He sits down by her, the closest he could, being unwilling to lose a word
of the precious speech of his Mistress, who in the mean time affected to speak
low, that he might conceive how repugnantly she explained her self upon the
matter* Heaven! what is not a witty and amorous woman capable to do (...) She
told him, She knows away how to get themselves both happy for ever, but that
modesty, which is the natural portion of her Sex, would forbid her to tell it,
yet she could not be silent without missing a fair opportunity to serve him,
and without betraying her own self-interest. This feigned perplexity which the
Major believed real and true, inflamed him more and more, and fed his curiosity
with a new store of impatience, he prays, entreats, urges, instanceth, and
swears so many oaths, he would be secret in case the intreague that was to be
trust'd him, should come to miscarry, that she thought no more seasonable to
dissemble; fearing besides, that any longer delay might perhaps quite break her
measures, and bring the whole contrivance to nothing. Sir, says she; I must
confess it, I am too free, but no matter; they must try fortune; that pretend
to her favors. I trust you such a secret, as shall discredit me for ever, if
you prove not a religious keeper of your Oath. Since heaven, who, no doubt,
appointed us one for the other, got me acquainted with you, I felt my heart so
lively smitten that from the insensiblity he had hitherto been in to love, he
grew tender on a sudden: that extraordinary tenderness is much increased and
strengthened through our mutual Society, and is come now to such a degree, as
not to permit me to look upon any other object in the world but ye. You are
enriched with all those parts that may inchant a heart and disarm the most
severe Ladies; So it is a piece of justice to me to submit to that Union which
heaven prescribed. But as on one side I would be extremely sorry, that
afterward you might have the least cause to reproach me the meanness of my
fortune; and as on the other I do ardently desire to see you set up in a place
in a manner answerable to your worth, here is that which I contrive both for
the getting of the one, and the avoiding of the other: You must, dear Major,
play for a while the Rival of your self, by using in my behalf all the
influence you may have upon your Colonels inclinations, to get me shortly
married with him. You know well enough how old he is, you presume of his
strength, and may easily conceive, he will not go far off. In the mean time I Will
bend all the powers of my wit, to rule the old man; so the Colonels-lieutnancy
that is now vacant, attends you surely, as well, as all the others benefits
wherewith he will gratify both my youth and my birth. It Is true, indeed,
sweet-Lady, interrupted here the Major, that the Colonel is old, that I have a
great power upon him; but who shall warrant me, that his caresses, his nights
efforts, pardon the freedom of this word, will bring him to the grave? Nay,
your company may revive him. It is rare to see people of ^usty and strong
complexion outlive an age. This possibility being granted, what will become of
our projects? what will become of your flourishing youth? what our mutual
flames will end to? and who shall warrant it, that I may live among so many
Causes of mortal sorrows, wherein I shall see my self overwhelmed? I would
willingly undertake to serve you in this occasion, but, indeed, the
Colonel-lieutenancy, whose hope ought to flatter me, has no charms enough to
make me look with a cold indifference on the loss of Berenice. Yet, my dear,
reparteed she briskly, you must resolve to do me that important service, which
I will not fail to acknowledge and return in due time. It is better for ye to
enjoy in hope by obliging me, than to run the hazard of an eternal privation,
by refusing to second me in an affair wherein our common interest is the only
end, I aim at. Do not balance all your objections, how reasonable and strong
soever they may appear to your eyes, will be weak and groundless to mine. Pray,
forbear to trouble me with reasons that I cannot hear without indignation, seal
up to me your love and zeal with the sacrifice of your own sentiments, and be
sure, you shall not oblige an ungrateful woman. This bit seemed to the Major to
be of a very hard digestion; yet he must either swallow it, or fall down from
the favor of one, which he would not have disobliged for all the world. What?
mumbled he low, but loud enough to be taken up by Berenice, To act the Rival of
my self, was this ever heard of? Or, was ever any man brought to so cruel a
destiny? Then, lifting up his voice, he spoke after this manner. Being, dear
Lady, you are so firmly wedded to your opinion, and will not in the least remit
of the necessity you set me in, to become in a manner my own hangman by playing
my self Rival, I do the more willingly yield to that fatal law of death, you
impose upon me, because, in effect after I have lost you; I cannot but languish
and pine away, being delivered up to troubles and despairs far more cruel than
the very death it self. Yes, you shall be obeyed, unmercifull Lady, I will
blind my self to serve you, and use my utmost power to secure and hasten that
high match your Ambition aims to. But as you have required my Oath, so I hope
you cannot but give me yours. To which the crafty Lady having reparteed, she
would; he made her swear, she would be as good as her word, as soon as Heaven,
who seemed to have ordained them one for the other, should open the way to
their happy marriage. Berenice did not account her conscience to be thereby
very much concerned. Love, who is none of the most pious Gods, is neither none
of the most faithful, and it seems, Antiquity did, to no other purpose, set a
band on his eyes, but to allow him a full liberty to mistake. Our Major
promised, he should the very next morning go and try the Colonels dying
inclinations, that if in the old man could but a little spark be found, he
would kindle it into a fire, and fail not, over all, to speak of Berenice
according to that high opinion, he had conceived of her parts, and give her an
exact account of his conduct; then he kissed her hand, which privacy she did
willingly allow him to refresh his heart, and sweeten his sorrow.

This conversation having endured above three hours at candlelight, one may
conceive how great was the impatience of Lysandre who had waited so long. It Is
true, he could be in some manner comforted by the pastime he had to hear all
through a door lying behind the Tapestry, and going in a chamber next the
Alcove, wherein they had betaken themselves; however, certain it is, what he
heard, surprised him strangely, and perplexed him as much as that, Berenice
told him the morning he came resolved to answer ambiguously about the
declaration he was engaged to by her, but the last things he heard through the
door did so much confound him, that his consternation was visible at the very
first moment he opened his mouth to speak. Nevertheless, through the stream of
an indifferent conversation, he took by degrees his Spirits again, and thought
fit to dissemble that he knew any thing of the Secret discourse in the Alcove.
Now, because Berenice's speech concerning her love for him did as much smell,
in his judgment, of a Sport, as of a truth, he took as a pastime to answer
gallantly gallant propositions: which he did after this manner. Could I fear,
Madam, you would dislike my freedom, I should never get loose so far out of the
bonds of respect and duty, as to publish, I love you; but being, that both the
strength and evenness of your wit are known to me, and that I have received of
you an express command to speak without disguise, I will not balance to tell ye
again, I love you; if it be without hope, God knows: but this I may say, my
self-love does not blind me so much as to fill my heart with hope. There would
be a great folly to speak more and spend time upon ridiculous and chimerical
pretensions. What? what do you call chimerical pretensions, replied Berenice? Am
not I worth enough your wooing? Or is my quality so low under yours, that I
must banish all hopes out of my heart? No, dear Lady, answered Lysandre, I do
not mean it so. It is I whose hope should be vain and groundless. It is I who
might deserve to be turned into ridicule, if I had the temerity to aspire to
such a noble alliance. This humble apprehension ye have of your self, added
she, is a strong argument of your merit. It makes me conceive, that I cannot but
be very happy under the Government of a man that makes so great an account of
me, but pray is there nothing else but modesty that moves you to speak so? Or
is it not, you love so much your liberty, that you would not exchange it to
that of a maid? By no means, pursued he; liberty, indeed, is a precious Jewel,
but it will be always both pleasant and glorious to Lysandre, to make a
sacrifice of it to a Lady infinitely handsome and reasonable: this last part is
rarer than the former, and I may say, without flattery, that amongst all those
of your Sex, I am acquainted with, I know none but you, that possesses
eminently these two excellent and almost divine qualities. You are extremely
obliging, said she, if I trust a man's word, there will be none in the Town, but
me that deserves the sacrifice of your heart. So it is, reparteed Lysandre,
there is none but you, that may rob me of it, and there is none also but you,
to whom I durst venture to proffer it. Would ye engage it heartily, dear
Lysandre? Yes divine Creature, if I could believe you would accept of it. But,
Lysandre, if you chance to trust it to a capricious one, you will have time enough
to repent your choice. If you be that capricious one, I am ready to adore your
caprices. Well, Lysandre, says Berenice, since I see you so firmly resolved to
love me, what humor soever I may have, I resolve to love ye for ever as ye
are; and, plainly to satisfy your judgment that I am in earnest, I must needs
open you the merry trick I am now about, by turning a man, who presumes I love
him, into the very Rival of his ownself, and engaging him to serve both you and
me against his own will and interest. Upon that she acquainted him at large
with the love of the Major, the means she was using to rid her self of the
coxcomb, and under what colors, pretensions and hopes she had persuaded him to
get her in the Colonels affection. You, and I, dear Lysandre, says she, which
both nature and birth have destined to an higher and better figure than that we
are now in, cannot more dexterously and wisely set up our fortune, than by
keeping and nourishing secretly for a while our mutual flames, until you be
further advanced in the world; and I better provided of goods; I look upon my
match with the Colonel as a business almost over, I shall then so cunningly
handle the good old man's brain, that his Lieutenancy now vacant cannot miss to
fall upon ye. A man of so many scores of age, whom warlike labors have
undermined, shall not live long. The vain hope of an heir will move him to
gratify me with his estate. He is extremely at ease; so we shall through this
superficial Union, get what to live happily, pleasantly and splendidly with
all. The Major has much credit upon the Decrepit's mind, as he flatters
himself with the hope of enjoying me, so he is disposed to neglect nothing that
may carry on the business, he shall to morrow night give me an account of the
effect of his first essays, which ye will be presently acquainted with. Now,
dear Lysandre, after such an intimate confidence, could ye keep any longer
within your heart any mistrust injurious to my sincerity, and doubt still that
I love you? Confess it (...) should not ye be the most unjust of men, if
hereafter you were not as open to me as I am ingenuous to you; what do ye
answer, dear Captain? are ye sensible of so tender a declaration? Is there any
thing in my project, you may be offended at? This happy and beloved lover took
up here the speech, and softly shaking his head, spoke so: I! dear Lady, I
could find any faults in your projects! Nay, if I did not approve of them as
just and reasonable, I would deem my self to be the most unjust and
unreasonable man in the world. All that ye have contrived pleases me, and
there is nothing in my power, but I would engage heartily, to bring to an happy
success a purpose that cannot be but extremely agreeable and advantageous to me.
But, being, your ingenuity awakes mine, I must needs swear you, charming
Goddess, that since the first moment I saw you, I lost my freedom, that my
heart yielded to the baits of your incomparable beauty, and that the coldness
you have remarked (...) carriage, came not out of indifference, but, indeed,
out of a deep sense and respectful apprehension of that heap of the most
excellent parts wherewith Heaven has been pleased to adorn you. It goes with
a strong passion of love, as with an extraordinary sorrow. An ancient says
wisely that little pains speak, but great sorrows are dumb. My love kept his
peace in your presence, because being exceeding vehement, he might never have
been able to express himself in that measure and after that manner, he was
resented with; and if now he breaks out it is not so much to publish his excess,
as to spend himself through a thousand thanks for the choice ye made of a man
so little qualified. You did just now, obliging Divinity, work a miracle; you
gave again the use of his tongue to a man who had lost it, but in that I may
say, you did me justice, since you gave me again what your divine perfections
had long before taken away from me. Berenice was very quietly hearing Lysandre,
and taking a great pleasure in his flourish, he nevertheless should have been
glad to be interrupted, but getting no answer he rose up as fearing lest his
longer stay should be troublesome to her, and took his leave after he had
entreated her never to belly her self, and to go on steadfastly in the carrying
on and managing of their plot. Whereupon Berenice having assured him of an
eternal and unshaken constancy, he retired very well satisfied of his destiny.

All this while our presumptuous Major grown up with the new quality of his
self-rival stands in a secret and intimate conference with the Colonel, there
unfolding and setting all the sails of his eloquence to move him, and cunningly
handling the most pathetical reasons to kindle again his almost dead fires, and
get him up in love, he represents unto him that, to pass away his time in so
sad and fretful solitariness, is rather to languish than to live; that all the
world admires why, having so great an estate, he looks not for the last and
sweetest comforts of this life in the society of some amable person; that what
service soever he may receive of a considerable number of attendants, yet such
a service, being interest'd, ought not to be compared with the tender cares he
might expect from a wife that would serve him out of inclination; that the
example of David is a precedent for him, and seoures his reputation against
biting tongues, in case he will join with some young woman; and in fine, that
none but indiscreet and foolish folks should be thereby scandalized, and laugh
sillily at his revived flames. Love, who seeks for nothing so forwardly as for
the perpetuating of himself and the improving of his Empire, takes part with
the Major, drops in the old man's heart, and causes him to answer with a smile:
That he was apt enough to follow his counsel, if he could meet with an object
worthy ones while, that long ago he had a great propensity that way, if his
continual diseases had permitted him to take a turn in Holland or Flanders;
because to his apprehension, Maestrich was so little furnished with exquisite
beauties, that he knew there not one which might awake his passion: That,
indeed, the several Nations, especially the English and French, had brought up
some Gallantry in the town, that there could be found some well bred and witty
creatures, but they were, for the most part, withered and liable to suspicion.
Ah, Sir, resumes the Major, must it be, that some braces of foolish and giddy
Women set shame on the forehead of a great many innocent? I confess, There is
scarce in all Europe a town that affords so little store of Beauties as
Meastrich, but yet it is not so absolutely unprovided with, but there may be
some one that will contend with the very English and Dutch Beauties themselves.
They are then Closet-pieces, pursued the old fellow; They dare not appear in
public, for fear of becoming too common; they are afraid of the Sun-burning;
or it may be, they scruple to shame the rest of those of their Sex. Prithee
Major give me an instance, show me some fair of that Character; thou have
described I know, there is no place so close, no house or family so severe, but
thou may get in a free access by thy fair humor and ingageing manners.
There, no doubt, thou saw some extraordinary merit; Oblige me so much, as to
tell me what thou did discover there, that may deserve the engagement of a
noble Soul. No need, Sir, replied the Major, to go so far, will ye know a maid
that deserves your love? Cast but your eyes upon Mistress, Berenice, that
worthy heiress of the great Virtues of your late friend the Colonel. This young
Maid is eminently endowed with the most excellent graces of Body and Soul, she
is the wonder of her age, her Virtue, which stands any trial, get's her respect
from the most licentious, and no man in the world can boast of the least favor
of hers. That Maid, reparteed the Colonel, has, indeed, all the parts, you
said I knew her, when very young, and am better satisfied than any other of her
excellent and curious breeding. But I can hardly believe show would sacrifice
so flourishing a youth to so many loathsome infirmities of a man of my age, and
prefer those small advantages, she may expect by her alliance with an old and
almost overus'd Soldier, before all the pleasures that attend her by marrying
some lusty and brisk young Gentleman. Could I hope, dear, Major, that charming
Maid would give ear to any terms, through your mediation, I would be ready to
do any thing in her behalf, and to acknowledge the good office, I should have
received of you in that occasion. But how to blot out of her mind the sweet
Ideas of so many complete young Cavaliers who court her assiduously, and how to
trace in, in their room the image of an old man no less troublesome than unable
to breed Love? Sir, Sir, replied the Major, I pass my word confidently, that
Mistress Berenice is none of those fickle and volatile Maids, which a suit of
cloth well set, a colored Ribban, a mingled Plumet, or a flourish, gently
uttered out, may entice, she has a refined taste, and I am enough acquainted
with her, to assure you, she will wisely prefer the solid benefits of your
alliance before the false brightness of all those Adonis, by whom she is every
day besieged. Give me but your word, that you love her, and let me alone for
the rest. I swear it Sir, said the Old man, but, to come about my design, what
am I able to do? my Gout gives me no truce, I cannot pay her a visit. So I am
out of all means to assure her of my love. No matter, answered the Major, I
will govern her mind so dexterously, that she shall wait upon you to the very
corner of your chimney; or else, if you think it more convenient to invite her
your self, write but a letter capable to make some impression, and next it will
be my ^art and business to help it with the most favorable commentary, I can.
Forget not to feign, you thought upon her a great while ago, and that you have
things of moment to acquaint her withal. The old man likes the proposal, calls
for pen and ink, and draws down himself the following lines.

Madam,
HAd my feet been as free as my hands, I had not failed to go and mingle my
tears with those, you have shed upon the death of your late Father my intimate
and unparallele^ Friend; but although I should have been able to mistrust your
resignation to the orders of Heaven, and believ^ you do need some comfort in so
great a loss, yet I never had been capabl^ to go and proffer it to you, being
limited as I am by my infirmities within the compass of a chamber. I intrea^
you to make violence to your modesty by liking that I send you my Coach; (...)
have had formerly with the late Co^lonel your Father many intimate bon^ of
friendship, you shall not be sorry (...) know them. Master Major will (...) you
the rest, and how much I am your servant.

The Major charged with this Letter went out presently to Berenice's lodgings;
he had no sooner paid her the usual duties, but, lifting up his voice as in a
transport of joy, he told her: Dear Lady, you have carried it, you have got
all, and it will be long of none but you, that you do not enjoy* read this
note, it confirms what I say. Berenice showed a great deal of gratitude to the
Major and said, that by obliging her, he had served himself, and with sparkling
eyes, witnesses of her joy, she kissed and read the Letter over and over* She
thought not fit to answer the note by another; had not her own interest moved
her to wait upon the Colonel, the deference and respect due to a man of that
quality, and who had been so great a friend with her own Father, could not but
persuade her to pay him that civility; Therefore she desired the Major to
acquaint his Colonel from her with an entire submission to his commands, and
that, at his best opportunity she would accept of his Coach. Our self-Rival
who, by a secret and almost prophetical motion, did as much fear the happy
success of this affair, as its miscarriage, stood a while in suspense before he
answered, looking earnestly upon the crafty Ladies eyes, which she set down by
modesty; and then he told her: Perhaps, Madam, I act in this play a strange
person, God forbid, it should prove at last against my self: whereupon Berenice
replied with a counterfeit anger: Pray, Sir ^rid your self of a thought so
prejudici^^ to your peace, and so injurous to (...) faith, lose no time, put an
end (...) your enterprise, and trust me for your happiness.

Thus the unfortunate Major thought best to venture all, to win all, he goes
straightway to the Colonel, acquaints him with the success of his negotiation,
and he had no sooner turned his back, but Lysandre took his place, and in a
familiar discourse with his Mistress knew all the transactions between her and
the old Man. They were in the heat of so delightful a conference, when the
Major arrived in the Colonels Coach and knocked at the door, she had no more
time than needed, to get behind the hangings her dear Lysandre, who not being
able to forbear coughing, gave birth to the suspicions and jealousy of the
Major; yet he was pleased for that time to dissemble and give the lie to his
ears; he took his pretended Mistress by the hand, led her to the Coach, and
from her house to the Colonels. Bashfulness which is so natural to the fair
Sex* painted upon Berenice cheeks at the moment of her introduction into the
Chamber, that precious vermillion, which contributes so much to the
imbellishment of beauty: the old man made all imaginable efforts to stand up
right and go to meet her; after sitting down at fire, it was first handsomely
complemented on both sides; the discourse fell next upon the late Colonels
death, whereupon Berenice paid an abundant duty of tears and sighs. The Major
fearing it would be a hard matter to pass from an extreme sadness to that
mirth, which ought to prepare them to the opening and receiving joyful
propositions, broke seasonably their discourse by rising up with precipitation,
and feigning to have now an appointment at the Governors Palace. It was of his
prudence to set so the old man in measures and give him opportunity to speak
alone; he took then his leave for an hour or two, which he spent in the next
gallery amongst the most extravagant fancies that jealousy can afford in such
circumstances: after his being retired, our old man drew with much ado his
elbow-chair near that of Berenice, changed his Screen to hers and spoke after
this manner: Madam, the Language of a man of my age is a great deal different
from that of a person which but begins to live: A young Wooer that would make
you his declaration of love, should use chosen terms, and should not venture to
entertain you with the discourse of his passion, before having, through a long
acquaintance, got some favorable prejudice for his design; but a man who
contends with death, ought to speak more freely, because he speaks with more
sincerity. My life has had, as well as that of others, its ages and its
language; It is come now to that point, wherein a man may speak with security.
My lord your Father was the best of my Friends, and to my judgment I cannot bear
any better witness to that eternal friendship, we swore one another, than by
making you heiress of the remembrance, wherewith I do honor his memory. All
that I possess in this world is altogether insignificant to revive his ashes,
but, sweet Lady, if you would accept of my alliance, then I might boast of
having tried all possible ways to revive him. This open declaration perhaps
surpriseth you, but I may circumstance it with so many advantageous conditions,
that, far from giving you any just offense, it is most capable to convince a
Maid, as witty and judicious as ye are. You know well enough, Dear Child, that
you can but hardly, by the inconsiderable estate my Lord left ye, get a fortune
that may answer your birth and the greatness of your heart. Men now adays do
little value birth and wit without riches, and we should call back again the
time of our old Romances Hero's, to ground upon beauty alone. Heaven that
heaped in your person both the graces of the body, the parts of the wit, and
the glory of a noble extraction, refused you the benefits of fortune, whose
privation, although indeed they are by themselves contemptible and despicable,
is nevertheless accounted, in this blind and unjust age, the greatest of all
imperfections. The respect I bear to the memory of our illustrious Dead, and
the tenderness, I have conceived for your amable Person in particular, caused
me a hundred times to reflect upon your fate with tears in my eyes. I have
lifted up my self above my age; forgot its coldness, and thought having no
heirs and being so near my grave, I could seal up and consummate all your
excellent parts by adding to them the last prerogative, you want for. If you
yield to my desires, all that I possess is yours; ye see, I am old, sickly,
subject to such infirmities, as would never permit me to live long. Now, Dear
Mistress, if your heart pleads for my happiness, pray make have to declare it,
as many minutes you delay to give you to me will be as many halfs of an happy
life, you rob me of. I confess, a conjugal union with some young Gentleman of
your age should be long weighed in the scale of wisdom, and would require a
great many reflections before coming to a final agreement; but that which I
proffer you, being but for a while, requires not so much consideration. Well,
Madam, urged now the old man, how do you like my motion? What do you think on it,
sweet Lady? That it is both honorable and advantageous to me, said Berenice
with a modest smile: without so much ado, Sir, I give my consent, I ow too much
to your bounty, to refuse you any thing, but do me the favor to believe, I act
in this affair less by interest than gratitude. Yes, Sir, I right both you and
me, when I sacrifice my liberty and my cares to a person I am so far engaged
to, through so many and so ancient obligations, you shall be obeyed as soon as
you please; a note from your hand will call me at any time to my duty; but I
would be glad, our business should make no noise abroad, and that I were sooner
honored with the quality of your wife, than the Town, or your very servants
might know it. This sweet consent being so delivered up, the old man put forth
his hand, took that of Berenice; and then they swore one another an inviolable
and everlasting fidelity; whereupon the Major coming into the Chamber, ended
their charming conversation. The Colonel bids him to sit down, fends the
footman back, and addressing to the Major, tells him merrily: Could ye believe
it, Sir, that a man as heavy as I am, might run so far in so little while?
Could ye be persuaded, I have stormed in an hour the finest and strongest place
in this country, and that this amable Child, pointing to Berenice, is now mine?
Yes, why not, replied the Major, a man that grew old in the wars as ye did,
does not he know all engines, tricks and stratagems whereby places are taken
in? and as for that you call Madam Berenice yours, could there be found in all
the world a person that deserves better your adoption? Say rather, my self,
resumed the Colonel, since I gave my self wholly to her, and am no more mine.
How Sir, pursued the Major! is it possible? What betrothed so soon, that is to
go very fast indeed, that is to dispatch matters pretty well. Two Souls born
one for the other, interrupted pleasantly Berenice, knit together at the first
approach, and their union is so natural, nay so necessary, that it must be made
in spite of all contrary efforts, and it passes by all sorts of
considerations soever. I bless God, Madam, said the Major, that he has been
pleased to give his hand to the execution of a match, which he had decreed from
all eternity, and I will prove none of the less zealous to honor with feasts
and pieces of Gallantry your illustrious Alliance. The Colonel thanked his
Major for his kindness and civility, trusted into his hand the handsome Bride,
to carry her back; fearing, if he should keep her the whole day according to
the motion of his heart, some body might have occasion to suspect something
through so long an absence. The company rose up: Madam Berenice proffered a kiss
to her old sensible, who staid half a quarter of an hour glued upon her cheeks,
even to the very shedding of tears out of joy. I leave you to think whether our
unfortunate Self-Rival bore this action very patiently in his heart; he, I say,
who reckoned all the kisses, the old man did give to Berenice, and looked upon
them, as, as many thefts of his own goods; but being of his moderation and
policy to dissemble, he played fairly the part of a Paranymph, stopping up the
sentiments of a desperate lover, he led my Lady to the Coach, and attended her
to her lodging, where he had not time to enjoy the pleasure of a long
conversation, because the Colonel, either already grown jealous, or impatient
to get all things in order against the next day, had desired him to return as
soon as he could; taking his leave of the Lady, he offered to kiss her hand as
he was used to do, but she refused him that favor with a gentle pride;
whereupon he could not forbear to tell her: What? Madam, I did presume, my
services ought to make me bolder, and you more private; but it proves now quite
contrary, you refuse that to day by contempt, which you granted me yesterday by
inclination; have you a mind to justify the sentence that says, humors change
manners: or am I guilty of any fault that may deserve the privation of your
esteem? By no means, Sir, answered Berenice, if I deny you to day, what I
granted yesterday, it is out of justice, not of any resentment. I could not,
without crime (since ingratitude is one) forget the great benefits I received
of your zeal, but could I neither, without injustice, dispose of a good that is
no more mine; you know to whom I belong; When heaven has put anend to the
work; whose happy consummation I am so greedy of, then I will prove as much
faithful to you, as I am now to him, which the same heaven has set over me for
some while. So judicious and reasonable an answer ought to satisfy and calm
again the most peevish of men; yet the Major could not like it, because he had
foolishly fancied, this alliance should serve but as a shadow to his pleasures,
he made to himself a great violence to stop his humor, and coldly took his
leave of Berenice; but as soon as he had stepped into the Coach, he gave himself
over as a prey to the most terrible trouble of mind that can be imagined, he
bids the Coachman to drive twice round about the town. The coach was very well
stuffed with cotton, nevertheless he finds himself uneasy within. One while he
leans on his elbow at the right, another, at the left hand; puts now his hat on
his knee, then on his his head; looks earnestly on the boot, yet, being there
saluted by many, he saluted none again. It Is impossible to tell how several and
extravagant postures he puts himself upon, till at last he arrives at his
Rivals house, where he calls back all that he can of his former tranquillity,
but, alas, in vain: as far as the old man could see him, he cried out merrily,
Well, Sir, what is my pretty Lady now a doing? What business was she about,
when you left her? He heard not a word of that; being come nearer, the Colonel
reiterates the same question, which he hears with the same attention. So
strange a wandering of thoughts surprised the old man, who for the third time,
went on in his former motion; but at that, our Lover quite out of countenance
answered, Yes, Sir, yes; which as you may judge, was a very extravagant
repartee: at first the Colonel was apt to believe his Major had been engaged in
some excessive drinking, but reflecting upon the little while, there was since
he had left him, and seeing besides, he looked not at all as a fuddled man, he
conceived so ill an opinion of this minister of his love, that he could never
since find in his heart to look upon him with a good eye; he played
nevertheless fair to him, invited him to supper, and through the several
discourses, they had together, he perceived clearly, he was not at all
satisfied of Berenice.

Lysandre who was always busy about some cloth, which he did never buy, in a
Drapers shop next to his dear Ladies lodging, observed from thence all the
Majors steps, and what time he was either going in or coming out of the house,
he spyed that day above three hours, and after he had at last seen him step in
to the Coach, he immediately flew to Berenice, which allowed him to savor an
hundred kisses upon her sweet lips with as much privacy, as with pride she
refused to the Major a simple kiss of her hand. She summed up to him all that
came to pass in the interview with the old man; next they both renewed their
mutual protestations of an eternal love, and then the wise Lady for some just
reasons dismissed him with an unvaluable kiss, strickly forbidding, him to wait
any more upon her in that house, lest his visits might perhaps prejudice his
fortune; and advising him further to court more assiduously the Colonel, about
whom she would not fail to serve him to her utmost power. S^arce was he out of
his Mistresses presence, but there came in the Colonels Chamber-Gentleman, who
had order to look what persons should be with Berenice, and to desire her from
his Master, to get herself ready against the next morning by nine a clock for
an extraordinary breakfast.

In effect about that time, after the Majors arrival into the Colonels house,
the Horses were put into the Coach, and he received command to fetch in
forthwith Mistress Berenice. She waited for him impatiently, being risen up
betimes that day, and having used all her skill to get herself extraordinary
handsome, and yet keep still the modesty of her mourning apparel* which design
succeeded her so well, and so happily joined Art with Nature to set off her
Beauty, that as soon as the Major cast his Eyes upon her, trouble and confusion
laid hold on his distressed Soul Alas! said he, is this the divine treasure I
am a going to sacrifice to the passion of a Rival? If Heaven ought to refuse it
to my vows, should he use my own hand to deliver it up into another? O
unfortunate Major! O too happy Colonel! Why does not fortune regard rather
strength and merit, than greatness and riches? O Heaven, what strange
inequality of ages! But it is to inveigh, to no purpose; it is to spend idly ones
while, pursued he; it is to provoke you, Madam, to declaim any longer against
the malice of fate: This unjust Divinity has condemned me to play the
ridiculous Rival of my self; you have subscribed my sentence, and now you force
me to put it into execution. Your transports, interrupted Berenice, being
interpreted by me, are not absolutely to be deemed unreasonable, but they are
neither to be altogether allowed. I confess, it is a hard case for a man that
loves sincerity to see another preferred before himself; but when such a
preference, which in these present circumstances we must call a preference for
a while, is to be turn to our own advantage for ever, then it ought to temper
our impatience, and calm all our troubles; or else we are rather our own foes
than the right lovers of our good: It Is true indeed you act now in a manner the
Rival of your self, but certain it is, you do it for your own sake, and upon
account of great hopes. Forbear then, dear Sir, to curse a destiny that does
you more service than wrong; the time to come will make good what I say. But
Sir, added she, is it not to try a little too long the patience of the company
that waits for us? Will ye be pleased to comply with their desires? I will,
Madam, reparteed the Major: If I have detained you so long, it is, Madam,
because your presence blots out of men's memory all the rest of the World. Let
us go then, dear and precious Victim, let us go, I will be the witness and
Priest of your Sacrifice. God grant, in a short time you may be the Divinity to
whom in my turn, I may devote the Sacrifice of my self. Come, Madam, let us go
when you please; remember but my fidelity, and what steps I have made for you.
After these last words, he took Berenice's hand, and she shak'd him by his own,
as a token that his vows would be fulfilled in due time.

The Colonel, to whom Joy lent a new store of strength, met his Bride at the
stairs, from whence he led her gallantly into the room, wherein a Notary and
the Parson of the Parish Church waited for them. There was but little talking;
the contract was plain, containing a general, free and exceptionless donation,
after death, of all the said Lord Colonels goods, both movable and unmovable,
effects, properties or appendants whatsoever, to his future Wife. Which being
done and signed, they engaged reciprocally their Faith before the company,
which subscribed as Witnesses to the action.

No Wedding was ever made with so little noise as this; only the Major dined,
and spent the remnant of the day with the Colonel and his new Lady; and the
very servants of the house were not a little amazed, when at night offering to
undress their Lord, there came a Gentlewoman, who paid the same duty to a Lady
which got first into the Bed. They believed all, it was a dream; but the next
morning the tidings of this alliance became public in Town, and Lysandre, whom
Berenice had given notice unto, came in, and before all the family wished to
the Colonel much Joy, and an heir both of his Virtues and his illustrious
Blood. After this publication, there was nothing but Feasts, Tourning, Races,
splendid Entertainments, Balls, Plays, and other pieces of Gallantry, wherein
the Officers of the Regiment, and amongst them the Major and Captain Lysandre
were the most forward and considerable Hectors. As any thing seems to be lawful
in such great solemnities, so in this the most grave and most severe Gentlemen
would appear very merry and free, except only our Major, who, contrary to his
temper, showed all along a very sad and scurvy carriage; he conceived the
preference was due to him by all means, yet he was one of those whom my Lady
seemed the least concerned at; ^ay, she could not so severely master her
natural tendency to Lysandre, but it broke out something by the Treason of her
Eyes, and ^he freedom of her mouth, which being perceived by the clear-sighted
^ealousie of the Major, was indeed (...) deadly stroke to his Heart. The Feast
lasted five^days, which while ^he variety of sports did not permit ^o our new
Spouses to have any other discourses but concerning mat^ers of Gallantry; but
when the house was set again in its former ^ranquillity, and my Lord had laid
upon my Lady the old management of his household, he fell nex^ to acquaint her
with the knowledge of his private affairs.

One day they were a talking together in the morning at Bed, he asked her,
whether upon the eve o^their Wedding she could not remember to have given to
the Major any cause of displeasure? Adding, that after he had brought her home,
being returned back, he was all at a loss, and almost ou^ of his wit; to which
the Crafty Lady answered, it was so indeed (...) and now she begun to discover
to him how the Major was that very time so bold as to require of he^ the favor
of kissing her hand, and how severely she rebuked his boldness: then making use
of the opportunity, she made him so hideous a picture of the man, that the
Colonel grew suddenly hot; and as the last age, because of his weakness* is apt
to be jealous, he blamed with sharp terms the Majors liberty which he took as
an insign affront put upon himself, and swore he would never make the least
interest to get him into the place of Lieutenant Colonel; but rather promote to
it the last Captain of the Regiment. Upon that Oath, Berenice (she will, if you
please, go still by that name) added, that indeed he would have reason to do
so, and that if the people talked of the good grace, expenses and swaggering of
the Major, all the Garrison did commend nothing so much as the prudence, wisdom
and moderation of a certain Captain, which she believed was named Lysandre.
That Lysandre, you speak of, reparteed the old man, is an Officer of an
extraordinary worth, and they say of him that he is the only Captain, who had
no deserters in his Company during two years, which is not a weak argument of
his prudent conduct: I would have already made something for him, had not I
feared to offend the Major, and turn into a dangerous enemy, a man that had
always a great part in my confidence. The wise Berenice insisted no further,
lest she might appear to be partizan of Lysandre. She thought the work was
begun well enough, and, no doubt, it would succeed to the best advantage of her
lover; so she cunningly diverted the discourse to some other matter concerning
the Economy of the House.

Things standing upon these terms, came on a weighty business that was to be
treated with his highness the Prince of Orange concerning the Regiment. There
was a great honor to be got in so important a trust; therefore Berenice was
not idle. She concerned her self too much in the glory of her dear Lysandre, to
not procure him a fair opportunity to get himself known to the Prince. She
suspected, the Major would privately sue for the commission; and, indeed, the
old man designed already to send him thither, but she broke dexterously their
measures, by persuading the Major to not accept a commission that would absent
him from her for a long while, swearing that, being bereft of his sweet
conversation, she could not enjoy one happy day in the company of so old and
exceeding troublesome a husband. This entreaty was like a law to the Major,
whom such a tender testimony of love cured almost perfectly of all those strong
suspicions, he had conceived of a secret intreague between Berenice and
Lysandre; so at the first motion the Colonel made him for his journey at Court,
he excused himself on pretense of a Sciatica, being thereby altogether unable
to go either on horseback, or in a Coach. Berenice was present when his excuses
were allowed, and after they had long debated, what Officer the management of
the negotiation should be trusted unto, Berenice took up the Speech, and said
to her husband, that two or three days ago he spoke to her of a certain Captain
named Lysandre, as a Gentleman of some extraordinary merit, and told her,
amongst several other Virtues, that. Officer was endowed with, he was highly
satisfied of his prudence and moderation; that this Character was fit for the
business in hand, and so he would do very well to pitch upon none other but
him. The Major who was looking for an opportunity to oblige Berenice, and
besides was very much content to remove Lysandre from her, fell into the snare,
and, for from Crossing her nomination, he approved much of it, commending and
setting off both the capacity and zeal of the chosen Captain; insomuch that the
Commission was given to Lysandre with order to depart forthwith.

He was no sooner set out for his Journey, but a certain fellow that my Lady
had turned away for a roguery, in hope of some recompense from the Major, came
and told him, that Captain Lysandre, before taking leave of the Colonel, had
been in a close and intimate conference with my Lady, and that he had heard all
their discourses. Our curious Major promised him a great reward, if he would
tell exactly and orderly all that he heard. Well, Sir, she began after this
manner, pursued the rogue: Dear Lysandre, O how much engaged thou art to
fortune; all things do concur to favor thy destiny. Now, my dear, now is the
time to work. Now it is your business to act vigorously in the commission, be
sure, my dear, your hope to the Colonellieutenancy, will not be set upon a solid
foundation, before you get in his highness esteem; take heed then to show your
ability and zeal to that Prince, who knows as well as any other in Europe how
to distinguish merit, and reward virtue. The Major, at first, had prevailed so
far upon my husband, that he was resolved to trust him with this honorable
negotiation, whose happy success had, no doubt, advanced him to the place,
which I hope you will obtain through my unwearied interest: but I found out, how
to take advantage of his weakness. I feigned, I could not want so long the
comfort of his visits (poor silly fool, he sees not, I deal so, to disable him
for ever to make me any.) Go then, sweet Soul, go on; remember, this is the
first step thou make into the temple of fortune: remember, Lysandre and
Berenices happiness lies in thy hands. Adieu, my dear, fail not to have me
acquainted with the place of thy abode, direct thy letters to my waiting women,
she is faithful and wise. This is all that I could hear, said the perfidious
footman; Enough in conscience for the Majors peace, and indeed, there was no
need, this indiscreet wretch would add, that Lysandre answered shortly: How
many thousand ways am I your slave, incomparable Lady, fear not, fear not,
where Berenice commands, Lysandre is able to perform all things; and then they
embraced one another the most closely they could, nay to such a transport of
delight, as to lift themselves up twice by turn out of the ground.

The Major showed not himself sensible of this narrative before the fellow, he
gave him money, and kept him in his house some while to that purpose, we shall
speak of. If love is sometimes suspicious without ground, that of the Major
grew so with reason. Revolving within himself, from whence could proceed a
reciprocal inclination whose greatness appeared in so dangerous a commerce, he
was confounded through the variety of his thoughts, but after a long vexation
of mind he resolved to intercept Lysandre's letters to Berenice, his anger did
not in the least break out the four or five days, during which no tidings could
come from Lysandre; for, on one side he would put off the opening of his
indignation to her until he might be altogether convinced of a perfidy that
could scarce find any belief within his Soul, what strong prejudices soever the
footman had given him; and on the other he found always Berenice so even in her
discourses and carriage toward him, that he had rather to belly his impressions
for a while, than accuse her of infidelity upon a suspicion which he would have
cleared in a short time: he sends then the footman to the factor of the
Post Office, who knowing him well, and supposing he was still a servant to the
Colonel, did not scruple to give him a letter which Captain Lysandre wrote to
his sweet Lady. The Major was just coming out of the Colonels lodging, where he
had received a great deal of new protestations of an everlasting fidelity from
Berenice, when the footman met him and delivered him the fatal letter. The
direction to the waiting woman, being agreeable to the testimony of the Rogue,
cast him in a dreadful perplexity, he scrupled whether he ought, either to burn
the letter for his quiets sake, carry it sealed up to Berenice, or open it; at
last after having spent the whole night in a great anxiety, he took the party
to read it. It was of this purport.


Madam.
ALL things do flatter them which you please to protect, when I remember, you
interest your self in my favor, I take upon me an air so easy and proud, that
my Friends seeing me this morning coming out of the Palace, took me to be
something more than I am. If it is a good omen, God grant the success may
answer it, and that I may shortly find my self in a condition to go and witness
you my respect and gratitude with a million of thanks. I lodge at the Royal
Princess upon the plain.

The reading of this Letter increased the trouble of the Major, it seemed to
him enigmatical and the sense obscure, therefore he resolved to have it
directed to the Colonels Sentinel, who gave it to a servant, from whose hands
it came into those of the waitingmaid, and next into my Lady's. Berenice read
it with abundance of joy. It was short indeed, but the most compendious
Love Letters speak always enough. She answered it, but that answer escaped the
curiosity of the Major, who would have willingly given an hundred Pistols
for it. In the mean time Berenice perceived clearly, her Letter had been
unsealed, and the indirect way it came by, confirmed her opinion. Now that it
was intercepted by any trick of the Major, she could not imagine it; So she
kept still with him the same countenance, until some ambiguous words
reflecting upon the matter having slipped out of his mouth through
indiscretion, she doubted no more but he had surprised her favorites Letter;
but it being convenient to dissemble, she feigned to not understand the
discourse where he betrayed and contradicted himself so imprudently;
nevertheless she conceived within her heart new seeds of hatred for him; Nay
she cooled on a sudden in that very conversation, and appeared so dull and so
wandering in her thoughts, that the Major at so subit an alteration took Omen
from thence, there was some thing a contriving against him, he rose up and left
coldly Berenice, who paid his coldness with her silence.

A bash of that nature offered to a Lady as sensible and refined as Berenice,
by a man who seemed to be in the wrong, appeared in her Judgment unpardonable;
but, pray, what had he to lose, that had nothing to hope? The Major on his side
accounted himself highly injured by Berenice, and thought it was no more season
to dissemble with her, he waits upon her in the usual manner, asks how stands
the business committed to Lysandre, and when he must be preferred to the Vacant
Lieutenancy. Berenice being scandalized at so rude a question, made answer,
that she meddled not but with her household, being conscious enough, all other
matters were above the capacity of her wit: that my Lord could better satisfy
him about his motion. The Majors impudence did certainly deserve the severity
of this repartee; however he was extremely amazed, and thought himself so much
wronged by it, that he forgot himself to such a degree of indiscretion, as to
say that a Footman who had newly left the livery came of his own accord and
discovered to him so strange things, that one could scarce give any credit to
them; and, although he suspended his judgment, yet he could not but be thereby
in a great trouble; that if she doubts of the truth of his words, he takes upon
himself, to cause the same Footman to tell again, in her presence, all that he
had reported to him concerning her love with Lysandre. You have lost all your
credit, and that part you have got in my esteem, said sharply Berenice, lifting
up her voice, If you do not immediately produce before me that man, and if he
maintains not his report to my face, win him at any rate, and bring him
hither presently; go on, Sir I stay for you. The Major went home, called for
the Footman and told him that in respect of his service, he had spoken a good
word in his behalf to my Lady, and set him again into favor; that he must come
along to get both his pardon and his Livery in his presence. This bait dazzleth
the wretch, who sees not how near he stands to the cudgel, which indeed he had
over deserved; he follows his gentle mediator to the Colonels house: my Lady
has notice of their coming, she bids all the servants to retire, and gets into
the stable together with the Major and the honorable Rascal, shutting up the
door for better security. Now the Major addressing to the Rogue says to him;
Friend, my Lady is more merciful than thou art guilty, she forgives thee all
thy faults on condition that thou shall confess to have reported to me what
passed between her and Captain Lysandre, before his departure for the Hague:
First, did not thou come to me of thy own accord, before I had ever spoken to
thee, that I know of? Secondly, did not thou -- he was ready to go on, when
the Boy who was not so dull as not to foresee the danger he was in, if he would
not speak in favor of my Lady, answered him briskly: hark ye Master Major,
there is no first nor second with me. First I came not to you, you met me.
Secondly, I told you nothing else but what the money, you gave me, made me tell
ye; there is all, urge me no more; for, by God, I will declare how you employed
me to surprise the Letter, but I say no more; are ye content, Master Major?
Master Major was quite out of countenance and ready to thunder against this
wicked impostor; but my Lady, whose interest was to stifle the noise, told him,
Master Major: we have got matters clear enough, send back this miserable, he
forgot your instructions; another time he will better play his part. At these
sharp biting words the Major took pet and came to that excess of passion as to
forget a little the respect due to the house he was in; he spoke so loud two or
three times, that all the family gathered together at the stable door to know
what was the matter, and some of them, to help against the Footman, who in
their apprehension was brought thither to none other purpose, but for his being
soundly ^^udgelled. Their talking about that spent some while; my Lord being
surprised to see no attendants about him, calls again and again, he cries, no
body comes; at last he crawleth a long as well as he could to a window that
looked into the yard, from whence he saw all his servants in allarm, he
inquireth about the subject of their meeting, the servants withdraw, and just
now both my Lady, the Major and the Footman come out of the stable. The old man
who knew not what to think of this uproar, troubles himself, and will know
what passes, one tells him that my Lady had been willing to have the Footman
examined about some new roguery he had committed; but this answer did not
satisfy him, and he complained that many things were concealed from him, for
which, said he, that Rascal, deserved, may be, the halter. Amongst other
servants there was on^ who had served him above twelve years, whom he trusted
more than the others; he commands him to follow his Camrade, and pump ou^ of
him the secret of this business; some glasses of Wine untied the tongue of the
fellow and he revealed the whole mystery to his friend who immediately
acquainted his Master with it. The old man was vexed at the tidings, and fell
into so great suspicions that at table he could not forbear to say in presence
of my Lady and others, that the last age was a very troublesome thing, and that
amongst other imperfections it had this, to serve as a sport to young folks,
but, for his part, he was more clearsighted than one could imagine. The pain he
took in unfolding this so imbroil'd mixture of interest between the Major,
Lysandre and his wife, brought him into a deep melancholy, which, indeed,
hastened his death, he afterward watched more carefully over the conduct of
his young Spouse, he looked upon the Major with an ill eye, and prepared
nothing more favorable to Lysandre. The Major absented himself for some days,
he was sore vexed for the Footmans perfidy, jealous and incensed against
Lysandre, impatient for his Colonels coldness; but, over all, he was almost mad
to see himself going for a cheat in his Mistresses heart. Nevertheless, matters
concerning the regiment, engaged him some weeks after to go and confer with the
Colonel, but he found always Berenice near his elbow-chair, in so much that he
could by no means justify himself to her; in the mean while Lysandre arriveth,
the happy success of his negotiation sets him up again in the Colonels esteem,
who seemed to have appointed him in his favor the same rank that the Major had
before.

How equal and moderate so ever Lysandre was in his growing fortune, yet the
Major did no more look upon him, but with eyes full of indignation, and take
his moderate carriage for a Pride, even to reproach him one day, that he bore
heels higher than ordinary; and you, lower, reparteed boldly Lysandre: Yes, to
make the better a pass, added the other. The Captain who conceived well enough
this swaggering manner of challenge, answered stoutly, and I, said he, I have
got a pair at home of the same sort, that may do me a good service on a like
occasion. I would fain see them, replied the Major; to which Lysandre having
answered, he would procure him that sport the very next morning without the
gate of Jermany, they engaged and went away.

All this while things were very peaceable within the Colonels family. Berenice
had made her self so absolute Mistress of her old decrepits mind, that she
handled and turned him which way she pleased, but especially since the
discovery of the Footman she had so strongly bewitched him by her constant
attendance upon him and her flattering manners, that his suspicions were quite
blotted out of his weak brain, she gets the Major acquainted with it, her
policy persuaded her to manage him, and, indeed she sacrificed to that man,
just as the ancients did to plague and to fever, not to get any benefits of
them, but lest they should suffer mischief from these hurtful divinities. The
presumptuous Major takes a favorable Omen through this kind advice, and
resolves to come and show her how sensible he is of it, immediately after the
duel appointed between him and Lysandre.

This appointment came to the ears of Berenice the very same day it was made,
by an Ensign of the Regiment, she could not sleep all the night long, being in
a deadly apprehension; lest the Major who looked stronger and brisker than her
dear beloved Captain, should get the better of him; yet her Soul was too noble,
to oppose so courageous a resolution. All that she could do in her favorites
behalf was to entreat the Ensign not to permit the fight grow too hot, and in
his depositions to put the Major in the wrong. This young Cavalier who had no
great love for the Major, and gloried to serve a Lady of so great merit,
assured her, she would have cause to be content of his carriage, and then took
his leave.

An hour after the opening of the gates our Rivals were followed by the Ensign,
we spoke of, and a Lieutenant, both of the same Regiment The field was chosen,
the sign given, passes were made and re^urned again, insomuch that victory
balanced and was dubious on both sides by a great while, till at last
Lysandre's Sword being unluckily broken, he was no more able to put ^y the
blows, and was wounded by ^ne push in two several places, the ^ne in the arm,
and the other an ^nch under the nipple of the right ^ap, his Sword broken, and
the blood ^e lost in abundance, because the wound was four inches deeep, did
^ot permit him to fight any longer; ^hey went to drink upon that score, and our
Major puffed up with Pride ^f his victory returned into Ma^stricht, wherein the
wounded Cap^ain also was brought with much ^do in a Horse-litter. As soon as he
was settled in his Lodging, the Co^^nels Valet de Chamber, whom my ^ady had sent
expressly, came to in^uire as from his Lord, what condition the Captain was in,
who^^ wounds he saw the first apparel se^ on. Although he had not lost hi^
speech, yet the Surgeon answere^ that it could not be judged right o^ the
malignity of his wound, bu^ within a day or two; that however it seemed in his
apprehension, ver^ dangerous. Some Zealots went presently after the tidings of
the Du^ came in Town, to the Governor an^ complained of the attempt committed
in defiance of the most Religion Laws of the Country; they prevail^^ so much
upon him, that he sent order to the Colonel to use the utmo^^ rigor against
the Offenders. So the Major was sent to the Provst, an^ the wounded Lysandre
kept Prison^ in his own house.

If the shameful detaining of the Major was a kind of sport to Berenice the
deep wounds of Lysandre which caused him to contend a while wi^^ death, cost
her a great deal of tea^^ There was no hour, nor moment, but she sent some body
to inquire of him, and see his wounds bound up. Nothing spared for his sake;
Essences, Conserves, Liquors, Sweetmeats of all sorts, and all that has power
to revive low spirits were profusely served him; he received a thousand visits.
Berenices waiting-maid repaired exactly every day to his bedside, and
comforted him in his pains by the assurance of her Mistresses ^ender and
constant affection for him, which was a balsam to the distressed lover. Nay,
Berenice her self went thither, when he begun ^o be in a prospect of recovery.
The joy, he felt at the sight of so charming and obliging a Lady got such an
alteration in his bodies humors that he was suddenly taken with a strong
fever, so that his life was quite despaired of; which was a cruel matter of
sorrow to the innocent author of this sad accident. Some Madrigals were writ
upon this adventure, but they have escaped out of my memory.

In the mean time our Major was allowed to speak to no body in his Prison,
there he was the prey of a strange melancholy such as may afford an horrid
solitariness; but that he was so much vexed at, was not so much the horror of a
dark and narrow apartment, as the sorrow he had to receive no Letters of
comfort, nor any tidings of the present condition of his party; but, ove^ all,
to be altogether ignorant how his Mistress had received the new^ of his Combat
and Victory, he engaged one day by the brightnes^ of some Pistols, his own
Jailer, to carry her a Letter and deliver (...) into her own hand: its tenure
was thus.


Madam,
IF a man is guilty, because generous, Virtue is become a crime. What? is there
no praise, no applaud in the world but for cowards? and do I deserve to be
persecuted, because I have discharged my duty like a gallant man? Duels are
honorable preludes, which prepare men for battles and other occasions where
danger seems to be the lesser, because it is common to many. But if these
reflections cannot free me from the rigor of the Law, pray, Madam, let both my
former services be considered, and such as I am able ^o do, and let me be set
out of a captivity, a thousand times, harder than death it self: I would speak
more boldly, Madam, if I could know what is ^he present condition of Lysandre,
who is the man in the world that deserves most to live, and for whom (...) will
keep to the last breath the sentiments of a singular esteem, speak but a good
word for me, dear Lady; allow but what your heart speaks to you in my behalf,
and I am sure of my liberty. It Is an illustrious wretch that Entreats you, and
the most humble of your servants (...) the Major.


Had he been certain, his Letter would fall immediately into Berenices hands,
he had sure added a great many other things, and touched higher matters, but
for fear of some miscarriage of the Letter, he wrote no more than was necessary
for his turn in the present construction of his affairs.

Berenice received the Letter, as soon as she had read it, she took pen and ink
to write a note, and sent them both to Lysandre, that she might procure him
some divertisement at his enemies cost, and cause him to triumph by love, whom
the chance of arms had vanquished. This note was too tender, not to find its
place in this History.

To Captain Lysandre,
HEaven concerns himself too far in the interest of your glory, to rob the
world of your noble person, before your merit has received its reward, he
suffered you to be wounded to none other purpose, but, that you might relish
longer the unvaluable pleasure to see how much you are loved. Now it is time to
come and show your gratitude. The Major shall not languish in the fetters but
as long as you will be pleased to keep him in. Here Is the Letter by which he begs
the influence of my credit, you may read it, but must return it back into my
own hands, for the rest, I am of opinion, you ought to consent to the liberty
of a poor wretch who will be confounded enough, when he sees you preferred
before him. Love, Dear Lysandre, and hope, it is Berenice that advises you so.


Lysandre being then perfectly recovered, goes out that very day, and pays his
Civilities to the Colonel, in whose presence he gave his assent for the liberty
of the Major. The old man's indisposition giving no opportunity of a long
discourse with him; he went on to my Ladies Chamber, he found her alone, and
was ready to throw himself at her feet, but she prevented him. I am in the
utmost confusion, Madam, says he: and I, interrupted Berenice in the utmost
joy, to see you again, and I am confident, yours shall not be less than mine
own, when you know out of my mouth that his highness, who was not acquainted
with your quarrel, gratifies you with the place of Lieutenant Colonel, and, it
may be, you will receive the commission the next post. In the mean while dissemble
your joy, and be not so assiduous in your attendance upon me, until you be
entirely possessed of your Office, lest the Major should suspect any thing of
my contrivance in the managing of so precious a favor; go your self and get
the Major out of prison; but first beg my Lords agreement, for the rest,
Lysandre, remember, not to forget your self in your new preferment. I, Madam,
forget my self, replied he; I, who know better than any man in the world, how
great is the inconstancy of fortune! Ah! let rather heaven -- No no, Madam, be
ye not afraid for that. They were apt to go further, if my Lords Gentleman had
not come in, to warn Lysandre, his master would speak with him; he took his
leave of my Lady, and got immediately by the bed of the Colonel, who bid him to
go in his name and set at liberty the Major with whom he entreated him to be
reconciled; he put his superiors order in execution. The Major was set at
liberty, and they supped together talking the space of two hours of nothing but
indifferent matters, the Major being free came to thank the Colonel and show
his gratitude to Berenice.

It was not true, the Prince had himself made choice of Lysandre to fill the
vacancy, but true it was, Berenice had prepared her husband to be favorable to
him; her husband I say, to whose prudence and wisdom his highness had trusted
the election of a worthy Officer; a mystery, indeed, which was hidden to the
Major, who would have taken quite other measures, if he had had the good luck
to discover it; he continued to give his frequent attendances upon the Colonel,
and did almost never meet there Lysandre: which he took as a good Omen, there
being but that only Cavalier that might stand in competition and dispute the
Lieutenancy with him. Berenice, to keep her Intreague more private, did often
speak to him of Lysandre as a man who had nothing of that greatness of Soul, of
that firmness of courage, which was necessary in a Warrior; to which feigned
sentiments the Major added some true ones of his own ground, no less
dishonorable than the former; Nay, sometimes in her presence he called him a
simple fellow, and told her one day, he was in a merry humor, he had played
him a witty turn; this Officer, Madam, says he, commanded before yesterday the
Guard at Wick, he had prepared a splendid entertainment for his friends, and
given order, it should be brought up to the Guard; I knew one of my Drummers,
was to carry the Pottages and fricasses. I promised him two Pistols, if in the
very midst of the great street, he would let fall down his burden by feigning
to fall down himself. It was done so, indeed, the Drummers foot slipped, all
slipped also out of his hands, and the dishes, through the help of half a dozen
of spoons borrowed of the Neighbors, were filled with an hundred nasty things,
which were eaten up with the greatest avidity in the world. The trick is noble
and witty, said coldly Berenice, but now you put me in mind of him, I believe,
it is he that is below, let us go down, and laugh at his cost, in my Lords
Chamber: they got in before him, and had already taken seats by the bed, where
the gout detained the old man, when Lysandre came in. The Colonel against his
custom, pulled off his cap to him, which the Major admired at, but he was far
more amazed when he welcomed him, not with one good morrow, master Lysandre,
but with one, master Lieutenant Colonel very welcome. This Complement was like
a Thunderbolt that took almost away from the Major the use of his Speech,
although he had yet some belief, the Colonel spoke but in jest; he altered
presently his mind, for the Colonel bid his Secretary to draw out behind his
pillow two Letters one of which he gave to Lysandre, saying, Sir, out of
gratitude you are engaged to serve faithfully his Highness, he honors you with
the vacancy, and for my part, I ease my self upon you of the care of the
regiment; you see in what condition both my age, and infirmities have brought
me; I believe I shall not go long. Don't take the pains to go to the Hague. The
Prince dispenses you with that duty, and allows presumptively your thanks.

While Lysandre was busy about thanking the Colonel with the strongest and
warmest expressions that just and true gratitude can afford, the Major turning
his eyes, full of anger and spite, toward my Lady, saw her fetching a deep
sigh, lifting up her shoulders, and casting aside upon Lysandre despising and
disdainful looks, he could not imagine her to be concerned in that affair; yet
could he not forbear with a low voice to say, Madam, had I more obeyed interest
and ambition than love, this bit had not escaped out of my hands: I was in
wrong to neglect the Journey to the Hague; this is the second time I act my
self rival, God grant I may not play the same a third time by losing you: To
which she answered, Sir, it is like Heaven has ordained you to some higher
fortune, dispense me with a further explication; be ye but constant and
discreet. In the mean while the old man was falling asleep; so, not to disturb
him longer, the company rose up, and my Lady staid alone near the bed.

The Major being returned back into his house, made so grave and so earnest
reflections upon the mysterious dealing of Berenice, that he plainly convinced
himself, she was the only Author of his Rivals advancement; and that, indeed,
not without a great design under hand: he concluded further, that all the fair
countenance she showed him, was but a counterfeit kindness, and that her heart
was driven quite another way: Therefore he resolved after a long meditation, to
try this ambiguous Sphynx's fidelity by a Love-letter, which he got written and
directed to himself as from another Mistress. He let it fall down in Berenice's
Chamber, in such a place where she could not miss to see and take it up; being
confident, her Jealousy would infallibly break out, if so be she had a true
love for him. In effect Berenice took up the Letter, in which, after his going
out, she read these lines.

If there be in the world a perplexed love, it is mine, dear Major. It Is in
vain for you to renew every day to me the protestations of that tender and
solemn engagement, we swore one another in the beginning of our mutual flames.
It Is in vain for you to assure me with so much earnestness, that you love me
still without any division of your heart. I have followed you, I know the abode
of the object of your vows, and that your exact attendance upon your Colonel,
is not so much to court an expiring fortune, as to sacrifice your heart to that
Goddess, who makes sport of so many Gallants as well as of you. It Is true,
indeed, she is enriched with all the graces that may enslave noble souls; but
she knows it very well, it is enough, I say no more. You ought to combine with a
person that presumes not so highly of her self, and whose love is grounded upon
a true and just apprehension of your merit. If you find me too severe, it is
perhaps, because you are not cold enough; grow more private, then you shall not
meet with a ravenous Mistress: Your love will be the measure of mine; resolve
quickly upon this declaration: Dear Major, adieu.

All this alarmed very little our cunning Lady; be it, she took the Letter to
be a fruit, either of the Major's brain, or of the passion of some jealous
Mistress; she had so little tendency to him, that she was by no means troubled
at it. Nevertheless, smelling well enough to what purpose the Letter slipped
out of the Majors pocket, she contrived with her dear Lysandre to pay the fool
with his own coin: so she wrote the following lines, which she left on her
Toilette, where she foresaw, the curious Major would, no doubt, set his hands.

I beg your pardon, Madam, if I take upon me to say, that a person as witty as
you are, ought not to be so much credulous. The Major, who has always looked
upon you as the most complete Lady in this Town, would account his inclinations
wronged, if he could set them in another place. I confess, the Letter, you sent
me, is able to breed jealousy in a true loving heart: but who can warrant you,
that it is not a trick put upon him by some one of those many jealous
Cavaliers, who repineth at his fortune? It may be, some of them are plotting
against his happiness, and would have him ruined in your heart, which he knows
well enough to be a great hater of perfidy. For my part, I cannot advise you to
condemn upon so flight conjectures, a Lover, who perhaps is guilty upon no
other account, but because he is too faithful to you. I know the Major he does
not shift his inclinations as his apparel: but would I were you, I would
conceal him nothing at all; I would open freely to him the Mystery of the
Letter, and, over all, observe curiously his countenance, his eyes, and the
grounds of his justification. This is, in my mind, the way you must follow for
your tranquillity. Adieu.


This Note was folded up and thrown carelessly on Berenice's Toilett. The next
morning, no purpose, she laid a-bed very late. The Major attended about half an
hour past Ten, and after the usual civilities, went to the Looking-glass to
mend his Perriwig. The first thing he cast his eyes upon, and that came under
his hand, was just the Note, which he softly unfolded, and read from end to
end. At first he flattered, himself with the tickling opinion, that credit had
been given to his Sham-letter, and that by this stratagem he had given a
strange alarm; that Berenice was mightily troubled at, since she begged her
friends comfort and advice; which pleasant error set him in the thought, he was
still the beloved one. Now, Berenice being dressed, addressed to him in this
manner; I am apt to think, you are constant and faithful to me, but I must
needs complain of your not being true and sincere: hazard has betrayed your
dissimulation, and I may bring forth authentical Witnesses of that I say. Pray,
Madam, explain your self, interrupted the Major, who feigned not to apprehend
the meaning of her discourse; and your self, reparteed she, Search your own
heart, and examine your conscience. At that word he puts his hand in his
pocket, as to seek there for something; and affected to appear a little out of
countenance, when Berenice presented him his Letter, saying, Trouble no more
your self, here is that you look for. This Note has cleared all my doubts.
What did ye learn by it, Madam, replied the Major? To right my self, Sir, and
confess, I am not the only Goddess, before whom you burn your Incense, that you
bring it upon other Altars; and to speak plain, that you court and abuse more
than one. Ah, Madam, said the Major, Let not this Note alter in the least, that
esteem I have deserved in your mind. It Is true, it came from a Lady; but how
evident is it, that my love for her is but a pastime; by the War, she declares
to my coldness, and through those many motives, she uses to stir up my too
great indifferency for her? This reason being likely enough, seemed to Berenice
to be of a great weight, and she showed her self much satisfied with it. On the
other side, our Major was extremely content with the happy success of his
Intreague, and tickled himself more than ever with the most charming hopes in
the World; when on a sudden, fortune, to make sport of him, put him a fresh to
a new trial.

Lysandre had promised to my Ladies Gentlewoman, that, after his being promoted
to the Lieutenancy, he would present her with a complete suit of Cloth; he had
now performed his word, as to the suit, but being it was not so rich as that
proud maid would have it, or that it was not made according to the rules of the
new mode, or to her own fancy, however she would not accept of it, and
upbraided Lysandre with a thousand reproaches of his covetousness and insipid
judgment. It was vain to my Lady to bid her silence, she grew hot more and
more, and several times got him quite out of countenance, insomuch that one day
my Lady was forced to send her packing into her Chamber. As she was walking
down the stairs that led to the Colonels apartment, she chanced to meet with
the Major, who, seeing her so much moved, gets along with her into the room,
offers to comfort her, and asks the cause of her tears. She was in so great a
passion that forgetting the unviolableness of the secret, and breaking all the
bonds of her duty, toward her Mistress and Lysandre, she declared all to the
Major. This unthought opportunity to make her speak, seemed to him so fair and
so favorable, that he spared nothing to set her upon an intimate confidence;
but, indeed, he know there a great deal more than was expedient for his own
tranquillity, and he confessed ingenuously, that he was abused at an high rate,
and had till now handsomely acted his Self-Rival.

Whilst they were in conference, my Lady sent a Footman to see whether the
Major was engaged with the Colonel. This fellow being ill affected to the
waiting-maid, because she had done him a discourtesy, reported that my Lord was
alone, and the Major locked up with her in her Chamber, that through the
lock-hole he saw them both sitting very close upon the bed, but they spoke too
low, to be heard. The Footman withdrew, and my Lady turning to Lysandre; No
doubt, my dear, says she, we are betrayed. That ill Tongue will have revealed
all; but no matter, methinks, we are gone further than half the way to the aim
we have proposed to our selves. If I can discover, that his inconsiderate maid
has declared any secret of mine, I will punish her according to the excess of
her Treason, and turn her away immediately. That fear, indeed, was not
groundless, for the Major who judged that through the interest of that
Gentlewoman, he could destroy all the pretensions of his Rival, made her a
thousand advantageous promises to draw her in to be of his side, and amongst
other shining proposals gave her the hope of an alliance with his own Nephew
who was an Ensign; or else that he would get her a considerable place near a
Duchess, with whom, said he, he had an intimate acquaintance. She took at that
bait, and not only unfolded him all the particulars of her Mistresses
intreagues with Lysandre, but also engaged her faith to do whatever she could
for his service.

After dinner my Lady took her apart, and first prepared her mind by kind words
to a downright confession of the truth, assuring her, Lysandre would mend his
fault and see her content of his liberality. Then she asked her what was the
matter of her conversation with the Major, all the while, they were both locked
up together in her Chamber, and whether in her transport she let not slip any
thing contrary to her duty, and prejudicial to the interest of Lysandre* The
treacherous Maid answered cunningly, she was past oversight, that she led him
along with her, to stop him from going up and disturbing her conversation with
Lysandre, and that, as for the subject of their talking, it had been all along
about her mothers death, whose tidings were just now come to her; that the
Major had attributed her tears to that cause, and spent all that while in
giving her Comfort in the sad condition, she was in. Berenice took that for
ready money, kept her and used her still with as much privacy and confidence,
as before, concealing from her none of her secret Love-tricks.

In the mean time the Major pining away with impatience of revenging both his
unfaithful Mistress and his troublesome Rival, contrived the blackest Treason
that can be imagined, he gets the following Letter written to the Colonel, by
an unknown hand, as from a friend of his, who concerns himself for his honor,
but concealeth his name for some Weighty Reasons.

My Lord,
I Am your Creature, and under that title I ow your Lordship all services, that
both duty and gratitude prescribes to a true Friend and faithful Servant, a
fair occasion presents it self to signalize my zeal to you, and I would think
my self the most guilty of all ungrateful men, if I could be silent, when the
keeping of my peace may in some manner countenance the dishonouring of your
Illustrious Name. My Lord, I must needs tell you freely, your weakness is a
sport to the Town, and ye are now the laughing stock of the world; Lysandre
stirs never from your house, he is always in the arms of my Lady; and that
ungrateful man, who owes you all that he is, forgets himself to that degree,
as to pay immortal obligations, with an affront that can be never wipped out.
It Is out of a deep sense of duty, that I tell your Lordship that which you
cannot read without horror. One of your best friends. Adieu.

This cursed Letter produced all the effect, the malicious Major could expect,
and awaked in the old man's Soul those former suspicions which time had almost
stifled and extinguished; For, without examining whether the advice was true or
false, he gave himself over to the motions which such ugly a picture may breed
in a jealous heart. Nevertheless for his own gravity sake he thought fit to
show no alteration in his carriage toward Lysandre and his wife, and that it
would be sufficient, to appoint her the next Chamber, whither there was no
passage but through his own, pretending it would be an extraordinary comfort to
him in his infirmities to have her always by himself.

Berenice who suspected nothing from the Major, sticked not to give that
satisfaction to her old bedfellow, and cheerfully changed her apartment. Now
the Lieutenant Colonel and the Major come every day exactly in waiting, but the
old man seems to have neither eyes nor tongue, for the former; yet because none
or little account was made of what he was doing or speaking, Berenice thought
Lysandre ought not to be much troubled for it, and told him publicly that, the
Majors voice being stronger, it was no wonder if he could be better heard of an
old man who had no more his ears of five and twenty. Well, but he had another
cause of trouble far more grievous than that.

Whatever time, hour, or part of the day he might choose to go into the Colonels
lodging, in hope of enjoying some delightful moments with his dear Mistress, he
found her always the unseparable, but sorrowful fellow of the old gouty
coxcomb, who was over him an exceeding troublesome Argus; he was consumed with
an ardent desire to discourse privately with her, but finding no opportunity,
he thought Letters would serve his turn against the watchful eyes of the old
man, and really wrote her the ensuing one which he impressed with the hot
character of his impatient love. But how lamentable was the sort of this
unhappy Letter? and what a brook of tears did it draw from the fair eyes of
Berenice?


Madam,
IF there be nothing in the world that may break the bonds wherewith our hearts
are united, must it, there be also nothing but opposes the union of our
persons? The more heaven favoors and countenanceth my Love, the more fate
persecuteth it. Life and jealousy playing booty together have resolved to bring
me to despair. Is it not enough then to a single man to live fourscore years,
and must he reckon as many ages as Mathusael, or those primitive springs of
life: But let him overlive an age, I grant it; must jealousy concert with it
to make unfortunate, the two most faithful lovers upon earth? When shall I be
mine, and when shall you be no more slave? you, I say, who, being possessed of
the right of chaining others, ought, methinks, be free your self; what then? is
a sheet of paper able, without burning, to contain fires, by which I am my self
devoured? and can it be exact enough, faithfully to reckon you the number of my
sighs, and of the tears, I shed? No no, how eloquent soever love may be, he is
barren and has no grace: when he takes pen and ink, to persuade one of his
excess, he must explain himself in presence of his object; at least, Madam,
mine is of that temper, he may, indeed tell you something of my passion, but he
cannot express to you with a pen, what motions I feel when I consider, you give
me leave to bear the honorable quality of your most faithful and devoted
servant Lysandre.

This Letter was slipped in one day; Berenice, by Galantry let fall her
hanckerchief, to give Lysandre the pleasure to take it up. She took it in, and
read it as soon as the company went out; one may imagine with what transports
of joy, she read a Letter that had nothing base in its style, and spoke with
vehemence of its Authors passion; she read it again a great many times, and
then hid it in the pocket of an under-petticoat. The next morning, reflecting
no more upon her Letter, she got her self dressed in a slighter apparel, and
put not on that petticoat. The waiting maid folding it up, found out the
Letter, read it, and presently made the Major acquainted with the good luck.
They appointed and met together to consult how to improve so fair opportunity;
after some debate on both sides, that foolish creature dazzled with the hope,
the Major would set up her fortune, opined the first, that the fatal Letter
must fall into the hands of the Colonel that would not fail to deal with
Lysandre so severely, that the Major should be revenged at an high rate; but
he, being unwilling to appear in the least concerned in that plot, to not incur
the just resentment of a woman that never could forgive him such huge and
insign a Treason, desired her to find out a way that might secure his
reputation in case of any discovery. Well, Sir, says she, if I am not
mistaken, this will serve our turn very well. Some day or other when my Lord is
alone, I will come softly near his bed. If he be asleep, I Will let fall this
Letter down nigh the bed; presently, I Will get down into the kitchen, from whence
I Will send up the little Page, to look about my Lord. That simple boy seeing the
Letter upon the flower, will believe that my Lord stirring let it fall from his
pillow, under which he is used to keep all Papers that are directed to him; he
will not fail to put it again in his hands, and so we may be confident, that the
Letter shall infallibly be read of him. Excellent well, excellent well, cried
out the Major, the stroke is sure, nothing was ever better concerted; but pray
lose no time, make have, and be certain, I Will, take care of your fortune. It was
done, as said. The Letter came into the hands of the old man, who after the
reading of it stood a while almost out of his sense, but having recollected his
spirits, he saw as clear as the Sun how true was the unknown friends Letter,
and resolved to revenge highly the ungrateful Lysandre, but first of all, to
not decide so slightly upon so important a matter, he compared the Letter by
some others he had received before from Lysandre, and it proved to be evidently
of the same hand; he mastered his anger till the afternoon, and then Lysandre,
the Major and Berenice sitting by his bed, he broke out after a most surprising
manner, his face was on a sudden altered, tears dropped from his eyes, and
after he had cast the Company into a strange consternation by a silence of half
a quarter of an hour, he addressed to the Major and told him: Dear Major, I am
much engaged to you; ye thought to do me a service worthy of your affection,
when you moved me to the alliance, I have made; but, pray, did you foresee it
should dishonor me for ever. I speak so, not upon suspicions of jealousy, but
my friends first, and next my own eyes taught me, that I nourish in this Lady,
(pointing to Berenice) the mortal enemy of my quiet and life; and that I have
advanced a man, meaning Lysandre, who pays my favors with the most notorious
ingratitude that was ever heard of. Do not trust me, Dear Major, here is to
prove withal, the reasonableness of my complaints: read aloud this Letter, said
he, giving it to him. Since you were the witness of so many benefits I bestowed
upon these two ungrateful persons, you must also be the judge of the cause, I
have to repent it. The Major could not refuse to take the Letter, but he
thought it to be of his policy to beg his being dispensed with the reading of
it: But the Colonel insisted upon reading, with so much earnestness, that it
was not in his power to avoid obeying any longer. So the Letter was read. A
mortal paleness diffused it self all over the face of Lysandre, and Berenice
became as red as Scarlet: Confusion and shame stopped up their Speech, and
there was none but the Major who durst speak. My Lord, my Lord, says he, you
know it, it is not a new thing for good people to be persecuted. The solidest
Virtue is that which stands the most cruel assaults; all that your imagination
represents unto you is a mere dream. I know too much my Lady, to think her
capable of such infidelity, and Master Lieutenant Colonel will also give me
leave to say, not by way of Justification, but to do Justice to his Virtue,
that he is the most grateful Gentleman in the World, and by consequence, the
most unfit of men to abuse you at such a rate. This Letter was directed to you
by some foe of his; and we need no other proof of it but this, that it is not
his own hand? What do you say, replied eagerly the old man, pray be not so
complaisant as to maintain things against your Conscience. I am acquainted with
his hand, the Character of this Letter is no way different from that of a
Letter he wrote me from the Hague. Judge it your self without any prejudice,
said he, showing him the other, take my part, and approve of my resentment,
against those that contrive to hasten my death, by overwhelming my Soul with
sorrow. The Major, to humor him, compares the two Letters one to the other,
and says, That indeed they had something like, but the last was counterfeit;
as for example, this p, said he, My Lord, has no resemblance at all with that
d, nor this c with that e, no more than an hundred other letters I could
examine, if you would leave them to my Judgment. The old man taking up the
Speech, added, You are, Sir, a very gracious Judge, and for my quiet sake, I
will give the lie to the truth it self, and make blind my own eyes, to have
occasion to forgive them both. All this while Berenice had kept her peace, and
minded what she could bring forth for her vindication: She spoke at last, and
having said, That her innocence might be slandered, but never shaken, she gave
liberty to tears, which dropped from her charming eyes with so much profusion,
that they excited those of Lysandre, nay of the Major himself. Lysandre next
said, he was not capable of the perfidy he was accused of; that Master Major
had reason to assure, his hand was maliciously imitated, and that if his
assiduous attending upon a person to whom he was obliged for his fortune, did
so much incense envy against him, he would forbear coming into his Colonels
house; So that the most urgent businesses could scarce engage him to step in.
He had no sooner ended his speech, but the old man who was still in his mind
convinced of the fact, desired my Lady to wipe off her tears, and show him
through her unwearied cares the falsehood of the imputation that was put upon
her. They all rose up upon that, and my Lady was ready to go and give her self
over to tears and sighs in her Chamber, when the old man who foresaw it,
entreated her not to leave him, and to stay by his bed. That crafty Woman, that
was not half so much anguished as she seemed, threw her self into the bosom of
the old man whom she embraced so long, and upon which she shed such abundance
of tears, that he was moved by, and past in an instant, from a violent passion
to a sweet one, whose motions proved no less dangerous to his life; for they
caused such a disorder and so great an alteration in the Economy of his bodies
humors, that they were all wambled; his gout left him on a sudden, and allowed
him the free use of his hands and feet; during three days he was feeling no
pain at all, and people crowded into his house to congratulate him for that
kind of growing young again. But upon the third day by two a clock in the
afternoon, no body but the Major and his Lady being with him, he fell suddenly
in a swoon and was taken with a general weakness in all his Members. His Gout
seized again on his hands and feet, and ascended to the heart, so that they
choked him in a quarter of an hours time: he had his mind very sound to the
last breath, and embraced both his wife and the Major, entreated the one to
espouse highly the interest of that young distressed Widow; and told the other,
that in case she would after his death choose a second husband, she ought to
prefer the Wisdom, Affection and Birth of the Major, before any more eminent
quality that should not be attended with those three parts: upon that he
desired them to embrace one another in his presence, and then shut up his eyes
for ever.

Thus the Colonel having given up the ghost, our Major thought his designs
brought about; and after he had uttered out a great deal of Pious and Christian
flourish to comfort her soul, he failed not to turn to his advantage the last
words of the dead, and to let her remember her engagements: but the cunning
Lady, to be rid of him, answered, That she would never give him any just cause
of murmur: that now she was not in a condition to decide so weighty a matter,
her trouble being so great, that either, Yes, or No, were all one to her; but
when time, which cures the greatest sorrows, should have set again her mind in
its former tranquillity, then she would not fail to acknowledge the great
benefits she had received of him.

The funeral pomp being ended, and the old Colonels Idea banished with it, our
two Rivals begun a fresh to court the handsome Widow. The Major did never lose
the sight of Lysandre; he had no sooner seen him step into Berenice's lodgings,
but there he followed him immediately, and was a constant and watchful guard to
him when he was alone with her; insomuch, that during two months, Lysandre
looked in vain for the opportunity of a private conversation with his Mistress,
to give her account of the progress of his love. A certain day was appointed in
the usual manner, for the exercise of the Regiment out of the Town. It was the
Major's duty to attend there; the Lieutenant Colonel sent him word, that he was
a little indisposed, and could not be present at the exercise; but the Major,
who was well, exempteth himself too, and goes to spend the morning with the
Widow. Lysandre comes by nine a Clock, and meets there with the Major, asked
him, if the Regiment has made well the Evolutions; and upon his answer, that
he believes it: Lysandre seeing he had not been there, taxes him with a small
zeal, desires him to remember from henceforth his duty, or else he would
complain to the Prince of his negligence. The Major took very ill this check,
and spoke some sharp biting words to the Lieutenant Colonel, who sent him
Prisoner to his own house, entreating him for his own profit, not to constrain
him to go further. The Laws of Military obedience forbad the Major to reply any
more: he retired with shame to his lodging, attended with a deadly sorrow, to
leave so near his Mistress the most audacious and formidable of his Rivals. All
his friends did interest themselves in his disgrace; and because the Governor
was now at Court, they made their application for his liberty to the Commander,
who being a good headpiece, would not be Judge of either of the two faults,
being unwilling to offend the Lieutenant Colonel; so the Major was by all means
exposed to the mercy of his own Rival. To write him a letter, the love of
liberty advised him to do so, but his courage described to him that step, as
the most base and unworthy of things. To write to my Lady Colonel, he would
thereby expose himself to the scoffs of the one and the other; and he would not
for all the world, go in her mind for a man of low spirits. To acquaint the
Court with the matter, it was to bear witness against his honor, and to depose
against himself; so he knew not what to do: when Fate, less cruel, opened him a
way to triumph in his turn over his Rival.

The Lieutenant Colonel was a moderate man, out of whose mouth nothing but
rational was used to slip. It fell nevertheless, that being one day a drinking
some Bottles of Wine with the chief Officers of the Garrison, a motion was made
about the fair Widow; the discourse growing hot upon her concern, it was there
spoken of the Major, as the man who carried it over all in her amorous
inclinations; that opinion grew so general, that Lysandre, to destroy it,
obstinately bent himself to maintain, that he knew a man that was without
comparison further in her favor than he. Every one knowing, he meant himself,
made sport to take the part of the Major against him, and drove him so far,
that he fell a swearing, he was sure of what he said; and that the person he
meant, had long ago received authentical tokens and exceptionless testimonies
of it. This was reported with a poisoning commentary to Berenice, who was so
much displeased at Lysandre's indiscretion, that her love for him cooled to
that point, as to forbid him her house for ever.

The Major heard with a singular pleasure his Rivals disgrace; he presently
takes Pen and Ink, to praise Berenice for the Justice she had done to the most
ungrateful man in the World, and entreat her to make her interest to the
Governor, who was returned for, his liberty. Berenice, who could not live
without being adored, and was earnestly incensed against Lysandre, was ravished
with joy to receive tidings from the Major, and conceived for him a tender
love: she read his Letter, whose Original is not different from the Copy
following.


Madam,
HAd my Officer formed in his mind a right Idea of true glory, he would have
known, it is more honorable to vanquish his resentment, than to make it appear.
He offended and engaged me to speak him sharp words as a Rival, now he
revengeth as a Superior. One must be Lysandre, to do such a base and unworthy
action, and to refuse to mend it after it is done. Age, experience, and the
science of the World, taught me how to bear equally the strokes of fortune; but
I am not Stoic enough, not to be sensible when I hear your honor is wounded.
I know all that passed in that company, where your heart was put to a trial.
But, Madam, you ought not to expect better things from the person you know.
Now, Madam, if the noble Inclination to favor unfortunate men, is still your
character, oblige me so much, as to speak to my Lord Governor in my behalf,
that it may be said no longer, one keeps me Prisoner, to no other end, but to
deprive me of the delightful sight of a Goddess, to whom I vow an eternal
sacrifice of my heart.

The Major.


This Letter charmed the charming Berenice; she felt her self moved with pity
and love for the Major; she went straightway to the Governor, told him, that
the Major was kept in arrest upon the slight account of a pique, that she was
witness of the quarrel, and admired how the Lieutenant Colonel did so much
abuse his authority, as to make it the tool of his passion. This humble
Petition presented by such a Lady, got the liberty of the Major, who scarce was
got twelve steps from his lodging, when he met with his Jailer. Lysandre, who
knew nothing of his being set at liberty by the Governors command, asked him
haughtily, Who made him so bold, as to go out without his leave? To which
having been answered by a scoff, the Lieutenant Colonel drew; the Major stood
firm; but as the fortune of Arms is uncertain, so, he was almost mortally
wounded. The Lieutenant Colonels action was generally blamed. The Governor was
not a little offended at it, and Berenice concerned her self for the Major, who
had this unvaluable comfort, that he received from her all the good offices he
might expect from his own Mother. But O inconstancy of fortune! this humorous
Divinity flattered him a while, but indeed it was only to get by him a richer
and fatter Victim to her Caprices. It seemed Berenice had quite forgot
Lysandre: Nevertheless, as the piques of lovers turn commonly into a renewing
of love; so Berenice was no sooner met and saluted in her Coach by him, but she
felt within her heart he was no more guilty, but still worthy of her love.
Lysandre, who had observed, through the gentle manner and sweet air wherewith
she bowed to him, that she was appeased, got in her favor, and kindled again
her flames by this Note.

Lysandre the most unworthy of Lovers, to the most worthy loving Lady upon
Earth.
IT is less, to justify my self, than to confess my guilt, that I make bold to
write to you, incomparable Lady: I have alone more faults than all the world
together: but also I have more love, alone, than all men. I suffered you to be
the matter of a discourse; it is my crime: But I could not abide that another
might be preferred before me, because I believe, there is no man under Heaven,
whose zeal and love may be put in parallel to mine. Pardon, amiable Berenice,
pardon me an oversight, which should be expiated enough: if I had been but one
day forbidden to see you, it is to languish too long; subscribe either to my
death; or to the permission I crave, to go and protest to you, that I will live
and dye your faithful servant,

Lysandre.


Berenice had too great a tendency toward Lysandre, not to accept of his
submission. She granted him his pardon; he knew his peace was made, and
resorted to her feet with an incredible diligence.

Upon his coming the fair. Widow disguised her self a little; but the
conversation being by degrees grown hot, the eyes having secretly, but
eloquently, spoken on both sides; and the fire by which these two hearts were
burnt, being kindled again more than ever, it was talked no more but of
reunion; next, faith was given and accepted of either party, without the
knowledge of any living soul: The Banes were published three Sundays one after
another; and there was no Officer of the Garrison that heard of it; because,
indeed very few amongst them do exactly go to Church.

One day, the Lieutenant Colonel and the Major met by chance at Berenice's
house; she obliged them to be reconciled, which they did, and both continued to
court peaceably their common Mistress: but the Major, who had no suspicion of
mischief, acted the Rival of himself for the third and last time, when he was
the least thinking on it. A circle of Gentlemen and Ladies met the first of
July at the fair Widows lodging: After some discourses upon mere indifferent
matters, my Lady rose up, took the Contract of her Matrimony with Lysandre, out
of a Drawer; and rolling it up within her hands, came to the Major, and
perplexed his mind with this Proposition; Master Major, said she, you, that are
the most complaisant of men, and make to your self an inviolable Religion, to
refuse nothing to Ladies, will you grant me the favor which I have a mind to
ask you? Yes with all my heart, replied the Major, with his hand on his breast:
What is it Madam? Must I shed my dearest blood for you? I will sacrifice it to
the last drop. No Sir, added Berenice, it matters only to sign a Writ: I will
with all my heart, though I must sign my own Condemnation: and if both your
Piety and Loyalty were not known to me, I would know, whether there be any
thing contrary to the Religion or State. No, no, Sir, it witnesses nothing
else but your free and voluntary consent to my everlasting happiness. To your
happiness, Madam, interrupted the Major, Ah! blood must be used for that
glorious consent. He offered to prick himself with a Pin, but Berenice took him
from that new extravagancy, putting a Pen in his hand. So he signed the Paper
as it was rolled up; but as soon as he had taken up his fingers from it.
Berenice laughing, made him know, he had subscribed the very Contract of
Marriage between her and Lysandre. This stroke would, no doubt, have killed
him, if he had not thought it to be a pastime. He was invited to make one in
the Wedding Feast against the next morning. He came, believing still, as hard
as Iron, it was but a mere sport. He lent all his jovial humor to the
entertainment and other rejoycings that followed it; he sung a great many Airs
upon Lovers unshaken fidelity, he danced with the Company till night: but he
began to alter his Tune, when he saw all the Convives contending one with
another for the honor of bedding Berenice and Lysandre; yet the strong opinion
he had, it was but a play, caused him to do still an hundred pleasant things;
he untyed the Shoos of Berenice, he helped Lysandre in the pulling off his
Coat, and saw them both a minute after with a wonderful amazement within the
same Sheets, and under the same Coverlet.

FINIS.

