Vindiciae Veritatis, ^R A CONF^TATION (...) THE Heresies and Gross Errors
Asserted by THOMAS COLLIER IN HIS ADDITIONAL WORD TO HIS Body of Divinity.

Written by Nehemiah Coxe, a Servant of Jesus Christ, and Minister of his
Gospel.

For there must be also Heresies among you, that those which are approved may
be made manifest among you, 1 Cor. 11. 19. Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know
these things before, beware lost ye also, being led-away with the error of the
wicked, fall from your own stedfastness, 2 Pet. 3. 17. (...) Theoph. Nonnulli
dum plus exquirunt (...)ando, quam capiunt, usque ad perversa dogmata erumpunt:
(...)um veritatis discipuli^ess^ negligunt humiliter, magistrierroris fiunt.
Greg. LONDON, Printed for Nath. Ponder, at the Peacock in the Poultry near
Cornhill, and in Chancery Lane near Fleet Street, 1677.

Christian Reader,
WE whose names are here subscribed, thought our selves more particularly, than
many others, obliged in Duty and Conscience to appear in the front of this Book
by way of approbation of the same; Wherein the manifold Errors of Tho. Collier,
in a Book entitled [ An Additional Word, etc.] are clearly detected, and
solidly enervated: Because although it be a most unequal judgment, to make the
Errors of one single person under any Profession, to reflect upon the whole of
the same; seeing the Apostle tells the Church in its Primitive and most pure
state, Act. 20. 30. [That there should arise from themselves men speaking
perverse things, and draw away Disciples after them,] yet woeful experience
has taught us that there is nothing more usual with the world. And we did
judge, that though we do not hope hereby to silence the mouth of malice; yet
this might be a means, to set us right in the thoughts of those who are not
biased by evil affections.

We had hoped that the snares, wherein the said Tho. Collier had been many
years entangled, and for which he seemed by Gods blessing on some of our
endeavors, to manifest repentance, might have been a caution to him, to avoid
these dangerous Rocks for the future; But to our grief we find it otherwise,
and see that the highest Profession cannot secure men from falling, when the
heart is not established with Grace, and kept humble before the Lord, as we see
in the examples of Hymenaeus and Alexander.

For the Author of this work, if any by reason of his inferiority in years,
should suspect him of an over-forwardness, arising from any overweening
s^lf-opinion, in undertaking this matter, although that answer is ready in his
behalf, which sometime David gave to Eliah in a case though of a different, yet
something like nature; 1 Samuel 17. 29. What have I done? is there not a cause?
shall the whole Host of Israel be defied, the principles of Gospel Truths
subverted, the name of God blasphemed, a flood-gate of Error opened, and any
be thought over-forward to oppose the Adversary?

But over and above we think meet to acquaint thee, that the Combatant in this
Conflict was not so much prompted to it by his natural inclination, as by the
joint and earnest persuasion of several of the Elders, and that of elder years,
partly because we did judge him meet and of ability for the work, and next, at
that time of his entering upon it, a more than ordinary Providence of God, gave
him leisure for it more then others, by suspending him from other more weighty
employment; thereby (as it were) calling him out, and determining him to this
employ: Wherein (upon our perusal) we hope, we may truly say, without
particular respect to his Person, he has behaved himself with that modesty of
Spirit, joined with that fullness and clearness of answer and strength of
argument, that we comfortably conceive (by Gods blessing) it may prove a good
and sovereign Antidote against the Poison: from which as we earnestly pray the
venture of it may be delivered, so no less that thou also may be preserved;
And in order thereunto, desire of thee, that thou would read this ensuing
discourse, with this candor and charity to believe, that it is Verity, not
Victory, that is here contended for: And farther we beg of God, that thou may
be enabled to weigh each particular in the just Balance of the Sanctuary; and
that he will direct thy heart into the love of Truth, which shall be the daily
Prayer of

Thine in the Lord, William Kiffen. Daniel Dyke. Joseph Masters. James Fitton.
Henry Forty. William Collins.


TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
AMongst all those vanities which are under the Sun, this is none of the least;
That some men puffed up with a conceit of their sufficiency for every
undertaking, do daily burden the world with their raw and indigested notions;
and whilst they contemn that guidance they might have in the way of truth, from
the labors of others who have been raised up and enabled of God to transmit to
posterity the Doctrine of the Gospel in a form of sound words, do darken
counsel by words without knowledge: But alas! Our sorrow on this account may be
drowned in Tears for a greater evil, if we reflect on the more bold and
dangerous attempts of some, who are not satisfied to have darkened the shining
luster of divine truth, unless they do also subvert the foundations of the
Christian Religion, by a downright opposition to some of the most important
Doctrines thereof. And one sad instance of this kind we have in a Book not long
since published by Thomas Collier, which he calls An Additional Word, etc.
which has occasioned my writing this small Treatise in answer thereto; For
although the argument of the Book may not seem to require his pains; inasmuch
as there is nothing urged by him to give countenance to his corrupt notions,
but it has either been answered many times already by those that have written
against the Pelagians, Jesuits, and Socinians, in whose steps Mr. Collier very
frequently treads; or else (where he does transcend the Heresies of those
mentioned) its weakness and impiety is more manifest then to need any
refutation by another; yet on many accounts, some Answer to him was judged
necessary, not only by my self, but by diverse others, whose Judgment in this
matter I esteemed much more then my own; That so (at least) a Public testimony
might be born against those gross Errors therein, by him exposed to public
view; and by the detection of them, the intanglement and seduction of weak
(though well-meaning) Souls might be prevented, who otherwise were in danger to
be drawn away by him, to drink in those notions that will eat as does a Canker;
and also that persons irreligious and ungodly, who are ready to catch at any
thing, even against the Judgment of their own Consciences, that may give them
quiet in their sinful ways, might not rest in peace on those Pillows he has
prepared for them; by his endeavor to persuade them, That there is no such
Eternal wrath and Judgment like to overtake them, as that which they have been
warned to flee from by those that know the terror of the Lord.

These with some other things of like import, prevailed with me to account it
necessary, That those precious truths opposed by him, should be vindicated from
his cavils and reproaches: though for my self, I can truly say, I had much
rather for many reasons, some other of my Brethren had undertaken this work;
and I have many witnesses this task was imposed on, not sought by me; for I
have no such esteem of my ability, as to desire to trouble the world in Print;
and therefore I beg a candid interpretation of my appearing in public on this
occasion.

In my answer I have been forced very briefly to touch upon many of Mr.
Colliers notions, being desirous to bring it into as little room as might be,
lest by its length it should be rendered the less serviceable to many of those
for whose good it was chiefly intended; and therefore have passed over many
things more remote from the main controversy, in silence, which otherwise
might have deserved some remark: Amongst which you may reckon that which so
often occurs in his Book, viz. This and that is true in a Gospel sense, or some
Scripture sense; which sense he yet gives us no account of, but what we must
gather from his accommodation of that which he says is true in a Gospel sense,
to his own absurd Opinions, which may serve to amuse and deceive his ignorant
and unwary Reader.

This I am abundantly satisfied in, That what I have asserted against Mr.
Collier is plainly confirmed in the Scripture of truth, and agreeable to that
Doctrine which the Church of God has always been possessed of; and are no new
notions of my own coining; and therefore I hope by the Grace of Christ to be
enabled farther to clear and strengthen what I have written, if occasion be
really offered by Mr. Collier his making such a reply as has any color of
reason urged against it; otherwise I shall not concern my self with a noise of
vain words, but rest satisfied in that I have once for all born my witness
against him, and detected his Errors.

I earnestly desire that God would give him Repentance unto the acknowledgement
of the truth, that by his own recantation of what he has published so contrary
thereto, and offensive to true Christians, this contest may have an end put to
it; And forasmuch as I understand Mr. Collier pretends some respect to the
Labors of Dr. Usher; I could heartily wish he would seriously read over his
Body of Divinity, and his Treatise of the Incarnation of the Son of God, called
Immanuel, printed at the end thereof; that if he will not attend to what I have
written, yet he may by that holy man be better informed about the principles of
Christianity. And that he may for the future escape that absurdity and
confusion he has cast himself into in his first Chapter concerning the Person of
Christ, I desire he would compare this observation of the Dr. with what I have
written on the same head, to the same purpose;

By reason of the strictness of the personal Union, whatsoever may be verified
of either of those natures (the Divine or Humane) the same may be truly spoken
of the whole Person, from whethersoever of the natures it be denominated. And
let him take in the other parts of that discourse with it, wherein he solidly
proves that the Son of God took the nature of man (not an humane person) into a
personal Union with himself, and so was manifest in flesh, and wrought out our
Redemption; as also his pithy and pious discourse of this subject in his Body
of Divinity, p. 164, 165. etc. and it may prove of singular use to guide him
out of that labyrinth of Error he is at present lost in, if more gross tenets
do not lie in the bottom of his discourses, then he is yet willing to speak out
plainly before the world; which I would not suggest my suspicion of, did I not
discern ground for it in what he has already written, especially if compared
with the Heresies formerly espoused by him; but being willing to wait for his
more plain and ingenuous opening of his own sense; I have for the present
passed over many things, especially in his first Chapter that are of an harsh sound
in Christian ears, though clouded in ambiguous terms; expecting that his
Rejoinder will either give me occasion to put a better sense upon those
phrases, then the words at present seem well to bear, or else engage me to a
farther detection of his abomination couched in them.

With the latter part of Mr. Colliers Book, which he intitles, An healing word,
I have not concerned my self, though diverse things therein are liable to just
exception; but I must tell him, There can be no Gospel Peace without truth, nor
Communion of Saints, without an agreement in fundamental principles of the
Christian Religion. We must contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to
the Saints; and mark those that cause divisions among us by their new Doctrines
contrary thereto, and avoid them; And lest any should be deceived by Mr.
Colliers good words and fair speeches, I cannot but take notice that his
General Epistles were ushered into the world, with the same pretext of making
peace, and discharge of his Conscience, and with as great show of zeal for God,
and other as plausible pretenses, as any he now makes or can make; And yet one
shall hardly find more contradictory and blasphemous notions, in the writings
of any called, or pretending to be Christians, then in them: For, besides his
contempt of the holy Scriptures and all Ordinances; there he tells us; To have
Communion and Fellowship with the Father, is to be one in Common with God; to
have fellowship, is to be Gods fellow; so is Christ, so are Saints, p. 243.
Christ is no more then a Christian, p. 244. with other like blasphemies, which
I abhor the recital of. These things indeed (as I am informed) he says he has
repented of; but never yet thought himself obliged to publish to the world an
ingenuous recantation of them; that so those concerned might have from himself
a plain and particular warning to take heed of that poison which has flowed
from his own pen: however, it may be a good warning to us not to heed the
smooth, or swelling words of a man carried about with every wind of Doctrine.

I have but a word or two more, and that is, to acquaint thee that I have been
troubled for the delays that this little work has met with, both before and
since it went to the Press, which yet I could not help; I have taken what care
I could that Errata's in Printing it might be prevented, and desire that those
(...), which do occur, may be pardoned, and amended in reading (I hope they are
not many, nor very material) And that thou may the sooner have a taste of the
Book I answer, I have in the following page given thee a specimen of Mr.
Colliers strange Heterodoxies collected out of his Book (for the most part) in
his own terms; which, with very many more contained therein, are detected and
refuted in this. And give me leave to express my desires in the words of that
holy man of old, concerning what I have written; Domine Deus unus, Deus
Trinitas; quaecunque dixi in his libris de tuo, agnoscant and tui; si qua de
meo, and tu ignosce and tui; Amen! August.

Let God alone have the glory of any thing serviceable to the interest of his
truth in this Treatise; and interpret well my poor Essay toward the clearing
thereof: much weakness therein I am sensible of; and know right well that one
of deeper Judgment, and greater abilities, endued with a more plentiful
anointing of the good spirit, would have said much more in less room then I
have done: But seeing no other was engaged in this service, my mite is humbly
offered; and that my weakness may be pardoned, and my poor endeavors succeeded
to some advantage (if it be but of the weakest) of Christ's sheep, and the
reflecting of some glory to his holy Name, is the earnest prayer of,

The unworthiest of his Servants, N. C.

Amongst the many gross Errors published by Mr. Collier in his Additional
Word, and refuted in this Treatise, are these following:
1. THat Christ is the Son of God only as considered in both natures. Addit.
Word, Chapter 1. p. 2. 2. As he was the Prince of Life, the Lord of Glory, was he
killed and crucified; and that was not in the humane nature only, chapter 1. p. 4.
3. As God-man he was a Creature, chapter 1. p. 9. 4. This Creature God-man made all
things, chapter 1. p. 10. 5. The word God-man was made flesh, chapter 1. p. 11. 6.
There are Increated Heavens; for the Eternal God must have some Eternal
habitation, chapter 1. p. 12. 7. Christ died for the Universe, the Heavens and
Earth, and all things therein, chapter 2. p. 13. 8. The Gospel ought to be preached
to the whole Creation, even to that part of it, that is not capable of hearing
or understanding it, chapter 2. p. 16. 9. The Foolish Virgins shall obtain some
great privilege in the day of Christ, chapter 3. p. 23. 10. Those that never heard
the Gospel cannot be under the Judgment of Damnation, chapter 4. p. 26. 11. The
sinful defilement of our nature, is not the sin, but the affliction of man, chapter
4. p. 27. 12. Its possible for men (in respect of power) to believe the Gospel,
if God do not work at all upon them by his spirit, chapter 5. p. 31, 32. 13.
Regenerate Persons, or True Believers, may finally fall away from God and
Perish, chapter 5. p. 36, etc. 14. None shall be Eternally damned but those that
sin against the holy Spirit, chapter 7. p. 47. 15. The Gospel has been preached to
men after they were dead, chapter 7, p. 48. 16. Men may repent so as to obtain
deliverance from their torment, after death, and the last Judgment, chapter 7. p.
c. 8. 17. Sluggish Christians and Formalists may find some mercy in the day of
Judgment, p. 51. 18. Perhaps the torment of some sinners may not exceed a 100
years, p. 52. 19. The Sodomites have already received their Judgment, and are
still suffering thereof, and the day of the general Judgment is like to be
their day of ease, p. 53. 20. The infinite Sacrifice of Christ remains the
same* to have its influence for the obtaining of Grace after the Judgment as
before, p. 54.
CHAP. I.
Concerning God; The distinct Subsistencies in the Divine Nature: And more
especially, the Person of the Son.

MR. Collier intimates in the beginning of his first Chapter, That he had been
from some private hand admonished of certain errors by him before published in
his Body of Divinity, which in this Chapter he endeavors to vindicate; and
makes this the occasion of the putting forth the whole of what we find in his
Additional Word: But verily this course is in no wise like to give satisfaction
to them who before were justly offended: For a man when he is blamed for
swerving from the form of sound words, and that Doctrine that is according to
Godliness in some instances; to repeat his errors with new Confidence, instead
of a retractation of them; and then to add many more, and more dangerous
against the analogy of Faith, yea the express words of Scripture, and common
sentiments of all that deserve the name of Christians, is not the way to
reconcile himself to the truth, or to any true lovers thereof: And that Mr.
Collier has thus done, will be manifested in our progress.

We are plentifully instructed from the Scripture, That there is but one only
living and true God, who is a most pure Spirit, Eternal and Immutable,
Incomprehensible, and infinitely perfect in his Being, and all the properties
thereof, etc.

This also Mr. Collier professes to own; yet he has in the close of this
first Chapter of his Additional Word, dropped an expression or two that seem to
hold no very full harmony therewith: He says, p. 12. As to the Omnipresence of
God the Father* I say what the Scripture says, which directs us to the
Father as in Heaven; and that by his Spirit he is present in all places.

Omnipresence is an Essential property of God, grounded on his Infiniteness; it
is as necessary to him to be Omnip^^ent, as to be God. It is all one therefore
whether we speak of the Omnipresence of the Father, or of the Son, or of the
holy Spirit, these three being that One incomprehensible and infinite Jehovah,
to whom all fear and worship is due: And to deny it of any of them, is to deny
their Divinity. And whereas Mr. Collier tells us, That he says what the
Scripture says, etc. That is not enough, unless he make it manifest also, That
he says it according to the true sense and intendment of the Spirit of God in
those Scriptures he refers unto. I am unwilling to entertain jealousies of any
man; but yet I must say, That those Socinians who have most opposed the truth
concerning the immensity of God, have yet said as much as Mr. Collier here
presents us with; and to clear himself from suspicion in this matter when
questioned about it, more might justly have been expected from him. The
Scriptures indeed speak of God as in Heaven, but that is (as many other
expressions in them ^re) in a way of condescension to our capacity. And we must
always remember, that those things that are spoken of God (...) after the
manner of men, must be interpreted (...) in a sense becoming God; else we must
immediately close with, the gross and absurd Heresy of the Authropomorphites.
Seeing then that we conceive of no place so glorious as Heaven, that is
represented to us as the dwelling place, or Throne of the most high, that so we
might be affected with his Glorious Majesty; Heaven also is the place where God
does manifest his Glory in a more eminent way then in any other part of the
Creation: On these accounts, or some other like unto them, he is said to be in
Heaven, but least we should conceive of him as confined to any place, or
limited in his being, we are expressly told in his word: The Lord your God, he
is God in Heaven above, and in Earth beneath, Josh. 2. 11. And again, Behold
the Heavens, and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee, 1 Kings 8. 27. Am I
a God at hand says the Lord, and not a God afar off? Can any hide himself in
secret places that I shall not see him, says the Lord? do not I fill Heaven
and Earth, says the Lord? Jer. 23, 24. with Psalm. 139. and diverse express^ons
of the same import we meet with therein, in other places. ^f then the Spirit of
God be present in all places, the Father is so, and the Son is so, for the
Divine Essence is undivided; and as I said at first, This is an Essential
property of God that we are speaking of. I might here stay to tell him in what
a corrupt and impious sense some have used the expressions he here makes use
of; but I shall proceed no farther with this point at present; If he declare
himself to embrace the truth, this suffices; if he farther declare his mind in
opposition thereto, we shall then have a fitter opportunity to in large on this
head.

In the same page he does re-assert and endeavor to enforce his notion of the
increated Heavens. But notwithstanding what he says. I cannot see how this
notion may be reconciled, either with the Scripture, or right Reason: Himself
confesses, that Eternity is an attribute proper to God alone, and certainly to
be increated is no less so: Creator and creature do divide all beings; how then
can we conceive of any increated being but God himself, or of any thing that is
absolutely Eternal besides himself? Again, if we allow him to conceive of an
Eternal and increated habitation for God; I ask him whether we may imagine any
space without those Heavens: if not? Then is the whole World within that
increated and eternal dwelling place; which will hardly suit with Mr. Colliers
opinion of it. If we may imagine space without those Heavens, then I ask
whether we are to conceive of God in those Heavens, and not in that space; if
he answer we are, then does he indeed oppose the immensity and
incomprehensibility of the holy one of Israel: If he say we are not to imagine
him limited by these Heavens; Then must he grant also, That he is Everlastingly
and Essentially present, as well in the infinite space without them, as within
them, for he is immutable; how then is the one his dwelling place more then the
other? If Mr. Collier remove these, his notion may easily be clogged with other
doubts: But we will consider what he offers for the proof thereof. Thus he
pleads, p 12.. 3.

As for the increated Heavens, though in the term of Increated it be not
expressed, yet there is enough in Scripture to prove the truth thereof; For the
Eternal God must have some Eternal habitation, as it is called Isa. 57. 15. The
high and holy place.

By Mr. Colliers own assertion (p. 2. of his Additional word) if he affirm that
concerning the increated Heavens, which the Scriptures do not, it must needs be
unsound and unsafe: He confesses that in the term of increated they are not to
be found in Scripture, but yet both here, and in his Body of Divinity, p. 46,
47. he has discovered the most Glorious Heaven, such as the Book of Job, or
the Psalms make no mention of; for the Heavens, and the Heaven of Heavens
mentioned therein, he affirms are polluted by the sin of Man.

And Mr. Collier does intimate to his Reader, as if the Glory of the Eternal
God was not exalted above these most glorious Heavens; and that the most high
God does not humble himself when he beholds them. As for the Heavens which were
known to the Psalmist, and of which he speaks, Psalm. 8. 1. Psalm. 1. 3. 4, 5, 6.
Mr. Collier acknowledges Gods glory to be set above all them, and that when he
beholds them, he humbles himself; and hereof he gives you a double reason, viz.
not only because he created them, (which is true) but also because as he
affirms the created Heavens are all in a fallen estate, together with the
Earth, by reason of the sin of man: And therefore in his Additional Word, p.
12.. 5. He endeavors to prove the corruption of the Heavens by the sin of man,
from Job 15. 15. The Heavens are not clean in thy sight: But I conceive the
scope of that Text is by way of comparison, to show how vile man is, inasmuch
as the purest part of the Creation, even the Heavens, in conspectu Dei, or
compared with the most holy pure God, are not to be reputed pure, rather then
to impute to the Heavens any sinful defilement. So that here again we have
another taste of Mr. Colliers unscriptural boldness: whence does he collect that
the sin of Man reached so high as to corrupt the Heavens? one would think, if
there be any such corruption, it should rather be referred to the sin of
Angels, who were once Inhabitants therein, then to the sin of Man.

But to come to a more strict examination of his notion, concerning his
supposed increated Heavens; which I take to be not only unscriptural, but
antiscriptural; and his proof by his oportet it must be so, to be most absurd
and irrational.

The only Text he quotes, upon which he would fasten his corrupt notion, is
Isa. 57. 13. of which he takes only a part of a sentence, and omits the rest;
The Text speaks thus:

For thus says the high and holy one, that inhabiteth Eternity, whose name is
holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart
of the contrite ones.

Here the habitation of the high and holy God is in general terms said to be in
Eternity, without reference to any place whatsoever; Then he comes to
distinguish of his present residence, and that is said to be, not only in the
high and holy place, (take it for Heaven) but withal, in the heart of every
one of his humble and contrite Saints: Heaven, and the heart of a Believer, may
be alike truly said, to be the habitation of God, Ephesians. 2. 21, 22. The Heaven of
Heavens is not comprehensive of the immense God: yet no Believers heart is too
narrow for an habitation for him: And as the Text does express the high and
holy place, and a contrite spirit on Earth, to be at the same instant Gods
dwelling place; so is it altogether silent as to this high and holy place,
being increated.

But to manifest that Mr. Collier speaks not only without the Scriptures, but
against the Scriptures herein, let these Texts be considered: Thus the Heavens
were finished, and all the Host of them, Genesis 2. 1. He commanded, and the
Heaven of Heavens were created, Psalm. 48. 4, 5. By the word of the Lord were
the Heavens made, and all the Hosts of them, Psalm. 33. 6. what the Hosts of
Heaven are, you may understand by 2 Chronicles. 18. 18. Luke 2. 13. And if these
Hosts of Heaven, the holy Angels, do always behold the face of God: and all of
them both place and Inhabitants, were part of the six days creation; as Exodus
20. 11. And if the face of God be beheld, where his glory is displayed in the
greatest splendor, then certainly there is no color, nor place left for any
increated Heavens.

And why cannot Mr. Collier conceive of the Eternal God, without an Eternal
Habitation distinct from himself? If he must have such an habitation, it is
either because his happiness would not be perfect without it, which is to make
him dependant on something beside himself, and to deny his Godhead, by denying
his self-sufficiency: or else it must be, because his being is such, as is
determined and limited by certain bounds: as Bodies are properly said to be in
such or such a place; because they are circumscribed within some space that
they fill up: Created spirits, (though in a more improper sense) yet are truly
said to be in a place; because, though they have not parts and dimensions as
bodies have, so filling up the place where they are, nor can be punctually
circumscribed as they may; yet they are so in some certain place, as not to be
at the same time without it, or elsewhere. Now therefore when we conceive of
the being of either of these, we must also conceive of some space susceptive of
them, which we call place; because they are finite: But what place can we
conceive of for his dwelling therein, who is immense, and indistant to all
places and things, present to all by and in his infinite essence and being, but
contained in none. He adds,

If God has prepared a Building, a House (for his people) not made with hands,
Eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1. Methinks it should be no crime to say,
that he has an Eternal habitation for himself; suitable to his name and
nature, and if Eternal then Increated.

I suppose the ambiguity of the word Eternal, which Mr. Collier meets with in
the Text, is the occasion of his mistake in part; If we look into the
Scriptures, we shall find mention made of a threefold duration; 1. That which
is absolutely Eterna, without beginning or end; and this is proper to God
alone. 2. That which has a beginning but shall have no end, which for
distinction sake is commonly called Aeviternity. And 3. That which has a
beginning and shall have an end, which is time. Now the term Eternal is
indifferently used in the Scripture to signify either of the two former; but
this ambiguity is easily removed, if we consider the subject spoken of; when it
is applied to God, we must take it in the first sense; but when unto Creatures,
in the second: so then the Apostle, as is clear from the scope of the Text,
when he speaks of an House Eternal in the Heavens, does not intend a building
that had been from Everlasting, but such an one as notwithstanding its Creation
(for it was made, though without hands, by the power of God) in time, should
not decay as the earthly house of our Tabernacle does, but abide incorruptible
for ever. And let not Mr. C. think, that because we need a house, a building in
the Heavens to complete our happiness; that therefore the former of all things
does so. So then this Text will not bear the weight he lays on it: And when in
the close he infers from the Eternity of Gods dwelling place, that it is also
increated, he might have added, and then God; for this necessarily follows upon
the grant of the other: and by this very medium Mr. Collier in his Body of
Divinity, p. 85. proves, that Angels are created beings: His words are these:

Reason teaches that they must be and are created, o^ else they must be
Eternal, which is proper to none but God; and if so they must be God; but they
are not God, etc. and by that Mr. C. may see that he has entangled himself in
meddling with things that he understands not. But I shall proceed;

The Scripture does also instruct us concerning the subsistence of God, or the
manner of his being; and this is such a glorious mystery as by his word only is
revealed to us; We cannot by reason comprehend it, but ought to adore it; and
by Faith rest in his testimony concerning it.

In 1 John 5. 7. we are taught, that there are three that do subsist in the
Divine essence; and that these three are the Father, the Word, and the Spirit,
who are the one true God. Here then is set before us the Divine essence,
subsisting in three relative properties: The relative property of the Father is
to beg^t, Ps. 2. 7. Joh. 3. 16. The relative property of the Son is to be
begotten; The relative properly of the Holy Spirit is to be breathed, or to
proceed from the Father and the Son, Joh. 15. 26. Romans 8. 9, etc.

Now unto these relative properties belong all imaginable perfection; but no
imperfection, because they are in God: Therefore as considered in him they do
infer personality, because a personal subsistence, is the most perfect manner
of being in the whole reasonable nature: And throughout the Scriptures when the
Father, Son or Holy Ghost are distinctly spoken of, those terms are made use of
that are proper only unto a person; and personal operations are every where
ascribed to them; Though in our conception of personality in the Divine nature,
we must separate from it whatsoever imperfection is seen in a created person:
Every created person has a limited essence distinct and distant one from
another: But all the increated persons in the Deity have the same immense
undivided essence, and are the one Eternal immortal invisible only wise God. In
created persons also there is difference of time in the proceeding of one from
the other; but here though there be an Eternal order of origination, there is
no priority of time or nature. Add hereunto the warranty of this term from
Hebr. 1. 3. where it is applied to the Father, (and there is the same reason
for our using it, when we speak of the Son or Spirit) and I cannot see why Mr.
C. should reject or except against it as he does, p. 11, 12. and in his Bod. of
Div. However I shall not strive about words, if the thing be owned: But it is
commonly seen, that men have been offended with apt terms, because the things
expressed by them have been displeasing to them. But I shall pass this also,
and return to the beginning of his Chapter, that his strange notions about the
person of the Son of God may be brought to examination.

And that I may proceed with the more clearness, I will first briefly represent
what the Scripture teaches in this matter.

That the Son of God might become the author of Eternal Salvation unto lost
sinners, he took upon him the office of a Mediator betwixt God and them; and in
order to the accomplishment of what he had undertaken on their behalf, it was
necessary that he should take hold of their nature, and be manifested in flesh.
In the person of Christ therefore we are to mind,

1. The distinction of both natures, Divine and Humane. 2. The union of both
natures in the person of the Mediator.
First, Both the Divine and Humane nature in Christ remain distinct in their
essence, and all their essential properties, and necessarily must do so, the
one being created, and the other increated; the Divine nature cannot be changed
into the Humane, nor the Humane into the Divine; neither is it possible that
they should be so confounded or mixed together, as to make a third nature
distinct from both. The Word was God, and the Word was made flesh, Joh. 1. He
was in the form of God, and yet took upon him the form of a servant, Phil. 2.
He was and remained the only begotten of the Father, his own Son, and yet was
in all things made like to us, sin only excepted. He was true God: God by
nature, and true man also, made of the seed of David, as concerning the flesh.

Secondly, There is a glorious and unspeakable union of both natures in the
person of Christ: As he is Immanuel he is but one person, and as such is spoken
of throughout the Scripture; even the same person that in the beginning was
with God. The Humane nature of Christ never having a personality of its own,
Vid. Am^s^i Medullam.
did from the first moment of its being subsist in the person of the Son of
God. So then,

1. Though the second person of the Deity have but one only subsistence, yet
his subsistence is to be considered with a twofold respect; first, as he was in
the Divine nature from Eternity; and also as he was manifest in the flesh;
which last inferrs no change in God, but only a relation: The Son of God
remained what he was; although he became what he was not, by uniting the Humane
nature with the Divine in one person.

2. Though there is not, nor cannot be a real transfusion of the properties of
the Divine nature into the Humane* or of the Humane into the Divine, yet by
reason of this strict union of both natures, there is a personal communication
of properties, which does consist in a communion or concurrence of both natures
unto the same operations, so as they are done by both natures together, yet
each nature works according to its own properties: So that all that Christ
did or suffered, is properly referred to his person: but if we consider the
immediate principle of his actions, some of them must be referred to his Divine
nature only, others to his Humane.

3. Hence arises, and herein is founded, that communication of properties in
the Scriptures speaking of Christ; 1. When that is spoken of the Person that
agrees to him only with respect to one of his natures; as when Christ is said
to dye, of which he was capable only in his Humane nature, or to create all
things which was proper to his Divine nature. And sometimes it is said of him,
that he knew what was in man, that he searches the reins, etc. at another
time, that he knew not the day of Judgment: So likewise of God it is true,
that he cannot be tempted of evil; and yet Christ* who was God as well as man,
suffered being tempted; but then this could not be as God, but as man,
considered as made like to his Brethren in all things, except sin: neither can
we avoid contradiction, without embracing this way of exposition, which is
alone suited to the mind of the Spirit of God in such sayings; and founded in
the real distinction of both natures, without division in the person of Christ.
2. Sometimes also that is attributed to one nature (as it does connote the
person) that is proper to the other, so Act. 20. 28. and 1 John 3. 16. That is
spoken of God, viz. his shedding his blood, and laying down his life; which
cannot without blasphemy be affirmed of the Divine nature as such. 3. And
again, That which is only proper to the person as such, considered in both
natures, is attributed to the one nature; as 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one Mediator
betwixt God and men, the man Christ Jesus. He was not Mediator as man only, nor
as God only, but as God-man in one person.

These things well weighed, may deliver us from that strange confusion that Mr.
Colliers discourse tends to cast us into, and might serve for a refutation of
his first Chapter: but for the help of the weak (for whose sake this work was
undertaken) I will particularly examine whatever therein might be occasion of
stumbling to them, and remove it out of the way.

In p. 1. of his Book he thus writes,

The exceptions against what I said in this matter (i. e. relating to the
Person of the Son of God) are as follows,

1. That he is not the Son of God in the Divine nature only. 2. That he is the
Son of God only as considered in both natures. 3. That he was the word as he
was God-man and man-God. 4. That as God-man he was a Creature. 5. That this
Creature God and man created all things. 6. That this Word God-man was made
flesh. 7. That he is the Son of Man in both natures.
By these words of his one would conclude these gross contradictions, were the
assertions of the animadverter on his Book; but his meaning is, That these are
the things excepted against in it, which he still owns, and undertakes the
vindication of them, in which fruitless attempt I shall attend him; He begins
with the first; That he is not the Son of God in the Divine nature only. My
reason for this is, Because the Scripture no where (that I know) affirms him so
to be, and for me or any other to affirm, that which the Scripture does not,
must needs be unsound and unsafe: The Scripture always when it speaks of the
Son of God, it is as he was in both natures, God and Man; and hence its safe to
say, that he was not the Son of God in the Divine nature only.

Had I met with this position concerning Christ by it self, That he is not the
Son of God in the Divine nature only, charity would have moved me to hope, that
the design thereof (though the words are harsh and improper) had been no more
then to assert the indissoluble union of the humane nature with the Divine, in
one person, since the incarnation of the Son of God. But his defense thereof,
together with his following positions, will in no wise admit this sense, but
determine his meaning to be, That Christ is no otherwise (nor ever was) the Son
of God, but as he was God-man, considered in both natures. Whence it
necessarily follows, That either he had no existence before the days of
Augustus Caesar, when he was born of the Virgin; or else that he had both
natures, and was a man, before he came of the Seed of David as concerning the
flesh: And this last absurdity he seems not to stick at in his following lines.
The argument he endeavors to confirm his notion by, may be thus framed.

That which the Scripture no where affirms, is unsound and unsafe for any man
to affirm.

But the Scripture no where affirms Christ to be the Son of God in the Divine
nature-only. Ergo,

For any man to affirm it is unsound and unsafe.

If his meaning in his first proposition be, that every notion that is not
either expressed in terms in the Scripture, or by just consequence deduced from
it (for ex veris nil nisi verum) is unsound, we grant it; But then his
assumption is false, and must be denied: All the inforcement he gives it is in
these words, The Scripture always when it speaks of the Son of God, it is as he
was in both natures God and Man. But I shall prove the contrary by an instance
or two (out of those many that might be produced) from the Scripture.

The first is Psalm. 33. 6. By the word of the Lord were the Heavens made. This
text I do the rather mention, because Mr. C. confesses, p. 2. That it is the
Son of God that is here spoken of under the name of the Word: And it is
evident, that he is nor here spoken of as he was God-man; but only as he did
subsist in the form of God: The design of the Psalmist being to set forth the
Glory of his Eternal Power and Godhead* by enumerating some of his great
works, in this and the following Verses. As he is the Creator of all things is
his praise here celebrated, long before he became Immanuel by taking our nature.

The next Scripture I urge for the proof of Christ's being spoken of as the Son
of God before his Incarnation, is Prove. 8. from v. 22. to the end of the
Chapter. Which Text has always been a grievous eyesore to the enemies of the
Son of God; and has by the Orthodox been pleaded with great advantage, both
against the Arrians, and Socinians; The last mentioned have laid in all the
Cavils they could devise, to persuade men that it is not the Son of God that is
here intended; and with them Mr. Collier joins, and puts in his exceptions also
against the application of it to him, p. 7. The learned know where and by whom
this Text with others, have been fully vindicated from their exceptions; And
amongst others Dr. Owen in his Exercitations prefixed to the second part of his
Exposition of the Hebrews, p. 37. etc. has so learnedly and solidly asserted
the truth by me pleaded for, from this Text; with so full an answer to all
Socinian cavils against it, as leaves no ground for Mr. Colliers saying, That
it is a question too hard for any man to resolve, whether this Scripture intend
the Son of God or not. His fond trifling in the exposition of it, I shall not
trouble my self with, but only remove his exceptions laid in against the true
sense of it; which being established, his gloss upon it vanishes without
farther trouble.

That an intelligent person is intended in this Text, almost every Verse in the
Chapter does confirm, for all kind of personal properties are ascribed to it;
and if we compare this with chap. 1. 21. ad finem; we must acknowledge, That
Wisdom speaking in them, is a person, and a Divine person too, unto whom all
fear and obedience is due; or else there is no such mentioned in the Scripture*
Moreover Christ is expressly called Wisdom in the New Testament, Mat. 11. 19. 1
Cor. 1. 30. and the word there, is of the Feminine Gender as well as here;
which evinceth the vanity of that cavil of Mr. Collier, That Christ is not
intended, Because the Wisdom here spoken of is in the Feminine Gender. What
terms can express at once the whole of his Glory who is infinite? Neither is
there any thing here spoken of Wisdom, that is not in other Scriptures
attributed to Christ: as we may see in a brief parallel, v. 22. The Lord
possessed me in the beginning of his way, etc. Joh. 1. In the beginning was the
word, v. 23. I was set up from Everlasting, etc. Mic. 5. 2. whose goings forth
have been from of old, from Everlasting. So 2 Timothy 1. 9. Grace is said to be
given us in Christ before the World began, v. 25* Before the Mountains were
settled, before the Hills I was brought forth: Col. 1. 25, 17. He is the first
born of every Creature, and before all, v. 29, 30. When he appointed the
foundations of the Earth, Then I was by him: Joh. 1. 2. And the word was in the
beginning with God. I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him: Mat.
3. 17. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: v. 32. Now therefore
hearken unto me O ye Children: Mat. 17. 5. Hear ye him. Thus might I pass
through the whole context, but this suffices at present; Mr. Collier still
objecteth, That here is no mention of the Son under that name and title. That
Christ is not here called the Son of God in terms, does not in the least weaken
the testimony of this Scripture, seeing it is manifest that such a person is
here spoken of as can be no other then the Son of God; And the relative
property of the second subsistence in the Divine nature is so expressly
mentioned, that it is abundantly evident he is here spoken of as the Son of God
before time: This we find first v. 22. The Lord possessed me (...) in the
beginning of his ways: The word signifies either to acquire something, or to
possess it being acquired: Now amongst other ways of acquiring; Acquisition,
and so possession by right of paternity or generation, is one: so the same word
is used Genesis 4. 2. and as the circumstances of the Text do necessitate us to
embrace that sense here, so the following words do put it out of doubt; For
thus he proceeds, v 24. When there were no deeps was I brought forth: and again
v. 25. Before the Hills I was brought forth. The word is the same in both
places (...) which is in like manner by many learned Interpreters rendered
brought forth, Psalm. 51. 5. So then here is the Eternal generation of the
person spoken of: In that it is from Everlasting it can be applicable to none,
but he that is God by nature; And in that it is to be begotten or brought forth
that is here predicate of him; it can be no other then the Divine nature
subsisting in the incommunicable property of a Son, that is here spoken of; And
an Illustrious exposition of these words you have Joh. 1, 1. etc. B^t Mr.
Collier says, The word translated brought forth, is in the Hebrew formed, else
he could not be set up from Everlasting. That the Hebrew word ought to be
rendered for(...), he offers not to prove; and his saying so, does not at all
(...)ce it: Nay, either he is unacquainted with that Language (which is very
probable) and took this by hearsay from some Arrian, or else he does wittingly
impose upon his ignorant Reader, that cannot contradict him. The root from
whence that word comes, viz. (...) does properly signify the pain and sorrow
of a Woman in Travail: Peculiare est parturientium* nisumque parturiendi
proprie significat. Mercer. and hence being formed in Pihel, it signifies
properly to cause to bring forth, or to bring into the pain attending
parturition, so it is used Psalm. 29. 9. and in Pyhall, as it is formed here, it
can signify no other thing then to be brought forth; according to its proper
import: It is granted that from hence it sometimes borrows other
significations, as from the Grief of parturition, i^ is transferred to signify
any sorrow or grief: and because the product of art in forming something, is a
kind of birth, or bears some similitude to it, being often accomplished not
without care and pain, which also bear some similitude unto the pains of
parturition; it is sometimes transferred to signify the formation of a thing
by art or otherwise. But this is a sure rule, that the proper signification of
a word is to be retained, unless the circumstances of the Text, or the analogy
of Faith require the contrary, But both favor, yea necessitate this sense in
this place; It is impious to think, that he which claims religious Worship to
himself, as Wisdom does in the close of the Chapter; is a formed creature only.
Mr. Collier adds, If it be not so, -- he could not be set up from Everlasting;
This does not at all weaken, but enforce what I have pleaded: Diverse able
interpreters, viz. Pagn. Mont. Merc. Vatabl. read it, I obtained a prinpality,
or was constituted a Prince from Everlasting: The intendment of these words we
have fully expressed: Col. 1. 15, 16. with Heb. 1. 2. The Son is Lord of the
whole Creation, and Heir of all things; and this right of principality in him
has a double foundation; 1. It is in him as he is the Son begotten of the
substance of the Father, having the same Essence with him, and the Creator of
all things. 2. It is founded in the Covenant of Redemption made between the
Father and him, and is referred to his Mediatory kingdom; The first belongs to
him by necessity of nature from Everlasting, unto his Mediatory kingdom and
principality he was designed of God according to Covenant, and foreordained
from Everlasting. There is then nothing in these words that will give Mr.
Collier any relief; what he further adds, requires no answer: So then here is a
second witness to the Everlasting Sonship of Christ, before he was God-man.

I will mention one Text more, where we have not only the thing, but even the
term plainly expressed, Prove. 30. 4. -- Who has established all the ends of the
Earth? what is his name, or what is his Sons name, if thou can tell? This
Scripture fully holds forth, That the Father had a Son before the Incarnation
of Christ, whose name was Wonderful, and his Glory as unspeakable as that of
the Father; It is therefore the Son of God, not as made flesh, but as he was
from Eternity with God, having his Essence and Glory that is here mentioned.

But why do I stay to enumerate particular testimon^es? seeing all those
Scriptures that speak of his Divine nature do confirm the truth pleaded for,
Joh. 1. The word was God, and the word was made flesh; How and when he was made
flesh, the other Evangelists particularly relate: But before that, This word
was in the beginning with God, and he is acknowledged by Mr. Collier to be the
second in the Trinity, and that his title is the Son. And indeed the being of
the Divine Essence is not more necessary, then the manner of its being, i. e.
the incommunicable relative properties thereof, or the subsisting of the
Father, Son, and holy Spirit therein.

I conclude therefore, that it is not only safe and sound to assert, but
moreover that it always was an Article of the Common faith of Christians; That
the Son of God was, before he was made flesh, while he subsisted only in the
form of God; And to deny that he was the Son of God in the Divine nature only,
is by just consequence to deny that he has a Divine nature, seeing it either
infers an utter denial of his pre-existence to his Incarnation, or at least,
that the nature he had before, was neither Person nor Son, until it received
its perfection, and became both by the uniting of the Humane nature thereto.

By Mr. Colliers after-discourse it appears, that he has been cast upon those
absurd contradictions that this Chapter is filled with, by a very gross mistake
of the Decree of God concerning Christ, and the Prophecies of his coming in the
flesh: Because it was from Eternity decreed that the Son of God should become
Immanuel, he concludes, that he is to be considered as being actually God-man
from Everlasting: and because it was foretold what he should be, therefore he
always was such an one. But he may as well conclude, That himself, or any other
thing that ever was, is, or shall be in nature, had an Everlasting existence,
seeing the futurition of all these, was from Everlasting determined in Gods
Decree.

Having thus removed the foundation of his whole discourse on this subject, I
shall not trouble the Reader with a reply to every futilous cavil and
contradiction I meet with in the remaining part of this Chapter, but pass
through it with all speed and brevity.

He proceeds to the second position, which depends on the first, viz. That he
is the Son of God only as considered in both natures.

His reason for this is the same also in effect with his former, and his whole
plea in defense of it, is already sufficiently enervated: But because he here
endeavors to wrest many Texts, to countenance his notion, I will in few words
reply to his abuse of them. The first is Joh. 1. 2. and 14. Let that whole
context be soberly considered, and we need no more to reprove Mr. Colliers
folly. But he says, The Scriptures that speak of Christ as in the bosom of the
Father before time, speak of him as he came forth in time.

That the Son of God, as to his Divine nature, is the same yesterday, to day,
and for ever, is certain; and that the Godhead of Christ underwent no change
when he was made flesh, is before proved; But that he took not into a personal
Union with himself a nature he had not before, when he was made flesh, is false
and absurd; and directly opposes the very terms of the Text produced by him.

Indeed it is too evident that Mr. Collier does not understand the force of the
particle as, which he so frequently uses; and therefore he supposes, that
whatsoever is spoken of the Person that was God-man, is indifferently spoken of
either nature as such in that Person. Whereas (although the Body and Soul of
man do make up but one Humane nature) in ordinary discourse we hear those
things attributed to that Person who is both animal and rational, of which some
belong to him only as he is animal, viz. to eat, drink, sleep, dye; others only
as he is rational, viz. to understand, deliberate, will, etc. It is to be
bewailed that a man which stumbles at such things as th^se, should become
troublesome to the World by Printing his impertinencies.

The next Scripture insisted on by him is Rom 8. 29. unto which we may add Ephesians.
1. 4. 1 Timothy 1. 9. Mr. Colliers reasonings from these Scriptures is to this
purpose,

God did cho^se and bless his people in Christ before the World was, even in
Christ the anointed who is the Son of God, and was then with the Father. But he
is not Christ in the Divine nature only, nor in the Humane nature only, but as
God-man.

Therefore as God man he was with the Father before time, and as such only is
his Son.

It is true that God did never intend the salvation of any sinners but in and
by Christ, and when God did before time choose a remnant in him, he had a
respect to his Incarnation, and redeeming of them according to the terms of the
Covenant between the Father and Christ: They were chosen then in Christ
considered as one that had undertaken to be a Mediator betwixt God and men, and
in order to the accomplishing of what he so undertook, in the fullness of time
to become Immanuel, the Messiah, or anointed ^f the Lord; It is true also that
Christ is the Son of God: But that he is so as the Christ, and could not have
been so unless he had been our Savior, or that he was anointed to be the Son
of God, and was not so by nature, is impious and false. So likewise to conceit
that he was actually God-man, when we were chosen in him, as Mr. Collier does,
can arise from no other ground, but his confounding the Decree of God with the
execution thereof. And let but the Reader compare Phil. 2. referred to by him
with 1 Pet. 1. 20. with which he closes this Section, and he will need no
other antidote against Mr. Colliers Doctrine.

The next series of Texts abused by him, are these wherein we have prediction
of Christ's coming in the flesh; diverse of which he cites p. 3. and concerning
them he says,

The Scriptures that foretell of him before he was come in the flesh, so speak
of him as to come, viz. God and Man, etc.

If there be any kind of argument in that Section, it must be this, (which to
recite is to confute.)

The Scriptures that foretell Christ's coming in the flesh, speak of the Son of
God.

But they foretell that the Messiah should be God-man, ergo, He i^ the Son of
God only as considered in both natures.

I might ans^er as p^rtinently as he argues, Si placet Domine negatur
Applicati^ (as a young Scholar once replied to his Tutor) It is strange that a
man who undertakes to teach others should yet himself b^ to learn to
distinguish between predictions and their fulfilling; He finds it foretold that
the Son of God should be incarnate, Ergo He always was so. But it is just with
God to leave men to such absurdities* in undertakings of this kind as Mr.
Collier is now engaged in

He proceeds p. 4 5 to reckon up many of those Texts, that speak of the birth
of Christ, his converse with men in the days of his Flesh, his Death,
Resurrection and S^^sion at the right hand of God; all which are cleared, and
his exceptions removed, by that which I laid down in my entry upon this point,
whither I refer the Reader: desiring him to remind Romans 9. 5. with other Texts
of like import that frequently occur in the New Testament. I know Mr. Collier
scornfully rejects what I insist on, in his 8th. page: But offers no reason for
his so doing; and the contradiction, yea blasphemy that he runs upon in
refusing that truth, may warn us to give the more heed thereto. Thus he writes
p. 4.. 5. And as he was the Prince of life, Act. 3. 15. the Lord of Glory, 1
Cor. 2. 8. was he killed and crucified, and certainly that was not in the
Humane nature only; for so he could not be the Prince of Life and Lord of
Glory. I wish Mr. Collier had seriously thought of that saying Prove. 30. 6. Add
thou not unto his words least he reproove thee, and thou be found a liar: In
the Scriptures cited by him there is no such thing written, that as he was the
Prince of Life, etc. he was killed and crucified: They say indeed, That the
Prince of Life was killed, and the Lord of Glory was Crucified: So the
Scripture says also, that God purchased his Church by his blood; and laid down
his Life for us: The person that died was very God, the Prince of Life and Lord
of Glory, but it was in his Humane nature, and not in his Divine that he
suffered, although both made but one person; and to reject this, and say with
Mr. Collier, that as God etc. his Blood was shed, he was crucified and died, i.
e. that all these things befell the Divine as well as the Humane nature; is
impious to that degree, as may make a tender heart bleed, and the ears of a
godly man to tingle. He says in the same Section,

That unscriptural notion does not reach the case, that the Humane nature
suffered, and the Divine nature satisfied; it is the same who suffered, that
satisfied. The common faith of Christians about this matter is, That the same
Jesus who suffered made satisfaction to Divine Justice for their sins; but that
his sufferings were in his Humane nature only, and the worth of them for
satisfaction to Justice did arise from the Union of the Humane nature with the
Divine in one person; so that the Godhead of Christ put an infinite value into
his sufferings. This he offers not to disprove; and they have taken it up on
better grounds then to part with it, because he boldly censures it as an
unscriptural notion.

In p. 5. etc. Mr. Collier does also undertake to give answer to some Texts
produced to prove that Christ was the Son of God in the Divine nature, The
first is Joh. 10. 30. I and my Father are one, that is, ( say they) one in the
same substance, etc. And a little after, That Christ did not intend himself to
be the Son of God in the Divine nature only is apparent; Because he speaks of
himself as he was the Son of God, not as he was not, viz. as he was God and man
visible, and not of the Divine nature only which was invisible, and must have
been an unseen Son, which could not be understood.

This Text does fully prove that Christ has the same Essence with the Father,
and therefore (without respect to his being made flesh) was from Everlasting
begotten of the substance of the Father; and this generation is the foundation
of that relative property of a Son, in which he did subsist before the World
was This we say, and other Texts do so fully assert it, and manifest its lying
in the foundation of the Christian Religion, that I will not doubt to say he is
an Heretic that does deny it. In the following reasoning of Mr. C. it is
evident he miserably begs the question; it cannot (he says) intend his Sonship
in the Divine nature, because in that only he was not the Son of God. But this
he should have proved, not dictated against the testimony produced. What he
says of the invisibility of the Son in the Divine nature, may be as well
applied to the denial of the subsisting of the Father, or Holy Spirit, who also
are the invisible God. And Mr. C. can never prove that it is necessary unto the
being of the Son of God, that he should be visible. The other Texts minded by
him do (diverse of them) speak expressly of a person sent into the world in our
nature; which was the Son of God; and in that he is called the Son of God, when
found in fashion as a man; it does firmly prove the personal union of both
natures in him; but not in the least intimate, that he was not a Son, before he
was a man, as Mr. C. would seduce his Readers to believe. And this may suffice
to this Head also.

His third position is, That he was the Word as God-man and man-God, or as he
explains it p. 8. That the same Word and Son of God, God-man was made flesh,
etc which falls in with his 6th position p. 11

How abundantly the Scriptures hold forth a distinction, betwixt the Word that
took Humane nature, and the nature assumed by him, has been already
manifested; and that the Word was from Everlasting with God, and was God, the
Humane nature not so. And the absurdity of his 6th. thesis is obvious even to a
Child; what was it for the Word to be made flesh, but to become a man; and if
he was God-man from Everlasting, how could he be made a man in time? The truth
is, Mr. C. fairly intimates his good will to deny Christ's coming of the Seed of
David as concerning the flesh; for in answer to this objection he says, p. 11.
He that was God and Man in Gods eye, was made so in our eye, when made or
manifested in flesh: So then he was a man before, it seems, only we knew it
not; and his Humane nature he took not of the Virgin* but brought it from
Heaven with him? If this be not his sense, he speaks nothing to the purpose;
and if it be, I desire he would speak out in his next, and the abomination of
it shall be farther detected. For the present he produces nothing more that
may give any seeming countenance to these notions, or in the least free them
from the highest absurdity; I shall leave them therefore naked, as they are
proposed by him, and follow him to his fourth Thesis.

That as God-man he was a Creature, i. e. He was a Creature as God, as well as
in his Humane nature. Verily Mr. Collier may as well persuade us, That the
Creature is God, as that God is a Creature. I will not suppose his Reader or
mine, to be utterly Brutish and without understanding, and therefore shall
leave this idle and contradictious fiction to confute it self also. Only I will
add an exposition of Col. 1. 15. abused by him p. 10. where he falls in
directly with the notion of the Arrian Heretics; and would persuade us, That
if Christ be not here considered as the firstborn of every Creature as being
one of them, there is nothing in the Text. But the contrary is abundantly
manifested by Dr. Owen in his answer to Biddle the Socinian his Catechism, from
whence I shall transcribe enough to stop Mr. C's mouth* and to inform those
that have not that Treatise by them. Observe then,

Although in the 15, 16, and 17 Verses the Apostle speaks of him who is the
Mediator, (God-man) yet he speaks not of him as Mediator, but that he enters
upon v. 18. But,

His present design being to set forth the excellent Glory of Christ, he speaks
of those things that appertain to him as God: For,

The Creation of all th^^gs by ^^m is most emphatically expressed, v. 16.
together with the end of their Creation; they were created by him and for him,
he is the Heir of all things: and in v. 17. His pre*existence unto all things,
and his providence in supporting them and continuing that being to them which
he g^ve them is asserted. And on this account, for this reason is he sa^d to be
the firstborn of every Creature; which are the words Mr. C. cavils at; He
therefore by whom all things, all Creatures were Created, is none of them,
otherwise he must Create himself: He is said to be (...) not (...) the
firstborn, ^ot the first Created, that is the Prince, H^ir and Lord of the
whole Creation, so that his privilege, rule and inheritance of and over all
Creatures is here expressed, which suits the Apostles aim, to set out the
excellency of Christ above all Creatures. His being begotten is opposed to the
Creation of all things. First in Scripture is sometimes used with respect to
things going before, in which sense it denies all order or series of things in
the same kind; so God is said to be the first, Isa. 41. 4. Because before him
there is none Isa. 43. 11. and in this sense is Christ the first born, so the
first born as to be the only begotten Son of God. He is also said to be the
beginning of the Creation of God, because he gives, and continues being to
all Creatures. And whereas Mr. C. says he is a Creature and the Creator too;
we grant it; but not secundam idem, in the same nature. As he was God he is the
Creator, as Man a Creature.

He says farther in the 5th. place,

That this Creature God man made all things.

As God-man he is not a mere Creature: It is true Christ made all things, as we
saw in the preceding Text* but not as man, for he was made flesh long after,
but when he subsisted on^y in the form of God, long before he was a Creature.
His 6th. position is answered before.

He adds 7thly, That he is the Son of Man in both natures.

As to his Humane nature, and that only he was ^^^e of the seed of David: But
the union of both natures, was so strict and indissoluble in the person of
Christ, that it is truly said, That holy thing that was born of the Virgin was
the Son of God. The person who as to his Humane nature was formed of the seed
of the Virgin, being Gods (...) his proper Son begotten of his own substance
from Everlasting, as to his Divine nature. And this distinction of natures in
Christ strictly observed, does not at all infer a plurality of Persons or Sons,
as Mr. C. vainly imagines p. 8. in his Question: For the Humane nature has no
subsistence of its own; It is the same person who is the Son of God and the Son
of David, yet is he the Son of God in his Divine nature in contradistinction
from the Humane* and the Son of David with respect to our nature that he took
of the Virgin in contradistinction from the Divine nature; though these natures
since the Incarnation, cannot possibly be divided or separated. And if this be
not owned, we must bring in a confusion of natures in the Person of Christ.

As to what he adds about Justification, it shall be taken notice of in a more
convenient place.

Whereas Mr. C. closes this Chapter with an affirmation, That he cannot yet be
convinced of any thing written in his Body of Divinity (wherein himself owneth
these things are found) of which he yet sees cause to repent. Truly his
blindness renders him an object of pity. And because he supposes these strange
Heterodoxies have proceeded from his being enriched in knowledge beyond all
others, his case is the more dangerous. But oh that he would be advised to go
to Christ for Eye Salve that he might see; and then we should hear another
story from him.

While I was engaged in my answer to Mr. Collier, I received from the hand of a
Friend some Animadversions on this Chapter of his, especially respecting his
second position concerning the Person of Christ; which because they are not
long, and may give some farther Light into this matter under debate, I have
here annexed.

Mr. Colliers Add. word, p. 2. That which I shall endeavor to demonstrate from
Scripture i^, That he is the Son of God only as considered in both natures. And
if this be proved, if he be the Son of God in both natures only, then he is not
the Son of God in the Divine nature only; and to prove that he is the Son of
God in both natures only, the Scripture so presents him to us, and no
otherwise: And as the Scripture presents him to us, so ought we to believe him
to be, and no otherwise.

Before I enter upon the consideration of what the Scriptures say in this
important Article of our Faith, let us hear what Mr. Collier himself says in
his Body of Divinity, under this Title, How this one God subsisteth in three
Persons, p. 44.

The sum of all is this, That God is one Eternal infinite substantial Being,
distinguished into Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and in all three, are Divine,
and distinct relative properties and operations, yet in all no one wills, no
one acts without the other, Genesis 1. 1, 2, 26. Heb. 1. 2. Job 33. 4. And p. 43
And this truth, i. e. a plurality in one infinite and eternal God, is clearly
to be proved from the Old Testament even from the Creation.

It might be supposed by this his brief description of the Deity, that Mr.
Collier is Orthodox in his opinion concerning the Divinity of the Son of God,
though in many places he be singular in his expressions: And that his design
wherein he is singular and different from others, is very charitable, viz. That
his supposed absurdity of making two Sons, or the Sonship of Christ not to be
the same at first as it was at last, might be avoided.

Yet whosoever thoroughly weighs his whole discourse, cannot but observe that he
speaks at least very doubtfully concerning any existence that the Son of God
had in the Divine nature, before he was made or manifest in flesh.

Add* word, p. 11. 6. That this word God-man was made flesh. -- Here it seems
lies the bl^ck in the way, that he that was a man, was made a man: The resolve
is clear from Scripture, he that was God and man in Gods eye, was made so in
our eye when made or manifested in flesh.

It were to be wished that Mr. Collier would yet speak more plainly, that if he
think a right, a wrong opinion may not be conceived of him, from his seemingly
affected obscurity in his expressions. What is the meaning of this, He that was
God and man in Gods eye, was made so in our eye. Is it that God the Father
always saw him as he was from Eternity, existing with him in the Deity in both
natures God-man, or never existing ^s God the Son till he was made or manifest
in the flesh.

Because of this obscurity, and the jealousies justly conceived that Mr.
Collier is very corrupt in his opinion concerning the pre-existence of the Son
of God in the Divine nature before he assumed flesh; let it now be considered
whether the Scriptures present the Lord Christ to us as being the Son of God in
both natures only, even those places of Scripture (among others) which Mr. C.
by his false glosses would have us to think do so only present him to us.

Heb. 1. 8. But unto the Son he says, Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever, a
scepter of Righteousness is the scepter of thy Kingdom, thou have loved
Righteousness and hated Iniquity, therefore God thy God has anointed thee with
the Oil of gladness above thy fellows.

Herein we have not only the unction of the Son of God mentioned, but the
reason of it: And that is plainly taken from his Everlasting Divinity, Regality
and Righteousness. Because he that is the Son of God, is God that made, and
upholds, and rules over the world in Righteousness, and loves it, and hates
iniquity, therefore as the only fit person is he anointed by God the Father,
his God and our God, to the Office of Mediatorship, which the whole Chapter
treats of: And from the dignity of his Person as the Son of God, is divine
adoration given to him, when as the Son of man, he came first into the world:
And from thence also his pre-eminence, notwithstanding his debasement in the
flesh, continues with him above all his fellows.

Heb. 2. 16. He took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the
Seed of Abraham.

If the question be asked (as the E^nuch did Philip in the like case) of whom
does the Apostle here speak? The answer is plain from the context of the Son of
God He is the person assuming* reflecting upon the different natures Angelical
and Humane, rejecting the former, laying hold of the latter; For here the
dignity of the nature of Angels, though in it self superior to the Humane, and
more near to the nature of God, as being purely Spiritual, (and who are in that
respect by way of eminency called the Sons of God, Job 38. 7.) was not chosen:
because the assumption of the Humane nature, though in it self more inferior,
was yet more proper and necessary for their sakes for whom he was the anointed
of God as their High Priest and Savior. Hence is plainly inferred, not only
his pre-existence as the Son of God, before his choice and assumption of the
Seed of Abraham, viz. his taking* upon him flesh; but that he was also purely
so subsisting in the Divine nature, as to stand indifferent as to the
assumption of the Angelical or Humane nature into the Unity of his Person,
otherwise then as he was pre-determined by the Decree, Council and Covenant of
God, in order to the work to which he was anointed.

Jo. 16. 28. I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world again, I
leave the world and go to the Father. -- Jo. 17. 5. And now O Father glorify
thou me with thine own self, with the glory I had with thee before the world
was. -- Jo. 8. 42, 58. If God were your Father you would l^ve me; for I
proceeded forth, and came from God; neither came I of my self, but he sent me.
-- Before Abraham was I am.

What words can express more directly the relation of Christ unto God the
Father as his Son, considered singly in his Divine nature, It was some 1000 of
years after Abraham that we had the knowledge of this mystery by Divine
revelation, God manifest in Flesh, The Word was made Flesh. That was
accomplished in the fullness of time. But from all Eternity he was the I am, the
Son of God, and as such came forth from God. And herein also we may note, that
he declares (not only his own action and motion, but also his Fathers) his
mission. It was not only his own undertaking, though he was therein also
voluntary. Wherefore he says, when he comes into the world, Sacrifice and
Offering thou would not, but a body have thou prepared me Then said I, ^o I
come to do thy will O God. In order to the perfect observance of this will of
his Father, for the performance whereof he had in time a Body prepared, fitted
for him which he had not before. The Father sends him and he comes (both are
active and spontaneous herein) for the accomplishing of this great work, the
Reconciliation, Redemption and Salvation of sinful and l^^t man.

The Lord Christ did not then first acquire his being or relation unto God the
Father as his Son: But being from Eternity the brightness of his Fathers Glory,
and express Image of his Person, after he had by the appointment of his Father*
and his own voluntary undertaking, veiled his Deity, humbled himself and taken
upon him the form of a Servant, and therein performed the work his Father gave
him to do, he prays to be restored to the same, not any other, for there could
be no greater Glory conferred upon him as to his Divine nature, then what he
had with his Father before the world was.

Joh. 6. 38. I came down out of Heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will
of him that sent me. -- Gal. 4. 4, 6. When the fullness of time was come God
sent out his Son. -- And because you are Sons God has sent out the Spirit of
his Son into your hearts, etc.

In these Texts compared with their Contexts, you have again a full discovery
of him who was by God the Father, anointed to be the Savior of the world. His
being in the Flesh was now manifest to all that conversed with him, it needed
no proof, he carried about with him a self demonstration, that he was made of a
Woman, made under the Law. The great thing that the Jews, and all the world
were to be fully informed in and convinced of, was, that the Person now
manifest in the flesh, was the Savior, the Christ, the Lord. And for the
evidencing of this great and important truth, it was necessary that the Lord
Christ should not only speak and do as never man before him spoke and did, but
also prove his descent, whence he was, and wherefore he came into the world.
And in that respect, together with all the testimonies born of him immediately
from Heaven by God the Father and the holy Angels, we have him frequently
asserting his Original himself, I came down from Heaven. Hence it was that the
Jews at this season took occasion for their murmuring, Jo. 6. 42. Is not this
Jesus the Son of Joseph, whose Father and Mother we know, how is it then that
he says, I came down from Heaven. In answer to this Objection, the Lord Christ
tells the Jews, that in order to a true saving knowledge of his Person, who and
whence he was, it was necessary they should be taught of God; Blessed art thou
Simon Barjona, for Flesh and Blood has not revealed this to thee, but my
Father which is in Heaven. And that they might know his original, and his
immediate and uninterrupted relation to God as his Father, notwithstanding his
then present state of Humiliation in the Flesh, he tells them from whence he
was, who he was, and wherefore he came into the world. The medium he uses to
prove his relation to God as his Father, is not his being born of a Virgin,
Abraham's or David's Seed (though that be also true, and most proper to prove him
who is the Son of God to be also that Son of man, the Messiah that was
promised) But he proves it by his descent from Heaven, his seeing of the
Father, (which no man ever did or could do) his being of God. And because the
exceptions to what he affirmed, both by the Jews and his Disciples, were taken
from his being in the flesh; Therefore to show that the Hypostatical Union of
God and Man in him, had not deprived him of his dignity of the Son of God, he
speaks of himself under the notion as they apprehended him, of being the Son of
Man as he then also was. And asks his Disciples, what and if you see the Son of
Man ascend up where* he was before, which is further explained Jo. 3. 13, 14.
chapter 12. 32. Ephesians. 4. 10. His condescension to take upon him flesh, to become the
Son of Man, and in that nature to suffer death upon the Cross, was no
deprivation of his Divinity, nor derogation from his Person, he still asserts,
even from thence, his then present being in Heaven. The Divine and Humane
nature subsisting in his Person, had not removed the Deity out of Heaven, but
by that intimate conjunction given the Humanity from the dignity of his Person,
a claim to Heaven, and right of Ascension thither. He did not therefore
descend, that he might always remain upon earth, but that after he had finished
his Fathers work which he was to do in the flesh, he might carry the Humane
nature with him into Heaven, whither he was to ascend again. So that since his
uniting of the Humane to the Divine nature in his own person, whether he was
spoken of as the Son of God according to his Divinity, or as the Son of David
according to his Humanity, under which notion soever he was spoken of, either
as the Son of God, or the Son of Man, he being in both natures but one entire
person, was still truly said to be in Heaven* not that it was, or could ever be
supposed that his claim to Heaven* and his being there, did arise from his
being the Son of Man, but as he himself asserts from his coming down from
thence, his coming, and being sent from his Father* and yet remaining always
with his Father, He and his Father being one. He that descended is the same
also that ascended; there neither was, nor could there be admitted any change
of the Person. It is also observable that Gal. 4. 6. the same word is used for
the sending forth of the Spirit of his Son by God the Father, into the hearts
of his adopted Sons, that is used for the sending forth of his Son into the
world. This is no slender evidence of the Eternity and Divinity of Christ, that
he has the same relation to the holy Spirit with the Father, 1 Pet. 1. 11. It
was the Spirit of Christ that was in the Prophets of old, that long before his
Incarnation did foretell thereof, and of his sufferings, and the Glory that
should follow: David himself said by his Spirit, The Lord said unto my Lord,
sit thou at my right hand till I make thine enemies thy footstool, as to his
Divinity he is the root of David, who according to his Humanity was his
offspring, Rev. 22. 16.

The Vision of Isaiah chapter 6. was true, and the voice of the Angels a real
voice, who cried as to the time then present, holy, holy, holy is the Lord of
Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his Glory. And if the Application of this
vision of the Prophet, and voice of the Angels by the Evangelist ( Jo. 12. 41.)
be also true, what more clear evidence can be given of the Lord Christ's
subsisting in the Divine nature, before his descension from Heaven and
assumption of the Humane nature.

Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundation of the Earth, and the
Heavens are the work of thine hands; they shall perish, but thou remainest;
they shall wax old as does a garment, and as a vesture thou shall fold them up;
and they shall be changed, but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.

From these and many other the like Texts, is the Divinity of the Lord Christ
fully asserted, and by the writings of the Apostles, directed by the Holy
Spirit, since his Incarnation applied to him. By whom we are given to
understand, that the Prophets aforetime spoke of our Lord Christ, and thereby
is made known to us the dignity of his person, as the Alpha and Omega. But I
would have Mr. Collier ingeniously consider, whether he or any other man,
without this future revelation and explication, could have gathered any such
doctrine as the Manhood coexisting with the Godhead in the person of Christ
from all Eternity; or that he who in the beginning laid the foundations of the
Earth, and made the Heavens, was when he did this work Man as well as God; or
that since this revelation and application of these sayings to the person of
Christ, can say any otherwise then that these titles and operations are
referred to the Son of God as he subsisted in his Divine nature with the
Father. And if this be so, let Mr. Collier be convinced and acknowledge, that
the Scriptures do sometimes (and that frequently) speak of the Son of God as in
the Divine nature only, and not always as he was in both natures God and Man.

CHAP. II.
Of Election.

I Shall for the better order sake pass over his second Chapter at present and
consider in the next place what he proposes in his third, of Election.

Only this I desire the Reader to take notice of once for all, that I intend
not to make Mr. C.'s discourse an occasion of going over the Heads of the
Controversy betwixt us and the Arminians, in a full stating and handling of
those points: It has been sufficiently done by others both formerly and of
late; but my present design is only to remove those stumbling blocks, that he
in this Book has endeavored to cast before weak Christians. Thus he begins,
p. 18.

Of this I have spoken something too in my Confession of Faith, or Body of
Divinity; but in this I shall speak a little more full and plain.

I will not undertake to justify all he has said about Election in his Body
of Divinity: but I must say, that in this he is gone farther out of the way of
truth; and instead of speaking more full and plain to the business, he involves
himself in many absurdities and gross errors which before he kept off from. He
proceeds to explain the term;

Election, or to elect or choose, from (...), or (...), in Scripture ordinarily
imports to choose, or to be chosen.

What Mr. Collier designs in getting these Greek words into his Book, I know
not: one that understands not the Greek can tell him, that to elect or choose,
ordinarily imports to choose. But I confess he must have more learning then I,
that can readily conceive how, to elect or choose, should import to be chosen,
which Mr. C. adds: Election indeed is sometimes put to signify ^ers^ns chosen;
the abstract being put for the concrete.

He proceeds to his division of Election; unto which I shall oppose a brief
account thereof from the Scripture, and so free the te^m from ambiguity, that
we may proceed without interruption.

Election as it is attributed to God may be variously considered: 1. There is
frequent mention in Scripture of Election unto some function or office either
Ecclesiastical or Political.

2. There is an Election unto a participation of some peculiar benefits and
favors from God; and this may be distinguished into that which is,

1. General; In which sense a Person or Nation is said to be chosen of God,
when they partake of such an adoption as that they are brought into some
covenant with God, and are reputed his people: so the Israelites, were an Elect
Nation.

2. Special; and that is Gods choosing unto Eternal life, and it is either of
Angels, or Men: And it is this Election, and the concernment of men therein,
that we are to consider; and as Mr. P^lhil well observes, (p. 24. of the Div.
Will) this is variously expressed in the Scripture: It is called (...), Romans 8.
28. because it is Gods purpose: (...), 2 Timothy 1. 9. because his gracious
purpose: (...), Romans 11. 6. because he separates or singles out some to mercy
in a way of choice: (...), 1 Pet. 1. 2. because he knows them as his own in a
way of singular love: (...), Romans 8. 29, 30. because he infallibly
predestinates them to Grace and Glory: and (...), Ephesians. 1. 5. because all is out
of the pure self-motion of his own good will. This Election of God then is,

G^d ^illing or decreeing to glorify his Grace in the Salvation of a certain
number of the posterity of fallen Man, through sanctification of the Spirit*
and belief of the truth.

And other Election unto Eternal Life, the Scripture knows not.

So then what Mr. Collier discourses p. 19. concerning a General Election in
the Gospel, has no foundation but in the ambiguity of the ^erm, which I have
removed: And indeed in the New Testament there is no countenance given to the
using of the term in that s^nse as he does: when whole Churches are said to be
Elect; it is rather because in the judgment of Charity each Member in a Gospel
Church is so to be esteemed, then for the reason which he supposes. That which
he drops in that Section concerning ^^lling from Grace* shall be examined
afterward.

He proceeds p. 20. To discourse of Special Election, which he mak^^ twofold.

The first is of those who are chosen in Christ before the foundation of the
world, unto the obtaining of Grace and Glory: A brief account of which I have
already given. The reason he gives for this is, That the undertaking of Christ
might be assured not to be in vain on the most special account, etc.

He acknowledges then; That if there had not been a certain number given to
Christ by the Father, who by effectual Grace should be brought to believe in
him, his undertaking might have been in vain: But this must not be: very true:
But then if the whole of his undertaking must not be left at uncertainty; why
should any part of it be so? How Mr. C. will reconcile this with his other
notions I know not. He goes on,

The second sort of special Election in the Gospel is of All that do believe
and obey the Gospel in truth, persevering therein to the end.

Afterward he accounts these distinct from the special Elect; but for the
present he makes this one branch of special Election: I shall allow him to
alter his terms as he pleases, if he find them unfit, and consider his present
notion, which is built upon this supposition, That many may and shall believe
and obey the Gospel, and persevere therein to the end, that receive no special
Grace from God in the pursuit of his Electing Love, to enable them thereunto,
or preserve them therein, (which notion shall be examined in its proper place)
And these are Elected on the foresight of their Faith and Obedience and
perseverance therein. And here we might reasonably expect, that Tho. C. in his
Add. word, should have confuted the arguments urged against such an Election by
Th. C. in his B. of D. p. 444, 445, 446. But this he silently passes over; and
this sudden change is the more to be taken notice of, because he tells us in
his Preface to that Book, That they are not the notions of sudden conception,
but the fruit and birth of many years travel; that he there presents us with:
and that he would have all his Doctrine to be compared with that Book; and
either reconciled therewith or rejected. I know some will be ready to say,

Inconstans levitas, levis inconstantia vulgi!
Nunc vult, nunc non vult, and nunc neque vult, neq, non vult!
But I shall rather mind that seasonable exhortation of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.
14. and Heb. 1^. 9. and so address my self to consider what proof of this
notion he offers to us.

Election (says he) under this consideration is declared in these and the like
Scriptures, Joh. 6. 40. and 3. 16. and 8. 31. Romans 2. 7. Heb. 5. 9. Col. 1. 21,
23. Rev. 22. 14. All these Scriptures hold forth no more but the inseparable
connection (as of the means with the end) of Faith and Obedience persevered in,
with Eternal Life and Salvation; not a tittle of the Election of any on the
foresight of these. He that holds out to the end shall be saved, which all
the Elect shall do, being kept by the power of God through Faith unto
Salvation; but this Grace, as well as future Glory, flows to them from the
eternal spring of Electing Love.

Yea Mr. C. himself can tell us at another time, That Faith is no where stated
in the Scriptures as the condition of Election; neither in reason can it be so,
if we consider what persons are Elected to, and that is to believe and obey the
Gospel, to be holy here and happy hereafter, 1 Pet. 1, 2. Bod. of Divin. p. 445.

And if Mr. C. will consult those that have written on this controversy, he
may find other arguments urged against this error also; but perhaps his own
may have the greatest influence on him. I shall therefore leave that with him,
and attend him in his farther offer of proof of the contrary opinion now; Thus
he proceeds, p. 21. We may not so understand particular and special Election,
as to derogate from the universal Grace and love of God to all men; nor from
the truth of the Law of Grace, which calls upon all, and encourages all, and
promises life to all that do believe and obey the Gospel, etc.

What Mr. Collier means by the universal Grace and love of God to all men he
does not here explain: But by the tenor of his discourse in other places in
his Book, his sense appears to be; That God intended the Redemption and
Salvation of all men in the death of his Son, and has recovered them all out
of their fallen state, and put them into a capacity of obtaining Heaven,
without his special Grace. And it is true, that the Doctrine of Election as
revealed in the Scriptures, does overthrow this fiction; but must it therefore
be rejected, because it will not comport with his errors? And whereas he
supposes that the Decree of God concerning the salvation of the Elect opposes
his revealed will, and gracious invitations unto sinners in the Gospel; this
must be imputed to his ignorance of these things: He tells us not wherein he
supposes the opposition does lie; And whatever he thinks, their harmony is
sweet and full. There is a sufficiency in Christ to save the whole world if
they did believe on him; and there is a sure promise of salvation to every
believer: And it is the will of God that salvation by Christ should be tendered
unto all where the Gospel comes on the terms mentioned therein; But the
wickedness of man's heart, and his natural enmity to God being such, as would
render all this fruitless if ^^ were left to himself; the most high did from
Everlasting Decree, (that which in time he effects) by his powerful Grace to
draw a remnant unto Christ, that they may obtain salvation by him, and to leave
the rest to perish in their obstinacy. Where then is our making null the
revealed will of God by his Decree, that Mr. C. talks of? He adds, The Lord
himself makes this distinction, with suitable promises alike to both, i. e. He
allows a latitude beyond the first and special Election, or gift t^ hi^ Son,
with promise of life on the universal account of Grace, Joh. 6. 37. which Text
he miserably wrests in his following lines; unto the whole my answer is briefly
this:

The Decree of God is one thing; his Command another; It is the latter that
constitutes our duty, not the former. It does not therefore follow, that
because many are called, and commanded to believe, and Life is tendered to them
on Gospel-terms; therefore many are chosen besides the special Elect. But to
the Text; All that the Father gives me shall come to me, and him that comes
unto me I will in no wise cast out. In the context Christ declares, 1. That
there was a certain number given to him by the Father; which Mr. Collier owns
to be the special Elect. 2. That concerning these the will of God was, that
they should be brought to Inherit Eternal Life by Faith in Christ, v. 40. 3.
That although the natural pravity of men is such, that no man without special
Grace can come to Christ, v. 44. yet these should by the drawings of the Father
be brought to him, All that the Father has given me, shall come to me. 4. That
these coming should in no wise be rejected by him; and the reason thereof he
renders, v. 38, 39. It is evident therefore the same persons are spoken of in
the end, that are intended in the beginning of v. 37. and Mr. Colliers
supposition of the contrary is without ground; and his reason for it
ridiculous; It cannot be supposed (says he) that him that comes, etc. is a
promise to the first gift, for they shall come; that is,

All the Elect shall believe in Christ; Ergo, There is no promise made of their
salvation by him. Apage nugas!

That which he discourses concerning the Book of Life, p. 22. if his notion of
it were granted, makes nothing for him, unless he suppose that the revealed
will of God, that declares and determines our duty, what we ought to do; and
the Decree of God, or what himself will do; to be all one. However we will
consider what he says, viz.

That Rev. 3. 5. and 20. 12, 15. and 22. 19. must be understood to speak of the
Gospel-book of Life, in which all Believers are written, and not the first Book
of Life in which the special Elect are written.

I answer* 1. The special Elect and true Believers are terms convertible, where
the one are written* the other are written: And it is Mr. Colliers great error
to suppose the number of the one to exceed the other: As many as are ordained
to Eternal Life believe; so the Election obtain, and the rest are blinded, Acts
13. 48. Romans 11. 7.

2. A Book is attributed to God in Scripture, not properly, but by a Figure
called Anthropopatheia; the metaphor being taken from wise men, who are wont
diligently to set down in a Book those notable things that they would keep in
mind, and signifies his providence with respect to, and most exact knowledge
of all things, and in the Scriptures cited by Mr. Collier it signifies Gods
special knowledge of his saved ones, concerning which the Apostle speaks 2 Timothy
2. 19. which is as a certain Catalogue of those whom God has chosen unto
Eternal Life by Faith in Christ: But Mr. C. says, they must be otherwise
understood: His saying they must is no proof; and his reasons are too weak to
enforce it, His first is, Because out of the Book of Life here mentioned many
may be blotted. I answer, The expression is Figurative, and is to be
interpreted according to the scope of the place; as God is said to blot out
sin, when he does not impute it, so to blot out the name of one out of the Book
of Life, that he does not reckon among his saved ones, which he will make
manifest in the day of judgment, when all the world shall know that he had no
part therein; thus the affirmative being put for the contrary negative; the
sense is briefly this, God shall take away his part out of the Book of Life,
Rev. 22. 19. i. e. He shall have no part at all in it, and so likewise e
contra, chapter 3. 5. I will not blot out his name out of the Book of Life, i. e. I
will reckon him amongst my own Sheep, and it shall appear by my confessing him
before my Father, etc.

His second reason is, Because this Book is one of th^se by which men shall be
judged, Rev. 20. 12, 15.

In the Text this Book is mentioned distinct from those by which men shall be
judged; and the opening of it in that day signifies the glorious discovery that
shall then be made of the Lord, his h^ving ordered all things in his holy and
righteous government of the world, so as to fulfill his own Decree, and that
all his saved ones are alone beholding to free Grace dispensed according to the
purpose that God purposed in himself before the foundation of the world; for in
the issue (when men have talked their pleasure of their own ability) it so
comes to pass, That whatsoever was not written in the Book of Life, was cast
into the Lake of Fire; not simply because they were not written there, but
because they being left to the way of their own heart, did wilfully persist in
their rebellion against God, for which they must then suffer the vengeance of
Eternal Fire.

Election (he says) is no ground to discourage any from believing; who says
it is? That crimination has been abundantly answered by others without the
help of his Scriptureless notion.

The tenders of Life in the Gospel are full of Grace, the command to believe,
equal and rational; and the promise of Life to the believer sure and steadfast:
Election is a secret and hidden thing, as to the concernment of particular
persons in it, which belongs unto God; and as none can know their Election of
God before Faith, so is it no way necessary that they should do so in order to
believing: for revealed things belong unto us and our Children, and we are
bound to attend to them in that same order in which God has revealed them: Now
in the Gospel is the Salvation of God revealed to lost sinners, and they,
simply considered as such, commanded to accept of it upon the terms propose^ to
them; none are called to believe under the formal consideration of Elect
persons; but as weary and heavy laden sinners; undone thirsty sinners; in which
terms every one sensible of his condition by nature, finds himself presently,
and equally with others concerned. Now* that God has purposed to make this
call effectual unto some; and these upon believing; through the Doctrine of
Elect on, have a prospect into the heart of God toward them, and his
Everlasting purpose of Grace concerning them, and find their spiritual and
glorious joy increased, by a knowledge that their names are written in Heaven;
being rightly weighed may on diverse accoun^s encourage, but on no account can
discourage the Faith of any.

We come now to his last Section in this Chapter, which is worse then all that
goes before; yet here he gives us but a taste of what he intends more largely
to pursue afterward. Thus he writes p. 23.

The Scripture seems to import that many, yea very many (compared with the
first elect and espoused relation) shall obtain some great privilege, though
below that of Election, and espoused relation to Jesus Christ.

That which he was to prove is, That besides those that are chosen to the
obtaining of Grace and Glory, there are others chosen to be heirs of Glory on
foresight of their faith, etc. so that they obtain Election thereby. To make
this good, he tells us of very many that shall obtain some great privilege,
though below that of Election. Such impertinencies are his writings full of,
But we will take his meaning to be, That they he now speaks of shall obtain the
second Election, but not the first; which is a great privilege, but below that
of espoused relation to Christ. But then is he at variance with himself again;
for thus he writes a little before, p. 16. Whoever among the sons and daughters
of men, do sincerely believe and obey the Gospel, shall have the special
relation to God and Christ therein, and the special benefit and salvation
thereof. And this he supposes many do besides the special elect; And in this
very Chapter he tells us, That faith and obedience with perseverance therein,
renders persons the objects of this Election; and certainly the Scriptures know
no other espoused relation to Christ, but what we have by Faith; neither are
there greater promises in the Book of God, then those that are made to persons
persevering in faith and obedience; They shall inherit all things, Rev. 21. 7.
But Mr. C. supposes that these believe, and persevere with less help from God
then the special Elect have. Be it so: there is no reason that this should
lessen their Glory; why therefore Mr. Collier sets these beneath the special
Elect, I know not. But indeed these are Saints of his own making, and therefore
he may prefer, or postpone them as he pleases. The Scripture speaks of no
true Believers, but the Elect that are enabled to believe by special Grace.

He proceeds to his proof; Else (says he) what means that Psa. 45. 14. The
Virgins her companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee, i. e. to
Christ, where the only one spouse is distinct from the Virgins her companions.
Mr. C. it seems is confident this can have no other meaning but what favors
his notion. But here it were easy for me to fill up diverse sheets in
transcribing the Commentaries of many learned men on this Text, of which not
one gives countenance to his opinion; but that suits not with my present
design? Briefly therefore I reply,

In this Psalm, and in Solomon's Song, (from whence he takes his next testimony)
the Holy Ghost does set forth things spiritual and heavenly by Types, and
Metaphors, taken from things t^rrene, and usages among men; which necessarily
fall short of the complete expression of the Glory of the things of Gods
Kingdom; and therefore as there is somewhat of similitude, so is there also of
dissimilitude betwixt the things compared, and the parallel must not be run
farther then the scope of the Texts themselves, and warranty of other plain
Scriptures will allow: Hence it is also that diverse Metaphors are used to
express the same thing, of which some do adumbrate ^t under this r^sp^ct, and
some under that. Now in this Scripture the manifest design of the Psalmist is,
to set forth the Majesty and Grace of Christ's Kingdom, as he is the head and
husband of his people, together with the glorious privileges of the Church his
Spouse, in her marriage relation to him: And therefore in his description of
the Church, in that state and honor unto which Christ has advanced her, she
is compared to a Queen richly adorned, and attended (as with her Ladies of
Honor) by the Virgins her companions; because so it uses to be with Queens
when brought in state unto their Lord and Husband. And if we strain the
Metaphor (or Type) no farther, we have a good sense of the words, and that
which suits the design of the Text. Although I am inclined to think, that the
same Church and Spouse of Christ is in various respects shadowed, by either
term, both of Queen, and of the Virgins her companions: As she is represented
by the Queen, respect is had to the then flourishing state of the Jewish
Church; as by the Virgins her companions, that should also be brought to
Christ, the bringing in of the Gentiles, and their gathering into diverse
particular Congregations is respected, which in the fullness of time should be,
though then they were as a little Sister that had no breasts. More might be
added* bu^ this suffices to show that he has failed of his purpose in the
citation of this Text. He proceeds,

And that Song 9. 6. (he means the 6. 8, 9.) where are multitudes, besides the
^spo^sed relation of Queens. (but ^ertainl^ if they be Queens indeed they are
espoused to him whose Queens they are) Concubines and Virgins, blessing and
praising the holy and happy estate of the undefiled Spouse; called chapter 5. 8.
the daughters of Jerusalem: so that there may be many friends and followers,
that may come short of the espoused relation, and yet have a part at that day.

As to Cant. 6. 8, 9. Here seems to be two things of a different nature, one
referring to the ways of the Kings of the Earth, and another referring to Jesus
Christ; the Kings of the Earth use to have many Queens and Concubines, many
single persons for their pleasure and recreation, and Solomon himself was
greatly presumptuous in this kind; But speaking of Christ's disposition, he is
not like the world, but says, ^y Love, my Dove is but one, and she is the only
one of her Mother, and the choice one of her that hear her: as there is but one
Christ, so in matter of Salvation there is but one Church. And therefore I see
not at present any just exception against the account that Mr. Ainsworth gives
of it in his annotations, which is to this purpose,

There are sixty, or be their sixty Queens, i e. Though there were sixty, etc.
yet one is my Do^e, or there is but one my Dove, so this one only is opposed to
the many Queens, Concubines, etc. beforementioned: Here the spouse of Christ,
which is but one (as there is but one body, and one spirit, one hope, one Lord,
one Faith even as we are called in one hope of our calling, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5.) is
preferred before the multitude of other, which in their own, and the worlds
esteem are Queens, Ladies, etc. Rev. 18. 7. Isa. 47. 7. -- and they praised
her. The spouse is counted happy for the great blessings of God upon her; as it
is said of Israel, Deuteronomy. 26. 19. That God had made them high above all Nations
which he had made, in praise and in name, and in honor; so the People
magnif^^d Christians, Acts 5. 13.

By the Daughters of Jerusalem in this Book we may understand ^^ose that under
some common ^r preparatory work of the spirit, have some respect to Christ and
his Church, though they are not perfectly brought over to him, or fully
instructed in his way, but enquiring after it, see chapter 5. 8. 9. and 6. 1. Now
in such either the Lord carries on this work unto a through conversion, and so
the uniting of the Soul unto himself by Faith, and then are they among his
espoused and saved ones; or else they sin away their convictions, and return
again with the Sow that was washed to wallowing in the mire; and the latter end
of such is worse then theirs who never made a profession.

Hitherto then Mr. C. can find out no persons in the Scripture to ^^^l up his
imagined middle room betwixt Heaven and Hell. If persons belong not to that
number which make up the Bride the Lambs wife, the new Jerusalem
(notwithstanding his idle talking) there will be no other place found for them
in the day of Christ, but amongst those mentioned Rev. 21. 8. and 22. 14, 15.
He adds,

And that Mat. 25. 1, to 12. seems to suit with those Scriptures; though the
Lord and Bridegroom will say to the foolish Virgins, I know you not; that may
be; in the espoused relation to go into the wedding he knew them not; but as
Virgins that had been his spouses companions.

Certainly Mr. C. esteems himself able (...) to overturn things immovable by a
blast of his corrupt Doctrine, or else he had never had the confidence to
produce this Text for the proof of what he brings it for; viz. That many (of
which number he reckons these foolish Virgins) shall be Elected for their Faith
and Obedience, and obtain some great privilege in the day of Christ. Let us
therefore consider the character of the persons that he supposes shall be thus
dignified: All indeed that are mentioned in the parable were Virgins, viz. in
profession; the foolish as well as the wise pretended to purity, and were
outwardly conformable to the Laws of Christ; but for all this five were
foolish, i. e. sinners, such as never in truth knew the things that did belong
to their peace; and these had no Oil in their Vessels, i. e. no true Grace in
their hearts; they were Hypocrites in the midst of their profession; and when
Christ came they were found unready, i. e. without a wedding garment of Faith
and Holiness, (and this account he gives of them himself in effect in his Bod.
of D. p. 135, and 136.) and the Lord protests, that he knows them not; but he
knows all that are his; They belong not therefore unto Christ, but to the God
of this world; they were in heart his Vassals; though with their Lips they
pretended kindness to Christ: and yet this man endeavors to persuade such that
they shall have peace; and for all this Hypocrisy, because they kept company
with others that were sincere, though they were painted Sepulchers all the
while; they shall have a place in the Kingdom of Glory, though not full out so
excellent as that which the special Elect obtain! I^ this Doctrine be according
to Godliness, I know nothing that deserves to be esteemed contrary thereto. But
let not men trust in this refuge of lies* nor cheat their Souls with vain hopes
because of the smooth things that Mr. C. does prophecy unto them. What in truth
will be the condition and state of such as these in the day of Christ, you have
graphically described in these Texts of Scripture, Mat. 22. 12, 13. and chapter 13.
40, 41. compared with chapter 24. 51. and this very Text compared with chapter 7. 21,
22, 23. and Prove. 1. 28.

As for the other Texts cited by him, viz. Mat. 10. 41, 42. and Mat. 20. v. 16.
etc. I cannot devise which way he thinks to put the first of them upon the
wrack* so as to make it speak to his mind. That which it teaches us is, That
they which love the members of Christ, and desire the furtherance of his work,
do give evidence of their own being in him, and relation to him, and therefore
shall be glorified with his Servants. This gives no countenance to his notion.
In the other, viz. Mat. 20. 16. with Mar. 20. 31. If the scope of the parable
be attended, the sense will appear to be this, Many that are first, viz. in
appearance, as to the earliness of their profession, and their outward
forwardness and seeming earnestness therein, shall be last, i. e. shall at the
last be found cast-aways, empty of good, and left behind unto destruction; and
the last, i. e. many that a while, and to man's eye seemed last, it being either
long e're they were professors, which was Paul's case; or for a while very
timorous and close, which was the case of Joseph of Arimathea, -- shall be
first, i. e. shall at the last be found real and precious, and accordingly
received and accepted in Christ.

For many are called, viz. not only having had the Gospel preached to them, but
being also thereby brought outwardly into the visible Church: but few chosen,
i. e. few of the aforesaid many, be Gods choice ones taken to himself in
Everlasting mercy, according to his Eternal purpose of saving them. See chapter 22.
14. Haec ex notis manuscriptis docti cujusdam simul ac pii jam (...) excerpta
sunt.

Mr. C. proceeds, Else what means that of the first fruits to God and to the
Lamb: Rev. 14, 14. if it do not intend the special saved ones in the Election,
and the multitudes that may obtain besides according to the metaphor, as the
Harvest to the first fruits. I answer this Text with Jam. 1. 18. has a meaning
very different from what Mr. C. supposes: The whole number of Elect regenerate
ones are set apart for God as his peculiar people and portion; even as in the
time of the Law, the first fruits were set apart for God, and sanctified unto
him: So then as the first fruits are but an handful to the Harvest, so are the
saved ones but a remnant, when compared with the multitudes of the world that
perish in their sins. For wide is the Gate, and broad is the way that leads
to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat: Because strait is the
Gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto Life, and few there be that find
it. Beware of false Prephets, Mat. 7. v. 13, 14, 15. But, says he,

It would be beneath the spirit and charity of the Gospel, to allow no
salvation (during the old Covenant) to any in the world besides the elect
Church of the Jews, and contrary to the Scripture, Act. 10. 34, 35.

In what sense the Nation of the Israelites was chosen of God, I showed before:
That all are not Israel (elect of God to eternal life) that are of Israel,
(according to the flesh) is certain; and I grant also, that in the time Mr. C.
speaks of God had his remnant (though we have reason to think not many) in
other Nations, unto whom he did by means ordinary or extraordinary manifest
himself; and these did fear God, and work righteousness, by which their
Election of God was manifested: But that these did not belong to the number of
the special Elect, nor were of that Church which is Christ's Spouse, is utterly
untrue, neither does he attempt to prove it. He says moreover,

-- Or to allow no salvation now under the Gospel, to any among the Gentiles
that have not heard of Christ; and contrary to the Scripture, Romans 2. 14, 15,
16.

Mr. C.'s notion about this matter, we shall meet with again and examine
afterward: At the present I must tell him, that without the Spirit and Grace
of Christ, which may not be separate from the knowledge of him, and Faith in
his name; all that persons can do, is from a principle of self-love to yield
some obedience to the Law of God externally, and so live honestly among men:
But by the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified in Gods sight; for by
the Law is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3. 21. and that the Law of nature, where
the written Law is wanting, will so far supply the place thereof, as to
convince of sin, and leave the sinner inexcusable in his disobedience, is the
design of the Apostle to evince, Romans 2. 14. When the Gentiles which have not
the law, (viz. written) do by nature, (i. e. by a knowledge and conscience
which God causes to remain in man's nature, though corrupt) do (...), the
offiees of the law, viz. condemning evil and in the^r consciences approving
good, not so as to love good and hate evil, but this they did sufficiently unto
full inexcusableness; These having not the law, are a law unto themselves, etc.

So Mr. C. closes this Chapter without proof of his opinion.

CHAP. III.
Of the Extent of Christ's death.

I Return now to his second Chapter, where he discourses of the extent of the
design of God in the death of his Son, wherein he is so extremely confused,
contradictious to himself, Scripture and Reason, that I fear the censure of my
Reader for abusing him, with the repetition of Mr. C's absurdities, that can
justly plead for no answer; and also for employing my own precious time to no
better purpose; But that which first engaged me in this task mus^ be my plea
for proceeding in my reply to this and the remaining part of his Book.

In the beginning of this Chapter p. 13. After he has minded us of differing
apprehensions among men concerning the end of Christ's death; That he may be
sure to outstrip all, he tells us.

That Christ dyed for the world, that is the Universe, the Heavens and Earth
all things therein, the whole six days Creation that fell with man for the sin
of man, etc.

Certainly whatsoever the Scripture holds forth concerning the curse brought
upon the Creation by the sin of man, and the future deliverance of the Creature
from the vanity it now groans under, it cannot but sound very harsh to
Christian ears, to hear, That their Savior dyed for the Universe, yea for all
things in Heaven or Earth, for every silly Bird that flies in the Air, yea and
every Creature known in nature, even the vilest, most perishing and
contemptible thing: Yea, how ridiculous might this notion be rendered; But I
fear God, and therefore dare not dally with those things wherein the dying of
my precious Lord must be mentioned. This woeful mistake he is cast upon by the
ambiguity of the word World, which he supposes must always intend the
Universe, but the absurdity of that Hypothesis abundantly appears if we look
into diverse Texts where the word is used, and can in no wise bear that sense:
Mr. Collier does also assert universal Redemption in the Arminian sense in the
next Section: Because this word and the term All is sometimes used in Scripture
where Redemption by Christ is treated of: And so do others more sober than he:
For an answer therefore unto his abuse of diverse Texts (even all that are with
any color pleaded by him) and fully to deliver the weak from his snares; as
also that my Reader may not complain of the utter loss of his time; I will
briefly give an account of those two terms from the Reverend Dr. Owen his
Treatise of Redemption, which I the rather insert, because that excellent
Treatise is now grown scarce, and in the hands of few of those for whose
benefit these Lines are especially designed. Thus he writes;

Two words there are that are mighti^y stuck upon Dr. O. Treat. of Redemp. p.
180, etc.
or stumbled at: First, the World. Secondly All. The particular places wherein
they are, and from which the arguments of our adversaries are urged, we shall
afterward consider, and for the present only show; that the words themselves
according to the Scripture use, do not necessarily hold out any collective
universality of those, concerning whom they are affirmed: but being words of
various significations, must be interpreted according to the scope of the place
where they are used, and the subject matter of which the Scripture tre^teth in
those places.

First then for the word World, which in the New Testament is called (...) (for
there is another word sometimes translated World, viz. (...) that belongs not
to this matter, noting rather the duration of time, then the thing in that
space continuing* he that does not acknowledge it to be (...) ( i. e. a word of
various significations) need say no more to manifest his unacquaintedness in
the Book of God: I shall briefly give you so many various significations of it,
as shall make it apparent, that from the bare usage of a word, so exceedingly
aequivocal, no argument can be taken, until it be distinguished, and the
meaning thereof in that particular place evinced, from whence the argument is
taken.

I shall pass over the Scheme inserted by the Learned Author, because it is
contained in what follows, which is more accommodate to mean capacities. He
proceeds,

The word World in the Scripture is in general taken four way^. First, pro
mundo continente, and that first general^y (...) for the whole Fabric of
Heaven and Earth, with all things in them contained, which in the beginning
were Created of God so, Job 34. 13. Act. 17. 24. Ephesians. 1. 4. and in very many
other places. Secondly distinctly; first for the Heavens and all things
belonging to them distinguished from the Earth, Psalm. 90. 2. Secondly the
habitable earth, and this very frequently, as Psalm. 24. 1. Psalm. 98. 7.

Secondly, For the world contained, especially men in the world, and that
either first universally for all and every one, Romans 3. 6. and 3. 19. and 5.
12. Secondly indefinitely, for men without restriction or enlargement, Joh. 7.
4. Isa. 13. 11. Thirdly exigetically, for many, which is the most usual
acceptance of the word, Mat. 18. 7. Joh. 4. 42. Joh. 12. 19. and 16. 1. and
17. 21. 1 Cor. 4. 9. Rev. 13. 3. Fourthly comparatively, for a great part of
the world* Romans 1. 8. Mat. 24. 14. and 26. 13. Romans 10. 18. Fifthly
restrictively, for the Inhabitants of the Roman Empire, Luke 2. 1. Six^hly, for
men distinguished in their several qualifications; as first for the good; Gods
people either in designation or possession, Psalm. 22. 27. Joh. 3. 16. Joh. 6.
36, 51. Romans 4. 13. and 11. 12, 15. 2 Cor. 5. 19. Col. 1. 6. 1 John 2. 2.
Secondly, for the evil, wicked, and rejected men of the world, Joh. 7. 7. Joh.
14. 17. 22. Joh. 15. 19. and 17. 25. 1 Cor. 6. 2. and 11. 32. H^b. 9. 11. and
11 38. 2 Pet. 2. 5. 1 John 5. 19. Rev. 13. 3.

Thirdly, For the world corrupted, or that universal corruption that is in all
things in it, as Gal. 1. 4. and 4. 1, 4. and 6. 14. Ephesians. 2. 2. Jam. 1. 27 and
4. 4. 1 John 2. 15, 16, 17. 1 Cor. 7. 31, 33. Col. 2. 8. 2 Timothy 4. 10. Romans 12.
2. 1 Cor. 1. 20, 21. and 3. 18, 19.

Fourthly, For a terrene worldly estate or condition of men or things, Psalm.
73. 12. Luke 16. 8. Joh. 18. 36. 1 John 4, 5. and very many other places.

Fifthly, For the world accursed, as under the power of Satan, Joh. 7. 7. Joh.
14. 30. Joh. 16. 11, 33. 1 Cor. 2. 12. 2 Cor. 4. 4. Ephesians. 6. 12. and diverse
other significations has this word in holy Writ, which are needless to
recount; These I have rehearsed to show the vanity of that clamor, wherewith
some men fill their mouths, and frighten unstable Souls, with the Scripture
mentioning World so often in the business of Redemption; as though some
strength might be taken thence for the upholding of the general ransom. Parvas
habet spes Troja, si tales habet. If their greatest strength be but sophistical
craft, taken from the ambiguity of an aequivocal word, their whole endeavor is
like to prove fruitless. Now as I have declared that it has diverse other
acceptations in the Scripture, so when I come to a consideration of their
objections that use the word for this purpose; I hope by Gods assistance to
show, that in no one place wherein it is used in this business of Redemption,
that it is or can be taken for all and every man in the world; as indeed it is
in very few places besides: So that as concerning this word our way will be
clear, if to what has been said ye add these observations.

First, That as in other words, so in this, there is in the Scripture usually
an (...), whereby the same word is ingeminated in a different sense and
acceptance: So Mat. 8. 22. Let the dead bury their dead: dead in the first
place denoting them that are spiritually dead in sin; in the next, those that
are naturally dead by a dissolution of soul and body: So Joh. 1. 11. He came
(...), to his own, even all things that he had made, (...), and his own, i. e.
the greatest part of the people, received him not. So again Joh. 3. 6. That
which is born of the spirit, is spirit: Spirit in the first place is the
Almighty Spirit of God; in the latter, a spiritual life of Grace received from
him. Now in such places as these to argue, That such is the signification of
the word in one place, therefore in the other, were violently to pervert the
mind of the Holy Ghost. Thus also is the word World usually changed in the
meaning thereof: So Joh. 1. 10. He was in the world, and the world was made by
him, and the world knew him not: He that should force the same signification
upon the word in that triple mention of it, would be an egregious glosser; for
in the first, it plainly signifies some part of the habitable Earth, and is
taken subjective, (...); in the second, the whole frame of Heaven and Earth,
and is taken subjective, (...); and in the third, for some men living in the
earth, viz. unbelievers, who may be said to be the world adjunctive. So again
Joh. 3. 17. God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that
the world through him might be saved: where by the world in the first is
necessarily to be understood, that part of the habitable world wherein our
Savior conversed; in the second, all men in the world, as some suppose, so
also there is a truth in it, for our Savior came not to condemn all men in the
world; for first, condemnation of any was not the prime aim of his coming;
secondly, he came to save his own people, and so not to condemn all; in the
third, Gods Elect, or Believers living in the world in their several
generations, are meant, (although it is granted, they are not considered in
this place as Elect, but under such a notion as being true of them, serves for
the farther exaltation of Gods love toward them, which is the end here
designed; and this is, as they are poor miserable lost creatures, in the world,
of the world, scattered abroad in all places of the world, not tied to Jews or
Greeks, but dispersed in any Nation, Kindred or Language under Heaven: ex eod.
p. 201. the like is to be said of parallel Texts) who were they whom he
intended to save, and none else, or he fails of his purpose, and the
endeavor of Christ is insufficient for the accomplishing of that, whereunto it
is designed.

Secondly, That no argument can be taken from a phrase of speech in the
Scripture in any particular place, if in other places thereof, where it is
used, the signification pressed from that place is evidently denied, unless the
scope of the place or subject matter do enforce it: For instance, God is said
to love the world, and send his Son; to be in Christ reconciling the world to
himself, and Christ to be a propitiation for the sins of the whole world: If
the scope of the places where these assertions are, or the subject matter of
which they treat, will enforce an universality of all persons to be meant by
the word World; so let it be without control: but if not; if there be no
enforcement of any such interpretation from the places themselves, [as indeed
there is not, but the contrary, that being spoken in them concerning the world,
viz. their being loved of God: reconciled to him, forgiven, etc. that in other
Texts is plainly denied to be the portion of all and every person in the world]
why should the world there more signify, all and every one, then in Joh. 1.
10. The world knew him not, which if it be meant of all without exception, then
no one did believe in Christ, contrary to verse 12. or in Luke 2. 1. that all
the w^rld should be ta^ed; when none but the chief inhabitants of the Roman
Empire can be understood: or in Joh. 8. 26. I speak to the world those things
which I have heard of him, understanding the Jews to whom he spoke, who then
lived in the world, and not every one to whom he was not sent* or in Joh. 12.
19 Perceive ye not that the world is g^ne after him? which world was nothing
but a great multitude of one small Nation, etc.

That all Nations, an expression of equal extent with that of the world, is in
like manner to be understood, is apparent, Romans 1. 5. Rev. 18. 3, 23. Psa. 118.
10. 1 Chro. 14. 17. Jer. 27. 7. It being evident that the words world, all the
world, the whole world, where taken adjunctively for men in the world, usually,
and almost always denote only some, or many men in the world, distinguished
into good or bad, believers or unbelievers, elect or reprobate; by what is
immediately in the several places affirmed of them: I see no reason in the
world why they should be wrested, to any other meaning or sense, in the places
that are in controversy between us and our opponents.

Now as we have said of the word World, so we may of the word All, wherein much
strength is placed, and many causeless boastings are raised from it: That it is
no where affirmed in the Scripture, that Christ dyed for all men, or gave
himself a ransom for all men, much less for all and every man, we have before
declared: That he gave himself a ransom for all, is expressly affirmed, 2 Timothy
2. 6. But now who this all should be, whether all believers, or all the elect*
or some of all sorts, or all of every sort, is in debate. Our adversaries
affi^m the last, and the main reason they bring to assert their interpretation,
is from the importance of the word it self, for that the circumstances of the
place, the analogy of Faith, and other helps for Exposition, do not at all
favor their Gloss, we shall show when we come to the particular places urged:
For the present let us look upon the word in its usual acc^ptation in the
Scripture, and search whether it always necessarily requires such an
interpretation.

That the word Al^ b^ing spoken of among all sorts of men, speaking, writing,
any way expressing themselves, but especially in holy Writ, is to be taken
either collectively, for all ^n general without exception, or distributively
for some of all sorts, excluding none, is more apparent then that it can
require any Illustration. That it is sometimes taken in the first sense for all
collectively is granted, and I need not prove it, they whom we oppose,
affirming that this is the only sense of the word, though I dare boldly say,
it is not one in ten times so to be understood in the usage of it through the
whole B^ok of God; But that it is commonly, and indeed properly used in the
latter sense, for some of all sorts, concerning whatsoever it is affirmed; a
few instances for many that might be urged, will make it clear; Thus then ye
have it Joh. 12. 32. And I, if I be lifted up from the Earth, will draw all
unto me: that we translate it all men, as in other places (for though I know
the sense may be the same, yet the word men being not in the original, but only
(...)) I cannot approve. But who I pray are these all? are they all and every
one? Then are all and every one drawn to Christ, made Believers, and truly
converted, and shall be certainly saved; for those that come unto him by his,
and his Fathers drawing, he will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6. 37. All then, can
here be no other then many, some of all sorts, no sort excluded, according as
the word is interpreted, Rev. 5. 9. Thou have redeemed us out of every kindred,
Tongue, and People, and Nation: These are the all he draws to him: which
exposition of this phrase is with me of more value and esteem, then a thousand
glosses of the Children of men. So also Luke 11. 42. where our Translators have
made the word to signify immediately and properly (for Translators are to keep
close to the proper and native signification of every word) what we assert to
be the right interpretation of it: for they render (...) which (...) is every
Herb; all manner of Herbs, taking the word (as it must be) distributively for
Herbs of all sorts and not for every individual Herb, which the Pharisees did
not, could not Tyth. In the very same sense is the word used again, Luke 18.
11. I give Tyth of all that I have; where it cannot signify every individual
thing* as is apparent: Most evident also is this restrained signification of
the word, Act. 2. 17. I will pour out of my spirit (...) upon all flesh; which
whether it comprizeth every man or no, let every man judge; and not rather men
of several and sundry sorts: The same course of interpretation as formerly, is
followed by our Translators, Act. 10. 12. rendering (...), literally all Beasts,
or four-footed Creatures; all manner of Beasts: or Beasts of sundry several
s^rts: In the same sense also must it be understood, Romans 14. 2. One believes
that he may eat all things, i. e. what he pleases of things to be eaten of:
see moreover 1 Cor. 1. 5. yea in that very Chapter (confessedly) the word is to
be expounded according to the sense we give, viz. v. 8. I will therefore that
men pray (...), which that it cannot signify every individual place in Heaven,
Earth and Hell, is of all confessed, and needs no proof.

I shall conclude all concerning these general expressions that are used in the
Scripture about this business, in these observations.

First, The word All is certainly and unquestionably sometimes restrained, to
all of some sorts, although the qualification be not expressed, which is the
bond of the limitation: so for all believers in 1 Cor. 15. 22. Ephesians. 4. 10. Romans
5. 18. The free gift came upon all men to the Justification of Life; which all
men that are so actually justified, are no more nor less, then those that are
Christ's, i. e. Believers, for certainly Justification is not without Faith.

Secondly, The word All is sometimes used for some of all sorts, Jer. 31. 34.
the word (...) is by Paul rendered (...), Heb. 8. 11. so Joh. 12. 32. 1 Timothy 2.
1, 2, 3. which is made apparent by the mention of Kings as one sort of People
there intended. And I make no doubt but it will appear to all, that the word
must be taken in one of these senses in every place where it is used in the
business of Redemption.

Thirdly, Let a diligent comparison be made, between the general expressions of
the new, with the predect^ons of the Old Testament, and they will be sound to
be answerable to, and expository of one another. The Lord affirming in the New
that, that was done, which in the Old he foretold should be done: Now in the
predictions and prophecies of the Old Testament (that all Nations, all People,
all Flesh, all the ends, Families or Kindre^ of the Earth, the World, the whole
Earth, the Isl^s, shall ^^ converted, look up to Christ, come to the Mountain
of the Lord* and the like) none doubts but that the Elect of God in all Nations
are only signified, knowing that in them alone these predictions have the truth
of their accomplishments: And why should the same expressions used in the
Gospel, and many of them aiming directly to declare the fulfilling the other,
be wire-drawn to a larger extent, so contrary to the mind of the Holy Ghost?

In fine, as when the Lord is said to wipe tears from all Faces, it hinders not
but the reprobates shall be cast out to Eternity, where there is weeping and
wailing, etc. So when Christ is said to dye for all, it hinders not but those
reprobates may perish to Eternity for their sins, without any effectual remedy
intended for them, though occasionally proposed to some of them.

Thus far are the words of that worthy Sevant of Christ.

I shall now return to Mr. Collier.

The Scriptures that he produces to prove that Christ died for all men, ( viz.
Judas as well as Peter; those that were already under Divine vengeance when he
laid down his Life, as well as those that were saved) are these, Joh. 1. 29. 1 Timothy 2. 6. Heb. 2. 9. 1 John 2. 2. 2 Cor. 5. 19. He tells us not how he thinks
to enforce his notion by them, but takes it for granted, that the word World,
and All used in them must intend every individual person in the world, which
Hypothesis is abundantly overthrown in the foregoing lines; and there needs no
farther answer to them; only I will briefly clear Heb. 2. 9. that there may be
no occasion of stumbling left to any; The words are thus translated, That he by
the Grace of God should taste death for every man: the word in the Greek is
(...) for every one; which is here used for (...) for all. That this term every
man is commonly used in Scriptures where some limitation of it must be allowed
is certain, see Col. 1. 21 where every man can intend only those to whom Paul
preached, and 1 Cor. 12. 7. with chapter 4. 5. And in this Chapter we have such a
description of these All for whom Christ tested death, as will by no means
agree to all and every one, but the Elect only, v. 10. they are called many
Sons to be brought to glory; v. 11. his Brethren and those that are sanctified,
the Children that God gave him, v. 13. those that were delivered from slavish
fear of death, v. 15. I conclude therefore that the All here spoken of are all
Christ's sheep and they only, whether Jews or Gentiles, etc.

Mr. C. seems to be aware, that he has made very bold with the two last Texts
cited by him, and that they will not bear the sense he imposes upon them; and
therefore he states an objection against his application of them to the General
ransom. p. 14. And seeing he will have it brought in, I will take leave to
frame the Objection my self; (and know that the like might be urged with
reference to the other Texts.)

By the World in 2 Cor. 5. 19. and the whole World, 1 John 2. 2. we may not
understand all and every man in the world. because that which is affirmed in
these Texts, is not applicable to them; in Cor. those that are called the World
in v. 19. are called us (Believers) v. 18. They are reconciled to God, and have
the pardon, or are under the non-imputation of their sins, being made the
righteousness of God in Christ: so also those spoken of in Joh. were such whose
sins Christ was a propitiation for, and that had by him interest in the favor
of God; so that in both these Scriptures, actual reconciliation to God, and the
application of Grace rather then the impetration thereof is intended, in which,
multitudes in the world have no part; and therefore these terms can intend no
more; but men living throughout the whole world in all the parts and regions
thereof (in opposition to the Inhabitants of any one Country or place as such)
even so many of them as being ordained to Eternal Life did believe, as well
Gentiles as Jews; according to Joh. 11. 51, 52.

That Mr. C. acquits himself but poorly in his answer to the objection as
framed by himself, every one will see, that shall seriously weigh his lines.
The s^m of what he insists on is this;

That the Scripture clearly states a general reconciliation, and a special: A
general reconciliation of all things, all men, Col. 1. 20. And having made
peace by the blood of his Cross to reconcile all things to himself, whether
things in Earth, or things in Heaven, etc A special reconciliation of
Believers, which is not the same as the General, but arises out of it* and is
that intended Col. 1. 21. Both these we have likewise in Romans 5. 8, 10.

These Texts do in no wise prove what Mr. C. does produce them for. The first
mentioned, viz. Col. 1* 20. is by diverse learned and judicious men, interpreted
according to the subject matter; all things, i. e. the whole Church or Family
of God: in Heaven, viz. the spirits of just men made perfect; and in Earth, i.
e. the Elect still in the world; even all that are reconciled, are so in
Christ. And if he carry it farther, as some able Interpreters do also; and will
have Angels included, and also the fabric of Heaven and Earth, and the
Creatures therein made for the service of man; yet can it not on alike account
be applied to a^l these; we cannot rightly conceive of a reconciliation of
Angels (properly so called) that never sinned, it is at most but an analogical
reconciliation; they being confirmed in Grace, and secure^ in their station by
Christ. And so with respect to the things that are in the world; it can be but
a metaphorical reconciliation, for they never sinned, neither was God angry
with them as breakers of his Law which they were not made under: Indeed as God
commanded that all that did belong to Achan should be destroyed for his sin; so
we may conceive, that the whole Creation that was made for man's use, came under
a curse for his sake, and for the farther declaration of Gods hatred of sin,
must have perished with him, had it not been for the Mediator; and so Christ
keeps off ^he wrath that was pouring forth upon man, and all his substance (if
I may so say) But this comes much short of Mr. Colliers purpose, and is so far
from proving any special reconciliation arising out of the general, that it is
from hence manifest, that the last mentioned is a fruit and adjunct of the
first. Indeed this Text, and that in the Romans, holds forth no more then this;
That by the death of Christ all the Elect of God were virtually, and
fundamentally reconciled to him, while they were sinners, i. e. The price of
their Redemption was then paid down to God, and accepted by him; But the actual
application of it to their Souls, and their personal interest in it is upon
believing: It is also evident that (especially) the Text last mentioned does
hold forth the certain application of the Grace purchased and obtained by
Christ's death unto all those for whom he died; which quite overthrows Mr. C's
notion of the General ransom.

He proceeds, p. 15. to Question,

In what sense may the world be said to be reconciled to God, and to have sin
not imputed? he means; not to have sin imputed.

I answer not in his sense, for if we understand by the World, as he does, the
whole universe: To talk of the reconciliation of Birds and Beasts, Stones and
Trees, etc. unto God without any distinction, and the non-imputation of sin
unto them that (...) were never under any Law, is absurd and foolish: no nor
yet is it true in respect of all and every one of the Sons of Men in the world;
For the greatest part of them live and dye enemies in their minds to God, they
are Children of wrath by nature, Ephesians. 2. 3. and lie (...) in the wicked one, 1 John 5. 19. and the wrath of God abides on them, Joh. 3. 86. But Mr. Collier
says, They are so in a twofold respect;

1. They are so far reconciled and sin not imputed, as to have the Gospel of
reconliation truly tendered to them, that whosoever do accept it on the same
terms thereof might be reconciled and saved.

This answer is built upon his supposition, that the Gospel ought to be, and is
preached to all inanimate and animate Creatures as well as man; the folly of
which notion I shall farther detect by and by: At present I make my reply only
with regard unto men, and even with respect to them, it is exceeding short and
weak. Reconciliation is tendered (says he) to the world; and pardon of sin is
offered on Gospel terms: Grant it: does this prove that they are already
reconciled and pardoned? But indeed the Gospel is not preached to all men in
the world.

2. The word is so far reconciled and sin not imputed, as that it shall not
hinder their resurrection, and restitution out of the fa^^en state, 1 Cor. 15.
22. Act 3. 21.

If there be in these words any due coherence with what Mr. C. writes before,
then does he here present us with another new notion, of the resurrection of
all those Creatures that died, or shall die, before the restoration of the
Universe; But then certainly the world must not only be restored, but either
new made or greatly enlarged, otherwise there will not be found therein place
for them all. But however two things with reference to man he supposes
undoubted;

1. That all men are by the death of Christ recovered from their fallen state,
etc.

What he intends hereby, he does not explain; and it is too evident that he
little understands what the redemption and recovery of man out of his lost and
lapsed state means. I cannot understand by what mediums he will prove, That the
world of ungodly men, that lie in their filth and under their guilt, that ar^
estranged from the womb, and speak lies as soon as they are born, with whom God
is angry every day, and they dye in their sins, are yet reconciled to God and
restored from their fallen state: when he has done it,

-- Erit mihi magnus Ap^ll^. For the present we have only his word for it,
without any proof tendered.

2. That the resurrection of all men (vessels of wrath as well as vessels of
mercy) is a fruit of their being reconciled to God by Christ.

Now seeing the wicked are raised for no other end, but that they may be
brought to a just, though fearful, Judgment, and are raised immortal that they
may be capable of enduring the fire that shall never be quenched, I cannot see
that this is any proof of their being redeemed by Christ, more then the Devils,
that must also receive their sentence from him in that day. And whereas he
cites 1 Cor. 15. 22. it gives no countenance to his notion: The Apostle says
indeed, v. 21. That by Christ came the resurrection from the dead; and v. 22.
that all shall be made alive in him: But who are these all? all and every one
of the sons of men? No certainly: for to be made alive in this Text, does not
signify simply the resurrection of the body, in which the wicked have a share
also; but their resurrection to a blessed immortality, to bear his image who is
the Lord from Heaven, confer v. 45. -- 50. In this Context Adam and Christ are
opposed as two public persons; and the term all is to be expounded
accordingly: All that were in Adam as their head and representative, dyed in
him when he fell; And so all that were in Christ as their head and
representative, shall be made alive in and by him; even all us, believers, they
that are Christ's, of whom he is the first fruits, v. 23. And indeed throughout
this Chapter the Apostle manifests, that it is the happy and joyful
resurrection of the Saints that he is speaking of, and all his reasoning
thereabout is accordingly suited to such: And it is granted, that the redeemed
of the Lord have a resurrection unto life and glory, by virtue of their
interest in Christ, who dyed and rose again: So then the resurrection
considered as the spring of Believers happiness, and their glorious privilege,
came by Christ: But how Mr. C. will evince that there is the like reason to
referr the resurrection of the wicked, which is only unto condemnation, unto
their redemption by Christ, I see not. He proceeds:

-- And the second death shall be for sin against the New Covenant and G^spel
law of Grace, for not accepting the reconciliation and salvation on the terms
thereof, Joh. 3. 19.

If there be any kind of argument in these words to Mr. C^lliers purpose it
must be this;

If Christ had not dyed for all men, and reconciliation to God by him been
tendered to them on Gospel-terms, they had not been liable to the second death.
But all that do not believe and obey the Gospel, must dye the second death;
Ergo, Christ dyed for them, and procured non-imputation of sin to them, etc.

I deny the major Proposition: Sinners are guilty of damnation by the breach of
the Law, though they never hear the Gospel, etc.

And immediately Th. C. will deny the minor, as we shall hear: Certainly he
will be hard put to it to prove that all men are redeemed, because most men are
damned.

The Scripture cited by him, viz. Joh. 3. 19. proves indeed, That where the
objective light of the Gospel is afforded to a people, and they obey it not,
but refuse to walk in it, they shall dye the second death, yea their case will
be worse then others that have not en^^yed the like means: unbelief is a crying
sin and brings them under condemnation with a witness, (as we use to speak:)
But it does in no wise prove, what Mr. C. supposes, that none are guilty of
the second death, by the breach of the first Covenant.

And in plain terms Mr. C. does not think, that all that have not faith in
Christ shall be damned, as his minor Proposition supposes; though for the
present he is willing to pretend so, that he may thereby prove they are
redeemed; for thus he writes, p. 26.

Damnation is the judgment of Gospel-unbelief and disobedience, (he intends
that only) yet those that never heard the Gospel^ cannot be un^er this
judgment, because its impossible (without a miracle) that they should believe
the Gospel; its in some sense their affliction and judgment that they have it
not; but not their sin because they believe it (...) because they cannot, Romans
10. 14.

I grant that a Law cannot oblige, unless it be sufficiently made known or
published, and that there are multitudes in the world that enjoy not the
Gospel; and these, as they are (in an ordinary way) capable of no saving
benefit by Christ: so neither is the sin of not believing the Gospel chargeable
upon them. But even these are under the first Covenant, which requires of them
perfect Obedience to the moral Law, or Law of nature, which (if they have not
the written Law neither) is so far written, even in their hearts, as that they
are a Law unto themselves; and utterly inexcusable in the breach of it* Romans 1.
19, 20 chapter 2. 15. But amongst these there are many filled with all
unrighteousness, chapter 1. v. 21. (...) 31. and shall we suppose according to this
man's licentious Doctrine* that these are in danger only of a temporal death,
which the best in the world cannot escape? The Consciences of these very
wretches tell them otherwise, v. 32. where by death, the second death, or
perishing under Divine wrath must be understood; otherwise there were no evil
peculiar to them intended therein; and the Apostle assures us, that the wrath
of God is revealed from ^eaven against all unrighteousness and ungodliness of
men; who imprison and stifle their natural Light, holding that truth in
unrighteouss, and not subjecting themselves thereto, through the ^nmity that is
in their hearts to God, v. 18. etc. Though the Law cannot give life; yet is its
curse heavy enough, to sink all the world under Eternal wrath, which it had
done without remedy, if Christ had not delivered Believers from the Curse of
the Law by being made a Curse for them Gal. 3. 13.

Thus we have heard out Mr. C. what he has ^o say for the reconciliation of
all the World to God, and the non-imputation of sin to them; and I know some
will take notice of that which immediately follows in the next Section, where
he asserts,

That there is a more special design of Grace in the death of Christ, i. e. the
salvation of his Elect of his Church, whose peculiar privilege it is, that the
blood of Christ is shed for them for the remission of sin: And they will
perhaps wonder at the man's acumen, that has found out such a notable
distinction of non-imputation of sin; from remission of sin; the one of which
belongs to the reprobate, the other to the Elect; though Paul took them to be
of the same import, Romans 4. 7, 8. But I cannot stay to remark every absurdity
in his Book; and therefore let this pass:

The glorious and wonderful design of free Grace to redeem and save to the
utmost all the Elect, by Jesus Christ, I adore: and to own that there was any
end or design of God in the death of his Son, which was not perfectly
accomplished thereby I dare not: But I shall proceed with Mr. C. it not being
my purpose (as I said at first) to enter upon a full discussion of these
points, or to urge the arguments that might be pleaded against his opinion, but
only to clear our way of that rubbish that he has cast into it.

He discourses in the next place of the Preaching of the Gospel, and he is as
liberal here (and good reason for it) as he was in determining the extent of
Christ's death.

The design of God (says he) in his Gospel Grace by the death of his Son,
being thus universal to the whole world in this threefold sense as has been
mentioned; Hence it is that the Gospel must be preached to the whole Creation,
etc. He grants indeed p. 16. That it is especially to be published to men who
were concerned in the sin and fall, But it is and may be truly preached to the
whole Creation, though they hear it not, nor understand it.

I suppose in this particular, Mr. C. may truly say he has not followed
Authors, for I know none before him that have been so fond as to assert what
here he does; though in other things it is evident that he has imbibed the
notions of diverse Heretics that have been before him: Although I must confess
the Papists in some of their Legends tell many odd stories to this purpose; and
we may collect from thence what some of them thought in this matter. And
although all Protestants deride their foppery; that will not discourage Mr. C.
from joining with them in this and other things; for he has observed (as he
tells us p. 59.) That the Protestants run themselves too much in both principle
and practice, beyond (almost) all works of Charity; amongst which perhaps he
reckons Preaching to Birds and Beasts, Stones and Trees, etc.

If I should recite to Mr. C. some of the stories they tell of St. Francis his
Preaching often to the Birds, and how affectionately they heard him: his
converting a ravenous Wolf, from his rapine to a tame and harmless life, etc.
and of Father Bid his Preaching to the Stones, when he was blind, and his
naughty Boy led him to a heap of Stones instead of a company of Men, and how in
the close of his Devotion they all cried out with a loud voice Amen. How he
would approve of these things I know not; but others would think I intended to
make him ridiculous; and therefore I will forbear; only if he will allow me
freely to impart my thoughts with him, I shall say this, That I think Mr. C.
would have been much more innocently employed, if he had thus spent his time,
and never Preached and Printed to men the lamentable stuff that we have in this
Book.

But let us consider what proof of this notion he offers to us.

There are two Scriptures produced by him, Mar. 16. 15. and Col. ^. 23. The
first says, ^o ye into all the world and Preach the Gospel to every Creature:
concerning which he tells ^s,

The word translated to every Creature, is in the Gree^ to all the Creation;
(...), to all the Creation.

What Emphasis Mr. C. supposes in these words to all the Creation, more then
in th^se to every Creature, I know not: some great thing he has imagined in
this criticisme that no body else can find out, else he would not have
inculcated it with such a tautology as he does: or it may be he^^nly took this
occasion to show his s(...) in the Greek: But if that be it, I must beg his
pardon, for I think it is not much Learning, but s^mething else, that hat^ made
him so far forget himself as to interpret this Scripture after such a mann^^ as
he has. There is doubtless no more intended i^ Mark then is in other words
expressed by Matthew in his record of ^he same Commission; Go ye therefore and
teach all Nations, Baptizing them, etc. Mat. 28. 19, 20. So that the Commission
to Preach the Gospel to every Creature, intends only those concerned to hear
and obey it* as the following words evince, He that believes and is baptized
shall be saved, etc. even the Children of men of all Nations, Kindreds and
Tongues, as well as the Jews. And as this phrase suits our dialect or way of
speaking, in the same sense; so was it common with the Jews (as I could evince
from their Writings) to use the word in their Language, that properly
signifiet^ a Creature for a Man, because men are the most excellent of all
visible Creatures.

Of the same import is Col. 1. 23. But there the words are expressly, which was
Preached (...) i^ all the Creation that is under Heaven, i. e. in all the Earth
to the men that dwell thereon. But Mr. C. says that under Heaven may be
understood to be under God: I answer it may not, neither is this phrase, under
Heaven, so to be expounded any where in the Scripture; and although it be
allowed that in the Texts cited by him, Heaven is put for God; yet it is so
used not according to its proper signification, but figuratively per metonymiam
adjuncti; for him that dwells in Heaven. It does not therefore follow that we
may take it in that sense wherever we meet with it; But what he means by this I
know not, unless he would have the Gospel Preached not only to the whole
visible Creation, but also to the Devils, for they are under God. Neither know
I what to make of that which follows,

That the Gospel may be truly Preached to the whole Creation, though they hear
it not, nor understand it: and thus we must understand Col. 1. 23. For the
Gospel was not then Preached in the hearing of all men, nor in the hearing of
the whole Creation, yet it was Preached to all the Creation.

If this were true, the Apostles needed not to have gone abroad into the world
to have preached the Gospel to every Creature; But I am persuaded if one at
London should pretend that he daily preached the Gospel to the Turks in
Constantinople that hear him not; or to the animate and inanimate Creatures
that either are not capable of hearing or understanding what he says; many
would laugh at his folly, and conclude the man was under a Delirium; but none
would think that he truly preached the Gospel to any of these, nor yet that it
was worth their while to refute his conceit by argument. Yea but thus we must
understand Col. 1. 23. Mr. C. were doubtless the greatest Tyrant in the world,
if he could force our understandings to assent to so great an absurdity: But
his words are but wind, we have our liberty still to think otherwise;
especially seeing his reason for it is so weak; For (says he) though the
Gospel was not then preached in the hearing of all the Creation, yet it was
preached to all the Creation: which in plain terms amounts to no more then
this: It must be so because Tho. Collier says it was so.

This needs no answer, valeat quantum valere potest. We may conclude, this
notwithstanding, that the Gospel was preached in the hearing of all it was
preached to.

In the next place he tells us, That the works of God do preach the Gospel to
the whole Creation. His notion of The preaching of the Gospel by the works of
God, we shall meet with again, and farther examine presently: in the mean time
we might enquire what these works of God are that preach to the whole Creation
in his sense; for surely the works of God that preach, must not be the same
with the whole Creation preached to: But however Mr. C. escape for writing thus;
I should incurr the c^nsure of idleness if I should pursue so fruitless an
enquiry. I will therefore leave it off; and proceed to the doubt or question
that he moves, and endeavors to solve p. 17.

Quest. If Christ dyed for the sins of the world; and if God had a real design
of good will and Grace to all men, in his general love, why then is not the
Gospel preached to all men? whence is it tha^ the greatest part of the world
have been, and still are without the Gospel?

If Mr. Collier had not been conscious to himself that his previous discourse
had been very vain and futilous, he needed not to have moved this doubt; having
already concluded, that a man may preach the Gospel to the whole Creation,
though they hear him not, nor understand him; and that it is also preached to
all by the works of God: But the truth is, notwithstanding all he has said or
can say, there is great weight in what he here suggests. For certainly if
Christ had given himself a ransom for all men, seeing none can enjoy the
benefit thereof without Faith, and none can believe on him, of whom they have
not heard; he would not so ^ave disposed things in his providence, that
multitudes of these ransomed ones, should never have knowledge thereof: But we
see that things are so ordered, Ergo, He never intended to give himself a
ransom for all men; in Mr. Colliers sense. Let us hear what Mr. C. says to
these things.

The first branch of his answer to this enquiry, as proposed by himself, has
nothing in it but a repetition of his former error, about the present recovery
of all men out of their fallen state; which has already on good grounds been
rejected; and he here gives it no inforcement: He adds:

2. The Gospel has been and still is preached to the whole world by the works
of God, and his common goodness to men, Psalm. 19. 1, 2. Romans 10. 18. Psalm. 145.
8, 9. Romans 2. 4.

The question is about that preaching of the Gospel that is a sufficient means
to beget faith, and so infers the duty of those to whom it is so preached to
believe and obey it; That it is so preached by the works of God, Mr. Collier in
this Treatise flatly denies: we recited one passage to this purpose but a
little before: I cannot think therefore that he at all satisfies his own
Conscience in this answer; but only to serve a turn, thrusts in this notion to
am^se his ignorant Reader. He does not at all explain himself in what sense he
supposes the works of God preach the Gospel: Indeed his notion is utterly
false, and therefore we need not wait for his explication of it; neither do the
Scriptures quoted by him prove any such thing: By the works of God, we grant,
his Eternal Power and Godhead is knowable to the ^ons of men, which leaves them
without excuse in that they worship him not as God: and by his common goodness,
is his patience and long-suffering of the Vessels of wrath manifested, which is
a further witness against them in their impenitency and rebellion against him:
And this is all the Scriptures produced by Mr. C. speak: There is n^^ a word of
preaching the Gospel in any of them; except in Romans 10. 18. which is not by the
works of God, but by a Ministry sent forth from God for that work, as the whole
context does manifest, which is also quoted by Mr. C. to prove that none can
believe without that means; notwithstanding this supposed preaching of the
works of God. So then though the Apostle apply those words in Psalm. 19. to his
present purpose, either by allusion to them, or more directly; yet does he in
no wise teach; that the Heavens, Sun, etc. preach the Gospel, but rather the
contrary. In Psalm. 19. There is mention made of a double medium of the
revelation of God to the Sons of Men, viz. His Works, and his Word: what the
works of God teach, and what the efficacy of their teaching is, the Apostle
discourses Romans 1. 19. ad finem. Unto the word of God the Psalmist ascribes
much more; even all saving effects, v. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and herein its
excellency beyond the other is manifested. He proceeds,

3. Though there is no other name given under Heaven among men whereby they may
be saved, Act. 4. 12. yet we must own that many have been, and may be saved by
that name, that never heard of him, and so could not have Faith in him.

In this it must be granted that Mr. C. speaks to the purpose, and has said
something that gives real countenance to his notions, and directly overthrows
that which has generally been the received Doctrine of the Protestants; yea
razeth the foundation of Gospel Grace, And therefore here we might have
expected some formidable arguments to drive Christians from that strong hold of
their common faith. That believing in Christ is the only way to Glory; But how
miserably he faulters in his proof notwithstanding his strange confidence, we
shall immediately discern. I desire the Reader to bear in mind, That persons
adult, and endued with reason, are the subjects of this discourse. Mr. C's
drift then is to show, That although it would grate upon this notion, that all
the world should not hear of Christ, if there were no other way to be saved by
him, but believing in him, yet it is otherwise, if many may be saved by him,
without faith in him, which they could not have but by hearing; And that many
have, and may be saved without that, we must own. Dictator like! But why must
we own it? Because if we will not own this, Tho. C. cannot prove that all men
are rede^med. And verily if we do own it, we must directly contradict the
Apostle, who says, That without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.
6. And that he there intends believing in God by Christ, in whom alone we can
know him to be a rewarder of all that diligently seek him, the whole scope of
that Chapter does manifest; and if Mr. C. think meet to deny it, I shall God
assisting, evince the certainty thereof, beyond his contradiction. And as he at
present does not, so I am assured ^e, nor his companions with him, cannot
produce one Text of Scripture that gives countenance to his notion.

That kind of proof which he offers, I will now consider.

For (says he) we may not suppose that any shall dye the second death for not
believing in the Son of God as crucified, that never heard of him, Romans 10. 14.

What there is in these words that may any ways strengthen his notion, I cannot
imagine: The argument is this,

None shall dye the second death for not believing, which have not heard of
Christ:

But many that have not heard of him do dye the second death: Ergo, many may be
saved without faith in him.

I hope by this kind of arguing he will not infect many with his principles; we
have already said and proved, That though disobedience to the Gospel, be not
chargable on those that never heard it; yet are they under the curse of Gods
holy Law, and must dye the second death, for their breach thereof, seeing they
remain strangers to the only remedy: And in the discourse of the Apostle cited
by him, he supposes, That there is no salvation to be had without calling upon
the Lord; no calling upon the Lord without Faith, no Faith without hearing;
Ergo, without hearing no salvation. He goes on,

And we must likewise understand, that there has been a sufficiency of
teaching, under all the ministeries of God to the world, to bring them to the
knowledge of God, and so to salvation by that name, (though unknown to them)
and to leave all others without excuse, which could not be were there not a
sufficiency of teaching therein, Romans 1. 19, 20, 21 and 2. 1.

Here we have Mr. C. again (as if he conceited himself in St. Peter's Chair)
imposing his Magisterial dictates upon us: This we must know; and that we must
understand; but no warranty thereof tendered besides his (...); and though
perhaps he will take it amiss that his authority is rejected, and may think
with himself, Si hoc non sit probationum satis, nescio quid sit satis; yet I
shall pe^^mptorily deny, and prove the contrary to, what he here asserts, and
supposes undeniable; viz.

1. That there is a saving knowledge of God attainable out of Christ. This is
first, contrary to the whole tenor of the Scripture, that represents God as a
consuming fire to all that are out of Christ; a God that will by no means clear
the guilty; and that his pardoning love and grace is made known to the sons of
men only in and by the Mediator; life and immortality is brought to light by
the Gospel; and thus it was from the beginning, the foundation of the Church,
after the fall of man was laid in the promise of sending Christ to be its
Savior, etc. There is no knowledge of God saving, but that whereby we know him
to be a just God and a Savior; and this we cannot know but in and through
Christ, who was set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood.

Secondly, It is against the express testimony of Christ, Joh. 14. 6. I am the
way, the truth, and the life; no man comes unto the Father but by me. And
again chapter 17. 3. This is life eternal to know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent into the world, not to know God and be ignorant of
Christ, as Mr. C. dreameth: And 1 Pet. 1. 20, 21. where the efficacy, and
saving fruit of Christ's death is declared to belong only to those who by him do
believe in God; and that it is God considered as raising him from the dead, and
giving him glory (so testifying his acceptance of the price that Christ paid
for the redemption of sinners) that is the object of our faith and hope. More
might be added, but I hasten.

Thirdly, It is also contrary to the experience of all that are saved. There
are some proud Hypocrites indeed, that are alive without the Law: that think
they can please God and trust in him without a Mediator; but a poor convinced
sinner, unto whom the Commandment is come with power; and he by it is convinced
of the holiness of God, and the exceeding sinfulness of his sin; can find no
rest until he have Christ revealed in him; all thoughts of God out of a
Mediator, are breaking and terrible to him, neither can he put his trust in
God, nor dares he once to think of an approach to him, until he have some
knowledge of the meeting together of mercy and Justice, and how righteousness
and peace did kiss each other in the undertaking of a crucified Savior.

That which he farther supposes in the words recited is,

2. That the works of God without his word, are a sufficient means to b^ing
persons to saving acquaintance with God.

But seeing it is conf^ssed by Mr. C. That notwithstanding this Ministry (as he
t^rms it of the works of God, men remain under invincible ignorance of Jesus
Christ; and we have before proved, That out of Christ there is no saving
knowledge of God attainable, there needs no more be said to enervate this
proposition also: Only for the more full discovery of its falsehood, observe,

1. In the Old Testament when the Scripture speaks of those Nations that
enjoyed not the word of God, it speaks of them as People under his wrath, Jer.
10 25. as People neg^ected of God, and in his just Judgment suffered to walk
in their own ways, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. compared with Act. 14. 16. And the sad
effects of being deprived of Gods word, we have signally set forth Amos 8. 9*
14. And in the New Testament when the Apostle relates what condition the
Gentiles were in, before they enjoyed the Light of the Gospel; he does it in
these words, Ephesians. 2. 12. without Christ, ali^ns from the commonwealth of
Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of promise; having no hope, and
without God in the world. To be brief, Though Mr. C. affirm the contrary; yet
the God of truth assures us; Where there is no vision the People perish; Prove.
29. 18.

2. The Condition of those Nations that enjoy not the word of God, is such as
plainly bespeaks them to be in the Region of the shadow of death: The Apostle
discourses of such Romans 1. 19. etc. and assures us their enmity to God is
such, as renders ineffectual the conviction they have of a Deity, by his works;
and that notwithstanding this means, they grow worse and worse, and necessarily
perish at last, if not converted and saved by the Grace of Christ revealed in
the Gospel, yea, enquire of those that know the state of the poor Indians, and
they will fully resolve you, That there is no proof of Mr. Colliers Opinion
amongst them.

And whereas Mr. Collier says, That otherwise they were not without excuse;
The Apostle in the Texts cited by him, proves the contrary, showing that they
are, and why they are, without excuse. Men are inexcusable in sinning against
the Law, and light of nature; yet can none be saved by the works of the Law,
without Faith in Christ, Gal. 3. 10, 11.

What he adds in the close of this Chapter, That God will save all upright
hearted ones, etc. though the special saved ones are such as are espoused to
Christ by the Word, Spirit and Faith of the Gospel; is a vain flourish, for
besides, that its foundation is laid in those principles that have been already
disproved; it is a fond imagination, that any are upright hearted with God, or
can be so; that are utter strangers to the Word, Spirit and Faith of the
Gospel; seeing such must needs remain unconverted; For Mr. C. himself
confesses p. 33. That in the great work of conversion, the Spirit works in
the word of the Gospel, by that means and ministry, and not without it: the
Word and Spirit may not be separated, Joh. 3. 5. and 17. 20. Jam. 1. 18.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the moral power of Man, or Free Will, where also of Original sin.

IN Mr. C's 4th. Chapter, and that which follows, he does abundantly
manifest; either great ignorance of the true state of those questions he
meddles with, or else a design to pervert their sense that maintain the truths
opposed by him, that so he may bring them, and their Doctrine under odium, and
entangle unwary Souls with his corrupt notions; To prevent him herein, and to
make way for the clear unde^standing of what I have to say in answer to him; I
shall premit these things.

1. That I do acknowledge, That all men have a liberty of will, or freedom of
choosing with reference to those things that are proposed to them. And this I
take to be an inseparable adjunct of all humane acts.

2. This liberty consists in a rational spontaneity: He acts freely, that is
under no coaction (which alone is opposed to liberty in the true notion
thereof) but does what the last and practical judgment of his own
understanding dictates to him. So that one that acts necessarily may yet act
most freely. God cannot but love and delight in himself, and order all things
to his own glory; yet is he an agent in every respect most absolutely free: The
good Angels now confirmed by Grace in their station, and glorified Saints,
cannot but love God, choose and delight in perfect obedience to his holy will:
yet in all this are they free agents, because they are thus determined by no
external force, but by the dictate of their own understanding. And on the
contrary, the Devils, and fallen man, are by their own wickedness determined to
sin, and that only, yet are they free in the choice thereof, etc.

3. That God made man upright, and so capable of yielding perfect obedience to
the whole will of God, according to that Covenant in which he stood related to
him; but he sought out many inventions, and by his voluntary defection from,
and rebellion against God, fell short of the Glory of God, and lost that
rectitude of nature which was concreate with him, and became blind, disobedient
and dead to God.

4. Man having thus wickedly and wilfully lost, and cast away his power of
obeying God, does infer no unrighteousness in the Law of God, still requiring
and commanding them to do that which is Just, and Holy and Good; neither does
it infer the least obligation on God to recover him out of his lost estate.

5. Although man in his l^psed estate, has such a principle of enmity to God
reigning in him, that he cannot, until converted by effectual Grace, choose
that which is right in the sight of God, yet does he freely put forth a
positive act of his will in refusing mercy tendered on Gospel terms.

6. So then the Question is not so much, whether men* left to themselves, and
the common helps afforded them, may believe if they will? But whether any such
will believe; and not rather finally oppose God, and refuse his Grace tendered
to them in the Gospel.

These things duly considered, tend to obviate the cavils of Mr. Collier, and
to detect his mistakes. He asserts in the first Section, p. 24.

That suitable to the means and Ministries men are under, there is a capacity
both of power and will in all men (that are not debilitated of the ordinary
capacities of men) to understand, believe and obey the Lord in them.

By this and other following passages, it appears that by universal Grace, Th.
C. means the sufficiency of the humane nature, which is it, and not Grace, that
he desires to exalt; and as his notions are the same in this matter with the
Pelagians, so is there the same deceit and aequivocation in his using the term
Grace, which they sought refuge in: and therefore let none be blinded with that
saying of his in the same Section, That this capacity both of power and will,
is of God; For Pelagius himself acknowledges as much; and it amounts to no
more then the acknowledgement of our endowment with natural abilities by God
who is our Creator: All these are from God in a way of nature, but ability to
believe and obey the Gospel is from him in a way of special Grace, which is
that we plead for; and deny that a natural unregenerate man is capable, of
saving knowledge of, or yielding obedience to, the will of God in the Gospel,
otherwise then as a dead Soul is capable of being quickened by the Almighty
power of the Spirit of Christ. This the Scripture is full and express in: I
will instance in a Text or two.

We read 1 Cor. 2. 14. But the natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God; For they are foolishness unto him; neither can be know them, for
they are spiritually discerned.

The Apostle does in the context divide all men into two sorts: Natural and
Spiritual: The last have the mind of Christ, and are made acquainted with the
Grace of the Gospel, through the effectual working of the Spirit, by which they
are born again; the other, viz. natural men, unregenerate persons (even the
wisest and best of them) receive not the things of the Spirit of God, i. e. the
Doctrines of the Gospel; because they are without any Spiritual discerning of
the glory that is in them, remaining under the power of darkness; they are
accounted foolishness, and as foolish things, are slighted and rejected by
them: Neither can they know them, viz. savingly and effectually, for they are
spiritually discerned, i. e. by the enlightening, and teaching of the Spirit of
God; and not without it.

But I find diverse exceptions laid against this interpretation of the Text by
Mr. Collier, p. 42. and 43. which I shall here remove out of the way.

1. He expounds this term the natural man, by, the sensual man: as if all
unregenerate persons were not intended thereby, but only some of the most
brutish among them; which is quite against the Apostles scope, whose design is
to show, that God has made foolish the wisdom of this world, and that the
principal men thereof are strangers to the things of the new Covenant, which
eye has not seen, etc. chapter 1. 20. and 2. 7, 8, 9.

2. He supposes the Idolatrous Gentiles that would not come to the Gospel
light, etc. to be intended. But this also is plainly to contradict the Apostle,
who speaks of both Jew and Gentile, and particularly those of them to whom the
Gospel was preached; as you may see most evidently in his foregoing discourse;
and these when the things of Gods Spirit were proposed to them, received them
not, but esteemed them foolishness.

His third exception is plainly ridiculous; He says, All where the Gospel
comes should understand and believe it, but its th^se only that by the Word and
Spirit of the Gospel, do believe and obey it, that have this spiritual
understanding. This we plead, That although all unto whom they are tendered,
ought to receive the things of the spirit of God; yet no unconverted man does
so; the reason is in part, because he cannot understand them; but they are
foolishnes^ to him, and accordingly rejected by him; and to confute this, Mr.
C. tells us that no unbeliever has this understanding indeed; but if he did
believe and obey he should have it; as if to obey and believe the Gospel, were
not to receive the things of Gods spirit: The sum is this, If he did believe,
he might believe, and if he were not ignorant, he might understand, etc.

4. He endeavors to persuade us, that it is only such an understanding of
Gospel mysteries as is proper to grown Christians, that the unconverted man is
incapable of, and how repugnant this is to the whole discourse of the Apostle,
I leave every one to judge: Thus he concludes his futilous cavil:

So that it supposes not any impossibility for the darke^t and worst of men to
obtain Light and Life by the Gospel. He would fain lie hid under the darkness
of his ambiguous terms: This Scripture does not suppose indeed but that the
darkest and worst of men, may be enlightened, and quickened, by the power of
Gods spirit working with the word: But that every man, which has only the
natural accomplishments of a man, may understand and obey the Gospel if it be
Doctrinally proposed to him, in the exercise of that ability which he has in
his lapsed state, is utterly denied ^n this Text; and Tho. C. convict thereby
of falsehood, who affirms it.

The second Scripture which I shall oppose to his forementioned assertion, is
Joh. 6. 44. No man can come to me except the Father which sent me draw him.
Christ does here assert, that notwithstanding the Gospel be preached to men,
their natural impotency is such, that they cannot come; yea their enmity such
that they will not come, unless the Father draw them, viz. by those effectual
teachings, and that illumination, by which alone this impotency is cured in the
Elect. v. 45.

Th. C. makes his exceptions likewise against this Text, p. 30 but to very
little purpose.

1. He endeavors to persuade us that this drawing of the Father, is the same
with the preaching of the Gospel, and so common to all that hear the sound
thereof; which the Text will in no wise admit, seeing it is of such that hear
the Gospel that Christ speaks, amongst whom some are thus drawn, others not.

2. He says they cannot, because they will not, and that the one is not
without the other. We grant this, they neither can nor will, without special
Grace come to Christ: neither are men condemned merely for their impotency, but
for their wilfulness in rejecting the Gospel, but this helps not Mr. C. at all.
And whereas he gives an account in some particulars why they will not, viz. 1.
Because they are habituated in sin, and accustomed to it, etc. And 2. Because
of the influence that the Devil has upon them: I grant that these things do
obstruct and hinder persons from coming to Christ; but I must tell him also,
That the first and main reason of their refusal is quite passed over by him,
and that is, the natural enmity that is in their Souls to God, Romans 8. 7.

The third Scripture is Ephesians. 2. 1. with other parallel Texts that declare all
persons unconverted, to be dead in trespasses and sins; and then certainly
incapable in that condition to put forth any truly spiritual vital act, in
receiving and obeying the Gospel of Christ; seeing they are without that
principle of life, from whence such acts must flow. Unto this Mr. C. replies p.
29.

It is a great mistake to think and speak as if men were as dead and incapable
to believe and obey the Gospel as a stock or a stone, or as men that are
naturally dead; this is a ridiculous and untrue imagination: and so proceeds
with his unlearned eloquence to set forth the folly of giving any thing in
command to a stone, etc. But to these things I say;

1. All men have indeed rational Souls; and none besides Mr. C. will be so
ridiculous as to to talk at such a rate as if Men and Stones were in the same
capacity of being wrought upon by exhortations, promises and threatenings; we
acknowledge that these are proper moral instruments in their own nature suited
to work upon the understandings, wills and affections of men, and to produce
the effects of Faith and Obedience in them; and seeing these faculties are the
principle and subject of all actual obedience, it is also granted that there is
in men a natural remote passive power of believing and obeying the Gospel which
is not in stocks and stones: but this power is never actually put forth, nor
can be, without the effectual Grace of God working in them both to will and to
do: so that this notwithstanding, as a stone or Corpse cannot perform any
operation of which natural life is the principle, because they have it not;
neither can a man in his fallen state put forth an act of spiritual life,
because he is without that Life and Grace that is the principle thereof: For as
the Soul is to the Body, with respect to natural life, so is the new nature to
the Soul, with respect to a moral, or spiritual life.

That which he offers that he might escape the force of this testimony is so
remote from the evident scope of the Texts insisted on; that I shall not need
to return any particular answer thereto, but leave his error crushed under the
weight of these savings of the holy Ghost, who has in them stained the pride
of all flesh: Only I could wish that they into whose hands these lines may
come, would ^lso consult Dr. Owen in his Discourse of the Spirit: where he does
largely plead and vindicate these Texts against the Pelagians, Arminians, etc.
from whom Mr. C. has drank in these notions. For my own part, I had not now
produced them, but only that I might take this opportunity to remove his
objections against their true sense, supposing this a convenient place for that
work; seeing my design is only to remove his cavils out of the way of weak
Christians; and not to handle any point my self, farther then in the pursuit
thereof I am led to: I pass therefore a multitude of other Scriptures that
contradict his notion, and shall attend him, in his proof offered, and discover
the weakness and insufficiency thereof.

The first thing which he says proves his opinion is,

Because it is the duty of all men (suitable to the mea^s and ministry they
have been under) to believe and obey God. And after he has by diverse Texts
proved this, which none denies, he adds;

All which proves a capacity in men to answer his will, or we must reflect on
God, etc.

Were man to be considered in his primitive state, as he came out of the hands
of God, there were some weight in this reasoning, But to suppose that the duty
of man must be measured by his power and ability in his fallen state, is fond,
and groundless: He cannot sin himself from under obligation to duty; Though he
loose the image of God, that rectitude of nature, by his sin, that enabled him
to obey God, yet the most high does not loose his right of commanding him, that
which is just and good. In truth, To say that we have power in and of our
selves, to do all that God requires of ^s, is in effect, to make void the Grace
of God, and to renounce the Gospel; at least to allow its usefulness (which is
the most Mr. C. does) only to facilitate the discharge of our duty. But if our
duty is to be measured by our power, it will appear that sinners hardened by
continuance in sin, and profligate wickedness, are most excusable; seeing they
have least power to obey God (as Mr. C. will confess) and so by his argument it
were unjust with God to require that of them, which he does of others not
immerst in their debaucheries. Yea let me add this also; from Dr. O. p. 245. of
his (...).

In the transactions between God and the Souls of men, with respect unto their
obedience and salvation, there is none of them but has a power in sundry
things, as to some degrees and measures of ohem, to comply with his mind and
will, which they voluntarily neglect; And this of its self is sufficient to
bear the charge of their Eternal ruin.

The second thing whereby he endeavors to prove his opinion, p. 25. is,
Because God blames those under all his ministrations, that did not or do not
suitably obey him therein: To which he adds in the third place, He threatens
and executes Judgment on all such.

Both these depend on the first; and no man besides Mr C. would have made use
of them as distinct mediums in the proof of his position.

The first therefore being enervated, these fall with it. But he says, If we
accept not this as a sufficient proof of his notion.

We cannot have right, honorable, and God-like thoughts of the Lord, to
require, blame, pity, promise, threaten, and execute terrible judgment on a
people, that in no case was able to help it.

He that can make good sense of these words, has more skill then I, but I
heartily wish nonsense had been the worst fault in Mr. Colliers Book, however
it be, I will endeavor to give a distinct answer to that which he drives at.
1. God may require obedience of those from whom it is due, though they have
si^ned away their power to perform it. 2. It is a moral sinful impo^ency that
men are under, they cannot, nor they will not obey; but they can and do
wilfully refuse to obey God, and therefore are justly blamed and punished for
this wickedness, and are also as Creatures, the object^ of pity while they thus
destroy themselves. 3. Promises and threatenings are fit mediums to work upon
rational Creatures, who are capable of understanding the terms in which the
things of the spirit of God are proposed to them (though the Glory of the
things themselves, they discern not) and to put forth a free act of their wills
in reference to them; as Mr. C. says himself in his Bod. of Div. p. 452.
Though man has lost the freedom of his will to that which is good by sinning,
yet not the power of willing. And 4. By the mighty power of Gods spirit giving
efficacy to this means, the Elect are made obedient, and the rest left without
excuse or Cloak for their sin.

As for that clause, That in no case was able to help it: it is fallacious.
They act spontaneously, and are in no case willing to help it, whose Souls are
not renewed by special Grace. He goes on, p. 26.

4. It must be so because the contrary leaves the condemnation of sinners at
Gods door, which f^r be it from any sober spirit to imagine: For God to bring
forth a glorious ministration of Grace and Life to the world, 1 and tender it
to sinners on such terms as is impossible for them to perform; with the helps
he affords, 2 and to damn them for nonperformance ther^^f, necessarily leaves a
necessity of perishing without hope or help: So that if this were true, that
men could not believe and obey the Gospel, where it comes 3 simply from their
debility and impotency, and the debility of the means ^fforded them for help
therein; It could not be their sin. 4 for its no man's sin, not to do what he
cannot do, but what he can and might do had he a will to it.

The things before pleaded, do fully remove out of our way what is here
offered: But farther to detect his aequivocation; mind, 1. Although it be
impossible for dead sinners to quicken themselves; yet seeing this
impossibility is founded in the corruption of their natures, and wickedness of
their own hearts, it cannot in the least excuse their disobedience. 2. Sinners
are liable to damnation for the breach of the Law, and if they add hereunto
disobedience to the Gospel, it necessarily aggravates their sin and
condemnation; and this they will do, if left to themselves; but neither does
this necessity, which is only a necessity of infallibility, with respect to the
event, in any wise infringe their liberty, or excuse their sin. 3. Whereas he
talks of unbelief that comes simply from the debility and impotency of men,
and the debility of the means afforded them: and in the next Section, Of that
which befalls a man that, he could not, nor in any case cannot help, etc. I
must tell him, that it is dishonestly done to represent this, as the opinion of
the men with whom his controversy is; seeing they teach, That men's
disobedience to God springs from their obstinacy, and not only impotency; and
they are condemned for that, and not simply for this alone, and also, That the
means of Salvation tendered in the Gospel, is full and gloriously perfect in its
kind: But the reason why the Gospel is not effectual to the salvation of all
that hear it is, The natural enmity and obstinacy of their hearts against God
is such, that unless it be overcome and cured, by him that raised Christ from
the dead, they do finally resist the call of God, and will not come to Christ
that they might have life: And this defilement of humane nature man brought
upon himself ^y his fall, which he could have helped and prevented if he would,
and it is approved and delighted in by all his posterity. 4. The falsehood
therefore of his saying, That is no man's sin not to do what he cannot do, is
evident, seeing man's duty is determined by Gods holy command, not his own
sinful weakness. So then our Doctrine does not lay the sin of men at Gods door
(as he suggests) but at their own, where the Scripture lays it; It spoileth man
indeed of all matter of boasting, which is the true reason of Mr. Colliers
endeavor to load it with this calumny.

And in truth though proud Hypocrites will be b^asting of their
selfsufficiency, we need not nor can have a more pathetical confutation of Mr.
C's Doctrine, then that which is gathered from the confession of one poor in
spirit, and distressed in Soul, under the sense of his lost condition by
nature; Methinks I see such an one rolling himself in the dust, and with floods
of tears, and groanings that cannot be uttered, pouring out his Soul before the
Lord with such expressions as these;

O Lord look down in mercy upon a captivated condemned sinner, that has broken
thy holy Law, and finds nothing in himself but a principle of enmity to, and
aversation from thy holy will revealed either in the Law or in the Gospel; I
confess that it is a miracle of mercy, that terms of pardon and acceptance by
Jesus are proposed to me: But ah Lord! my blindness is such that I shall never
find this way of life, if thou do not lead me; and the hardness of my heart
such, that it will not bow, unless thou make me willing in the day of thy
power! I hear Christ say Come; but alas! I cannot came; Oh draw my Soul to thy
self by thine effectual Grace! Heaven is opened to the Believer: but O Lord!
that word Believe slays my heart; It is my duty I confess, and ever to be
admired is Grace, that found out such a remedy: But oh my unbelief! I am shut
up under it! what shall I do! whether shall I flee! Lord Faith is thy Gift, and
by thine Almighty power it has been wrought in some such as I am: Oh magnify
Grace in me a lost Creature, even me also! renew my Soul, change my Heart, make
me a Believer, work in me both to will and to do of thy good pleasure, else I
may as ^^^n reach Heaven with my finger as Believe; my impotency, my blindness,
the perverseness of my heart is so great! I must confess O Lord thou art just
if thou damn me; but oh pity! and save a Soul without might, that is now
sinking under thy wrath, if free, free Grace prevent not, by working in me what
thou requi^^st of me.

I return to Mr. C. who will now give us instances to illustrate his former
assertion, and (that he may take this opportunity, to let out more of his
poisonous Doctrine) chiefly insists on original sin, which he endeavors to
persuade men is an harmless thing, and of it self lays them under no more
guilt, then does a fit of sickness, or any other affliction of the like kind,
that no man can help, etc. only thus much he grants,

Its true the first death is come on all men by Adams transgression, they
having the same original nature of sin and death, its come into all men as a
Judgment for the first transgression, but not as a sin to the second death.

Although it may not be easy to find out any good sense of these words [the
Original nature of sin and death] yet it is easy to understand what is the
drift of his discourse, which he also farther explains anon, and which I before
touched: And therefore to prevent him, before I examine what he says, I will
briefly propose the truth concerning this point as it is taught in the
Scriptures Romans 5. and other places, viz. Job 14. 4. Psalm. 51. 5. Joh. 3. 6.
etc. From whence I gather,

1. That Adam in his primitive state was to be considered as a public person,
in whom all mankind (that in an ordinary way of generation came of him) were;
and in whom they sinned and fell, when he fell: And they are to be considered
in him legally and naturally: 1. Legally as he was (according to the terms of
the Covenant in which he stood related to God) their representative; and so
received his perfections, or original righteousness, for them as well as for
himself, and they as well as he lost it by the fall. 2. Naturally, as he was
the root of all mankind, which were virtually in his Loins when he fell: So
then,

2. Original sin is either Imputed or Inherent. The imputation of Adams sin to
his posterity, by which they are most justly accounted to have sinned in him,
who was the root, and both generative and faederal principle of mankind, is in
some sort the meritorious cause of the inherent pravity of the humane nature
derived from him, which is diffused through all the parts of the Soul, and is a
just punishment for the first offense; by which we are turned away from God,
and disposed to all wickedness, it being the root, seed and principle of all
actual transgressions and sins; and is therefore so frequently by the Apostle
Paul called sin in a way of emphasis; and the flesh; of which all the
abominations that are in the world are the proper fruit and offspring, and are
so represented by him, Romans 7. 8 etc. chapter 13. 14. Gal. 5. 19. Col. 2. 11. Ephesians.
2. 3.

3. When therefore we affirm with the Apostle, Romans 5. 18. That by the offense
of one, Judgment came upon all men unto condemnation; neither does the holy
Ghost in that Text, nor we, intend to assert, that any are actually damned for
Adams particular fact: but, That by his sin and our sinning in him, by Gods
most just ordination, we have lost original righteousness, and so (as darkness
necessarily is, where light is taken away or denied, and sickness where health
is not) contracted that exceeding pravity and sinfulness of nature, which
deserves the curse of God and Eternal damnation; and it is inherent
uncleanness that actually excludes out of the Kingdom of God.

From what has been said, it is easy to gather how pernicious Mr. C's
doctrine is, who teaches, that Original sin exposes only to temporal or
bodily, not Eternal death. The Apostle constantly affirms Romans 5. that it is
the death and condemnation, that Christ saves his people from, (which surely
is the second, not the first death only) which by our fall in Adam we were
exposed to, and guilty of.

But why does not Original sin deserve the second death? Is it because Adams
transgression was but trivial, certainly the aggravations of his sin were
exceeding great, There was contempt of God, dis-belief of his word, pride,
breach of Covenant, Theft, Murder* etc. all combined in that one sin; so that
a greater (the sin against the holy Ghost excepted) and ^ore (...)ex evi(...)e
of the Sons of ^^n were ever guilty of. But if (...) had (...)n, There (...)in
in ^^s own nature so small, but ratione obj(...) in that it is ^^ainst an
infinite Majesty, it deserv^^ Eve^lasting p(...)shment; a^ (...)ry one that
fears God, and knows his te^rour* (...) Is it because ^^e corruption of our
nature derived from Ad(...) ^t a small thing* who trembles not at such a
thought, that ha^^ ^ot cast off all sense of a Deity, and the holiness thereof*
We have before proved, That it is the spring of all the evil that is done ^^der
the Sun; it is in its own nature a principle of enmity to G^d; that from whence
the heart of man is denominated to be dec^i(...) above all things, and
desperately wicked.

If there be any thing therefore in what he says besides his bold affirmation
it is only this,

Because it is a Judgment for the first transgression, ^t cannot be a sin to
the second death.

But he may learn from the Scriptures, that God oft-times punishes sinners by
giving them up to sin, and yet that sin, which has also in it a punishment of
former transgression, will sink a Soul under divine wrath, as well as any
other. Let him take for instance, Romans 1. 21. ad finem, 2 Th^s. 2. 10, 11, 12.

I thought in my reply to this, and what follows, to have showed how Mr.
Collier in some things takes the Pelagian notion of Original sin, in effect
plainly enough denying it; and also how in asserting the defilement of our
nature, not to be ou^ sin, he agrees with Bellarmine and other Jesuits, in
their opposition to the Protestant Doctrine in this point; But I must be brief;
and shall therefore content my self only to show his repugnancy to the truth of
God in the Scripture. Thus he goes on,

All men are born into the world with sinful nature^, now this defilement of
our natures (though sinful) no man can help; therefore it is not their sin, but
their affliction.

Here is a sinful nature, a sinful defilement of nature; and yet no sin but an
affliction only! Let such confusion be the ^ot of all that oppose Gods sacred
truth? Can the nature of man be defiled, and sinful, and yet he not a sinner?
yea but

-- no man can help it, therefore it is not their sin. I answer,

This defilement of humane nature came by that sin, that man might not have
committed; he might have helped it if he would. Yea moreover Original sin, is
habitually in the Will as the subject thereof as well as other faculties of the
Soul, and therefore is voluntary; and every particular person is to be
accounted, and truly is, the immediate principle as well as the subject, the
Author as well as the possessor, of his own individual Original sin, or
corruption of nature, even as a man is of his natural faculties, or acquired
habits, or as Adam himself was of ^his Original Sickness or Disease, in his own
person: as the Learned Voetius asserts in his first Book of Select.
Disputations, p. 1105.

And it is by reason of this defilement of nature, that we are by nature the
Children of wrath; which could not be, if it were not our sin, Ephesians. 2. 3. And
on this ground the Lord Christ asserts the necessity of regeneration, and that
without it none can see the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 5, 6, 7. Mr. C says
farther,

And cause we have to bewail it as our affliction; but not as our sin; so the
Apostle does Romans 7. 24. It is consenting to it which is the sin, v. 15, 16
Jam. 1. 14, 15. when persons consent to covetous and worldly lusts, to proud,
envious, and disobedient lusts; this is the sin that will usher in the second
death: Original guilt and stain only brings under the first death, but not not
the second as distinct from consent.

Original sin may be considered either in the unregenerate in whom it reigns,
and is wholly unmortified; or as remaining in the regenerate, though mortified
and spoiled of its reigning power; The unregenerate are under the power thereof
in all the faculties of their Souls; It is blindness and vanity in their minds;
hatred of God, and obstinacy in their wills, etc. and they are content to be
commanded by this principle, and the first moral acting of the Soul is
influenced thereby, Psalm. 58. 3. and in them the lustings of the flesh are
never resisted, from any true hatred of their sinfulness; though on other
accounts, as they are apprehended destructive to themselves one way or other,
they may be so, in some particular actings thereof. But in the regenerate there
is a contrary principle, even the Law of the Spirit of Life which is in Christ
Jesus that sets them free from the Law of sin and death, so that they obey not
the flesh in the Lusts thereof; and these, as they are by the power of the
spirit of Grace delivered from the service of sin, so are they also by the
efficacy of Christ's blood saved from the condemning power thereof: There is no
condemnation to them, Romans 8. 1. But it is not because in-dwelling sin deserves
none, But because Jesus sa^eth them from the wrath to come. Now such an one is
personated by Paul* Romans 7. unto whom all sin is an afflicting burden; and the
lustings of in-dwelling sin, which were opposed by the new Creature, he
complains of as his greatest affliction, b^t not as his affliction only, as
outward trouble, and persecution was, but as his sin also: Nay therefore it was
his affliction, because his sin, and so he calls it about ten times in that
Chapter, and as such bitterly bewails it. Let the Text be consulted for proof
hereof. In me (says he) that is in my flesh (in me so far as not renewed by
Grace) dwells no good thing: Now sin is (...), ^ privation of that Good and
Holiness that the Law requires, and this says the Apostle is in me: and yet
Mr. C. supposes he acknowledges no sin; but this may be in a rational
Creature, and he not a sinner. Yea the Apostle confesses, that he was greatly
hindered in his duty by the working of his corruption, and at last flies to
Christ for deliverance therefrom; and yet shall we say he owneth no fault all
this while?

As for Jam. 1. 14, 15. The evident scope of the Apostle is, not to teach men
to justify the wicked lustings of their hearts, as Mr. C. does; but to prove
that the spring of all the wickedness of man, is in his own Breast, and it will
be in vain for him to think of shifting off the blame to any other. It is
granted indeed, that the Apostle says, Lust when it has conceived brings
forth sin; and that this conceiving of sin is by the consent of the will,
agreeing to the Commission thereof; but by sin here, it is evident that actual
transgression is intended: and what says the Apostle of this Lust? verily,
That it tempts, draws away the Soul from God, and enticeth it to sin; and
that it works thus as a principle in the Soul; it is a man's own lust. Shall
we then suppose actual transgression to be a sin, and the working of that
principle in a mar that disposes to it, not to be so? Has God no regard to
the hearts and principles of men, and the habits of their Souls? do not they
come under his Law? or is not the habit of Grace, Grace as well as the exercise
thereof, and a man denominated Gracious therefrom? and here ^ppositorum par
rati^, In plain terms; to suppose the lustings of a corrupt heart after all
wickedness, is no harm, unless they be fully consented to, is impious.

As to that which he adds concerning Infants and Idiots; To suppose them no way
concerned in sin as he does, and so well enough without Christ, is like the
rest of his Doctrine: This I say, because the Scripture says it, which
declares all to be under sin (even those that have not sinned after the
similitude of Adams transgression, viz. actually) and all sin to deserve wrath;
That neither Infants nor Idiots can stand before God without a Mediator: They
have sin enough to damn them, but there is Grace enough in God, and Merit
enough in the blood of Christ to save them, unto which (and not their own
innocence) they must be beholding for salvation.

The 5th thing he insists on to prove his opinion, is Gods expostulating with
men to convince them of the equality of his ways: That the ways of God toward
the Sons of men are full of Equity and Grace; is evident from what I have
already proved in opposition to his errors; and to his harangue about it, I
shall only say: There is no need for him to speak wickedly for God: His
righteousness is abundantly manifested by the light of Scripture Doctrine,
without the help of his notions, and shall be yet farther manifested in the day
of Christ, to the shame and silencing of all that now reply against God, even
in those things where his Judgments are a great deep: as the Apostle
discourses at large Romans 9. and 11. Chap^ers.

The Objection that he starts about God his creating man upright, etc. I need
not long stay upon; The truth concerning this is before stated and proved; and
every impartial Reader may see, how miserably he trifles in his endeavor to
solve it: He gives you his word for it, that God will excuse men from all that
Obedience that they have by their sin lost both power and will to perform. But
I hope none are so credulous as to take his Book to be Canonical. Not one Text
of Scripture does he, nor can he produce for the proof of his opinion: but only
attempts to back one falsehood with another; saying,

That since the fall God requires not perfect obedience of men; but only
sincerity; and that he knew that man might yield sincere Obedience ^n Faith and
Love; and in that has promised both assistance, and acc^ptance in his Son, etc.

Two things he here takes for granted, but both without ground.

1. That all the World are under the Covenant of Grace, so as to be presently
interested in the privileges thereof; and accepted in those sincere endeavors
to obey God, which they are capable of in that condition wherein they are by
nature, which is not so; For all that can be said of Men in General unto whom
the Gospel is preached, amounts to no more then this, That the Grace and
Blessings of the New covenant are offered to them upon condition of Faith: God
declares his good pleasure to sinners, that if they or any of them do confess
and forsake their sins, they shall find mercy; and those of them that do
believe, he gives the sure mercies of David unto, Isa. 55. 3. and they are
under Grace Romans 6. 14. But the rest of the world are under the severity of the
Law still; yea whosoever does in heart depart from Christ, and seek life by his
own works, is a Debtor to answer the most rigorous demands thereof, and is
fallen from Grace, Christ shall prof^t him nothing, Gal. 5. 3. 4. And that
passage 2 Cor. 8. 12. For if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted
according to what a man has, and not according to what he has not: is
pitifully wrested by Mr. C. in that he would apply it to the case in hand: for
neither the thing nor persons there spoken of, will at all agree thereto.

1. It is not a moral sinful impetency or deficiency, that the Apostle there
speaks of: but only a want of riches, and ability in that respect to contribute
so largely to the necessity of the ^oor Saints, as otherwise they might and
would have done.

2. The persons spoken of are Saints, Believers, such as are accepted in
Christ, and interested in the Covenant of Grace; whose sincere endeavors to
walk with God, are according to the terms of that Covenant accepted by him
through the beloved, (though this Obedience of theirs is not their justifying
righteousness, nor accepted for that end*) But the case is otherwise with
persons out of Christ.

Mr. C. endeavors to strengthen this notion, p. 32. by proving, That under
Moses Law, sincerity was accepted, and that though the Law required perfect
Obedience, yet this perfection cons^sted, in universality and sincerity, etc.

But here again he pitifully confounds things that ought to be heedfully
distinguished.

In the Mosaical economy, there was such a remembrance of the Covenant of
works revived, with the terms and sanction thereof; as that hereupon it is
called the ministration of cond^mnation, and did engender unto bondage, 2 Cor.
3. 7. Gal. 4. 25. But yet the promise of Salvation by the Messiah, being made
long before, was not enervated thereby; but even this was laid in a
subserviency to Gospel ends; and also the Gospel was preached to them, Heb. 4.
2. (and so the Covenant of Grace revealed) though more darkly in types and
shadows, through which they were instracted, to seek Justification unto Life by
Christ promised, and so deliverance from the curse of the Law by him. Now
amongst these some did believe, others did not; and so some were related to God
in the New Covenant, others remained under the Old: The sincere Obedience of
the one was accepted on Gospel gracious terms, and for Gospel ends (not that
they obtained life thereby, according to the terms of the Covenant of works, Do
this and live) Christ being their surety to answer the utmost demands of the
Law, for their Justification before God. The other were(...)n their own persons
responsible for the br(...) of the L^w (...)nd stood (...)ty of death by the
curse thereof, (...)ll for wa(...) (...)lu^ (...)rtection, as sincerity in
their Obedien(...) (...)e Covenant of works considered formally as such, knows
no c^ange of sincerity for perfection, but its commands must in every spect be
obeyed, and its demands answered, and they are so by Christ alone who has
fulfilled the righteousness thereof for them that do believe; and without Faith
in him, the Soul stands or falls to the unallayed and most rigorous sentence
thersof.

The second thing Mr. C. supposes is,

That every man has ability in his fallen state to yield sincere obedience to
God in Faith and Love.

This has been already refuted; and here is nothing offered to enforce it, I
shall therefore refer the Reader to that which precedes in this Chapter: where
also the foundation of what Mr. C. farther pleads in his two following
Sections, is fully removed, so that there remains only a flourish of words,
wherewith he beats the Air; in returning answer to which, I shall waste no more
precious time.

CHAP. V.
Wherein some things relating to the principles already asserted, are farther
cleared and vindicated: And also the Saints perseverance proved, and Tho. C's
Exceptions removed.

I Am now come to his 5th. Chapter, wherein he endeavors farther to strengthen
his Opinions before laid down, and is more express in his asserting Believers
final falling aw^y from Grace: The most of what he says is built on those
principles that have been already discussed; and therefore in my examination
thereof, I will only note, either those things which are very gross, or that
wherein he seems to offer something that has not before been urged and
answered.

Those Texts which he endeavors to wrest in the beginning of this Chapter,
have been already vindicated from his corrupt glosses, I do therefore here pass
them over, and attend to what he says, p. 31. where he propounds this question,

May we suppose that persons may believe, or that any do believe unto life,
only by the objective evidence, or external Ministry, without the spirits work
in and with the Gospel? His answer is, If we may suppose the Ministry to go
without the spirit working therein, then we may suppose a p^ssibility in
respect of power, else men could not be condemned for not believing, etc.

The absurd folly of his supposition, That by our sin we out God short of right
to command our Obedience to his holy will, as well as loose our power to obey,
has been already detected: By this and what follows, you may see (what I
said before) that this man does not stick at the grossest Pelagianisme; but
supposes man in his fallen state, by his corrupt mind and natural capacity,
without any work of Gods spirit upon him, to be capable of disc^rning,
believing, and yielding acceptable Obedience to the revelations of God
contained in the Scriptures of truth. Howbeit we have heard the Scripture
teaches other Doctrine: And the Apostle Paul was so far from this proud
conceit of himself, that he confesses the quite contrary, viz. 2 Cor. 3. 5.
That we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves,
but our sufficiency is of God, i. e. It is of God in a way of Grace, who works
all our works in us. But against the saying of the Apostle, he excepts p. 43.

Its true as of our selves only we are not, distinct from Christ and Gospel
Grace we are not; but by the helps afforded there is power both to will and to
do the will of God in the Gospel.

It seems by these words of Tho. Collier, That he is conscious to himself that
this Text does overthrow his notion of the sufficiency of men without any help
of the spirit of God to do any thing that is truly and spiritually Good,
especially those that are utter strangers to Christ, and Gospel Grace; for he
now owns that distinct from Christ and Gospel Grace we have no such
sufficiency: But he does not use to trouble himself, to keep an harmony in his
Book, betwixt pages so far distant as is 31. from p. 43. and therefore it is no
marvel to find him here unsaying what before he said; and instead of that, to
content himself for the present with asserting, That there is a sufficient help
afforded to all, etc. But brings forth no proof of that neither; but besides
what has been already proved against him, I shall farther examine this notion,
before I come to the end of this Chapter: and at present manifest, that it is
overthrown by this Text: The Apostle does in these words (not with a feigned
modesty) but from his heart confess he is beholding to the Grace of God, for
every good thing wrought in him or by him; And therefore he instanceth in that
which scarce amounts to any good work, even a thought; when he affirms our
sufficiency to be of God; and denies that we are (...) sufficient or meet for
it; any way capable of our selves to exert, or frame a good thought in our own
Breasts: and this he denies of himself when converted, and refers all the
praise of the exercise of Grace in his Soul to the spirit of God even then; now
it is less to think then to will, and less to will then to perform: And if our
ability for the former be denied, it must be so much more for the latter: And
if it be denied of a converted man, much more of one unconverted: It is
repugnant to reason and Scripture evidence to think, that the blessed Apostle,
a person in all respects qualified with natural endowments and education, yea
in an eminent manner assisted by the Spirit of God, should say that he had no
sufficiency of his own, for any thing that was truly good; and in the mean
while to suppose that any unconverted person, has power of himself to be so
good, in thought, will, and deed, as to get to Heaven by the mere improvement
of his natural capacity, without any assistance of Divine Grace.

In p. 32. he farther opens his mind about conversion and tells us, If God did
not work at all by his spirit, but only give the Gospel which has in its self
a natural tendency to draw sinners to Christ, if according to their capacities
they believe and obey it* they should undoubtedly be saved.

There are two things supposed in these words, the one true, the other utterly
untrue; a common artifice of Deceivers to make their notions pass the more
readily with the weak that cannot discover their imposture herein.

1. He supposes that whosoever believes and obeys the Gospel by any means,
is under the promise of salvation, which is a great truth; th^se two, viz.
Faith and Salvation being inseparably connected in the Scripture.

2. He takes it for granted (as before) That a man in his natural Estate,
without any the least assistance from the spirit of God, has a sufficient
ability, and is in a capacity to be^ieve and obey the Gospel; And so all that
he allows to the spirit o^ God, is but to render the work of conversion the
more facile and easy; for thus he writes again p. 33. That after believing and
obeying the Gospel, God usually gives a greater measure of his spirit; so that
after believing, Christians are or might be, in a better capacity to live to
God then before. They were therefore in a capacity to live to God before
believing; and again p. 34.

As the Ap^stle speaks in the matter of prayer, Romans 8. 26. He helps our
infirmities, so its true in all cases; the work of the Spirit is to help our
infirmities, for its we that d^ believe and obey the Gospel, and not the
Spirit: The result or necessary consequence of these words of his is, That
persons may believe and never be beholding to the Spirit; they can convert
themselves without him: But if he do ex abundanti afford his help, it is not to
convert the Soul by his own power and grace, but only to facilitate the work,
by exciting a principle that he finds in the Soul, and which was there before
any special working of his in and upon it.

But if we consult the holy Scriptures, we shall find that in them conversion
is spoken of in a Dialect far differing from Mr. Colliers. For instance Jam. 1.
18. Of his own will has he begotten us, etc. Now this new birth, or being
begotten of God, does bespeak plainly the infusing of that gracious principle
into the Soul that was not there before; and this is done by the Spirit of God,
in the exercise of Sovereign Grace; As the wind blows where it lists, so of
his own will has he begotten us. Of the same import is that phrase, of taking
the heart of stone out of the flesh, and giving an heart of flesh; a new heart,
so often mentioned in the Covenant of Grace; and can signify no less then the
effectual removing and curing of that wicked disposition of Soul, and
stubbornness of heart, by which a person is kept in rebellion against God, by
communicating to them a divine nature, as it is called 2 Pet. 1. 4. So also
conversion is called a new Creation, and Grace the new man, or a new Creature,
2 Cor. 5. 17. Ephesians. 4. 24. and 2. 10. which terms in the common sense of men,
signify the production of that which before was not in being, by a divine
power, even the same that wrought in Christ, when he was raised from the dead,
Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. and do not suppose any pre-disposition or inclination in the
person where this new Creation is not, exciting the great Creator to a
concurrence or assistance in order to its production. Yet Mr. Collier has the
boldness to say, that all these expressions amount to no more (if rightly
weighed) then what he has asserted, viz. That God does help men to believe, by
the working of his spirit with them; so cherishing the Good he finds in them
that it be not mastered by the sensual brutish part. Greater contempt has not
lightly been cast upon the holy spirit of God, who works all Grace in us; nor
upon his sayings in the Scipture, whereby his operation on the Souls of men is
unfolded to us; as if the holy Ghost intended to persuade them, that they are
beholding to distinguishing Grace for that, which in truth they have in nature,
and do themselves.

The reason that Mr. Collier gives for his talking at this rate, is, Because
its we that believe and obey the Gospel, and not the Spirit: and its our duty,
and so stated in the Scripture.

By this he intends to prove, that the Spirit of God is not the only and
principal efficient cause of Faith in men: but they open their own eyes, and
raise themselves from the dead, and create themselves anew in Christ Jesus; or
else believing must be attributed to the Spirit, and not to them, and must be
considered as his duty, and not theirs.

I might tell Mr. Collier (seeing he pretends to Learning) Qui actionis causa
^fficiens principalis and prima est; non illico ab action, cujus causa est
denominatur (lieet in illam per modum causae particularis determinantis
influat) sed ille tantum qui action informatur. But its in vain to trouble his
head with any Philosophical notion: I shall rather make evident his mistake, by
some familiar instance that may be within his reach. And I know none fitter ^o
the case in hand, then that of Lazarus his Resurrection from the dead by
Christ. I suppose it will be grated that the Lord di^ not only help Lazarus to
live and come out of his Grave, but that by his Divine power he made him to
live, that was before dead and utterly incapable of action; yet was it Lazarus
that came forth, and revived, not Christ: so though the Spirit of God do give
life to the Soul, and by his own power make it to believe; yet is it the man
converted, not the Spirit that believes, etc.

To make the matter more plain we must remember, That there are two moments in
conversion to be considered; The first is the infusion of a principle of Life
and Grace, by which the Soul is enabled and disposed to convert and believe,
being renewed after the image of God; and this is called Gratia prima, the
first Grace, in the reception whereof we are passive. The second is, the
exercise of this Grace in actual turning to God, believing, etc. through the
blessed assistance of the Good spirit, who worke^h in us to do as well as to
will: and this is called Gratia secunda; In this the Soul is active, and works
according to the working of him who works in it mightily.

Before I pass farther, I think it may be a convenient place here to remove out
of our way, the corrupt glosses of Mr. C. upon a Text or two, which he is
pleased to take notice of toward the end of this Chapter.

The first is Joh. 15. 5. mentioned by him p. 39. The words are, without me ye
can do nothing. The design of Christ in these words, is to press his Disciples
to abide in him; for this end he tells them in this Verse, I am the vine, ye
are the branches; he that abides in me and I in him, the same brings forth
much fruit; for without me (or, severed from me (...)) ye can do nothing.

We are by nature dry branches, and unfruitful, meet fuel for the fire of Gods
wrath; and if ever we bring forth fruit to God, we must first by the powerful
Grace of God the great Husbandman, be ingraffed into Christ the true Vine;
that we may derive Life and Grace from him: neither will our admission into the
Church suffice thereunto, without real union with himself, and cleaving to him
by faith lively and unfeigned, by the daily exercise whereof we fetch new
supplies of Grace, so drawing sap, from him, from whom our fruit is found: Thus
is he unto us as the Vine unto the Branches; for without Christ, i. e. the
influence of his Aid and Grace, or in a state of separation, in which we are
not capable of this vital influence from him, we can do nothing; understand it
according to the subject matter, nothing that is spiritually Good. Surely this
casts man down from that Throne of self-sufficiency, unto which Mr. Collier
would advance him; and very poorly does he acquit himself in his reply thereto;
He says:

1. All the common light, understanding and reason that men have is from him.

This is the refuge of the P^lagians of Old, in which Mr. C. has before
attempted to shelter himself: They would pretend to own the Grace of God, when
their meaning was no more then this, That men as men, were beholding to God for
their natural accomplishments; more then which they neither had, nor needed
from him, to enable them to yield acceptable obedience to him: but that
something else is intended in this Text, we have already manifested.

2. The Gospel leads Souls to him, where their help is; Its that which I say
there is no capacity or power without the Gospel, which unites Souls to Christ
in whom their Life is, etc.

It is the Faith of the Gospel, and not the bare hearing of it that unites the
Soul to Christ; and though Mr. Collier here tell us of drawing to Christ, and
Union with him, etc. yet his design is still to exclude the special and
effectual work of the spirit, to bring the Soul to Christ, and preserve it in
him, which I before proved necessary hereunto. And there is little heed to be
taken to his saying, There is no power or capacity without the Gospel: this is
but to serve a present turn; for he has in his foregoing Chapters pleaded,
That where the Gospel never comes, men have sufficient means and power to live
to God without it.

The second Text is 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who makes thee to differ, and what have thou,
that thou have not received? So Mr. C. reads it, p. 43, about which we need not
contend: add thereunto the close of the verse; now if thou did receive it,
why do thou glory as if thou had not received it? From hence we may safely
infer, That if any man differ from another, or from what he was in himself
before; that is to say, be raised from a state of death in sins and trespasses,
unto newness of life; delivered from the power of darkness, and translated into
the Kingdom of the Son of Gods love; it is God has made this difference, to
the praise of the riches of his Grace. And thus much Mr. C. in answer to the
objection grants, It is God by Gospel Grace makes us to diffe^; But if Mr.
Colliers notion elsewhere be true, that amongst men that receive every way as
much Grace from God the one as the other, some believe unto life, others remain
in their sins; it will necessarily follow, that those of them which choose the
better part, do make themselves to differ, and have cause of boasting, if not
before God, yet in comparison with other men; And this is in terms denied by
the Apostle; And Mr. C. makes no reply thereto, but what has now been often
mentioned and answered; and therefore I will not trouble the Reader with a
repetition of it.

The Text that remains to be insisted on, is Phil. 2. 13. For it is God which
works in you, both to will and to do; of his g^od pleasure. That this
Scripture is directly opposite to Mr. Collier^ Doctrine, is evident. In the
foregoing Verse he exhorts the Philippians to work out their own Salvation with
fear and trembling. By working out their Salvation; he intends laboring for,
or bestowing their utmost industry to obtain Salvation: and according to this
sense is the same word rendered, Joh. 6. 27. Labor not for the meat that
perishes, etc. Now hereunto two things are required: 1. A principle enabling
and disposing them to walk humbly with God in Faith and Obedience. 2. The
exercise thereof, Dr. OF s (...). p. 496.
which is referred unto the internal acts of the will, and external operations
in duties suitable thereunto. And as we have before proved, that Grace is
wrought in us by the spirit of God; so the Apostle here expressly affirms, that
both to will and to do (which expressions take in the whole of its exercise) is
also effectually wrought in us by him, of his own good pleasure: which is the
most prevailing argument and motive to an humble walking with God, and
encouragement thereto.

He that reads Mr. Colliers Gloss upon this Text, p. 43. will find him
constrained almost to embrace that notion of it that does evert his opinion:
and all that he offers toward the salving of it, is in these words; To
understand it to intend Gods working an impulsive will, and that they could
not, or should not work without it, destroys the exhortation, and makes null
the duty.

What Mr. C. intends by an impulsive will or whether there be any good sense in
those terms we need (...) inquire, That God works in us to will, or the very
act of willing, the Text is express: And it has been already manifested to be
his great error to conceive, That nothing is required of us in a way of duty,
but what in our lapsed state we are able to perform without the help of Gods
spirit. And therefore it is fallaciously done of him, to join those terms
together, as if they were of equal extent; that they could not, or should not
work without it: It was their indispensible duty to obey the exhortation
foregoing; but this they could not do without the effectual working of God in
them. And there is not more frequent mention of any one thing in the Gospel (it
being that wherein Gospel Grace does eminently shine forth) then of our
receiving Grace from God to enable us to yield to him that Obedience which he
requires of us.* Pious therefore and well grounded was the petition of that
worthy opposer of the Pelagians of Old: Da Domine quod jubes; and jube quod
vis: Give me O Lord what thou requirest of me, and command what thou please.
Indeed to deny that we receive any thing from god in a way of special and
distinguishing Grace, that is required of us in a way of duty, is flatly to
reject the Gospel, and to deny the Grace of the New Covenant. We do not then
destroy the exhortation, and make null the duty; but instruct men which way
they may expect, and receive Grace to obey it in the performance of their duty;
which is certainly a great quickening and encouragement thereto, unto all that
have an humble sense of their concernment in these things.

I shall now return to Mr. C. p. 34. where he propounds another Question.

Does the spirit in the Gospel where it comes work in all alike? or may we
suppose that he effects a more special work in some then in others?

In answer hereunto he first tells us, That this is a mystery known only to
God; and then immediately proceeds to give an account of very different
operations of the holy Ghost upon the Children of men, as,

1. Some are convinced but not converted. 2. Others are wrought so far by the
same word and spirit, as to believe and obey the Gospel so, as if they continue
therein they shall be saved, Col. ^. 21, 22, 23. 1 Timothy 2. 15. Mat. 10. 22. 3.
Though the work be sufficient by which all might obtain the end, yet he works
differingly, and gives differing measures, for differing ends, etc. 4. His
work on the special Elect is certain, and shall not leave them until it bring
them to Glory.
Here we have another instance of the man's contradiction to himself; as well as
unto truth. But to these things I say,

It is indeed certain from the Scriptures, that many are convinced, who never
are converted by the spirit of God; and also that the convictions of some
proceed so far, as that they escape the pollutions that are in the world
through Lust, 2 Pet. 2. 20. pass under that work described Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and
yet fail of those things that accompany salvation, which are things better then
all that was before mentioned. Such with respect to their profession and
general assent to the truth of the Gospel, etc. are said to believe for a time.
And perseverance being the great touchstone of sincerity, the interest of
persons in Christ, is often referred thereto, with respect to the manifestation
and proof thereof: So in Heb. 3. 6. and those Texts cited by Mr. C. If persons
hold fast their rejoicing of hope, and confidence steadfast unto the end, it is
evident they were sincere, and that their Faith was of the right kind, in that
it proves victorious against all opposition made thereto. But if they draw
back, and fall away, their Hypocrisy is detected, and it is made man^fest that
they were not of us; For if they had been of us no doubt they should have
continued with us, 1 John 2. 19 But the Scripture no where says (as Mr.
Collier supposes) that these are in a saved condition, and Heirs of Glory,
before their rottenness at heart is discovered; or that any sincere sound
Believer ever did, or ever shall return from life to death, from a state of
redemption by Christ, and reconciliation unto God, into a state of bondage and
enmity against God; from a state of Justification before God into a state of
condemnation and wrath.

The Scripture also fully declares, that there are some who are the called
according to Gods purpose; a remnant according to the Election of grace, that
obtain like precious Faith, through the effectual and saving operation of the
holy Ghost, who dwells in them, and by whose indwelling they are made lively
members of Christ's mystical Body, espoused to him and one spirit with him; but
that any other then the Elect of God, predestinate to be conformed to the Image
of his Son, called by his grace to the Obedience of Faith, are, or ever were in
a state of salvation; The Scripture no where teaches but the contrary. Those
that are not Vessels of mercy, are Vessels of wrath. And that fiction of his p.
33. That the spirit works in all Gospel believers (as he calls them) alike,
which are the Elect in the threefold sense minded by him, which might all
obtain, were they sincere, and constant to the end; is in this 35th. page in
part refuted by himself, whilst he tells us, That the work of the spirit on the
special Elect is certain, and infallibly brings them to Glory, but on others,
some do wholly resist it, others though for a time they savingly comply with
it, yet at last undo all again and dostroy it. Certainly then here is a
peculiar work of the spirit, to be allowed in, and upon the special Elect,
which in Scripture phrase are the only Elect unto Salvation. Yet he supposes
that others are savingly wrought upon besides them, and some of these
persev^re, others fall away; and that many more are convinced, and all have a
sufficient work, so as they might obtain the end, even those who
notwithstanding never believe, nor are converted to God. And probably the thing
he drives at in this Question is, whether God does more for, and the Spirit
works more powerfully in one of these then the other. And first he pretends
that this is a great secret, and God only knows it, but according to his
principles it is easily resolved in the Negative: For although (as the
Arminians say) God draws some modo congruo, and others modo non congruo. So
that some have external and circumstantial advantages beyond others; yet there
is no specifical difference in the drawing it self; both the one and the other
is only by way of moral swasion, not physical operation, objective and
external, not subjective and internal; and the turning cast still lies on the
will of Man, not the efficacy of Grace. And I marvel that he should pretend so
much modesty in this point, who but a little before has asserted, that which
all sober Arminians protest against, viz. The sufficiency or ability of man to
believe, without any help from the holy Ghost.

We have now met with Mr. Colliers assertion, That there is a sufficient work
of the Spirit upon all, so that they might obtain the end; repeated ad nauseam
usque: It may not be amiss therefore to look into it a little more strictly. I
say then,

1. Upon whomsoever the Spirit works in any degree, it is more then they
deserve, it is of grace and not of debt, he is no way obliged to do so much for
them; and even the common workings of the Spirit have in their own nature a
tendency toward a farther good in the conversion of the Soul, were they not
opposed and stifled by the enmity that is in man's heart unto God. But

2. (To pass over many other things that might be urged) If the work of the
Spirit upon all men be sufficient to bring them to Heaven, how comes it to
pass that all men are not saved? It will be answered; Because many refuse to
comply with, and resist his working upon, and striving with them. Be it so. I
ask again, From whence arises his opposition to the Spirit of God, and his
work in the Souls of men? Certainly from that corruption of nature, and
aversion of will from God, wherein all men are immerst by the fa^l. But then
the Question returns on the other hand; How comes it to pass that all men do
not p^rish in their obstinacy? The true answer is; Because God prevents a
r^mnant with distingui^hing mercy, and quickens them whom he found dead in
trespasses and sins (by his grace they are saved) and takes the heart of stone
cut of their flesh, and gives them an heart of flesh; thus making them a
willing people in the day of his power; and considering mau in that fallen
condition wherein he is, there is no other work of the Spirit sufficient to
bring a lost sinner to grace and glory; but that by which his natural enmity to
God is cured, and so the opposition of his Soul to the work of the holy Ghost
overcome; even that work by which the heart is circumcised, and made willing
and obedient that before was not so. And this Mr. C. seems to own as the
privilege of the special Elect; and without this none ever was, or will be
converted.

In p. 35. Mr. C. proposes a Question about the foreknowledge of God, which
he supposes to be really distinct from his Decree; and though he be very
unmeet to dispute such a Question, yet he resolves to give the poor Calvinists
another lash, before he finish his answer to it: Both Question and Answer are
too confused for us to get any good by a particular examination of them; and
therefore instead thereof, I will only give a brief account of what I
understand in this matter, and so obviate his design.

The Divine knowledge is variously distinguished, according to its respecting
different objects; I shall at present cons^der it only as it is conversant
about, things merely possible, or things future: Things only possible, are
indifferent (considered as such) unto being or not being: and are such as in
their own nature imply no contradiction unto being; even all things that all
within the unlimited compass of Divine Omnipotence: God knows all things that
himself can do, though an infinite number of these never are done. Things
future are all those things, and only those, which do in time come to pass. Now
whatsoever hat^, does, or shall come to pass in time, was future from Eternity;
i. e. It was true from Eternity that such things would be, and as things that
would be were they known unto God before time. Seeing then some things were to
be, and many things possible never shall be; it appears that some things were
from Eternity passed from the condition of things merely possible in which they
were equally with others, by their own nature; into a condition of futurition:
and there can be no cause assigned of this migration or passage, without God,
for there was nothing before time but himself; It remains therefore that the
cause thereof was in God; and indeed it was the will, purpose, or decree of
God, that some things should be, others should not, that alone made this
change. So that the foreknowledge of things to be that is in God, supposes his
Decree that they shall be; and in truth, the foreknowledge or Decree of God,
considered as in him, is the same; and the Scripture indifferently uses either
term to denote the same thing; though we, because of the imbecility of our
understanding, form differing conceptions of them; we conceive of the Decree as
an act of God, willing that such things should be; and of Divine prescience as
an act of God, foreseeing or knowing the coming to pass of the things willed by
him.

Amongst things future, some are good, some are evil, viz. morally. Those that
are good God decreed to effect; those that are evil, to permit, or suffer to be
done, knowing how, and having purposed in himself to order them, and over rule
the doing of them for his own glory in the end. Again, some things we see, are
the effects of causes that work necessarily, necessitate consequentis; others
of free agents, which are to us wholly contingent; yet do also necessarily come
to pass, necessitate consequentiae. And things are therefore thus effected in
time, because God had decreed this order before time. Hence is the certainty of
Gods foreknowledge (which depends not on any thing without himself) and so a
necessity as to the event, that whatsoever has been or shall be, should so
come to pass as it does: But this is a necessity of infallibility, not of
coaction, and does establish, not infringe the liberty of free agents.

I shall briefly apply these things to the case in hand: It will be granted I
suppose, that the utmost end intended by God in all that comes to pass, is his
own glory: He has made all things for himself; and in the making of man, God
had an eye to the manifestation both of his mercy and justice, Romans 9. 22, 23.
In order hereunto he purposed to create man upright, but mutable; and to permit
his temptation and falling by sin; and to save a remnant of fallen mankind, by
Jesus Christ, through sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth;
that his free grace might be everlastingly glorified in the Vessels of mercy,
which he before prepared untoglory: so also he purposed to leave the rest in
their fallen state, to the wickedness of their own hearts, and justly to punish
them for it; therein showing his wrath, and making his power known, on the
Vessels of wrath, which he had endured with much longsuffering, who were fitted
for destruction. Thus the end of all men is foreknown unto God, and nothing
falls out casually unto him, yet is there no force put upon man, nor injustice
or hard dealing from God for him to complain of.

But Mr. Collier says p. 36. It is dishonorable unto God, and pernicious to
men; and lays all the wickedness and plagues of the world at Gods door, to
affirm, as some do, That God decreed Adams fall before he made him; or at least
so far foreknew it, as that it must be; i. e. so as to necessitate it.

An heavy charge! And we know right well who M. Collier intends it against: But
it will be far more easy for me to manifest, That the men of his controversy
have no concernment in it; then for him to vindicate his own truth and honesty;
inasmuch as what they hold infers no such thing, as you may see by what I have
already written of this matter, and whatsoever in his report of their opinion
looks this way, is untruly imputed to them. His best plea will be, that he
slandered them by hearsay, and that himself knew not, nor understood what they
affirmed of this matter; yet will not this excuse him. But to the business.

Himself confesses, That God foreknew that Adam would fall: I ask then, Could
the Almighty have prevented this or not? If he could and yet did not, we
conclude, that he willed or decreed not to prevent it, (though no ways
approving thereof) having determined to raise glory to his own name out of it.
And if the most high decreed to permit it, and so from Eternity foreknew it as
future, this inf^rs a necessity of Infallibility, that in time it would so come
to pass; but leaves man as a free agent to the liberty of his own will, without
any coaction thereto. This notwithstanding therefore, the sin and plagues of
the world, lie at the door of rebellious man. And if Mr. Collier mean by
foreknowing it so as to necessitate it, such a foreknowledge or decree of God
concerning it, as in the execution thereof man should be compelled to sin, and
his fall effected by God; I detes^ such a notion, and so do all those whom he
reflects upon; And it is expected, that he either make good his charge out of
their Writings, or else right them by a public acknowledgement of his fault,
in thus misrepresenting their Doctrine.

And if Mr. Collier cannot yet conceive of a necessity of infallibility
respecting the event of things, arising from the decree or foreknowledge of
God, without a necessity of coaction, respecting those that are to act in the
accomplishment of them; I will endeavor to help him by one plain instance,
Act. 4. 27, 28. For of a truth against thy holy Child Jesus whom thou have
anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and People of
Israel, were gathered together for to do, whatsoever thy hand, and thy counsel
determined before to be done. It is evident their design was not to fulfill the
counsel of God: But thus it fell out; for whatsoever they did to the Lord
Jesus, God had in his counsel determined before to be done; yea had foretold by
the mouth of all his holy Prophets, that so it should be, unto every
circumstance of Christ's passion, viz. his Crucifying, having Gall and Vinegar
given him to drink, the parting of his Raiment, piercing of his side, etc. Now
either these things must so come to pass, or else the counsel of God must be
disappointed, and his word falsified; will Mr. Collier then lay the Murder of
Christ at Gods door? were not all the agents by whose hands these things were
immediately done, free from coaction, and therefore responsible for their
wickedness, all this notwithstanding? And to make this yet more clear, I will
transcribe a few lines from Mr. Norton in his Orthod. Ev. p. 75.

These two proposioions, 1. Adam might not have sinned. 2. It could not be but
that Adam would sin, are both true; and notwithstanding they may so seem, yet
they are not opposite one unto the other: not being both of the same kind: Adam
might not have sinned; is a Categorick, or simple proposition* and is true of
Adam in the sense of division, considered as in himself. It could not be but
that Adam would sin, is a modal, or qualified proposition; and is true of Adam
in a sense of composition, being considered as subordinate to the Decree. The
Jews might have broken the bones of Christ is true; speaking in the sense of
division, i. e. looking at the free will of the Jews as in themselves: It could
not be that the Jews would break the bones of Christ; is true, speaking in a
sense of composition, i. e. looking at the will of the Jews as subordinate to
the Decree. That answer of Elisha to Hazael, enquiring of Benhadads recovery,
contains in it two like propositions: 1. Thou may certainly recover. 2.
Thou shall surely die, 2 Kings 3. 10. his Disease was in it self curable, and
as such is considered in the first proposition; The second proposition, looks
at him diseased, as subordinate to the Decree, which had pre-ordained his
death, through the^stifling of Hazael, by occasion of this Disease. Thus much
of these things.

Mr. C. goes on to attach another ground, and foundation of the Saints
rejoicing in God, who has promised to preserve them blameless unto his
Heavenly Kingdom. He propounds this Question, p. 36.

May we suppose that persons who are regenerate, and born from above, may
possibly fall from this state of Grace?

Perhaps Mr. C. has some design in thrusting in that word [ possibly] into his
Question: I will therefore explain the term, that he may have no equivocal
reserve to fly to.

A thing may be said to be possible either simply, and in its own nature; or
possible on supposition of all things to be supposed with reference to it: In
the first sense it was possible that a bone of Christ might have been broken;
in the latter, viz. on supposition that God had decreed and foretold the
contrary, it was not so. The Question in reference to the Saints perseverance
proceeds in the last sense, whether supposing their Election of God, Christ's
undertaking for them and their interest in the Covenant of Grace, it is yet
possible that some of them may finally depart from God, and be lost for ever.
And to this I answer in the Negative: But he says,

The Scriptures do not say they may not; nor that they shall certainly obtain.

This is false: The contrary appears from these Texts, Psalm. 125. 1, 2. Isa. 4.
5. and chapter 54. 8, 9, 10. Jer. 31. 3. and chapter 32. 39, 40. Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. Joh.
6. 39, 40. with chapter 10. 28, 29. Romans 8. 29, 30, 38, 39. 1 These. 5. 23, 24. 1
Pet. 1. 3, 4, 5. 1 John 2. 19. with many others. He adds,

We are to suppose all Gospel-believers to be regenerate, and then we may, and
must suppose a possibility, for the regenerate to fall, or none can fall away.

By Gospel-believers I presume he intends those that are members of the visible
Church of Christ; such as profess Faith in him, and Obedience to him, and do
not at present contradict their profession by a contrary practice in the sight
of men, My answer is, If we respect any particular person or persons among
these, we are bound to hope so of them; because Charity always inclines to the
better part: But if we respect the whole bulk of professors together, we are
not to believe that they are all regenerate persons; because the Scripture
tells us, there are foolish as well as wise Virgins, Hypocrites, as well as
sincere Believers in the visible Church, though who they be we know not, till
their works discover it; and when their Hypocrisy is discovered, we are not to
think that they once were new Creatures, and are fallen from that state; but
the quite contrary, 1 John 2. 19. So then though many Professors fall away,
even such as have past under some common work of the Spirit; this does not at
all infer, That those who are truly born again, not of corruptible Seed, but
incorruptible by the word of God that lives and abides for ever; may do so in
like manner. He proceeds,

I know nothing stated in the Gospel-law of Grace, as a duty in order to obtain
the end, but that persons may obtain, and be supposed (possibly) to fall
finally from, Joh. 15. 4, 5, 6.

Nothing! that is strange! Is not perseverance in Faith and Obedience required
in order to salvation, and may persons persevere, and fall finally too? The
Text cited by Mr. C. does no ways confirm his notion, although we allow him to
except perseverance from the duties intended by him; Unto the 4th. and 5th.
Verses, something has been spoken already, by which it appears that they lie
directly against Mr. Colliers notion of the Creatures ability of himself to do
any thing that is spiritually Good: I suppose it is the 6th. Verse that he
promises himself some relief from; The words are, If a man abide not in me, he
is cast forth as a branch, and is withered, etc. He does not tell us on what
account he thinks this Text may serve for a proof of his Doctrine; but probably
he thinks that the words suppose, That such as for a time truly abide in
Christ, may afterward cease to do so, and perish out of him; But there is no
such thing intended in them: For this Text (as many other do) speaks of
Professors, according to what their condition appears to be before men; and
so all that are members of the visible Church, and have a place therein; are
counted branches in Christ; some of these bring forth fruit, by which the
sincerity of their Faith in Christ, and the truth of their being spiritually
united with him is manifested; These do not fall away; but he that has begun a
good work in them does perfect it to the end: The Father purges them that they
may bring forth more fruit: Others of these branches do not bring forth fruit;
which is an evidence that their being in Christ is only by profession, for it
cannot be that one united to Christ by true Faith, and the in-dwelling of his
spirit; should be without those vital influences from him, is will produce some
good fruit; these do not abide in Christ by a lively exercise of Faith, and
therefore being indeed separate from him, while they appear to be one with him;
they can do nothing; but in time of temptation fall away from their profession,
and are cast out as branches, and are withered, and men gather them, and they
are cast into the fire and are burned. And more then this cannot without
offering violence to the Text, be inferred from it; which does not make
against, but confirm the truth concerning the Saints perseverance.

That which Mr. C. offers to strengthen his desired inference is this,

The truth hereof will father appear if we consider,

1. That the Gospel makes no difference, but warns all to take heed of falling;
which necessarily supposes a possibility of falling with respect to us,
without taking that heed.

That all are warned (and that very frequently) in the Scriptures, to take heed
of falling, is granted; and that these warnings are sanctified and made
effectual by God for the preservation of his own Elect from final Apostasy, is
pleaded: But Mr. Colliers inference from hence is very impertinent, and argues
that he understands not their Opinion that he has undertaken to confute: He
says, That in respect of us there is a possibility of falling, if we do not
take heed. Very true! It is not only possible but certain, that those which do
not walk humbly, and heedfully with God, nor make any conscience of so doing,
may fall away from their profession; But God according to his promise will keep
his own from such a course as would ruin them: And this is all which with the
Scripture we say, That God has promised by his effectual Grace to preserve all
his chosen ones, all that truly believe, in a way of holiness and diligence
unto Eternal Life. And therefore that is quite besides the business that Mr. C.
writes, p. 35. That nothing shall be able to make a breach or separation,
unless we do it our selves by sin; whereas God has promised to prevent our
making this breach, when he says, I will put my spirit within you, and cause
you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them, Ezekiel.
36. 27. The truth is, if Mr. C. will abide by his opinion; he must either
assert, That God never loved any person, one or other; or that he is like us,
changeable in his love on outward external reasons. He goes on p. 36.

2. They have all (he intends all in the visible Kingdom of Christ) the same
faith and love for kind: there is but one faith which has the same object, and
is influenced by the same spirit, which produces the same effect, i. e. a good
Conscience, even in such as fall from it. And in the beginning of p. 37. he
adds,

So that according to the Law of Grace, all that do believe and obey the
Gospel, stand related to God therein, and nothing makes the difference, but
sincerity and perseverance shall be crowned, and Hypocrites and Back sliders,
must fall short, and meet with condemnation.

It is well done of Mr. C. to join Sincerity and Perseverance together, and so
also Hypocrisy and Backsliding, for the latter is a certain discovery of the
former. If ye continue in my words (says Christ) then are ye my Disciples
indeed: And so e contra. But then see what confusion he has again cast himself
into; He affirms there is in all the same faith and love for kind, and
nothing to make a difference between them, the same effect produced by the same
spirit, etc. and yet some are sincere, others Hypocrites: It is strange that Mr
C. can find out no specifical difference, betwixt the lively faith of a sincere
believer, and the dead faith of a painted Impostor; the most holy and precious
Faith of Gods Elect, which purifieth the heart, and the temporary feigned Faith
of Simon Magus, notwithstanding which he was in the gall of bitterness and the
bond of Iniquity.

The Text which he insinuates a perversion of, is 1 Timothy 1. 19. Holding faith
and a good Conscience, which some having put away, concerning Faith have made
shipwreck. By Faith here, as in some other places, we are to understand the
Doctrine of Faith, the truth of the Gospel; which we are exhorted to cleave to,
and hold fast, and that we may do so, we must keep a good conscience also, i.
e. walk in holiness; for where that is not attended, men are not like to abide
sound in the Faith, in an hour of temptation; The mystery of Faith must be held
in a pure conscience: which some having put away, that is, rejected, and lived
in the neglect of; concerning Faith have made shipwreck; that is, have lost and
relinquished, that truth which once they professed: of such he gives an
instance in the following Verse; But this notwithstanding; The foundation of
the Lord stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows who are his, etc. 2 Timothy 2. 18, 19. Here then is no such thing supposed as Mr. C. intimates, That
those who once had true faith, and a good conscience, did finally fall from it.

He says farther,

3. The Scripture supp^seth that persons may have the same Gospel Spirit in all
its operations, and yet may p^ssibly, finally fa^l from God, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.

If it were allowed Mr. C. that true believers were spoken of in this Text, he
could not prove from hence, that any such shall finally fall away; The
discourse being conditional, and it remaining a truth, That if a person whoever
he be, or persons do depart, and fall away from God, they must unavoidably
perish: though none of the persons spoken of should do so, such expressions
holding forth the inseparable connection of Apostasy with damnation. And men
may without any disparagement to their wisdom or reason, earnestly exhort
others to avoid falling away from God; though they are fully persuaded that
those whom they so exhort, by the help of those exhortations, and other
considerations shall abide with God to the end. But indeed it appears upon a
serious view of the context that the persons here spoken of are such as have
only past under some common work of the spirit; and that such may fall away, is
not denied by any. And Mr. C. does without ground assert, that they have been
the subjects of the same gr^cious work as is effected by the spirit of God upon
true believers. For,

1. Here is nothing ascribed to the persons spoken o^ that is in Scripture
found to be the distinguishing character of true Believers, which are commonly
said to be, the called See Dr. Owen of Pers. p. 427.
according to the purpose of God, quickene^, born again, jus^ified, united to
Christ, adopted, etc.

2. The persons ^nt^nded are verse 8. compared to the ground on which the rain
falls, and ^eareth Thorns and Briars: True believers whilst they are so, are
(...) such as bring forth nothing but Thorns and Briars; faith it sel^ being an
herb meet for him by whom they are dressed.

3. T(...)gs that accompany Salvation are better things then any that were to
b(...) in the persons mentioned, v. 9. and true Believers are in this dis^^urse
of the Apostle, opposed to the persons lying under a possib^lity of Apostasy,
and are distinguished from them, upon the acc^^nt of their works and labor of
love showed to the name of God, v. 10. their preservation from the
righteousness and faithfulness of God in his promises, v. 11. and of the
immutability of the counsels of God, and his oath for the preservation of them,
v. 13. 1^, 18. All which does evince, that they are not the Children of God by
Faith in Christ, of whom the Apostle speaks in the place referred to.

In p. 37. He moves a question about the absolute and inconditional promises of
the new Covenant; where he again pitifully intangles himself. It might help him
a little out of the Labyrinth he is lost in, if he would consider,

That the New Covenant is originally made with Christ, who became a sponsor,
and surety for all that the Father gave unto him, Psalm. 89. 31. etc. and in him
all the promises thereof are yea and amen; God the Father promised unto Christ
Eternal Life for all his before the world was, Tit. 1. 2. and engaged in time
effectually to draw, and bring them unto him, to give them a new heart, etc.
for whom he became surety, that they might not fail to enjoy it on Gospel
terms: And this truth will of it self bear down all Mr. Colliers notions of
free will, and falling from Grace: It is granted that all the promises of Life
and Glory in the Gospel, are conditional as set before us; But the fulfilling
of the condition in the Elect is absolutely undertaken for in the Covenant
betwixt the Father and Christ. And whereas Mr. Collier says That the Covenant
in the perfection thereof, when we are come to Glory, will be absolute in all
its promises; its absolutely true to all over-comers; he lamentably discovers
his weakness thereby: For our present enquiry is after those promises that do
secure the Saints safe arrival in Glory, and to talk of the absoluteness of
these promises to those that are already glorified, and to represent them as
uncertain to those that alone are concerned to draw comfort from them, is
exceeding absurd.

In p 38. he frames this Objection against himself;

This asserts a possibility of falling from Grace, and so destroys the
assurance and comfort of Believers: Unto this he answers,

It does no other then the Scripture does: its that of which the Scripture is
full: it frequently presents us with a possibility of falling: Else those many
and frequent exhortations to the contrary are useless, if there were no danger,
as also the examples of those that have fallen, 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. 2 Timothy 1. 15.
Heb. 4. 11. Else what means the Lords appointing a Ministry in the Church to
preserve it from falling.

That the Scripture asserts no such thing, but the contrary, we have manifested
already; as also what the import of these exhortations are* and their
usefulness in Gods hand for the preservation of the Elect. We say moreover, if
we respect our own weakness, and the temptations we are to conflict with, there
is ^anger, but free Grace will secure the Elect from perishing in the midst of
their dangers, and from being overcome by all the difficulties that are in
their way. And it is strange to me that he should conclude true Believers may
fall away, because God has provided means, and appointed a Ministry, to
prevent their falling.

To the other branch of the Objection, respecting the comfort and assurance of
Believers, he says;

Its so far from diminishing the consolation of Believers, that its the only
sure way for Gospel consolation, etc.

I grant that none are capable of well grounded comfort, but those that are
under the promises of the Gospel, viz. sincere Convert, sound Believers: but
how Mr. Collier will evince that his Doctrine is the great spring of
Gospel-consolation; even this, That though I be now a Child of God, yet the
next temptation I meet with, for ought I know, may sink me to Hell; although
God do at present l^ve me, yet I have no assurance that he will continue to do
so, a day to an end; for many that have been united with Christ, as I now am,
are l^st for ever; and I daily tremble under a sense of my own weakness, and
have no promise of preservation to trust to: I say, how this makes for their
comfort I cannot understand; nor how Mr. Collier will reconcile his present
Opinion with what he writes in his B^d. of Div. p. 197. We ought to believe
that God will maintain our Faith, and k^ep us from falling, Phil. 1. 6. 2 Timothy
1. 12. else we could have no solid comfort.

To that which he adds in the beginning of p. 39. concerning the usefulness of
fear; I answer; The fear that arises from Mr. Colliers Doctrine has torment
in it, and therefore a right understanding of the love of God will cast it out,
and teach the Soul to reject that Doctrine from whence it springs: That is the
true Gospel-fear, which respect God as a Father, and is temp^red with an holy
rejoicing in his goodness, which is a fruit of the spirit of Adoption, that
bears witness with our spirits that we are the Children of God, and if Children
then Heirs; Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ. Moreover, There is (as
Dr. Owen has well observed, Saints Persever. p. 293.) a twofold fear of
Eternal death and destruction: 1. An anxious perplexing fear in respect of the
end it self: 2. A watchful careful fear in respect of the means leading
thereunto: The first is directly opposite to that peace, consolation, and joy
in the Holy Ghost, that God is pleased to afford unto his People, and exhorts
them to live up to; and therefore it cannot be his end or design to ingenerate
it in them by any of his threatenings, or warnings given in his word. For the
other, viz. A watchful heedful fear, for the avoiding of the way and means that
would lead them, and do lead others to destruction, it is not in the least
inconsistent with that assurance that God is pleased by his promises to give to
his Saints of their perseverance.

I shall now hasten to a close of this Chapter; after I have in a word or two
cleared the sense of two Texts of holy Scripture, which Mr. C. has endeavored
to darken, because they speak not according to his mind.

The first is Romans 9. 16-22. After Mr. C. has for a while labored against the
stream of this Text, he is forced p. 40. to acknowledge the truth, viz That it
is not our willing and running, that can bring us within the c^mpass of special
Electing Grace; that being past in Gods will before the world was. Indeed the
design of the Apostle throughout this Chapter, as well as in the Verses
referred to, is to show the freeness of Gods grace to his own Elect, together
with his just severity against the vessels of wrath; and that one is a vessel
of mercy, and another of wrath, proceeds from the mere good pleasure of God to
choose the one and leave the other; his choice not being grounded on foresight
of their willing or running, faith and obedience, but being purely resolved
into his Sovereign Grace.

And this does quite overthrow Mr. Colliers Election on foresight of Faith; and
does also afford a very good argument for the Saints perseverance, which we
were last upon: But I must hasten; only it is necessary I should remove an
abusive passage or two (of which his Book is full) out of our way:

He says, N^r may we understand that the special Elect only shall obtain, and
that all others are debarred, that though they will and run, all will be in
vain.

And again p. 41. he intimates that his opponents infer from this Scripture.

That God will damn whom he please from his own will and power, and save whom
he will from his own will and power: Let men believe or obey, do what they will
or can its all nothing; But that after all their willing, running, repenting,
believing, obeying, w^tching and warring, they must leave all to the Eternal
will and power, etc.

This is as notorious a slander, as he could well have cast upon them; for all
they say, amounts to no more then this, That the Election have obtained, and
the rest are blinded: And this we are bold to affirm still, having so good
warranty for it as we have, though he go on to reproach us therefore. But that
we say, willing and running, believing and obeying, etc. is in vain to the
non-Elect, and that after all watching and warring, the state of men must be
determined by the Eternal will and power, is a very gross, and I fear a studied
untruth, there being no footsteps of any such assertion to be found in the
Doctrine or Writings of the men of his controversy. It being constantly
asserted by them, That there is an inseparable connection between Faith and
Salvation, and that it is an Everlasting truth, That he which believes shall
be saved. ^^d he which believes not shall be damned: and it is as true; That
none do will or run after a right manner but the Elect, who are drawn with
loving kindness, because loved with an Everlasting love. It is in vain for Mr.
C. to pretend to be a follower of peace and holiness, whilst he makes no
conscience of belying and abusing those, that have no otherwise offended him,
then by a sober asserting of those truths, that the corruption of his heart
rises against.

And whereas he says p. 40. That it condemns all willing and running, without
having respect to the mercy of God in the Gospel, leaving out Christ, and
Grace, etc. This is a truth in it self, though not the direct sense of this
Text, That all such running will be in vain. But I desire to know how he will
reconcile this with his other Doctrine, of the Salvation of very many that know
not Christ, nor the Grace of God as revealed in the Gospel.

The other Text is 1 John 2. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of
us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us; but
they went out that they might be made manifest, that they were not all of us.

This Text is so express against the falling away of true Believers, that Mr.
Collier despairs of dealing with it, on any Add. word, p. 44.
fair terms; and therefore instead of an Exposition, adventures upon a
downright contradiction to it. The Apostle says, That by persons going out
from the true Church, it is manifest they never were living members of it; and
that God suffers such to fall away, that so their Hypocrisy might be
discovered. Mr. C. says, John might know it some other way; and that this
proves not that all that may go out from the Church were not of them. The Text
says again, If they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with
us. Mr. Collier says nay, Some may go out, who if they had continued might,
yea must have obtained, i. e. were once sincere: John says, if it had been so,
no doubt they would have continued. Now let the Reader choose whether authority
he will embrace.

Audacia --
Creditur a multis fiducia.
And if Mr C. shall still object (as probably he will) That it is not to be
desired that men should persist in their Hypocrisy; neither is there any
danger of falling away from it, etc. I answer in the words of Dr. Owen, Saints
Pers. p. 295.

Though they may not be exhorted to continue in their Hypocrisy, which
corrupts and vitiates their profession, yet they may in their profession which
in its self is good: And though there is no danger of leaving their Hypocrisy,
yet there is of their waxing worse and worse, by falling from the beginnings of
Grace which they have received, the profession which they have made, and the
regular conversation which they have entered upon. So that notwithstanding any
thing said to the contrary, the Scriptures insisted on to prove the Saints
final Apostasy, may principally belong to some kind of Professors, who
notwithstanding all their gifts and common graces which they have received, yet
in a large sense may be termed Hypocrites, as they are opposed to them who have
received the spirit with true and saving Grace.

I shall close this with my earnest request to Mr. C. That before he adventure
on a farther opposition to this great truth, he would seriously per^se the Book
referred to, and diligently consider the strength of what is there pleaded by
the reverend Author for the Doctrine of the Saints perseverance; which if he
would do, I am persuaded the profit, or at least, conviction of the weakness of
his present arguments against it; which he might receive thereby; would (even
in his own judgment) abundantly compensate his pains: However, it will farther
inform him, what he has to remove out of his way, before he can establish the
Doctrine now assert^d by him, and so may guide and influence him to speak more
pertinently, and mod^stly, then hither to he has done in a matter of so great
importance.

CHAP. VI.
Of Justification.

THat Article of our Faith which concerns the Justification of a sinner in the
sight of God, must needs be acknowledged to be of great importance, and we
ought to be more careful of nothing, then that our minds be not corrupted from
the simplicity of the Gospel, and we moved from our sted fastness thereabout;
and therefore although Mr. Collier in the Book before me has said but little
directly to that point, yet observing diverse things therein very opposite to,
and inconsistent with the truth in this matter, I could not pass them without
some remark.

And in the first place I shall briefly propose what the Scripture teaches us,
and then examine Mr. Colliers notions that are contrary to the truth revealed
therein.

The term Justification is constantly in the Scriptures speaking of this matter
taken in a Law-sense, as it imports the acquitting of a person by the sentence
of a Judge; The Justification of a sinner by God, is,

The gracious sentence of God by which for Christ's sake apprehended by Faith,
he loooseth the sinner from his Obligation to Eternal wrath and punishment; and
accounts him righteous to the obtai^ing of Life and Glory.

1. It is the sentence of God as a Judge acquitting, Romans 8. 32.

2. It is a gracious sentence without any respect to our worthiness, or works
of Righteousness that we have done or can do, Romans 3. 24. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10.

3. The meritorious cause of our Justification is the Obedience of Christ both
passive and active; and our actual Voet. Select. Disput. pars 5. p. 281.
Justification is the effect or consequent of the imputation thereof unto us.
Justification in the formal reason thereof, does speak two things.

1. A discharge from condemnation; or, the remission of sins; which was
purchased by the death and bloodshedding of Christ; Gal. 3. 13. Ephesians. 1. 7. The
benefit of which purchase r^dounds to us, because of Gods reckoning upon our
account, or imputing to us what our surety suffered in our stead, Isa. 53. 6.
11.

2. The adjudging of us to be Heirs of, and so inrighting us in, Life and
Glory, for the sake of Christ's active Obedience imputed to us in like manner,
Romans 3. 22. chapter 4. 4, 5. and 5. 19. Gal. 2. 15. and chapter 3. 11, 12.

4. True and lively Faith whereby we receive Christ and his benefits freely
given of God to us, and rest on him and his Righteousness, is the instrument of
our Justification, Joh. 1. 12. Romans 5. 17. So that Faith alone justifies
(though justifying Faith is never alone, but works by love) and that
Righteousness for the sake of which we are justified before God, was wrought
out and fulfilled only by Christ; who was made sin for us, although he knew no
sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. And therefore in
the business of Justification, Faith is opposed to all good works, as exclusive
of them from any influence into the obtaining of our pardon and acceptance with
God, Romans 3. 20, 21, 22. and v. 28. chap. 4. 4, 5. Gal. 2. 16. chapter 3. 11, 12.

The first mention of this Article, that I meet with in Mr. Colliers Book is
chapter 1. p. 12. where after some boasting of his clear stating the matter in his
Body of Divinity, he thus writes,

If any persons dare to maintain, that any are justified before God without
Faith and Holiness as the terms thereof, though not the deserving cause; I must
leave them to their own understanding without all Scripture grounds; for my own
part I fully, on good grounds, believe the contrary.

Notwithstanding Mr. Colliers swelling words of vanity, and contempt of the
understanding of others; I must tell him, even these words are not so clear and
scriptural, but that they give just occation to suspect his own understanding
to be dark, and his judgment to be unsound. For although true and justifying
Faith is pregnant with good works, and whosoever is justified is sanctified
also; and that Faith considered as a Grace inherent in us, belongs to our
sanctification: yet does not the Scripture any where allow good works the same
influence into our Justification as it does unto Faith; which is a clear
evidence that it is not the act of believing, ^^r any other holy duty for which
we are justified: but that in this business, Faith is to be considere as
relative to Christ, and that it is the object of Faith apprehended thereby on
the account of which its said to justify. And this Mr. Collier cannot but own,
if he understands what is asserted by himself in his Bod^ of Div. concerning
the imputation of Christ's Righteousness unto us in order to our Justification
before God; For if we are justified freely by Grace, and are presented without
spot before God in an imputed Righteousness, then can our good works have no
interest in the reason of our acceptance with him. And indeed if this were not
so, we could not be justified at all, forasmuch as the Lord is of purer eye:
then to behold iniquity; and our sanctification is imperfect, so that if all
our Righteousnesses, so far forth as ours be examined in strictness of justice,
they will be found but filthy rags, a Covering too narrow, and a Bed too
short. Yea if those that plead mos^ for the interest of good works in our
Justification, would seriously consider what themselves dare abide by before
the tremendous tribunal of the great Judge; they must all fly to Bellarmines
tutissimum est, and put an end to this controversy, by acknowledging that they
dare not venture into Gods sight, nor pass out of the World to his
Judgment Seat in their own Righteousness.

But indeed there is another principle laid down once and again by Mr. C. in
those Chapters of his Book already examined, which (if true) renders all
discourses of deliverance from wrath to come by Christ needless, and without
ground; It is this,

That the penalty of the breach of the first Covenant, was only temporal death,
and Eternal damnation is inflicted on men only for sinning against the Gospel,
the Law of Faith.

Now if this were true, Besides that in some respects it renders the condition
of those that never heard of Christ more eligible then those who live under the
sound of the Gospel.

1. If there be no Law threatening Eternal death, Ferg. Differ. of Moral Virtue
and Grace, p. 107.
but the Law of Faith, then there is no such thing as forgiveness and remission
of sin in the World; For the Gospel denounces damnation only against final
impenitency and unbelief; and as these are not pardoned nor pardonable, so on
the other hand, if there be no Law threatening Eternal death besides the Gospel,
then is there no other sin we need forgiveness of.

2. If this be true, Then Christ never dyed to free any from wrath to come
(which yet is plentifully asserted in the Scriptures; wherein we read also that
his death was for the Redemption of the transgressions that were under the
first Covenant, Heb. 9. 15.) For it is nonsense to say that he has freed us
from the curse of the Gospel; yea it is a repugnancy, unless you will introduce
another Gospel to relieve against the terms of this, nor will that serve the
turn, unless you likewise find another Mediator to out-merit this. Thus Mr.
Ferguson, in answer to one of Mr. Colliers mind.

So then if Mr. C. will abide by this notion, and the just consequences
thereof, his sense of our Justification must either be contradictory to
himself, or else very corrupt and unsound.

Another passage that has a bad aspect this way, you meet with Addit. Word, p.
50. where he gives this reason why his supposed deliverance of the damned will
not extend to any degree of Glory, but only a deliverance from pain and misery,
For they are under no promise of reward of Good works, because they had none.

That God will graciously reward the good works of Believers, is granted, so
that besides that joy and glory that all Saints have an immediate right to by
virtue of their interest in Christ, every one shall receive a superadded Crown,
according as his work shall be; which lays a foundation for our believing the
enjoyment of different degrees of Glory among the blessed in another world. But
to suppose, as Mr. C. here does, That the admission of persons into the Kingdom
of God is for the sake of their own good works, is contrary to the whole
current of Scripture, and cannot consist with a sound Judgment concerning our
Justification; but necessarily leads to a Popish or Socinian notion thereof. I
cannot see what good works the Thief upon the Cross had to procure his
admission into the Kingdom of God; yet he being freely justified by Grace, went
immediately from the Cross to Paradise.

To conclude this; no less offensive is that passage we meet with, p. 59.

The Protestants to be rid of Popish meritorious works, run themselves too much
in both principle and practice, beyond almost all works of Charity.

This has a long time been the clamor of the Jesuits against the faithful
Ministers of the Gospel; and for Mr. Colliers joining with them in this calumny
and slander (of which neither he nor they can ever make proof, at least so far
as concerns their Doctrine) there is no reason; but their refusing to advance
the good works of men into the room of Christ, and to assign unto them, what we
are alone beholding to his Righteousness for. On other accounts none plead the
necessity of good works, nor press men to holiness with greater earnestness,
and force of Scripture reason then they do, as cannot but be known to all that
are conversant in their Writings. And therefore public satisfaction for this
reproach cast (not on particular persons, but) on the whole Protestant
interest, is justly expected from Mr. Collier.

But however, forasmuch as it appears that Mr. C. is little acquainted with the
wholesome Doctrine of Orthodox Protestants, I will give him a taste of what they
teach concerning the necessity of Good works.

In Synopsi purioris Theologiae, written by Polyander Rivet, Wallaeus and
Thysius (no obscure men amongst the Protestants.) After they have in their 33
chap. laid down, and abundantly confirmed that truth concerning our
Justification, which I have before touched; in the 34chapter they professedly treat
of our holiness or Good works, which are the fruits of a lively and justifying
Faith; concerning which they say. 24.

Necessitas bonis operibus multifariam tribuitur. Necessaria enim dicuntur,
1. Necessitate praecepti divini. 2. Necessitate medii, ad Dei gloriam and
salutem nostram ordinati 3. Necessitate cultus and obsequii, Deo ex obligatione
nostra naturali, debiti. 4. Necessitate bonae and tranquillae conscientiae, de
sua electione and vocatione ad salutem sibi probe consciae. 5. Necessitate
officii charitatis proximo praestandi.
The sense is this,Good works are necessary on diverse accounts: They are said
to be necessary,
1. Because commanded of God. 2. They are necessary as a medium ordered (or in
order) to the Glory of God, and our own Salvation. 3. They are necessary, in
that they are the Worship and Obedience that we are by the Law of nature
obliged to perform to God. 4. They are necessary for the keeping a good and
peaceful Conscience, comfortably witnessing to our Election of God, and calling
unto Salvation. 5. They are necessary on the account of that office of love,
that we ought to perform unto our Neighbor.
I might heap up testimonies of this kind; and will at any time, if called to
it, evince from the confessions of Faith of all the reformed Churches, and from
the Writings of all the worthy reformers that treat of this subject, as also
from theirs w^o of late have asserted our Justification by free Grace through
the imputation of Christ's Obedience both active and passive to us, without the
works of the Law, That they all plead for a necessity of good works on the
account, and for the ends, before mentioned. So then their Doctrine deserves
not this calumny; and if any have not practiced according to their principles
and profession, let them bear their own burden and shame; however, I suppose
it is easy to manifest, that no where under Heaven is impiety of every kind
more abundant, then amongst the Popish merit-mongers. And I must say again,
That as the Writings of Protestants need no Advocate in this matter, they
sufficiently speaking for themselves; so in this charge of Mr. Colliers against
them, thus causelessly Printed to the World, and accommodate (though perhaps not
designedly) to help forward the ruin of the Protestant interest, and introduce
Popery, he has raised a monument of his own petulancy and ignorance, that will
remain to his shame as long as his Book is in the hands of men, to be read by
them.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Day of Judgment, and the Everlasting punishment of the wicked.

I Am now come to the Chapters in Mr. Colliers Book, wherein he treats of the
day of Judgment, and the punishment of those that then come into condemnation;
concerning which his notions are so corrupt, and accommodate to give
countenance to, and encourage men in, a wicked course of life in this world, by
suggesting, yea affirming that this notwithstanding, there is hope for them in
another world; That scarce any thing could have been written more opposite, and
destructive to the Christian Religion; and the main design of the Gospel.

I shall (according to my former method) briefly propose what the Scripture
teaches concerning this fundamental Article of the Eternal Judgment; and then
remove out of the way what he has opposed thereto. The Scripture teaches,

1. That there shall most certainly be a solemn and set day; or time of
Judgment, in which God will judge the world in Righteousness by Jesus Christ,
Act. 17. 31. Romans 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10.

2. All persons of high and low degree, good and bad, must appear before his
Judgment Seat, and receive their sentence from him, Mat. 25. 32. etc. 1 Pet.
4. 5. Rev. 20. 12.

3. All the actions, words and thoughts of men in this world, (though now never
so secret) must then be brought to light, and accounted for, Prove. 24. 12.
Eccles. 12. ult. Mat. 12. 36, 37. Romans 2 16. 1 Cor. 4. 5.

4. Sentence shall be past upon all according as their works shall be found to
have been, and every man shall receive what he has done in the body, according
to what he has done whether it be good or bad. As is abundantly proved by the
Texts cited before. But yet

The works of the Saints, and the works of the wicked, fall under a different
consideration in this day: For

1. The works of the Godly are not considered as meritorious of Heaven, which
is assigned to them for an Everlasting Inheritance by the sentence of the great
judge: Luke 17. 10. but only as the fruits and evidence of a true and lively
Faith in Christ, unto which Salvation is promised for the sake of his merit.

2. The works of the reprobate world are directly considered, as deserving in
their own nature the punishment to be inflicted on them, and they are
accordingly proceeded against, Romans 6. ult.

Thus all nations are divided into two Companies: The Sheep are set on the
right hand of Christ, and the Goats on his left; The first are sentenced to
Eternal Life, and the other to Everlasting wrath; and accordingly these shall
go away into Everlasting punishment, but the Righteous into Life Eternal, Mat.
25.

Mr. Collier begins to discourse of this matter in the 5th. Chapter of his
Book: some things dropped therein, have been already answered; and therefore I
shall only stay to mind the Reader, That although the Scripture speaks of
different degrees of the punishment of sinners, according to the different
measures of Iniquity which they have filled up; yet it every where assures us
that the punishment of all sinners that are found without an interest in
Christ, at the day of Judgment, shall be Everlasting; as shall more fully be
evinced in my reply to his next Chapter. And whereas he here speaks something
of the condemnation of those that sinned against the Law, and never had the
Gospel tendered to them, either before or since Christ came in the flesh; it is
very doubtful to me, whether he honestly speak out his mind in this matter,
seeing he has so stiffly maintained before, That the penalty of the breach of
the first Covenant was only temporal death; and that damnation is the
punishment of Gospel-disobedience only; which they cannot be guilty of, which
never heard the Gospel. If this be true, I am sure such must not now come into
condemnation. But whatever Mr. Collier will, or will not allow, we are sure of
the truth of the Scripture, which teaches other Doctrine, as has been already
proved against him; which if he will subscribe to, he must of necessity recede
from this corrupt notion.

We are now come to his 7th. Chapter, p. 47. where he first proposes this
enquiry,

Whether there may be any probability from Scripture light, of any deliverance
from, or mitigation of the punishment of any, after the sentence is past, and
the Judgment executed. Which he thus answers,

Touching this I do apprehend that there are probable grounds both from
Scripture and Reason, that there may be a deliverance of some from the poenal
part, or pains inflicted, though not from the sense of loss; the Judgment in
that respect will be Eternal.

Although it be exceeding sinful for a man, though with the greatest pretense
of modesty, to suggest that which is opposite to a fundamental Doctrine of the
Christian Religion, and on that account Mr. Colliers pretext of proposing his
notion on probable grounds, will not excuse him; yet besides this, you shall
find him to be most positive, and peremptory in his assertion of what he here
pretends to lay down only as a probable supposition; and that in the very next
Sections; which is a full evidence that this pretended modesty of his, serves
only for a bait to the hook, which is by him let down to take simple Souls;
which renders his design so much the worse, and the more blame worthy.

The sufferings of the damned, have by the Schoolmen (not improperly) been
distinguished, in poenam sensus, and poenam damni; into the punishment of
sense, and punishment of loss, the one is signified in those Texts that speak
of their being shut out from the Kingdom of God, and the like; the other of
those that speak of their being cast into a Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone, their being tormented day and night, etc. But that there is any part
of their punishment which is not poenal; and that this punishment of loss, is
to be distinguished from that which is so; is such a contradiction, as I think
is peculiar to Mr. Collier, who has here furnished us with this distinction.
Thus we may see, The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness; and
the end of his talk is (like to prove) mischievous madness, Eccles. 10. 13.

And whereas Mr. Collier supposes the duration of their punishment of loss,
who are damned, shall be Eternal, but not that of sense; he is utterly without
any probable ground in Scripture or right reason for his Opinion; For although
their suffering be sometimes expressed negatively, and sometimes positively, yet
there is no intimation of the separating of the positive part from the
negative, so that some persons shall Eternally be punished with the loss of
good, but not with the feeling of Evil; But both are ^n Scripture ins^parably
linked together, both with respect to the subjects of them and their duration.
Who shall be punished with Everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and the glory of his power, 2 These. 1. 9. which certainly speaks the
punishment both of sense and loss, and the duration of both to be alike. And
that the positive part of their punishment, or (as Mr. C. terms it) their pain
inflicted shall be Eternal, the Scripture is express, which says more then
once, That they shall go into Hell, into the Fi^e that never shall be quenched,
where their worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched, Mar. 9. 43, 44. etc.
For the Ch^ff Christ will burn up with unquenchable fire, Mat. 3. 12. and the
smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever, Rev. 14. 11.

Let us now see what countenance Mr. C. gives to his notion; His first plea is;

The Scripture lets us know that some shall be saved, that through their own
miscarriages, shall loose the reward of their own work, 1 Cor. 3. 14, 15. They
shall be saved yet so as by fire; and what that fire is, and how far it shall
extend, at and after the Judgment, I must leave to him that knows all
things, to determine, etc.

This Text is by the Papists abusively applied to their Purgatory, and it must
be acknowledged their reasoning from it, has as much probability as Mr.
Colliers, though both they and he do miserably wrest it. He confesses that he
neither knows what this fire is, nor how far it shall extend. He may well
excuse us therefore, if we refuse to take this, for any proof of his notion.
That the fire here mentioned, is not to be taken properly, but metaphorically,
is evident from the Apostles discourse, which is wholly in terms used
figuratively, viz. Wood, Hay, and Stubble, to signify such works as will not
abide trial; Gold, Silver and precious Stones, to denote those that will. So by
fire, we are to understand, such a probation of men's works, as will be like
fire unto the Gold, Stubble, etc. burning up the one, and manifesting the
excellency of the other. And seeing Mr. C. in his following lines (though
without giving any sufficient reason therefore) does reject the interpretation
of those, that refer this to any time or trial before the day of Judgment; I
will not contend with him thereabout; but granting its respect to that time,
consider what must then be the true meaning of the Text; which can be extended
no farther, then to signify to us,

1. That in the great day every man's work shall be strictly examined, and
proved of what sort it is.

2. That those works which have not been wrought in God, all labors bestowed
in a wrong way of Doctrine or practice, will then be burnt up, and prove
unprofitable to those that have wrought them.

3. That it is possible that some who are themselves built, and do build on the
true foundation, may yet so far err in their work, at least some part of it, as
that it may not be approved in this day, but must be lost, even as Wood, Hay,
and Stubble is consumed by the Fire; and they miss of that reward which shall
be given to those, whose labor has been better employed, in the promoting of
sound Doctrine and Godliness, to the glory of God, and the profit of their own
and others Souls. And

4. That this notwithstanding, those that have an interest in Christ, and have
been in the main sincere with God, shall themselves be saved; yet so as by
fire, they cannot escape this trial of their work, and loss of that superadded
gracious reward, which they should have received, if they had built upon the
foundation Gold, Silver, and precious Stones. Now let the whole context be
diligently read and weighed by his Reader and mine, and I doubt not but he will
see that this Scripture proves not at all the Salvation of any that dye in
their sins, after the final sentence is past upon them.

And here it may not be unseasonable to remind Mr. Collier, of those rules of
interpreting Scripture, that he would seem to have some regard to p. 39. viz.

1. Not to understand any dark Scripture contrary to the plain revealed will of
God in his word.

2. Not to understand any Scripture so as to contradict others, especially so
as to contradict the Volume of the Book of God.

This himself confesses must needs be corrupt and dangerous, and yet every one
may see that his business throughout this Chapter is to oppose some few sayings
of Scripture, that have some difficulty attending their interpretation, with
parabolical and figurative expressions, corrupted by his false glosses, unto a
multitude of plain Texts, and the whole scope of the Scripture bearing
plentiful witness to the certainty of the Everlasting punishment of the ungodly.

But I shall proceed. He says again;

The Lord of all lets us to know that none shall be Eternally damned, but those
who sin against the holy spirit; Mat. 12. 31. Three of the Evangelists state
this for confirmation, Mar. 3. 28. Luke 12. 10. And if all sin shall be
forgiven, then there must be a delive^ance from the Judgment.

Now is Mr. Colliers mask of pretended modesty put off, and laid aside; and
instead thereof a daring assertion of his Heresy is introduced, and that by
him boldly entitled to the Lord of all, which owes its Original to the Father
of lies, viz. That none shall be Eternally damned, but those who sin against
the holy spirit and that he may at once give full proof of his confidence, he
adds, that this is stated by three of the Evangelists; whereas in truth there
is no such thing, so much as intimated in any one of them; But in diverse Texts
of Scripture, the Lord of all lets us know, that many shall be Eternally damned
for other sins, that may not be chargeable with the sin against the holy Ghost:
unto those already pleaded, you may add Rev. 20. 15. and 21. 8.

As for the Texts abused by him; The scope and design of them plainly; is to
let the malicious revilers of Christ and his Miracles know; That although the
Grace of God to sinners is so abundant, that all sin and blasphemy, of those
that truly repent and believe in Christ may be, and to some has been and shall
be forgiven on the terms aforesaid; yet those that willingly and maliciously
reject and blaspheme Christ, so doing despite to the spirit of Grace, whereby
they have been so far enlightened as to know, that what the Gospel reveals
concerning Christ and salvation by him is truth, are utterly excluded from
hopes of pardon, or possibi^ity of salvation; it being impossible to renew them
to Repentance, and there remaining no more sacrifice for sin. Compare the Texts
cited with Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and chap. 10. 26, 27, 28, 29. The words in Mat. 12.
are,

v. 31. Wherefore I say unto you; All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy against the holy Ghost, shall not be
forgiven unto men.

v. 32. And whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man it shall be
forgiven him; but whosoever speaks against the holy Ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him neither in this world, neither in the world to come.

The same thing is intended in either of these Verses, though the expression
thereof be doubled for the greater certainty, and remarkableness thereof.

Wherefore I say unto you, This refers to what is before recorded, v. 24. etc.

-- all manner of sin and blasphemy, i. e. sin and blasphemy of every kind; not
every individual sin and blasphemy: The adultery of Repenting David was
forgiven, but not the adultery of those mentioned Rev. 21. 8. The blasphemy of
Paul, and the words that he spoke against the Son of man, but not of Caiaphas,
Herod, etc.

-- shall be forgiven unto men: and so v. 32. it shall be forgiven him, i. e.
it is remissible; By the grace of God through Faith in Christ, it may be
forgiven, and to some it has and shall be forgiven. Verbs that signify
action, are sometimes understood only of a faculty or power of action; so Psalm.
22. 18. I may tell all my bones: in the Hebrew it is, I will tell all my bones.
The sense is well expressed in our translation: and Prove. 20. 9. Who can say, I
have made my heart clean, etc. In the Hebrew it is, who says. Many will say
and pretend this; but the meaning is, who of right can say so. And that the
words should here be taken in this sense, the analogy of Faith does require.

-- but the blasphemy against the holy Ghost; or whosoever speaks against the
holy Ghost, i. e. whosoever blasphemeth wittingly and maliciously, against the
inward enlightening, and conviction of the Spirit;

-- shall not be forgiven unto men: and v. 32, it shall not be forgiven him
neither in this world, neither in that which is to come. Thus you have the
certainty of their damnation first absolutely expressed, v. 31. and then
emphatically repeated in such terms as may serve farther to cut them off from
all hopes, and exclude all possibility of their forgiveness, v. 32. And in them
no more is intended then was before expressed; and is in like absolute terms
expressed by the other Evangelists: no intimation (which Mr. C. vainly imagines
p. 48.) that any which are not forgiven in this world, may obtain pardon in
that which is to come.

It is certain that it was a familiar phrase with the Jews to call the age of
the Messiah; the world to come; and some with great probability to accept this
sense both here, and in Heb. 2. 5. and 6. 5. which if admitted, gives this
interpretation of the place; That although by Christ believers are justified
from all things, from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses;
yet in the Gospel is there no remedy provided for them that sin against the
holy spirit, but that transgression remains unpardonable, both under the Law
and under the Gospel. Nay moreover, if we allow Mr. C. that forgiveness in the
world to come is in these words in^imated; yet neither will this relieve him;
for the Apostle speaks of the blotting out of the sins of Believers at the
coming of Christ; and it is certain that then the sentence by which they are
now absolved will be published before men and Angels, and they possessed of the
utmost advantages accruing to them by their pardon; so then declaratively they
are forgiven in another world; But none have or can have an interest in this
forgiveness, but those that have repented and been converted in this world,
Act. 3. 19, 20

Indeed if we allow Mr. C. this notion, That sinners shall be forgiven after
they are damned; we must grant him more then what he yet openly pleads for,
viz. That they shall not only be delivered from the positive part of their
punishment, but the negative also: For he whose sins are forgiven is a blessed
man, and certainly interested in the favor of God. But it is in vain to expect
that notions so opposite to truth as Mr. Colliers are, should be brought to any
consistency.

In p. 48. Mr. Collier forms and answers this Objection,

This Scripture only supposes that on repentance, all such sins may be
forgiven; not that they shall be forgiven without repentance.

In his answer hereunto he grants,

That we may not suppose the forgiveness of sin first or last to be without
repentance.

It seems then that the forgiveness in another work, which Mr. Collier dreams
of, is attainable on the same terms on which it is offered in this, and no
other; which is not only repentance, but also faith in the Lord Jesus. So that
according to his principles, after the Judgment is past, sinners are still
upon the same terms with God as they are now in the day of his patience; Then
which supposition, nothing can be more false, and repugnan^ to the Scripture:
Now is the accepted time; now is the day of Salvation; And if poor sinners do
not seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near,
Isa. 55. 6. it will be too late in another world; for then although they call
upon him he will not answer; they may seek him early but cannot find him. See
Prove. 1. 24-31. When death has once turned us off the stage of this world, our
day is past, and the night is come wherein no man can work, Joh. 9. 4. Eccl. 9.
10. There will be no more repentance unto life then, or possibility of changing
our state, but every man must Eternally reap the fruit of what he has sown in
this life. And as there is no promise for the damned to hope in, or Gospel to
be preached to them, so neither shall they have any more a call to repentance,
or tender of mercy for ever. He adds*

And that there may be forgiveness, and acceptance after death, seems farther
to appear: else what means 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. with chap. 4. 6. In chap. 3. 19,
20. its said, By which also he went and preached to the spirits in prison,
which sometimes were disobedient, etc. Thus far Mr. C. repeats the words, but
omits the rest, which are, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the
days of Noah, while the Ark was a preparing: wherein few, that is, eight Souls
were saved by Water. Mr. C. is here quite started from the thing in Question,
viz. Whether the damned may be released from their torment, after the day of
Judgment; and instead of proving that, talks of forgiveness after death before
that day come, which is short of the task undertaken by him, though as contrary
to the whole tenor of Scripture. The meaning of the words wrested by him (so
far as concerns the business in hand) is, That Christ by his spirit in Noah,
(for thereby were the Prophets of old acted, 1 Pet. 1. 11.) who was a preacher
of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 5. went and preached to the old world, whose
spirits, for their disobedience, were now in prison reserved to the Judgment
of the great day. But against this, two things are objected by Mr. C.

1. It is said he went, i. e. Christ, not his spirit only by Noah.

The Text says indeed He went, but fully explains also the manner how he went,
viz. by his spirit; as God is frequently said to speak to those, unto whom he
sent his Prophets, so is Christ here said to preach to the old world, by his
spirit in Noah.

2. He does not say he went by Noah to the people of the old world, but he went
and preached to the spirits (not persons) in prison: Noah's preaching was to
persons living, this to the spirits in prison.

The former part of this Objection is answered already, and the scope of the
Text does enforce the sense I have given of it; and whereas Mr. C. says this
preaching was to the spirits, not persons in prison, etc. it is a mere quibble;
for the Apostle speaks of them according to their present condition when he
wrote this: He does not say they were spirits in prison when preached to; but
that the spirits of th^se persons were now in prison, unto whom Noah preached
while they lived in the world.

And therefore that suggestion of Mr. Colliers is utterly groundless, That its
greatly doubtful whether this be it which is here intended.

But however, if it were only doubtful to him; it leave^ him inexcusable, in
his bold adventure to pervert it as he does. Certainly if the time of the
preparation of the Ark, was the time of Gods* long-suffering, toward them unto
whom Noah preached by the spirit of Christ, there was no pardon to be expected
for them, or offered to them after that time. Neither can any reason be given
why this should be restrained to those that were disobedient in the days of
Noah, if ever the pardon of sinners after death had come into the Apostles
mind: for we may not suppose that these were privileged above all others that
dyed in their sins.

And although Mr. C. says a little after, That this does ^ot justify the
descending of Christ's Soul into Hell, as some hold: yet it must necessarily
inf^r, That Christ in person descended into Hell, which is as absurd, if not
more.

3. And especially, compare this with chapter 4. 6. which seems to be the same with
this: For, for this cause also was the Gospel preached to them that are dead,
that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to
God in the spirit. Where the Apostle states these things: 1. That the Gospel
was preached to them that are dead: 2. The time when it was preached to them;
that was, after they were dead.

Although it be granted that in some respects this Text is hard to be
understood; yet it is most easy to evince, that it gives no countenance to Mr.
Colliers notion; neither does it seem, that the same persons with those
intended chapter 3. 19. are here spoken of, but rather such as the preaching of the
Gospel had a far better, even a saving effect upon; and Mr. Colliers saying
that the time when the Gospel was preached to them, is by the Apostle
determined to have been after they were dead, is utterly false. He says
indeed, The Gospel (...) was preached, or has been preached, i. e. ^n time
past, to them that are dead, i. e. are now dead; They were dead when Peter
wrote this, but alive when the Gospel was preached to them. I need say no more
to evert Mr. Colliers design, but it may not be amiss to make a little farther
enquiry into the meaning of this Text. It is evident from the context, that the
design of the Apostle is to press those to whom he wrote unto sanctification,
and conformity to Christ, which does consist in their dying unto sin, and
living unto God, v. 1, 2, 3. And in v. 4. he meets with an Objection, by which
they might be retarded in their course of Obedience, viz. That if they did not
conform to the world, they must expect to become their gazing stock, and to
suffer hard things from them; which he fortifies them against, by remembering
them of the day of Judgment, in which ungodly sinners must be accountable for
all those wrongs which the godly have received from them, v. 5. and this
judgment is illustrated by a distribution of the object, the quick and the
dead; and from the occasion of this distribution the Apostle urges another
argument against that discouragement which might arise from persecution;
Because it had been the lot of others unto whom the Gospel had been preached
afore-time, and they had yielded obedience to it, to be judged according to men
in the flesh; i. e. to be censured and condemned according as the malice of men
did dictate to them, in this world, which they did patiently bear, and through
much tribulation did enter into the Kingdom of God, the great design of the
Gospel being accomplished upon them, in their living according to God, in a
conformity to him and his will, in the spirit; i. e. in the exercise of grace
and holiness, under the conduct of the hol^ Ghost, who is the fountain of that
spiritual life which is begun in the Saints here, and perfected in Glory. The
end and effect of the preaching of the Gospel to Believers that were dead, was
the same, as unto those that then lived, viz. That though they did meet with
suffering, they should persist in their duty of living to God. A ^ike manner of
speaking we have: Romans 6. 17. Thanks be to God that ye were the Servants of
sin; but ye have obeyed, etc. i. e. though you were; for it is that expressed in
the close of the Verse, which was the ground and occasion of the Apostles
thanksgiving, viz. their Obedience: So the great end of Gospelpreaching is,
That men may live to God, though the Cross will fall in their way. I know some
do interpret the former sentence of the latter part of the Verse otherwise, as
holding forth mortification, and the last vivification, so taking the whole of
our sanctification to be expressed by them together, which I shall not oppose, it
being the sense of those far more learned and judicious then my self; but at
present my own Judgment is most determined in the sense given; which diverse of
great worth, have also embraced before me. But to return; Mr. Collier still
pleads for his corrupt sense of the first words of the Text.

That its apparent from these expressions; 1. It was preached to them that are
dead.

Wherein the evidence of this expression lies, Mr. Collier does not declare; we
read in Ruth 1. 8. of Naomi her Daughters in Law, dealing kindly with the dead,
i. e. with their Husbands who were dead when Naomi spoke this, but certainly
their dealing kindly with them, was while living; and in the Verse before this,
is mention made of the Judgment of quick and dead: shall we hence conclude,
that any shall remain dead in the day of Judgment.

2. That they might be judged according to (or as) men in the flesh, viz. that
they were judged, in this matter, as if they had been alive in the flesh, which
imports they were not.

It is plain that (...) An old version put forth in K. Edwards time, reads it,
that they should be condemned of men in the flesh.
that they might be judged, must intend, either conviction, or censure and
condemnation, not account or esteem of persons as if they were, what they are
not, as Mr. Collier does imagine; neither is it (...), as men (according to his
gloss) but (...), according to men; the sense of which has been already given;
so that Mr. Colliers inference being built on this false gloss, has no weight
in it, but it still remains certain, that they were alive when the Gospel was
preached to them. What follows in this Section needs no farther reply, but is
fully answered in what I have already written.

The next ground urged by him p. 49. is as follows:

The Scripture presents us with the deliverance of Sodom and Gomorrah in some
time, from the greatness of their judgment; and of Samaria, Ez. 16. 46. and
49. he promises a restoration to them both, out of their forlorn estate, v.
55. 61. This is spoken of literal Sodom, and cannot be mystically applied.

Here are two things supposed by Mr. C. without any proof offered.

1. That in this Scripture literal Sodom is spoken of, etc. But if we take the
words as they are read in our translation, I conceive he can give no reason why
they should be applied to literal Sodom, more then for the understanding of the
promise literally, that they shall return to their former estate, which none
shall do in this world, after death; much less after the day of Judgment.

2. He supposes that the promise of restoration made to the Jews, etc. must
be applied to those particular persons that perished under the stroke of Gods
wrath; then which nothing is more absurd; For the bulk of the people then in
being, were threatened with utter destruction, and there was but a remnant that
should escape, which God would still own, and make good these promises to.
Indeed some passages in the close of this Chapter may most properly be referred
to Gospel times; and were never intended, as promises to all the Seed of Israel
after the flesh (as the Apostle argues at large in the Romans) but to the
Church, the spiritual Seed; although the Israelites shall have a large share in
them, when the desired day of their calling, and returning to God is come; but
their claim of right in new covenant blessings, must now be on the account of
their Faith in Christ, not their natural descent from Abraham.

Let us now look into the Text: and first we find, that when the Prophet enters
upon this comparison of Jerusalem with Samaria and Sodom, v. 44. he says,
Every one that uses Proverbs, shall use this Proverb against thee, etc. which
does plainly lead us to a metaphorical sense of diverse terms used in this
proverbial, or parabolical discourse. Yea he says, v. 45. to the Jews, your
Mother was an Hittite, and your Father an Amorite: which certainly is not to be
taken in a strict literal sense, but is rather intended to note their corrupt
manners then their natural descent. And so although in the name Sodom there is
an allusion to literal Sodom, and the punishment thereof, yet may we rather
understand the Moabites and Ammonites to be intended, who were like to Sodom
and Gomorrah in their sinfulness, and in their punishment. See Zeph. 2 9. And
there seems to be some farther occasion of this allusion, not only in the
situation of these Countries near to the Land where Sodom stood, but more in
that they sprang from Lot, who was once an Inhabitant among the Sodomites,
whose evil manners his posterity did now conform to. And indeed we find this in
Scripture to be a common brand of Great sinners: See Job 36. 14. Isa. 1. 10.
Rev. 7. 8. Now many of these two Nations did return to their Country, as diverse
of the ten Tribes did also, when Judah returned; but especially are these
promises made good in Gospel times, in the gathering of Jews and Gentiles into
one Church, under one head Christ Jesus. And these things duly weighed, lead to
such an interpretation of this prophecy, as is according to the analogy of
Faith, and fully agreeing with other Texts, both which are crossed and
contradicted, together with the whole scope of the Text under consideration by
the sense that Mr. C. would force upon it. For,

1. It is evident that the promises here made must have their accomplishment in
this world, which is the only time and place for godly repentance, and entering
into Covenant with God by Faith in Christ.

2. The Scripture and Reason does cut off all hope of the returning (so much
as) of any remnant of literal Sodom; see Isa. 1. 9. and says expressly, that
the Sodomites do suffer the vengeance of eternal fire, Jud. 7. which passage
Mr. Collier mentions a little after, I suppose to prevent others objecting it
against him, for certainly he cannot be so ignorant as to think that it
strengthens his sense: no doubt those that suffer the vengeance of Eternal
fire, are cut off from all hope of deliverance.

3. The Grace promised in v. 62, 63. is not a deliverance from torment only;
but a full and free pardon, and taking of the persons pardoned into Covenant
with God, which includes their enjoyment of him as their portion, which, by Mr.
Colliers own grant, is no ways applicable to the damned in Hell.

And it is evident that the tollerableness allowed unto Sodom in the day of
Judgment, Mat. 18. 15. (which he pleads) is only comparative; they shall be
tormented less then those that have rejected the Gospel. And the reasoning of
our Savior in that, and like Texts, is to this purpose, That the condemnation
of the Sodomites will be great, is easily granted by you, because they were
great sinners; and you are promising to your selves a far better portion then
theirs is like to be in the day of Judgment; but do not deceive your selves,
for your sin in rejecting the Gospel, is greater then any they were guilty of,
and your punishment (if you go on to neglect so great salvation) will be
heavier then theirs; It shall be more tolerable for them in the day of
Judgment then for you. And there is no force of reason or terror to the
persons threatened, suitable to what is intended, if according to Mr. Colliers
notion, p. 53. The day of general Judgment should be the day of Sodoms ease.
That they should not be then condemned, but released from their punishment, and
escape the Judgment that the rest of the wicked world fall under. If this
assertion of his be not bold and antiscriptural, I know not what deserves to be
so accounted.

Mr. Collier proceeds to argue,

Why may we not suppose that God may in time be pacified toward sinners, after
they have born their sin and judgment, as formerly he has declared himself to
be, or will be in time to come, Ez. 16. 58. -- Seeing God has been or will be
pacified in Judgment, why should we suppose him to be unreconcileable, and
never to be pacified in this last and great Judgment?

Is there indeed no difference betwixt the state of men in time, and in
Eternity? why then can Mr. C. see no reason against sinners expectation of the
same mercy hereafter, as now some do partake of in the pardon of their sins,
and salvation by Christ? Men are now under a mixed dispensation of justice and
mercy, and the time of life in this world is the only time of Gods patience, 2
Pet. 3. 9. and while this time does last, he does as well design the reclaiming
of sinners by temporal Judgments, as the vindicating of his own holiness, and
therefore when this is accomplished, he may be here, and oft-times is pacified
toward sinners. But in the world to come this mixed dispensation cease, and
the Vessels of mercy shall enjoy the fruit of mercy perfectly and only; and the
vessels of wrath the extremity of justice, all that is then designed toward
them, being the making known of wrath, and glorifying justice upon them, Romans
9. 22, 23. They must drink the Wine of Gods wrath without mixture, Rev. 14. 10.
And therefore no hope for them after this last and great Judgment.

He proceeds; The Scripture says expressly, That God is the Savior of all men,
but especially of those that believe; and it is not present outward salvation
that the Apostle is there speaking of, etc.

The Text referred to, is 1 Timothy 4. 10. where the Apostle is giving an account
of his diligence, and constancy in the work of the Ministry, notwithstanding
the persecutions that did or might attend him on that account, as also the
encouragement he had thereto; because he trusted in the living God, who is the
Savior of all men, especially of those that believe; which can intend no other
then the conserving providence of God, which is over all, and especially his
own people: So the 70 render Psalm. 36. 6. (...); Thou will save (or preserve)
Men and Beasts O Lord. It is evident the Apostle encourages himself in that
salvation that is presently enjoyed in this world, who is the Savior, etc. and
if Mr. Colliers corrupt sense of this Text be admitted, I cannot see how he
will exclude those that have sinned against the holy* Ghost, otherwise then by
an arbitrary exception of his own; for every man is partaker of the salvation
here intended.

In the 7. p. 50. Mr. Collier repeats again who it is for whom he intends this
deliverance from Hell Torments; But with his vain words we are not concerned,
being well assured, There is no such thing: and that distinction insisted on.
8. we have already proved to be vain and groundless; Those that are under the
Eternal Judgment, must suffer Eternal torment as well as loss. And indeed
(according to this man's principles) they may as well expect deliverance from
the one as from the other; for those that have forgiveness of sin, have also
Righteousness imputed to them; and are on that account received to glory, not
for their own good works; the want of which he makes the only bar unto the
admission of these persons into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Yea he asserts farther. 9. That this favor and mercy shall be extended to
them on the account, and for the sake of Christ; and again, p. 54.

Why we should make that an argument against all Grace after the Judgment (the
infinite Sacrifice remaining the same to have its influence herein) which has
been our alone hope and help before the Judgment: -.- I do not yet understand.

It is pleaded that sin is against an infinite Majesty, and therefore deserves
Everlasting punishment; and this Mr. C. acknowledges to be true; but yet
says, that God is infinite in Grace as well as in Justice, and therefore this
property of God can be no bar to the relief of the damned; and then pleads,
That the infinite sacrifice of Christ remains the same to have its influence
for the obtaining of Grace after the Judgment as before.

Now if this be so, either Heaven was never purchased by Christ for those that
believe in this world, or the damned have through the influence of his
sacrifice, as free access thither, upon their Repentance as we. Nay, if Mr.
Collier will suspend it on men's good works, seeing they may repent when damned,
why may they not do other good works also to such a measure as to earn Heaven
as well as we?

But behold here another instance of his daring confidence in asserting his
antiscriptural and pernicious notions! where is the Scripture that says Christ
died for the Redemption of the damned in Hell? or that his Sacrifice was ever
designed for the obtaining of Grace for such as die in their sins? It is most
certain, that when the great day of Judgment is past, the Lord Christ has
finished all his work as Mediator, and will then present his Church complete
before God, and so give up the Kingdom to the Father, that God may be all in
all, 1 Cor. 15. 24. etc. There will therefore remain no more sacrifice for sins
pleadable for the remission of any that are not already saved, but their
Redemption cease for ever. And although sinners in the day of Gods patience,
are invited and encouraged to come to him on the account of his infinite mercy
in Christ; yet is it no where proposed as a ground for hope, or spring of
comfort to the damned, who are the objects not of mercy, but divine vengeance.

In the last place he pleads;

That this is rational and most God-like, who has let us know that he will
suit his Judgments, to men's various facts for measure.

That is most rational and becoming God, which he has revealed in his word,
and it is the highest presumption to dictate unto him another way, for the
manifestation of his glory upon the vessels of wrath, then himself has fixed
on. Who has been his Counselor? Himself also has revealed, That as a
righteous Judge he will suit his Judgments to the various facts of men, and
that some shall be beaten with many stripes, others with few, Luke 12. 47, 48.
But this difference of punishment does not consist in a differing duration, but
present degrees of torment; Their fire that have sinned ignorantly shall not be
so hot, as theirs that have sinned wilfully, neither will their worm gnaw them
so grievously; yet of both it is true, That their worm never dies, and their
fire is not quenched. He adds,

From the same reason and rule of Righteousness, has he given us ^ints of
limitation in respect of time, as if he would not be for ever punishing: Luke
12. 58, 59. And this word till, or until in Scripture rarely imports Eternity,
but limits to time, Mat. 18. 34, 35. and 5. 25, 26.

That we have any hint in the Scripture of limitation, in respect of the time
of the punishment of the wicked, is false. And that reason and righteousness do
render such a limitation necessary, is audacious boldness to assert: Is God
unrighteous who takes vengeance? shall vile dust be so bold, as to fix the
demerit, and limit the punishment of an offense against the infinite Jehovah!
But Luke 12. 59. is brought in to give countenance to this abomination: the
words are, I say unto thee, thou shall not depart thence until (...), thou
shall have paid even the last mite. Apply this now to the case of sinners in
the prison of Hell, as Mr. Collier does; And

1. It utterly overthrows his notion of their release by forgiveness, on
condition of repentance, through the influence of Christ's sacrifice; no such
thing can be admitted in this case, no favor is to be expected, but even the
last mite must be paid, or no release can be obtained.

2. It most emphatically sets forth their irrecoverable and everlasting
damnation; for if they may not expect any mercy, but must themselves pay the
utmost mite they are indebted to divine Justice, we know they must be paying it
for ever, it being impossible for a finite creature to satisfy the demands of
an infinite God, justly provoked to anger by our rebellion against him; so in
the other Texts mentioned until being referred to, and determined by that
which never can be done, does utterly cut off all hopes from those that are
once fallen into the hands of the living God; and so by consequence does
necessarily infer an absolute denial of the thing spoken of. See 1 Samuel 15. 35.
And this is directly the scope of the parable, to take men off from their
presumptions of relief in another world, and to press them now to make their
calling and Election sure. And if it may be thought that men may satisfy
divine Justice, and pay the last mite, I know not out the Devils may possibly
do so too; and may as well as men, on this account, justly claim a release from
their torments, sooner or later.

Thus far I have confidered and removed what Mr. Collier offers for the
countenancing of his new Doctrine; and by reason of my having already exceeded
the room I intended to have comprised this reply in, I shall be forced only to
touch upon diverse things that are behind in his Book; The next work which (all
in vain) he addresseth himself to; is an endeavor to obviate those Objections
that may be made against his notion of the Judgment, some of which have
already been enforced, and his cavils answered; others of them are laid so
slightly, (I suppose) that he might make some show of answering something, as
scarce any body besides himself, would have so expressed their mind; and with
these I shall little concern my self; only the second must be insisted on when
we come to it.

The first Objection Mr. C. takes notice of; is that which he supposes may
arise from those Texts that affirm, but few shall be saved, Mat. 7. 14. Luke
13. 24.

It is certain that more may be collected from such sayings, then ever he is
able to remove out of his way; For if there be but two sorts of men, viz. The
little flock of Christ, his Church which shall be saved; and the Goats, the
world of ungodly which shall be damned, then may we in no wise admit (what he
has before afferted) that multitudes shall be saved, that are not espoused to
Christ; or, That none shall be Eternally damned but those that sin against the
holy spirit. Let us hear what he says to these things.

First he grants, That few enter in at the straight gate, etc. but then adds,

Though sluggish Christians and Formalists enter not in at the straight gate,
yet this proves not that they shall find no mercy at all: if so, Woe will be the
case of most of professors at that day.

There is no middle way, if persons enter not in at the straight gate that
leads to Eternal Life, they must go in at the wide gate that leads to
destruction; and if their names are not found in the Book of Life, they must be
cast into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, where they are
tormented forever and ever. Yea but if there be not some provision made against
this rigor; Formalists, yea the most of professors will be in an ill case; and
the foolish Virgins are not like to obtain so great a privilege in this day as
Mr. C. has before allowed to them, And therefore he concludes his opinion must
be admitted. This in plain terms is no less then to accommodate his Doctrine to
give countenance to the wickedness of men: Formalists are Hypocrites in the
midst of their profession, and they shall be so far from finding mercy in that
day, that their case will prove worst of all: see Mat. 24. the last Verse. And
how many soever they be that are in that day found without the wedding garment
of Faith and true Holiness, they must (however they may now trust to lying
words, and make much of the pillows that Mr. C. sows under their Arm-holes)
be cast into outer darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat.
22. 12. etc. And it will then be manifest to the Eternal woe of formal
professors, That many are called but few are chosen.

The second Objection is thus laid down by him, p. 51.

The Scripture sentenceth the wicked with Eternal damnation, assuring us that
it shall be Everlasting, Mat. 25. 41, 46.

This in my Judgment is utterly unanswerable, unless Mr. Colliers testimony
prevail against that of the Scripture. That the Everlasting punishment of the
wicked is plentifully asserted therein, is manifest; and a cogent proof hereof
we have in the Text instanced, Mat. 25. 41, and 46. In v. 41. we read, that the
sentence which Christ will pass upon the wicked in the great day, will be,
Depart from me ye cursed (...) into Everlasting fire (or, into that Everlasting
fire; for the doubling of the Article adds Emphasis to it) prepared for the
Devil and his Angels: Observe here, they are sentenced not only to Eternal
loss, but Eternal torment also, to Everlasting fire, even that Everlasting fire
that is prepared for the Devil and his Angels: As the Children of God being the
Children of the Resurrection, cannot die any more, but are (...), equal to the
Angels, Luke 20. 36. or in a condition of immortality and blessedness without
change, even as the blessed Angels are; so the damned are in the same condition
with the Devils, as to the unchangeableness thereof, and duration of their
suffering. An account of the issue of this Judgment we have v. 46. And these
shall go away (...), into Everlasting punishment; but the righteous, (...),
into Everlasting Life. And here we find nothing of the sentence abated, but are
assured of its execution ^n the full extent thereof; The persons condemned
being driven away from all good, and cast under divine wrath, and punishment in
Hell Fire, which is Everlasting; of the same duration with the Life and
Happiness of the Righteous; For the same word (bot^ here and in other places)
is used to express the duration of both, and that in such wise as can no more
admit of limitation with respect to the one then with respect to the other;
Everlasting life, and Everlasting punishment, being constantly and directly
opposed to each other. We will now consider Mr. C's answer: He says,

Its evident that Mat. 25. intends professing Christian nations; for others
cannot be accused and sentenced for not showing kindness to Christ in his
Members, -- and so may be such as under the sound of the Gospel, sinned against
the holy spirit, or such as may obtain a time of mitigation.

That only professing Christian nations are intended in this Text, is utterly
false, and against the express terms thereof: Before him shall be gathered all
Nations v. 32. Mr. C. says, Others cannot be accused for not showing kindness
to Christ in his Members: We grant it; But must they not therefore appear
before his Judgment Seat? and may they not be accused and sentenced for other
sins? Mr. Collier may as well infer from this Text, That professing Nations
shall be accused and sentenced only for sins of omission, seeing no other are
here mentioned, as that other Nations shall not be concerned in this sentence;
It was evident that Christ's design was not to enumerate all the sins, that men
shall be condemned for, but only to give instance in some, which they to whom
he then spoke, were immediately concerned in. But if this were granted, Mr. C.
he is still in as bad case as before, for certainly thousands that die in their
sins, even where the Gospel is preached, are yet never guilty of the sin
against the holy Ghost: To solve this he tells us, such may obtain a time of
mitigation; Although the Text say, That all which were set on the left hand of
Christ, shall go away into Everlasting punishment. Thus by contradicting the
Text, he has boldly adventured to cut the knot which he could not untye. He
proceeds,

Eternal, Everlasting and for ever, being understood according to the common
use and import of the word in Scripture, seems rather to confirm this
understanding then otherwise; for we must understand it according to the time
or times intended, and not always for ever without end, but very often the
contrary, and that both in the Old and New Testament.

Mr. Collier could have said nothing more against himself, then what he has
here written; for if these words are to be interpreted according to the subject
matter, (which he calls, the time or times intended) then certainly when they
are referred to that state which succeeds time, when duration shall be no more
measured by days and months and years, but time, shall be swallowed up in
Eternity, they can denote no less, then for ever without end. Moreover that
these terms are most commonly used in this sense, both in the Scripture and
amongst men, cannot be denied: and when a thing is said in Scripture to be
Everlasting, we cannot on any account suppose it shall have an end, unless it
be in one of these two cases.

1. When the duration of that thing is expressly limited to some time, in other
Texts. Or,

2. When the subject to which any thing said to be Eternal, is attributed, is
not capable of an absolutely Eternal duration, at least in that condition,
wherein alone, this may be attributed to it.

And thus it is, in all those Texts where these terms are used in a limited
sense in the Scripture; as any one may clearly see, that shall read the places
cited by Mr. C. or others like to them. Now this will in no wise warrant his
restriction of them in the present case. For,

1. They are (in reference to the punishment of the wicked) no where limited
throughout the Book of God.

2. Mr. Collier himself confesses, that wicked men shall remain in being for
ever: So then here is an unlimited threatening of Everlasting punishment to be
inflicted on a capable subject; and for any man to say that less is intended,
is a blasphemous contradiction to the Scriptures. Indeed the Eternity of the
torment of wicked men, is expressed by all those phrases in the word of God, that
are most significant of a duration without end; so that nothing can be spoken
more, then is therein contained for the clearing this matter.

Mr. C. proceeds to instance in some Texts where for ever, and everlasting, are
used in a limited sense in the Old Testament; which limitation has already
been considered, and the reason of it fixed; But he seems to lay special weight
on Jer. 7. 7. and 25. 5. where (he says) for ever and ever must be thus
understood.

There is the like reason for the limitation here, as in the other Texts, that
speak of serving for ever, and an everlasting Priesthood of Aaron, etc. and
till Mr. C. can produce evidence of the same reason, and necessity to admit a
limitation with respect to the punishment of sinners, he says not one tittle
to the purpose: In both these places the Israelites are told, that on condition
of their Obedience to God, they should enjoy their Land, (...) which we render
for ever and ever; the 70 exactly (...): i. e. from age to age; or from
generation to generation, as long as they and their offspring remained in the
world: But there is another phrase used in the Hebrew to signify an absolutely
Eternal duration, viz. (...) which by the 70 is rendered very commonly, (...);
and to express the same thing are these words used often in the New Testament;
and are rendered for ever and ever: yea three times is the duration of the
torment of the wicked expressed by them therein; and that the phrase might be
more emphatical, they are put in the plural number, (...), the significancy of
which we cannot reach in our Language: This you find Rev. 14. 11. and 19. 3.
and 20. 10. And I am well assured neither Mr. C. nor any of his Socinian
masters, can produce one place in the New Testament; where these words in such
a connection, may be taken in a limited sense.

To his discourse concerning the words (...), I shall briefly make this answer.

1. That (...) is (...), a word of many significations, is granted; and
therefore must be interpreted according to the scope of the place where it is
used; although it cannot be denied but oft-times Eternity is signified thereby;
as in Joh. 6. 51. and 58. (with diverse other places) where it is used to
express the Eternal duration of the life and blessedness of Believers; and in
Mar. 3. 29. The Everlasting misery of those that have sinned against the holy
spirit, is expressed thereby. And for Mr. C. to instance in those Texts where it
is not directly expressive of time; but the duration of things created in time;
as Mat. 28. 20. or does signify the course of men in this world, as Ephesians. 2. 2.
to prove that it may be taken in a limited sense, when it strictly imports the
duration of something, in another world, when time shall be no more, is mere
trifling. But he says, not only (...), but also (...), which are the common
words for everlasting, and for ever, yet must frequently be understood with
limitation, etc. (...), sometimes intends the time before the world was;
sometime the time of a man's life, Phil. v. 15.

I suppose Mr. C. will grant, that the use of this word, Tit. 1. 2. and Romans
16. 25. where it is to be considered a part ante, is that wherein we are not
concerned in our present disquisition: it is therefore incumbent on him to
prove, that when it is used to signify duration (a part post) yet to come, it
is frequently to be taken in a limited sense in the New Testament; and that it
must be so taken when predicate of the torments of the damned. This last (which
alone would relieve him) he despairs of, and therefore silently passes over:
and gives but one instance of the first; in Philem. v. 15. That thou should
receive him (...), for ever; which we grant to be an hyperbolical expression,
denoting as long time as they lived together; and the reason of this limitation
is clear in the Text; He could not longer enjoy him as a Servant. A like saying
to this we meet with in an Heathen Poet,

Serviet aeternum, qui parvo nesciet uti. Horat. Not one place more can be
produced, where such a limitation of the sense of this word may be admitted;
and yet it is used about 70 times in the New Testament. And therefore Mr. C.
does woefully prevaricate when he says, it must frequently be thus understood.
Indeed the common use of it is such, as (Mr. C. himself being Judge) will admit
of no limitation: sometimes it is put to signify the everlasting being, glory
and blessedness of God himself; and about 50 times or more, in the New
Testament, is the eternal duration of the Saints life and happiness in another
world, expressed thereby; and frequently the everlasting torments of the wicked
is so also; as has been before urged; and every one may see how preposterous a
course it would be, because the term is once used figuratively in a limited
sense, which the subject there treated of, and scope of the place does enforce;
therefore to limit it in all other places where it does occur, although there
be not only no reason for it, but also in the things spoken of, an utter
repugnancy to such a limitation. And if Mr. Collier know these things already,
he is far from upright dealing in this business: if he know them not, he is
guilty of great temerity in publishing such things as these to the world at all
adventures.

Much more might be added, but I must hasten.

In the last branch of his answer to this Objection, p. 52. he has recourse
again to his former distinction, and allows the Judgment of the wicked to be
Eternal in respect of their loss: But the vanity of this, has been already
detected, and my answer thereto need not be here repeated.

The next thing he attempts, is to clear his Doctrine from a charge laid
against it most justly, viz. That it tends to the encouragement of sinners in
their wicked ways. And truly this is so evident in it self, that it needs no
farther inforcement; yea in his answer he lays a farther ground for such a
charge; His words are these,

If a fit of sickness and terrible pain, be so hard to be bo^n here for a
season, in which men wish for death, and cannot obtain it; what will be the
dreadful state of sinners that must lie in the fiery Lake, some perhaps a 100.
some a 1000. and some perhaps 10000 years, etc.

Thus he will interpret Everlasting punishment, to be lying in the fiery Lake
perhaps an hundred years; yea according to his principles, perhaps it* may not
be an hundred days, no nor an hundred hours neither; for if they repent (which
he supposes they may and shall do) the sacrifice of Christ remains the same to
procure their pardon then as now; and no doubt he will allow them the same
power and free will to repent there as here, so that as soon as they find the
place displeasing to them, they may repent, and repenting may obtain mercy, and
deliverance out of it. And if this were true, there is nothing can be devised
more effectual to encourage a wicked life; as on the contrary, The Doctrine of
Eternal Judgment does make sinners tremble: and by it they are restrained from
much wickedness which otherwise they would rush into: See also 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11.

Mr. C. is aware also that some will tax him for complying with the Popish
Doctrine concerning Purgatory, and therefore p. 53. he endeavors to show the
difference betwixt his Purgatory and theirs.

I cannot now stay to run the parallel betwixt them; but must tell him in short,

1. That although his Doctrine of a Purgatory after Judgment be not so
pernicious to men's Purses, as the Papists have rendered theirs, yet it is full
as much, if not more ruining to their Souls that shall receive it, and they
that follow either of these blind guids, and content themselves to go out of
this world without Faith and true Holiness, on hopes of a time to repent and
better their state hereafter, will certainly fall into the ditch of Eternal woe
and misery, and their heavy curse will (all too late for their own relief) come
upon those that seduced them with this vain hope, that will prove as the giving
up of the Ghost.

2. On two accounts, his Doctrine in this point is more gross then the Papists;
for,

1. They make believers, fideles (supposed to die in venial sin) the subjects
of their Purgatory; But Mr. C. will indulge the Sodomites, yea all that have
not sinned against the holy Ghost, to pass through his Purgatory unto
forgiveness and ease.

2. They place their Purgatory before the last Judgment and final sentence; so
that they do not so directly oppose that fundamental Article concerning the
Eternal Judgment, as he does; nor suppose any possibility of sinners obtaining
a change of their condition after the sentence is past by the great Judge;
which yet Mr. C. has the boldness to plead for.

There are other unsavory notions couched in his answer to this Objection,
viz. That ordinarily sinners do not come under any Judgment, or suffer any
punishment before the great day, etc. But I must pass over them at present;
only mind how contrary this is to what we are taught in Luke 16. 23. 1 Pet. 3.
19. etc.

The last Objection that I shall be concerned to take any notice of, is to this
purpose;

If the damnation of the wicked be limited unto time, why may not the salvation
of the Godly be so likewise?

Now although Mr. C. pretend that there is not the like reason for the one as
for the other; this will not secure us of the possession of this truth; For if
his arguing were right, we had no word in Scripture that assures us of Eternal
Glory; There being no term used therein to signify the Everlasting duration of
the Saints happiness, but what is used to denote the duration of sinners
torment; which Mr. C. will not allow to be without end: And as he has to day
pretended reasons for limiting the words in this respect; so may another idle
brain to morrow, devise as good reason (...) duration of the Believers
happiness; and then where are we in this point* seeing the Eternity which the
Scripture speaks of after Judgment, may (in this man's sense) have an end in
one hundred years?

In Mr. Colliers 8th. Chapter he pretends to give some reasons of his understanding
the Scriptures abused by him as he dot^: But they being urged on those false
grounds, which have been already detected and refuted, I will not abuse my
Readers patience to attend my second, or farther raking into such an heap: But
shall oppose thereto some reasons, why his notion of the Judgment and
punishment of sinners must be rejected, briefly summed up from the former
discourse. I shall begin with his own words, p. 1, 2.

1. For any to affirm that which the Scripture does not, must needs be unsound
and unsafe.

But the Scripture no where affirms, nor allows, That persons may obtain
forgiveness after they are damned, and by Repentance get out of Hell Torments,
etc. Ergo.

Mr. Colliers assertion hereof (by his own confession) must be esteemed unsound
and unsafe.

2. That assertion, which is contrary to the express terms, and evident scope
of the holy Scriptures, in a fundamental Article; is pernicious and Heretical.

But this Doctrine of Mr. Colliers is such; ergo; It is pernicious and
Heretical; and if so, to be rejected by all that love truth, and tender the
safeguard of their own Souls.

The first proposition I suppose will not be denied, and the second, is
abundantly proved in the foregoing Lines; unto which you may add Heb. 6. 2.
where you read, that this truth concerning the Eternal Judgment lies in the
foundation of our Religion. And it is evident that it is called the Eternal
Judgment; because the sentence then pronounced is unalterable, and binds for
ever: The condition of men is finally determined thereby, and they left under
an impossibility of obtaining any change thereof (either in whole or part) to
Eternity.

3. That Doctrine whereof the just and necessary consequences, are absurd and
contradictory to Scripture, is so it self.

But such is the Doctrine of Mr. C. concerning forgiveness after death, etc.
Ergo.

The major I think cannot be opposed with any color: it is a sure maxim, Ex
veris nil nisi verum. The just and necessary consequence of a true notion, is
truth, and nothing else.

The minor is in part proved before; and shall be now farther enforced by an
instance or two.

1. If Mr. Colliers notion be admitted, The day wherein we must all appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, is not the last day, (though called so
Joh. 12. 48. Jam. 5. 3.) nor can that be accounted the final Judgment: for he
measures the damned sinners enduring of torments, by days and years after that;
and allows no Eternity of them, but that which perhaps may expire in an hundred
years; and then they experience a change in their release from them, which
release cannot certainly be obtained without a second sentence of the Judge
past concerning the persons discharged; yea his notion admits of a vicissitude
of changes in infinitum, after that Judgment, which in Scripture Language is
the last, has past upon men. For if they are capable of repenting so as to
obtain forgiveness, then by the same reason we may conclude a possibility of
their sinning again to condemnation, and so repenting again, etc. which does
infer that men are in no fixed state in another world; and also that infinite
sentences may be past upon them (according as they change their manners) after
the Judgment of the great day.

2. His Opinion supposes another Gospel, wherein provision i^ made for the
relief of the damned; and does contradict all those Texts, that speak of the
present Gospel ministration; as the only day of Gods gracious visiting sinners,
and making tenders of mercy and forgiveness to them.

3. It lays a foundation not only of praying for the dead, but the damned also.
If favor and mercy may be extended to them for the sake of Christ, as he has
asserted, we have the same reason, and so the same warranty to pray for them;
as is by the Apostle urged for our praying for all men while living in this
world, 1 Timothy 2.

But why do I detain my Reader with a particular account of the absurdities
that flow from this man's opinion, which yet he would have us think to be most
rational? Dato uno-absurdo, mille^s^equentur. I will break off here, and leave
others to collect those that remain, in their own thoughts of these things, and
speedily put a period to these lines.

To his 9th. Chapter where he tells us what use he supposes may be made of his
Doctrine; I shall make no farther reply; but having already proved his Doctrine
to be corrupt and unsound; I conclude that it must needs be not only useless,
but also pernicious to the Souls of men.

I shall close all with one word, 1. To Professors, 2. To open sinners.

First, Unto those that profess subjection to Christ, and are found walking in
his ways, I make it may earnest request, and that not in my own but Christ's
name; That they labor after stedfastness in the faith and profession of Gods
truth, especially in such a day as this, wherein many speak perverse things to
draw away Disciples after them: And in order hereunto, that they cry mightily
to God to make their hearts sound in his Statutes; and content not themselves
with a bare assent to truth, but receive it in the love thereof; that they may
in their own Breasts have that testimony to the power and efficacy thereof,
which alone will secure their profession, in an hour of temptation; and that
they be careful as well to hold forth the Doctrine of Christ, by a life
comformable thereto, as by confessing it with their tongues.

Secondly, To those that live in their sins, I would speak in the words of the
Prophet, Can your heart endure? or can your hands be strong in the day wherein
God will deal with you? Oh remember how fearful a thing it is to fall into the
hands of the living (sin revenging) God! who can dwell with devouring fire,
with Everlasting burnings? Be persuaded therefore by them that know the
t^rrours of the Lord, to seek him while he may be found, and to call upon him
while he is near: oh what would the Christless man give in exchange for his
Soul, when he sees there is no remedy, but he must have his part with the Devil
and his Angels, in the fire that is not quenched! But Repentance, Entreaties,
Tears, will obtain no pity, when once the door of Grace is shut; If Christ be
not received, and the heart made obedient to his counsel in this world, the
sinner is lost, and shall be rejected by the Lord for ever. Oh that word
Eternity! how full of dread is it to them that live and dye Children of wrath!
and yet how few are there that now lay these things to heart? and are seriously
concerned to fly from the wrath which is to come! One would think the thoughts
of Eternal Judgment, should make the boldest sinner tremble, and should turn
the sweet morsels of his iniquity into Gravel-Stones, and make that which he
now drinks down like Water, to become as Gall and Wormwood to him: But alas! So
wicked is the heart of Man, and desperately bent on a sinful course; that
unless he be renewed by effectual Grace, no persuasion will prevail with him to
forsake those ways, which lead to that place of torment where there is weeping
and wailing, and gnashing of teeth for evermore.

FINIS.

