AN ACCOUNT Of some Proceedings, lately made, for an Effectual Prohibition of
the EXPORTATION of WOOL, etc. Recommended to the WOOLLEN MANUFACTURERS ^f this
KINGDOM.
FRANCIS MONK, and others, having made several Attempts to obtein a Commission,
to Empower them to put in Execution the Laws for Prohibiting the Exportation of
WOOL etc. Petitioned the Late King of Blessed Memory to that end, the
Consideration whereof was referred to the Right Honorable the Lords of the
Committee of Trade, who made their Report thereupon, which, together with the
said Petition by Order of Council, was referred to the Right Honorable the
Lords of the Treasury; and their Lordships, for their better Information,
referred the Matter, with the said Monk's Proposal and Papers, to the Attorney
General, to the Commissioners of the Customs, and the Hamburgh Company; who
having severally made their Respective Reports, the said Proposers not being
recommended thereby, as Persons fitting for so great an undertaking, their
Project took no effect.

And in regard, some of the said Proposers, in former Sessions of Parliament,
had endeavored to set on foot new Bills, to alter and abate the Penalties of
the Laws, already made, to Prohibit the said Exportation; it was doubted,
whether they were Persons qualified for a hearty carrying on the pretended
Prohibition.

Therefore, in July 1684, Benjamin Craker, Charles Craker, and Joseph Reeve,
Staplers, William Brewer, John Wood, John Walkley, Richard Scott, Thomas Small,
Thomas Crundal and several others, Clothiers and Factors, hearing of the
Attempt of the said Monk and his Partners, Petitioned the Lords of the
Treasury, setting forth, that the said Proposal (if honestly intended) being of
great Moment, and universal Concern to the Kingdom, was not fitting to be
trusted in the hands of such (or any) private Persons; and therefore prayed
their Lordships to recommend the same to the Hamborough, East India, Turkey,
African, Russia, and Eastland Companies, and other general Woollen Traders, of
whose Prudence and Integrity there could be no suspicion, to consider the said
Proposals, and to report to their Lordships such Rules and Methods, as they
thought sit, for the Effectual putting the said Laws in Execution.

In answer to which Petition, the Right Honorable the Lords of the Treasury,
by their Letters to the said several Companies, of the 25 of July 1684; taking
notice that the effectual Prohibition of the Exportation of WOOL would be of
great advantage, not only to his Majesty, but all his Trading Subjects,
Transmitting also a Copy of the said Proposal and Papers, desired the said
Companies, or some Members by them Deputed, to meet together, to consider the
said Papers, and report such rules and methods, for putting the said
Prohibition in execution, as they should conceive most effectual for that end;
and to inform their Lordships, whether they were willing to take the care of
seeing the Laws put in Execution, for Prohibiting the said Exportation.

Hereupon, several Members were Deputed by each of the said Companies of
Merchants to meet; who at a Conference together agreed, that the said
Prohibition could not be effected, without raising a Fund to defray the expense
thereof, and that it was not fit to put the KING to the charge of it; but
rather that all the Woollen Artificers and Traders should contribute thereunto,
that so those Persons, who feel the said Greivance, should be instrumental and
assisting in the Redressing thereof.

The Factors of Blackwel-Hall did also choose one or two Persons out of each
Hall, to attend the Committee of the said Companies of Merchants; who having
declared their readiness to Contribute to so good a Work, several of them
entered into a Subscription to pay voluntarily several Rates upon all sorts of
Woollen Manufactures consigned to them ( viz.) for every Cloth 2d. for every
Searge 1d. and so proportionably for all other sorts of the English Woollen
Manufacture, which Subscription was cheerfully Signed by several of the most
eminent Factors.

Now because, at several Sessions of Parliament, there have not been wanting
some Persons, who have attempted to overthrow the wholesome Laws, already made
for prohibiting the said Exportation. And therefore it is likely, the same
Designs will again be set on foot, either by the same or such like Persons.

And the Session of Parliament being near approaching, for the prevention
thereof it is proposed, that all manner of Woollen Manufacturers in the several
Counties of England, would join in the said Subscription for the carrying on so
good a Work, by so light and easy Contribution as aforesaid, only for an
Experiment of three Years, that so the Progress already made therein may not be
obstructed; the Merchants being likewise willing to Contribute thereunto
considerably. And for the satisfaction of all Persons assisting in so great a
Work, that there may be no just Objection against it: It is Proposed, that the
Clothiers and Factors shall have Liberty to appoint Members out of themselves
to join with the Merchants, deputed to consider of the Method, and dispose of
the Moneys collected, that it may be impossible the Contribution should be
abused or employed to other Purposes; it being not likely to imagine, that,
where there is such a joint united Assistance of all manner of Persons
concerned in the Wollen-Trade, so many incorporated Companies of Merchants and
others concerned, the Clothiers and Factors by their Deputies being present and
privy at all Consultations, there should be any Miscarriage.

And the said Prohibition can never be Managed with that Candor and
Vprightness, by private and particular Persons. Who, as they declare undertake
it, to get Money by it; Whereas these Companies do propose to spend both their
Time and Money without any manner of Design of private Benefit to themselves,
but with a constant Annual Charge, freely Contributed for the Public Good.

Now for as much, as, in former Sessions of Parliament, the whole matter of the
said mischiefs of Exportation has been thoroughly considered, and Concluded,
that the Acts in force against the said Exportation, wanted only Explanation
and Execution; to the end that a short Bill to that purpose may pass, this next
Session, its desired that the Woollen Manufacturers, in the several Counties,
will engage their respective Members to promote the same.

FINIS.

