WEALTH DISCOVERED: Or, An Essay upon a late EXPEDIENT For taking away all
IMPOSITIONS, AND Raising a REVENUE without TAXES.

Published, and presented to his most Excellent Majesty, King Charles the II.

By F. C. a Lover of his Country.

Whereunto is added his Majesty's Gracious Order.

LONDON, Printed by E. C. for A. Seile over against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street, 1661.

TO THE KING'S Most Excellent Majesty.
Most Gracious and Royal Sovereign,
IF so ill-promising an Author (upon so fair a tender of freeness to serve his
Country gratis) may gain credit, Great Sir, accept this as a discovery of
Richer Mines then any the King of Spain is Owner of; and for wealth not much
inferior to what Solomon possessed in all his Glory.

Royal Sir, I humbly take leave to put you in mind of the great increase of
Wealth and Honor which King Henry the Seventh lost (or mist) by distrusting
and refusing the offer of Christopher Columbus: And of this your Majesty may
(as King Henry the Seventh could not) make an experiment without expending
Blood or Treasure: Therefore, out of Duty to your Majesty, and Love to my
Native Country, (your impoverished Kingdom) I most humbly pray, that it may
have your favorable recommendation to the Council of Trade, which is most
proper to gain it reputation; since your Royal bounty, and Fatherly kindness
to your People, has so naturalized their affections to your Person, and their
obedience to your Precepts, (as it is their Duty;) that I hope they will
unanimously pray, that God Almighty will make your Reign to be long and
victerious here, and your new Crown of Gold to become an Everlasting Crown of
Glory hereafter; which is the hearty Prayer of

Your Majesty's most faithful Subject and Servant, Fran. Cradocke.

CHARLES R,

RIght trusty and right well beloved, and trusty and well beloved, We greet you
well. Being given to understand that Fran. Cradocke Esquire has written a fuller
Explanation upon his Expedient late published, for Raising a great Yearly
Revenue by the Ease of the People; We do out of our desire to promote so
acceptable an undertaking (in case it may be effected) specially recommend it
to your speedy consideration, and if upon debate you find the same practicable
in England, then to consult how it may be done with most accommodation of
Trade, and ease of the People, and report to Us accordingly: And Our Royal will
and pleasure further is to order, and We do hereby order and appoint, That the
said Francis Cradock, William Godolphin, Geo. March, Samuel Hartlib, and Henry
Ford, Esquires, Sir Peter Leare, and Sir William Petty, be added to Our Council
of Trade, as amply as if they had been by Us at first constituted. Given at Our
Court at White Hall, the 12th day of April, in the Thirteenth year of Our Reign.

To Our Right Trusty and Right well beloved, and to Our trusty and well
beloved, Our Council of Trade. By his MAJESTY'S command. Will. Morice.

To his Excellency, GEORGE, Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Torrington, Baron Monck
of Potheridge, Beauchamp and Teyes; Captain General of all his Majesty's
Forces by Land, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and of the County of Devon, Master
of the Horse, and Gentleman of the Bedchamber to his Majesty, one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, Knight of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, and the (never to be forgotten) most renowned and happy Restorer of a
most Gracious King, and his Kingdoms to their Rights and Liberties.
May it please your Grace,
It Is observed, that the best Physicions having cured and cleans^d the body
from all foul humors, do prescribe their Patient some wholesome diet or
admonition for prev^nting future Maladies; which directs me to the
consideration of England, a monstrous body without it is Head (late your
Patient) and so full of gross Distempers, that all the advice and help of
Europe proved fruitless in order to its recovery, until by Divine Providence
your Grace alone become the most Excellent Physician, that without violating
her Body, or bl^eding the least Member, ^ath cured her, to the admiration of
the World, and your perpetual honor.

Most N^ble Sir, I may not ask what wholesome Diet or Admonition you have
prescribed to prevent the like evils, knowing it is filter for me to hear the
Proclamation then to peep in at the key hole of your Councel-chamber: Yet if
this which I humbly and freely offer (in the behalf of my Country) may receive
the honor of your N^ble Count^nance, and (as you find it to deserve) your
furtherance at the Council of Trade, (whither the Kings Majesty is graciously
pleased to recommend it) I have an assured ^^^fidence, it will prove a means to
raise two Millions yearly, by the ease of the people; which (if well employed)
can prove no prejudice to the future well-being, health, and fl^urishing estate
of England.

My Lord, that this so great a Revenue may be yearly raised, and the people
eased, is truth, and I again affirm it; not out of design to prejudice or
please others, or to gain the favor of any to my self, but only to enduce some
to believe, and encourage all to promote, so great a Benefit, that concerns
both the King and his good Subjects in general; whose Interest I ever prized
before my own preservation, as your Grace is my witness, that knew my
integrity before you had made known your intentions of giving this opportunity
to pray in public (as I hope all will) for his Majesty, and your Grace to
live to see his long and happy Reign over us. I am

My LORD, Your Excellencies most humble Servant, Fran. Cradock.

THE PREFACE.
Courteous READER,
THE Heads I have laid down in this Book to be considered, are such as though
very useful in order to the Temporal good both of King and Subjects, to be
believed; yet are least labored in by any to be understood: and therefore the
more subject both to question and doubting, especially with men of the sharpest
wits, the most public spirits, and of the richest endowments, whom Nature has
prepared for the search of highest matters of public Concernment; from whose
penetrating, fiery wits, will most probably arise such a confident kind of
framing Objections, to themselves appearing so unanswerable, that my hopes of
seeing so advantageous a design reduced into practice, are only supported by
the delight I have taken in giving many Gentlemen and others (so qualified)
such satisfaction in their greatest Objections, that they are now become
favorers of the Proposal; and by finding many not only of my Judgment, but
some ambitious to share in the Project.

I could have wished that some excellent Master Workman, more plentifully
abounding both in leisure and Learning, would have taken this task upon him,
whereby the many and great advantages to all, so far exceeding the prejudice to
any, by the erecting such Banks as were propounded in my last, might have had a
better Illustration, assuring you, it is the public Interest, not private ends
or ambition to be esteemed an Author of this Expedient, that have prompted me
to a second Essay; the subject whereof I know to be of such importance both to
his Sacred Majesty and faithful Subjects, that I could be content to be
esteemed any thing so the design might take effect, in order to so public
ends.

I confess, some have written before of Banks, and under that title
endeavored to promote it in public; but it was of Banks of another nature:
And though others, for want of better information, fancy this in effect the
same matter: I answer such, That no man yet ever wrote of Banks in this manner,
desiring whomsoever pretends I have done him Prejudice, to do himself right in
Print; which will be answered, and the Controversy be decided like that of
Solomon between the two Harlots: For such reports tend more to destroy then
advance or further the Proposal; and I may truly take up that Excuse for all
incident Errors which Lucreti^^ does even in this very case, that

Avia Pieridum peragro loca, nullius ante
Trita solo --
I confess, the Books which I have seen written upon the subject of Banks,
(for I go not beyond the compass of mine own Library) are Malynes in his Lex
M^r^atorin, Lewis Roberts in his Map of Commerce, Henry Robertson in his Book
entitled, Trades Increase (...) England 's Safety: and Samuel Lamb, in his
Book styled, Seasonable Observations: In all which I find nothing more then an
Encouragement for us in England, to imitate others in Forain parts, or a
Declaration of what is now practiced in Holland, Genoway, Florence, etc. and
that also by Banks of Money, which neither there take away the Peoples
burdens, nor augment the public Revenue: But the task I have now undertaken,
is to prove and show how Banks may be here erected without Money, that shall
answer all the ends of Banks of Money established abroad: How all men wanting
Money may be supplied at a low Interest, to their satisfaction (yet not with
Money;) How the Stock of the Kingdom may be increased to five times more then
ever this Nation was owner of in Coin (of as true an intrinsique value as Gold
and Silver,) with an increase both of Forain and Inland Trade accordingly also
without Money; and how a very great yearly Revenue, exceeding any the former
Kings of England, may be thereby raised in Money: And all to be done by the
ease of, and accommodation to, the people. But as I must not make the door
wider then the room, neither may I be larger in promising, least I incur the
censure of some Vtopian Student; so may I not omit the remembrance of Mr.
William Potter, whose name I find written in a Book published by the ingenuous
Author Samuel Hartlib Esquire entitled his Legacy of Husbandry, wherein are some
hints of a Land-bank, or an improvement of Lands, never thought on in former
Ages, contained in a Manuscript written by the said Mr. Potter. Which although
I have not perused, yet by discourse had with the Gentleman, I cannot but
render him an Ingenuous person, and of a public spirit: I wish there were
more such that would labor to promote so profitable a design, or that would
but spare time to read what is here written, wherein I presume many will
receive so good satisfaction, as that they will become furtherers of it in what
they may.

My request to all is, that none will pre-judge of it before the reading; and
that those who begin to read part, will end the whole: which is not long
considering the subject; and if not thereby satisfied, the Author will be ready
at all times, more fully to explain it for the understanding of such as desire
it, or make amends in reading twice as much of theirs to as little purpose.

From my Lodgings at the Lion and Sugar loaf at Charing Cross, the 25 of April,
1661. By a Well-wisher of his Countries good, Fran. Cradocke.

Wealth Discovered.
SUch is the unhappiness of our Age, that most men delight more in the enjoying
what they have, then industriously to seek for what they want or have not; and
it is seldom seen of the few Ingenious persons, who (out of love to their
Neighbors or Native Country) expend the greatest part and prime of their
years in study to contrive the public good, that such endeavors are held
acceptable, further then to be scanned for information, to show us, how far our
particular may stand concerned, or rather how we may apply it so as to reap a
singular benefit without admitting others to share therein.

By which means, and for want of some better encouragement by public
Authority, I presume many the ingenious Inventions of persons small in power,
and of weak Interest, have been either stifled in their birth, or laid asleep,
to be awakened again some years after, when perhaps they come presented to the
World by an ambitious Stepfather, so metamorphosed, to make the people believe
it is of his own begetting, that wanting all natural helps they thrive not at
all, or at least so little to purpose, that they bring a scandal and reproach
to others of worth and desert, insomuch that the name of Projector is with us
esteemed and given in derision; when the Ancients attributed the most Divine
Honors to the Authors of Noble Inventions, and gave only the Honor or Title
of Heroes to the founders of Cities, Lawmakers, or the Deliverers of their
Country from Tyranny, and the like: Which they did upon this just ground, for
that the benefits of new Inventions may extend to all mankind universal, but
the good of Civil Achievements can respect but some particulars; and of the
many profitable and rare Inventions found out for the help and accommodation of
mankind throughout the World, how few can England (especially of late years)
boast of, or claim a share in as Authors, to her great dishonor abroad, and
small encouragement of Ingenuity at home.

Besides, let us but consider the virtue, efficacy and consequences of three
Mechanical Inventions but late found out, (and that were unknown to the
Ancients) to wit, the Art of Printing, Gunpowder, and the Mariners Needle,
which have so changed the estate and condition of almost all things in the
universal world; the first in the matter of Learning, the second in War, and
the last in Navigation, that even the very manners of men, and all other
affairs of Kingdoms, Countries and qualities whatsoever, are become the better
governed, instructed, enriched, supported, and accommodated by those
Inventions: and why may there not be (as without peradventure there are) as
worthy secrets yet undiscovered, or at least not yet reduced into practice?

I speak not this in favor of Innovations or Inventions, whereby to invite
others into more then a reasonable esteem of them; neither would I have any to
speak in a condemning or deriding way of such which perhaps may seem altogether
impossible to them (as being not suited to their apprehensions) yet to the
judgments of others may at first sight (or at least upon mature consideration)
appear most practicable and easy. For we know that speaking and writing have
their several graces, and things livened by the expression of the Speaker,
oft-times take well, which afterward upon mature review seem either
superfluous or flat: I shall therefore prosecute my purpose, intended for the
advantage of Trade and ease of public burdens, under the most distinct heads
and denominations, for the more clear explanation of the parts thereof; in
hopes that it may give it way with diverse (such as my self) to whom many things
of like nature, at the first reading has seemed a mystery (and so laid aside)
to invite the more to the Patronage of so beneficial an Invention.

1. Mankind subsisting in a state of Property and not of Community, and no one
man having property in all things needful for his use, it was necessary in case
of borrowing or buying what another had, to introduce the use of some things,
which by the common consent and esteem of men might pass as current in Law,
either in pledge or purchase of other things, and be held and taken as a
valuable consideration.

This Prerogative of denomination or setting an Extrinsique value or sovereign
stamp, has at all times been given or allowed the King or supreme power, and
in process of time the things introduced to be current, have been diverse and
various: As in the Kingdom of Tombu^a in Africa, Shells; in Massa Iron, in
Molina Glass Beads; in Bengala a fruit resembling the Almond for small
payments, and the Sculls of their slain Enemies for great, in Aethiopia Stones
of Salt, in Guinney Shells, in Pegue Leather, in New Spain Cacao, in Peru Coco,
in New Spain at another time Cacao and Silver, and Copper and Silver in Old
Spain, and in the same places we read of Pepper and Parchment at some times
made current, to answer exchange, as in a siege, or the like, for want of
sufficient of the aforesaid Money, yet by all these several and invaluable
sorts of Coin, each person held his due Propriety, and trade stood there
governed under a good Decorum: for their manner was, (and in many places is to
this day) that any man might have as much of that Coin as he needed to live by,
not exceeding the proportion of Goods which he is owner of; which makes either
of those Coyns as valuable as the things themselves, or as the product thereof
in Money, and is no other but a kind of Bank, whereby the Owner is supplied by
imaginary Money; the which whosoever takes is excused by the Pledge, and so the
next and the next, in infinitum, and no man hurt, or at any inconvenience for
want of Money, for this is current, as well because of the Sovereigns Law, and
value of the Deposite; as if he had Money, he could do no more with it then
with this, for he could not eat Money, nor can he eat this, Money was but
current, and so is this.

So that you see those Coyns or stamps of Sovereignty were originally ordained
for no other end then to serve, as now they do, for a common measure of all
things: And time that great Grandfather of Invention, having found by
experience, that amongst the diversity of Metalls none was more excellent then
Gold and Silver; the Governors in former Ages, thought fit to make them the
most general Medium of Exchange in Commerce, and many (as well for private as
public ends) have reduced them into a certain weight, impression,
denomination or proportion in being current, as by experience we find
throughout Europe, and many other parts of the world.

Yet are none of these reductions absolutely necessary, so as the value be
ascertained. The Gold in Cbina is not current by impression or denomination, or
in solid bodies, but kept in Powder; when they pass it away, it is by a double
trial of measure and weight: There is no powder of such a weight, as an ounce
will go into that little measure which Gold will, so if measure and weight
agree it is current.

The payments of the Ancients were by the weight of tried Silver, and it was
attested as at Goldsmiths-hall, and not by denomination or stamp of certain
value, as we find in Genesis the 23. Abraham bought a burial place, for which he
weighed 400 Shekels of Silver current amongst Merchants, which custom to this
day remains in many places of the East Indies, as in Maccau, etc. where neither
the Inhabitants are held to be disingenuous, nor can the manner of giving a
Sovereign stamp or impression to Gold and Silver be esteemed a mystery amongst
them, when (from us and other Nations) they daily receive Coined Gold and
Silver by weight, and being melted into wedges or pieces fit for that purpose,
will pay it again in like manner, concluding it is the easier and safer way both
to pay and receive in that kind (as I conceive it may) where all men go
furnished (as there they do) with fit Instruments for that purpose.

So it is not the manner or figure, solidity or dust of metalls, that
necessarily make it current, but the certainty and security of value by which
it may be current from one to another, which I hope is sufficiently proved. I
shall therefore in the second place show how payments are and may be made upon
the Credit of Money, as well as by Money in specie: Thirdly, that Goods, Jewels
and other Pledges, may supply such credit of Money: Fourthly, that Land may be
as good, if not better security then Money or Jewels; and then fifthly show how
such credit or security of Jewels, Goods and Lands may pass in payment from one
Kingdom, Country, place or person, to another, and be esteemed of as good a
value, and acceptable as Gold and Silver.

2. I presume it is known to most how usual a thing it is for a person indebted
to make over a debt due to him for satisfaction of a third person, which being
accepted, is oft-times transferred in like manner to a fourth, for a debt due
by the first Assignee, and so on before any Money is either told or received;
so that in a short time all are accommodated by transferring the credit or
ownership of the Money only; and three of the four persons excused from twice
telling over, receiving and paying the same to and from each other: The
consideration whereof together with the many fruitless Journeys usually made
for Money where due, gave (as I conceive) the first light, and was the only
inducement for the erecting Banks in Foraign parts; which though I confess was
in it self sufficient, yet I can sum up a most incredible number of advantages
and accommodations besides, of much greater importance, which is concluded fell
in more by accident then design, (whereof I shall speak more hereafter) and the
utility of transferring such Bills of Debt, having once introduced that novelty
of Banks amongst the Florentine Merchants (which I find to be the first
founders) the Genoes, Venetian, and since Holland and the Low Countries, have
imitated their example, but none as yet taken on them to exceed their method,
which for information to those not well acquainted in Trade, I shall give a
short description of the nature of Banks in general.

A Bank is an incorporated number or Society of sufficient men of credit and
Estates, joined together in a Stock as it were, for keeping several men's Cash
in one Treasury, and making payment thereof by assignation, transferring the
ownership of Money from one man's account to another, so as the propriety
remains still entire to the right Owner, and will always be found on his
account, until transferred by his order to some some other persons: Insomuch
that if a person wanting Money can but procure credit in Bank, he may make as
good payment by transferring such credit without it, (as for Example) Suppose
that all men dealing together in London, should each of them deposite in the
hands of one Casheer so much Money as they use to turn in their Trades; and the
said Casheer by their appointments does transfer the ownership thereof from
one man's account to another, in his Book of their Accounts; it is all one
having a trusty Casheer, as if he to whom it is turned over had it in specie,
for there he has it in credit, and may have it in specie when he will, as well
as if he (or each of them) had a special Casheer in his house.

And in truth the Banks of the Low Countries and Italy, are as it were the
common Cash of the Cities or Countries wherein they are: Thither are millions
of Money brought and left in Bank, and being there once deposited, remain
scores of years untoucht, only the Ownership thereof is transferred in manner
as aforesaid from one man's account to another, (it may be ten times or oftener
in twelve Months) by which diverse Merchants and others have thousands in Bank
whereof they never touched nor saw a penny, esteeming such payment in Bank by
assignation to be better then payment in specie by ten shillings in a hundred
pounds, as preventing the trouble and loss of time in receiving, beside the
hazard of clipped and counterfeit Money.

So that I hope there is no ingenuous Reader but will allow that payments are
and may be made upon the Credit of Money, as well as by Money in specie, by
transferring the Ownership thereof either by Bill or in Bank, from one person
to another, both which are of daily practice in the Low Countries and other
parts abroad, and found to be of great advantage in Trade, the first of Bills
being much used in England, under the name of Bills of Exchange, though in as
improper a method (for want of Laws suitable to those in Holland) as the Shops
of L^mbard-street (which are Banks in effect) may be esteemed, when compared
with the richest and best governed Banks of other Nations: I shall proceed to
my third Allegation, that Goods, Jewels and other Pledges may supply such
Credit of Money, which is a great part of my first proposition for the erecting
Banks without Money in England.

3. That as there are Banks of Money hoorded up in Nummis numeratis coined and
denominated Shillings, Half-crowns, Dollers, etc. (which I know will not be
denied) why then may there not upon the consideration of intrinsique value, be
a Bank wherein not only Money coined, but Wedges and Vessels of Gold or Silver
approved for their fineness and goodness by an Assay M^ster, or by some such
course as at Goldsmiths-hall: And these by the weight and fineness being
received into Bank at a value, may lie there for so much, and be as good
security for their value as Baggs of Dollers; and give as current credit when
occasion shall be, to answer so much Money in specie.

Of this we see daily practice in Holland by their Storehouses there called
Lumbers, whither if any person bring either Bars of Silver, Jewels, Plate or
other Goods not soon perishable, the Owner of such Pledge shall have a Bill
obliging the Master or Keeper of such Storehouse or Lumber (who are men of
credit) to pay at a day some time after so much Money as the Goods, Plate or
Jewels does lie deposited for; which Bills are esteemed so good payment, that
such person may buy any other Goods to that value, assigning over the said Bill
for satisfaction; and likewise the first Assignee may pass the same in like
manner to a second, and that second to a third, and so one peradventure to a
sixth or eighth person, before the Bill become payable; so that hereby upon the
bare credit of him that keeps the Lumber, all those several persons are paid to
their satisfaction, the Lumber secured by the Goods deposited, and the Owner
thereof accommodated at a reasonable Interest, until he can either sell or
redeem his Goods; which if he had first sold at a price current, might perhaps
have yielded him the less by twenty or thirty in the hundred.

So then considering the foundation and use of Banks, is credit and security
between such as are therein concerned, I humbly submit whether such security or
credit in Bank may not as well be by Bullion, by Jewels of known and approved
truth and value; by rich Pictures or Hangings deposited, some of which have
been esteemed at a thousand pound a Jewel, Picture or suit of Hangings; but
this being already reduced into practice in foraign parts, upon so reasonable
grounds, I conceive it useless to enlarge further on proof that it may be made
practicable in England, since the same in effect is done by several Brokers
already. And if this be reason, that the Banks may have security and give
credit upon such other things as well as Money; why not upon other Merchandise
that is not periturum or wasting as it lies, but of a firm and enduring value,
such as are Linnings, old and new Draperies, Silks, Iron, Sugars, and diverse
other Commodities? Or why not upon Wines, Tobaccoes, Fruits, and the like, for
some small time, to be either redeemed or sold upon a day certain, before the
same may become either decayed, rotten or perished.

It is observable, that Tradesmen and Merchants, who have great store of Goods
lying by them, but no Moneys, are fain sometimes to sit still three, four or
six Months, till such a season, Fair or Voyage, and cannot trade the while,
for want of some ready Money or perhaps credit; but if by depositing of their
Goods in Bank, they may there have credit as others have for Dollars, Plate or
Jewels, they may presently be dealing again, and a much vaster Trade be driven
then now there is by most particular persons, which will comprehend the general
good of Trade: This admitted, (which upon consideration of what has been
already laid down, I presume no ingenuous person will deny) makes way to the
main proposition, That Lands may be as good, if not better security then Money
or Jewels.

4. To my purpose in hand, I conceive it requisite to look into some
inconveniences which the latter Ages have found in those metalls of Gold and
Silver, which are, First, that there has not been (at least not yet) a
sufficient quantity of either of them to supply all Nations toward that
increase of Trade which a greater Stock would do, and is most necessary in
order thereunto; it being an undeniable truth, that the more there is of Money
in a Nation, the greater is their Trade, and the quicker are all returns made
upon Commodities, or what else Money is ordinarily employed in.

A second inconvenience is, that such Kingdoms or Countries whose Mines of
either Gold or Silver are but inconsiderable (if any at all) must (for the
obtaining a thing so necessary to the upholding of ordinary Commerce) part with
their best Staple Commodities oft-times to great disadvantage, to purchase what
they want from that great Merchant of Gold and Silver, the King of Spain;
whereas could there be means used at home to supply it otherwise without paying
for, being liable or beholding to any other Prince, it would not only render
this Kingdom so much richer in general, but prove advantageous to all
particular Interests whatsoever.

The third Inconvenience, found more particularly in Silver, (the most common
metal of the two) is the same as I have already laid down, as being dangerous
to be kept in a private Cash, continual carrying it from one place to another
both dangerous and troublesome, besides the time spent in counting it, and
hazard of receiving clipped and bad Money, are not the least prejudices to Trade
in a Kingdom, from which with other causes of inconvenience, (as I have already
spoken of) arose that most admirable invention of a Bank, which (amongst
Merchants) has approved it self to be of excellent use for the dispatch of
business in payments: But the inconveniences not yet remedied thereby are,

First, that nothing of value besides Money has been yet introduced for a
Medium in Commerce; the necessary requisite to a Bank being in all parts Money,
without or beyond which a Bank can neither be raised or extended; since the
having more credit current in Bank then there is Money to answer it, is no
other then a public Cheat, and to be accounted so much worse then in any
private person, in that Rulers have (by their Office) a more immediate Image of
God, and are (in some places of Scripture) honored with that name; And shall
not the Judge of all the Earth, or of all Nations, do right?

Secondly, that Money deposited in any known place, proves not only a
temptation to the Sword, but (if once surprised) becomes a certain loss to all
the Owners, which is (as I conceive) the reason so few Banks are erected under
Monarchies; most men in these latter Ages being not only afraid to trust each
other, but too many doubtful of relying upon the Faith and Honor of their
Prince or Sovereign, the consideration whereof (I confess) put me upon the
study of contriving some Engine to take off that Remora, and to frame such a
method for Banks in England, as will wholly obviate that great objection.

Thirdly, Banks have been (hitherto) applied to the dispatch of business of
payments amongst Merchants only, and not (ordinarily) to the concernments of
the rest of the people of the Nation where the Bank is kept or erected.

Having now hinted at the inconveniences of these Metals (Gold and Silver) in
which this Medium of Commerce or universal Credit has formerly been placed,
together with the imperfection of Banks, which (though an excellent Invention)
by reason of their being grounded upon Money only, are but a lame and short
remedy to the inconveniences aforesaid; I shall now offer to your
consideration, that such defects may be supplied in this Kingdom by a Land
Bank, or Bank wherein the security of Lands may pass and be held of equal value
or credit with any other species whatsoever (as in truth it is) and when
reduced into practice, will be found to answer all those ends for which Money
was first ordained.

The Lands of England, I presume, may be estimated at near twenty times the
value of all the Sterling Money remaining in the Kingdom: For it is conceived
upon the debate of some ingenious men, that of the twenty two Millions Coined
in and since the Reign of King Edward the sixth, scarce the Moiety is left in
the Nation, the other being either exported, hoorded up or melted down; so that
this small Stock would receive a very great addition, if but the value of a
Tenth part of all the real Estates in England were employed in Trade, which by
the raising of Bank-credit upon Lands may be multiplied to the Moyetie; two
thirds or three fourths (if not more) of all the Lands of the Nation, and the
Lands remain notwithstanding in the possession of the same Proprietor
unaltered; whereby that great defect of the general want of Stock, will not
only be supplied, but such an honest Usurer (I mean the Bank) will be likewise
found willing at all times to lend Money upon reasonable security at three per
cent. for supplying all men's occasions though dealing or owing ten times more
then at present.

The second and third inconveniences of purchasing Gold and Silver to our
disadvantage from others, and the danger, trouble and loss by keeping, paying
and receiving Money in specie, will be prevented, the one by a sufficient
supply of Credit instead of Money, the other by making payments by assignation
without Money; which by consequence does likewise answer the three other
inconveniences not yet rectified by Banks upon a Money foundation: But the
whole yet depending upon this Issue, Whether Lands may be made as good security
as Money, Plate or Jewels, which I affirm it may, as at present it is in such
Countries and places wherein every man's real Estate and claim in Land is
registered, and where it is impossible underhand to incumber an Estate; for
there an Estate in Land is as sure and certain a security and pledge as Plate
or any other Goods of a man's own mark or making: I shall only instance Tuscany
(where the Prince is so absolute, yet his Ministers so punctual in payment, and
other dealings for their Princes peculiar service, as no Merchant can be more)
there all Lands being registered in an Office for that purpose, the true Title
thereof is seen in an instant, so that no Land may be there subject to any
Encumbrance, but such as may appear with the Register of each precinct: (much
like our Copy hold Land in England, which cannot be encumbered but by surrender,
which must appear upon the Court Roll, unless it be by Lease, which a
Copyholder has license to let, and in such case the Lessee is obliged to
enter his Lease) and if any man there desires to have credit in Bank upon his
Land, he shall be as soon as any admitted, paying Five per cent. the accustomed
Interest there current: And as his Majesty in England, so the Bank there to be
first satisfied in case of Bankrupt; so that in this way the Duke of Tuscany
obtains a great yearly Revenue, and in truth his Banks are governed the nearest
to the way or method I here intend, of any Banks in Europe, or the whole World:
The only reason (as I conceive) that they have not there taken upon them to
regulate their method, and bring the whole profit of their Banks into the Dukes
peculiar Treasury, being obstructed by the infinite great sums of Money left by
particular persons intayled upon their Posterity, which by a Law made upon the
first erecting the Florentine Banks is never to be removed or alienated, and by
report is not there in Bank to be returned in specie, if it were to be had out
upon demand: But the interest of Five in the hundred being duly paid, the
principal may not be questioned. From hence I cannot but observe that great
advantage which England might have above other Nations, if but sensible of it;
for such a Bank of Credit being here once erected, it will bring in the same
advantage to his Majesty as both the Duke of Florence, the Dutch and others
have to themselves, and all those whose Estates depend upon or in the Banks, to
whom the said Duke and States of Holland pay great yearly sums for Interest,
which his Majesty of England will be freed from, and receive the whole profits
de claro, when for the reasons aforesaid (with others to be given) neither
Dutch, Florentine, Genoes, or other Bankers whatsoever can either imitate or
follow the Example here intended.

Now having showed you, that payments are and may be made upon the credit of
Money as well as by Money in specie; that Goods, Jewels, and other Pledges may
supply that Credit, since it serves for no other purpose but as a pawn or
ground of security for making good the Credit that runs current instead
thereof; there is no doubt to be made, but that Lands being morgaged to a Bank,
would serve as well and better for such a pawn which cannot be removed, or made
away by force or fraud, as sums of Money lying long in one place may, neither
is it a temptation to an Enemy as Banks of Money are: There only remains to
show, how such credit or security of Jewels, Goods and Lands may pass in
payment from one Kingdom, Country, place or person to another, and be esteemed
of as good a value, and acceptable as Gold and Silver.

5. This will be best effected by Banks; which as they are in themselves are
nothing else in effect but places where men pawn or deposite their Moneys for
obtaining current Credit, as that which they may keep with less danger, and
assign to another with less trouble: But previous to the practice thereof in
England, these things are necessary.

1. That the Kingdom be divided into a hundred Divisions, or some such like
number, and in the midst of each Precinct a convenient place be erected for a
standing and constant Bank or Registry.

2. That by Law all Estates in Lands, Houses or Rents, either for Lease of
years, Lives, or in Fee, be enjoined to be registered at the Bank of each
Precinct, as also all Claims or other interest pretended to such Estates, with
all Morgages, Purchases or Bequests at any time to be made on such Estates in
like manner, by all Persons resident in England, within six Months from a day
certain; by such as are out of England, and by this side the Aequinoctial Line,
in twelve Months, and those beyond the Line in two years, upon penalty of
being barred his claim, interest or title to so much of it as shall be disposed
after the expiration of the several times limited, without other remedy then
against the person that sold, disposed or morgaged the same.

3. That Proclamation be made thereof in all Cities and Towns Corporate, and
read in all Parish Churches throughout England and Wales: And that care may be
taken to send such Proclamations to all Governors of Plantations abroad,
Ambassadors in foraign Kingdoms, and Consuls or other public Ministers,
entrusted by any Society or Corporation in parts beyond the Seas.

4. That the Justices of Peace within each Precinct be ordered to send for the
names of twelve of the most able honest men in each Parish, unto whom at the
end of six Months, an exact Duplicate or Copy of such Entries distinctly, as
they belong to each Manor, Town, Parish or Tithing within each Precinct should
be sent respectively, with instructions to inquire into the truth thereof, and
whether any the Lands, Rents or Estates be over-valued therein, and how much
per Ann. and whether they know or believe that any Orphan, Feme Covert, persons
Lunatic or beyond the Seas, have any right or title of claim to any the said
Lands, Rents or Estates, whose claim, title or interest is not therein
mentioned.

5. That at the end of nine Months, a person be sent commissionated from each
Bank, with Interrogatories to the end aforesaid, and having sworn and examined
the said Jury thereupon, (or such other persons as the said Jury shall direct,
for the better clearing any doubt either in the title or value of such Lands or
Estates) return thereof may be made accordingly by the persons employed, who
might also have power and Instructions given him, to leave three of the
properest Persons in every Parish in Commission, whereof two upon the death of
one to choose a third, with whom the Bank upon occasion may at all times
correspond, for satisfaction of any doubt which perhaps might aftetwards arise.

6. That a method be agreed upon and used alike in all the Banks, for the most
exact way and manner of keeping a Register of all Estates, Titles, Conveyances,
Encumbrances and Bequests, so as no Deed or Conveyance may be entered at large,
and yet all things appear plain and easy to be found or seen: For I am humbly
of opinion, that the true meaning of any Conveyance may be best taken in fewer
words then the Deed it self, as for Example: Suppose A. purchase an Estate of
B. to himself and the Heirs of his body for ever, and for want of such Heirs,
then the one moiety of such Estate to go to some charitable use, as building an
Almes-house in the Parish of C. for so many poor people, and the other moiety
to D. and the Heirs male of his body lawfully to be begotten, and for want of
such Heirs then for 99 years to such Daughters as D. shall leave at his
decease, in Coheirship with the remainder in-tail to the first Heir Male
lawfully to be begotten upon any the Coheirs or Daughters of D. and for want of
Issue of D. then to E. and his Heirs in like manner; and for any Covenant made
between the Devisor and Devisee, it may be also abbreviate (yet so as the true
intent may be set forth) that a Deed or Device of two Skins of Parchment, may
in effect or substance be entered at the Registry in less then half a sheet of
Paper.

7. That at the end of twelve Months (for I presume by that time the Registers
will be so completed) that all Encumbrances will appear, or such cautions in
reference to dorment Titles of Infants, persons Lunatic or beyond the Line
(all others being equitably barred) that the Bank may safely adventure to give
credit upon any clear Estate to a half part of the value (or for more to such
reputed, known, honest or able men) as shall enter their Estates as a
foundation of Credit in Bank, for some less value then the Land it self, and
such writing the same in Bank may be made in Law an employed Recognizance, that
the Lands are free of Encumbrance, and of such value as they are entered for.

8. That two years time be allowed for all persons to determine all
Controversies upon any Claim or Title pretended in Law to any Estate, (provided
the same appear entered upon the Register, and the Suit be commenced within six
Months after such Claim, Title or Encumbrance be first entered) and that three
years in like manner be allowed for ending all Causes depending in Chancery,
but no longer; unless the Lord Chancellor or other Judges of the Kings Bench,
Common Pleas, etc. shall think fit to continue the same, and certify so much
to the Bank under whose Precinct the Estate in controversy lies; and that in
such Cases of a longer continuance, security may be given the Defendant (to be
approved in Court) for the making good of damages to be sustained by him in
case of a Non-suite, Plea, Bill or Demurrer, be either overruled or dismissed;
or other deletory or vexatious proceedings, proved to be acted by the Plaintiff.

9. That any person whomsoever having obtained Credit in Bank (by entering his
Lands or other Estate there, or by depositing any Goods, or valuable Pledge
whatsoever) that such Bank credit may by Law be made as undeniably current in
payment for any debt, goods or value, as so much current Coin either in Gold or
Silver (as in truth it is) and that the condition upon the reception of any
morgage of Lands, Estates, or other Pledge, be to pay the Interest for so much
credit in Bank, after the rate of three pounds per cent. in Money the Principal
for all Chattells and Leases determinable, in three months after summons (in
Bank Credit) and for all Lands, Plate or Jewels, within six months from the
day that Bank Credit shall (any way) fail to be current, and in default of such
payment the Lands, Goods and Pledges to be forfeited without redemption, and to
be sold and paid the person who is in truth Owner of the Credit (which will be
easily found, though of many years standing) or otherwise to be divided among
the Owners of the Credit in Bank.

10. That no person be admitted to take Credit in Bank for any sum less then
Twenty pounds, or for less time then one Month (to be accounted, though not so
much) nor shall any payment by assignation be made for any sum under ten
pounds, unless it be to even or balance Accounts; in which case it may be
allowable either for the Bank to pay or receive any sum not exceeding Ten
pounds, to be done upon demand either of the Banker, or other person whatsoever
that desires to balance their Accounts in Bank.

11. That for the encouragement of Trade, such as have Bank Credit in one
place, and are desirous to have it in another (for their accommodation) may
have it remitted, paying after the rate of 10 s. for 100 l. to the Bank; and
also that where there happens yearly to be a standing great Mart or Fair, (like
that of Sturbridge or Way hill) the Bank of that Division may be removed
thither during the Fair time; which will be easily done, since nothing is
required but the Books of Debtor and Creditor; so that whosoever shall have
occasion to buy Goods there, need only to get his Bill of Credit allowed at the
Bank, which may the next day pass for payment, and much trouble and danger of
being robbed etc. to such as live remote, be prevented.

12. That no man shall personate another to obtain Credit in Bank, nor
counterfeit any Bill or Seal of Office, upon pain of death.

13. That where any Estate (being morgaged to the Bank) shall be found to
belong to an Infant, person Lunatic, or that was beyond Sea, the Morgagee
shall be liable to imprisonment without Bayl or Mainprise, and his whole Estate
to Sequestration, until the Credit be discharged, and if found to be done
knowingly, or the person to depart the Country, then to be guilty of death
whenever taken.

And lastly, That this Bank may be established by Law, and his Royal Majesty
invested with the Government thereof, which he may please to refer to
Commissioners, and such Commissioners substitute proper and sufficient Deputies
to manage and govern each Bank, whereof the principal will be in London; and
for the rest, wheresoever seated, it will be proper, that the Post-stages be
directed thither, for their better corresponding with each other: For the
foundation of these Banks being Credit, and such Credit transferrable without
danger, may be remitted from York to London, and from London to Bristoll, or
any other places of like distance in six days, which will not prove the least
advantage in Trade, especially when all Estates are free from Encumbrances,
which will be upon the determination of Suits depending for all matters before
in controversy (for I presume there would be less cause of Law hereafter, if
all obscure Pocket conveyances were discountenanced) which I hope will not be
rendered a prejudice to the Kingdom: And if it shall happen that any person
Lunatic, or Infant, (the only obstruction that Banks cannot take infallible
security) shall afterward lay claims to any Estate in Morgage to the Bank, and
thereupon appeal to his Majesty in equity for relief, (which indeed were hard
measure, less Charity, and not like his Royal bounty to deny) especially being
to such who of all persons living must be esteemed most friendless (that shall
not in that case have some to inspect or discover their Interest or claim
before the time limited for entering thereof be expired) that then in such case
(if the person that took up the Credit in Bank upon the Estate be insolvent)
satisfaction may be made out of the profits of the Bank (which in its proper
place I shall show) will be so considerable, that an inconvenience much greater
then this will no more disparage the design, then the giving of six pence in
Charity will impoverish the Estate of a rich man.

This duly considered, I hope it will be granted, that a Bank may be formed,
wherein real security by Land may be a foundation of Credit in Bank to the
Owner, for some less value then the value of the Land, (as first for a moiety,
and in three or four years when Encumbrances are determined for two third
parts) and that such value may go as current payment in Bank (in manner as
aforesaid) and be turned over from one Kingdom, Country, place or person to
another, as well as if there were so much dead Money lying there.

Now that such credit is as good as Money will appear if it be observed, that
Money it self is nothing else but a kind of security which men receive upon
parting with their Commodities, as a ground of hope or assurance that they
shall be repayed in some other Commodity; since no man would either sell or
part with any for the best Money, but in hopes thereby to procure some other
Commodity or Necessary.

True it is, that Coin which has no intrinsecal value (viz. Money of Brass,
Copper, etc.) though whilst it runs current the Owner may obtain Commodity for
it; yet when the use of it is prohibited (no man being engaged to make it good)
he suffers loss; which if he had security in Lands of sufficient value would be
prevented; whereby it appears, that security answers to the intrinsique value
of Coin.

And that such Credit is as good as Money, is also evident upon this ground:
That Money, if it were a better security then it is, yet it serves only to
supply the intervall of time between the selling of one Commodity and the
buying of another: Now the best assurances in Land are a security sufficient
for the supplying of that intervall: Especially considering that men's Estates
are generally either in Land or Commodities; and in Land (though more certain
then Commodity) yet if absolutely purchased, there may be a loss by its
decrease in value; But if accepted only as a Morgage, that hazard is prevented,
and so becomes the most certain security on Earth, and therefore must needs be
sufficient to supply the short interval between the selling of Land or
Commodity and the buying thereof.

Upon this ground, that securiity is in effect the same thing with Money, it is
that in diverse places of the world it runs current instead of Moneys.

Thus Bills in Flanders obliging the Debtor to pay Money at a certain time, are
accepted by those who esteem of the man as able and sufficient, whereby such
Bills do usually pass from one hand to another, until they become payable.

Thus in Venice, Legorn, and Amsterdam, the security (commonly called Credit)
grounded upon the Depositions of Money in Bank, runs current; and though the
Owners may have Money if they please, yet they choose rather to deal by Credit;
whereby it appears, that it is neither unpossible, strange nor impracticable
for security to be made to supply the place of Money, there being nothing in it
but what is daily acted amongst men.

For first the raising of Credit upon the security of Land is no new thing:
Witness Tuscany, where Lands being registered, are held to be the best and most
infallible security in that Country; and at home in our own Country, as at
Taunton Dean in Somersetshire, the Custom and Tenure of Lands there being the
same in effect; for that no man can alien or purchase an Estate, but it must be
entered and enrolled at an Office kept for that purpose within the Manor: Nor
can any person grant a Lease for any term but it must be there entered in like
manner: And hence it comes that Lands of that Tenure are sold for two, three
and sometimes four years Purchase more then others, though lying but in the
next Parish; and I have heard that some Gentlemen have affirmed, that 100 l. a
year there have proved of greater worth and accommodation to them then 300 l.
elsewhere, for that thereupon they have commanded Money at pleasure out of Bank
(as I may so properly call it) for that many Usurers in those parts do send
their Money thither, upon security of that Land, because an infallible pledge,
and let it out at six per cent. rather then at eight elsewhere (when that was
the Standard of Interest) and as I have been credibly informed, great sums have
been there so taken in and let out again to others at the like advantage, which
puts me in mind of Holland, who did the same thing by us not many years since.

Secondly, the making use of Credit in Bank instead of Money, and transferring
of such Credit from one man to another in Books kept for that purpose is also
practiced in the Banks of Florence, Genoway, Venice, Legorn, Holland, and also
in China under the great Mogull, then where (by report of some that have been
admitted into his Country) there are not more famous Banks and better governed
in the whole World: Now put those two together, and you have the whole of what
I promise in the Preface, To show first how Banks may be here erected without
Money, that shall answer all the ends of Banks of Money in foraign parts;
whereunto I expect some will object,

1. That this Credit of Lands or other Pledges in Bank, though of as real a
value as Gold and Silver, and perhaps may be at some times by some pesons
esteemed as acceptable, yet by others, (or peradventure the same persons) at
other times it may be disliked for diverse reasons, as in the case where a man
has occasion to pay small sums, either for hire of Laborers, or to buy
Necessaries for the back and belly, or for Pocket expenses, which payments are
not to be assigned in Bank, if less then Ten pounds, and for which in truth, a
man cannot upon all occasions go to the Bank.

To this I answer, that the making payments by assignation current in Bank
Credit will be found of so great advantage and ease to all Merchants and others
of any considerable dealing, in curing all these evils following, (viz.)

1. By avoiding the trouble in counting of Money. 2. The danger of loss by
receiving clipped and counterfeit Coin. 3. The many Journeys in vain made to
receive debts. 4. The innumerable Suites of Law about such debts. 5. The
imprisonment of men's persons for debt. 6. Much trouble in keeping Accounts. 7.
Great loss by trusting those that fail. 8. Cousenage in those who (concealing
their Estates) compound with their Creditors. 9. Under-selling the Market for
procuring Money to pay debts. 10. Hard bargains by taking up Ware upon trust.
11. Disabling men from managing their Trades, and taking the advantage of the
Market, their stock being in other men's hands. 12. The transmitting their
Estates without danger, in little time, from one place to another, for the
accommodation of Trade. 13. The furnishing such as want Money at three per
cent. whereby many will support their Credits, and yet thrive by having Credit
at so low Interest. 14. The making English Merchants capable to Engrosse the
Commodities of another Country, and to withold it from others, as the Dutch
do at present by the help of their Banks. 15. The procuring English Merchants
credit in Forain parts, or in Forain Banks, to buy any Commodity there without
Money as well or better then with Money, and upon as good terms as the
Hollander or any others.
All these benefits and advantages are so plain to be understood, that I need
not give any further illustration or proof on the particulars, which (with
other accommodations, by introducing so much current credit) will make all sums
of Money to be paid above Ten pounds, so great a seeker to be turned into Bank
Credit, that I presume (when these conveniences are approved) Money will not be
as acceptable in payments as Credit, till so converted: So that by consequence,
he that wants Money for any such use as aforesaid, (or for any other use or
accommodation whatsoever) having Credit in Bank, or something that may obtain
credit there, (without which neither Money nor ought else (of value) will be
had) he may at pleasure truck or barter the same for Money, which he will have
with thanks and content to both Exchangers.

I confess, falling into consideration of the worth and true value of this Bank
Credit, and the great accommodations which it seems to promise infallibly upon
the erecting such a Bank far exceeding what is now done by money in specie; I
did omit (in the method laid down) to insist upon, or speak of the injoyning
all payments above twenty pounds (or about that value) to be made payable in
Bank, conceiving there will be no necessity of it here (for that no man will
scruple the lying of his Credit secure in Bank) though in all other places upon
the first erecting Banks it was done, and stands yet in force as well in the
Florentine Banks as others, built upon Money foundations, in the Low Countries,
where (at first) he which was bound to receive his Money at a certain place,
thought it best to leave it there upon security of the Bank, until he had
occasion to use it; and when he comes to pay it away meets perhaps with another
of the same mind, and as willing to excuse trouble takes it by assignment
there, and so the next and the next in like manner, till in process of time
payments in Bank became (as at present they are esteemed) better then in specie
by ten shillings in a hundred pounds, as it will be also in England when Banks
are here erected, and if Credit in Bank be better then Money in kind, no fear
of getting Money for Credit.

But to this some perhaps will allege, That in the Banks of Holland and other
places, all men may take out their Money at pleasure, which in the Banks here
premised they cannot do, since no Money is intended shall be brought into
Bank: To which I answer, Let such but consider, that where Money is a
commodity, it is exported, imported and transported at pleasure, which together
with the declining in Trade by some, and the increasing the Stocks of others,
are the great causes of the taking out Money and the paying it into Bank; for
were it not for those reasons, it were the same thing, if in Holland a Law were
made, that no person should take his Money out of Bank, so he still continue
the same Trade without exporting it; and a man may as well there by the same
rule procure Money for credit in Bank (since all men will exchange for the
better) with thanks to boot, for there is no necessity to withdraw or increase
the Stock in Bank, of any person that does not augment or decrease his Trade,
whereby to have more or less use of it; and this may as well be done, (and the
Stock of credit in Bank be either increased or diminished at pleasure) by the
securities here propounded, as by the best Dollars or Coin whatsoever used in
any Bank of Europe.

To make it plain to the meanest capacity, that Credit may as well obtain
Money, as Money Credit. I shall show that it is daily practiced in England; the
very taking up Money at Interest by those that oblige themselves to pay it
again being no other, for it is the Credit of their security which obtains that
Money; so contrary, he that gives his Money in one place for a Bill to have so
much paid where he owes it in another, does but barter his Money for Credit. We
daily see Silver buy Gold, and Gold Silver, and both are current amongst us;
and in Holland and other places where Banks are erected, it is the daily
practice for Brokers and others to exchange Bank Credit for Money; and as often
Money for Bank credit: Also in Spain you have always current Money of Gold,
Silver and Brass, and with all you may purchase one the other (though at some
times the exchange a little varies) where if any man's Cash be in Brass the
worst of Money (in the Language of the place called Vellon) and his occasions
calls him presently out of that Kingdom, he may at a days warning procure for
it Gold the best of metals. And if Brass (that has no intrinsic value) will
(by virtue only of the Sovereigns Law and Inscription) procure Gold, I hope it
will be granted, that Credit in Bank (which is as really good security as the
best Gold) may (when made also current and established by Law) obtain Silver,
or what else is necessary for the use of man.

Yet some may further object, That the making of Bank Credit current in
payments will be an Obstruction in Trade, as in Case where a Person comes to
buy with it of another that will have Money for his Commodity, either out of
Fancy or Necessity: To whom I answer, That this is no other but like him that
refuses a good rate for his Commodities, because tendered him in Gold, not so
proper to pay for pints of Wine and Flaggons of Beer as Silver: But I think few
are so ignorant as not to apprehend, that Gold being taken with its allowance
for weight, will purchase Silver without loss; as Bank Credit also will, in
whose weight and value there can be no deceit.

Besides, it may be alleged on either hand, That the occasions for Bank
Credit are many, and those for Money in kind more: But I answer, That though
those of Money be most, yet that of Credit is greatest; for it will oft-time
fall out, that Shopkeepers and others, (that have by many little sums
received, heaped up a good total in Sterling Money) must for their
accommodation turn it into Bank credit, perhaps to pay it where they owe it in
some other Town, City or place far off, or else to pay for some Commodity
bought at home from some Merchant or other, who will best esteem of payment
made in Bank Credit; which necessities (with other of the like kind) puts
Moneys still to be a seeker to obtain Credit; and it will be found that one sum
so remitted, will furnish ten that may peradventure want Money for their
Household necessary Expenses. But the scope of my intent being only to vindicate
this Bank Credit so far as to prove it most proper for all payments to be made
of sums considerable used in Trade, and not to accommodate such by it, as deal
in pots of Ale or penyworths of Tobacco, though I could by good demonstration
prove it might (if need were) be made extend far in that also.

Conceiving I have sufficiently proved that Credit in Bank will at all times
purchase Money by barter or exchange (which is a thing most common in practice)
I shall now consider of an answer to such whose too much credulity thereof may
perhaps purchase their so great esteem of Credit in Bank, as to cause them to
think (and object) that in time it will evacuate the Use of Money.

2. He that shall light upon this objection without having read and considered
what is written upon the whole matter, will (I presume) judge my conceptions of
this Bank too fantastical and airy to be worthy of debate or consideration by
wise and ingenious persons, (it being a thing so repugnant to most Opinions (to
think that any man should part with his Lands, Goods or Commodities for Credit
in Bank, or as they esteem it a piece of Paper) that had I not met with some
Objections (to this purpose) made by an ingenious Gentleman, I should have
thought that scarce a person but my self (and some others that have studied the
subject of Banks) would have had so great an esteem of Bank Credit: But before
I can come to answer the main objection, I must consider the cause supposed,
(which I take to be,) That when these Banks shall be established, all the
Credit to be given therein will be (as it were) so much Money new Coined and
passed abroad in current payment in the Kingdom; and that such Credit being (as
elsewhere it is) current at more then Gold or Silver Coin by 10 s. in a hundred
pounds the value of Credit above Sterling money, will give it such reputation
as that Money will be out of favor here, and therefore exported, since of
Credit we can never want to supply the room of Money, for that the Lands of
England are irremovable.

To which I answer, That it is true, all Credit taken up in Bank, will be the
same as so much new Coined Money for the time it remains a debt in Bank, but
once paid in and discharged, is no longer current, but that Credit ceases; and
although it is also true, that there may be as much of this Credit coined as can
be desired, yet will there never be more then is requisite: For it can be no
more presumed that any man will take it up and pay three per cent. that has no
need of it, then it may in reason be imagined, he that has Silver and Gold (as
current in payment as Bank Credit) will let that lie unimployed, and pay
Interest in the mean time at the Bank for Credit, since by so converting his
Money, he may discount and balance his Account there at pleasure; the great
accommodation of this Credit in Bank being such, that no man shall ever want it
that has an Estate of value to deposite, nor shall any man be compelled to
take more then he has occasion to employ; whereby men's Stocks will never be
idle, and if there can be no more coined then is needful, there will be no
more Money sent out of England then must and will go (notwithstanding this or
the greatest penalty a Parliament can put by way of prohibition) to supply
where we send not out enough of Merchandise to purchase what we have from
Forain parts; for if we send not out more Goods from England yearly then we
import and consume, Plate must and will go to supply it; as on the contrary if
we export more then import, the overbalance must at some time be returned in
Bullion; which I affirm to be truth, though it implies a contradiction to
several Acts of Parliament made against the Exportation of Bullion, which
under favor signifies no more then a profit to such persons as can make
discovery, but nothing of good to the common Interest of the Nation, and if the
overbalance must be returned in Plate, Bullion or Jewels, and such returns be
not altogether converted into Money (by reason that want may be supplied by
Lands in manner as aforesaid) what hurt is there to any, if this Plate or
Bullion be converted into all sorts of Dishes, Boles or Cups, or (as in Mexico)
if our very Pots and Kettles were of Silver, it being our own, is and will be
as valuable as Coin, and as great a reserve upon all occasions.

3. A third Objection I expect will be made to what I have herein granted by
admission: That all Credit taken up in Bank will (as long as it remains
unballanced) be the same in effect as if so much Money were new Coined and
dispersed abroad in current payments, which great plenty of Money must (as some
will suppose) by consequence cause all Commodities to rise in price or value
accordingly.

To this I answer, That although where much Money is current all provisions are
usually dear, yet Money is not the cause of it (otherwise then as it is the
cause of the increase of Trade) for where any place or Kingdom abounds in Money
and Riches, it is observable, Commerce and Trade there best flourish, and
without it are the best Merchants in esteem nothing; so that Money begets
Trade, and Trade Wealth and Riches; which where they increase (Solomon tells
us) those are increased that eat them: By which it appears, the rise of
provisions is accidental, either by the situation of the place, scarceness or
plentifulnesse of Commodity, and number or concourse of people; which being
innumerably gotten together in a place of Trade (as in London) makes things
dearer then in Cardigan-shire in Wales, not so populous; and as Cardigan-shire
stands in a more barren soil then London, if London were removed (in case it
were possible) thither, her provisions would be dearer then now they are,
though her Stock in Money were the same.

True it is, that the Prices rising or falling, the Standard or extrinsick
value or denomination of Coin would cause all Commodities to rise or fall
accordingly in the Country or place where it is done; but the intrinsic value
(or real worth) stands still the same, both in it self and in esteem with other
Nations, for both Gold and Silver are of so known and approved value by weight
and fineness throughout the world, that if it were possible for one Country or
Kingdom to convert their very Iron or Brass into either of those metals, yet
in respect of the use that is (and would be) made thereof throughout the whole
Universe, it would not at all vary or alter the intrinsic value thereof, or
give it any disproportion to the value before usually current upon Goods and
Commodities; for unless it be allowed, that a plenty of Money in England will
raise the value of Commodities in France, Spain, and other Countries, (which I
know no man will affirm) it can be no argument that it will raise the price of
Commodities here (since God has ordained one Country and place to help
another, and raised up Instruments fit to perform the service) for that by
Shipping and Merchandising the scarceness of a Commodity in one Country is
supplied by another that has it cheaper and to spare, and being brought from
the place where it falls out to be at that time cheapest, will not (the freight
adventure and a reasonable profit allowed) be sold for much more then
peradventure it sold usually at before in the place whither brought for a
Market: And this we find true by experience in Holland, who having little or
nothing grown of their own, yet by their great Stock and industry by Trade,
purchase all things at so easy rates, that they oft-times furnish others in
great abundance by their superfluity. Which is, I hope, not only plain, that an
increase of Money in one place or Kingdom, will in no respect raise the price
of Commodities (either within it self, or whereby it may not be afforded to
others at as cheap rates as before it was.) But an evident demonstration also
that the more Money or Wealth any Nation is Owner of, the greater are their
advantages above others.

1. For first, though Goods and Commodities stand the same, yet the value of
all real Estates will increase, because being the foundation of the increase of
Stock will be now more useful then formerly; and the rise of Land and fall of
Interest were never yet esteemed prejudicial.

2. Secondly, by the help of a great stock at low interest, English Merchants
will be enabled to deal for much, and thereby to buy cheap, work cheap, and
sell for less profit in the pound (and also to procure their Commodities at the
best hand, viz. at the place of their growth, in their proper seasons) whereby
out-trading and under-selling other Nations they obtain the preemption of sale,
and so cannot fail of vent abroad.

3. Thirdly, a great Stock at low Interest would enable Merchants to raise the
price of our own Native Commodities in forain parts, by keeping them for a good
Market, which helps much to the enriching of a Nation by the overbalance of
Trade.

4. Fourthly, by the obtaining Money at so low Interest as three per cent. men
will not spare either Sea or Land, but the one by the fishing Trade, the other
by Husbandry and all ingenious ways of improvement here in England, by
planting in Ireland, and other new Plantations throughout the whole Globe,
would bestow all their skill and diligence to multiply Commodity and
Livelihood, to the employment of innumerable poor and all other men whatsoever,
and the abundant increase of our Shipping and Dominion on the Sea, and thereby
the strength, renown, and flourishing Estate of the Kingdom.

5. And not only so, but if there were such vent here in England, even forain
Nations would dispatch their Commodities hither, as to the quickest Market; and
by meeting here (as in a Center) might furnish each other with returns, so as
England would become (as it were) a general Mart or Fair to other Nations, to
the great enriching thereof; whereby the Frontier Towns upon the Seacoast, by
reason of Trade would (when all Ports are free, which his Majesty upon erecting
such a Bank will find most proper for his advantage) grow so populous, rich
and flourishing, that they will become more honorable and strong for the
defense of the Nation.

Having spoken as much as I think is needful to this also, I shall proceed to
the next Objection, which I expect some will make in favor of Widows and
Orphans, whose Estates lying in Money at Interest (and who are not capable of
employing it in Trade) will suffer much by the fall of Interest to three per
cent. per ann. whereby the Usurer (being supposed to be a loser) will perhaps
find some to pity him, and object the like in his favor also: To which I will
first answer.

4. I shall not take upon me to determine the lawfulness of Usury, because I
find both Protestant and Papists, Doctors, Divines and Lawyers to disagree in
the definition thereof, and both the one and the other have given sundry
definitions of Usury much d^ffering amongst themselves: But that which on both
sides nearest agree is, That whole Countries practice it with little or no
scruple; so sweetly and powerfully does Gain and Lucre benumb the Conscience,
which many notwithstanding have sought to awake by writing and loud preaching,
terming it to be Extortion, and forbidden (if intentional) throughout the whole
Scripture, and to be utterly sinful and unlawful: But whether in the most
strict sense (as determined by the Church of Rome) intentionall Usury be a sin
mortal, and therefore not pardonable but in the other world or not; sure I am
that it has proved so fatal to many worthy Families (whose Estates have been
morgaged to such men) that they could never again redeem them in this world;
and of the many that daily go into that Purgatory, few come out but they are
well scorched, if not thoroughly refined and sent to Paradise, where it is hard
for a rich man to enter. But to speak to the Usurers loss (who has gotten
sufficiently already) I shall answer that they will have the like advantages
with all other persons, by employing their Stocks in Trade, Husbandry or the
like, or to employ them still at Interest as now they do, if they can be
content with the reasonable hire of about Three per cent. per ann. (for it is
presumed few or none will give more then they can have it for at the Bank*)
Besides, such Usurers as are inclined to purchase Land with their Money, (as
all may do) will have a far greater advantage then many others, for that by
purchasing Land now at a current price of about twenty years purchase, such
Lands will in few years (upon the establishing a Register and erecting Banks)
so rise that they will soon become worth twenty five, and shortly after thirty
years purchase again to be sold, whereby instead of his present Interest he
will have the yearly income of the Estate, a liberty to deal or trade as others
do, and an advantage in few years of Forty or Fifty per cent. above many
others: And whether the Usurers prejudice by erecting such Banks will be
considerable (if any at all) I appeal to all indifferent persons.

Now to speak of Widows and Orphans, whom we are commanded to cherish, and
whom in truth (by the provisions and intentions of many their Progenitors,
Predecessors and Benefactors, long since deceased) ought both in Charity and
Justice to have at least five or thereabouts in the hundred per ann. for Moneys
left either in the hands of Trustees, or in the Chamber of any City or
Corporation, (which is the most usual rate allowed according to my best
observation) and especially where it happens to be belonging to those either
past, or not yet of age, or capable to trade, purchase or dispose thereof to
advantage, for whom I have thought my self concerned to find out a remedy, as
I hope I have done, (which will both accommodate them and many thousands else
besides in the Nation.)

This may be done by petty Banks, to be in like manner established; which may
serve instead of the many Brokers, petty Goldsmiths and Scriveners, who deal,
some in public, others more private, in a kind of petty Usury (or as I may
more properly call it great Extortion) whereof there are not so few (by report)
as a thousand in London and Precincts that either deal in their own, or take in
the Moneys of others and let it out upon Pawns or such like kind of security,
to be paid by some at so much a week for the use of twenty shillings, by others
so much per week until the principal be paid with advantage; and some there
are that sell Goods to be paid by the month or week, whereby twenty shillings
shall be paying in equal proportions perhaps ten or twenty weeks, which
considered, together with the manner used by these several kinds of Usurers
(but especially by Brokers) in taking their security (for every Art has its
mystery) by their bills as they call them (though no other then the persons
name, the sum lent, and day when) written upon a Card or the like, and fixed to
the Pledge or Pawn left in deposite, for which in every sum of twenty shillings
their demand is usually six pence, under twenty shillings four pence, and above
forty shillings a shilling; besides, of some persons something will be expected
for keeping the account of payments made, and for looking out the Pledge or
Pawn upon redemption; but if a part be redeemed (as most usually it is) before
the whole, the charge of a new Bill is the least that will suffice, all which
comes to thirty, forty, and by some fifty per cent. yearly for the Interest of
sums so lent, which usually are under ten or twenty pounds; which abundantly
are taken up by diverse persons (but principally by poor laboring persons) who
are at some times constrained to supply themselves at such (or any) rates to
procure bread for themselves and Families to eat. By which kind of extorting
Usury incredible sums of Money are yearly employed. Those that are poor made
poorer, and such as least deserve it grow rich by the ruins or others, which
if prevented, and yet such as want be accommodated at reasonable Interest, it
will not be one of the meanest acts of Charity in our times done by public
Authority.

Now I submit, that if the Money of Widows and Orphans were put into some
convenient place appointed in every Division, which (for the better content of
some) may be in the hands of the Corporation where the great Bank shall be
erected (for it will be most proper both Banks should be together) and Officers
appointed to deliver out any sum (under what may be had in Credit at the Grand
Bank) upon valuable pawns or pledges for any time, after the rate of eight
pounds per cent. per ann. whereof five pounds may be yearly paid to the use of
the Owners, and the other three pounds to remain with his Majesty (who is most
proper to have the superintendency (by his Commissioners) of these Banks also)
toward the Salaries of Officers, and in consideration for the allowance of
time which perhaps some Moneys may remain in Bank unimployed: And whether by
this all Widows and Orphans (that pretend to any thing of prejudice by the
erecting Banks and fall of Usury) may not be accommodated according to Equity
and good Conscience, I appeal, etc. and not only them, but many thousands also
be eased and preserved from falling into the hands of such Extortioners, for
whom I have not charity enough to spend in contriving their future advantages
which they will find in some other way (I doubt not good) themselves fast
enough.

Yet notwithstanding some perhaps will object to this, and ask how I am assured
to ascertain the Moneys that shall be brought into the petty Banks, so that it
may neither be too much nor too little: for if too much, it will remain
unimployed and dead in Bank, and if too little, then all persons that may want
will not be accommodated.

For a cure to this, and satisfaction to those that scruple, I answer, These
evils may be at any time (in case of defect on either hand) regulated, by
allowing the payments to be made in the great Bank either more or less; for in
case there remain more Money in the petty Bank then is employed, then by
ordering no payment to be made by assignation in the great Bank under twenty
pounds instead of the aforesaid Ten pounds will (as it were) press the stream
of smaller p^yments into the petty Bank, whereby Moneys will there find a
current of employment running quicker then formerly; and so also in like manner
may it be stopped if running away thence too fast, by allowing smaller payments
to be made by assignation in the great Bank as occasion shall require, which by
Proclamation may at any time (when ordered) be made known in all parts of the
Nation, and lest some others should call this a Bank of Moneys, and therefore
object against the security, under the color of alleging (as some do) That
no Bank can be safe under a Monarchy; I shall desire them to consider, that
although Money be the foundation, yet the Bank may not properly be styled a
Bank of Money, for that it is intended no Money shall lie still or dead in Bank,
as in other parts.

For first the King being obliged to pay 5 per cent. per ann. to Widows and
Orphans (which in point of Honor and Charity he will surely perform) he must
be as sure to keep it always employed, or else will lose by it, and if always
in employment, there will be little at any time remaining in Bank, or in the
hands of the Corporation, or whomsoever is entrusted.

Secondly, those Banks of Forain parts, though wholly upon Money Foundations,
yet are the payments therein made most usual upon the Credits of the Moneys
brought in, and not by Money in specie; whereby the Money either does or ought
to remain in Bank, which (so many and great sums constantly lying in Bank, only
employed in that manner by the Credit thereof) are indeed considerable (as in
the great Bank here designed upon Land Foundations will be also) and if in
Money, I confess were a sufficient temptation to any but a virtuous Prince. But
the thing here in consideration being small in it self, may be put into the
possession of Corporations, will have at any time little Money lying still in
Bank, and that also in several places of the Kingdom, does belong to Widows and
Orphans, and will be under the superintendency of so good and pious a Prince as
ours, who can doubt of its being secure will surely believe nothing.

I thought to have shown how any person first taking up Credit at three per
cent. in the great Bank, should have made use of it in the petty Bank as a
ground of security, whereby to obtain any sum of Money in specie at 5 per cent.
more, and also to have laid down a method for the correspondence of all great
and petty Banks, and each of them one with the other: But I fear I have been
too large already, and doubt not but those will appear so plain and easy
(especially to men of business) that they will be well understood without it.

5. The next great Objection I expect is, That these Banks cannot be
established but by a Register, which in Parliament will never be assented to,
for that diverse Gentlemen and others may be unwilling to have their Estates
discovered, some perhaps that others should not know what they have, and others
to seem to have what they have not, which may on either hand be alleged, will
prove prejudicial.

Although I am no stranger in the Courts of Civil Law, Common Law, and
Chancery, (in some or all of which I have now served an Apprentiship) yet am no
proficient in either, my greatest studies having been only how to get out, and
therefore Errors in terms of Law, I hope may be excused. And notwithstanding I
have made the Registring of all Estates to be a foundation of infallible
security and Credit in these Banks, yet I am of opinion, (and bold to affirm)
that these Banks may be erected and carried on to very great profit, advantage
and accommodation without it, and his Majesty make as great a benefit thereof
as is at present made by all Money let out at Interest in this Kingdom (the
differing rates of Interest only considered) for I submit, that if Banks were
established in manner as aforesaid (without the registring Estates) and his
Majesty should at every Bank maintain an able Council at Law, (which out of so
great a Revenue would be but an inconsiderable charge) to examine all men's
Deeds, Writings and Conveyances of Estates, which they should at any time bring
to deposite by way of Morgage to the Bank, Whether might not such security
prove as good and valuable as what is at present taken by Usurers, Scriveners
and Brokers? who sometimes meet with a bad Title as peradventure his Majesty
then also may, which nevertheless will prove something better by so much as all
debts to the King will be first satisfied: but this though it will be made out
upon reasonable grounds, yet is not so proper to my present purpose.

To the Objection, I am of opinion that Suits, Pleas, Bills, Plaints, etc.
about Titles of Land and other real Estates, are so many, I take this to be one
main reason, (viz.) That any man may sell and dispose of his Estate in private
to another, without notice taken by some public Register to be enrolled, for
information of those that may have occasion at any time to be satisfied of all
encumbrances thereupon; by which means it so often falls out, that some Estates
are sold, morgaged and made away several times to several persons, when in
truth but only one ought to buy it, and no more then one at once can enjoy it;
though diverse may at the same time pretend as many Titles as they please; so
little truth and great danger is there in Pocket conveyances, that I have been
informed by a Gentleman of Credit, how he late arrested a person (then reputed
to be of good worth in London) whose Estate in Land was supposed considerable,
but being once in the Fleet his Creditors all came in against him, and by
sueing forth a Statute of Bankrupt, much of his Land proved to be morgaged
several times and so often, that the Gentleman my Informant acknowledged a
Morgage of his to be the seventeenth, there being sixteen made of the Land
before to other persons. And hence it comes to pass that the greatest Lawyer or
wisest man living cannot assure either to himself or any other, that he shall
purchase a good Title, so many ways are there for private Cheats; (flawes and
errors in Deeds and Conveyances are no less common) and all Estates (when once
in controversy) either in possession or reversion, by Lease, in Fee, or in
tail, are but simple remainders for Lawyers to live upon: And that this is
true, I shall give you one or two instances.

Suppose a person being about to buy an Estate in Fee, should first go to the
most able Council for advise, with a resolution that if he may not be sure of a
good Title, he will not part with his Money upon the Purchase: In this case I
affirm that no Council living can give satisfaction, or in truth any
encouragement, whereby the person may confide in the certainty of the Title,
for as long as the person selling the Land (and also his Ancestors) might
preconvey the same by Lease to any other, to commence any time after the death
of either, how then can any man be sure of a good Title?

True it is, that Council are good to advise about what Deeds or Coveyances are
shown, and upon those they are best able to distinguish what Estate may legally
pass and what not, and are also able to draw up Covenants binding to either
party; but how this can amount to an infallible Title I know not: Conceiving it
rather signifies in the general that a man were better to buy Land of a rich
man then of a poor, and of an honest man before a knave; for I conceive it is
more the warranty and security of the person, then the Title or Interest
pretended, that comes nearest the best security, since both Seller and Buyer
may be deceived notwithstanding the best provisions in Law yet made for
prevention.

The like it is in case of an Estate bought of an Executor or Administrator,
which being given by will of the Testator, and the will concealed, when it
comes afterward to be discovered and proved (which may be any time in ten
years; and without limitation in case the Executor or principal Legatee be
either a Minor or beyond the Seas) the administration by an appeal in Court of
Delegates may be made void ab initio, so that all Sales and Conveyances made of
that Estate, upon the first administration are in Law to be avoided, and such
also in equity that were not made Bona fide for the discharging the Testators
just Debts and Funeral Rights, and the person whose right it is by will is no
ways bound to consider the Purchasor, though purchased for a valuable
consideration, but he is left to repair himself at Law or Equity, upon the
warranty of his Deed on the first Executor or Administrator, who if having
committed waste (as usually they do) knows the way to the Kings Bench or into
some other Country or place of obscurity, and how those Cases with a thousand
others of like nature can be foreseen or other ways prevented then by a County
Register, I never could yet understand.

Besides these, are not the only preventions or benefits by a County Register,
for of all men that are, I think most are concerned some way or other in or
about buying or selling Estates; if in selling, then shall such sell to a
greater advantage, for that Lands and Estates will (when the certainty of Title
is known) yield much more then otherwise they will, the Title being doubtful;
and such as have occasion to buy shall be sure of a good Title, and may
therefore call it his own when paid for; and again for those that shall have
occasion either to borrow or lend, (as most have to do either the one or the
other) then may such take up Money (or Credit in Bank) upon their alone
security without engaging or obliging himself to Friends; and others that lend
may know assuredly upon what security: He that sells Goods for time, may know
to a person of what Estate; but a greater benefit will be, that few will deal
upon Credit for time, when by Registring their Estates they can have Money at
Three per cent. whereby a number of inconveniences will be taken away.

The Registring Estates will be a foundation for Credit in Bank, and the Credit
taking up in Bank will bring in at least two Millons yearly, for a Revenue to
his Majesty, (as shall be proved elsewhere) and that also out of the ease of
the people: By this all public Burdens may be taken away, and by that Trade
will be much encouraged; his Majesty wanting Moneys may supply himself upon the
Credit of his own Right for at least a Million, without being beholding to his
Subjects or alienating Crown Lands; the abundance of Suits in Law and
Controversies about Titles will in a short time be ended, and many for time to
come be prevented: All these advantages, preventions and accommodations,
besides what I named to you before in the Arguments used for proof of the
validity of Bank Credit, will in a great measure depend upon the Registring
Estates, which being all Conveniences, I shall speak to some supposed
Inconveniences that may obstruct it.

The Objection of having Estates discovered (though I think all that can be
termed to seem of prejudice thereby, if put in the Balance with what does
really appear of advantage, would weigh many hundred scruples too light) I
shall notwithstanding endeavor to show that it may be so done as shall answer
all these ends, and yet no Estate be farther discovered then at present.

I am certain there are no Lands or real Estates in England (other Estates need
not be registered) but are reputed to be the Lands or Estates of some known
person, though peradventure it may belong in reality to another, and it may be
made over by some dorment Deed or Conveyance to a third, whereby the Property
in Law may not be known to be in either: In all which Conveyances there must be
trust reposed in some, since it cannot be done without privity. Also there are
other Deeds usually made whereby Estates are conveyed in trust, and the trust
expressed in the Deeds, for whom and to what end; yet is the Estate in Law the
Trustees, though in Equity otherwise: And an Estate in Law may be conveyed to
him that knows not of it, which he might afterward (upon request) own, and in
Conscience preserve for such ends as may be afterward appointed; yet with all
these and the like concealments there must go both trust and privety.

So then admit that A. be the true Proprietor of an Estate, why may not he as
well entrust B. to enter it as his own at the Register, which is but a trust,
and A. can be found no Proprietor: Or for the better security, in case A. be
afraid to entrust B. why may not A. enter the Estate in his own name or in the
name of C. and order B. to enter a Morgage too, near or above the value, and
take the defeasance of B. thereupon to himself or a fourth person, which
Defeazance against a Morgage may be allowed to rest dorment without prejudice
to any, since it is not intended that Morgages or Encumbrances on Estates shall
be a ground of Credit or Security in Bank; so that in this case though A. be
the true Proprietor, yet the Estate upon the Register appears to be in C. and a
Morgage entered by B. thereupon, in which case if C. be desirous to wrong A. he
cannot do it without B. for B. may enter upon the Estate by virtue of his
Morgage; or if B. and C. should join together in such dishonest intent, A. may
then bring forth his Defeazance against the Morgage of B. in whose name soever
taken; so that neither B. nor C. can cheat A. nor all or either of them any
other.

This and other the like ways may be contrived for a safe and secure
registring of Estates (by ingenuous persons that will be studious therein) so
that Estates may be entered at the Register with all Encumbrances thereupon, for
satisfaction to the Bank-Masters and others that desire to purchase or the
like; and yet the propriety of the real Owner remain concealed with more safety
then at present, since it may not now be done without trust and privity, and
the trust most commonly in a single hand, which how dangerous it is the longest
Speaker of the R -- (well skilled in Law) by experience is best able to advise.
The thing most requirable at the Register is, that every Estate has some Owner;
for if never so many pretenders the prejudice is only his that has the best
right; and that also but in case of his occasions and intentions to morgage it
for Credit in Bank, in which case damages may be given upon the dismission of
Claims, according to the nature of the offense: And for such as set up Titles
or Morgages themselves to conceal the Propriety of their Estates, or enter
their Estates at less yearly then it is worth, to conceal the value thereof:
Their so doing can wrong no man; for the Jury (before spoken of) are directed
only to return whether the Estate be of the value entered; and if not worth so
much per ann. then how much less, but for what it is worth more, the Bank need
not take notice of; the intent being only to credit under the value of Estates;
and by those that enter their Estates for less then value, there is no doubt for
their coming to Bank for much Credit.

Thus I hope it is clear that men need not discover more then at present of
their Estates, and to those that desire to seem to have what Estates they have
not; I answer, That the chief end of this being to prevent Estates from
Encumbrances, whereby no Deeds, Conveyances or Morgages may lie dorment; it may
not be avoided but that Morgages, Claims and all Encumbrances whatsoever, upon,
and to Estates, must be entered by a time limited (except Defeazances upon
Morgages as aforesaid) so that if herein any be offended (as not willing to
have Encumbrances on his Estate discovered) that can make out how in general
it will prove a greater prejudice then profit to the Kingdom, I will freely ask
pardon and acknowledge my error, but till then I desire excuse; for sure I am
that amongst those dorment Titles are often found pernicious practices, which
prove to be the occasion of most Suits and Controversies, and by that means the
ruin of whole Families, who by seeking remedy from Lawyers find a greater
malady, the too often effects of Law. But I may not stay longer on this, since
I expect a further Objection:

6. That the discovering of Conveyances, Titles and Encumbrances on Estates
will rather augment then abbreviate Suits; for that many by enquiry and search
made at the Register will either find matter to destroy, or set up Titles, or
Encumbrances to Estates, by discovering flawes or imperfections in Conveyances;
or by some want of puntillioes to be observed by rules of Law.

To this I likewise answer, That no man will be obliged to discover his
Conveyances or to show them at the Bank; for he that will may bring a Brief of
his Deeds drawn up by his own Counsel; which will be sufficient for the
Register to enter, since (as I said before) it is not intended Conveyances shall
be registered at large: And as no man will be obliged or compelled to discover
what he apprehends may tend to his prejudice, so are not others debarred from
putting in their Claims or prosecuting thereof upon what they have or may
discover, which is neither more or less then what either may do at present,
and cannot be said properly to augment Suits, since by the determining of all
Contests about Estates in a short time to be prefixed, and taking away the
cause, will prove a future prevention of such effects.

True it is that Suits may be multiplied for a year, two or three, especially
upon the discovering of Encumbrances, but it will chiefly fall out where two or
more dorment Deeds, Morgages or Encumbrances are found upon one and the same
Estate; for in that case each will strive to be first satisfied, or desirous to
know who has the best right, and being determined has its end, which by lying
dorment would have produced the like or greater evils (to the same or other
persons) almost ad infinitum. This considered, no new matter can be found, or
imperfection discovered, that may either unjustly set up or destroy Titles by
means of these Registers, but many new accommodations and advantages (as I have
before shown) may.

Yet others perhaps will object, That the Registring all Estates and
Encumbrances is a thing impossible; the keeping so great Accounts (as it were)
of all the Cash in the Nation impracticable: And many more such Objections may
be made, that to answer would require a Volume of more time then I have spare
to spend in writing, or men of business patience to read: But if it may be
allowed those already handled are indifferently resolved: I am satisfied, all
others are too inferior to deserve an answer.

So that in general (whether the prejudice or advantage by the establishing
such Registers will be greatest) I submit to all, and as soon to those the most
ingenious Gentlemen of the long Robe as any, who in the opinion of many, will
be no friends to further it in Parliament, where the alone subject of a
Register has been formerly debated, and as I am informed found parties near
equal: But when it shall be there presented with Honors in the one hand, good
Deeds on the other; before it the greatest accommodations, and after it the
most flourishing Trade of Europe, and Crowned yearly with two Millions of Gold,
a Revenue (for a gracious Prince by the ease of loving Subjects) that will
render the Nation as terrible abroad as it will be happy at home: Surely no
ingenuous Lawyer or true English man will appear against it.

Now having done with those Objections, I return to the main proposition, which
as I have shown, is no other then a complication of several things already
practiced in the world, and arising chiefly from the grounds of reason
whereupon Forain Banks consist; and upon the whole do appeal to all indifferent
Judges: That if Banks were erected in England, of Credit only without Money
(upon the reasons laid down) whether would not such Credit (in effect) answer
all those ends of Credit in Bank, grounded upon Money Foundations in Forain
parts? And if so, what then may hinder it from being practicable, since nothing
is wanting but the countenance and furtherance of Authority, whose concernment
is not the least therein?

The next thing I propose is, To show how all men wanting Moneys, may be
supplied at low Interest, to their satisfaction (yet not with Money) etc. To
which I cannot properly speak, (as to the remaining also I may not) without
admission, that such Banks of Credit as are proposed be established by
Authority, and Estates registered accordingly.

This being allowed, there is no man whatsoever of an Estate, that does or may
want Money to pay Debts, to purchase Lands, to buy Goods, to improve his Lands,
augment his Trade, or the like, but will assuredly take up Credit in Bank upon
his Lands or other real Chattels or Pledge of Security, as soon as such Bank
Credit is known to be current payment in manner as aforesaid; and this they
will the rather do out of respect,

1. That but three per cent. per ann. will be demanded for Interest. 2. That
the Interest being paid half yearly, the principal (if taken upon real security
of Land) will never be demanded. 3. That no man will be obliged to pay Interest
for above a Month, in case he can discharge the Credit sooner. 4. That nothing
will be paid for Bonds, Morgages or Conveyances, upon taking up such Credit. 5.
No obliging persons to become bound, or Counter-bonds to be given to save
harmless. 6. No Brokeridge for procuration, or Money to be paid for
continuance. 7. All fear of forfeitures taken away, and the danger of falling
into the hands of unmercifull Usurers avoided. 8. An assured certainty of
having what we need at pleasure.
These and other advantages will accrue to the people of England upon the
obtaining Money at Interest at Three per cent. the Inconveniences certainly are
none (considering what has been said before in favor of Usurers, Widows and
Orphans) for otherwise there need no Law of injunction to prohibit the taking
or paying high Usury, as we find done under all Governments; which is
occasioned more by the want of a competency of Stock to supply all men's
occasions, then by any deserving value there is extraordinary in Money: For in
Holland where it is generally more plentiful, you may have it upon security at
4 or 5 per cent. when the intrinsique value is the same as with us in England;
where I am persuaded (were all men left at liberty to take and give for Money
at Interest what they pleased) it would soon come up to Ten (if not more) in
the Hundred; which is an infallible argument that Money is much wanting amongst
us, and being so much wanting, it hereby follows,

1. The great decrease of Trade for want of Stock to employ or drive it on.

2. The fewer Manufactures made here, and by that means our Staple is exported
unwrought.

3. It occasions the Hollander (that has Stock at command) to buy our Wool,
carry it home (and being now become Artists) are able to bring it in again
wrought, and undersell us in our own Commodity at home, as they have done of
late years, in all forain parts where formerly the English had the only Trade.

4. That so little Fish is caught by the English, when the Hollanders by their
great Stock come and takes it even at our Doors in great abundance, to their
greater profit, which were there a competent Stock in England, his Majesty by
re-assuming his Prerogative of being Lord of the British Ocean, (which by the
most ancient Prescription always belonged as rightly due to the Kings of
England) and countenancing the English in prohibiting others to fish on our
Coasts, might in a short time bring it to be of more worth to his Kingdoms then
the Spanish Indies are to the Kingdom of Spain.

5. By the want of Money and decrease of Trade, the rich that should support
others are diminished in Number and weakened in Means, and the poor that should
be upheld are increased both in Number and Necessities.

6. Were there more Money or Stock, almost all the Lands in England might be
made to yield much more increase by employing more in manuring the same.

7. Many Husbandmen want wherewith to stock their gound, whereby (perhaps) the
Nation suffers more then many times by much unseasonable weather.

8. A great part of Ireland lies waste, which without more Stock to plant is
like to continue.

9. There are great quantities of Oazey Ground about the Seacoast, and other
Fens and waste Grounds, besides Forests and Commons, which drained and
improved might equalize in value some two or three Counties in England.

10. There are many Mines in England, Ireland and Scotland, which being
wrought, would much increase the Exportation, and be employment for poor men
that want it.

So that in effect, the Trade, Manufacture, Shipping, strength, repute and
flourishing estate of the Nation is decreased for want of Money, and not to be
encouraged but by some way that tends to the increase of the Estates of some
without impoverishing others (for whatsoever takes from the Estate of one man
as much as it adds to another, does not enrich the Nation.)

Now then if the introducing so much current Credit as shall be needful to
supply all men's necessities, and those wants and defects in general, without
the least diminution to the Estate of any man in particular; be a thing worth
encouragement, I submit, Whether by the erecting such Banks as are described in
manner as aforesaid, must not in the judgments of all judicious persons prove
an effectual remedy, even to the value of five or ten times more Money (if
there be occasion for so much) then ever this Nation was Owner of in Coin: And
if this be reason, who then can find matter to oppose so advantageous a
Proposal?

Sure I am, that if a person of an ingenuous spirit, and of quality and repute,
should be sick, and groaning under heavy debts, which he is not able by his
greatest care and diligence to compass; in which case (I think to any truly of
desert) no sickness can be worse, and some friend of his being entrusted with a
considerable Bequest of Treasure from another, not to be delivered him but in
that necessity, or until his becoming of the age of forty years, or the like
(at which time men are generally most sollid, and fittest to become Owners of
great Estates) whereof this person entrusted acquainting him, and bidding him
dig in such a place, where he should find it accordingly; I presume none can
imagine but that this news would be welcome, and such person would not neglect
much time before he went to dig for this Treasure and be satisfied of the truth
of so unexpected a Fortune.

Now then let us but consider, and apply this to the Nation so wanting Money or
Stock as aforesaid: Is not their case the same with this? and may they not at
pleasure supply themselves by that gift which God and Nature has left them as
their own, without being obliged to Forain Nations, or parting with their own
Staple to disadvantage, to purchase Money? since that which is within
themselves, if (as it were) dugg up (for the trouble in comparison is no more)
might serve the turn as well and better, and is also of the same intrinsic
value as the best Gold or Silver in the World. I hope some in the Nation will
be of age to understand it to be of better worth and value, insomuch as neither
Gold nor Silver being found or dug out of the ground can be esteemed worth more
then its present current value: But this Credit in Bank will be found of the
same use and value in the Kingdom, and yet produce also an yearly growing
Revenue of at least two Millions to the King, for a supply of his occasions,
without more (or so many) public Burdens or Taxes; and whether this may not
amount to the supplying all men wanting Moneys, at a reasonable Interest, and
to increase the Stock of the Kingdom, with the encouragement both of Forain and
Inland Trade: I also appeal unto those that will but consider the validity and
accommodations of the aforesaid Banks, and now am come to my last Proposition,
How this great yearly Revenue may be raised to his Majesty in Money, by the
^ase of his People.

The advantage which I propose to the King is, by Gentlemen, Merchants,
Tradesmen and others, that are in the Usurers Books, and deal upon Interest
money, who are now constrained to have others bound with them, or to make
tedious Morgages (the writings of which in little sums come to as much as
Interest) and to pay Scriveners and Brokers for procuration, and besides all
this, to pay 6 per cent. per ann. Interest; now such having entered their
Estates in Bank, may have Credit there without any of this Charge: But because
the King and Law do give them this Privilege and Stamp, their Goods and Lands
for current Credit (as a great Talent or Prerogative not to be done by any
other power) they shall pay the King Three per cent. per ann. as long as they
use this Credit in Bank thereupon, and until this Credit be again discharged,
the Interest shall be paid in Sterling Money half yearly, (but nothing for such
time as men's Estates stand only written there as ready but not used in Credit.)

This will bring in all the Interest Money now paid in England into the Kings
Treasury, for that the Bank will be the sole Usurer, and those that have been
so (too long) will become more profitable Subjects to their King, and better
Benefactors to their Country, for now they will rather trade or fall to
purchase Land and improve it, then let out their Money at Three per cent. as
they must do or none will take it, since at the Bank Credit (which is as good)
will be had at that rate.

It will certainly bring in a vast yearly Revenue to his Majesty, by the sums
taken up at present from Scriveners, Usurers, at Prottomree, from Brokers, and
others, which are as innumerable as impossible to be computed at a certainty:
All which in an instant, upon the establishment of such Banks will transfer
themselves thither, and for all such sums taken up, will produce a clear yearly
profit of Three in the Hundred to his Majesty.

A second advantage will be by those that now deal for time, who will then get
Credit in Bank, and pay ready Money for their Commodity, considering that no
man can buy any Goods for time, but shall pay more then double the Interest at
Three per cent. for the forbearance, upon which more then two third parts of
the Trade of the Nation is now driven, and whereby more then many persons make
bad debts, with other inconveniences already spoken of; which will be by these
Banks of Credit prevented, and a great yearly Revenue also thereby come in to
his Majesty's Treasury.

The third accommodation will be to all Merchants that are constrained to keep
unvendable goods by them as a dead Stock upon their hands, who will then take
up Credit in Bank thereupon, to continue their Trades; since they cannot trade
the while for want of ready Money (or perhaps Credit) but if by depositing of
their Goods in Bank they may there have Credit as others have, such will be
presently dealing again, and a much vaster Trade be driven then now there is,
whereby will also come in a great yearly Revenue to his Majesty.

The fourth and last advantage will be by the remittances of money, or by
imaginary Money from one place to another, which when known to be at so easy a
rate, by exchange for Ten shillings in a Hundred pound, no person will
adventure to carry any sum considerable, though but a days Journey, considering
the having it in Bank will be esteemed worth so much (as is paid for
remittance) better then if kept in specie, and will also bring in a
considerable profit to his Majesty yearly.

Now then consider, whether the Interest of all Money at present taken up upon
any kind of Usury whatsoever, together with what will be taken up to prevent
the buying Goods upon trust, and by such as keep a dead stock in Goods upon
their hands, will not at Three per cent. per ann. (with the advantage by
remittances) amount unto two Millions yearly; it being the opinion of some
ingenuous persons, that it will amount to more, and be also improvable
proportionably to the increase of Trade; but for that no exact account can be
taken thereof, or computation made but upon grounds more reasonable then
certain: I submit it also to the ingenuous Reader, as I shall likewise, Whether
this Revenue will not come in by the ease of the People? it being most sure,
that it is easier for any man to pay Three per cent. then Six for Interest
Money; that Money will be had at less trouble and charge in the procuring, and
that none will be compelled to use the Bank but such as do find it to be both
for their ease and accommodation.

To what I speak of a general benefit, perhaps some will object, That trading
Merchants, who usually have little Lands, or it may be none at all (yet by
their Credit and Stock keeps on a Trade to the advantage of the public
Interest) will reap no benefit hereby, but rather a loss, since they shall not
now be Credited as those of Lands will.

To which I answer, That such are not the general Interest, neither is any
other particular body or Corporation whatsoever a competent weight to sway the
Balance or stand in competition with or against a National concernment; and
yet I cannot see wherein such Merchants will be at the least disadvantage: For
surely no man will lend them Money upon security at present, without some
others bound with them, and if security be to be had that will stand bound to
another, why not as soon to the Bank, that takes no notice who has the Credit,
so there be some Estate as a valuable Pledge to answer the Credit and Interest;
and for what Estates such Merchants now have either in Goods or Money, it will
always be of the same value as at present, and as well to be employed in
Trade, or any other way whatsoever; and not only so, but better also by so much
as the Goods and personal Estates of such may be upon occasion deposited at the
Bank or Lumber (to be provided for that purpose) and will for some convenient
time be as good and valid a Pledge for Credit in Bank as the best Lands or real
Estates whatsoever, and also a great advantage to such will be, that they shall
now sell their Goods either for ready Money or Credit, which is equivalent; so
that keeping their Stocks always going in their own hands, they will be able to
deal for more, and make quicker returns here in England, which will expedite
returns abroad, and quick returns makes a small Stock equivalent to a great
Stock with slow returns.

Now therefore if the Merchants of England could vent all sorts of Commodities
here as fast as they could possibly procure them, it would enable them to deal
for much, and consequently to buy much cheaper, work cheap, and sell for less
profit in the pound; so as in this case there would not want vent for
Commodities, either at home, by reason of the plenty of money here; or abroad,
by reason of our own out-trading other Nations through the greatness of our
Stock and quickness of Returns. And sure I am, that England being situated (as
it were) in the Center for Trade in Europe, enjoying so many safe and
commodious Harbors, having plentiful store of Provisions, and many good and
rich Staple Commodities; when supplied also with as much Stock as shall be
needful to employ both in Forain and Domestique Trade, will become the Scale
or Mart of Trade to other Nations (which consists in buying the Commodities of
other Countries, working them here and selling them again in Forain parts,
wherein every man to improve his Stock, would in some measure be dealing, and
many thousands become Merchants more then now there are, all or the most part
laying out their Money in Commodities, and those that receive it would be
laying it out again upon others, and those upon others, and so on, which would
beget a constant return or quick vent for Commodities, proportionable to the
quantity of Money or Credit so perpetually revolving amongst men:) whereby if
England were a City upon a Rock (and held no Land, but Money or Credit) they
might be maintained comfortably, (witness Holland.)

Now besides all those general advantages, conveniences, accommodations and
profits, already shown to be attainable by the establishing of Banks; there is
one more in particular that will prove very accommodatious to his Royal
Majesty, upon any occasion of want of Money, either in his own Kingdoms or
abroad in Forain parts: For by the help of those Banks, and upon the Credit of
so great a Revenue as two Millions yearly, his Majesty surely cannot want
Credit at any time either at home or abroad, for a Million or more in case of
necessity: For he as well as others might either draw, remit or accept Bills,
and pay them out of such Money as will be received for Interest in Bank, and
surely all rational persons must esteem of Bills so accepted by his Majesty (or
those his Commissioners before spoken of to govern his Banks) to be as good,
sure and certain payment, as if accepted by the most punctual Merchant that
walks the Exchange of London, considering that the default in payment but of a
hundred thousand would wholly discredit and overthrow the Bank, and
consequently so great a Revenue; whereunto such Commissioners and Governors
ought to have regard, and not to draw more upon any Forain Banks or persons
whatsoever, then by the time of return of such Credit they may be able to
discharge, which will be a Million every Six Months: An accommodation so
great, that I think the greatest Prince of Europe cannot boast of the like.

I might have insisted upon his Majesty's real Estate in Lands, and otherwise,
which may be valued at some Millions; and that upon this also Credit might be
obtained according to proportion of the Estates of his Subjects, upon occasion;
but how acceptable that might be I know not, since no Law but his Majesty's
Royal pleasure in that case can properly be made binding, it being the great
Objection against erecting Banks of Money under a Monarchy, which (as they say)
is subject to the Kings pleasure, and therefore cannot so properly be called
their own, especially when under the power of an Army, or the like. But
although I am not wholly of that opinion, because I find Banks to be erected
and flourish, as well under the Great Mogull in the East Indies, as in Tuscany
under the great Duke, both which are as absolute Monarchs as any King of
Christendom; yet to give satisfaction to all, and especially to those
Merchants in London (whom I find almost generally averse to the erecting such
Banks as may submit their Estates to the pleasure of Supreme Authority or
Power) I have studied these kind of Banks whereinto no man will be compelled
to bring his Money; nay (as I have laid it) he cannot bring it if he would: But
if at any time by the consent and request of Merchants it be desired, that such
as will may deposite their real Money in Bank as a ground of security for
either Credit or Money at any time to be again drawn out of Bank at pleasure
without paying any Interest more then some small matter for keeping their
Accounts: This coming freely from the People, and being by their
Representatives enacted in Parliament, may be for their better satisfaction and
greater accommodation in Trade, and will be no prejudice at all to his
Majesty's Revenue, or disparagement in the least to Bank Credit, grounded upon
the foundations of Lands or Goods as aforesaid, which is and will be still of
as real a value as Gold or Silver, as I have before proved I hope to
satisfaction of all men.

I fear I have been too long in the explanation of these Banks, and tired the
Readers patience with Impertinences; yet in some particulars (perhaps) I am
short, whereby all may not fully understand what I am desirous none should be
ignorant in; which if it be any that may give it a furtherance, or that are
inclined to study or promote so public an undertaking, I should be as glad to
spend some further time in answering any written Objections, as I am willing to
give a meeting to those that desire rather by discourse a more clear or full
satisfaction; for having my self found a great benefit by discourse (on this
subject) with others, it were not Charity in me to deny the like to any: Some
there are that have given me their opinions, and others that have sent it in
writing as from unknown hands; and all prompting me to this further Edition,
which for the validity of the subject (out of the respect I owe my Country) I
heartily wish it had been handled by a more acute Wit and better Pen then mine.

I have therefore no better way to disperse those clouds which my dirty
expressions (in this Treatise) has cast upon so clear a demonstration of the
greatest Temporal advantages to our Sovereign Lord the King and Kingdom; then
to give you the opinion of an ingenuous Gentleman, Samuel Hartlipe Esquire,
which take in general as a Case put, (Viz.)

Suppose any company of men should proffer to lend his Majesty two or three
hundred Millions of Money gratis, let us consider what he would do therewith.

1. He could not employ it with safety any otherwise then by lending it forth
to the people upon sufficient security, at a reasonable Interest, because it is
but lent to him, and therefore must be restored.

2. It may be he would resolve also to raise Banks therewith, whereby the
Credit grounded upon such Money might run current amongst the people rather
then the Money it self, which is not so fit for daily use in great sums, in
respect of the trouble of telling and re-telling, the loss in clipped and
counterfeit Money, the hazard which men sustain in keeping much Money by them,
the trouble of carrying great sums of Money from house to house, and the danger
of conveying it in specie from one Town to another: Whereas dealing in such
Credit (as to all great sums) would prevent Highway Thieves, who if they have
nothing but goods to seize upon in the Road cannot go long undiscovered, nor
can advance any thing thereupon worth their attendance, which would totally
discourage them from following that lewd kind of life, and thereby free the
Highway of such kind of Vermin.

Credit also is better amongst the people in these two respects: First it
cannot be transported to other Nations: Secondly, it will not be hoorded up as
Money many times is, to the great hinderance of Trade; for that which will be
perhaps at first of least esteem amongst the common sort of people (if it be of
real value in it self) is most for their good; because every man striving to
post it off from himself does thereby quicken returns in Trade.

Now suppose that (upon these manifold considerations) such Banks should be
erected, and it should thereupon come to pass, that this Money thus lent to
the King should lie dead in Bank, and the people should make use of the Credit
in stead thereof (as they do in other places) I demand then to what purpose
this Money serves.

If it be said, it lies for a pawn to secure the Credit that runs current
instead thereof:

I answer, the Land which was taken for security when the Money was lent to the
people, is a sufficient pawn to make good such Credit; if not, then the Money
lent upon that security which fails is lost, but if the security hold good it
is the same with Money; and therefore if the King might venture to lend the
Money it self upon the best security, the people may even as well venture to
take such security it self for Money.

Hereupon, there is no doubt but the King (in order to his own security) would
restore this Money to the Owners, and proceed without it, as being first
altogether superfluous, secondly a great temptation to any home or inbred
disaffected spirits or Enemies; Thirdly, subject in process of time to the
fraud of Officers if it lie dead in Bank; and if it go abroad, then not so fit
for daily use as Credit, in the manifold respects already mentioned; and if
they thus proceed without the said Money, they do the same thing as is here
proposed.

The Premises considered, to dispute against the aforesaid Banks grounded upon
security, is the same thing as to oppose the accepting of the aforesaid Money
in specie, if it were to be lent the Nation gratis.

This being so, if any should ask whether the King would refuse the free Loan
of so much ready Money? I answer, surely no:

1. Because by the lending thereof to the people upon Interest, a Revenue may
be raised to free them from public burdens.

2. Interest might be brought to a low rate for the encouragement of Trade, and
without any compulsive Law.

3. The filling the Land with so exceeding great a quantity of Money would by
the revolution thereof quicken Trade in the highest degree.

4. It would be a means to furnish the people with abundance of Stock to employ
in the Forain Trade, Fishing, Plantations, improving their own Lands, drowned
and wasted Grounds, Mines, etc. in all the three Nations.

5. By such fall of Interest, Land would rise much in price; which (besides the
help of sufficient Stock and quick vent) would much encourage the improvement
thereof.

6. Many public burdens and grievances would be prevented thereby (as is
already observed,) viz. Oppression amongst Brokers and Extortioners; the
trouble, charge and hazard in returning of Money, highway Thieves,
imprisonment for debt, innumerable Lawsuits, losses by failers, underselling
the Market, enhancing Forain Commodities, and debasing the value of our own;
and in brief the burden of all bur^^ens, namely, extreme Poverty; with diverse
other particulars, which I shall not further repeat.

Now considering our present great extremity for want of Stock and Money, who
that loves his Country would be against the accepting of such an immense
Treasure of good and current Coin, if it were prossered this Nation gratis? And
yet it plainly appears by the Premises, that all this Treasure lies within our
own reach, in that kind of Bullion which is better then Money in specie, and
wants nothing but the mere stamp of Authority to make it current, and has this
further advantage in it, that it may be made use of to the Worlds end, without
fearing it should ever be demanded, which so much Money lent gratis cannot.

To conclude therefore, it plainly appears, that the way to remove Poverty,
Taxes and most public grievances, and to make this Nation abound in Wealth,
Trade, Cities, Shipping, People and Renown, is (according to means) neither
unpracticable nor difficult: Except we renounce all humane Prudence, and with
the Sluggard in the Proverbs, create difficulties to our selves where God has
made none.

POSTSCRIPT.
THE Author is doubtful this proposal is mistaken, as well as his person; for
there are some that have been pleeased to report him the Son of Cradock the
Preacher, so great with Cromwell, to whom the same or others say he presented
this Proposal, without success. Also it is reported, he proposed the same thing
to the Elector of Brandenburge, where his projects so dislasted the people,
that he was forced to fly from their fury to that Prince for succor: And from
hence draws a conclusion, That it cannot be of worth, since Cromwell and
others refused to embrace it.

Now forasmuch as these are most notorious untruths, and reported either to
invalidate the Proposal, or for other ends in prejudice to the Author, he
cannot do less then give this in answer.

And first, that he is not the Son, nor of Kin to the aforesaid Cradock, but
was the Son of another of that name, who lived about 17 years since in Somerset
shire near Glastenbury, in which County be had about five bundred pounds per
Ann. and was also possessed of so loyal a soul, that had his Estate been ten
times more, he would have engaged all, with his life, which he lost in the
service of his King and Country: And as to that of divulging this Proposal to
Cromwell, the Author does in the presence of God protest, he never found in
himself any inclination to do him the least of good, much less to offer him
what he esteems of so much worth; and that he did not discover it to any,
until he had acquainted the Lord General Monck thereof, after his restoring
the Secluded Members.

Likewise for that of promoting it in the Elector of Brandenburghs Country,
the Author does protest he never saw that Prince, nor set foot in his Country;
and therefore is abused in that also, conceiving he is mistaken for some other
that in Cromwells time did endeavor the establishing Banks of Money in
England, or else is misunderstood in a former Book of his, which he so far
owns, as that he mentioned it in a Postscript of his late Expedient: It was a
book for reducing the Excise of Forain Goods under the management of the
Customs, for the case of the abused Merchant, and at the request of some of
them was printed in Richards Patliament, and by the Author again reprinted
after the Lord General had restored the Secluded Members, and took effect in
all such duties as were continued. And since the Author for intending good, and
freely offering it to serve his Country, has not deserved those ill reports,
he hops that such as hear the like for time to come, will be so ingenuous as
to acquaint him of the reporters, who will have as much thanks from the Author
as they deserve, and his short stay in England (from whence so^e occasions
calls him) permit him to requite.

A TABLE of the most general and principal Heads.
THE benefit of Inventions, and small encouragement they receive in England,
page 1, 2. The Original cause and use of Money, and the several sorts,
introduced to pass current in Forain parts, p. 2, 3. Gold and Silver made the
measure of Commerce: It Is not the denomination or stamp of Sovereignty, but the
security of value that makes all Moneys current, p. 3, 4. That payments are and
may be made upon the Credit of Money, as well as by Money in specie, and of the
descrip^ion of Banks in general, 4, 5. 9, 10. 17, 18. That Goods, Jewels, and
other pledges, may supply the credit of Money, 5, 6, 7. The inconveniences of
Money, etc. 7, 8, 9. That Lands may be made as good or better security then
Moneys or Jewels, and will supply the defects of Money, 8, 9, 10. The design
for Banks in England, and how the Credit of Lands, Goods, etc. may be made to
pass current in payment from one Country or person to another, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14. That the aforesaid credit will be esteemed as good, and h^ld
acceptable, as the best Gold or Silver, 14, 15, 16. 1. An Answer to such as may
object, That though some will approve of Credit in Bank yet others may dislike
it at some times for diverse reasons, 16, 17, 18, 19. 2. Objection (That the
introducing so much current Credit to serve instead of Money will in time
evacuate the use of Money) answered, 19, 20, 21. 3. Objection (That the great
plenty of Money, or Credit instead thereof, will cause all Commodities to rise
in price accordingly) answered, 21, 22, 23. 4. Objection (That Usurers will be
great losers by the erecting such Banks) answered, 23, 24. 5. Objection (That
Widows and Orphans will have prejudice thereby) answered, 24, 25, 26, 27.
The Description of petty Banks, 25, 26, 27. 6. Objection (That such Banks will
not be established without registring Estates, and therefore be opposed in
Parliament) answered, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. 7. Objection (That the discovering
Titles and Conveyances will rather augment then abbreviate Suits) answered, 32,
33.
How all men wanting Moneys, may be supplied at 3 per Cent. per ann. for
Interest; Of the many advantages thereby, and the disadvantages for want of a
competent Stock at low Interest, 33, 34, 35, 36. 16, 17, 22. That a great
Revenue (of at least two Millions yearly) will be brought into his Majesty's
Treasury, by the ease of the people, 36, 37, 38. 8. Objection (That such as
have no Lands or real Estates, will have no advantage, but rather a prejudice
thereby) answered, 38, 39.
That his Majesty hereby (at any time wanting Money) may procure a Million
either at home, or in Forain parts, without obliging others for the same, 39,
40. Merchants of England being averse to the erecting Banks of Money, caused
the Author to contrive these of another nature, which will prove of much
greater advantage to the Nation, 8, 40. A recital of a Case put by Samuel
Hartlipe Esquire in favor of this Credit in Bank upon Lands, etc. 41, 42, 43.
FINIS.

