To the Merchants and Clothiers of England.
GENTLEMEN:
Though I have for many years attended that which I have conceived, to be the
greatest Concern of any that related to the Merchants and Clothiers, etc. which
is that of preventing Transportation of Wool; and though I have met with many
discouragements in it, not only by reason of the greatness of my expense and
neglect of time, the many hardships and dangers I went through: But by reason
that all those endeavors have been misinterpreted by some, and slighted and
neglected by others; as if the Charge I had been at, had not been considerable,
or as if the Pains I had taken, had been no way effectual to prevent a great
deal of this mischief, that would otherwise have certainly and unavoidably
followed: Yet those that have been more thoroughly acquainted with my
endeavors, cannot but be convinced of the contrary.

From which Convictions, some were pleased long since to give me a testimony of
the Truth thereof; in the Year 1672, I pr^^^et an Advertisement to the
Clothiers and Merchants, and laying before them the consequence of delays, and
how far I had proceeded at that time, and was in a fair way to put a stop to
that Mischief: Having made such a discovery of grand Transporters; I prosecuted
and convicted many of them, but for want of necessary assistance, I was forced
to desist.

Notwithstanding all those discouragements, perceiving at length what I had for
some time a suspicion of, that some Persons at the then next Session of
Parliament, did not only appear to justify the Fact of Transportation of Wool
privately, but did appear publicly and in Print, to assert and avow the
conveniance that it would be to this Nation; and therefore did desire, that an
Act of Parliament might be made for a limited Exportation, giving also some
pretended Reasons for the same.

In March 1676 a Bill was put into the Hand of an Eminent Member of the then
House of Commons, to be brought into that House, with whom I had some
Discourse, and did so far diswade him to delay, till the following Letter
prevailed on the Factors, and some Clothiers then in Town, to assist me.

March the 22 d. 1676
Sirs, Having been at Westminster this day, and spoke with diverse Members, I
find the Arguments for the Exportation of Wool, have so far prevailed with the
Parliament Men, that a Bill is already put in Sr. T. M ^^ Hand to bring it into
the House, which may be done this very day (although I had some Discourse with
him about it, and did endeavor to diswade him from it)

The Consequence of which, seeing it must tend to the utter Ruin of the
Clothing Trade, and seeing I have done the utmost that can be expected on my
part to prevent it, which is to draw up Reasons effectually to make out the
Inconvenience of it, which I have also put into the Printer's hand.

I thought it my Duty therefore, further to acquaint you, that unless some
further speedy Course be taken for a general meeting, to consider how, and in
what manner this Mischief should be obviated. I conceived the Interest of the
Clothier would suddenly have grown desperate, seeing no private or single Man's
appearing in this Case, who ever he be, can signify any thing to oppose it.

I am much convinced, that not only the Clothing Trade, but the very Interest
of the Nation in general is at stake, and in hazard to be utterly lost, if
this Point should now be wholly neglected? This I have for some Years foreseen,
and have talked of, but it has not been regarded, but you will find that I
speak not slightly, but on good grounds, and what there is just Cause to
suspect, will come to pass, if this Matter be not with Industry and Diligence
prevented.



After I had prevailed with the Clothiers to give me some encouragement; I did
then endeavor to use proper Arguments, and took a fit Season to present them,
when the House of Commons was so earnest for the prohibiting French
Commodities, laying before them, that the Wool endeavored to be limited for
Transportation was principally intended for France, which proved so effectual
for the Ends designed; which Arguments I refer you to for your further
satisfaction, viz. Page 3. 4. 5. 6. of my Reply.

After this was laid aside, the next Session of Parliament comes a Gentleman
that has been all along my Competitor, and brings in a Bill, and prevailed so
far as to get it read and committed, upon which I drew up the following
Petition, which was signed by several eminent Merchants and Factors, viz.

Whereas there is a Bill depending, the Preamble whereof seems to be against
Transportation of Wool, the Scope and Consequence of it (as is humbly
conceived) will tend rather to encourage it: For whereas it is suggested in the
said Bill, that the Act made in the 14th. Year of His Majesty's Reign, making
Transporting of Wool Felony, is ineffectual for the preventing thereof, and
therefore prays the Repealing the Felony of that Act, without confirming the
rest of that Act; as if making Transportation to be Felony did encourage
Transporting; that Suggestion with all submission is conceived to be a great
mistake: For though it must be granted (whatever Laws have been or shall be
made in this case) that some Persons for their own Lucre (though it be never so
much to the Damage of the great Manufacture of this Kingdom, and
notwithstanding all the Care imaginable) will adventure to transport Wool. Yet
for some Years after that Act of the 14 Car. 2. was in force, there was a great
stop put to the said Transportation, until wool so increased in ^^^land beyond
its Consumption there and here, that great Quan tities were actually
transported from thence; but till that Glut the Act of the 12th. Year of His
Majesty's Reign (by which the Forfeiture was Three Shillings for every pound of
Wool, besides the Wool forfeited) conjoined with the Act in the 14th Year of
His Majesty's Reign, was found effectual to prohibit Transporting Wool, for
the Prosecutor had liberty to prosecute upon which Act he pleased as to the
Forfeiture.

Your Petitioner further shows: That it is well known that the most part of
the goods, which are Yearly Imported into this Kingdom, being to the value of
several Millions of pounds Sterling, are no otherwise answered, but by the
value of the Commodities which are exported hence; the bulk of which consists
chiefly in our Woollen-Manufacture.

And it must be granted, that the employment of the Shipping of this Kingdom,
which is wholly the maintenance of Seamen, depends not (as in some other
Countries) upon the Fishing, but upon the said Manufacture mainly and
principally:

Which therefore is at this time the chief support of this Kingdom, as that
upon which the whole Trade Custom, Shipping, and Strength of it does mainly
depend; over and above the employment that is given to the Poor, and the price
that is raised upon all sorts of victuals, and consequently upon Land it self.

From all which it must naturally follow, that Wool, the material of the said
Manufacture, ought to be very dear to us, which if we are not senssible of ur
selves, the French King will teach us; who well under standing, not only
wherein the interest of this Kingdom does consist, but how to supplant it for
the advancement of of his own, has of late years used all Artifices, to
acquire the making the said Manufacture in his own Dominions with our Wool;
thereby drawing away the sweet Sapp and Juice from our Root, for the
nourishment of a foreign Country, and endeavoring to starve our own, in order
to which, he labors to prevent the Importation of our Manufacture, either into
his own or other Countries, and has therefore laid diverse heavy Taxes upon it.

Notwithstanding which, and though the said design does obviously and manifestly
appear, yet some are so ready to contribute to their Countries Ruin, as to
argue for, defend, promote, and encourge the Transportation of Wool.

I also printed a broad sheet, entitled Some Considerations humbly offered to
the Honorable House of Commons; and got some eminent Merchants to assist me at
the Committee; by which means it was then laid aside: To which Paper after the
Adjournment of the Parliament, I wrote a Narrative of the Proceedings, dated
the 15 of July 1678, and printed it on the back side of the Considerations, to
which I also refer you.

I shall only add, that the Person therein mentioned is he, that about fiveteen
Years ago, was endeavoring to put a Tax of 2 d. per Tod, upon all Wool of the
growth of England and Ireland, to be paid by the buyer, and that upon Oath,
which I then prevented, and this was for some private Person, and the same
Person is still endeavoring to oppose me by his Agents.

Having therefore for many Years made it my Care to secure the Prohibition of
the Exportation of Wool, and been ready in all places to obviate the Designs
of those, who went about to enervate and alter the Laws made therein: I have
spent much Time and Money in my Attendances both on the King and Council at
every Session of Parliament: where I have been constantly vigilent.

I have also humbly represented to His Excellency the Lord Livetennant of
Ireland (now going thither) the mischief of Transportation of Irish Wool which
upon my Petition to His Majesty is referred to His Excellencies Care.

Besides my Journies and late Services in Kent, in overseeing the Vessels at
Sea, has been no small Charge to me, wherein also my Danger has been as Great
as my Success, in regard the Exporters go armed, and have ventured to kill
those that oppose them.

And since I have taken the three Sloops, the French King has put out three
Men of War, who are now crusing upon our Coast, to protect the French Sloops in
stealing away our Wool.

And this present Month, viz. 3 d. of November 1685 about midnight, a parcel of
Wool ready to be ship't off, being seized on the Sea side near Hythesiade in
the County of Kent, the French Men that belonged to the Sloop that waited to
transport it, being well armed, fell upon us that seized it, and rescuing the
Wool carried it away to Sea.

Now seeing our Adversaries are so bold and daring, that what they cannot
accomplish by secret Fraud, they will carry on by open Force; besides the
Diligence and Industry to prevent them, there are apparent hazards of Life.

Therefore as well in Consideration of my past Services, the charge of Servants
and Assistance, as the present burden lies upon me in looking after the said
Vessels, as also my constant and unalterable Resolutions, by my future
continued Attendances in all Places. Needful and strict Vigilance to secure
this Point: Therefore I cannot but doubt, that I may have reason to expect
Encouragement therein, by some light and easy Contribution of all Persons
concerned, least otherwise I ruin my private Condition, while I am
endeavoring to serve the Public.

Gentlemen Your Humble Servant W. Carter.


