A Tender Salutation: OR, The Substance of a Letter given forth by the
Rationals, to the Despised Remnant, and Seed of GOD, in the People called
QUAKERS.

By him, of whom the World is not worthy known by the Name of Rodger Crabb, O.

LONDON: Printed for J B 1659.

A Tender Salutation, etc.
IN essence the Father of Spirits, this is the Word of the Lord unto you people
called Quakers: I would that you remember when I first called you forth in
simplicity of heart, to bear my testimony of Judgment in you, against the gross
darkness and filthiness in the People; for which Testimony you have suffered
stripes and imprisonments, burnings, ^ufferings, and what not; and in all this
you fainted not, but still acknowledged, that it was by my hand and power that
you were upheld: Therefore I would, that you would keep in, out of Self, and
behold Wisdoms Work with a single eye: See how I have taken the Children of
Darkness, and made them a Rod in my Hand, to persecute and try you, that both
you and they might have advantage thereby, that they may be wounded by your
stripes; and that you may be purified by their violence; that I might make you
a Body, or a Woman, having conceived by my power, might be made fit to bring
forth my Child, that I might be made manifest to the Out-parts of the Earth:
Therefore make not Self your Midwife, nor call upon the Children of Darkness to
deliver you, or to prosecute your (...): for unless you turn back again, they
can yield your flesh no comfort, (...) your form or beloved which you have set
up according to my order; for although I gave you order to set up a Form or a
Beloved, exceeding all Beloveds, it was not that you should stick there: nor as
yet intended that you should be Supreme Judge over all, only you are to judge
all that are below you in the Truth. Therefore, know this O Woman, the Child
thou should a brought forth, sticks in the birth, because Self has taken up
his ^^ode in that beautiful Beloved, and is willing to sit down there, and to
contain the Child in its Limits and Bounds: But even I the Lord, when this
Beloved has done her work, I shall disfigure her Form, and rend her Bonds like
a strong Lion, rending the prey; so that all that I find faithful in this
Beloved, I shall fill up their measures, and make them run over with such
Floatings and Rivers of Life, that the Powers of the Earth shall not be able to
impropriate, or measure it one to another; for all Beloveds, and all Forms
shall pass away, and be brought to nothing; and then will I (sight) even I the
Lord, when all is come to nothing, create a New Heaven, and a New Earth, where
no impure thing can be, where no Righteousness, nor Unrighteousness can enter;
where one shall be all, and all one. This this was, and now is, and shall be
again, to those that said before it was; to those that see it now it is, to
those that shall see it, it is to come. Therefore, know this my Beloved One,
that see Wisdoms Steps, Power and Dominion; the Serpents Wisdom is my Servant,
for I created it; without me it could not be, the Serpent could not make it,
but only to the Children of Darknes^. Therefore turn in, turn in, my Beloved
One, look with a single Eye which pierces through all Forms and Beloveds, and
there shall thou see that there is but one Power over all, though Darkness does
imagine many; for one other Beloved have I yet to set up, which far exceeds all
Beloveds that ever yet were in form: To all that behold him afar off he is
terrible; he appears pale, and black as Hell: but if once they come to behold
his Face, they will be ravished with his Beauty: For this Beloved is like a
City with three Gates, and a Guard of Watchmen at each Gate: the Watch at the
first Gate examines and tries all Passengers and Spirits that would enter; And
if they cannot lose the pleasure of the outward Sense, the pleasing of the
Pallat, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of the Eye, they will not admit,
nor suffer them to enter. The second Gate, and the Watch there tries the
secrets of the Heart, and the Righteousness and Idols set up therein, they will
suffer nothing but good to enter, which feeds only of the Tree of Life. The
third Gate none can enter, that feeds of the Tree of Knowledge, of Good and
Evil, or that have any Sin or Righteousness left, or any Earth-thing that bears
either Name or Term distinct from other; neither Joy nor Sorrow, Good nor Evil,
for all tears must be there wiped away, and all brought down to nothing, that
Wisdom only may be all in all in sight of the Enterer: Therefore, look about
you, o ye wise men of the Earth, for danger is coming forth to the Spirits that
lives in the Flesh; for even I wisdom have prepared a Fool, and clothed him in
White Sheeps Clothing, and sent him back again through the three Gates, to
deceive you of your Black Sheeps Clothing, and of the Pride that you have
therein, and all your Artificial Colors invented by the Serpents Wisdom only
and alone to please the pride of the Eye; and he will also deceive you, or some
of you, in drawing you from the pleasurable Bits to the Pallat, and from your
Idols of Gold and Silver, and the Glory of your Buildings, and from all
corruptable pleasures, and so forth: Evil to him that evil thinks; let Envy
increase in the Envious, and Fury in the furious, I will fill up their Cups,
that it may break them to pieces with shatterings and torments, that they may
be consumed and brought to nothing: Even so it shall be, for I am the Lord.

This indicted by my Servant, Rowedger Criop, O.


