A Hue and Cry after BLOODSHED;
OR, A short Relation of that inhuman, barbarous, cruel, and bloody Tragedy,
acted upon the Innocent People of God called QVAKERS, at their Meeting, at Bull
and Mouth within Aldersgate, upon the 31. of the 6th. Month, 1662. by some of
the trained Bands of the City of LONDON.

HEarken and give heed, ye that are called Magistrates, and likewise all
People, of what condition soever, of this great City of London and elsewhere:
What have we the poor innocent people of God called Quakers done, that such
cruel and bloody usage we should receive from your hands? Have we been at any
time found plotters against the life of any person? or have we been sowers of
sedition? or have we been peace-breakers, or tumult-raisers? or any that have
in the least fomented mischief, or trouble to the Government? I say, the God of
our life clears us in all such cases. Therefore who is not astonished at such
bloody actions, to have persons come with swords drawn, and other weapons, and
with unheard of violence, to cut and hew, and knock down, sparing neither age
nor sex, spilling so much blood as there was; who will not blush at such
actions? And as though we were appointed for nothing else, but to satiate the
minds of blood-thirsty men, and to do it by order, as they say. Oh fear, dread
and tremble, ye Citizens of London, and others; and as if there were no Law in
England, but club Law: Was there ever such things acted in times of peace, and
at such time as it is said, the restoration of the ancient Laws of England is?
I tell you, I have read the History of the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, but
then they dealt with them by Law, though exceeding wicked and cruel, yet not by
club-Law, as now; does not this exceed Bonner and Gardnor's cruelty? for they
would still endeavor to convince before they murdered; but you will kill before
you convince, all which considered, far exceeds their cruelty: Must innocent
blood be the cry in this great City, that must bring down the fierce vengeance
of the eternal God upon you, and to make an utter desolation, devastation, and
to lay it on heaps? I tell you, the Cry is heard, and Judgment is at hand;
therefore lay it to heart all people: And as for the acters of this bloody
Tragedy, your portion you will have in the Lake, amongst your Brethren. O
London, London, is there no bowels of compassion left in thee! is all given up
to obduracy and hardness of heart? Woe is me for thee; do thou sport thy self,
and make such actions thy mirth? and must our innocent blood be mingled with
thy daily Sacrifices? why do you hunt our lives, as a Partridge is hunted upon
the Mountain? and is it because our Religion is different from yours? do you
think to force us to yours by sheding our bloods? I tell you nay, that will
never be; we abhor in our souls all such actions, and do also loath that cursed
way of (Heaven driving) which never was practiced by true Christians, but by
cruel Heathens altogether, and such as were professed enemies to every
appearance of God; and will ye of this generation practice their cursed bloody
works, that ye may pull down the plagues of God upon you and your posterity, as
they did? and have ye not read, how that the wicked and blood-thirsty shall not
live out half their days? think ye God eternal is not as just as he has been,
and that he will not recompense your work into your bosom? Oh London, London,
how am I smitten for thee! Oh, how am I bowed down under the unheard of
wickedness that is committed and practiced daily, and then covered up in thy
skirt! Oh, where is the man in power, that seeks to suppress vice! I say, he
need not hunt it in the twy-light, or search into corners and holes for it; but
at midday, and high-noon, in the chief streets of thy City, and every where
else does it appear? is it past the Magistrates power, or cannot his sword
comprehend it? I say, if so, then an overflowing scourge from the hand of the
Lord, is as natural for you as your food and sustenance; and I faithfully
believe from God it attends you. Oh my soul, my soul, mourn and weep till thou
have emptied thy Cisterns of sorrow! Oh, that ever a City, a professing City, a
City whose Inhabitants are called Christians; (and besides, the cry that is
now, that the ancient Laws are restored, and true Religion again settled on its
Basis,) should see her Inhabitants blood laid upon the pavements, for their
unpolluted Consciences in the worship of their God; yea, and by their own
Neighbors, and by authority and order (as is said.) Oh, my very soul bleeds
within me for these things! where are you that call your selves Overseers or
Bishops, and by some (reverend Fathers in God?) where are you that you come not
forth in this great day of scattering, and of gathering, and seek out the poor,
hunted, worried, and driven sheep, and carry them on your shoulders to your
fold. If we be in an error, why do not you come and convince us of that error?
if we be deluded, why do not you come amongst us, and tell us wherein? I tell
you, it would be worth your while, to come into our Meetings, and there both
openly confute us, and convince us, before the people; which actions, in
meekness and pure moderation performed, would make you honorable in the places
wherein you are set, and then those names wherewith you are entitled, would
not be vain and a lie, (which otherwise seems to be) and by that means you
might happily convert many to your Faith, which you say is the true Faith; and we
much question it, because of the fruits, which manifests it: But alas, alas,
instead of your coming with humility, in your own persons, your messengers
treat us far otherwise; for they come to kill, and not to convince, and to shed
our bloods, and not to convert us. Behold ye Bishops, ye cannot be ignorant of
this, for known be it to you, it has not been once or twice, nor many times
more, that the like Tragedy has been acted in that place, though not
altogether so bloody as on the day precited; for it was taken notice of, at
that time and place, there came one or more Papists to the assistance of the
party, and one was seen to take a drawn sword out of a Soldiers hand, who cut
and hewed all that in his way stood, which made that days work more bloody
than usual; [but in prudence to his cause, he might have had more patience;]
these were bystanders, and no Soldiers, but well-wishers to that bloody work,
which was that day perpetrated by those that cry out, we will make you conform
to the Church of England, and the Laws. Now O ye men, that bear the name of
Bishops, do you justify these men in these actions, or do you think that
conformity will ever be wrought by that means, and in that way, by spilling of
innocent blood? Oh, what shall I say, if these be some of the fruits of your
Religion, that you would have us conform to, I must and do call it a bloody
Religion; we are not ignorant what true Religion, pure, and undefiled before
God is, viz. to visit the fatherless and widows in their afflictions, etc.
which Religion we own, love, and are in, and for which we suffer this day; and
I do aver in Gods fear to this Religion, there is no Law, either secular or
military; for it wholly consists of love and charity, which never was, is, or
shall be forced or compelled, nor ever did it mix it self with any coercive
power since the world began, but has remained a pure, chaste virgin from
eternity, and will remain to eternity: but what shall I say? this is a
mystery to you learned ones; and if at any time it be told you, ye call it
(canting, or Chemical Divinity) but that matters little what you call it; I
aver it to be so, and the Spirit of the eternal God, which has instructed and
guided me therein, has sealed it unto me. And further, know you that presume
to set your posts by the posts of the Lords house, your Religion, and not only
yours, but the Religion of the whole world, from head to tail, not being
instituted by the Spirit of the eternal God, and founded upon love [which is
free from force] I tell you, it is all a lie, and a juggle, and indeed the
great cheat of the world; for the eternal Being is neither to be limited to
time, place, as when, and where, or by quantity measured, so much and no more,
so little and no less: I say and do aver, God eternal knows no such service,
as to be limited or comprehended. Oh vain man, what art thou doing! will thou
that comes forth of time, and ends in time, go about to comprehend eternity in
thy vain imaginations? thou pot-sheard, thou heap of dust, thou Attome of dust,
not seen but in the Suns ray, for littleness; have thou not read, that the
Nations of the earth are as grasshoppers about his Throne? how dare thou then
go about to limit and set bounds to his holy Spirit, in any appearance
whatsoever in his People? Now consider these things in the pure fear of God,
for they are wonderful weighty, and if you can, stop those bloody incursions
and inroads that are daily made upon Gods innocent people in their Meetings, it
may be well for you; but if you persist and persevere in these Tragical works,
know this, and be it known unto you from the Lord God, that as you thirst after
blood, blood shall be given you to drink, with which you shall be choked, and
you shall be spewed out of every mind, as nautious, unsavory, indigested meat
is cast out of the stomach, when it is burdened with it. This is Gods Eternal
Truth to you, which will stand on your heads for ever: And as for us, who are
the only objects of your cruelty, many and great have been the provokations
wherewith we have been provoked, not only from you, but from the Powers gone
also, though our provokations from you are much more vehement and cruel, and I
may say, more barbarous and inhuman, many degrees; and though it has been your
intents, both of you, to make us break forth into rebellion, that you might
have but one stroke at us, and no more, and so cut us off from the face of the
earth, from being a People; I know in Gods fear, this is, and has been your
ends, but the Lord has prevented you, and does prevent you even to this day;
for the Lord God has brought us forth in his Lamb like spirit: And know you
this, we have not the envy that is said to be in a worm, which being trod upon,
will turn again; and the Lord has clothed us with his patience, which was
before your cruelty, or any cruelty in the world was, and I do aver, will also
outlive your fury, be it as hot as Hell fire; and so in the strength of God,
which is the patient suffering Seed in us, we bid all cruelty and fury of men
defiance; for we well know the Power that gives you power, and we further know,
he can restrain the wrath and fury of man when he pleases, and can turn it to
his praise, and in his due time he will also accomplish what he has determined,
concerning the enemies of his holy Seed, not only in this Nation, but
throughout the whole world, which this day groans for deliverance, from under
that horrid and cruel oppression of Conscience, in matters of Religion.
Therefore be awakened all you Magistrates of both Orders, and People of all
sorts, lest you dip and plunge your selves into the blood of the innocent, as
some did, not many Generations since, the stench of which remains upon the face
of earth to this day, and is yet not wiped away; therefore what they left
undone, do not you finish, lest you bear the burden of their wickedness upon
your shoulders, and so go out of your generation with a stench, as they did;
and what hard measure we have received from you, if it be the will of the Lord,
that ye may, both high and low, and every soul who has contributed to our
troubles, be forgiven.

Rich. Crane.

Printed in the Year 1662.


