An ALARM Sounded in the Borders of Spiritual Egypt, Which shall be heard in
Babylon, and astonish the Inhabitants of the Defiled and Polluted Habitations
of the Earth.

And the Power of the Prince of Darkness called into Question; and he himself
Examined by the Truth, how he came to reign over Mankind; and how long his time
shall be, till he come to be cast out of his Dominion, and the Creature be
delivered from under his Tyranny; to serve God in Spirit and in Truth, as
Christ, the Prince of Peace has ordered them

Also the Number of him, whom the world has wondered after, found out; and
demonstrated to be near at an End: and withal, that it is no ways unlawful,
nor in vain, both to hope, and to expect the ^^ter Desolation, and Destruction,
of Sin in this Life, and the setting up of perfect Righteousness, in the souls
of men, where Sin has too long reigned.

Written in a Testimony to the Truth, and against the false Position of the
Devil and his Servants; by a Servant of God, Steven Crisp. Mat. 15.12, 13, 14.
Then came his Disciples, and said unto him, Know^^ thou that the Pharisees were
offended after they heard this Saying, But he said, Let them alone, they be
blind Leaders of the Blind, etc.

1 John 3.8. He that commits Sin, is of the Devil, etc. Printed in the Year,
1671.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
This small Treatise, does not Appear with the Approbation of the Learned
Doctors of this our Age; Neither do I believe, it will be received in the
Accademies, or Universities, and among the Rabbis, whether they be Papists or
Protestants; and considering the Subject, it is not like that it should get
such Patrons. And therefore must I singly Recommend it, to the Witness of God,
in thy own Conscience, who ever thou art; by which Witness thou know, that
as long as the Devil Reigns in thee, it is not as it ought to be: And if thou
be at all desireous, that it should or might be as it ought, it will be no
ways offensive unto thee to hear of the overthrow of him, that has brought out
of order; and withal, of the Appearance of him, who is the Restorer of Israel,
and the right Heir of the Gentiles.

And this one thing I do desire of thee, of what Profession, Religion, or
Judgment thou may be to wit, That thou layst by thy own Interest of the
Controversy (for a little time) and read without prejudice or partiallity, and
be not offended, that another is not of thy Judgment; but consider, that thou,
in thy own particular art in one and the same Transgression, in the matter
aforesaid; seeing the greatest part of Mankind is not of thy Judgment; And
they have as much power to Judge thee, that thou art wrong, as thou have to
Judge me that I am wrong. Therefore read in coolness, and consider what thou
read'st; as knowing, that it is God that must give an understanding: and
whereas the Subject or Matter of the Treatise does comprehend much, and many
things are but hinted at, therefore look up to the Lord, who can enlarge thy
understanding in it, as it pleases him.

And as concerning the Priests, who are so busy to make Complaints against
Sectarians, Heretics, and heretical Books; desiring the Magistrates, they
would abuse their Power, to defend them and their Doctrine by Persecution: They
would do better, to employ their time in the answering of these Positions. And
whereas they are called Spiritual, let them fight with Spiritual Weapons (if
they have them) and bring forth something in defense of their old Master, and
his Kingdom and Power, now in a time of need, when it is near come to an end.

And whereas the words Government, Dominion, Reign, and Kingdom, are often
used; by which, some of perverse Minds may conclude, That I intend thereby the
Overthrow, or Changing or Subverting of outward Government. To prevent such a
Momus, I do declare in the sight of God, and before all Men, That I have no
such thought, or intention; perfectly declaring my Judgment, viz. That a
Christian ought to live peaceably, and quietly under all sorts of Governments,
which the Lord permits to be, or is pleased to set up; and I do believe, That
the Ruling or Government of an Emperor, King, Prince, or State in it self, is
not Repugnant to, but Co^sist^nt with the Government of Christ, whose Kingdom
is Spiritual; and the more he Re^gns in the Hearts of People, the easier will
it be for the Rulers of th^s World to f^lfill their Office, and if the Devil
were wholly dis-thron'd; yet no^withstanding, they might still Rule, De^ree^ng
Justice, according to the Words of him, who said, By me Kings Reign, and the
Princes decree Jus^ice; by me Princes Rule, and the Nobles, even all the Judges
of the Earth, Prove. 8.15, 16. And then they would be under him, who is their
King and Lord; and the People would live a pleasant, Godly and peaceable life,
under their Respective Kings and Lords.

And seeing these things are promised, and that he is faithful that has
promised them; Why should not we then hope for, and expect the fulfilling
thereof? And so, Courteous Reader, having given thee this short Caution and
Instruction, I leave thee to Read the following Discourse, and Remain a Friend
to thee and all Men.

S. C.

An ALARM Sounded in the Borders of Spiritual Egypt Which shall be heard in
BABYLON, and Astonish the Inhabitants of the Defiled and Polluted Habitations
of the EARTH.
MAny are the Devices of Satan, and great is the Subtilty which he furnishes
his Children and Servants withal; by which he seeks to uphold his kingdom;
pleading now a Right to that which he got by Subtilty; and has taught his whole
Family, That it is impossible for any to be freed from under his Service; even
as if all men, that are created of God, were created to the service of the
Devil: and although he can make no man, yet that he is able, after they are
made, to keep them in his service; yea, although their Maker does call for them
to serve him: And so by this supposed Necessity (which is a Doctrine
well-pleasing to the flesh) he keeps Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, and People in
Bondage to his will; and not only so, but he has so bewitched, and besotted his
whole Synagogue, and every sort in it, that they cannot endure to hear that
they should be made free; and all that comes to declare Liberty to these
Captives, and an opening of the Door of this Prisonhouse (the darkness) unto
those that are shut up within it; they cry out against such, Away with them
from the Earth; let them be Crucified, Stoned, Hanged, Burned, Imprisoned and
Banished; or at least, derided and mocked at, and all manner of evil be spoken
of them: And what have they done? They have preached against Sin, that it must
come to an end; and have preached that that which is Perfect is to be found in
this life, by which men might come to the acceptable Year of the Lord, unto
whom there is nothing acceptable which is imperfect.

Certainly there is no manner of Slaves, so well contented with their Bondage,
as the Devil's are; and therefore it is worth the considering, what right he
has to Reign over Mankind, and what Work it is, he gives his Servants to do,
that is so well pleasing unto them, that they cannot endure to hear of being
set at liberty, as long as they have a day to live: As for my part I have
considered; what right the Devil can claim to the Government, which he has
among the Children of Men, reigning over Kings and Princes, Priests and People,
from one Sect to another, setting them all to work in blind Zeal one against
another, yet all agreeing in this one Question (to wit) Is there any Man or
Woman upon the Earth, that is freed from under the reign of the Devil, that he
can live without Sin? or is it possible for any to be so? the general Answer
is, No; we are all, and must be all his Servants all the days of our lives.
But some might say, Seeing you are all Fellow Servants; and that both you, and
your Work do belong to one Master, why then are you disagreeing with one
another about the work: But Oh, my soul longs that some might be awakened,
once to consider, and to bethink themselves, how they came to this state and
condition, and by what right and authority, their Master keeps them in this
Bondage; and whether it i^ not both lawful and possible, to come from under it.

And in the first place it is to be considered, that this spirit, which is
called the Devil and Satan, had no dominion over Man in the beginning; for God
gave Man power over all Beasts, Fishes, Fowls, and over every creeping thing,
that he should Rule over them; and in that time, the Devil that old creeping
Serpent was kept under, and could not speak, nor command as with authority, and
he being but a subject himself, he sought to have dominion; having lost the
glory of the everlasting Kingdom, and so he came to the Woman, which was made
and brought forth in a time of sleep and persuaded her, (Mark, not commanded)
and his persuasion was; that she should break the Command of God; under
pretense that she should be profited thereby: So here was but a sneeking
underly spirit, coming to the Woman in a deceitful feigned manner, with a Lie
in his mouth, to see if he could deceive her, and lead her to be disobedient to
her God and Maker; Who could then have thought, that this spirit, that was
subject to all sorts of misery, should have reigned and ruled over so many
Millions of thousands of Men, both high and low, young and old? Well, the Woman
hearkened after a Lie, and broke the Command of God, and went to try whether
this Serpent had found out a way, to make her better or not; and not only so,
but went to the Man, and gave him also, and he did eat: Mark, this Devil; the
old Serpent, he did not go to the Man; that was a work too high for him; but
there comes his Companion, (which was given of God) which was of his Flesh and
Bones, to tempt him; he did not hearken to the Devil, but to his deceived Wife,
and he did eat, and their Eyes were opened, and they were ashamed, and hid
themselves: Here were the two first subjects which the Devil had in his
Kingdom, he having before this time no Dominion among the Creatures which God
had made.

Now it is to be observed, that there are but four ways to come into Dominion;
to wit, by Descent, by Election, by Conquest, and by Treason.

Now which of these it is, by which the Devil got his entrance, is easy to be
concluded: All that are wise will say, That it was by Treason and Falsehood, and
that Man thereby came to be deprived of that Dominion and Rule, which he had
before, and his boldness, was taken from him, and he was ashamed: So now see
for whom you are pleading, all you that are so zaelously pleading for the
Devils Kingdom (viz) for an old Traitor, that came into his Government by a
Lie, and spoiled our Predecessors, of their Dominion, Glory and Power at once,
by Sin, for which you are now pleading: Oh, Blush and be ashamed every one of
you, and let your mouths be stopped for ever.

But now, seeing that it fell out so; What was the determination of the Lord in
this matter? hearken to his Sentence: And to the Serpent he said, because thou
have done so, thou shall creep upon thy Belly, and art cursed above all Cattle;
and above all the Beasts of the Field; see he must creep upon his Belly, and
not stand upon his tip-toes, lifting up his head above the Nations; he must eat
Dust, and the other Beasts must eat the Grass of the Field; but he Dust, all
the days of his life, and not the Fat of the Land, and to have the tenth part
of the Fruits of the Earth bestowed on his meanest Servants, having also the
other nine parts of it bestowed and ordered to his will, and so shall it be
with thee as long as thou live; that is not to say, that he shall live for
ever, and to have Dust to eat, and a Belly to creep upon; But at last God has
determined that his head should be bruised, there is his end. Oh! All ye
Pleaders for Sin, behold your Prince, and hear his Sentence and be ashamed, and
stop your Months forever.

And now when he had gotten a little Dominion, let Us examine a little, how
this Trayter used his Rule in the beginning? his first Lesson was, to Teach his
new subjects, to hide themselves from the presence of God, that which before
was their chiefest joy and crown, was now their greatest fear and dread; and so
they run under the Trees, hiding themselves, as their Posterity now does at
this day; but the Lord found them out, and spoke to them, and caused them to
hear that dreadful Sentence; and not only so, but drove them out from where
Life was to be found, into the Earth, where there was nothing to be gotten
without pain and labor; and whereas they were before in Dominion, and had
nothing to do but to dress the Garden in which the Life was; they must now Till
the Ground, which brought forth unto them Briars and Thorns; and in that state
Man's misery was great, and his sorrow unspeakable; and his darkness not to be
expressed; and had lost his discerning of things that differ, and having an
expectation of a Seed, which should destroy the Serpent, and bruise his head;
he was apt to think every Birth, to be that Seed (as his Children in the fall
do at this day) so that when Cain was born, his mother said, she had gotten a
Man from the Lord; but poor Woman, she knew not the feed, and how that that
seed which is born of the flesh, is a Persecutor, and that the Enmity is great
in the first birth; and so that although he grew up to be an Offerer, yet he
did not grow up in dominion over the Serpent, nor over the quality of the
Destroyer in himself, and that sort of Offering was more acceptable to the
Devil then to God. And now mark; that man was a Sinner, and yet religious, his
Sin and Religion were consistant, and could have place together at one and the
same time in one man, as it is now with the Professors of this Age; who say,
they are Sinners, and that their best Works are polluted and defiled with Sin,
and that they must remain so whilst they live; and yet they will seek
acceptance with God in these poluted Offerings; notwithstanding they do profess
him to be pure to whom they Offer: Thus was this first Sacrificer blind and
darkened, and so are many Thousands after him, and the dominion of the Devil was
over him.

First, Deceiving him, by Leading him, to Expect an Acceptance, because he
Offered, though with an Evil Heart.

Secondly, to lead him into the evil which had kept him from acceptance.

Thirdly, by making him so Wrath and Angry (because he was not accepted)
against his Brother that did well, and was partaker of the one sure Faith of
the Elect Seed of God: And the Serpent having thus darkened his mind, then he
durst come before him with a Lie (though he was a Man, of whom Eve thought,
that she had gotten him from the Lord) persuading him, that if that Faithful
Abel was out of the Way, that then it would be better with him: So he hearkened
to the Counsel of this evil spirit, and shed Innocent Blood about Religion;
here Persecution got his entrance into the World, by one that was an Offerer,
and an evil Doer together; a fit Instrument for such a Work. But behold, what
became of this Man; the Blood which he had shed, and the Earth which had drunk
it up, cried for Vengance against this bloody Offerer, and he feared
exceedingly, and said, He could not bear his Punishment; and said, Every one
that finds me will slay me; and to prevent that, he went and Built a City in
the Land of Nod; hear was the beginning of Fortifications, which was to defend
the Transgressor; for the Righteous have a Tower, namely, the Name of God, and
there they are safe without such Gates or Walls.

Now let every one consider, how little right this spirit had in all these
things; but he entered by a Lie, and Reigned by a Lie, and Darkness and deceit
was his defense for his Government; and how little reason there is to plead for
such a spirit, let the wise in heart judge.

It would go beyond my present aim and purpose, to trace this spirit, who is
called the Devil and Satan, the Dragon and old Serpent, through all Ages, since
the beginning; to see with how little Truth, Right or Equity he came up, to
Reign among Men. The understanding Reader of the Scriptures of Truth, can see
it clear enough; and it is a great wonder (and one of the greatest) that is in
that part of the World, called Christendom, that there are so many men (being
men of knowledge in other matters, and such as set up the Scriptures, so much
as they seem to do, calling it the Word of God, the Rule of Christians, the
Light of the World, the Guide of Life, etc.) that they should go with such a
Book in their hands, pleading for the Devil's Kingdom; and for a necessity that
it must continue, as long as there is a man upon Earth: Whereas the Scripture
in substance, is nothing else but as a Declaration against him, and his
Government, and shows, how he ought to be forsaken, opposed, resisted, and
cast out; and withal, how that Primitive, pure and holy, and Righteous Law of
that Spirit, which is called God, and is holy, pure, and Blessed for ever, how
that ought to be embraced, received and exalted in the whole Creation; I say,
this is a very great wonder, of which and of the consequences thereof, the
Christians so called have cause to be ashamed; yea, are a Reproach to the whole
World; and it is high time that some do arise for God; and the call is gone
forth, Who is on the Lord's part, Exodus 32.26. The Devil has an innumerable
Host, to plead for Sin, some with Arguments, and some with cruel Weapons; but
who is on the Lord's part, that can say, the Lord Reigns in Righteousness, and
in Truth he Judges the Earth? Oh! All ye carnal Professors of God and Christ,
in words, but in works deny him, and says, that Sin must stand, and remain as
long as you live. Be it known unto you, in the Name of the God of Heaven, that
where Sin remains, there the Devil is Prince and Ruler: And if that must remain
as long as you live, the Devil desires it no longer; for he that will be his
Servant in this life, must be his Companion in the World to come. But hear ye
the Word of the Lord, thou great Host, and mighty Army of the Devil, Beast,
Serpent, and the old Deceiver, who plead that his Government shall stand as
long as there is a man to live upon Earth: The Controversy of the Lord God
Almighty is Proclaimed, and begun against you all, and your Prince; yea, the
Arm of the everlasting God is stretched out against you, and henceforth ye
shall not be prosperous; but the Dominion of your Prince shall be lessened, and
both his and your Power shall be weakened, and your Weapons, both of Deceit and
Cruelty shall be broken and come to naught: The Inheritance of of the Wicked
shall be laid waste, and the design which has been carried on so long shall be
frustrated; Deceit and Falsehood shall fall before the Truth, and Darkness shall
flee before the Light, and your fortified City shall fail you, and the Land of
Nod will not be a hiding place for you: For the Arm of the mighty God of Jacob
shall scatter you as a reproach, and make y^u ashamed of your Work, and of your
Prince.

Now to touch a tittle at your Arguments, which the Servants of this spirit
make use of, for to hold ^p his Kingd^m; of which they say, It is impossible
tha^ it should be brought down; even as if God had given up all Man kind? which
is the best of his Creation) unto the Devil; and that he should keep none of
them for himself to serve him, till they have fulf^lled the Devi^'s work to the
^^ll; and can serve him no longer: Certainly t e Heathens, M^ors, and Indians,
have a better Doctrine then these in the ground, though Darkness is over their
understandings, as concerning God and Heaven, and such things, yet many of
them, do not judge that there is such a necessity to do evil as long as they
live; but abstain from that which they know to be evil, and they that do so,
are esteemed to have their pleasures and delight in the Elizium-Feilds, after
they are dead. Lucillius said; know ye not what grevious Punishments and
Torments the wicked and evil men are to suffer after this life; or in what
great happiness the good men shall live? The Heathen Epicarmus, said, If thou
art godly in thy mind, thou shall (being dead) not suffer evil; and many such
sayings are among them: But these fallen Christians who plead a necessity to
serve this spirit, whom they call the Devil, whose place they will confess is
in Hell, and in the everlasting Fire; yet they notwithstanding without doing
good expect to enjoy their Elysium; to wit, a Heaven where God and the holy
Angels dwell forever.

Now let us examine a little what reason there is for this great mistake.

First, They say, that Sin is rooted and planted in the Nature of Man; yea, so
that a Man must cease to be a Man, before he can come to cease from being a
Sinner.

Answer, That Man in his Natural state, is so united with Sin as that he
thereby is separated from God, I do not deny; and also that there is a natural
inclination in man, to commit Sin, is also true; to wit, as long as they remain
in their natural state and condition: And if these Champions for the Devil's
Kingdom had blotted out (out of that which they call their Rule) all those
Precious sayings, that make mention of a state of Grace, of being under Grace,
of being Changed or Translated, of being Redeemed and made Free, of being
Washed, Cleansed, Sanctified, perfectly in Soul Body and Spirit; and many more
such places; then they had had a Plea for their Prince: But seeing there is
such a large Testimony of the Mercy and goodness of God, and of his Power and
Al-sufficiency to Redeem and Save; therefore it is worthy to be pleaded, before
we allow the Devil such an unlimitted Power in and among, yea, over all the
Sons and Daughers of Men. And therefore, as concerning the first part of this
Objection, to wit; That Sin is rooted in the Nature of Man; How came it to be
rooted there? Whose Work was it to make it so? was it the Work of God? or has
he ordered it, that it should be so? If so, Why is any Man or Woman punished or
condemned for its being so, seeing it could not be otherwise? But none else but
such as are wholly blind from a true sense of God will dare to say so: For then
the manifold calling of Sinners unto Repentance, to Wash them, to Cleanse them,
to put away the Evil from them, to Cease to do Evil, etc. must all be against
his will and ordering; and so consequently but a mockery: But God forbid that
any Man should say or think so. Well, if it was not by the ordering or
appointment of God, but that God has made Man Righteous in his Nature, Will and
Affections; yea in the Image of God he Created him: Then it must needs be
another that has wrought this great Work, to plant Sin in his Nature; and when
it is examined, it will appear, that it is the work of a cursed Outcast, an
Unclean, Lying, Treacherous Spirit, who was rejected of God, and had no place
in the whole Creation, but by framing a lie he brought a poor Woman from her
Integrity and Obedience; and so from that came a great alteration to be in her,
and a Ground or Foundation was laid for the Devil to build upon; and from that
time he has always had a Rule in the hearts of the Children of Disobedience:
But now that this Rule and Government should not only be Universal, but also
Irresistible and unalterable; yea, though God Almighty stretch forth his Power,
to Redeem any out of this Kingdom, to bring them into the Kingdom of his dear
Son; yet they say, it is impossible for him, till he dies. It is as much, as to
say, If God will have any Man to serve him perfectly, he must first kill him,
and then he shall have him to his service in another World: Oh Horrible
Ignorance of the Power of God, and of the end for which Christ came into the
World! namely, to destroy the Devil and his Works. Now when his Work is
destroyed, which has a tendancy to corrupt man's nature; then the nature, of
Men and Women come to be ag^in holy, clean and pure, and Man comes to be
Restored to his first Image, and the Glory of the first Body is again known, of
which all the Bondslaves of the Devil are Ignorant; and this Power to restore
the nature of Man again, is the Lord's alone, it was the Devil that corrupted
it, and it is God that sanctifies it again, and delivers it by the Spirit of
Judgment and of Burning, which the Hypocrites cannot bear.

Now the manner how, the nature of Man came to be corrupted, you have heard
that it was by Man's joining with that spirit, that was fallen and cast out
from God, and had only a power in the Darkness, and could not Reign over any
thing, but over that which he could draw from the Glory of God into the
Darkness: And God who dwells in the Light, being moved with infinite
compassion, sent his Eternal Son, that was with him before the World was, that
he should be made partaker of the same nature in which Man was Created; that by
the Virtue of the Eternal Power he might restore him unto God; and might
minister unto the spirits of all such, to whom this Darkness and corrupted
state was as a Prisonhouse; And this Jesus received not the nature of Angels,
that was not his Work, but he received the Seed of Abraham, which was in
Captivity, that he might Redeem it from Captivity through Death, suffering
under the weight of that which oppressed the Creature, and caused it to groan
after Redemption; so that although it could not deliver it self, yet it might
come to be Delivered through Faith in him who is mighty to save; And this Jesus
which was of the Seed of Abraham after the flesh, purifieth the nature of all
those that join with him; for the Work of the Devil is to bring in corruption,
and the Work of Christ is to destroy it, and instead thereof to bring in
Everlasting Righteousness: Now where Sin is remaining in the nature; there the
Covenant with Hell and Death is not broken, neither are such in Covenant with
God, but are yet under the Power of the Prince of the Air, whatever they may
profess, And the death of Christ is yet of no value unto them, because they are
yet in their Sin, and corrupted nature, unchanged, Untranslated; So that those
that hold this Plea for the Devil, that because he once got a Place in the
nature of Man, and has corrupted it; that therefore Sin must remain so long as
the Life or nature remains, such are strangers to the Work of God, and to his
Power by which he works, and also to Christ Jesus, through whom he works; and
they have more Faith in the Power of the Devil, then in the Power of Christ,
believing that the Devil is more able to keep the Creature, and to hold fast
that, which by Deceit, and Treachery he has gotten in it; then God (who made
the Creature good in his nature) is ^ble, to restore it to his first purity,
that the Creature might come to serve him in Righteousness and Holiness; And
such as so believe, are no true Christians, nor true Believers: But are
standing in the corrupt nature, that has unity with the Devil and plead his
Cause, who is willing, that his corrupt birth should live in Man, as long as he
lives in the World; For he knows that so long no acceptable Sacrifice can be
offered up to God; for you cannot bring forth a clean Sacrifice out of an
unclean Vessel; and as long as nature is defiled; the works will be unclean,
that are wrought in that nature.

Secondly, The second pleading is; That never any Man was freed from Sin, ever
since Sin first entered into the World; and that therefore it is Presumption, to
expect such a thing in this Life.

Answ. If this Position were true; That there was never any Man freed from Sin;
yet it would be presumption to say, that God should not be able to do that,
which he never did: and it is also presumption to conclude, that never any Man
was freed; but if this Position be false, then not only the consequence is
false, to wit, that none can be freed, but also the Argument it self is proved
to be a Lie, and so is swept away, and a Door is opened unto all, that has more
love to Righteousness, then to Sin, both to hope and to expect, that the same
work should again be wrought in and for them, without presumption. Now, that
all men are Sinners by nature, is evident; and that some were changed out of
that natural State, is as evident; so that the Question is only; whether those,
that are translated out of that sinful nature, remain sinful, yea or nay?
which if it be so, what advantage have they beyond others, if they, after they
are translated; must remain unfreed? But I answer, with the words of the
Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.1. He that has suffered in the flesh; has ceased from Sin.
And here he spoke of such that were yet in the Body; but had suffered with, and
were made partakers of the Sufferings and Death of Christ, which was to Sin;
through which every one must pass, before they can come to the Resurrection,
that is in Christ, by which (said Peter) They obtained the answer of a good
Conscience in the Sight of God; which he calls the Baptism that Saves: now,
some having been Partakers of that Death, Baptism, and Resurrection of Christ,
by which they came to cease from Sin, and to have an answer of a good
Conscience, without offense both to God and Man, (which none that sins, can
have) then may there some lawfully expect to come to the enjoyment of the same
state of freedom and clearness, as well now, as formerly without presumption.

Secondly, I answer with the words of the Apostle John, 1 John 3.9. He that is
born of God sins not; because his seed abides in him; and he cannot sin,
for he is born of God. Now whereas there have been some, that were born of God,
and have been his Children; and that they that were so, had overcome the Wicked
one, so that he could not touch them; but they had kept their Garments white
and unspotted; and that some have been freed from the Law of Sin and Death; and
that some have Walked unbl^mable, and without spot, and had put off the old Man
with his Deeds, and had known the new Birth, and could by the Holy Spirit call
God, Father; which things are all manifest in the Scriptures of Truth, which
none can deny, but those, that will deny the Scripture; Why then should any man
question, that the same Works of Redemption should not now again be brought to
pass? And therefore it is lawful to expect it without presumption. This
Argument being confuted by the experience of the Saints.

Thirdly, The Faith of Gods Elect is but one in all Ages; and that Faith has
purified the Hearts of many in former Ages, and has taught them to Walk with
God; as for Instance, Enoch Walked with God several hundreds of years: Genesis
5.21.
and it would be a horrible thing to say, that he Walked with God, when he
Walked in Sin; as if God Walked in a Sinful Way: for the Prophet said; the
Bloody-man, nor the Worker of Iniquity Dwells nor walks not with the Lord: But
Enoch Dwelled and Walked with the Lord, and did not Iniquity; for if he had, he
should not have obtained a Testimony, that he pleased the Lord: for Sinners and
Evildoers do not please him. By Faith Noah Walked with God, and was a Preacher
of Righteousness in the old World; 2 Pet. 2.5.
also Lot in Sodom: which they could not have been, if they had been Sinners,
except they had been such Preachers, as the Preachers at this day; but they
were owned of God, though they were mocked of men; and it is said of them, that
they did Inherit Righteousness which they preached: And of Lot it is said, that
his Soul as well as his Doctrine was Righteous: And by the same Faith Job was
kept in the fear of God in the Land of Vz; for that taught him to eschew evil,
by which he obtained a Testimony of God, that he was perfect and upright; which
no Sinner is: 1 Job 1.22.
and if he had not been free from Sin, it would have been false to say of him;
that he eschewed the evil, and was perfect: and though his Trials were many;
yet he sinned not with his Lips, neither did he charge God foolishly, and in
the end of all his Trials God cleared him of having sinned, witnessing, that he
had found him faithful, and received a Sacrifice from his Hand for those
zealous Professors, that had charged him with Sin, whom God had cleared: And
the same Faith caused Abraham and Sarah to be partakers of the Promise; and
Abraham was a Friend of God, of which Christ said, That none could be, but by
fulfilling his Will; and those that do so, are no Sinners: And by this Faith
Moses chused rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, Heb. 11.25.
then to enjoy the pleasures of Sin: So mark, he left Sin and the pleasures of
it, and then he must be without Sin; by which he obtained a Testimony, that he
was a Servant of God, which Sinners are not. By Faith David's Heart was made
after the Mind of God, and that is not sinful, but free from it, for in him is
no Darkness at all. By the same Faith the Prophets were chosen Vessels of God,
and were upheld in their Testimony for God, till they came to obtain that
Testimony, that they were the Men and Servants of God, which they could not
have been, and withal Servants unto Sin; And the Scripture bears Record of
Zachariah and Elizabeth his Wife, Luke 1.2.
that they were both Righteous before God, not by an Imagined Righteousness;
but in regard to their Couversation, walking in all the Commands and Statutes
of the Lord unblamable; but if they had been under the Power of Sin, and not
freed from it; they had been neither unblamable, nor Righteous, but must at
least have Transgressed some of the commands of the Lord, or else they could
not be Sinners. Also Nathaniel, in whom there was no Guile, which could not
have been, John 1.48.
if he had been under the Power of Sin; And much more might I write upon this
Subject, to show, how that many by this one Faith in all Ages have been
delivered from Sin, and become the Children and Servants of God; and therefore
those, that are Partakers of this Faith in this Age, may hope and expect, that
the same Work may be wrought in them; and this is no presumption: And if these
Sin-pleaders should say, that there is none Partaker of this Faith now at this
day, and therefore cannot be made free from Sin, they will exclude themselves,
which they will hardly do, because they would fain have a Name of being
Believers, though they deny the Work of the True Faith in themselves.

Further, let us consider, what these strong Pleaders for Sin have to fortify
themselves withal; They say, they have the Scripture to plead withal for Sin;
which certainly was never the intention of the holly Spirit, by which it was
given forth: But (say They) It is written in 1 Kings 8.46. For here is no Man
that sins not. Answ. This is very true, neither do I plead, that any man is
free from Sin all the days of his life (except Christ) but have confessed,
they are all Sinners by nature, until they be changed: and besides, there it
is but spoken of a People, that were under the Law, of which the Apostle says,
that it made nothing perfect; but, said he, the bringing in of a better Hope
did; but the Law did not purify the Comers thereunto, according to the
Conscience: but, when the Offerers had offered, there remained an Evidence of
Sin in the Conscience; but what is that to the Christians, who are come to know
a better Hope, and the Blood that purifieth the Conscience; for that same
Apostle that said, the Law made no man perfect (under which Law Solomon was, as
also that People, concerning whom it was said; there is none that lives and
sins not) notwithstanding the same Apostle said, that it was the bringing in
of a better Hope, that did it: And what are these Fighters for Sin, and
Sin-pleaders become so Zealous, that they will rather deny the better Hope then
to cease from Sin? if not, then there is a possibillity to be made perfect by
the Blood of Christ, which the Blood of Bulls and Goats could not do.

An other Objection is brought forth; that is, That the Apostle Paul said, that
Sin lived in him, and that the good that He would do, He did not; and the evil
that He would not do, that He did.

Answ. That Paul knew the passing through such a State, is without question,
and is not denied; but this does not prove at all, that he never knew no better
State; or that he never came to perfection; for in that place he makes mention
of three States. First, How it was with him, when he lived without the Law of
God in his liberty to fight against the Truth; and he thought, he might do many
things against the Name of Jesus. Secondly, He declares of his Convincement,
and how it was with him then, when he knew, he should not do no more against
the Truth, and yet, not being wholly changed he did things which he knew he
ought not, by reason of Sin living and dwelling in him; and that State he did
not call Happy or Blessed (as these blind Professors do at this day, that takes
up a Rest in this State, and say, they can never be Redeemed out of it (for he
speaking of such a Condition, cries out for Deliverance, calling it a miserable
Condition, which plainly shows, that his eye was upon a further and better
State, unto which he also bears Witness; saying, he was made free by the Law
of the Spirit of Life both of the Law of Sin and of Death; in which time he was
yet in the Body.

Now, what ^eason have these Pleaders for Sin to believe, that Paul was in all
these three States at once? and if not; Why not in the last? being the other
two are but foregoing States, leading to the third; especially considering the
many other Testimonies, which he gives of his being perfect; and of those, that
by his Ministry were brought to perfection; saying, concerning himself,
Timothy, and Silvanus: We can do nothing against the Truth: and in an other
place he testifies, That he has fought a good Fight, kept the Faith, and
finished his Course. Now if it was finished, then there was no more to run: and
if the Fight was Fought; then the Enemies were no more alive, as they were,
when Sin lived and dwelled in him. Again he says in an other place; We preach
Wisdom among them that are Perfect: That is after the explication and Sense of
these Sin-pleaders; We preach Wisdom among none, except among those, that are
already departed out of this World, and gone to Heaven. And again, As many of
you as are Perfect, be so minded: That is to say, after their explication; let
none be thus minded, before they be dead. Again at last, Dear Brethren be
perfect; And of one mind, etc. But this, they say, cannot be in this Life. And
again he says to the Hebrews; You are come to the spirits of just Men made
perfect, and to God the Righteous Judge of all, etc. But where were these
Hebrews? were they yet alive, or were they dead? if dead; How came his Epistle
to meet them? But a wilful Blindness is come over many of these Servants and
Ministers of Darkness, and they have rebellious Hearts against the Light, that
discovers their Sin, and would lead them out of it.

But because they have more love to Sin, then to the Light; therefore they seek
to cover themselves so much: But the Day is come, that has discovered them, and
their deceitful Coverings will not longer cover them.

An other pleading is of that which is spoken by the Apostle, John 1 John 1.8.
If we say we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us.

Out of which words every miserable, and pitiful Soldier of this great Prince
of Darkness thinks, he may Arm himself sufficiently to fight against that,
which would deliver them and make them free: But if this Scripture were seen
and read with that Spirit by which, and in which it was written; then it would
appear, that this John was not such a great Friend to Sin, and the Devil (who
is a Father of Lies) as they would have him to be; For in the same Chapter he
had showed before, into what State they must come, before they can come to have
Fellowship with God, viz. To walk in the Light, as Christ was in the Light: and
those that said, They had Fellowship with God and Christ, (as the Priests and
Professors do at this day) and did not come to attain unto that State to walk
in the Light, but instead thereof walked in Darkness; such said he, were Liars,
and did not the Truth.

Now he said; his Fellowship was with the Father and with the Son; which could
not be, if he had walked in Darkness, or was a Sinner, or that he had not
walked in the Light, as Christ was in the Light, for then he would have made
himself a Liar, if he had been a Sinner, when he said; that he had Fellowship
with God and Christ.

And therefore it ought to be well observed, that John speaks there of a sort
of Men, that were not yet brought to confess their Sins; and if such came to
that Conceit and Pride, as to say, they had no Sins to confess; and so exalted
themselves above the Witness of God that reproved them; then such deceived
themselves: But if these that are so sinful, come to own that which brings
them to a Confession of their Sins; then God is Faithful to forgive such their
Sins, and to Cleanse them from all Iniquity. Now, when this is done, to wit;
when the Creature has confessed his Sin, and God has forgiven it, and Cleansed
him; What must then that Man say? Must he then say; that he has his Sin still,
when he has it not? Must he say, that he is Filthy and Defiled, when he is
Cleansed from all that? This would be a Lie; and If he should be Cleansed from
all Sin; he must certainly be Cleansed from Lies: And if it was his Duty to
confess the Work of the Devil, when it was standing in him, which were his
Sins; May not he now being Cleansed, confess God's Work that has Cleansed him;
he being Cleansed by him freely? Must he therefore be cried out of for a
Deceiver and Heretic? Who is so blind, that cannot see, that it is as
serviceable as needful, and as lawful for a man, that has known the Power of
God to cleanse him, to confess that, and to bear a testimony to that work; as it
is needful and lawful, when the Devil's work is manifested in him; to confess
that, and to bear a Testimony against that.

Yet says John to those that were thus washed: If we say, that we have not
sinned, we make God a Liar; It is as much, as if he would say, That even those
that are saved, must confess to the Power of God, by which they have been
judged for sin; and not to exalt themselves above it, as if they had never
sinned; seeing that the Witness of God testifies in all, that they have
sinned, and come short of the Glory of God; So that now the understanding
Reader may see, that John has not written here of an impossibility of being
Delivered from Sin, but absolutely the contrary; Namely, that those that cannot
say that they are without sin, may come by confessing their sins to be Cleansed
and made free from it; yea, from all that which is Unrighteous: Yet some will
say, that the Apostle in that place uses the word We, as if he included
himself; as if he would say at that time; if I should say, that I had no sin,
etc.

Answ. This is no proof at all, because the contrary is proved before; to wit,
that he had Fellowship with God and Christ, which no Man could have that walked
not in the Light, as he is in the Light, and such may as well, by the same
manner of speaking, prove James to be a Curser; whereas he said, with the
Tongue we Bless God, and with it we Curse Men that are made after the Image of
God; and many more such Instances might be brought forth, of the Lamentations
and Complaints of the Prophets concerning the House of Israel, which is
Translated so in that manner of speaking, which does not prove at all, that the
Prophets were Guilty of such Sin and Rebellion, of which they complained, Neh.
9.37. etc. But how zealous are these Pleaders for sin to find out words, which,
they think, do serve for the upholding of the Kingdom of their Master, when
there is not one word, that properly belongs, or was written to their purpose,
except that Part of it, which the Devil and his Servants, their Predecessors
has Spoken or Written, and that indeed may serve them; as I once heard a
Priest, that was exhorting of the People to employ their Time, and Ability to
gather knowledge, confirming his Exhortation with the Scripture, (viz.) Genesis 5.
You shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil.

And an other, a Mennist Preacher in North-Holland, whilst he was warning the
People to take heed of being Deceived, he exhorts them to Immitate the deaf
Adders, Psalm. 58.4. And so to stop their Bars against the voice of the
Charmers, that charm never so wisely: So, the one has his Proof from the
Adders, and the other from the Devil. Such Scripture Places as these, I do
confess, that these Pleaders for Sin may find to strengthen their Arguments;
but that which was written by the Motion of the Holy Spirit of God, is a
perfect Testimony against them all; against their Work, and against their
Prince.

So, having answered their chiefest Objections, which they draw out of the
Scripture; by which they endeavor to prove, That none can be free from sin in
this life, contrary to Romans 6.22. I make haste to the third great Argument of
these Captives, which they lay down against their own Freedom:

Thirdly, That is, That it is the Will of God, to let some Sins remain in the
Best of his People, to keep them Humble thereby.

Answ. If it be the Will of God, that his best Servants should sin; then his
Will is done, when they sin. And what reason have any men to be humbled and
cast-down, because they have done the Will of God? but rather to rejoice, and
be glad, that the Will of God is done, and that their Will is conformable to
the Will of God, that the Will of both can be done together: This is a very
easy way to the Joy of the Lord, if this brings to tha^ sentence, Well done
Good and Faithful Servant, etc. But Woe unto those, that are given up to believe
this Lie.

Again, Let the understanding Reader (I mean those, that are weary with their
sins, and are willing to be freed) consider, (for, as concerning the other,
they are my Opposers) How can God properly be called Almighty? and how can the
Work of the Conversion of Souls properly be called His, if he is necessitated
to borrow something from the Devil to keep his Children Humble withal?
Certainly we must conclude, That if God had a better way to do it, that he
would do it in the best, and not in the worst way, viz. By Sin; which is so
very contrary to his nature.

But, Let but these Sin-Pleaders suppose, That if God should stretch forth his
Power so far in man, that it should destroy all the Works of the Devil, and
cast out Sin; and cause his Soul to take as great Delight and Joy in
Well-doing, as ever it had in Sin; and should plant Humility as naturally in
the Soul, as the Devil has planted Pride in it.

Now the Question is, Whether this Power, that works this change, be not as
able to keep the Creature in this Condition, as to bring him to it, without any
help of the Devil or his Work? But they will say, To suppose a thing that is
Impossible, is either against Reason, or Presumption.

I Answer, All things are Possible with God, except to Lie; and as concerning
this, It is not only possible, but the contrary is impossible, because God has
so often promised it, to make a perfect Work, and to finish his Work in all
them that trust in him: And for this End is Christ Jesus come, That he might
destroy the Devil, and his Works: And in the Parable he says, When he comes,
that is stronger, he shall bind the strong Man, and spoil his Goods, and cast
him out. This seems as if Christ, who is the stronger, had no need of the
Devil, or his Goods either, to keep his People Humble thereby: But the Apostle
said, That they were kept by Faith through the Power of God, unto Salvation:
Except you will say, as the Priests in Scotland say, Cursed is he that says,
Faith it without Sin; and let all the People say, Amen. Then the words of the
Apostle must be read thus, You are kept by a Faith, which is mixed with sin, in
the Power of God unto Salvation: But if you will have it so, speak it out, as
they have done; but, being you profess, That Faith is the Gift of God; we may
well say, It is able to cleanse the Heart, and to give Victory over the World,
and also over the Devil, and Sin; and then there is no need of sin, to keep us
Humble: For if Humility was a Fruit of sin, it would not be so acceptable unto
God, as it is; for the Prophet says, He gives his Grace to the Humble, and
dwells with such that are of a Contrite and Broken Heart.

Again, if a few sins, yea, though they be but a Remnant, can keep men Humble;
then a great deal of sin must needs make a man more Humble: so, then let us
plentifully sin, that we may plentifully be Humble. But, God forbid that such
doctrine or such Teachers should go unreprov'd; for, they have exalted the work
of the Devil beyond the Work of God: And it is, because such Teachers have been
countenanced, that the People have been led into so much Blindness, Ignorance,
and Hardness of Heart; and that People have wholly lost the Hope and
Expectation of a Day of Deliverance; and have taken up a Rest in a sinful and
slavish state.

And now, If any come to Preach the Gospel, which brings Deliverance and
Freedom to the Soul, their Souls being in a Rest already (though a False
Polluted Rest) such are looked upon as Disturbers of their Rest, and Breakers
of their Peace, and such like; even as it was with the Prophet Micah, when he
cried out ( Mic. 2.10.) Arise ye, and depart; for this is not your Rest,
because it is polluted: it shall destroy you, even with a sore Destruction.

But Blessed be the Lord God of Heaven and Earth forever, for he has brought
forth his Day of Salvation, which many have longed after, and are longing, and
are in travel that they might come to know it; to whom a sinful state is no
Resting Place, but is unto them as a strange Land, in which they cannot sing
the Songs of Sion; but still have Jerusalem in their remembrance which is
Freeborn from above; longing after the Day of Gathering, that the Lamb (and
not the changeable Priests and Teachers) may be their Light and Leader: Unto
such I say, and testify in the Name of the God of Heaven, Lift up your Heads,
for the Day of your Redemption draws nigh, and Deliverance shall come out of
Sion, the City of our Solemnity: Isa. 33.20. And a Mighty Voice shall be
sounded forth from the holy Mountain, from the Lord of Hosts, and those that
hear it, shall live; and the dead Bones in the Valleys shall be enlivened: and
the Joy of that Day shall be greater then the Joy of the Harvest.

Now, How, and in what manner, these things will be brought to pass, is a great
Dispute among many, that are yet seeking in the carnal Wisdom to conceive and
comprehend spiritual things, and so they come to be scattered and divided in
their imaginations: And therefore in the mean time, those that are become
willing to sit down in Quietness, in the Light of Christ Jesus, that shows
every running-out of the Mind, they come to feel the Pure Fear of God to be
planted in their Hearts: so that they dare not think their own Thoughts, nor
speak their own Words: And here is the beginning of the true Wisdom, by which
Wisdom it is given unto them to understand those things which they could not
find out in all the time of their Travel and Pains in the fallen Wisdom.

And whilst they were hearkening after the different Voices of men, they never
could have a Certainty: But now hearing him, by whom God speaks, who is
manifest within them, whom their Ear is inclined unto within; they come to know
certainly that which they know, through the Testimony of the Holy Spirit, who
alone is able to reveal (unto those that Fear Him) the Mysteries of God's
Kingdom; and he shuts them up from the Wise and Prudent of this World.

And therefore you that desire to have an understanding of these things, come
down from your high Builded Towers of Knowledge and Comprehension; and sit down
in that Pure Light, that brings a Death upon the Earthly Wisdom, and become as
Fools, that you may be wise; and that Wisdom that is so received, shall lead to
know the Number of the Beast, which the whole World with all their Accademical
Wisdom, and all the Sects with their Inventions are strangers unto at this day,
and are carrying about with them his Name, and the number of it, or his Mark,
by which they are accepted among Men, and yet do not know what it is: But when
they come to a wise enough to know it, and honest enough to forsake it; then
they will see, that the Friend-ship of this World comes to be broken, and the
Enmity to work against the Holy Seed: and the Seed comes to arise and bruise
the Head of the Enmity, and to nail it fast to a Cross, till it Dye; and then
comes Freedom, then there is War no more, then there is peace on Earth, and
nothing but good will toward all Men; yea to Enemies: Then Anguish and Sorrow
flies away, and the perfect Love of God casts out fear, and there is Death no
more; but that which is overcome by Immortality: Blessed and Happy are all they
that come to know that state, and Blessed are they, that Believe and waits to
enjoy it; and Blessed is that Hope, which leads thereunto.

Now, as concerning the chiefest matter of this Treatise (to wit) Concerning
the Reign of the Devil among Men; there is yet one thing worthy to be
considered, of which there is made mention in the Scriptures of Truth, in which
it appears, that in the beginning and setting up of the Reign of Christ, and
that the Everlasting Gospel was Preached, and that many Thousands had Believed
and Obeyed it, so that they came to be Witnesses of the Kingdom of Christ; and
that the Devil was cast out, Dis-throned and put under their Feet; and some
were made Priests and Kings to God: I say, after all these things aforesaid
there came an Apostasy from the Faith by which all these things before mentioned
were brought forth; and of that Apostasy Paul Prophesied to the Thessalonians;
and John by the Spirit saw, how that the Devil should get a great Dominion over
Men by many changable Means and Ways executing his Power, as a Dragon; then as
a strange Beast with seven Heads, and ten Horns; at another time, as a little
Beast with two Horns; then with an Image; and then with a Whore etc. And that
the Almighty God has set and appointed a Time, a certain Time; to this
Dreadful, Dark, changable Government; And has given John to know, that it
should last and continue but One Thousand Two Hundred and Threescore Days, or
Years: And this is a set Time, and has its beginning, and its ending; but the
Kingdom of Christ, and also his Priesthood, are both after the power of an
endless Life.

Now, seeing, that this last Power, which the Devil has gotten, is but to
continue his appointed time: Why should any be his Friend so far, as to say,
that it must continue always, and that it must never come to an end; and that
People no ways can get freedom from under his Tyrannical Power? Certainly these
Men, that plead so strongly for his continual Reign, and Power, have more
Reason and Understanding, then they use: As for instance, suppose that one had
hired a House, or Farm of another for several Years, and the Years being come
to an end, that Man to whom that House or farm belongs, has a desire to live
in it himself: And the In-dweller not being willing, and they both should come
to one of these Sin-pleaders, to hear his judgment, and determination: I
believe they would soon say to the In-dweller, thou must depart; the other is
the Landlord, and thou have had thy full Time, and he now desiring to have his
House, he must have it; and especially if the In-dweller was come into the
House as a Thief in a dark Night, and had kept it by Violence, and had brought
no profit to the Landlord at all. And this is properly the Cause between God,
and this Prince of Darkness; for he has posessed the Inheritance of God, and
Ruled over it; not to the advantage of the Lord; But to his disadvantage and
dishonor: And yet these Men will not do so much right to God, as they will do
to their Neigbour. But on the contrary they say; that this Usurper, or Thief,
that has stolen away the Hearts of Men from their Creator, must sit there as
long, as there is a Man upon the Earth, and not any Man Redeemed. Oh! Blush for
shame, ye Hypocrites; can you make a difference between Good, and Evil among
Men; and will you not judge for God? Come, take your Books into your Hands, and
read the number of the Years, it is called 1260. Days; reckon after the
reckoning of the Ancients 30. days to a Month; and see whether that does not
make out 42. Months, and see whether 42. Months does not make a Time, Times,
and half a Time; and see what things are ordered to be in those different
Times; and see, whether you can find out the beginning of those Times, that so
you may find the end of them; for all those, that had their confidence in the
Number of the Year, 1666. are now Confounded, Ashamed, and their Hope is
frustrated: And now it is high time to wait upon the Lord, to get an
Understanding, and Knowledge which makes not ashamed.

Now, the first thing to be considered, to the opening of this thing is: That
the first appearance of this Man Child, that was Born in Heaven by a Woman,
that was clothed with the Son; and had her Feet upon the Moon, and was Crowned
with the Stars. The first I say, that appeared against this Child, was a great
red Dragon: Mark, this was no Substitute under the Devil; but was the Devil
himself; though he appeared in Heaven, as you may see Revel. 12.13. and he it
is, that has given Power to all those, that have Persecuted this Woman, or her
Seed; but as long as he was in Heaven, he was no perfect Persecutor; there he
had no Power, but only to be an Accuser of the Brethren, and therein he busied
himself Night and Day: But by this it is evident, that there was a Power over
him, to which he accused them, and so long they could not sing: but when he was
cast out with his Angels, then they sung: Now is Salvation come, and Power, and
the Kingdom of our God, and the Power of his Christ; for the Accuser of our
Brethren, that accused them Day and Night before our God, is cast down, etc.

But then woe unto them that dwell on Earth, where the Devil got his Power, that
is in the Earthly Ground; there he Rules with great Wrath, Anger and Fury, and
Indignation, Persecuting the Woman, and the least appearance of her Seed; and
because he cannot do harm enough of himself, he goes and makes him a
Substitute, to wit; a Beast with Seven Heads, and Ten Horns: Mark, just the
Number of his own Heads and Horns; only he came out of the Pit, and this out of
the Sea or Waters, of which Waters you may read in Revel. 15.17. That they are
Peoples, Tongues, Languages, and Nations; and out of them came this strange
Beast, which the Devil counted worthy to have his perfect Power, because he
knew that he would do his Work for him to purpose; and he received his Power
for the space of 42. Months: And his first Work was, to Persecute the Saints:
Secondly, to set up the Worship of the Devil: Thirdly, to bring the dread of
this seven Headed Beast over the whole Earth: Fourthly, To blaspheme the Name
of God, and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell therein: And fifthly to make
People believe, that there is no overcoming of his Power: And these Works are
spread, and carried on by three unclean Spirits, which came forth out of the
mouth of the Dragon, Beast, and False Prophet, over all Kindreds, Nations,
Tongues and People, and there was none able to resist them, except those, whose
Names were written in the Book of the Life of the Lamb. And as concerning them,
because they would not receive the Mark of the Beast in their Forehead, or
Right Hand, They must be Banished, and must not have Liberty to Buy or Sell;
and those that would Worship nothing but a Living Substance, and not an Image,
though it was alive; those must be killed, and when that Sort was all Killed
and Banished; and the whole World being brought, sometimes to Worship the
Dragon, sometimes to Worship the Beast, that had so many Heads and Horns as the
Dragon himself; and then to Worship a little Beast with two Horns, that came
out of the Earth; and then to Worship the Image of the old seven Headed Beast:
When I say, that all things upon the whole Earth were thus disposed, then was
it as the Devil would have it; for now had every one subjected himself unto his
Power, and received that Name or Mark or the Number of the Substitute, and
admired his great Power; and set him up as the chiefest among Men, whom none
could overcome, except some few, that had the Word of God it self (for the
other had the Scripture) and durst seal their Testimony against the Dragon and
False-Prophet with their Blood; and because these were but a few, and were soon
killed; they being dead, there was a Joyful and Merry World; the Devil was
well-pleased, and they did send their Gifts to one another abundantly; and
those that had been most busy, and serviceable to kill the Witnesses (that
dared to speak of another Kingdom or Dominion, besides that of the Dragon and
Beast) they had the greatest Gifts. And in those days there was no Prophesying,
but in Sackcloth, and that did not continue long neither; but the Prophets
were killed, and being Dead, their Dead Bodies were kept above the Earth, and
were more esteemed of, then their living Testimony was; for that plagued all
the Worshippers of the Beast.

So, in such a time have the Nations been so long, that they are so used to the
Power and Reign of the Devil, that they plead for it; as if he had an undoubted
Right thereunto: And if the Devil might speak himself, he would not desire of
the World to rule any longer, then the World allows him: and they have
forgot, that it is but to continue Forty two Months; whilst the Man-Child was
caught up unto God, and whilst his Mother was in the Wilderness; and also,
that it was to be expected, that both should appear again in their appointed
time.

But whilst it was thus with the World (viz.) That the true Church was not to
be found upon Earth; but was fled away, as upon Eagle's Wings; and that he,
that ought to rule over all, was caught up into Heaven; and that the Devil was
in his place, the old Serpent ruling, and giving his power to whom he pleased,
to a Great Beast, or Little Beast, or to a Whore, or to any thing like him: And
whilst Great and Small, High and Low, Bond and Free, did wonder at his power,
and were ready to worship any one that had his power, let those, whose Eyes are
open, but consider in what a Lamentable State the miserable World then was; and
whether that Abomination, that made the World desolate of God and all good
Order, was not then set up in the Holy Place, where it ought not: And was the
World without a Religion, or without a Profession of God and Christ in those
days? No: they bore a Profession of Christ, that is Unchangeable, in all their
Changeable ways; and this was a time of Gladness to many: and they had many
sorts of Religions; and when they came to be weary with one, the Devil
furnished them with another. And when they had been exercised a long time in
the aforesaid Worships of the Dragon, the Seven-headed Beast, the Little Beast,
and of the Living Image; then there came forth yet a deeper Mystery of Iniquity
then before, the Mother of all these Abomination; she showed her self not as a
despised Whore, but as a Queen decked with Scarlet, Purple, and
Precious-Stones: and that very Beast, which none could overcome, but the whole
World had wondered after it, he himself must be under her command, and must
carry her up and down upon the Waters; which are, Peoples, Lands, Tongues, and
Languages. And this Whore has another Design upon the poor blind World [Mark]
She comes with a preparation to make all drunk, that they might not make use of
their Senses, to bethink themselves where they were; and that they might not
have any suspicion against any thing, the furnishes her self with a Golden Cup,
which there was none that had any thing against it, but every one could well
receive it; and this was but to deceive them; for, any Potsherd of the Dunghill
had been good enough (yea, a Hog's Trough had been too good) to drink that out
of, which she had to give them. But she must give her drink to Kings, and
Princes, and Nobles, and Captains, and Merchants, and to all sorts of men; so
she proffered them her Cup, and they have all drunk: But what have they drunk?
Her Whoredoms, Fornications, and all Abominations of the Earth: How much? Till
they were drunk: What did they then? They committed Fornication with her; they
were drunk of Abominations; and the Whore was drunk of the Blood of the Saints
and Witnesses of Jesus: and yet, the Name of Jesus was still professed upon
Earth; that was not persecuted; but those were persecuted, that witnessed Jesus
himself, that takes away sin, such were persecuted: For, she being the Mother
of Whores, and having nothing to proffer to her Customers but Abominations, she
could not endure to hear, That Sin, which is an Abomination to the Lord, should
be taken away; and that men should live without sin, and be perfect: For, if
so, then she must be Childless, and as a Widow, and must lose her High-place
on the top of the Beast; and then they would not be so drunk of her Cup, and
that would not tend to her Advantage; therefore if any came to be Witnesses of
Jesus himself, she drunk the Blood of such; but if they would be content to
drink her Cup, and so would please themselves with good and precious words, and
in the mean time drink in her Abominations, then they might live and flourish,
as long as she flourished.

But Alas! What do you think, that read with Understanding was the state of the
World in those days? Was it not high time that Plagues, Indignation and
Vengeance should be poured out upon this Bloody Whore, and upon the Seat of the
Beast, upon which she did ride, and upon the whole Earth, which had committed
Fornication with her? Is it not high time that the Carpenters should come,
Zach. 1.20. to cut off these Horns? For at that time the power of Darkness was
spread over all, and the will of the Devil was done, and his One Thousand Two
Hundred and Sixty Years were prosperous to his Kingdom; and he did what he
pleased; and if any spoke against him, and against his kingdom, he would have
them killed; and then his Whore would drink the Blood of such; and there were
none left, neither Great nor Small, neither Bond nor Free, High or Low, neither
Young nor Old, but they had submitted themselves all of them; and said, Who is
like him? None are able to overcome him: It is impossible to be made free from
under his power: He must reign as long as we live: it is possible for us (cry
they) to overcome Princes, Kingdoms, and Armies; and therefore we go out, and
fight valiantly, and many times we get Victory, and become Conquerors; but to
overcome sin, which the Devil has set up in us, that is impossible; and
therefore it is in vain to trouble our selves about it; and we will not do any
thing concerning it, seeing we have drunk in a Faith, That it is impossible to
perform or accomplish it.

And thus has the whole World been bewitched, in the time when the Devil
Reigned: And will he and his Servants make us believe, That it must continue so
always? Though never any other time was given him, but such as was limited;
and in the end of that time we understand there is a great Alteration to come
to pass, to wit, That the Church, the True Woman, must come out of the
Wilderness again; the Man-Child must come down again, and appear upon Earth,
and Rule the Nations with a Rod of Iron; and the Whore must be judged; that
Sorrow, Death, and Famine must come upon her in one day; and that Ten Kings
should agree together, to burn her Flesh with Fire; and that the Smoke of her
Torments should ascend to Heaven; and then must the Dragon, the Beast, and
false Prophet, that had still preached Peace, though it was so, as above said,
they must all be taken, whilst they are yet alive in this Work and in their
Power, and be cast into the Lake of the Wrath of God, which burns forever;
and these Princes, and Captains, and Merchants, and Inhabitants of the Earth
must Howl and Lament because of this great Alteration.

And therefore, seeing that such a time is Lawfully to be expected, in which
the Devil, the Old Serpent may be thrust out of his dominion; and that then the
time of Joy and Rejoicing will be for the Upright, it is worth the spending of
our Labor and Time, to find out that Time; that so it may not come over us,
and we see it not, nor know it not, and so let it pass by, as the Jews did; and
so doting and waiting for it, as a thing which is yet to come, as they do at
this day; when almost Two Thousand Years are past, since the thing is come to
pass.

Now you know the Jews had a Prophet, which told them the time, when the
Messiah should come; aforehand, to wit, Daniel, as you may see, Dan. 9.24. etc.
where he told them, That it was Seventy Weeks that were determined upon the
People and upon the City, and that the Holy one should be Anointed: Now this
was not such a great Mystery to them; they knew it was common to reckon a day
for a Year among the Prophets; so that that time was but four hundred fourscore
and ten years, that the Visions should be sealed, and the daily Sacrifice taken
away, the City be made desolate and the Anointing of the Holy One, and the
Messiah be slain for the sins of the People: And since the time that the
Command was gone forth to build Jerusalem again, in which time the Seventy
Weeks had their beginning; it is above Two Thousand years ago, the City is
since builded again, and also made again desolate, and the daily Sacrifice
taken away; and the Prince of the People, that then came (viz.) Titus
Vespasianus the Roman, has destroyed the Sanctuary, and the Destruction of it
was with an overflowing to the end of the War; and yet all these things cannot
convince them, nor make them believe, that the Messiah is come, or that it was
he, whom their Forefathers have killed as a Blasphemer.

Now, That We, after such clear Prophesies of the setting up of the Kingdom of
Christ, and dis-throning of the Devil, Sin, and Antichrist, should not come to
be surpised with the same Blindness and Hardness of Heart; Let us have a
strict Observation of the Times, that we may not fight against the Appearance
of Truth, and put it far away from us, and say, The Days are not come yet, in
which the pouring out of the Spirit can be witnessed; and that the Knowledge of
God must cover the Earth, as the Waters cover the Sea; and that the Gospel must
be preached again unto those that dwell upon the Earth; and that the Lamb and
his Saints must have the Victory over the Dragon and his Angels: For, such as
put the Day so far from them, are in one and the same Error with the Jews, and
do not understand the Times better then they do; and so are persecuteing the
true appearance of that, which they seem to expect, and to pray for (as the
Jews did) because it does not appear in their Way, to answer their Carnal
expectations, that despise the day of small things: But from such are the
Mysteries of the Kingdom shut up; and are revealed unto those that fear the
Lord.

Now to understand these things, let every one come to read the Prophesies in a
measure of that Spirit, by which they were given forth, and that same opens the
Prophesies, and without it every one understands only according to his own
Fancy, or private Judgment: The Apostle said, There should come an Apostasy
from the Faith; that is, from the true Christian Faith: Now, when was that? And
who are they that are thus Apostatized, or fallen away? Ask the Pope, and the
whole Roman Catholic Church, and they will tell you, that the Prophecy points
at Martin Luther, Zuinglius, Aecolampadius, Calvinus, Menno Simoni^, and other
Heretics, that have rent many Nations from the true Apost^lick Faith, and the
Ancient Christian Church, the infallible Foundation and Pillar of Truth, etc.

Ask the Bishops of England, and the Presbyters in Scotland, the Pfarrherren or
Pastors in Denmark and Sweed-Land, and Predicants in the Low Countries, and
they will tell you, that this Prophecy signifies the general Apostasy from
the Apostolic Faith and Order in the Church of Christ, to the Pope and Popish
Exercises, and Institutions over all Christendom. Again, ask them; Which among
themselves continue as yet in the true Apostolical Faith and Religion? Then the
Lutheran Pastors will say, that are we, and therefore cry they, Join with us.
No, say the Bishops in England, we will prove that the Apostolical Church had
Bishops, and that the Apostle said; He that desires the Office of a Bishop, he
desires a good Work; and therefore We are they, that are the true Church
according to the first Institution. Then says the Presbyterians and Dutch
Predicants; The Bishops in the Primitive Churches were not such as you are, but
such as we are, whose ca^e was over the Flock, and did Teach, and Rule in
Ecclesiastical Matters, but not in Councels and Parliaments, as you do;
therefore you are fallen from the Primitive state. And now at last what says
Truth of these, and all others, who deny that Faith, which Purifies the Heart,
and can Cleanse the Conscience from Sin, and can give Victory over the World?
This was the Faith which Paul Preached, that was nigh, in the Heart; and
therefore all those that say, that the Heart of a true Believer cannot be made
clean; nor that he can come to live without Sin; nor to have a Purified
Conscience; And all those that denies the Word of Faith in the Heart, and
Christ to be the Rule, and set up another Rule, and another Faith, and another
Foundation for it, then the Apostle set up; all such are fallen from the Faith,
and are not Apostolic, but Antichristian; and when the Man of Sin comes to be
revealed, they will come to be revealed with him, and fall with him, and with
Babylon the Mother of them all; and great will be their fall in that day.

There is yet another Prophecy of Christ, when he said, When you see the
Abomination of Desolation standing in the Holy Place, where it ought not; then
let not him that is in Judea flee upon the Mountains; Nor he that is in the
Field, go back to fetch his Clothes: And he that is on the House top, come
down to take any thing out of his House, etc. Mat. 24.15 and said he further,
verse. 23, 24. Then if any Man shall say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or there,
believe him not, etc. signifying plainly, that when the Abomination of
Desolation should be set up, that the People would notwithstanding not want
diverse sorts of Teachers of the Name of Christ. What were they made desolate of
by the setting up of this Abomination, seeing they were not desolate of a
profession of Christ in diverse manners? They were desolate of the Power and
Presence of God in all their Holy Places, (as they called them) where this
Abomination was set up; even as Christ said to the Jews, when they had made
the House of prayer to be a Den of Thieves; then said he, your House is left
unto you desolate. Mark, it was not then desolate of People, of Congregations,
of Religions and Worships; but it was desolate of the Presence of God; for that
was not to be found there. So that Abomination, which makes People desolate of
the Power of God, by which they should have power over their Sin and Lusts; and
which make the Ministers and Teachers desolate of the Spirit of God, by which
they should have been led to Preach the Gospel; this Abomination has been set
up a long time, and made the People and Nations as a Wilderness; and this has
been since that time, that the Christian Religion has been carried on and
maintained by the Traditions of Men; Then came the Poison to be poured out into
the Church, and thereby it is come to be so swelled and bigg, that it can
comprehend in it the Tyrannical and persecuting Princes, Proud and Rebellious
Bishops, wicked Man-slayers and Murderers, Unclean, Wanton and Drunken People;
they have all room enough in it: and since that time it is counted Heresy,
that any should make a profession of being Purified and Cleansed; and from that
time it may be reckoned, that the Abomination of Desolation has been set up:
And therefore let us consider how long it is yet to stand, before the Devil
come to be cast out, and the Temple of God be Cleansed, and the filth of
Abomination be burned up, that the God of Heaven may again delight in his
Sanctuary, and that the Earth may not for ever be empty of his presence, but
that he may be found of those that seek him, and be heard of them that are
Mourning after him.

Now John says, that this time of Desolation was to continue a Time, Times,
and half a Time, that is, three years and a half, or three times twelve Months
and six Months, that is 42. Months, or 1260 Days; which times are agreeing
together in one, and do perfectly fulfill the time of the restoration of the
Church, and of the coming down of the Righteous Judge, whose right it is to
Rule over Men; for to him are the Gentiles given for an Inheritance, and the
ends of the Earth for a possession: And that time does also perfectly fulfill
the time of the Power of the Beast; for these times do all agree together, and
as they had their beginning about one and the same time, they must also have
their end shortly after one another, because they are like one another.

Now to find out the end of those times, the beginning must be first known; now
the daily Sacrifice was taken away long before the Abomination, that made the
Earth desolate, was set up; but from that time, that both should be fulfilled,
said the Angel to Daniel, should there be 1290 Days, that is 30. more then
John writes of: Now the Abomination of Desolation was not set up in the time of
Christ; for said he, When you shall see it set up, etc. speaking as of a thing
that was not yet come to pass; and the Apostle said, There shall come an
Apostasy from the Faith; that shows, that it was not yet come, neither did it
come till s^veral hundreds of years after; for the true Christians suffered
many cruel and grievous deaths for the Christian Faith; so that they did not
fall away, but endured to the end, and were saved, and so long the Earth was
not Desolate: But when that Faith was lost, which did support in Sufferings,
and that the Christian Religion (which was the holy Place) came to be corrupted
by Pride, Covetousness, Persecution and Worldly Pleasures, Ease, and the
Delights and Honors of this World; then the Abomination was set up, that made
the Earth Desolate: And reckon from that time 1260 Years, and add to it these
30. Years, of which the Angel spoke to Daniel, Dan. 12.11. and see whether we
be not about the Forty Five Years, of which there is made mention in the 12th
verse, where the Angel having spoken of the 1290. years, adds, Blessed is he
that waits, and comes to the Thousand Three Hundred and Thirty Five Days:
Signifying plainly, that there must be a time of Patience and Waiting for the
Blessed Restoration, which was promised; and that that time of Waiting should
continue from the 1290. till 1335. which are 45. days or years; and then they
are Blessed that come thereunto. So he that has Wisdom let him reckon: But
this Reckoning is not comprehended in Arithmetic, or the Art of Reckoning;
neither can it be conceived by the Wisdom of this World; But such as have the
Wisdom, which comes from God, they shall understand; and it is to such I
write; for, I have learned to cover the Pearls before the Swine, and to
withold the Children's Bread from the Dogs.

And by what is here said, it sufficiently appears, First, That this Intruder
or Usurper, called the Devil, Satan, Dragon, or Antichrist, has no Right to
Rule and to Rain over Mankind all the days of their Life. Secondly, That his
Kingdom is a limited Kingdom, and was not to continue forever. Thirdly- That
the limits of it has been revealed to several of the Servants of God. Fourthly,
That the appointed time of his Government is nigh come to an End. Fifthly, That
there is a Blessed Day and Time to be expected after the end of his Reign. And
Sixthly, That none can come to enjoy that Blessed Time and Blessedness, nor
sing the Song of Joy and Deliverance, but those that patiently wait upon the
Lord in the days of Tribulation; and have that Hope to see the Salvation,
which comes out of Sion.

And therefore, for a Conclusion, I shall say this, That all those that feel
themselves in Bondage under this Prince of Darkness, in what manner soever it
be, and are not willing to remain so always; Believe but in him, that shows
you your Bondage, and wait in his pure Light in your own Consciences, which
discovers Darkness, and the Prince of it; and then you will feel a Hope to
spring up in you, that you may be delivered, as I my self have felt: 1 John 3.3.
And this Hope will lead to a daily Washing and Purifying, and to a daily
Crucifying and Mortifying of thy earthly Members: And as this Hope comes to
work in thee, it will bring thee to an Experience of being delivered in some
particular things, and that will strengthen thy Hope of being delivered from
more; and so, at last a Faith will arise in thee, Perfectly and Thoroughly to be
made free from sin: And when thou art made Partaker of this Faith, then the
greatest and strongest Bond of the Devil is broken; for, through the Unbelief
of it he keeps his Kingdom in Man and Woman: And when this Evil Root of
Unbelief is taken away, then his Kingdom comes soon to an end, and the
Government of Truth comes to be set up in thee; and so there comes a Change to
he wrought in thee, both inwardly and outwardly; and so comes his Kingdom, who
is the Intruder or Usurper, to be lessened, first, in thy self, and then thou
come to see that Change in another; and so it goes forward, from one to ten,
and from ten to a thousand, and so forth, more and more, until the Inheritance
of the Wicked comes to be wholly laid waste; till Truth and Righteousness, and
the Reign and Government of Christ Jesus our Lord comes to be set up in the
Earth, which my Soul longs and travels for; and so, I know, it is with many
more, for whose sake this is written; and as a Testimony against that proud and
presumptious Generation of Hypocrites, of what Sort or Name, or in what Nation
or Kingdom soever they may be, who not only have subjected themselves unto this
Prince of Darkness, and unto the Power of him who is called the Devil, and
Satan; but also pretend, That all Mankind must do so, and continue so all their
days, and that there is no Remedy nor Help against it; and so deny the Power
of God, and lead the people to trust in a Lie: But the Day of the Power of God
is come, and the Refuge of Lies is swept away; and the Deliverance and Victory
of the Lamb is known unto many; to whom, and to the Everlasting God, by the
Operation of the Holy Spirit in the Hearts of the Redeemed be sung Everlasting
Praises, Thanksgiving, Renown, Honor and Glory, and Dominion forever

Postscript.
THere comes something further up in my Heart concerning this matter, which I
think good to communicate unto you.

There are hardly any ignorant, how commonly it is said, That we cannot live
without sin; and that we cannot be made free from it, as long as we live in
this World; even as if our Sin and our Life were so knit together, that they
cannot be separated from one another; but that they must end together, and not
the one before the other. Now all those that believe there is (...) God, they
also believe, that he is the Fountain of Life, and gives Life unto all that
Lives: And all that believes that there is a Devil, they also believe, that he
is the Author and Original of Sin; as Christ said, When he speaks a Lie, he
speaks of his own; for he is a Liar, and a Father of Lies, Joh. 8.44. and so he
is of all other Wickedness: Now he gives life to no man; for that comes of God;
and he having made them live, then comes the Devil, and betrays them unto sin:
And now are Men and Women become such Fools, that they seek to bind together
inseparably that which is of God, with that which is of the Devil; and that is
a great Foolishness: For, What Fellowship has Christ with Belial, or Light with
Darkness? So also the Life of Men (simply considered in it self) has no
Fellowship with sin; for they come forth of two different Originals; and he,
who is the Original of Life, is stronger then he, who is the Original of Sin:
And though he has brought in Sin, and has corrupted Nature (which first was
pure) by sin; and men, in that corrupt Nature, do abuse their Life, which they
have from God, to his Dishonor, and to their own Perdition; yet that Life is
not so joined unto Sin, that they are inseparable: For, though it be true, That
men cannot sin, if they live not; yet it is not true to say, That if men sin
not, then they cannot live; for the life that some lived, they lived by the
Faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. and that is in dominion over Sin, and over
the Devil the Author of it.

There is another common Position, That we must live in sin so long as we do
carry about with us this Body of Sin and Death; meaning this Substantial or
Corporal Body; alleging the words of Paul, Romans 7.24.

Now this is also a Blind and Foolish Position, as if the Fault of all sins
which they commit, were in the Body, or the Member^ of it; whereas on the
contrary the Body (simply in it self) is not guilty of that which through the
Body is done, it being altogether passive, having no will in the Members; but
they are as Instruments, that are ordered or disposed of according to the Laws
of God, or of the Devil; the one or the other being set up to rule in the Will
and Mind of the Creature; and the Members have no power to do, or leave undone
any thing, but as they receive it by the Will or Understanding.

Also there is no Member of the Body, but is made to serve the Lord, and is
also made fit for it; and they are as ready and willing to do, and to fulfill
the Will of God, as to fulfill the will of the Devil; yea, and they are more
properly in their right place and service, and have more joy and freedom in it,
then in the service of the Devil; for the service of the Devil is but Bondage;
to which the Creature is led captive by a Lie, as is before said, and those that
call the Corporal Bodies the Bodies of Sin and Death, they please the Devil
well enough; for he well knows that as long as they so Believe, his Birth and
Seed will remain in them without hinderance, when the Eyes of Men are led out
to suspect their own Bodies, as being the cause of all Sin and Evil which they
commit; which Bodies are more fit to serve God; but are capable to be given up
by the Will and Affection to serve either God, or the Devil; as is manifest by
the words of Paul, Romans 6.19. As ye have yielded your selves Servants to
Uncleanness, and to Iniquity unto Iniquity; even so now yield your Members
Servants to Righteousness unto Holiness; Now here every one may see, that the
same Members, that before were given up to serve Unrighteousness, must now be
given up to serve Righteousness [Mark] they had them still, they did not say,
we would we were delivered from these Members and Bodies (that were used to
commit Sin) that so we might come to be made free: But the Apostle said
plainly, That they were free from Sin, and were become Servants unto
Righteousness, and that therefore they should give up their Members to the
Service of him, that had made them free; as formerly they used to do to him
that had brought them into Bondage: And th^se People that so complain against
their own Bodies, calling them the old Man, the Body of Sin and Death, and of
Corruption; How will they understand the Apostle, where he says, Mortify your
Members which are upon the Earth? What, will they Mortify their Hands and
Feet, and pull out their Eyes, and cut out their Tongues? I suppose not; But
how will they fulfill the words of the Apostle, except they find out another
Body of Sin, and the Members of it, which ought to be crucified with the daily
Cross? But the Apostle has named the Members of that Body, which must be
Mortified, Col. 3.5. to wit, Fornication, Uncleanness Inordinate Affection,
Evil Concupiscence and Covetousness, which is Idolatry, verse. 8. Anger, Wrath,
Malice, Blasphemy, filthy Communication out of your Mouth, and lying one to
another, etc. these are the Members, that make up that Body which is called the
Body of the Sins of the Flesh, Col. 2.11. and this is a sort of Flesh which God
has not made; for that which he has made, that is good, and it is for himself,
and not for Sin, 1 Cor. 6.13. and though the Devil has his seat in the Heart,
commanding the Members of the Body to do his will; yet the same Members could
serve to do the Will of God, if the Devil were cast out, and Truth and
Righteousness were set up in the Heart; and then these Sin-pleaders would come
to see, that the fault was not in their Bodies, but in their corrupt Hearts,
and that there is another Body to be put off, before they can come to do the
will of God, and not the Corporal Body, which God has Created to serve him.

And besides that, these People show themselves to have but little love to God;
that all his kindness and manifold Mercies cannot draw them to serve him, but
on the contrary they will serve his greatest Enemy, as long as they have
Members to serve him withal, using those Members which God has given them,
against him and his ordering; and if he will not permit it so to be, he must
take away those Members again; even as if there was no other remedy to put an
end to sin; that is as much as to say, If the Lord will not have them to Swear,
to Lie, or to spoke Evil; he must make them Dumb; and if he will not have them
to do bad Works, he must make them Lame, and if he will take away their Life
from them, then they will leave off sinning, but not sooner: yea, they cannot
endure to hear of putting off of Sin sooner; That (say they) is the Grand Error
of the Quakers, to speak of ceasing to Sin, before we cease to live.

O! Where is the sense of the Love of God, that this People should feel in
their Hearts sh^^ abroad to God, to constrain them unto Obedience? Al^^ (...)
They are strangers thereunto, and the Covenant with Hell an^ ^^^th is so
strong, and the Unbelief is so rooted in them, that ^^ey think, this Covenant
cannot be broken: But Blessed be ^he Lord; that Faith is now manifested, that
gives Victory, and breaks this Covenant.

Another great Plea, which these Sin-pleaders bring, is this, If People can
come to Perfection in this Life, then they have no need of Christ to be their
Savior; as if the Salvation by Christ; and a Perfect and pure Life were
Inconsistant with one another: You fools, and blind, Know ye not that all good
and Perfect Gifts come from the Lord; and that none can come to Perfection, but
by his Gift? and if God be the giver, Is it not then by Grace? Where are Works
then? but these Pleaders for Sin are as great strangers to the Salvation which
is in Christ Jesus, as they are to Perfection; otherwise they would see their
Ignorance: When Christ said to his Disciples; Be ye Perfect, as your Father
which is in Heaven is Perfect: that is, as much as to say, (according to the
explanation of these People) There is your Command, when that is done, you have
no need of me: And the Apostle spoke Wisdom among them that were Perfect, but
not such wisdom (or rather foolishness) as this, to persuade them, that they
had no need of Christ to be their Savior, because they were come to
Perfection; but on the contrary he said; That he could do all things (then he
could be Perfect) but not as of himself; but through Christ that enabled him:
and those that come to a Perfect State, they know that their Salvation is not
of their Works, how good and pure soever they may be, but merely by Grace
through Jesus Christ; and that in respect of these three following Observations.

1. First, That it was the Appearance of Christ Jesus, who is the Power of God,
that has brought them off from their Sin and Imperfection; and that they have
not left them off of themselves, but do own that it is the Grace of God, as the
Apostle did, Tit. 2 11, 12. For the Grace of God that brings Salvation has
appeared unto all Men; Teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts,
we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World. So here
you may see, that it is the Appearance of the Grace of God, that leads to
Perfection, and this Perfection is not yet a perfect Salvation; for those that
have it, may fall from it again, and so not be s^ved; but those that endure to
the end shall be saved.

2. But Secondly, it is Christ, who is the Preserver and Keeper unto the end of
those that trust in him; and the Apostles testify that those, that were
Delivered from the corruption of this World, must know him to be their Keeper,
that had gathered them out of the World; and therefore said Jude in his Epistle
verse. 24. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to Present
you faultless before the Presence of his Glory with exceeding joy, etc. And
Petter testifies, 1 Pet. 1.5. You are kept by the Power of God through Faith
unto Salvation, ready to be Revealed in the last Time. And Paul testifies,
That the keeping is by Jesus Christ, Phil. 4.7. So here you may see, that the
bringing to the state of Perfection, and the keeping from falling from it
again, is both the Work of Christ; and yet this is not a perfect Salvation; for
this does not put away the former Sins.

3. But thirdly, Whoever comes to perfect Salvation, he comes to know Christ to
be an Offering for Sin, and to obtain Reconciliation with God, and forgiveness
of his former sins: For all the holy Conversation, and perfection of Life can
be counted no more, but his Duty; and therefore he cannot obtain remission of
one of his former Sins; but those that confess their sins, and forsake them,
such comes to forgiveness by Jesus Christ, and comes to know his Blood clensing
them from all their former Sins; and so they come to perfect Salvation by
Grace, not by Works, but by Faith, that works in the Love of God, unto
Obedience, without which, Faith is but dead, and makes no man saved; but those
that have this true Faith and Hope in them, They purify themselves, as he is
Pure, 1 Jo. 3.3. and he that has not this Hope, does not purify himself,
neither does he believe, that he can do it; and by this we know the true
Believers from the false; and by this Sinners are made manifest, that cannot
stand in the Congregation of the Righteous, Psalm. 1.5.

So now let all the Pleaders for Sin stop their Mouths for ever; and let the
Devil stand for himself, and plead his own cause; and henceforth do not despise
and revile the Innocent, (that are traveling and striving after Perfection,
with a Faith to obtain it) that they think to be saved by their own works; for
we hope for no other Salvation, but that which is in and by Jesus Christ the
Eternal Son of God, who is the Firstborn of every Creature, that brings many
Sons and Daughters unto Glory; but not by leaving them in their sins; but his
Name is Jesus, and he saves People from their Sins.

S. C.

THE END.

