A LAMENTATION Over thee O LONDON With thy RULERS and PEOPLE, who have slighted
the day of thy Visitation, and resisted the Spirit of the Lord, and despised
his counsel, and evil entreated and persecuted his Servants, Messengers, and
Children; and now must receive thy reward at the hand of (...) Lord.

And when he was come near, he beheld the City and wept over it, Luke 19.41.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets and stonest them which
are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even
as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not? Matthew. 23.37.

London, Printed in the Year, 1665.

A LAMENTATION Over thee O LONDON.
O Thou great City, whose borders are even extended beyond compass, and thy
inhabitants like unto the mighty swelling of the sea, even as it were
numberless, the day of thy judgment is come, and the sword of the mighty God
is drawn forth against thee, and he is come to plead the cause of his poor,
oppressed, despised, and afflicted ones in thee whom thou have destinated for
destruction, and counted unworthy to live in thee, though the Lord, whose
mighty hand is stretched forth against thee, has placed them there to live out
the remnant of time given unto them, and thou seek with thy utmost strength,
to root up what the Lord has planted, and to separate what he has joined
together, and in what thou have done, thou have even done in despite of his
love unto thee; O how has he striven and wrestled with thee in the bowels of
his dear love shed abroad in the hearts of his faithful lambs and servants for
this many years past; O how has the tender breathings of his love visited
thee, and thy Rulers, from year to year, and from time to time, and even from
day to day, warning thee and thy Rulers of the day that is come, and has
overtaken thee, and thou have rewarded them, and art rewarding of them with
prisons, whips, stocks, stones, and even with death, and now thou art filling
up thy measure with banishment, which punishment is more severe then death it
self, and greedily art pursuing thy cruelty upon them by wholesale, not
minding the sword of Gods just judgment, which has already pierced thy bowels;
O thou City with thy inhabitants, that have made a mock and a scorn of the
faithful warnings of the servants of the most high God, ministered and dispensed
in thee, early and late, in thy streets, in thy Markets, and in many of thy
dwellings, some being made signs unto thee, and others declaring in words the
Mind of the Lord concerning thee, and in fulfilling the will of the Lord in
true obedience, have delivered their messages unto thee even with their lives
in their hands, in that day, the burden was theirs and they did bear it, and
now it is thine, and thou must bear it, and though in times past thou have been
threatened with Judgments of another kind, yet have thou had thy God at hand,
even thy riches and treasure, and with it have stopped the wrath, which
otherwise might have reached thee, and because the mighty God has permitted
things so to work, thou have sat as a Queen over the Nations, and have tasted
no sorrow, and for that end have thou magnified thy God, but have dishonored
God Almighty, who is come to plead with thee in judgment, and now sorrow shall
thou both feel and witness, and he who is thy Judge will not at all be bribed,
thy gold, thy silver, thy riches, and all thy costly delicates, will stand thee
in no stead, unless it be to add plague unto plague, for Just is the Lord who
is come to judge, and he will make inquisition in thee, even in thee, O City
for the innocent blood which has been shed in our meetings, in your prisons,
and on your pavements, and also for those souls who have been most barbarously
thrust out of their native land, into exile, their cries with their wives, and
tender children, are entered into the ears of the Lord God, and he has regard
unto them, and for their sakes, yea even for their sakes, is he entered into
judgment with thee, O City and thy inhabitants, for thou may observe that
before thy rulers put forth their cruel hands to execute that barbarous penalty
of banishment upon the people of the Lord, called Quakers, the judgment of the
Lord which is now made visible, was withheld, but as soon as they did make a
president of their malice, the Lord did show an example of his judgment, ye
and not many doors It was said that in or near Beerbinder lane, a mealman were
shut up of the Plague, who was E. B. his near neighbor soon after he was
banished.
from the habitation of that faithful servant and Saint of the most high God
Edward Brush, who with his dear Companion, James Hardin, was the first in
England that the Lord permitted thy Rulers, O City, to wreak their wrath upon,
yet this was not at all laid to heart, or taken notice of, but the ice being
broke, or entry made, into this bloody work, seven more of the precious Lambs
of the Lord, were most barbarously thrust out of their native land into exile;
and here was thy first aggravation, concerning this thing, and after them eight
more for their precious testimony unto Gods dear truth thrust out of the Nation
in the like manner, and besides those numbers that are condemned by thy Rulers
for banishment now in that dismal cell of Newgate, who for want of room and
air, many times, and my eyes with weeping tears have beheld them, panting even
for breath through the grates of thy prison, and all this thou layest not to
heart, O City, neither thy Rulers, nor Inhabitants, but notwithstanding the
Lord is entered into judgment with thee, and is giving thee a Cup which thou
must drink, by sending his Messenger amongst you, even his Plagues, which is
that, which must and will awaken thee to receive thy reward; thou go on
still, and does what in thee lies, to perpetrate the destruction of them
people, that never did, neither said thee harm ever since they had a being, in
that life which cannot reward or recompense evil with evil; but this in time
thou must see and also confess.

And though many may seek to save themselves by flight from the Judgments come,
and coming; yet let such know, though they mount upon dromadaries for have, the
hand of God Almighty will overtake them, yea the strong shall pursue the swift,
and take hold on him, and to that end shall confession be made by every tongue,
that the Judgments of God are Just, and righteous, and that they are not come
upon thee, O City, and thy Inhabitants at unawares, but many years warnings
have thou had, yea thou have been warned near this twenty years by the servants
of the most high, as aforesaid, and know this, it is not only for thy gross
unclean sins, which thou have accumelated, which in these late years have so
much abounded, but this is the sweep of thy drag persecution, yea PERSECVTION
and the very malice of it, is that above all other, that does awaken the wrath
of God, and bring down vengeance upon a generation, this has been known, this
is known, and this will the Lord make thee know in time.

And this may be said of thee, O City, as of Jerusalem, and a Lamentation taken
up for thee, yea a bitter Lamentation; O that thou had known in the day of
thy visitation, the things that belong to thy peace, but now are they hid from
thy eyes.

Woe is me for thee, O City, where is the man that shall stand in the gap, and
make atonement unto the Lord, whose fierce wrath is kindled against thee,
warnings thou have slighted, good Council and reproof from the Lord thou have
rejected, the mercies and blessings of the Lord God thou have sacrificed (...)
thy lust, and have lived out of the sense of him, who would have drawn thee
unto himself by the cords of love, as with the cords of a man, but thou have
despised it, and now must thou eat the fruits of ^hy works; and this is thy
portion from the Just ^and of the Lord.

R. C.

THE END.

