Anti-Baal-Berith JUSTIFIED, AND ZECH. CROFTON Tried and Cast in his Appearance
before the (so called) PRELATE-JVSTICE of PEACE; In an Answer To his seditious
Pamphlet, Entitled, BERITH-ANTI-BAAL.

Wherein his Anti-monarchical Principles are made manifest and apparent, to
deserve his Just Imprisonment.

Together with an Answer and Animadversions upon The Holy-Prophane League and
Covenant, Wherein, according to their own words and ways of Arguing, its proved
to be null and invalid, and its notorious contrariety to former Legal Oaths,
is in several particulars plainly demonstrated.

Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, Luke 19. 22. Circumferamus oculos
per omnem Historiam, quod unquam saeculum tot vidit subditorum in Principes
bella sub Religionis Titulo? and horum Concitores ubique Reperiantur Ministri
Evangelij ut quidem se vocant. Grot. de Antichristo. p. 71 By ROBERT CRESSENER,
(...).

Licensed and entered, according to Order.



London, Printed by Tho. Johnson, and are to be sold by Fr. Kirkman, and Hen.
Marsh, at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane. 1662.

A Paraenesis to the Reader.
THe Guisian Leaguers in France having sworn their Associations and Leagues
(which they blasphemously termed, The Confraternities of the Holy Ghost) and in
1588. having tormented and vexed the Dukedom of Bovillon with their troublesome
Military Suitors, The principal of the Pack assembled at Nancy in Lorrain,
where there was great consultation held how they might advance themselves, and
overthrow the King. There they agreed to present certain Articles to the King,
which they would have him agree to, and those were such as tended to the utter
destruction of the King and the Ancient Nobility of France, and the safety of
themselves. First, They requested the King to join more nearly with the League.
2. To establish the Spanish Inquisition. 3. To put such Castles and strong
Towns into their hands, as they should name unto him. The King considering how
wonderfully they did derogate from his Crown and Dignity, and that they tended
directly to the weakening of himself, and strengthening of the League, would by
no means be induced to condescend unto them. And as the Leaguers sought by such
devices to weaken the King, so they would not be quiet till the King of Navarre
and Prince of Conde were both dispatched out of the way; the latter whereof they
murdered, but the first for the time escaped. Guise, the principal Head of
those Monsters, had in the mean time caused such infamous rumors to be raised
of the Kings Actions, and by secret practices had so disgraced him among his
subjects, that he was almost grown into contempt with the Commonalty, and was
counted no body in comparison of Guise: who knowing that he had stolen away
the peoples hearts from the King, away posts he to Paris, and notwithstanding
the King had truly mistrusted his mischievous designs against his person, and
therefore commanded him not to come upon pain of his displeasure, and being
looked upon as a Traitor, and the Author of all those miseries wherewith the
Land was so encumbered at that instant, yet he not regarding the Message,
followed the Messenger close at his heels, and was almost at Paris as soon as
he; and not long after went very confidently to see the King, and with all
humble reverence with his knee to the ground, saluted him; but the King being
displeased with his coming, frowned on him: He seeing that, stays not long at
Court, but into the City runs he, and by his and his Companies instigations,
the City rose up in Arms, and down they went to the Louvre to take the King,
either alive or dead; which he seeing, and having not forces to resist such a
rabble, determined to leave the Louvre, at the persuasions of sundry his most
faithful Counselors, who advised him to give place to that desperate
Rebellion, and to seek his safety some other where, and so incontinently he
went from Paris. Hereupon Guise conceiving that the King would seek to be
revenged of so great an indignity offered to his person, forthwith seized upon
the Arsenal, and his Treasure, removed Perrense the Provost of the Merchants
there, from his Office, and the rest of the chiefest Officers which he knew to
be affectionate to the King, and placed such as were the most factious and
seditious Leaguers in their rooms; wrote sundry Letters to his friends abroad,
and to the principal Towns, requiring them to join with him, and be in a
readiness when he should have need. When he had taken this course for himself
and his friends, he wrote Letters to the King to disguise all his Actions, and
to persuade him that he had no evil meaning against his Majesty, but had always
been, and still remained his most dutiful Subject, and therefore besought the
King to be his Gracious Lord, and to accept of him as his most faithful and
loyal Subject; whose damnable hypocrisy and villainous practices had their just
reward given them soon after, by some of the Kings servants, in their setting
upon and slaying him. But yet having left others of his Leaguing Conspirators
behind him, men of the same traiterous Regicidian Principles with himself,
they never left contriving and hatching of mischief, till their murdering ends
were accomplished in James Clement (the Sea the mutability of France.
Dominican Friar) his stabbing of their King with a poisoned knife. He that
shall well mark this Breviate of the Leaguing Story, and consider with me of
the actions of those (whom some are pleased to call The long Parliament) how
after they were once got into their Den, and the King had unfortunately Enacted
their Continuance, they began to present their Nineteen destructive
Propositions to His Majesty, utterly derogatory to His Crown and Dignity, That
all such as they were pleased to miscall Delinquents and disliked, should be
put out of their Offices. That the Militia (that ancient Flower of the Crown)
should be plucked off thence, and put into the hands of such persons as their
seditious humors should agree with. That they murdered Strafford, and took
away the life of the Archbishop of Canterbury; How by infamous Rumors of the
Kings actions, they thereby lessened His Subjects affections to him, and made
Him so contemptible in the eyes of the people, that some had the audacity to
throw seditious Pamphlets into Witness that, To thytents, O Israel.
His Coach as He passed along the streets; how by their own instigations they
caused the Citizens of London to come down to Whitehall in tumultuou^
Companies, saying, No Bishops, no Bishops, no Popish Lords, and so audaciously
too, that they set a Bill upon Whitehall-gate, to give the people notice that
it was to be let; that the King was thereupon persuaded to leave the place, and
give way to that popular Commotion, and did leave it accordingly. How after his
departure, they raised an Army to send against Him, seized upon his Treasury,
as well as Militia, and ordered it which way they pleased themselves. How they
removed Sir Richard Gourney then Lord Major of London from his Office, and put
in a fiery persecutor of the Loyal Clergy, (whose name, as one says, should
more properly Isaac Pennington.
have been Julian) in his place; as well as others who they knew, or suspected
to be affectionate to the King and his Legal Cause, and placed others of the
most factious and seditious Covenanting Extirpaters in their rooms. How they
wrote their Letters to the French Protestants abroad, and sent their Agents
into all parts of the Nation at home, desiring the one, and requiring the other
to join with and assist them. How they set up a Disciplinarian Inquisition
among us, that cast out more Ministers in three or four years, then all the
Bishops had done in fourscore years before. How before, and after all this,
they wrote their Letters, and sent their printed, demonstrating, declaratory
Knacks to the King, to disguise their actions, That they had no ill meaning
against His Majesty, but had been, and still remained his dutiful and loyal
Subjects. How yet by their leaguing together, and prospering in their
wickedness, they came at last to a peerless act of Regicide, of murdering
their Sovereign before His own Palace windows, Shall quickly and easily
perceive, that they were sworn Leaguers together in one and the same Cause of
Extirpating Reformation, and Covenanted Rebellion, and yet both hypocritically
pretending their Loyalty and Allegiance, which manifests the Serpents art in
beguiling people into the snares of wickedness, and into the ways of impiety
and profaneness, and then showing his servants the way to delude others, to
disguise their Villainies with the show of Godliness; and their seditious
actions with the vizard of faithful Obedience and Subjection; for there is no
more difference between our Covenanters here, and their Deer Leaguing Brethren
of France, as to the main end and scope of their Leaguing Designs, then there
is between Guy Faux with his Mine and dark Lanthorn, and Bradshaw and his
execrable Confederates in Westminster Hall; both whose intentions we know well
enough, was clearly the Murder of Kings, though upon different grounds. The
first endeavoring to blow up the Father for being too much an Enemy to the
Popish Ribaldry, and Massing Trinckets; The latter actually cutting off the
Son, because they thought him in their cauterized consciences to be a Popish
Tyrant: but murder we see was the aim of both.

The world (says See his Survey of the pretended holy discipline. p. 7.
Archbishop Bancroft) now adays is set all upon Liberty. Everyman almost is of
their humor, which thought scorn that any should be lifted up above the
Congregation, Numb. 16 1. Crofton at least has wedded himself to their
murmuring fancy for Ecclesiastical parlty, and is very well pleased with his
confused thoughts of it, or else we should certainly have never found him
affronting his Episcopal Antagonist, with his Jangling Discourse of Falsehood
and Sedition; more particularly asserting this palpable whimsie against the
general current of Venerable Antiquity, viz. That See p. 25. of his book.
that which was charged upon Aerius by Epiphanius, for Heresy, was an
undeniable universal truth. Knowing man! Excellent Disputant! that can daub
over his own errors with the untempered mortar of confidence and falsehood!
There Is no meddling with such kind of people, who (with the men of China)
conceit two eyes to themselves, and that leave all the rest of the world in
arrant blindness; No hopes of ever prevailing with fanciful creatures, who will
(for no other reason but because they will) be in the right order and way, and
have voted all their Antagonists to lie, and stick fast in a muddy ditch of
error. Its very strange to me I must needs say, that an Ecclesiastical
Historian should not know what he wrote, at the same time he wrote it, better
then one of his Juniors at many hundred years distance, that should at that
time point blanck affirm, That what he said was false; but when men are
resolved once to have their wills, no Truth nor History must dare to control
them, for fear of being taxed of speaking untruths: But seeing its an
Affirmation without proof, it is but answering No, to his Ay, and then where is
he? He has a wish behind still, a request to the Bishop, to ease him of his
unprofitable, unlucky pains, which is this that follows.

I would Dr. Gauden would own Dr. Saunderson as his Dictator in the nature of
an Oath, he should not then so much need the Dictates of little Master Crofton.
Its Page 45.
no marvel indeed Mr. Croftons Dictates are of such profound depth; that the
Dr. should want them to enlighten his understanding: Its the unhappiest man
(one of them) that ever I met with, to bring Dictators to overthrow his own
dictates. I wonder what he can get by his Citation of such a Reverend Prelates
Works? What profit or advantage is there in those learned Writings, for the
upholding of his Covenanting Spell? The Reasons of the University of Oxford,
declares him to be a person of admirable parts, and himself to be a grand
Antagonist against their sacred Covenant. The Reverend Prelate cited by that
faithful Royalist Mr. Roger L'estrange, in his Holy Cheat, tell us, That no man
can bind himself Page 35.
in things wherein he is subject, without leave of his Superior. And again, The
Oath of one who is under the power of another, without the others consent is
neither firm nor valid. Now unless our Presbyter can prove, that a son or
servant can do any thing without the Father or Masters consent. That a part of
the Two Houses (who themselves were but part of a Parliament) can lawfully, (i.
e. by the Laws of God or this Land) order and change the Affairs of the Church,
and thrust out, and put in what, and whom they please, without the Kings
consent, the learned Dictates of that excellent Bishop, clearly proves the
nullity of the Covenant, and the rottenness and weakness of Mr. Crofton's
Dictates; how imperiously soever they are ushered in with his I deny, and I
averr, and such like examples of his brother, the Scotch Confuter of the
Learned Cardinal Bellarmin.

Dr. Gauden having affirmed, He took no Oaths, but those appointed by Law.
Crofton tells him, Page 63.
He might reckon the Covenant to be of this nature. And why so? Pray Reader, do
but observe his pitiful reason; for the Authority of Parliament is by the
Petition of Right, the legal appointment of an Oath: And what then? I cannot
but laugh methinks at his folly, and wonder how he keeps his proselytes in his
nose, how he leads them by the nose to believe his fooleries to be
unanswerable! The Petition of Right desired no Oath might be imposed upon the
people of this Land, but by Act of Parliament: Ergo, The Covenant imposed by an
illegal Ordinance made by a part of a part of a Parliament, is appointed by
Law. What a Non sequitur is here? What an illerate Dolt as to the Laws of
England, have we got here? He might as truly argue thus: The Petition of Right
declared no Oath to be lawful, but what should be framed and imposed by
Authority of Parliament: Ergo, The Engagement made by a part of one, to be Qui
semel modestiae fines transilierit, oppor et ut sit gnaviter impudens. Cicero.
Page 182.
true and faithful to the Commonwealth, without a King or House of Lords, is of
the nature of those Oaths appointed by Law. What the Authority of Parliament
is, will be easily perceived in the subsequent Discourse, wherein you will
find the Opinions of the Reverend Judges, and Learned Sages of the Land
concerning it, more a great deal to be minded then Ipse Dixits, then the
Chymaerical Dictates of little Mr. Crofton; who, what he wants in knowledge,
profoundly supplies with a petty large measure of confidence.

The Bishop having spoken of what happy days there were before the Covenant
came, Sure (says Pa. 53
Crofton) those happy days were not real, but seeming. And why were they
seeming? For the Covenant (he says) does naturally make for what is truly
good. What man? The Covenant naturally make for what is truly good? What, have
you eaten shame, and drunk after it? Truly good? Sure the goodness that is in
it, is not real, but seeming; for the Serpent and your party laid their noddles
so together, that they would be sure it should tend to nothing but to raise
sedition in the State, and divisions and sub-divisions in the Church, for the
Enlargement of the kingdom of your Grandfather the Pope. I perceive a lie will
not choke these men; but a Surplice and a Tippet will make their stomachs
wamble. The happy days we enjoyed (before the devil began to appear in the
likeness of an Angel of light, and sent forth his sacred Covenant to trap
people in his delusions) was the envy of all Europe, and glory of our English
Nation, and an everlasting Monument of a gracious Monarch, and made evident in
the vast mass of Treasure, which was so profusely spent afterward for the
maintenance of an horrid and odious Rebellion against His Sacred Majesty, and
swearing this truly evil Covenant, in prosecution thereof; which though it was
imposed by See his Speech, 5. Dec. 1648. p. 33. 39.
a bare Ordinance of part of the two Houses only, without the Kings Royal
Assent thereto; which by (Croftons profound Lawyer Mr. Prynne himself) is
consessed to be a new Device of that present Parliament (as he called it) never
known nor used in any former Parliaments, what ever has been conceived to the
contrary; yet our profound Pulpit-prater would needs have us believe that it
was imposed by Authority of Parliament. And those very words of Mr. Prynne too,
does clean overthrow his Brother Classicks dream of the Two Houses Supreme
Legislative Power. What the goodness of that Covenant is (which the Irish
Parliament declared to be a grand Incentive of Rebellion) what Schisms,
Separations, Divisions, and Sub-divisions it naturally produced, will be pretty
well seen in the following Sheets; and what the purity of that Discipline and
Reformed Religion is (which the Covenant was taken for the maintenance of) will
appear amongst many other Letters that were wrote by this of Gantois, a grave
and learned Foreigner in the time of that Phaenix Queen Elizabeth, who being
requested to write his Opinion what effects the Presbyterian Discipline had
brought forth in Holland, returns this following Answer, which is but a part of
the whole set down at large by Archbishop Bancroft, in his Survey of the Holy
Discipline: Is any man able (says he) to repeat the monstrous Page 456.
Heresies and Errors that Holland does nourish under the shadow of Reformed
Religion? This is aimed at, viz. That the Turpitude of all blasphemies being
covered with this cloak, may lie hid, and that it may be lawful without
controulment (if any list) to recall the old Paganism, or to profess Mahome^s
Religion, or what worse is, if there be any thing worse. Here Is rare effects of
that godly Babe, that must be brought forth into the world with a bloody
Covenant, enough I warrant you to make a man in love with it over the left
shoulder. Ay but this is not all neither, for he tells us, That the Magistrates
there did suspect this Form of Ecclesiastical Government, why? because (says
he, pray mark their reason for it) they fear lest it may degenerate into a
worse Tyranny then the Spanish Inquisition. The Genevians themselves were so
hampered with the imperious courses of Calvin and his Companions, that they
were forced to banish them, and after their expulsion, they gave this reason
for it: Tyranni esse voluerunt in Liberam Civitatem; voluerunt novum
Pontificatum revocare. They would have been Tyrants over a free City; they
would have recalled a new Papacy, (Calvin ad Farel. Epist. 6. p. 11.) And
Carter one of the Disciplinarian Gang, writing to his friend Field from Embden,
in the time of Qu. Elizabeth, tells him, That if he did see the confused state
of the Churches of those Countries, he would say that England (how bad soever)
was a paradise in comparison. What a damnable Discipline is this, that its very
Idolizers, as well as others, should so terribly exclaim of the mischievous
effects of it? And that we may see with what wonderful wisdom, and with what
grave Divines it was at first brought forth into the world, Calvin himself (the
Father of it) will give us a clear Testimony, (f) In illa promiscua colluvie
suffragiis fuimus superiores. In that confused offscouring of the whole
multitude, we had the most voices. Calvin to Bullinger. Epist. 107.
Here was the first rise and product of it in a confused multitude, only
Calvin and his party got the upper hand for it by most voices, which makes me
throw in this one query amongst the party, Where is the divinity, or divine
institution of that Ecclesistical Government, which is clearly beholden to most
voices in a confused multitude for its Establishment?

What the genuine result of Establishment of this confused Discipline (so much
contended for by the Covenanting party with us in England) has been in foreign
parts, their several Testimonies have made apparent. What it has been in
Scotland, the Primates Fair Warning has shown as manifest; and what it has
been here in England, since they removed the Prelatical Yoke from off their
shoulders by their Covenanting endeavors, their own serious Confession
hereafter inserted, is a most convincing testimony against themselves.

If any shall now demand or enquire why this subsequent Discourse no sooner saw
the light, Let them be pleased to satisfy themselves with that which follows;
That the Author having dispatched the first part thereof, was by extraordinary
occasions in the country, diverted from further prosecuting of it the last
summer season, and coming up this Winter time to the City again, his worldly
Concernments for a pretty space took him off from any immediate further
proceeding, till being somewhat at leisure again, the business entered into his
thoughts, and then made a final end of it; but yet notwithstanding kept it so
finished by him, till the thoughts thereof prevailed with him to show it to a
Reverend Person (his much honored Friend) for his perusal, who suddenly after
desired its publication; and though his desire I presume, proceeded from the
subject matter of the Discourse, and not from any worth that is in it, which
cannot well issue from such poor abilities wherewith the Author is endued, yet
he cannot but crave pardon for appearing in public, hoping that the Judicious
will be pleased to pardon his frailties in the management of it, and accept of
his well-meaning mind for the grand defects of his understanding; who humbly
conceives, that Discourses of this nature are at all times seasonable, to
antidote the contagion of those persons seditious principles and practices,
whose Motto will be always this, Of being seditious in the State, and
schismatical in the Church, and conclude with that remarkable Observation of
Archbishop Bancroft, in his admirable Survey of the pretended Holy Discipline:
That Page 6.
It has been an ancient practice of the Adversaries of the Church of God, then
especially to be complotting of some mischief both against Sion and Jerusalem,
when in outward show they have pretended most of all to be desirous to repair
them, and to seek their glory.

Die Lunae. 20. May, 1661.
THe Lords in Parliament having considered of a paper sent unto them from the
House of Commons, for burning of the Instrument or Writing called, The Solemn
League and Covenant, by the hands of the common Hangman, Do Order, That the
said Instrument or Writing, called, The Solemn League and Covenant, be burned
by the hand of the common Hangman, in the New Palace at Westminster, in
Cheap Side, and before the Old Exchange, on Wednesday the Twenty second of this
instant May. And that the said Covenant be forthwith taken off the Record in
the House of Peers, and in all other Courts and places where the same is
recorded: And that all Copies thereof be taken out of all Churches, Chapels,
and other public places in England and Wales, and in the Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, where the same are set up.

Anti-Baal-Berith justified, etc.
NOthing can be the matter of a Vow or Covenant which is evidently unlawful,
but it is evidently unlawful for a Subject or Subjects, to attempt to alter the
Laws established by force, without the concurrence, and against the Commands of
the Supreme Legislator, for the Introduction of a foreign Discipline, said the Sea his Fair warning to take heed of the Scottish discipline, page 30.
now most Learned and Reverend Primate of Armagh. Upon consideration whereof,
and finding that Juggling Oath, Entitled, A Solemn League and Covenant, to be
the subject matter of Debate between the Reverend Episcopalians and the
Presbyterians at this day, I resolved with my self (how unlearned soever) to
make a serious Enquiry into the nature of that Covenant, and set down my
Animadversions on it. And upon such Enquiry, I found it not at all to portend
any good to this Nation; and by an impartial Search into the genuine fruits,
and bloody villainous effects thereof (which as Springs from that venomous
Fountain, have run forth over the Nation,) I find that it deserved rather to
have been buried like Corah and his Accomplices, in everlasting oblivion and
forgetfulness (except it were for a detestation and perfect abhorrency of it)
then to be revived again as an Achan amongst us, to involve and keep us still
in blood and confusion: I speak not this out of passion or partiality, but out
of a serious consideration of the evil matter contained in it, part of the very
Preface whereof sounds very strangely in mine ears, where they tell us, That
according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former times, and
Gods people in other Nations, they have resolved to enter into a Solemn League
and Covenant, etc.

I have read a Saying somewhere, That its ominous to stumble at the threshold,
and that these Absolonians should stumble so grossly against the Truth at the
very entrance of their League, argues their being filled more with Puritanism,
then Purity; more with frantic zeal, then that according to knowledge; for had
they had any regard to truth, the world had never then been made acquainted
with such a groundless Fiction; for let them make appear by true Evidences and
Histories (if they are able, and if not, let them renounce their bold
Assertion) that ever such a League (as this of theirs) was ever framed,
devised, and put in execution within this Nation, for the extirpation of all
Archbishops, Bishops, and the rest of that glorious Hierarchy, whose Liberties
and Privileges are established by the great Charter, and other good Laws of
this Land) and that ever there were such a Combination against their Prince for
no other end, but to defend him. If this were the Practice of former times,
What meant the Olivarian Covenanting-Metropolitan Nigh, when he point blanck
affirmed, That it was Covenant with Narrative, p. 12.
such an Oath, as for Matter, Persons, and other Circumstances, the like has
not been in any Age or Oath we read of in Sacred or Humane Stories? Now can any
one that has read any thing of the English Chronicles, be so mad and frantic
as to think that to be the Practice of former Ages, which was never visible,
never done by any within this Kingdom: nay, and which one of the profound
Swearers themselves affirms cannot be paralleled, That the like has not been
in any Age? Either the one or the other, must lie with a witness. If what the
Preface says, be true, then Nigh is notoriously deceived; then farewell truth it
self, and all the noble Assertors of it: if what Nigh affirms be true, (as
undoubtedly it is, and cannot be denied) then that part of the Preface (which
sets such a fraud and deceit to catch the eyes and hearts of some credulous
poor mortals) must absolutely appear to be a damnable falsehood, and the proper
effects of a Serpentine infatuation, and their Covenant-building it self, to be
like that of the fools, spoken of by our Savior in the 7. of Saint Matthew. and
the latter end. Nay, that is not all neither; for they call it a commendable
practice: what, and never done, nor performed by any in this kingdom? Surely,
if I should go and do a thing (which was never before visible, or acted by any)
and say, It is according to the commendable practice of others, I might well be
esteemed void of any sense or reason; in a mere distracted condition: fitter
for an inhabitant of Bedlam, then any sober place amongst those who were able
to distinguish betwixt Sobriety, and Frenzy: betwixt an Orthodox Christian, and
a Guisian Leaguer. But suppose there had been such practices heretofore, in the
times of Popish Egyptian darkness, shall any pretending to true Protestantism
(which severely declaims all such perfidious Antichristian courses) be found to
be so far approvers of such infamous actions, as to commend them for examples
to others to tread in the same steps? Can Subjects combining and swearing
together to extirpate the legal established Church Government of a Nation (as
Bishops were, and are still here, though the leg) exercise of their Coercive
power in the Star Chamber, and High Commission Courts was taken away by the Act
in 1641. to prevent the subsequent Rebellion, and Jesuitical-Combinations of
Leaguing Presbyters) and vowing to assist one another in their Covenanted
Rebellion, with their lives and fortunes, against the express command of the
supreme Governor, for the attaining of their Leaguing ends, be called and
styled Commendable by any one, pretending some affinity to Loyalty or
Christianity (which are inseparable, and the constant attendants upon a true
fearer of the Lord)? It Is a brave time with Rebels, when their Treason and
disloyalty are enrolled amongst the Records of Fame and Honor, and their
obedient opposites to the commands of their lawful Prince, are in the very act
of Loyalty termed, and Recorded for terrible Delinquents against the thing
which Nicknamed it self so often, A Parliament: Halcyon days for Sacrilegious
Schismatics, when that which is condemned by the word of God (nothing more)
shall be garnished forth with an Epethite of Commendable, though, what the
Prophet, by God's express command, said so long ago, that do I say now unto
these strangers to Truth and Loyalty, Isaiah 5. 20.
Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil.

. 2. They tell us too, It was according to the practice of Gods people in other
Nations. Aha! What, Gods people, and Covenanting Rebels too? What, Reformers,
and swearing Extirpaters of the Episcopal promoters of the Reformation? Saints,
and yet Schismatics! Christians, and yet Traitors! Surely our Covenanters were
put to extreme hard straits, to make lies their refuge for their carrying on of
their extirpating Reformation? No other way to catch people into the black Road
with them, but by blinding their eyes with Errors and Contradictions? A sad
geneneration of Merozians: Its true indeed, the Guisian Leaguers in France,
went directly in the same impious courses before them, and unless they be their
Gods people, I know none: for they alone were the Monsters that our Leaguers
could properly say they were imitators of, because they went to their hellish
work with an Oath (like ours) and yet Guise himself (like ours too) had the
face to tell his Prince, That he was his faithful subject, for all that, Who
(as the Translator of a Parisians Work tells us) living under See the right of
Kings, and duty of subjects. Pref.
a mild and peaceable Prince, slandered their King that he was an enemy to the
Roman Catholic Religion (as our Covenanters did the late Carolian Martyr, to
be an enemy to the Protestant) and under the fair pretense of Religion, screwed
themselves into the favor of the Common people (who are usually deceived by
such pretenses) raising a strong party against the King, by the name of the
holy League, which caused much confusion in that kingdom, (as by too sad and
lamentable experience we have found to be the effects of our English Leaguers
in this.) And now I appeal to the conscience of any man living, whether they
that can first Rebel against their For so they swore the King was.
only Supreme Governor, and then have the confidence to tell us of a thing
which never was (like that of the man in the Moon) and set it down with such a
positive Asseveration (as making it a pattern for their illegal traitorous
undertakings) and style that Commendable, which (if any such thing had ever
been) ought to be abhorred, as much as hell, by him that desires the Rules of
Christianity: I say, I appeal to the Conscience of any man living, who desires
not to be ensnared (and kept so) with the Sea Mr. Reynell's Panegyrik
entitled, The unfortunate Change.
Caledonian Boar, which was the cause of our distempers, whether they that
speak these lies and juglings, these palpable falsehoods and deceits, could
possibly have (according to their assertion) Before their eyes the glory of
God, and the advancement of the kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
(whose See Mr. Quarrel's Loyal Convert, P. 5.
glory will not be vindicated by such unlawful means, and unwarrantable
proceedings, and whose kingdom is endeavored to be pulled down by such a
peerless Covenant)? But what is it they swear, that must have a juggling Preface
to set it forth? Why, they tell us in their first Article, That they will
sincerely, really, and constantly through the grace of God (as though that
would ever square with such proceedings) endeavor in their several places and
callings, the Preservation of the Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland,
in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, according to the word of God,
and the example of the best Reformed Churches.

. 3. What have I to do with the reglement of Foreign Churches? See his Fair
warning, P. 1,
said the Reverend Primate, and so say I too, What had English men to do, to
swear to preserve the Doctrine, and Discipline of another Country? Let them
stand or fall to their own Master. Ay, but here was the Mystery, We have an
earnest longing desire to have Bishops extirpated, and we, having followed the
pattern of our dear Scottish Brethren, in rising up in arms against our King
for that purpose, and being not well able and sufficient of our selves, to
carry on our design against them, we must call in the other to our aid, and
they will not come to us, unless we will swear to set up their Church Way
amongst us; and therefore, rather then Bishops shall stand, we will do it: For
(as the late Martyr said upon the Covenant) nothing will induce them to engage,
till those that called them in, have pawned their souls to them by a solemn
League and Covenant: I am verily persuaded, that there was not one amongst a
hundred that swore that League to preserve the Scottish Discipline, that knew
no more what their Discipline was then a horse, and so they swore with a blind
implicit faith to preserve they knew not what themselves: Pure good swearing,
(is it not)? Was this sworn in Truth, Judgment, and Righteousness, as the
Prophet says, an Oath should? Jer. 4. 2. If not, (as it was not) Is not
therefore such men's swearing unlawful, and so to be renounced, and repented of?
Is it not an abominable wickedness in any one to swear to preserve the Scottish
Discipline (or when sworn, to keep such a wicked Oath) when the Reverend
Primate has made it appear by such cogent and undeniable Arguments of truth,
and sound Divinity (beyond the reach and power of a Crofton, or any
Presbyterian adversary to answer without palpable cavilling, and declaring of
their own folly) That See his fair warning, p. 2.
this discipline (which the Croftonians so much adore) is the very quintessence
of refined Popery, or a greater tyranny then ever Rome brought forth,
inconsistent with all forms of civil Government, destructive to all sorts of
Policy, a rack to the conscience, the heaviest pressure that can fall upon a
people, and so much more dangerous, because by the specious pretense of Divine
institution, it takes away the sight, but not the burden of slavery. Reader,
peruse that small book, and i will undertake it shall give thee full satisfaction
what this Cockatrice egg, the Scottish discipline is, and what a precious
jewel it is to be preserved. But how will they preserve this Pandora's box?
why, according to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed
Churches: that is brave indeed! to swear to preserve that according to the word
of God, which knows nothing of it (as it is singular by it self)? Suppose I
should swear to preserve a thief in his pilfering courses, according to the
word of God, would that make the thieves actions good, because it is expressed
according to the word of God? or would it not rather aggravate and heighten the
bloody nature of my sins, to swear with such a strange self-contradiction? Just
as if I should say, I would do a thing according to the will and desire of
another, who has openly made his protestation against it: I am sure the
thieves actions cannot be more opposite to the Sacred Canon of Scripture, then
some part of the Scottish Discipline is, (which the Reverend Primate has well
informed us of, to which I refer the doubtful for satisfaction) and therefore
notwithstanding that expression, the Oath for preservation of such an
Anti-Monarchical Discipline, cannot but be very wicked, and therefore unlawful
to be sworn or kept. And as for the best Reformed Churches, the Church of
England, by all impartial, unbyassed, sober Protestants, was wont to be
accounted the best Reformed Church in the world; and, See the fair warning, p.
2.
before these unhappy troubles in England all Protestants, both Lutherans and
Calvinists, did give unto the English Church the right hand of fellowship:
which made the most Reverend Doctor Hammond (of renowned memory) to affirm,
That See his View of the new Directory, and vindication of the ancient Liturgy,
P. 7.
the Church of England, as it stands established by law, is avowable against
all the Calumniators in the world, to be the best, and most exemplary Reformed:
so far (says he) that if I did not guess of the sense of the Covenant, more by
the temper, then words of the Covenanters, I should think all men that have
Covenanted to Reform, after the example of the best Reformed Churches,
indispensably obliged to conform to the King-Edward, or Queen-Elizabeth-
English Reformation, the most regular, perfect pattern that Europe yields.
Thus that indefatigable Defender, and Propagator of Catholic truths, against
the novel inchroachments of the then Julianizing times, whose memory will be
precious, and his name smell as sweet odor in the nostrils of all true hearted
Christian Protestants, when the name of an Assembler will hardly be thought on,
without immediate branding him for Treason and disloyalty. And so now, having
briefly dispatched the first, I shall proceed on to the second, and there they
speak out what their Covenant for Reformation is; for they tell us there too,
in their Rebellious language,

. 4. That they shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellors, Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hyerarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be
found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of godliness, lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues. In good time! Excellent Deformers! They that were the grand Promoters,
and carriers on at first of the Regular English-Reformation (though indeed, not
by Sedition and Rebellion against their Sovereign, nor by making use of
cursing- Merozian Texts, to stir up the people to assist them in such filthy
courses, but by obedience and subjection to the unjust punishment of Majesty,
and freely offering their bodies to the fire) must now be extirpated by our
Deformers of Truth and Christianity, under a sly pretense of a detestable
Reformation. A good requital to them for their incomparable defenses of the
true Protestant Religion against the Jesuits, and others of the Babylonian
Romish rout, to be now cast out, as unprofitable branches, by a pack of holy
Leaguers, not worthy to be named with them: but what said our own late most
noble Sovereign? See Eikon Basilike upon the Covenant.
Many Engines of religious and fair pretensions are brought, chiefly to batter
or raze Episcopacy: This (says he) they make the grand evil Spirit, which
(with some other imps, purposely added to make it more odious and terrible to
the vulgar) must by so solemn a charm and exorcism, be cast out of this Church,
after more then a thousand years possession from the first plantation of
Christianity in this Island, and an universal prescription of time and practice
in all other Churches, since the Apostles times, till this last Century. But no
antiquity must plead for it: Presbytery, like a young heir, thinks the father
has lived long enough, and impatient, not to be in the Bishops chair and
authority, all art is used to sink Episcopacy, and lanch Presbytery in England,
which was lately boyed up in Scotland by the like artifice of a Covenant. And
therefore for that Apostolical-Primitive Universal Church Government of
Episcopacy (so Universal, That See Eikon Basilike, in 24. P. 103.
(as the Martyr says) since the first Age, for one thousand five hundred
years, not one example can be produced of any settled Church, wherein were many
Ministers and Congregations, which had not some Bishop above them, under whose
Jurisdiction and Government they were: and so, by consequence unavoidable, the
damnable infamous nature of the Covenant for extirpation thereof. There has
been so much said by our Reverend Episcoplains, and by our late Josiah, of most
blessed and glorious memory, that I shall forbear to say any thing more of it,
but refer them that desire satisfaction, to their respective writings; (and I
wonder when the Presbyterian will answer them: I do not mean by cavillings, and
railings (for there have been too much of that already) but by true, good,
solid, sound arguments and reasons; such as may carry truth in their forehead,
which people shall easily perceive, when they can once have the happiness to
see the Swans turn black.

. 5. But is this all that these Leaguers swear to extirpate in this Article?
No, they join with the former (just as if a man should join a Scottish
Presbytery with a Monarchy, which (in the wise experienced judgment of King
James See the Conference at Hampt. Court. p. 81.
as well agrees as God and the devil) Superstition, Heresy, Schism,
Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the
power of godliness. A good hearing! I like this part of the Article extremely
well; and the better, for that hereby they must endeavor to extirpate, as much
as possibly they can, (under the danger of perjury) their very Extirpation.
Down Covenant, down: What do thou hold up thy head for? Thy Fathers that
begot thee, have knocked thy brains out, and have sworn to do it by their
Sacred Covenant (as they call it) in swearing to extirpate Heresy, Schism, and
Profaneness: this I will make appear by their own confession (and let them deny
it if they are able) which they unanimously set forth to the view of all the
world, no less then 52 of the party, See the Testimony to the truth of J. C.
subscribed by the Ministers within the Province of London, p. 30. p. 29. p. 30
p. 26.
That in stead of true Piety and power of Godliness, they had opened the very
floodgates to all Impiety and Profaneness, and after they had removed the
Prelatical yoke [mark] from their shoulders, by their covenanted endeavors (i.
i. by virtue of their League) Well! what then? What followed their extirpating
Oath against the Prelacy? They tell us, There was a rueful, deplorable, and
deformed face of the Affairs of Religion -- swarming with noisome Errors,
Heresies, and Blasphemies in stead of Faith and Truth; torn in pieces with
destructive Schisms, Separations, Divisions and Sub-divisions, in stead of
Unity and Uniformity. page 31.
That in stead of a Reformation, they might say with sighs, what their enemies
said in scorn, they had a Deformation in Religion; and in stead of extirpation
of Heresy, Schism, Prosaneness, etc. they had an impudent and general
inundation of all those Evils. A fair Confession, and an ingenuous
self-condemnation! Observe Reader, what these Changers of our times, and
deforming Leagueing-Reformers have publicly confessed, to the shame and
disgrace both of themselves and their graceless Covenant. Here they tell us,
that they have opened the very floodgates to all Impiety and Profaneness, (by
virtue of that very Covenant whereby they were sworn to extirpate it) and that
after they had removed the Bishops, Religion swarmed with noisome Errors,
Heresies and Blasphemies, torn in pieces with Schisms and Divisions: Very good;
Was not this very Covenant (by force whereof these mad exploits have been done,
and the terrible effects thereof are so sadly complained of) taken and sworn
without, yea against the consent and express Command of the only Supreme
Governor, (and so by consequence absolute rebellion) to whom these Swearers
before by a legal established Oath, had solemnly swore to bear true faith and
allegiance? Is not then that League which was the Instrument and Means for the
producing of these horrible Impieties and sad Effects, both in the form and
matter of it, extremely unlawful, naught and wicked, and therefore not to be
kept, but damned eternally? Our blessed Savior says, Matthew. 7. 18.
A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring
forth good fruit: And can this Covenant (whereby the Swearers thereof have
acknowledged (for that was it they were speaking of when they confessed) they
have opened the very floodgates to all impiety and profaneness) be a good tree
that has brought forth such venomous deadly fruit? or not rather a very
corrupt tree that cannot bring forth that which is good? Certainly that League
must be a League and Covenant with hell and death, that shall produce such
hellish fruits and effects, as by the printed Confession of the Swearers
themselves was too evident and palpable (it seems) to be with any truth denied.
What remains then, but that it should have the deserved fate of a corrupt tree,
even to be ver. 19.
hewn down and cast into the fire by the hands of the common Hangman? The
blessed Apostle St Paul told his Romans, that he would have them to Romans 16.
17, 18.
mark them which caused divisions contrary to the doctrine they had learned,
and avoid them; for they that are such (says he) serve not our Lord Jesus
Christ but their own belly, and by good words and fair speeches (like our
unsacred Leaguers with their According to the word of God, and the example of
the best Reformed Churches) deceive the hearts of the simple, who are not able
to see into the depth of their delusive Cheats. And in another place asked his
Corinthians, that 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4.
whereas there was among them divisions, (and what they were, he tells us other
where 1 Cor. 1. 12, 13.
were they not carnal, and walked as men? And therefore again I Quaere, Can
this League (from whence such destructive Separations, Schisms, Divisions, and
Sub-divisions have naturally flown) be any other then extremely abominable and
wicked, when the very causers of such divisions, by what ways or means soever,
are branded by the Apostle with this black mark of not being spiritual, but
carnal; of serving not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly? Qui vult
decipi, decipiatur; He that will be deceived, let him. But its impossible to
catch any other with their destructive schismatical courses, then those who are
either ignorant, or wilfully shut their eyes that they might not be enabled to
see the mischiefs and villainies of their solemn League and Covenant; which
being so extremely sinful both in the form and matter of it, and by filling
Religion with noisome errors, heresies, and blasphemies, in stead of faith and
truth, and causing an impudent and general inundation of all those evils, to be
vehemently, contrary to sound doctrine on the one hand, and by opening the
floodgates to all impiety and profaneness, to be notoriously opposite to the
power of godliness on the other hand, (for there were none of these things
heard, or to be complained of in the Bishops time, till Isaiah. 14. 29.
out of the serpents root this Cockatrice (the Covenant) came forth, whose
fruits have proved no better to us then a fiery flying serpent.) I do here warn
and conjure them in the presence of God, Angels, and men, and as they will
answer it before the Judgment Seat of Christ, not only to renounce, but (as
much as in them lie) to endeavor to extirpate such an impious, profane, and
faithless Covenant for extirpation of the Prelacy (the noble Hedge against all
those Schisms, Separations, Divisions and Sub-divisions, so much complained of
by them) according to the reality of the last Clause of this their second
Article which they swore. Return, return (O sacred Covenanter) return, return
into those ways of truth, plainness and loyalty toward God and your King, which
by your peerless Covenant you have so deeply apostatized from, into the ungodly
ways of falsehood and ledition, ugling and deceit, disloyalty, treason, and true
malignancy, lest (according to your own Covenanting words) you partake matter
men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues.

. 6. But because my intentions are to be brief in my Animadversions. I shall
pass from this second to the third Article, where they tell us, That they hall
with the same sincerity, reality and constancy in their several vocations,
endeavor with their estates and lives mutually, (to set the cart before the
horse, and the tail of a man above his head) to preserve the Rights and
Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and to preserve
and defend the Kings Majesty's person and Authority (with a Juggling Jesuitical
King-destroying limitation) in the preservation and defense of the true
Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms, that the world may bear witness with
our consciences of our Loyalty, and that we have no thoughts or intentions to
diminish His Majeiesties just Power and Greatness. This very Article, and the
notorious Juggling in it, were enough to make an understanding person abhor the
League eternally, and detest the very thoughts of having any thing to do with
it; and that will appear if we do but consider well their limited defense of
their noble Sovereign, which in the whole amounts to no defense at all, but
rather a direct imperious opposition and resistance against His Regal Power and
Authority.

. 7. I have read many of the Leaguers indeed exclaim against the Royalists, for
asserting, That the Covenant tended to the destruction of the King. What (say
they) the Covenant tend to the destruction of the King! Is there not a
particular Clause in it for preservation and defense of the Kings Majesty's
Person and Authority? Yes, there is so; and so far the words sound some what
like Loyalty: But what of that? Tell me (O ye holy Leaguers) did you defend the
Kings Person in Leaguing together to send Armed men against Him? and were you
not bound by a subsequent Article of this very Covenant, to assist and defend
them in such actions? Was that the defense of the Kings Person, when those
rebellions Forces (raised and sent by the illegal power of a factious party of
the Two Houses then usurping the Supreme Authority) shot at those (who were
really risen up in His Majesty's defense, according to their bounden duty and
allegiance, and amongst whom in several Battles He had His residence) with a
Cannon and a Musket Bullet, which makes no difference between a King and
Subject, the Superior and Inferior? Was fighting against him, seeling and close
imprisoning of him, preserving of his Authority? Was it not by virtue of this
Covenant that Treason before begun, was carried on by dint of sword
so long against the pretended Malignants, by true Delinquents, till the
Martyrs Forces (through Gods Divine permission) were wholly defeated and
overcome? Did not that force him to surrender himself to a pack of Scottish
Presbyterian Judasses? Did not their selling him into the hands of Leaguers at
Wesiminster, cause his Imprisonment? I say, was not this done by virtue of the
Covenant? Is not imprisoning of his sacred Person by force of Arms, absolute
The Law interprets it as a seeking the Princes life, when any one seeks to
force the Prince, Cook. in E of Essexs Case.
high Treason by the Laws of this new-risen Kingdom? And was not his
Imprisonment the true underiable consequence of this Cainish League and
Covenant? and is it not therefore evil and treasonable, and so abominable, and
not to be kept? And was not His Majesty's traitorous Imprisonment, the
immediate Harbinger to his bloody devilish murder? Did not one succed the
other? What then is it less then what the Assertors of Truth and Loyalty said,
That it tended to the destruction of our Martyred Sovereign? and shall that now
dare to be pleaded for, and asserted for to be still kept by any that fears God
or reverences man?

. 8. But some have said, (and others may say the same still) That though we
rose up in arms against the King, yet we kept our Oath still, for it was with
this limitation, In the preservation and defense of the true Religion, etc. and
he not following of the one, nor maintaining of the other, though we fought
against him, yet we are true Swearers still; Oh hellish Clause and Regicidian
Limitation! what! Is that your Loyalty to swear to your King with a Juggle?
From such Loyalty and all its abettors, O Lord deliver all Kings and Princes,
and more especially and peculiarly, Lament. 4. 20.
The Breath of our nostrils, our now incomparable Sovereign; For what Traitors
or Rebels will not swear any oath whatsoever with such a cursed limitation as
that, to defend their Prince, whilst their Prince defends that which such
shall please to term the true Religion, whilst he preserves that which such ^
Sav^. 10. 27.
children of Belial may call the Liberties of the Kingdom? The Jesuitical
Papists will without any scruple take an Oath to the King with such a
limitation as that, whereby (though afterward they murder their Prince for
not upholding Popery, either by powder, poison, or poniard) they may justify
the true keeping of their oath notwithstanding, because he not maintaining
their Popes Supremacy, nor the abominable Mass of their Romish trumperies,
their defense of him ceased, by such his actual maintenance of another Religion
contrary to that which they account the true? Nay, did not the Sectarian party
(who took this Covenant which See Feaks Beam of Light, p. 13 in Marg.
was magnified most blasphemously when it came into England first, as the very
Ark of Gods presence, and) who notwithstanding that, afterward brought their
pious Sovereign (whom they had swore to defend) before their Court of highest
Injustice, and condemned and executed Him most barbarously before the windows
of his own Royal Palace, yet pleaded they were not perjured or forsworn,
because of this remarkable Restriction, or special Limitation (In desence of
the true Religion, etc. And he being (as they most impudently with faces of
brass affirmed) Page 29.
a desperate enemy to the Lord Jesus his true seed and kingdom, and a great
friend to Antichrist, and the carnal and persecuting Church in all his
Kingdoms, their murder of Him was no breach of Covenant seemingly made for his
defense; I am confident he that is a true Christian Protestant, will detest
such limited Loyalty, such juggling destructive defenses of his Prince, as
favoring too much of Jesuitical venom, and Anti-monarchical designs, wherein
a Kings preservation stands altogether upon peoples fancies; when they fancy a
Religion or the Liberties of a Kingdom to be such as he does not maintain, then
farewell Loyalty, down goes true Faith and Allegiance, and up goes Treason and
Rebellion, and yet pretend to be his dutiful, loyal Subjects too for all that
(which some may say is impossible; but yet such blind pretenses have been made
by those who had nothing else to say for themselves and their illegal courses,
being assisted too by such a Learned Assembly of so many Divines, who after a
Three years Conference, most profoundly voted God to be the Father.)

. 9. And yet notwithstanding this Anti-monarchical limitation, they declare
they did set it down that the world might bear witness of their Loyalty, (they
might have said Juggling and Rebellion, for that is the true english of such a
limited Loyalty) and that they have no thoughts to diminish His Majesty's just
power and greatness; No question but the world would, did, and have
sufficiently taken notice of that which they call their Loyalty, and have found
it to be such as their Guisian Leaguing Brethrne practiced, who under pretense
of 2 Samuel 15. 7, 8.
maintaining w See The Right of Kings, in Marg.
the Roman Catholic Religion, (as these did for that which they usually
mis-called the Reformed) undermined the Kings Authority, and sought to advance
themselves; the very same which Absalom (the Beautiful Rebel) showed to his
Father, when under a fair color of Evil Counselors at Court, and under a
plausible pretense of paying his vow he made to the Lord in Hebron, he verse 6.
stole the hearts of the men of Israel from their due allegiance to their King,
and drew them verse 11
in their simplicity into a damnable Rebellion with him; and therefore he that
is loyal in practices and works, will never approve of these Westmonasterian
Leaguers loyalty, which only consists in words, whilst their actions declares
nothing else but Treason and Rebellion, unless See A Vindication of King
Charles, by noble Mr. Symmons. p. 40.
when they are in Cathedris, in their seats as Parliamentmen, they are all as
infallible as the Pope, and have a power as well as he to do what they please,
to make evil good, and good evil, to make Rebellion and Treason to be Duty and
Loyalty, and duty and loyalty to be Rebellion and Treason; to vote sacrilege,
murder and theft to be no sins; killing, slaying and destroying to be acts of
zeal and christian duty, Till then their loyalty will appear in the eyes of all
judicious men to be no better then a Wolf in Sheeps clothing; As for their
disclaymer of diminishing His Majesty's just power and greatness, upon search
and inquiry after it, we shall find it to be a chip of the old block, a parcel
of contradictions like the other of preserving the Kings person with a
destructive limitation, and therefore I again thus Quaere, Is the taking the
Ancient right of the Militia from him (which was never for See The Royalists
Defense, p. 97.
the space of 1700. years past questioned or disputed until by these usurpers
injuriously wrested from the Crown, but has been time out of mind inherent in
the King, See Judge Jenkins Lex Terrae, p. 37.
The practice of all times and the custom of the Realm) no diminishing his
Majesty's just power? Was the justifying the war by a party of the two Houses
(the Kings sworn Subjects) against the Martyr to be warrantable, both in point
of law and conscience, and making a deforming Reformation without the consent,
and against the express prohibition of their Dread Sovereign, and not only so,
but justifying for a commendable practice, the iniquity of Witchcraft (which
Rebellion is termed by the Prophet) was this no diminishing His Majesty's just
greatness? What do they think English men are made of? What are all made up of
a bundle of contradictions that they impose such juglings upon us? Surely the
power of the Militia in the King was a very just, necessary power, (and he
being See A Letter to a Member. p. 5.
under God the Protector of the Law, I wonder how he could could defend it, and
the d Privileges of Parliament without the power of the sword) and the
greatness of His Majesty's over all in his dominions was very just too, if
either the laws of God, or of this Land, or an oath of Supremacy are able to
make it so; And yet forsooth people must be forced, by virtue of an illegal
Anti-parliamentary League, not only to be See The Animadversions upon General
Monk's Letter to the Gentry of Devon, p. 4.
engaged in the wars against the King, (and so thereby become perjured and
faithless persons) and to swear to assist all those that shall do so too, in
order to the taking away the Kings Negative voice, and the power of the Militia
from him, which was one of those jurisdictions, privileges, preeminencies and
authorities belonging to the Kings Highness, His Heirs and successors, and
united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, which every one of the
Parliamenteers (as they were called) had by a solemn legal Sacred oath of
Supremacy sworn to assist and defend to his power) but also hipocritically (to
say no worse) to swear too, that for all that they have no thoughts of
diminishing His Majesty's just power and greatness? Was there ever such juggling
seen, that men should endeavor to take away that from their King (which is his
just right) and yet swear with their right hands, lifted up to the most high
God, that they have no thoughts to diminish it? Ay and swear too that they had
before their eyes at this present, the honor and happiness of the Kings Majesty
and his posterity? in what part of the world can these men's peers be found, as
to the art of juggling and contradictions in their oaths? Where may we find a
pattern of their venomous courses, but among the damned Guisian leaguers in
France, who murdered their King with a promise of fidelity, and of their being
his true and faithful Subjects? And yet this, this is that Covenant (God wot)
that notwithstanding it set us together by the ears, and put us all in blood
and confusion, must be still kept to inrol us amongst mad men for ever; This
juggling and contradictions in this ungodly Covenant, cannot but be contrary to
the nature of a true oath, which as the Prophet says must be made in Truth,
righteousness, and in Judgment, and therefore unlawful and not to be kept by
any, without an evident disobedience to the command of the Lord, expressed by
the said Prophet to the men of Israel.

. 10. And though they can tell us in their sixth Article, That this Cause and
League of theirs, so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the kingdoms,
and the honor of the King; yet I demand (and they may answer me if they can)
Was is it ever heard spoke before by men that pretend a fear toward God, that
that which is a most horrible breach of the Laws of God, could ever tend to his
glory? and was not this Rebellions Covenant, and covenant Rebellion against the
Martyr, directly a breach of the Divine Precept spoken by the mouth of his
blessed St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
To submit our selves to the King as Supreme, and that for the Lords sake? and
did they not swear his Supremacy? yea, that he was the only Supreme Governor
(thereby implicitly denying upon Oath any Co-ordinates with him in the
exercise of the Supremacy)? and therefore can perjury and disobedience to the
Laws of our Creator be affirmed by any one (not possessed with a deep frenzy)
to concern the glory of God? Its true indeed, when the Jews crucified our
Savior, it was out of a pretended tenderness to the glory of God, and when our
English-Jewish Tygres had murdered their lawful Sovereign, it was merely (as
they pretended) for the advancement of Christ's kingdom; but that such actions
as either of those, concerned either the glory of God, or the advancement of
his Sons kingdom, is only a demonstration of the Assertors strong delusions;
for it plainly intimates unto us, See the Right Rebel, p. 121.
That there is a special work of Satan in it, when such a strong delusion is
sent unto men, that they should believe such an Antichristian Lie, tendered unto
them under the color of a Christian truth, as the Doctrine of Rebellion is.
But this is just like the Second, of the good of the kingdoms: and therefore to
that I again thus Quaere, Was there not a War begun by a pack of true
Delinquents got into the House of Commons, (and that they were such, I appeal
to the judgment of the Law?) Did not that war (as all wars do) tend to
impoverish and oppress the Kingdom? Was not this League sworn to carry it on,
and not to leave off (whether to make defection to the contrary part, or to
give themselves to a detestable indifferency, or neutrality in this cause of
rebellion) till they had fulfilled their mischeivous traitorous ends? Can then
that Covenant which binds people (as this certainly did and does) to continue
the imbroyling of a Nation or Kingdom in blood, confusion, perjury and
Rebellion, concern so much the good of it? Can that which stirs up people to
pursue the impoverishing, taxing, and inslaving of a kingdom, (for whither did
the Rebelling and rising up in Arms, and swearing men to continue therein tend,
but to that?) be affirmed by any except Frantic bedlamers to concern the good
and benefit of it? And lastly for the honor of the King, (for he and his honor
are put at the fag end of all in this perfidious League) I further again
Quaere, Is it for the honor of the King to have his subjects rebel against him?
Is it for the happiness of the King and his Posterity, to have all his
Assistants and Adherents destroyed, as much as their fellow subjects can, under
the black false notion of Evil Counselors and Malignants? Did not the Covenant
bind the takers to such things as those? Let them deny it with truth if they
can. Can that Covenant which binds men to disloyalty and treason, (though
hypocritically and lyingly pretending loyalty which does not better the evil,
nor antidote the venom in it; The devil though he appears as an angel of
light sometimes, to ensnare men the more easily in his delusions, yet he is but
a black devil still for all that; and therefore I may justly and truly make my
Question thus, Can that Covenant which binds men to disloyalty and treason) and
to break the Laws of this Land, be any thing less then Antichristian? And is it
not therefore damnable and abominable, and to be abhorred of every one that
desires to observe the dictates of Gods good Spirit, in the sacred Canon of
Scripture? Undoubtedly every one that understands the true ways of advancing
the glory of God, the honor of the King, and the good of the kingdoms, will
hold himself obliged and bound to desie this Covenant, as the very sink of
Jesuitism, and highway to hell it self; and he that has ever read, and
considered well the Sacred Canon, and the undeniable truth of what our Carolian
Martyr bid the Scotch Parliament always See Reliquiae Sacrae Carolinae, the
last printed Letter.
remember, That as the best foundation of Loyalty is Christianity, so tr^e
Christianity teaches perfect Loyalty; for without this Reciprocation, neither
is truly what they pretend to be, will find cause enough to refuse the taking
of, and if taken, to renounce and abjure such a seditious Vow and Covenant,
which ties men to continue Rebels all the days of their lives; for he that
shall swear to extirpate a sort of men (whose Function is established by the
great Charter of our Liberties) in absolute breach of the Law, and against the
Command of his Prince, and endeavor to bring to pass his extirpation by force
of Arms, (which is high Treason) and swear that he will all the days of his
life, zealously and constantly continue therein against all opposition, That
man by any reasonable person will be concluded a sworn Rebel, and to continue
by virtue of his Oath (without a just renunciation) a Traitor to his King, as
long as breath remains in his body to enable him to carry on the intentions and
purposes of it. And yet this is the League that such a stir and clutter is kept
about some men's Christian and loyal breaking of it: and though some of its
unlucky Patrons are pleased to allege for its goodness, that part of the
Clause of the first Article, wherein it is said, according to the word of God,
and the examples of the best Reformed Churches, yet I affirm, That that does no
more prove what they intend, by bringing of that Allegation, then the 2 Cor.
11. 14.
devils being transformed into an angel of light, does prove that he was in
reality that into which he was transformed, then the Matthew. 7. 15.
false prophets coming to us in sheeps clothing, does prove that they are not
inwardly ravening wolves; then the Pharisees Matthew. 23. 21.
appearing outwardly righteous unto men, is a convincing Argument to prove that
within they were not full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

. 11. But lastly, they tell us, That they profess and declare before God and
the world, their unfeigned desire to be humbled for their own sins, and for the
sins of these Kingdoms, especially that they have not as they ought valued the
inestimable benefits of the Gospel, that they have not labored for the purity
and power thereof, and that they have not endeavored to receive Christ in their
hearts, nor to walk worthy of him in their Lives. No, it is very true, for if
they had, we should never have seen an ungospel-like, unchristian Rebellion
raised and sworn to be upholden against our gracious King, painted over with a
plausible pretense against some pretended evil Counselors, nor an Anti-legal
juggling self-contradictory League sworn for the Dathanian extirpation of the
great upholders of Monarchy and it is just Rights, Privileges, Preeminencies,
and Authorities, against the several Encroachments of Papists and Presbyters,
of Jesuits and Sectaries. They complain there indeed that they have not
endeavored to receive Christ in their hearts, and are they fit to be Reformers
of Religion, and setters up of the ways and worship of our blessed Lord, when
they have not so much as endeavored to receive him in their hearts? Does the
devil begin to make a Reformation of Christian Religion? Do Atheists go about
to set up Christianity? What may we then expect the fruits of it to be, but a
dismal cloud of darkness and confusion, which indeed does suit well with these
extirpating Leaguers Reformation they have made amongst us, See A Vindication
of king Charles. p. 88.
such a one as Nebuzaradan steward to Nebuchadnezar made at Jerusalem, when he
threw down the walls both of the City and Temple; They make it matter of
humiliation it is true, that they have not walked worthy of him in their lives;
and is this Baal-berith the way to do it? What shall we think of that man that
shall outface the Sun with his Treason, and seemingly repent for his wicked
courses, and yet at the same instant swear to carry on his rebellion still? A
serious man will give judgment, that such a one has nothing to do with God or
Christianity, but is wholly possessed by an evil spirit, which haunts him to
his everlasting destruction; And yet this is directly the case of our English
Baalims of the Covenant; they first raise a war (which the Law of the Land
calls Rebellion) against the Kings evil Counselors, to remove them from him,
which is absolute high Treason, and then pretend to humble themselves that they
have not endeavored to receive Christ in their hearts, nor walked worthy of him
in their lives, and yet in the very act of this feigned humiliation swear too
that they will zealously continue in such their filthy courses all the days of
their lives; was there ever such grand hypocrites, and mockers of God since the
world began, among those that pretended a fear of his name, as these Leaguers
are? The Scribes and Pharisees were but pigmies to them in this matter; First
pretend a sorrow for their sins, and yet in the very act of their temporary
repentance bind themselves by an oath, to proceed in them as long as ever they
can; Go about to persuade some credulous heady mortals, that they are very
sorry they have not walked worthy of Christ in their lives, and at the same
time with their right hands lift up to the most high God, swear to break his
Laws and Precepts, even to Rebel against their King, to whom he has commanded
all men to yield a due subjection and obedience, and if that be the way to walk
worthy of him, Libera me Domine, the Lord deliver me from any walking with
them; If the way to walk worthy of Christ, be to turn Rebels and Traitors to
the Prince we live under, and out of pure love to God, profane his Sanctuaries,
break his Laws, and run directly counter to his sacred Precepts, I know none
that walked more worthy of God and of his Christ, then the blind Jews on the
one hand that ignorantly crucified our blessed Lord for a Blasphemer, and the
hellish wilful Regicides on the other hand that knowingly murdered his
Anointed for a Tyrant; For my part, I am in such disorder of spirit whilst I
am thinking upon their deceipts and juglings, that I shall hasten (as much as
confutation of rebellion will permit) to ease my self of their puddle of
contradictions, and for that end and purpose I shall proceed to the next that
follows, where I find them to let fall these goodly expressions; And are true
and unfeigned (how shall any man believe the truth of it?) purpose (say they)
in public and private, in all duties we owe to God and man, is to amend our
lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a Real Reformation.

. 12. Here Is a fair Protestation we see; Plausible language again (as the
former) to delude the hearts and minds of those that take up all things upon
trust without any examination, but every whit as much juggling in it, as was in
that which went before; which will easily appear by a few more Queries which I
thus set down; Was it not a duty they owed to God to observe his commands? And
did not he command by the mouth of St. Paul, That Romans 13. 1.
every Soul should be subject to the higher powers, (which the oath of
Supremacy and what another Apostle has 1 Pet. 2. 23.
said, does plainly evident to be the Kings most excellent Majesty) and that
too under pain of eternal Damnation? And was that a Real Reformation in the
duty they owed to God to walk in opposition to his Injunctions? Again, for
their duty toward man, Let them remember the Case of the Earl of Essex, in the
time of Queen Elizabeth, who (in comparison of Edgehill Battle) gathered
together but a handful of men, nor was that Queen fought with, (as our late
renowned Sovereign was) nor her person in danger (as the Martyrs was) The Earl
upon his Arraignment protested his intentions were only to remove from the
Queen some evil Counselors about her, yet notwithstanding he raising force to
do this without the Queens warrant, his plea was not available, but his action
was judged Treason, and he and his Adherents executed as Traitors for it; Now
mind, Was our Leaguers fighting against the King (for their declaring to fight
for King and Parliament, at the very same time when they sent Armed men against
those where he was in person, serves only for a record and to eternize the
memory of their damnable juggling and hypocrisy, but I say, Was their fighting
against the King) a real Reformation of their duty toward man? Was their
walking in the direct steps of the Traiterous Essex (who left an ungrateful son
behind him, to follow the same curses with himself) which was judged high
Treason, the going before one another in the example of a Real Reformation? Was
their actual See judge Jenkins's Lex Terra p. 12.
incountring such as came to aid the King in his wars (which is Treason too) a
Reformation of their duty toward man? Was swearing to commit Treason a Real
Reformation? Observe Reader, They confess themselves faulty in duty toward God
and man (for what do they talk else of a Reformation?) and then lest it should
be thought to be feigned, their purpose is, they say (but we have but their
bare word for it) to make a Real Reformation, and what (trow we) is this Real
Reformation of their default, but swearing together to break the Laws both of
the Sacred Canon, and this land, in the wilful actual proceeding on to the
commission of Treason and Rebellion? Thus their Reformation of their lives is
so like that of Religion, that it must needs proceed from one and the same
treacherous mouth and juggling lips, that are altogether used in this League for
the advancing of falsehood and depressing of the truth: alas our Covenanters
made it appear, that their words and actions are two distinct things (and
people are very ready always to pass sentence upon men, (not according to their
fair words and pretenses, but) according to their actions, and when they find a
contrariety between them, to fasten upon them their proper deserved name of
hypocrites) Nay their very words do not agree one with another, (and such
surely must be accounted selfcontradictory juglers with a witness) for they had
no sooner told us of making a Real Reformation of their lives in all duties
they owed to God and man, but presently after they shut up their Baal-berith
with this Antichristian, rebellious, infamous (and never enough to be detested)
prayer and conclusion, beginning with a Most humbly beseeching the Lord to
strengthen us by his holy spirit for this end, and to bless our desires and
proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance and safety to his people,
(as though Rebellion could ever produce safety long to the undertakers) And
which surely proceeded either from the instigation of the Devil, or else was
the plot and devise of some Romish Jesuitical Emissaries to make the true loyal
Protestant Religion (which teaches men according to Christ's Rule, rather to
suffer and flee, then to fight with and kill our enemies) to stink as unsavory
stuff in the nostrils both of God, and all truly pious men, else certainly we
should never have heard of an hellish lewd League made for) encouragement to
other christian churches (if they be truly Christian they will abhor our Leaguers
courses) groaning under or in danger of the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny
(what, for very Titus 3. 1.
fear of a yoke must Christians rebel against Principalities and powers to
disobey Magistrates, which Titus had a command from St. Paul to put the then
Christians in mind to be subject to, though really groaning then under a sad
yoke, of Jewish and heathenish tyranny on the one side, and the other?
certainly the Covenanters mind not what a neerness their feet are to be the
very brink of hell, when they laid down these Antichristian Articles for
others) to join in the same or like association and Covenant to the glory of
God, the enlargement of the kingdom of Jesus Christ (Suppose a man that has
cut himself, to stop it from bleeding, should afresh with a knife make the
wound wider, would you not think him frantique?) and the peace and tranquillity
of christian kingdoms and Commonweals (Its a brave art to persuade people that
wars and bloodsheds, confusions and disorders, tend to the peace and
tranquillity of a kingdom, and that this Covenant bound the takers to pursue
their resolutions by the sword is plain beyond contradiction, and we have not
been deluded and cheated by our Leaguing Absaloms long enough (it seems,) but
we must continue hampered still in the noose of a Regicidian, Antichristian,
lewd, impious, profane Covenant for fear of being perjured forsooth, if we draw
our selves and necks out of it, whereas true Christianity will not suffer a man
to transgress so far the bounds of loyalty, as to keep that, nor true loyalty
permit a man so far to go beyond the limits of the English Laws, as to turn a
Rebel to his King to stand to such a faithless Covenant, which teaches men to
See Eikon Basilike, His Majesty's words upon the calling in of the Scots.
build their piety on their ruins of Loyalty, to make bankrupt of their
Allegiance under pretense of setting up a quicker trade for Religion; But to
their conclusive prayer, a particular answer I shall give in such following
terms as these.

. 13. We read in the 58 of Esa. 1. verse, the Lord commanding the Prophet in
this manner, Cry aloud and spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and
show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins; Yet they
seek me daily and delight to know my ways as a Nation that did Righteousness,
and forsook not the Ordinance of their God, they ask of me the Ordinances of
Justice, they take delight in approaching to God; Wherefore have we fasted (say
they) and thou see not? But what said God to them? Behold (says he) ye fast
for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness. Here was fair
pretenses; who could make better? but that did but aggravate the sinful nature
of their Crimes, we have had such mock-fasts too in our times by our Leaguers
(God bless us from any more such) and promises to reform themselves, that the
Lord might turn away his wrath from us, and yet make it a part of their
reformation presently to pursue their rebellious intentions against their
lawful only Supreme Governor; They pretended indeed to fast for their sins,
but their subsequent actions declared to all the world their fasting to be like
that of their Jewish Brethren, even for strife and debate, for prosperity in
Treason, and to smite with the fist of Rebellion, to cut and slay all the
assistants of their King, because they will not forsake their virtuous
Sovereign, renounce their sworn faith and allegiance, and become joint actors
with them in their unclean beastly courses; The Jews sought God daily and
delighted to know his ways, yet that excused them not, So our Holy Leaguers
pretend to seekafter God, and to delight in approaching to him, yet that serves
not for an extenuation of their crimes, nor for the lessening of their
offenses; Observe Reader these Leaguers prayers, how devoutly they can pray for
success in their Treasons and Conspiracies, nay, and to have it for this end
too that other people in foreign Nations may Covenant in like manner to rebel
and rise up in Arms, for the extirpation of the settled Church Government of
the Nation, without and against the consent and precept of their respective
Princes, and to follow our Leaguers peerless practices in it; But I demand, Is
not such a prayer as this extremely sinful in the matter of it? do they not as
good as pray for prosperity in their breach of the Law of God? When I read it,
methinkes I cannot but admire at these Covenanters confidence, and stupidity,
that they should first break the Laws of God in a most notorious manner by
their perjury and disobedience to their Prince, and then Covenant and bind
themselves to proceed in the carrying on of their evil Treacherous designs, and
yet pray to God to prosper them in their villainy, when they might more justly
according to Gods dealing with Corah, and his holy-conspirators for
Church-paritie, have expected to have found the fate of those murmuring Saints
against the Supremacy of the Prince and Priest (the true and exact picture to
me of our Covenanting Jack Presbyters) to be swallowed up alive for their
Extirpating Covenant, and the earth whereon they trod to sink under them: For
See his Pious votary, p. 47, 48
a Rebel (says the learned Hardy) who goes forth to fight against his lawful
Sovereign, to pray that God would be with him, were not a Petition, but a
Presumption: for though it be true that Almighty God does sometimes suffer (for
reasons best known to himself) such wretches to prosper in their wicked ways,
yet they cannot either justly expect, or religiously desire it, and by how much
the more devoutly they seem to undertake such attempts, by so much the more
abominable they are in the eyes of God, who never more abhors Rebellion,
then when it is masked with Religion and Devotion. Do they think it was no sin
in them for to make such an horrible conclusive prayer, as that which is here
made for a close to their Covenant? If they say no, then a pack of thieves, who
lie in wait for to spoil men of their goods and estates, and sometimes of their
lives, may pray to God too for prosperity in their pilfering courses, (that is,
in plain English, to bless them in their disobedience to him with success for
it) and count their prayer in such case lawful too; and so Absalom, and his
deluded confederates, might most humbly beseech God to bless them with such
success against King David, that they might not only usurp his Authority, and
cast him out of his Throne, but that other of their neighbor Nations might be
encouraged by their example to do the like to their own Kings; and so of any
other whatsoever in the commission of any villainy: if they can but first have
the courage to do the thing without fear of punishment, and in expectation of
praise for it, and then can have but the confidence most humbly to beseech God
(as our Leaguers Cant it) to bless them with success in it, if they say, yes,
then I hope their Covenant ought to be abolished and renounced, as being (what
it is undoubtedly) sinful in the matter of it.

I remember (Mr. Croftons profound Lawyer) Mr. Prynne in his printed Treatises
has told us, That the unparalled proceedings of those who unjustly usurped
the title of Parliament, (though their title was only in nomine, non re, in
name, not in reality) in relation to their barbarous murder of their Lord and
Sovereign (to whom they had sworn to bear true faith and allegiance) and to
their traitorous banishing of his incomparable Heir, through a quaternary of
perjuries, have given occasion See his Republicans, and others Spurious good
Old Cause, briefly and truly Anatomized, p. 17.
to all our Popish adversaries, not only to traduce, deride, reproach,
blaspheme our Protestant Profession, as some of them have done in print, as a
mere Seminary of Treason, Rebellion, Sedition, Hypocrisy, Perjury, Disloyalty,
and all sorts of villainy, but to combine together in a HOLY LEAGUE to extirpate
it, and all Professors of it out of the world; And See his True and perfect
Narrative. p. 55.
to massacre, eradicate, them as a company of Traitors, Antimonarchists,
Regicides, Hypocrites, Rebels, and seditious persons, And made it great matter
of lamentation (as it is undoubtedly to every good Christian) that men
pretending to fear God, should ever give such an irrepairable scandal to
Christianity; And I have no sooner set down that Gentleman's words, but I
presently find that there was occasion enough given by their warlike Covenant,
to turn the edge of these Covenanters words upon themselves; for they having
rebelled against their Sovereign, as it were for Gods sake, for the further
strengthening of themselves in their wicked courses, combined by League and
Covenant, not only to proceed on further in their rising up in Arms against
their supreme Legislator for the glory of God, (a practice (as a loyal Scotch
Minister See Scotlands late misery bewailed, p. 14.
says) inconsistent with sound divinity, against all orthodox doctrine, a
practice contrary to Scripture, contrary to the doctrine of the ancient Church,
and their practice contrary to the Confession of Faith; No King upon the
account of his intellectuals, morals, or religion, being to be suspended from
the exercise of his Government, or denied submission too by his Subjects) but
also to continue therein all the days of their lives, against all lets and
impediments whatsoever, for the peace and safety of the three kingdoms; which
as they are notorious contradictions in themselves (like the rest of their
Juggling League) by being instrumental to the dishonor of God in the horrible
breaking of his Laws, and directly opposite to the peace of this kingdom (as
well as all others where such Antichristian prayers are put in practice) in
being acted so rebelliously to the praise and glory of the man of sin, to the
pulling down of the kingdom of our most blessed Savior, and to the everlasting
disgrace of true Christianity (even of the true Protestant Religion, which
vehemently exclaims against all such seditious Antimonarchical ways and
principles:) So with every rational man that knows there must be a flame
kindled, before a house can be burned, that the King had never bin murdered by
prosperous Rebels, if the flame of Sedition and Treason had not first set the
kingdom a burning, (and for a man to make a flame in a house, and by that flame
at length that house is burned and destroyed, and then to say he never intended
the house should have been destroyed, savours of little less then frenzy, and
will hardly ever excuse his innocence in it. These Leaguers had first raised a
war, and vowed and swore the prosecution thereof against the Martyr, and the
swordmen taking advantage of the Military power which by the Covenanters means
they had obtained, executed their villainy in their villainous act of Regicide,
and yet the former would persuade the world that they never intended it; which
if the rising up in arms had not first bin practiced, the murder would then
have never bin heard of; which being so evident to any man's understanding) this
conclusion naturally flows from the premises, That their rebellious Actings
against the King in the behalf of a Faction of the Two Houses, (that had
renounced all allegiance save in order to that which they called Religion) do
give as great occasion (as the murder) to foreign Princes to extirpate, as
much as in them lies, the professors of the Protestant Religion, to prevent
them from rising up in arms against them, lest their prosperity in such ways of
darkness, should invite them at length to attempt to serve them
there, as the renowned Martyr was here, after he had been by virtue of this
hellish black Covenant fought against, and all his Forces overcome, and (as the
immediate fruits, issues, and effects thereof) first sold, then imprisoned, and
afterward delivered to his perjured Subjects to be crucified. Finally, for a
conclusion to this Covenanting Prayer, which the famous University of Oxford
affirmed, their hearts trembled to think that they should be required to pray
it, I shall here subjoyn the judicious and memorable thoughts of that then
loyal conscientious University, which I find expressed in the following words;
See their Reasons. p. 15, 16.
To pray (say those reverend persons) to the purpose in the conclusion of the
Covenant, seems to us all one in effect, as to beseech Almighty God, the God
of love and peace, 1. To take all love and peace out of the hearts of
Christians, and to set the whole Christian world in a combustion. 2. To render
the Reformed Religion, and all Protestants odious to all the world. Mark the
third, To provoke the Princes of Europe
to use more severity toward those of the Reformed Religion; if not (for their
own security) to root them quite out of their several Dominions. 4. The tyranny
and yoke of Antichrist (if laid upon the subjects necks by their lawful
Sovereigns) is to be thrown off by Christian boldness, in confessing the truth,
and patient suffering for it, not by taking up arms, or violent resistance of
the higher Powers; and yet forsooth this is that sacred Covenant that must be
so strictly kept, to set the whole Christian world in a combustion. This is
that League which must be so zealously continued in, to render the true
Protestant Religion and professors thereof, odious and detestable to all the
world, yes and for the enlargement of the kingdom of Jesus Christ too they tell
us.

I remember a very good observation of one upon this very account, See the
Right Rebel. p. 145.
That as none of the Disciples denied, cursed, and forswore his Master, but
Peter only, who alone without his leave, drew a sword in his defense, so
neither is it said of the rest, that they forsook him and sted, till after that
Peter had rashly attempted to defend him by force; as if the Holy Ghost would
have Christians observe, That fighting for Christ without warrant from him, is
the next forerunner of forsaking him: That Page, 139
if there be any one thing above others, which The Antichrist may properly
challenge, as peculiar to himself, it is the professed practice of Rebellion,
of purpose to promote pretended Religion: for nothing can be more directly
opposite, both unto the Doctrine and Practice of Christ himself, and his
Apostles, of Orthodox Christians in the times of the Primitive Church, and of
all genuine Protestants since the Reformation, and yet that was the absolute
tenor of the Covenant, to resist King Charles, to fight with a pretense for
the advancement of King Jesus, which how contrary to his Will, Practice, and
Command, may very well be gathered out of what has been already set down, as
well as what Croftons profound Lawyer, Mr. Prynne himself, has said upon that
subject, in his True and perfect Narrative, Page 68, 74, 75, 76. In which last
page he sets down one of the express affirmations of the Jesuits, (plainly
declaring the great union between them and our English Leaguers, in that
unchristian Practice) That their Gospel and Religion is to be propagated, set
up; the Heroticks, and Evangelical Sectaries, who resist them, Refuted, (how?)
Extirpated, Abolished with Fire, Sword, and War (like holy Leaguers) and
therefore upon all that has been said in my Animadversions upon the several
Articles of the Sacred Covenant (so called) I hope there is no man of any
ingenuity, or understanding, but will conclude with me, the damnable sinfulness
thereof, both in the Form, and matter of it; and so, according to the Leaguers
own Assertions, in the number of those unlawful Oaths, which must at no hand
be kept by any takers of them.

. 14. Having thus dispatched my Animadversions on this illegal League, I shall
now proceed to set down their own words, to prove the unlawfulness, and sin of
keeping of their so much idolized Diana, and so the necessity of repentance
from all its takers; Their words are these in their exhortation to take the
Covenant; That if there should any oath be found, into which any Ministers or
others have entered not warranted by the Laws of God, and the land, in this case
they must teach themselves and others, that such oaths call for repentance,
not pertinacy in them; which words being suitable to what the Reverend Dr.
Hardy said I shall here adjoyn his words, That See his Pious Votary, p. 16.
those Covenants which ingages men instead of keeping the Laws of God,
injuriously to violate both the Laws of God, and perfidiously to break their
own former oaths, are no better then Leagues with hell, and Covenants with the
Devil; Now mark, will the Law of God warrant any persons whatsoever in the
swearing a Reformation against their Kings consent? will that Law, which
commands me to yield obedience to the King as Supreme, warrant me in my
disobedience and rebellion against him for to carry on my work of reformation?
Can that Law which enjoins me to be subject to Principalities and Powers,
warrant my throwing that subjection off because I have the face to affirm, and
pretend it is for the fulfilling of it? That this is the tenor of this impious
Covenant, we need no other witness then it self, which plainly testifyeth to
all the world, that the swearers thereof took up arms merely to alter Religion,
And that disobedience to God in the rebellion against the King, was the very
matter and subject of the Covenant, is exceeding plain to any who consider the
famous assertion of the now most learned Primate of Armagh (one of whose words
weighs more in the judgment of any understanding person, then ten thousand of
of such bablings as our wily factious Presbiters keep such a chatting in the
Nation with) See his fair warning. p. 30.
Subjects (says that most accomplished Speaker) vow to God and swear one to
another to change the Laws of the Realm, to abolish the discipline of the
Church and the Liturgy lawfully established, by the sword (which was never
committed to their hands by God or man) without the King, against the King,
which no man can deny in earnest to be plain Rebellion. So that unless they can
make the Law of God to warrant that which it no where commands, but severely
condemns, Their League and Covenant according to the exhorters own affirmation,
calls for repentance, and not continuance in the keeping of that, which the
several takers had either the confidence at first rebelliously to swear or
through the horrible seductions or threats, and menaces of the Delinquent
Imposers, took it (not considering the venom in it) without, and against the
Carolian Martyrs consent in perfect defiance of his legal sworn only supreme
authority; And as for its being warranted by the Laws of the Land, hear in the
first place what the reverend Judge Jenkins says in general; It is an oath
(says See his Lex Terrae p. 158.
that famous Lawyer) against the Laws of the Land, against the Petition of
Right, and he gives us a reason for it presently after thus, No man (says he)
by the Law can give an oath in a new case without an act of Parliament, and
therefore (says he again) the imposers thereof are guilty of the highest
crime; Now can that oath be said by any man in his right wits, to be warranted
by the Laws of the Land, which is directly opposite and contrariant to them,
and for which the imposers may be hanged at Tyburn (for the gallows have
commonly been the immediate fate and consequence of that highest crime of
Treason)? This Covenant was thrust down the Throats of many people, not by an
Act of Parliament (which must have been made (as the Petition of Right, and all
other Laws and Acts have been) by the King, and all the Lords and Commons, but
by an Ordinance (as it was called) of a packt black faction of the then never
to be forgotten two Houses (which serves for nothing but to p. 84.
record to posterity a lawless and distempered time) A thing so far from being
warranted by the Laws of the Land, that such a thing was never heard of, till
these latter times of Treason and Sacrilege, Rebellion and Confusion, when
men's brains began to be possessed of the effects and virtues of a
Midsommer-moon. Again, can that be warranted by the Laws of the land which is
so far a breach of those laws as its esteemed high Treason? p. 22. 40.
Arising to alter religion established or any Law is Treason, says the
reverend Judge. And did not the thing which Crofton will needs have to be a
Parliament, arise to alter the religion? and was not this league devised to
keep men under an oath for the doing and assisting of them in it? Let Jack
Presbyter deny it if he can. In the second Article of this Covenant, the takers
swore to endeavor to extirpate Archbishops, Bishops, etc. which is absolute
contrary to Magna Charta (which in the 25th of Edw. 3. chap. 1. 2. is declared
to be the common Law of the Land) chap. 1. and the last, Salvae fint Episcopis
omnes libertates suae, That the Bishops shall have all their whole Rights and
Liberties inviolable, and this great Charter the Judge tells us p. 62. is
confirmed by no less then 32 Acts of Parliament, and in the 42th of Edw. 3. The
first chapter enacts, That if any Statute be made to the contrary, it shall be
holden for none, and therefore their impious, lawless League in this respect is
far enough from being warranted by the Laws of this Land, being so notoriously
against the very Charter of our Liberties. Again, the Leaguers declared (as
Crofton himself told us lately, for I am scarce old enough to remember the
doing of it) That they Abolished the Common Prayer Book in pursuance of their
Covenant. Very good; This very book (which they pretended to abolish with the
power of an illegal ordinance) was not only compiled by true Martyrs, and
Reformers, and practiced in the times of four Princes, but was (and is still,
p. 62.
notwithstanding their Rebellious Ordinance) settled by no less then five Acts
of Parliament; And therefore their Covenant being in that act also contrary to
the Laws, All Ministers and others that have taken this Oath, must teach
themselves and others, (according to the exhorters own assertion, for I love to
take men at their words) that such oaths call for repentance and not pertinacy
in them, it being proved to be so far from being warranted by the Laws of the
Land, that it is an absolute breach of above 26 of them.

. 15. I remember, The Leaguers in their Disputes and Arguments
against the wearing of the Surplice, and performance of other commendable
Ceremonies of our best Reformed Church of England, do out of their wise Noddles
send forth such doughty windy Affirmations, as will excellently well serve to
prove the unlawfulness of their Covenant. Let a man go and ask them why they
will not wear the Surplice, and live in conformity to the Rites and Customs of
the Church, they will tell him, because they are unlawful: and why are they
unlawful? because God has no where commanded them to be done in the Scripture;
though in any wise man's judgment, there can be no unlawfulness in a thing,
without it be a breach of some Law which has forbid it, and where they will
find that Law against the Surplice and Ceremonies, its possible they will tell us
when they are able, and their ability for that end will be I believe Ad Grecas
Calendas, but not well before. Now according to their own ways of arguing, I
shall make this retortion; That God has no where in the Scripture commanded
subjects (in case of a default made by the Prince, or that he will not consent
to any Reformation) to rise up in Arms, and rebel against him, and swear an
Oath to do it themselves without any Royal Consent at all; and let any of the
Pack make it appear if they can. For, for them to set down the examples of the
Oaths and Covenants, Kings and Subjects jointly made for a Reformation, when
they are demanded to show a pattern for their Covenant, is no more to the
purpose, then to say, Queen Elizabeth and her Nobles made a Reformation in this
kingdom, to pull us out of the mist of Popish darkness; no more satisfaction to
a Quaerist, then (as the Reverend Dr. Pierce told one of his Antagonists) for a
man when he is asked what is a Clock, To answer a windmil, or a pump? for the
question is not, whether Kings and Subjects may jointly swear a Reformation of
Abuses, either in Church or State, (for there is no body I think will stand to
dispute that) but whether in case a King will not make that extirpating
Reformation his Subjects would have him, whether they may do this without his
consent, by Oaths and rising up in Arms, which is palpable rebellion? See the
League illegal p. 17.
Where does God command the English to swear to preserve the Scotch Discipline
and Liturgy, which they themselves have often varied? Or to abjure Episcopacy,
which was the only Government of the Church for more then 1500 years, and
under whose shade Christian Religion most flourished, and the Church stretched
forth her branches to the Rivers, and her boughs to the ends of the earth?
Where does the Scripture warrant (much less command) the association of two
kingdoms, and jointly taking up Arms in the Quarrel of the Gospel, and
defending and propagating Religion by the sword? And let them answer that, or
let their silence conclude their being convinced: I say again, God never
commanded Subjects any where in the Scripture, to make a Reformation without
their Princes consent by arms. And therefore to deal with them with their own
weapons, according to their own ways of disputations against the Ceremonies, I
affirm, that their Covenant is wicked and unlawful, and being an unlawful
sinful Oath, by the resolution and judgment of all Casuists, it ought not to
be pleaded for, nor taken, or if once taken, to be kept by any that ever took
it, because See The Fair Warning, p. 30.
To observe a wicked engagement, doubles the sin, according to the found
determinations of the Reverend Primate; And so my Argument herein, I am sure,
ad hominem, is unanswerable.

. 16. The next thing that will come under examination, will be the unlawfulness
of the Covenant, in respect of its contrariety to the two former legally
established Sacred Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and the Protestation; and
to that end I commend to the consideration of my Readers, the excellent
Determination of the Irish Primate in relation to this point, in his
incomparable Fair Warning to take heed of the Scottish Discipline, p. 31. Where
(after he had affirmed That a Supervenient Oath or Covenant either with God or
man, cannot take away the obligation of a just Oath precedent) he immediately
adds, But such is the Covenant, a subsequent Oath, inconsistent with, and
destructive to a precedent Oath, that is, the Oath of Supremacy; which all the
Churchmen throughout the kingdom, and all Parliament men at their Admission to
the House, and all persons of quality thoughout England have taken. The former
oath acknowledges the King to be the only Supreme Head (that is, Civil Head,
to see that every man do his duty in his calling) and Governor of the Church of
England. The second Oath or Covenant to set up the Presbyterian Government as
it is in Scotland, denies all this virtually, makes it a Political Papacy,
acknowledges no Governors, but only the Presbytery. The former Oath gives the
King the Supreme Power over all persons, in all causes. The second gives him a
power over all, as they are Subjects, but none at all in Ecclesiastical causes.
This (says he) they make to be Sacrilege. And therefore I Quaere, 1. Whether
he that has taken the legally established Oath of Supremacy to His Sacred
Majesty, which (as a Paraphrast very well notes) See The Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance, which have layen dead many years, etc. p. 10.
Admits of no Rival in the Throne, but does exclude all others from the
Supremacy, from being enabled to act above His Majesty, or contrary unto Him,
or without Him, or his allowance, in any acts of Government, can take this
illegal Covenant, whereby he swears, according to his utmost power, not only
to carry on the Rebellion then already begun, (for that it was so, needs no
further demonstration) but also to assist all other persons that shall take it,
in what they shall do in pursuance thereof (thereby implicitly owning the power
of the then two Houses, and disowning the Only Supremacy of the King, so
clearly asserted in that Oath) I say, whether he that has taken the former,
can ever swear the latter, without a notorious guilt of apparent Perjury? If
not, (as no man I think upon serious consideration will affirm he may) then it
necessarily follows that the one is an opposition to the other.

Again, The Oath of Supremacy binds the takers to their power, to assist and
defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences, and Authoritys, granted,
or belonging to the Kings Highness, and united and annexed to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm: And the famous University of Oxford have told us, That See
their Reasons, p. 38.
the whole power of ordering all matters Ecclesiastical, was by the Laws of the
Land in express words, For ever annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm,
(citing the Statute for it in their Margin:) whence I Quaere, Secondly, Whether
he that has once taken the Oath of Supremacy, and afterward swallowed down
this Regicidian League, was not desperately forsworn in taking upon them the
ordering of Ecclesiastical matters (which is one of those Jurisdictions and
Privileges granted to the Kings Highness) so far as to swear the Extirpation
of the Legally established Ecclesiastical Government, without, and against his
Majesty's Royal assent? one while swearing to defend the Jurisdiction and
Preeminence granted, or belonging to the King, and another while vowing the
performance of that which is absolutely contrariant unto it? And Perjury
attained by taking of two Oaths, in my shallow judgment, does unavoidably
imply, the vast proportion of difference and contrariety that is between them.
Since the writing of these last words, I heard of the burning of the Solemn
League and Covenant, by the hands of the Common Hangman, according to the Noble
Order of the truly Honorable two Houses, May 22. 1661.
now at this present assembled in Parliament, by virtue of his Majesty's
Gracious Writ; which, as it is no more then its deserts, in having bewitched
people into an odious Rebellion against their Prince, which (as one says well)
See the Right Rebel, p. 72.
Must needs be acknowledged a sin of Sodom, especially since the Sodomites are
the first that the Holy Ghost in Scripture has taxed for the practice thereof:
So I shall desist from saying here any more of this Loyal Vote, concerning that
monstrous League, but shall now go on to the finishing of what I have here
intended, to show the sinfulness thereof in its contrariety to former Legal
Oaths; and to that end and purpose shall again Quaere: Thirdly, Can that Oath,
Which * was devised only to ** See his Majesty's Proclamation prohibiting the
taking of it.
prevent peace, and to engage the Kings good subjects in the maintenance of an
horrid and odious Rebellion against him (as this wicked League did) any way
accord with an Oath of Allegiance, which solemnly bound all its takers to bear
true faith and Allegiance to his Majesty, and to defend him to the uttermost of
their power, against all attempts and conspiracies whatsoever (therefore
against that damnable one of the then two Houses) which shall be made against
his Person, Crown, and Dignity? Fourthly, Can this subsequent, seditious, and
traiterous Vow and Covenant, which endeavors to withdraw the subjects from
their natural Allegiance, which they owe unto their Prince (they are his *
Majesty's own words) and engages them in acts of High Treason, by the express
letter of the Statute of the 25. of King Edward the 3. be any way consonant, or
agreeable with two preceding Oaths, which expressly obliges them to bear to the
King truth, and faith of life, members and earthly honor, and to See the
oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, etc. p. 15.
appear for the defense of him, of his Person and Government, against all
attempts against them, by any whatsoever, upon any pretenses soever? Can any be
so wild and frantic, as to make such an affirmation? Fifthly, How can that
Oath which binds men absolutely to bear true faith and Allegiance to the King,
without any relation to his good, or bad Government, suit with an Apostate that
is sworn with a cursed destructive limitation, to defend him so long as he
shall continue in the preservation of that, which the swallower thereof shall
fancifully call, the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom, and no longer?
See more of this in the excellent Scotch-Covenant condemned; That the one is
the intention of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and the other, the
purpose of the Covenant, needs not to be demonstrated with any illustration,
seeing the doubters may be satisfied in the Oaths themselves: And therefore I
conclude the contrariety between the one and the other, in the words of the
learned Paraphrast, when he set down his mind with a Neither can that
limitation in the Covenant, wherein they oblige Page 8.
themselves to the preservation of the King, in the maintenance of the true
Protestant Religion, the Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberty of the
subject, limit or abate the force of those absolute obligations, whereby all
subjects are obliged to the King, and his lawful Heirs and Successors, which
are upon them by the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance; but as such limitations
look very unhandsomly, so they have not at all any force of abatement in them,
but ought to be abhorred, disclaimed, and rejected by all honest Subjects and
Christians, as an evil gapp opened to Rebellion and Sedition to those that have
a mind to make such an evil use thereof, under pretense that the King does
(that which indeed he ought not to do) either depart in any thing from the true
Religion, or violate the Privileges of Parliament, or the Liberties of the
subject.

17. Lastly, For this League and Covenants contrariety to the Protestation, I
shall first set down in general, the words of a Right Reverend person upon it,
who has told us, That See the Ima^e unbroken.
the Protestation was confined to established Law, but the Covenant to destroy
Law, and what was established by it; the Protestation to defend the Doctrine,
the Covenant to destroy the Government, which is comprehended in the Doctrine:
How do these two hang together? Reconcile them, and it will be as easy to make
light and darkness, order and confusion, virtue and wickedness, lawful and
unlawful acts, to appear one and the same thing to every persons eye and ear;
And therefore how shallow and weak soever my judgment is in every thing, yet I
hope those that are judicious, will excuse me, though I presume for once to
commend, what I say now, to their, and every man's serious consideration;
because if I am erroneous, its not through wilfulness, or obstinacy, but merely
for want of understanding to discern that which is better, (upon supposition
that I am in an error, which I cannot say, till I be convinced of it) and that
which I have to say upon this account, shall come dressed to peoples eyes in no
other terms then these which I have now subjoyned: Every one that took this
Protestation, did Vow and Protest to maintain and defend (as far as lawfully he
might, observe that well, Sir John) with his life, power, and estate, the true
Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of
England: Now mind, the Thirty nine Articles (as they are usually called) have
been always hitherto wont to be accounted, The Doctrine of the Church of
England: the Thirty sixth Article whereof is so far from speaking against the
Bishops for the advancing and promoting of a dogged, surly, Anti-Monarchical,
Scottish Discipline, that the very book of Consecration of Archbishops, and
Bishops, and ordering of Priests and Deacons, (which had the Royal Civil
sanction at the making thereof) is affirmed there to have nothing in it that is
superstitious or ungodly: and this is a part of that, which in this
Protestation was termed, The true Protestant Religion: Nay, and this must not
be defended neither, but as far as lawfully I may, so that if there had not
been the least mention of Episcopacy in any of the Articles, yet confining
themselves in their Protestation, to the rules and orders of the Laws, the
Supremacy of the King over all persons, Clergy and Lay, in all causes,
Ecclesiastical, and Civil, and Episcopacy, its stout propp and defender, (both
undermined, subverted, and destroyed by a Scottish Discipline) stand as safe,
and firm by the very Protestation, as they were before that was ever made or
taken. Now comes a Solemn League and Covenant, and binds its takers, by force
of Arms, to beat down Episcopacy, comprehended in that very doctrine (which the
Presbyters had sworn to maintain and defend with their lives, powers, and
estates) and established by Law, to turn their neighbors (as the Revered
Primate See his Fair Warning, page 2.
says) out of a possession of above one thousand four hundred years, to make
room for their Trojan horse of Ecclesiastical Discipline (a practice never
justified in the world, but either by the Turk, or by the Pope) I, and do this
too, not as far as lawfully they may, but any way in the world, by hook or by
crook, per fas, aut ne fas, so that they can but attain at the ends aimed at in
their extirpating noddles, to beat down the firm brazen walls of Episcopacy, to
rear up the muddy, noisome ones, of an unwholsom factious Presbytery in their
rooms. And therefore once again, I Quaere, Can that Protestation (whereby I A.
B. do promise, vow, and protest to maintain and desend, as far as lawfully I
may, with my life, power, and estate, the true Reformed Protestant Religion,
expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England (wherein the lawfulness of
Bishops is expressly comprehended) any way agree with an illegal League, which
binds me to extirpate Bishops (in direct opposition to that Doctrine) as
contrary unto the power of godliness Our Leaguers, I know, would fain be
accounted true and good Protestants, and yet swear to extirpate that which is a
main propp of the true Protestant Religion; and therefore in this case the
definition holds very firm and true, which was long since given of such, at the
Conference at Hampton Court, That they are Page 38.
Protestants frayed out of their wits.

Again, part of that doctrine which by the Protestation, the takers vowed to
defend is, that The Kings Majesty has the chief power in his Realm of England
and other his dominions, unto whom the chief Government of all states of this
Realm whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil in all causes does appertain. And
by the Covenant the takers swore to preserve and maintain all the days of their
lives the thing called the Scottish discipline; Now nothing can be more
opposite to the Supremacy of the King asserted in the Article, and vowed to be
defended with life, power, and estate, in the Protestation, then this very
Scottish discipline, which our Baal-Berithists by an after oath swore to
preserve: Yea light and darkness, God and the Devil, heaven and hell, the
serving of Christ and the worshipping of Baal, will as soon be brought to agree
with each other, as the Scottish Presbytery will with Monarchy (King James told
us it by a sad doleful experience) as the discipline of Scotland will accord
with the Regal Supremacy over all persons, in all causes, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil; he that has once read, and reading, well considered
the Primates Fair Warning, to beware, and take heed of this Scottish
Cockatrice, he will find cause enough to perceive a vast contradiction between
the Protestation and this: Yea, and as different a sound between them both, as
there is betwixt two bells in a steeple, and so by good consequence see too the
horrible impiety of their solemn League and Covenant; The Protesters vow too
according to the duty of their Allegiance to maintain and defend His Majesty's
Royal Person, Honor, and Estate, without any cursed destructive Limmittation of
that defense; All which are diminished decreased and taken away by Sir John's
Holy League, which therefore can admit of no accord between them; The late
Carolian Martyr in his discourse upon the covenant professes he could not See
Eikon Basilike.
See how they will reconcile such an innovating (observe that, O Leaguer!) oath
and Covenant with that former Protestation, which was so lately taken to
maintain the Religion established in the Church of England, since they count
discipline so great a part of Religion, But if all that has been said, cannot
(which in my weak judgment has sufficiently) prove the opposition of the one
to the other, That there is a great deal of difference between them, may be
easily perceived by his Majesty's deep silence, when the Protestation was taken
under his nose, (as we use to say) when they were hard by him at Whitehal, as
well as by his Public Printed proclamation as far as Oxford, against the
taking of that Seditious and Traitorous Vow and Covenant (as he called it) in
the day he heard thereof, and his prohibition of all people upon their
Allegiance, not to swear it, as engaging the takers in Acts of high Treason;
yea, and by the late order of the Lords and Commons for the Hangmans burning of
it, when they did not so much as mention the Protestation, which if it had
agreed with the Covenant, sure enough those Loyal Houses would never have
suffered it to have lain still, but had sent them both one way together; Upon
consideration of all that has now bin said by way of evidence, to prove the
great contradiction between the two Legal Sacred Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, the Protestation and this juggling League and Covenant; for my own
part I cannot but submit to the Primates truth, See his Fair Warning. p. 31.
That this Covenant is neither valid, nor lawful, nor consistent with our
former oaths, but deceitful, invalid, impious, rebellious, and contradictory to
our former engagements, and consequently obliges no man to performance, but
all men to repentance; And therefore the difference being so great between
them, I appeal to any Casuist living, whether the former must not be kept, as
well as the latter rejected; the one stood to, and maintained for fear of its
true consequence, Perjury, as well as the other to be renounced, and disclaimed
for the very same cause by those that took any of the three former; and so
(according to the exhorting Leaguers own words) it calls for repentance and not
pertinacy in it; which makes also palpable and manifest, the great necessity
and justness, of that memorable Vote of the two now most Honorable Houses, when
out of a noble disdain to all Religious Rebellion, and Seditious Leaguing
principles, as well as out of a true fear of God and the King, they ordered
this Presbyterian Scotland whore to be burnt by the hands of Smectymnus the
common hangman.

. 18. Having now gone through this peerless Covenant, and proved (as far as my
poor understanding enables me to see,) the great sinfulness thereof, both in
the form and matter of it; and also its juggling contradictions in it self, as
well as its absolute opposition to former Legal Oaths, (and so by consequence,
undeniable, the great necessity of every takers sad and serious repentance,
renuntiation, and abhorrence thereof.) I shall desist from saying any more now
of it, but shall from hence proceed to the consideration and examination of a
certain seditious Paper-book (entitled BERITH ANTI-BAAL) set forth by one
ZECHARY CROFTON, (a Presbyter of the Right stamp) whose contradictions, and
shallow Arguings therein against the reverend Lord Bishop of Exeter, made it so
much the fitter task for me to set down my Animadversions on it; I know indeed
the man is looked upon as the Diana of the party amongst the Brethren, and the
ablest to deal with such unlearned Ceremonialists, as the short-sighted
proselites Judge the Profound Episcopalians (how learned soever they be.) But
certainly they are either deceived in their Judgments of his parts, or else
the man was so hampered with what the Bishop replied to him, that (as he
affirms of the Bishop) in this Rejoinder of his See the fifth side of his
preface.
Having loosed from the Haven of Reason, true Religion, and the fear of God, he
runs a drift wherever the wind of his own words can hurry him, and leads his
Reader into a Wilderness, where he hears no sound but the shrieks of Satyrs,
barking and howling of beasts, at best; raging and railing of men, or wild and
improper discourses that tend to no certain end; For in my judgment, (which is
none of the wisest I am sure, but nevertheless what I write, I commend to the
censure of the impartially Judicious) this book of his (for a great part
thereof) contains nothing but sedition and justification of rebellion, to the
debasing of the Regal Supremacy, and power of making Laws, or of giving his
consent thereunto (for Crof;ton tell us the two Houses may exercise their
Legislative power without the Royal consent) and sneaking away from the
question in hand, like a mere shifter, and acting in some places the part of a
pitiful Caviller. And by that time I have set down what I have to say of it, I
leave it to every Readers judgment to make answer whether it be not so in his;
And to that end and purpose I shall set down what in my short cursory perusal
of the Book, I found worth taking notice of to be answered; He (good man!) in a
fit of piety cries out, The Lord deliver me from rendering railing for railng,
And yet (to Page 8.
give the world a specimen of his breeding, and manners, and good words) in the
second side of his Preface, he says, he fears nothing more then to be bound to
his good behavior, for misbehaving himself so much as to answer a fool
according to his folly, (meaning the learned Prelate) and to show his meekness,
humility and aversation to railing (for he tells us p. 8. he does not delight
to rake in that puddle,) In the very first side of his Preface, he compares the
Bishop to the Devil, in the fifth and sixth, to the Heretics, and Harding the
Jesuit, Page 62.
to an envious, and cruel Vulture: the book he styles, a Page 3.
swollen Toad, the Bishop himself he calls Page 42.
a proud Pashur, and shameless Semaiah, a Page 49.
Runegado, an Apostate Presbyter, a Page 51.
man of Fancy: Page 61.
An envious Runegado and Apostate, Page 63.
A shifting Runegado, and a Page 67.
subtle Sophister: and yet behold, and wonder! this is the man that cries, The
Lord deliver him from rendering Railing for Railing. The Bishop having said in
his Anti-Baal-Berith, Page 191. That the late Primate of Armaghs Reduction of
Episcopacy, was propounded, not in order to bind the hands of, or limit
Bishops in England and Scotland, but as a condescension, and expedient to
disarm and bind the hands of Presbyters and People. Crofton, in answer
thereunto, thus profoundly Quaeres: Page 13.
Sir, Who told you that this was the politic stratagem of that pious Bishop?
Did not Bishop Wren? It would make a man mad, and it would make a man laugh, to
see such pitiful arguings used in a rejoinder to an Antagonist, and yet to be
believed as excellent, and invincible by some people, to hug themselves up in
their delusions? Just as if a man should make such a like Quaere to him, Who
told people that it was little Mr. Croftons Politic stratagem, not only to
whipp his maid behind, but before too? Did not the Churchwardens, and several
other of the Parishioners of that Parish, where that noble Ministerial act was
done, to administer somewhat to the maids necessities? So again, The Bishop
having said, That the League which Joshua, and the Rulers of the people made
with the Trappanning Gibeonites, was to the damage of no honest men, but
themselves: Crofton cries out, Page 48.
Was the Oath of the Gibeonites no way to the injury of honest men? Was it no
injury to Israel to loose four Cities out of their inheritance given them by
the Lord? Whereas the Bishop had said, It was to the injury of no honest men,
but themselves, which two last words, Crofton very cunningly leaves out, to
make his Readers believe the convincing force of his Arguments: But alas! he
knew to set down the whole Proposition, was not for his turn of disputing, but
would have broke the neck of his cause and design, and made it evident to every
one, that he was a mere shifting caviller; one that was minded more to quarrel
with an Antagonist, then to answer him by good Reasons and Arguments; which
practice of his brings to my remembrance, the like cavilling tricks and
shiftings, of the most learned Bishop Mountagues Puritanical Informers in the
very selfsame case; who thereupon told them, that the setting down of his whole
passage and Proposition See his Appeal to Caesar. p. 145.
Stood not with their prime purpose of calumniating; directly it gave check to
their detraction in chief, and so they passed it slightly over.

. 20. So again, The Bishop having said, That See his Anti-Baal-Berith, p. 146.
a King, though never so Supreme and Free, yet may not Vow and Covenant to the
diminution of his own just Sovereignty, and Authority and Power, which is his
by Law: Crofton thinks fit to give no other answer but this Page 32.
Which all people of the world must, and will contradict; and leaving out (like
a wrangling Sophister) the principal Clause, and Hinge of the Bishops Sentence,
on which hangs the force of the preceding words, which is this: And necessary
for his high calling, to protect the Church and State, himself, and his good
Subjects. And does he, or any one in his wits, think that any Prince may Vow to
diminish that, whereby his Subjects are defended? to extenuate and give away
that Power he has given him by God, to Preserve and Protect those people, over
whom, by the same God, he is set as Ruler and Supreme? To cast his Subjects, in
a manner, out of his Protection, and give leave to others to Domineer, and
Tyrannize over them, and do them what rapine and mischief they will, and he
himself sit still, as a Cipher? Certainly those people that are in such a case,
may well cry out of an Egyptian slavery, and sadly proclaim, to their great
grief and sorrow both of heart and mind, That every man does that which seems
right in his own eyes, as though there were no King at all in Israel; That a
Prince may vow the diminution of his own just Sovereginty and power (which is
too hard for his Subjects to bear, and when such diminution tends to their ease
and benefit) no body indeed in the world I think will deny; but that is nothing
at all to what the Bishop says: But that a Prince may not Covenant the
diminution of his own just Sovereignty and Power necessary for his high
calling, to protect his Subjects (which, and which alone is what the Bishop
says) is a truth as clear as the Sun, and in that case our Presbyters, all
people in the world that must and will contradict it, must beyond dispute be
such people as belong to the world in the Moon.

. 21. Again, the Bishop having set down p. 149. That the two Houses alone, no
nor the King alone, or with them, have any Legislative power to decree or
execute what is unrighteous against God or man: The Shifter answers with a p.
32.
So that the Legislation is founded in the piety and justice of the decree, and
rebellion against authority is acquitted by the iniquity of the command; not at
all caring to consider, that what the Bishop says in those words, must needs
have reference to the Law of God; and his meaning thus, that by that Law
neither King nor two Houses, jointly or severally have any lawful power to
decree or execute what is unrighteous: for its impossible that that Reverend
Prelate should ever forget what he has read in the Scriptures of wickedness
established by a Law, and the possibility of Governors Legislative power to
execute Isa. 10. 1
unrighteous decrees by the Woe, that by God himself is pronounced unto them
that decree such: Nay, the very language of the Bishop in that assertion of
his, does convince me clearly that he was wholly guided by this very Scripture
in what he said (which Crofton so much carps at) and so (as I just now said)
must needs have reference to the lawfulness of such power for such ends, and
purposes by the Law of God which expressly has prohibited it, and pronounced a
woe against the Actors of it. But hark what the man makes a matter of complaint
of! why, that Rebellion by the Bishops saying (oh how loyal he is all of a
sudden, and fearful of maintaining any Rebellious principles, not above eight
lines before he has point blanck affirmed (nay, and as though it were a
convincing truth too) what I shall prove before I have done with him, not only
to be sedition and rebellion, but an open denial of the Supremacy, Power, and
Authority of His Most Sacred Majesty: but lets hear what he can say for
himself, why sentence of condemnation should not be passed against him for a
wrangler; he says, that by the Bishops assertion it follows, that Rebellion)
against authority is acquitted by the iniquity of the command; Pray Mr.
Caviller tell me, whether an impious decree must be done or performed at the
Command of any Prince whatsoever, by any one that has the fear of the King of
Kings before his eyes? Is not rebellion in that case against man, loyalty and
true Allegiance toward God, and so by Sacred Rules Justifiable and acquitted?
What think you of that Antichristian Acts. 5: 27, 28, 29.
strait command and decree, that the Jewish high Priest and Council once gave
unto the Apostles, not to teach in the name of Jesus? And of their stout noble
Christian answer, we ought to obey God rather then men? Was not their Rebellion
(if it must needs be so called) here against the Jewish Governors justifiable,
and acquitted by their loyalty toward God, in performing of that which he had
commanded them to do, and miraculously inspired them with his holy spirit for
that end? Certainly the man is either out of his wits in this complaint, or
else an evident Rebel against his Savior, as his party (if not his own self)
have bin formerly against their Prince; for where the Laws of God and man, run
counter, and come in competition one with another, I conceive its no Rebellion
at all to observe the former in what he commands, and not at all the latter,
and he that shall make it a matter of complaint of a man's Christian refusing in
such a case and terming it by the odious name of Rebellion, he must certainly
be an Atheist, one that regards not the injunctions of the 1 Timothy 6. 15.
blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords; I remember
an observable saying of one of His Majesty's Loyal Subjects to this purpose,
though he tells us that See the right Rebel p. 28.
It appears, that that which sometimes is esteemed and termed Rebellion by men
may be, and is in truth, and in Gods account, not only lawful, but necessary
also, and so not rebellion indeed, but duty; As when (says he) the commands of
inferiors in authority, are disobeyed in obedience unto the lawful commands of
those that in authority are their Superiors; So the Sovereignty of God, being
absolutely Supreme, as himself is the most high over all, if men (though the
highest upon earth) command that which is forbidden by God, or forbid that
which is commanded by him, it is not unlawful, but necessary Rebellion (if it
may be so called) to obey him, though they thereby be disobeyed.

. 22. Again, The Bishop having said, page 146. That the King may not Covenant
to diminish or destroy any honest subjects, in any of their just Rights, much
less to extirpate or expel out of his Dominions, any Rank, Order, and Degree of
men that are useful, and in some sense necessary for the being, and well being
of his people: Nay, neither Prince, or any party of the People may Vow to
extirpate the meanest Calling, which serves the body Policick, any more then
men may Vow to cut off their feet or toes, (for I love to set down the words as
I find them in the clear Fountain, and not as they run in the unclean, muddy
Streams of the Wranglers giddy brains.) The Shifter contents himself with one
of his merry whimsies, to laugh out his Reverend Antagonist, rather then to
give out a solid answer to the Bishops Assertion, and says, (behold, Reader,
the profound quality of his Argument!) Page 32.
Tinkers, and Pedlers, and men of the like Order, will certainly cleave close
to this Conservator of their Liberty; where the man wants ability to answer,
there he he affords his Readers one of the marks of his Crazy Brain, as
conceiving that his Proselites, See his Preface.
doting on the bare say-so of an holy Leaguer, will the sooner persuade them to
believe the strength of his cavilling Objections; when he wants wherewith to
convince an Opponent, he thinks its enough if he can but give him a Jeer, and
afford him matter of laughter; which in a wise man's judgment, redounds to the
discredit and shame of none, but the pitiful gasping Asserter, who being
destitute of sound Reasonings, for the supporting of his Sandy Building, and
the holding up of his tottering Cause, thinks it sufficient if he can but get
so much breath as may enable him to sling a Jeer at his Antagonist, before he,
and his Covenant, do jointly breath their last. He resolved, it seems, to say
something, rather then be thought to want wherewith to gainsay; and therefore
laid down the preceding Position, to sooth up his Proselites with a belief of
his Abilities, when (if they are no better then that I have hitherto taken
notice of) they may well be compared to those of fools, the upshot of whose
wisdom is to be wise in their own conceits: and were he any more then See p.
8. of his book.
The shadow of a Disputant, we should never have seen such shallow answers made
to convince his Reverend Antagonist of his supposed Error about the Holy
League: but such Pitiful evasions in Argumentations, well becomes, indeed, the
men of his stamp, in the defense of their peerless Oath; which as it engaged
men in Acts of High Treason, can certainly be maintained by no other means,
then either by such sneaking cavilling tricks as these, or by Page 40.
Stating of damnable Doctrines of Sedition, yea Rebellion.

. 23. Again, the Reverend Prelate, having according to the tenor of those words
in Numb. 30. shaken the force and validity of the Covenant, as to its binding
force upon the takers of it, because of our Only Superiors Prohibition of it,
Crofton very cunningly (to show the excellent skill he has in the Art of
cavilling, and running away from the question in debate) that he might be
thought to be some body in the eyes of his Classical Admirers, is pleased to
set down what he would have, in this manner, Page 34.
Will Doctor Gauden please to frame his Argument a Pari, for little Mr.
Croftons rescue, he conceives it must run thus: Numb. 32. directs that the
Oath or Vow of a Daughter, Wife, or other Inferior, made without the knowledge
of Father, Husband, or Superior, should be at the pleasure of the Superior
confirmed, or made void; Ergo, No Scandalous, Disgraceful, Dishonorable Oath
may be taken, if taken, must not be kept, if kept, it must be well interpreted.
No, Mr. shifter, your Ergo is rotten, and invalid, and serves for nothing but
to stir up peoples laughter and admiration of your cunning Sophistry; for if
you had acted the part of a Scholar, and a sound Disputant, we should have
found your Ergo according to the Bishops Arguings, to have been thus expressed,
Numb. 30. Directs that the Oath or Vow of a Daughter, Wife, or other
inferior, made without the knowledge of Father, Husband, or Superior, should be
at the pleasure of the Superior confirmed or made void, Ergo this unsacred
Covenant being taken without the consent or knowledge of our Regal Superior,
(or as the Bishop alleges, by the Sea the 144 page of his book.
Subjects of England, who were by Law and Oaths inferior to, and dependents on
the King, obliged to duty and allegiance) by his open Proclamation against it,
according to that Scripture, is frustrate, void, and of none effect: but
ingenuons Arguings would have quite and clean spoiled the design of such a Page
232
Sophistical Caviller, and therefore he craftily forbore the pursuit of true
Disputations (not quarrellings and envious cavillings) with his Reverend
Adversary, lest thereby his 2 Timothy 3. 9. See p. 10. of Croftons book.
folly should have been made manifest to all men, yea even to his Presbyterian
proselytes, who are pleased with a sound against the Bishops book, and consider
not the certainty of it, and are ready jurare in verba Presbyteri, be they
never so groundless, with whom the Say-so of a godly Presbyter is esteemed a
sufficient reason of their Faith; And yet the man thinking how bravely he had
drawn the Bishops Arguings to serve the base ends of his own vain talking, he
presently begins to crow and vapor, and cries out of a Syllogism, Currens
quatuor pedibus, running of four feet, and tells his Readers a Tale of a tub, a
story of his godly Brethren, the Jesuits Conference at Ratisbone, who (just
like his own Argument here against the Bishop) set down thus their profound
Determinations of the Articles of their Faith, Qui negat articulum fidei est
hereticus, sed hereticus est qui negat Tobiam habuisse Canem: Ergo, (just like
our matchless Disputer) sequitur articulum esse fidei quod Tobias canem
habuerit; He that denies an Article of Faith, is an heretic: But he is an
heretic that denies Tobit had a dog; Therefore it follows, that it is an
Article of Faith, that Tobit had a dog; Not considering that in his Parallel he
fights with nothing but his own shadow, that he utters his mind for the
disgracing and vanquishing of no body but his own dear self, not at all of the
Bishop, who has no such rotten Arguments in all his Book. And that we may
perfectly see the man's design in Writing (even to fill up his Book with
cavilling) he tells us in his Preface (side 3.) of the Bishops writing Mr.
Grafton, as if he should answer Dr. Gaudie, when as one that could not read,
he takes no notice of what the Bishop had set down at the latter end of his
book to read Crofton for Grafton through the whole Discourse; If his eyes were
so dim he could not see it, he should have said so, and then I should have done
my best to have got a clear pair of Spectacles for him, that he might by that
means have read what the Doctor had said for him to correct, as well as others,
seeing he was one of his Readers: but alas, he wanted somewhat to say to fill
up his Preface, and therefore sets down this for a part of it, to make appear
his invincible ways of disputing; His quotations of the Bishops words are such,
that (besides those imperfect un-scholar-like ones I have already set down)
there are no less then fifteen or sixteen several other quotations, which are
either imperfect like the former, or else absolute false ones, as upon a true
examination I have found them, and such as leads his Readers into a wilderness
for to see the truth of them: but I consider his cavilling Discourse was made
in a great deal of haste, and his mad-brain'd tricks have made his Book good
for nothing, but to be the subject of some men's laughter and indignation; for
my part, Mr. Crofton, I See the 8. page of his book.
will excuse you for your wrong, imperfect, false quotations (though not for
your Antimonarchical, seditious Principles and Assertions up and down your
Book) if your very friends do not with blame to you, say, You are come a great
deal too soon, and have verified the old proverb upon your self, The more
haste, the worst speed. And truly I am afraid it had been better for your
outward and inward safety both, that your Book had been like the Bishops, which
you madly profess and say, contrary to the judgments of many sober
understanding men, Page 5.
whosoever in his right mind does but read, will find it a Rudis indigestaque
moles, a mere Chaos of Confusion, (where by the way, whosoever is not of the
same judgment therein with you, is censured to be out of his wits, like your
self, whose Wits run a wool-gathering) rather then that which you are pleased
to style methodical exceptions, which denies the only Supremacy of the King;
Its but a sad merriment to play with edge-tools, to laugh at your Adversary
with Rebellion in your mouth, and (if the mercy of our most Gracious Sovereign
prevent not, which I know no reason in the world for) you will find it so to
your cost, before you are let loose from the reins of your Just deserved
Imprisonment.

. 24. Again the Bishop said (page 196.) That he peremptorily determines, that
the King, Lords, and Commons have no prudent, moral, religious, and lawful
power, to change an ancient, universal, and excellent Government by Bishops, To
any that is (AS new and Schismatical, SO) far worse, and unsuitable to England
every way. Christian Kings and their Parliaments, are obliged to the Laws of
God, and Rules of Christian Piety, and Polity too, of which the whole Church in
its Primitive example, and constant custom, is the best interpreter; As no
Legislative power, is empowered by Gods Laws to bring in Heresy, and Error,
and Superstition, so nor Schism, Faction, or Confusion, by causelessly nuding or
taking from the Essentials of sound Doctrine, or Christian Communion, ever
owned and maintained in the Church of Christ; Here Is the Docters whole
sentence, word for word, as I took it out of his own Book, and not as its
mangled by our Presbyters paultry delusive false quotation, where he makes the
words run thus: Doctor Gauden peremptorily determines, That Parliaments,
Kings, Lords, and Commons, have no Prudent, Moral, Religious, and lawful
Authority, to change the Ancient, Universal, and excellent Government by
Bishops, for Christian Kings and Parliaments are obliged, etc. leaving out
those words of the Doctors, which made his learned Assertion unanswerable, and
true beyond any sound contradiction, which are these, (To any, that is, AS new
and Schismatical, SO far worse and unsuitable to England every way) that so his
own arguings might thereby appear the better, and sound more pleasingly to the
ears of his factious brethren (a practice somewhat like unto one that pictures
a man with the greatest deformity of body he can, for no other end, but to make
his own naturally deformed one, appear the neater and beautifuller.) But I
consider, otherwise he could not hide his folly from being palpable and open to
every person (that is not possessed of a Bedlamers understanding) nor his Book
from being thrown into the fire by ingenuous persons, rather then they would
vex themselves so much as to read his lies and juglings, his cavillings and
sedititon, his false quotations, and confident language, both of the judicious
Assertions, and person of that Learned, Reverend Prelate, whom this Holy
Leaguer may well put to silence after the usual Presbyterian ways of Disputing:
for indeed it will soon make any wise man leave off meddling with such notorious
Salamanders, who loves to live in peace and quietness, and endeavor to advance
the Unity of the Church, and delights not to live in contention with them, to
kindle the fire of Combustion and Sedition, both in Church and State. But we
will see, however, what the man conceived fit in his Scotized noddle, to say
for himself, and make it the matter of his Answer to the words of the Bishop,
as he had filthily mangled them in his false quotation of them; and that I
find, upon search, to be this learned one that follows, with a P. 25. of his
Book.
But Sir, have you not stretched too far, and stepped into a Praemunire? Little
Mr. Crofton should fear to be made less by the head, as guilty of Treason,
Sedition at the least, should be thus confront King and Parliaments in what all
their Statutes declare to be their own creature and constitution, changeable at
their pleasure, even from the Statutes of Carlisle, and 25. of Edward the 3.
Declaring against the Pope, That holy Church was founded in Prelacy by their
own Donation, Power, and Authority, and so by the same way changeable. Where
is, Sir, the Kings Prerogative (why not Supremacy? Would not that word have
choked you?) over all persons in all causes Ecclesiastical? What is become of
your oath, of Supremacy? Can you make this peremptory determination (as your
self calls it) consist with it any more with your Covenant? Has a gracious
King lately advanced you to debase, nay, dethrone him, and his Parliament too?
And then tells his Readers a story, How it has been observed to be the fatal
chance of the Bishops of England, to run themselves into a Praemunire.

The man would fain make people believe that Bishops are Seditious persons, and
in particular his Reverend Antagonist, and therefore the best course will first
be to consider what the Bishop has said, and then see whether it amount to the
Sedition supposed by the Leaguing Rhodomantado, and in order thereunto I shall
begin with the first particle of the Bishops words, That Kings, Lords and
Commons, have no prudent, moral, religious, and lawful authority, to change an
ancient universal Church Government by Bishops, to any that is (As new and
schismatical So) far worse and unsuitable to England every way, and see whether
they may be found to be either contrary to truth or a derogation to His
Majesty's legal Supremacy, and therefore first, that they have no prudential
authority to change Episcopal Government, (much less swear to extirpate them
root and branch) is evident, not only by the desperate excommunicating
antimonarchical brazen tricks and practices of the Godly party (forsooth!) in
Scotland against the excellent King James, in walking direct contrary to his
Royal Commands, and stirring up the people in Rebellion against him, because he
did not submit himself to their traitorous imperious humors, and making him
for his own safety to fly out of his own capital City of Edinburgh, but also
by that Kings famous Motto; No Bishop, no King, and by the sad woeful experience
of the truth thereof, by the late never to be forgotten Rebellion in 1642, and
the Regicidian genuine issues and effects of it; know thou not Sir John
Presbyter, the undeniable truth of that Assertion of the noble L'estrange,
which he put forth to the view of the world, That See his Interest mistaken:
or, The holy Cheat, page 88.
by those very Troops that cried down Bishops, was the King murdered? Know
thou not Sir John, what the wise King James said to Dr. Reynolds's desire at
the conference at Hampton Court, for the rearing up a (domineering Tyrannical)
Presbytery within this Kingdom? if not, then I shall for once declare it unto
your Honor, the Royal Answer ran thus: See the Conference at Hampton Court, p.
81.
Stay I pray you for one seven years before you demand that of me, and if then
you find me pursey and fat, and my wind-pipes stuffed, I will perhaps harken
to you, for let that government be once up, I am sure I shall be kept in
breath, then shall we all of us have work enough both our hands full, but Dr.
Reynolds, till you find that I grow lazy, let that alone; If Kings and
Parliaments have a mind never to be quiet, and to be always in a combustion, I
know no better advice can be given them, then for to set and rear up this
Presbytery, but if they desire to keep themselves in rest, peace and unity,
they will find I am confident no prudential authority to extirpate Episcopacy by a
Baal-Berith, and bring an headless currish Presbytery in its room, but will
abandon the Covenant, that See Mr. L'estrange his Interest mistaken, p. 35.
popular Sacrament of Religious disobedience, as the very poison of hell, and
the secret underminer of the Regal Authority and Supremacy, but then

. 25. Again secondly, that they have no religious authority (for as for moral
authority, that is an authority secundum morem, according to former custom,
their authority is so altogether in the negative there, that its in vain to
blot any paper with an answer: but I say that they have no religious authority)
to change Episcopal government, is evident too in regard of the
Apostolicalness, and primitive use thereof by the Apostles while they lived, in
commanding obedience, and controuling the subordinate governors, and their
disorders as well as the peoples in the several Churches they planted, and
enjoining the same to be done by his Episcopal deputies at Ephesus and Creet,
(and in them all their successors in the Episcopal office) in those several
Churches over whom they had their jurisdiction; Certainly he that tells me,
that 1 Timothy 3. 1.
he that desires the office of a Bishop desires a good work, gives me no
religious nor lawful authority to vow and swear with an Anti-regal Oath to
extirpate it, and make an exchange for one of the plagues of Egypt to overwhelm
us instead of that; That the Apostle said the one, and that therefore for that
very reason Kings and Parliaments have no religious authority to do the other,
None but a Crofton and his crafty companions would ever have had the confidence
to deny it, which makes me proceed to the next thing, and that is,

. 26. That they have no lawful authority to change it, which must needs have
reference to the Laws of God according to the subsequent words of the Bishops,
where he explaines his meaning by judiciously asserting, That Christian Kings
and their Parliaments are obliged to the Laws of God, and rules os Christian
piety and polity too, of which the whole Church in its primitive example is the
best interpreter, and so his position in short is this, That they have no
lawful authority by the Laws of God, and rules of Christian piety, and polity
to change Episcopal Government, which is a clear evident truth to me, for I
consider with my self, that those Laws and Rules will admit at no hand of any
schism, ataxy, confusion, or division in the Church, which are contrary to true
Christianity (for the abounding whereof amongst the Corinthians, they were so
often taxed of their too much carnality) and that Bishops were set up by the
Apostles themselves in remedium Schismatis, for the preventing of schisms and
divisions, and that none of those errors and heresies were so prevalent or
apparent to humane eyes in the Bishops times, as since their Julian extirpation
for the setting up of Prsbyterian practical-jesuitism, was the ground of a day
of fasting, and humiliation amongst the Godly rebels, and a Sermon thereupon
preached by our unsacred Covenanter; What shall we say to those things, that
men should show so much pretense of goodness in appointing a day to humble
themselves for the errors and heresies of the times (the true proper effects,
of their arrogant ways of Rebellion, in setting up Presbytery as a distinct
Government by it self, without Episcopacy, in direct opposition to the practice
of the Catholic Church, as well as to the King and his Laws, which is, and
has bin the head and fountain from whence the unclean muddy streams of
heresies and blasphemies have had their rise and product) And yet forsooth,
must have the means still kept for the production of the same ends of disorder
and confusion, Upon the consideration of the whole, I cannot but subscribe to
the great truth of the Bishops words, That as no legislative power is empowered
by Gods Laws to bring in either Heresy, Error, Superstition, Schism, Faction,
or Confusion, so neither have the King, Lords and Commons any prudent, moral,
religious, or lawful Authority by those Laws or those of this English Nation,
and Rules of Christian Piety and Polity, to change the Ancient, universal, and
excellent Government by Bishops to any that is, As new and schismatical, so far
worse and unsuitable to England every way. If one part of the sentence be true
(which by Croftons silence is absolutely concluded.) No man need fear to affirm
the other without any derogation to the legal, rightful, Supremacy of the King;
That which speaks against Schism and faction, confusion and disorder, will
not surely give me any lawful power to extirpate Bishops, the main preventers
of it, by being the constant promoters of love and unity.

. 27. Thus I have examined the words as I found them imperfectly quoted in
Croftons Discourse, without that additional clause which I have set down in my
true Citation of them, which he most unworthily and basely had left out, that
so he might have some what to fill up his rambling discourse with; for a true
Citation would have fo confounded his understanding, as immediately to have
commanded him into a becoming silence and ingenuous conviction of the Bishops
truths: but rather then he would depart from his cavilling art and shiftings,
he will mangle the words of an Antagonist to make his own way the smoother, for
credulous poor mortals to set their steps in; which has brought to my
remembrance the answer of a most Reverend person to the Miltonian Justifier of
Regicide and Rebellion, depraver of verity and breaker of the Kings Image, That
he See the Image unbroken, p. 153.
broke sentences and truths, lest he should break for want of matter; And the
words of the Bishops with that additional clause in it, is so clear a truth as
can no ways be darkened by a Presbyters Argumentations (which was seen evident
enough by Crofton himself, and so very craftily left it out) and therefore
needs no other defense but the bare words themselves which carry truth in their
forehead, to the convincing of any opposer, which I have no sooner done but I
took a resolution to follow the man's pattern for once, and turn Quaerist too,

Where Is the Praemunire that the Bishop has stepped into now? Is speaking of a
known Truth, confronting of King and Parliaments? Suppose the Bishop had lived
in Queen Mary's days, and had said, That neither Queen nor Parliament had any
lawful power by the Laws of God, and Rules of Christian Piety and Polity,
either to change the King Edward-Reformation, or to set up and establish Popery
in the kingdom, Was it fit for any man's mouth but a cursed Jesuits, to charge
him with sedition and treason against the Queen, in confronting her and her
Parliaments, by saying black is black, and white is white, by asserting a known
truth? Blessed be God, we live under a Prince that desires not to have His
Supremacy stretched so, as to make it an Instrument of Justification of the
Lawfulness of His Actings, either against God, or his Truth, or the Defenders
of true Christianity; that desires to have His Supremacy carried on, and
maintained for no other ends and purposes, then those for which it was first
established, To make Clergymen as well as Lay, know that he is their only
Supreme Governor, and in case of offense, that His Power will reach to the
punishment of both; that they shall not be exempted from the Civil Magistrates
sword of Justice, either by the wicked pretense of a foreign, Papal, superior
Jurisdiction, or Antimonarchical Sentence or Determination of the traitorous
seditious Consistorians, if they do that which is not justifiable either by the
Laws of God, or this Land? Where Is the Bishops sedition, I wonder? Where Is his
treason, that he needs to fear to be made less by the head for (as this Leaguer
cants it)? Why he says, in affirming the defect of the Kings and Parliaments
prudent, moral, religious, and lawful power to change Episcopacy to one that is
worse, and far unsuitable to England every way (for that is it which the Bishop
says, which our unsacred Covenanter has dared to contradict with his shabbed
prattling). Ay but, says Crofton, The Statutes of the Kings declare against the
Pope, That Holy Church was founded in Prelacy by their own donation, power and
authority, and so by the same way changeable: Ergo, What? That they have any
prudent, moral, religious, and lawful authority to change it to a worse? After
what rate does this wily Covenanter argue? Can they that swear to govern a
people well, and according to the Laws of the Land, have any of that quaternary
Power, to change one Government for a worse? Will the people in such a case
think (or can they?) that they are well governed, or that their Prince mind
their peace and safety? If I may be so bold with the world as to tell them my
simple judgment of those words of the Kings, I humbly conceive (with
submission to those that are wiser) That those Statutes were made merely to cut
off the spring of the Popes universal Supremacy, and as much (as in them lay)
to cast out his bold, unwarrantable, antichristian Encroachment upon the
English Liberties, and to give acheck to his Lordly domineering over them, that
the Kings (as now) might have their due rightful Supremacy over all persons in
all causes within their dominuous, Over Clergymen (who were humble servants, to
the principles and injunctions of the Papal Usurper) as well as over Common
people (who were led by the nose by them,) In all causes Ecclesiastical, to
reform Abuses in the Church, and punish Clergymen for their Errors, Heresies,
and Seditious principles, as well as Civil, To execute wrath upon those that do
evil, either by Rebellion, or Treason, or Speaking, or bellowing out from
Press, or Pulpit their damnable positions against their Persons Crowns
Dignities, or Governments upon any account with any person or persons joint or
separate whatsoever; This I understand to be the grounds of that Royal saying,
That holy Church was founded in prelacy by their own donation power and
authority, and not for any intentions of theirs to extirpate Episcopal
Government, or the manifestation of the lawfulness of their power by the Laws
of God, and Rules of Christian Piety and Polity for the doing of it.

. 28. But the man has not done yet, but has some more questions (such as they
are) to be answered still, and therefore I Will hasten to the consideration of
them, and what should they be but these paultry impertinent ones that follow
(which are as proper Queries for the Bishops true position, as if he should
have put his pen in's tail, and held them both up to the Sun to look at,) Where
is (Sir) the Kings Prerogative over all persons in all causes Ecclesiastical?
What is become of your Oath of Supremacy? Can you make this peremptory
determination (as your self calls it) consist with it any more then with your
Covenant? Weighty questions indeed, but such as are more worthy of laughter at
his folly, then of any answer to his proud boasting Quaeries, but seeing the
Scotized Presbyters aim therein (if I hit him right, if not, let him or any of
the gang inform me how I shot amiss,) is to make the learned Bishop by his
saying, to savor of the guiltiness of perjury by his pretended contradictory
assertion to the noble Oath of Supremacy, which he like a true Christian and
faithful Subject had sworn, its high time to look about us, and stand up in
defense of this vilely slandered Prelate against this Covenanting Goliath of
the City of London, and make answer to his sorry (though insolent) Quaeries,
which though they seem to be of a ternary quality, yet in sum, the three amount
but to one: and first he asks, Where is, Sir, the Kings Prerogative over all
persons, in all Causes Ecclesiastical? Good lack! what a great Upholder of the
Regal Supremacy you are become, Mr. Caviller? What Sir, do you turn Quaerist
after it? Do Presbytery begin to shake hands with the Supremacy of His Sacred
Majesty? Does the devil plead for God? and Baal for the worshipping of Christ?
Certainly then there needs no great fear of danger from the Apostatical
Calvinian Hierarchy, or of Letters of horning from the Scotized Presbytery; But
good now, Sir Presbyter, Why Prerogative? Why not Supremacy? Was that word like
a Bishops Lawn Sleeves to your party, that it would have choked you to have
named it? In all my little reading did I never meet with that word Prerogative
joined with that sentence before, put in in stead of the rightful word
Supremacy, which makes me think of a tacit denial of the thing, at that very
time he saucily corrects the Bishop for his seeming contradictory Position to
it, as giving a back-blow to the Kings Supremacy in his seeming paultry defense
of it, else surely he would have made use of the usual word Supremacy, and not
impotently ask Where is the Kings Prerogative over all persons in all causes
Ecclesiastical? Come, come, Mr. Zechary, you are a cunning companion, and lie
altogether upon the catch, to see how you can take away a Prelates credit from
him, but all wont do, you are horribly deceived if you think to meet with any
unbyassed persons, to trap them into your cheating Snare with you; for there is
none that compares one Book with the other (as I have done) but will see your
cunning Sophistry, and infamous ways of arguing, and thereby learn to detest
the Leaguing Author of the one, and honor the reverend Writer of the other. If
he that says, That the King has no prudent, moral, religious and lawful
Authority by the Laws of God, and Rules of Christian Piety and Polity, to
change Episcopal Government unto any one else that is AS new, and schismatical,
SO far worse and unsuitable to England every way, (and so not to bring in
Schism or Heresy) denies the Supremacy of the King, certainly the great and
invincible maintainers of it against the joint encroachments of Papist and his
brother Presbyter, will be quickly found to be against it (and so indeed every
one else that understands Christianity, sense, or reason); Take the Supremacy
in that notion for which it was first established, and this Assertion of the
Prelates may very well consist with the Oath; but if this Calvinian prater for
a little cavilling sport, (for its for no other end be be sure, for he is
either no Presbyter, or if he be, he is no more a friend to, or pleader for the
Kings lawful Supremacy, according to the true intent and meaning of the Framers
of the Oath, then the rigidest Jesuit at Rome) will take it to reach to every
thing, that he that denies the Kings lawful power to do that which is
unrighteous by the Laws of God, is presently against His legal Supremacy, Then
not only the reverend Prelates and Episcopal Divines (the only constant
Assertors of it all along, against the several wild fancies of Jesuits and
Scotized Presbyters) but the Kings Sacred Majesty himself will be found to be
vehement opposers of it. I Am confident His Highness desires no such thing, but
that His Supremacy might only reach so far, as he may lawfully exercise it
without breach of the Laws of God.

. 29. But this is not all, for there is one Question still behind (a shrewd
one indeed) which follows immediately upon the back of the former, and that is
this: Has a Gracious King lately advanced you, to debase, nay dethrone Him and
His Parliament too? What a huge careful man this Presbyter would fain make
himself appear to be of his Princes honor, so far as to question a learned
Prelate for his seeming sedition and irreverence? How now Mr. Zechary?
Whereabouts are you? What, will you never leave fighting with the Sun? never
leave striving, and presenting the people of this Nation with See p. 18 of his
book.
the foggy fancies of your own giddy brain, and run away with them by your
fluid and gliding tongue or discourse, as if the state of your question were
granted by understanding persons for the truth? you crake hugely methinks, but
I doubt I shall mar your sport with what follows, and to that end let me
entreat this favor of your Kirkifi'd Holiness, as to speak the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, to these few questions I have subjoyned
here, for an answer either from your self, or godly partakers; Does the Bishop
go about to debase and dethrone his Sovereign, as to follow your religious
pattern so far, as to say any where in his learned Writings (which you so much
snarl at) that See his Preface to the Considerator considered
The Common Prayer Book was expelled by a lawful Authority, which if it be not
Treason (as the Noble L'estrange says in his Holy Cheat) Scot and Peter's were
no Traitors? Does the Bishop talk any where of See p. 51. of his book.
The Two Houses Supreme Legislative power without His Majesty, and so give the
lie to the Oath of Supremacy and Laws of the Land, which ascertains it to be
the peculiar Prerogative of the King? Or does he in any of his Writings (like
you) Page 31.
averr, That neither the place of His Majesty's retirement, nor reason of his
absence, does add or abstract to the authority of Parliament? Or fourthly,
Does the Bishop any where bid His Majesty keep that damnable traitorous and
seditious Oath (called, The Solemn League and Covenant) and tell him, He shall
be delivered from, that distress, which Page 42.
may too late engage His Majesty to send to (you for sooth!) his faithful
Monitor, to pray for him? Oh Mr. Crofton, you are a notable fellow at feminine
scourges; feminine do I say! I am a little too short there, for male and female
are both alike to you, nay and not every ordinary one neither; for the King
himself must not be exempted from the distress you threaten him with, for not
performing of a bloody treacherous Oath; but the best on it is, Cursed Cows have
short horns, and its very fit you should be so short kept, lest being left to
your self, you should be apt to stray out of the paths of loyalty and
obedience, and get into the by-pathes of religious Rebellion, and playing the
devil for Gods sake, pushing and goring at every one, nay at your own Sovereign
himself, if he will not fulfill your whimsical humors; Its like you would be
good enough, if you were but once thoroughly cleansed from the Kirkish leaven of
Hypocrisy and Treason, Sedition and Rebellion, but till then, they that trust
to you and your party for exact loyalty and obedience, will soon find upon any
opportunity for Tumults and Sedition, that they have trusted to a broken reed,
to their own fancies and chimaeraes. The Bishop might well fear I must needs
confess (and that most justly too) to be made less by the head, as guilty both
of Treason and Sedition, should he so confront his Prince and his Supremacy, as
to set down such treasonable and seditious Affirmations as you have done: but
you Presbyters have been so always constant (as Mr. L'estrange says in his
Holy Cheat) to the rule and method of doing your own business in the Kings
Name, that you can plead your being His Majesty's true Subjects at that very
time, when you your selves are debasing and disallowing of His legal Supremacy,
and so setting a fair step for the dethroning of him, when your desired
opportunities of doing mischief, shall unhappily fall out for the performance
of your Antimonarchical Consultations. And now to conclude this particular, I
shall put his own question to him, and all the godly Generation of Scribes and
Pharisees, Has a gracious, and (I wish he be not in the mean while too)
merciful a King out of His own Princely Goodness passed an Act of Indemnity,
(by which He pardons the long continued Rebellion, begun by a Club of Running
Lecturers (as Mr. L'estrange calls them) and their Adherents in 1642. against
His Royal Father, for the doing whereof He might by the Statute have cut off
the heads, as well as seized on the estates of hundreds of those primary
Rebels, who yet by the mercy of a Princely Patron of Episcopacy, enjoy both the
one and the other; I say, has a Gracious King out of His own sweet Christian
Nature done this) for you and your party to debase, nay and dethrone him by
your denial of His Supremacy, and setting on foot the doctrine of the devil,
who was a Rebel and a Murderer from the beginning?

. 30. Ay but says Crofton, Page 29 30.
Dr. Gauden being well considered, will be found to be no less erroneous in his
Politics, then in his Ecclesiastics, So then, who ever concludes for the
truth of the Doctors Assertions in his Book, he is by your heady suppositions
adjudged to be one that has not well considered them: But we will see your reason
for it first before we believe you (good Mr. Zechary) and that is I perceive the
Bishops true saying, that The Hierarchy or Episcopacy is established by the
Laws of England, which you (you say) have in your Analepsis Analephthe denied.
At this rate its in vain to meddle with you, That a man's expressions shall be
true or false, according to what they seem to be in your giddy brains, That
your Ipse dixit only shall be proof enough to overthrow the arguments of your
Reverend Antagonist; But such things as these (Mr. Zechary) must not be allowed
of, and therefore the examination of your Denial will in this case be somewhat
needful. You say, You deny that Episcopacy is established by the Law; The more
shameless man you, to deny that which is so apparent; For what think you of the
very first Article of the Great Charter (which is not only declared to be the
Common Law of the Land, (as I have already said) but is confirmed by 32 Acts of
Parliament) which runs thus: Salvae sint Episcopis omnes Libertates suae; Let
the Bishops have all their whole Rights inviolable. What think you now, Mr.
Presbyter? Is the Great Charter no Law? or are Bishops and their Liberties
expressly named in the very first Article, and yet Episcopacy not established by
the Laws of England? What a grand Cheater is this high-flown Presbyter, that
shall have the face to condemn his Superiors, and give them the Lie for
speaking such a notorious truth as this, That Episcopacy is established by the
Laws of England.

. 31. But he will Print Errors, and give a Reason for it when he has done. I do
averr (says he, like an arch Presbyter) That the English laws finding
Episcopacy conversant about the Church, does restrain its exorbitances, and
direct its administrations; but neither Canon, nor Common Law does establish
it, and in terminis, declare and authorize it to be the Government of the
Church of England; That neither Canon, nor Common Law does establish
Episcopacy, is notoriously false, by your good leave, Mr. Shifter: And that
neither do, in terminis, declare it to be the Government of the Church of
England, is clearly beside the purpose. It Is not your (I averr) nor mine
neither, will weigh any thing, in the way of Argumentation; but good solid
Grounds and Reasons, raised upon a Foundation of Truth, must be the way and
Method for the satisfaction, as well as conviction of an opponent; and I am
sure there is none at all in this: and mine (I am sure) is as good a proof of
the truth of my expression, as your (I averr) is of yours, but are both of the
same metal, both a kin to the Scotchmans confutation of Bellarmine, Bellarmine
says thus, but I say the contrary, where is he now? You say, That neither
Canon, nor Common Law do in terminis, declare and authorize Episcopacy to be
the Government of the Church of England. Well, What of that? Because neither do
in express terms name Episcopacy to be the Government of the Church of
England, to say presently, its not established by the Law (notwithstanding the
express mention of Bishops, and their Liberties in the very first Article of
Magna Charta) signifies little to me, but only the shallowness of the Authors
brains; and yet his proud confidence too, to strive with a Father of the
Church, with an ipse dixit, who avers nothing but his own folly, mixed with a
Turbulent and Seditious spirit.

I had not read much further beyond these last words, but I meet with a
Traiterous expression of his, in his venomous Answer to the Reverend Bishop,
which makes as clear as the Sun, what a Factious, Seditious spirit a Sacred
Covenanter is composed of; even such, That if the Law makes once a strict
enquiry, will send his head to accompany his Brethren in Iniquity upon London
Bridge; and to that end, observe the words of this factious Pulpiteer.

. 32. The Bishop having said, That the Parliament (he means the the two Houses)
can Act, Vote, Determine, and Execute nothing under the Kings withdrawing from
them into any part of his own Country, Who may yet (says Page 31.
Crofton) do all things in his infancy, or while in a Foreign Country, As if
the place
of his Retirement, or reason of his Absence, did add or abstract to the
Authority of Parliament. A right Rebellious Covenanter! One ready for the work
of Treason! Perfectly opinionated of the Sovereign power of the two Houses over
the King, and ready prepared for a Second Rebellion upon the old false
thredbare grounds of Loyalty and Religion! He offers first, as an argument
against the Legislative power of his Sovereign, for that feigned suppositious
one of the two Houses, That they may do all things in his infancy, or whilst
in a Foreign Country. Either the man is very short sighted, and simply versed
in the Royal English Laws (and yet before we find him pretending to it) or
else he is a wilful Sophisticator: If he is not knowing in our Laws, Why is he
so arrogant and presumptuous, as to offer his shallow Arguments against the
Bishops undeniable Assertion, and to stand to contradict him in that, wherein
he has no skill? If he does know the Laws, he is the blindest of all Beetles,
by being wilfully blind, and speaking contrary to his knowledge (I do not mean
contrary to his desire, or his Traiterous Seditious spirit) for its a thing too
well known and evident to be denied by any (whose face is not perfect metal,
and free from all the sparks of Modesty) That in the infancy of a King, there
is a Protector appointed in the Princes Supreme Legislative place of Calling,
Proroguing, and Dissolving of Parliaments; of setting the Stamp of the Regal
Sanction upon the Writings and requests of the Two Houses for the making of
them Laws (for without the Royal consent, no Law) and Repealing of old Laws, if
it be thought convenient; and this that I say, is confirmed by that learned and
Reverend Judge Jenkins, who tells us, That Lex terrae, p. 52.
the Protector, assisted by the Counsel of the King at Law, his twelve Judges,
the Counsel of State, his Attorney, Solicitor, and two Sergeants at Law, his
twelve Masters of the Chancery, has in the Kings behalf, and ever had a
Negative voice. And whilst the Prince is in a Foreign Country, there are
certain Noble men Commissioned under the great Seal of England, to supply his
place, while he comes himself, as the Histories of our Kings (whilst in
Foreign parts) do attest, as well as the practices of our present Prince (whom
God long preserve out of the juggling, murdering Clutches of Presbyterian
Judasses) in relation to Scotland and Ireland, by appointing a Lord
Commissioner in the one, and a Lord Lieutenant in the other, to supply the
place of Majesty in both Kingdoms; So that his (may yet do all things in his
infancy, or whilst in a Foreign Country) without either Protector at the one
time, or Deputed Nobles at the other, is nothing else but a mere fiction, a
delusive Cheat, (the effects of his Crazy brain) endeavored to be put into
peoples belief, and therefore I Will trouble my self no further with it.

. 33. But behold, the spirit of the man! That neither the place of his
Majesty's Retirement, nor reason of his Absence, does add or abstract to the
Authority of Parliament, Is the issue and fruits of his wild seditious humor.
He (without whom there can be neither Parliament nor Law) is concluded by this
hair-braind Presbyter, to be but as a Cipher, and that the two Houses are a
complete Parliament of themselves alone, without his Sacred Majesty, their Only
Supreme head and Founder. By what Warrant were they at first called together?
Was it not by virtue of his Majesty's Writ? And was not the tenor of that Writ,
the Treating, and Advising with the King? And did they perform the ends, for
which they were summoned together, when they raised Tumults against their
Prince, and forced him away from them, and at last had the confidence to
declare by their Votes of non-Addresses, that they would neither Treat, nor
Advise with him? If not, then it is clear they sat to no purpose in the world,
but ingraved the name of Rebels upon their foreheads, and made themselves to be
no Parliament, by destroying the ends for which they were called together. But
because Crofton is so arrogant in denying the Kings Presence or Absence to be
of any force or validity in adding or diminishing the Authority of a
Parliament, I shall make bold to present him with this one Example, Queen
Elizabeth summoned 3. Eliz. Dyer. 203.
her first Parliament to be held the 23. of Jan, in the first year of her
Majesty's Reign; the Lords and Commons assembled by force of the same Writ, the
21. day the Queen fell sick, and could not appear in her person in Parliament
that day, and therefore Prorogued it until the 25. of the same month of
January; Resolved by all the Judges of England, That the Parliament began not
the day of the Return of the Writ, viz. the 23. of January, when the Lords and
Commons appeared, but the 25. of the said month when the Queen came in person.
What think you now, Sir Presbyter? You see the Queens presence, and the reason
of her absence was so far looked upon, and esteemed in those days, in relation
to the Authority of a Parliament, that her absence but for two days, by the
resolution of all the English Judges, was enough to degrade them of their
Parliamentary title, till her Personal appearance amongst them gave them the
denomination of a Parliament: And unless this man can make it out, That the
late blessed Carolian Martyr, had not the same place and Authority over these
Nations, as that noble Queen had, the same Conclusion will follow upon his
Assertion, That the place of his Royal retirement, and reason of his absence,
did so far add and abstract to the Authority of that, which our Presbyterian
Jugglers so often miscal, a Parliament, that they were neither Titular, nor
Real, neither Name, nor Thing without him, For See Lex terrae. p. 51
the King is the head of the Kingdom and Parliament, How then can a body act
without a head? There has one long since told us (to whom for knowledge in the
Laws and Customs of the Realm, our Caviller is not worthy to be compared) That
Page 156 157.
the two Houses are no more a Parliament, then a body without a head a man. Two
Houses, and a Parliament, are several things, Cuncta fidem vera faciunt; all
circumstances agree to prove this truth: Before the Norman Conquest, and since
to this day, the King is holden Principium caput and finis, the Beginning,
Head, and chief end of the Parliament, as appears by the Treatise of the
manner of holding Parliaments, made before the Norman Conquest; by the Writ of
Summons of Parliament, whereby the Treaty and Parier in Parliament is to be had
with the King only; by the Common Law, by the Statute Law, by the Oath of
Supremacy taken at this, and every Parliament, it does manifestly appear, that
without the King there can be no color of a Parliament See the Royal Buck ler,
p. 62.
The two Houses (says Mr. Duncomb) frame the body, the King gives the soul,
for without him, it is but a dead Carcass. Nay further, says the learned Judge
in the Table of his Book concerning Parliaments, This became no Parliament,
when the King with whom they should parley, was driven away. By what has been
said, and many more instances, that I could produce for this purpose, I leave
it to every understanding person to consider, whether His Presence or his
Absence (without whom there can be no color of a Parliament) does add or
detract the Authority of Parliament: And leaving Crofton to the just deserved
censure and punishment of Majesty for his Rebellious, Malignant Principles, I
shall proceed on to his next Arrogant, and yet Ignorant prattling for his
Seditious Vow and Covenant, which has been the cause of so many direful
plagues amongst us.

. 34. Whatever the Libeller (i. e. Dr. Burges his sweet-tooth'd Sacrilegious
Brother) did, Mr. Crofton (he Page 37.
says) allowed the Doctor this Text (i. e. Numb. 30. before mentioned) in its
Latitude, and referred him to be judged by it, and now grants, That the
inferior in things not sui juris may have the action vowed superseded by the
declared pleasure of the superior, and that whether it be son or servant. Does
he so? Does Mr. Crofton grant then the truth of the Doctors Arguments? What
does he keep a kackling for then? What does he make such a buzzing then in the
peoples ears with his perjurious Covenant? Does he first confess his
Antagonists Arguments to be good by granting what the Doctor wrote for, and yet
set out another vain glorious discourse against them, so far as to run into
seditious principles to keep his faithful Covenant on foot? Ay but in our case
he then affirmed (he said) The Parliament sitting had over us a Legislative
power to which we owed subjection; They were (in their National capacity) the
Nation Collective and sui juris, and to be obeyed during their session by those
whom they represented.

The Parliament? What is that? It is the King, the Lords, and the Commons,
says the Covenant at the trial of the Regicide Harrison. That the world may
not be abused by the insinuations of a man, who acts as if he had a spirit, and
in truth is possessed, I will say (says his Majesty's Learned Council) That
the Lords and Commons are not a Parliament, That the King and Lords cannot do
any thing without the Commons, Nor the King and Commons without the Lords, Nor
the Lords and Commons without the King, especially against the King, if they
do, they must answer it with their heads: See judge Jenkins Lex Terrae p. 80.
The Lords and Commons make no more a Parliament by the Law of the Land, then a
body without a head makes a man, for a Parliament is a body composed of a King
their Head, the Lords and Commons the Members. All three together (says Judge
Jenkins) make one body, and that is the Parliament, and no other; The Two
Houses are not the Parliament, but only part thereof, and by the abuse and
misunderstanding of this word Parliament, they have miserably deceived the
people. So then we see what is become of our zealous Presbyters Parliament
consisting of Two Houses without a King, (for its clear by the preceding words
he means them, and them only when he prattles of the Parliaments having a
Legislative power over us) Here we find the judgment of the Reverend Judges
and learned Sages of the Law to be clearly against him and his Titular
Parliament, and telling us, how the faction miserably deluded the people with
the name (when they were destitute of the true nature) of a Parliament, by
applying it to them, to whom it no more belonged, then the title of a man
appertains to him, who wants the convenience of a Head.

As for their Legislative power; Its huge like their empty title of Parliament,
and both Phantasmes of their own brains, and that it may apppear to be such, I
shall bring in Croftons profound Lawyer Mr. Prynn in the front to bear witness
against him, for he tells us, That See his plea'gainst illegal Taxes. p. 5.
the Parliament Rolls, and the Printed Prologues to the statutes of, etc. (and
names a great many) run all in this form, At the Parliament holden, etc. By the
advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and at the special
instance and request of the Commons of the Realm, our Lord the King has caused
to be ordained, or ordained certain Statutes; where the advising and assenting
to Laws, is appropriated to the Lords, the ordaining of them to the King, and
nothing but the requesting of, and petitioning for them, to the Commons. Thus
he.

Other Statutes (says See his impartial inquiry into the nature of sin. p.
211. See his Lex Terrae, p. 26.
the Reverend Doctor Pierce) which have the force of Acts of Parliament, are
known to be directed as private Writs with a Test Meipso. And the Common style
of most others is found to run in this form, The King with the advice of the
Lords, at the Humble Petition of the Commons, Wills this or that, (where by the
way take notice of the saying of Judge Jenkins, That Consilium non preceptum,
Confiliarii non preceptores, Counsel is not a command, nor to be Counselors is
not to be Commanders:) So the form of passing Bills is still observed to be
this, Le Roy le vieult, The King will have it, And Soit fait il comme est
desire, Let it be done as it is desired; plainly speaking by way of grant to
something sought or petitioned for; (from whence (says he) by some it has bin
gathered, That Rogation of Laws does rightly belong to the two Houses, but the
Legislation to the King, that their Act is preparative, his only jussive.

The Acts of Parliament (says the learned Mr Duncomb) are called the King
Laws. And why not the Kings Laws? Does not he make See his Royal Buckler. p.
306. 307 308.
them? The whole body, and volumes of the Statutes proclaim the King, the sole
Legislator. What is Magna Charta but the Kings Will and gift; The very
beginning of it will tell you it is no more, viz. Henry by the grace of God, etc.
Know ye that we of our mere, and free will have given these Liberties; In the
self same style runs Charta de forresta. But wherefore evidences to prove that
which no man can deny? The styles of the Statutes and Acts printed to the 1 of
Henry VII. are either, the King wills, the King ordains, the King
provideth, the King grants, the King ordains at his Parliament, or the King
ordains by the advice of his Prelates, and Barons, and at the humble petition
of the Commons, etc. But in Henry VII. his time, the style altered, and has
sithence continued thus; It is ordained by the Kings Majesty, and the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled.
And why do the Lords and Commons ordain? Is it not only because the King does?
It is so; they do, because the King does, which only denotateth their assent,
for the Kings Majesty gives life to all, as the Soul to the body; For did ever
the Lords and Commons make an Act without the King? Never; They cannot; The
Lords advise, the Commons consent, but the King makes the Law; Their Bills are
but Inanimate scriblings, until the King breaths into their Nostrils the breath
of life, and so that which was mould before, becomes a Law, which rules
living souls. And as Sir Edward Cook observes, In ancient times all Acts of
Parliaments were in form of petitions, which the King answered at his pleasure;
Now if it be the duty of the Parliament to petition, and in the power of the
King to receive or reject their petitions at their will, Judge you who has the
supreme power. Thus far he.

. 35. By what has been said, I leave it to any understanding person to judge,
where the Legislative power lies, whether in the Two Houses, who most humbly
beseech His Majesty (under the notion of dutiful and loyal Subjects) for making
new Laws, Or in the King, who grants their petitions, makes the Law, and
ordains it to be observed, who both by the Law and a Sacred Oath, is declared
and sworn to be the only Supreme Governor of the Land.

That there is no difference between a Son and Servant, to his Father and
Master, and the Two Houses to the King, is clear by one oath they took, wherein
they swear To bear true faith and allegiance to our Sovereign Lord the King,
and by the other they acknowledge (cutting off all pretenses of Co-ordination)
His Majesty to be the only Supreme Governor of the Land; which implies His
Lordship and Dominion over them; And they in all their Addresses and
Declarations, style themselves His dutiful and loyal subjects, (and so
servants) and in relation to the Kings style of Pater Patriae, may be very well
called sons too. And seeing the Two Houses imaginary Legislative power by the
Laws of this Land, is not able to empower and authorize them, either to make
new Laws, or to repeal old ones, without the Royal Consent of Majesty, it
clearly follows, That their vowing to extirpate Bishops, established by Magna
Charta (confirmed by 32 Acts of Parliament, and irrepealable) was not sui
Juris, it lay not in their power, nor had no right to do it without His
Majesty's consent, and so having not that, according to Croftons own grant, the
Action vowed was superseded, (and might very well be so) by His Majesty's
public Proclamation, (his declared pleasure) against the taking or imposing of
it, in regard it was a traitorous and seditious Vow and Covenant, and therefore
null and void to all intents and purposes. But further, our Leaguer affirms,
That

. 36. Their power in this Covenant was no less Legislative, then in the
Protestation of May, 1641. What does he Jabber thus for, of non entities, of
things that never had a being? of a Legislative power in the Two Houses, which
they never had, which neither Divine nor English Laws ever gave them? If I
should for once allow of his nonsense, and lawless Assertions, yet I should
spoil his sport there too; for their power in the Covenant was not so
Legislative (I speak according to the Presbyters canting tone) upon these
grounds:

The Protestation was made and taken in the presence of all the Members of both
Houses, and giving their free consent, it was confined to established Laws, had
a Parliamentary authority (as it were) by His Majesty's deep silence (though
nigh at hand) and thereby implying His tacit consent to the doing of it, many
thousands took it, who yet utterly damned the wretched Covenant, detesting it
as the venom of hell, and not without just cause; But when by the Midwifery of
Tumults and Armies, this devouring Brat of Abiram was brought forth, See Judge
Jenkins Lex Terrae p. 126.
All men know, That of 120 Peers of the kingdom, who were Temporal Peers before
the Troubles, there were not above thirty left in the Lords House, and in the
House of Commons about 200 of the principal Gentlemen of the kingdom, left the
Houses and adhered to His Majesty. The Covenant it self destructive to the
former, directly contrary to above 30 Acts of Parliameat, The King himself
protesting against it as far as Oxford, by his public Proclamation, as
engaging the takers in Acts of high Treason; Does our Leaguer think, that when
290 Voices are taken away out of 600, that the remaining part has as great a
power as when they were all together? Or does he think that the Kings silence,
or his Protestation does not add or diminish the authority of the thing sworn?
But I must needs say indeed, See Croftons Berith-Anti-Baal, p. 51
Suppositions are sufficient supports to a man of fancy, who all along this
Discourse plays at Bo-peep, begging what must never be granted while his Nose
is between his eyes; which I leave him to see at large his ignorance and folly,
his seditious and treasonable Principles against His Gracious Sovereign.

. 37. Crofton citing out of his Analepsis, p. 12. That the two Houses of
Parliament are Coordinate and Sharers in the Legislation of England, and the
Bishop asking (p. 148.) What, and can they legally exercise this power without,
yea against the Kings consent, being out of his nonage, and not out of his
wits? This furious offspring of Smec cries out, (p. ^9.) That they may do it
without the Kings consent, none do, or can deny it, common practice, with the
peoples constant obedience, does plainly manifest it; as also the Protestation
of May, 1641. (never doubted as to the validity of Authority) which you say was
precarious; but Resolves of the House declare to have been Authoritative; The
Votes, Resolves, Orders and Ordinances of one or both Houses do proclaim it;
And the Privileges of Parliament, That the King can take no notice of what is
debated or voted, ordered or acted by them, until it be by themselves formally
presented unto His Majesty. And the very nature of Coordinate power (if the
Doctor understands it) with their Actings, in case of his absence by minority,
or otherwise, does determine it; As to the exercise of it against the Kings
consent, I shall conclude nothing, but commend Mr. Prynn's Sovereign Power of
Parliaments, to your serious study. And the Legislative power of their Votes,
Debates, Resolves, Orders, or Ordinances, were never gainsaid by His Majesty.

O Lump of wickedness and sedition! What do, or can none deny that the Two
Houses may exercise (that Vtopian Fiction, their fancied, imaginary)
Legislative power without the Kings consent? Why is your lawless Assertion so
true, think you, that it is past all contradiction? Alas poor Presbyter! why do
you hug up your self so in your own delusions? Its pity you should go on
uncontrolled in your wild positions, and therefore I Will try for once what I can
say against it: Are the Two Houses any better then the Kings Subjects? If you
say otherwise, the Law affixes the deserved name of Traitor upon your forehead;
Can they convene and assemble together in the House, without the Regal Summons?
Are they any more then the Kings own creature? Can they stay one minute there
(when met together) to debate or consult of any thing, without His Majesty's
free leave? Can the creature do any thing what he please, without the Creators
consent? Suppose they should (as your Long-Parliamentidol did) reproach their
Sovereign, maintain five traiterous Antimonarchists in their treason and
villainy, hatch a Conspiracy, and bring forth Rebellion, cannot the Creator have
so much power over his forlorn creatures, as with the breath of his mouth
immediately to command their speedy departure by a dissolution? Oh Crofton,
Crofton, beware of the perjurious consequence, and stop your mouth, left the Ax
for your treason, make no difference between your own and those heads of your
fellow-rebels on London Bridge. But this is a Scotized Assertion, an opinion of
See Bish. Garden's Anti-Baal-Berith, p. 151.
Seminary Presbyters, who have been the Protoplasticks of a rebellious
generation both in Church and State, and agreeable to their all along
rebellious practices, and by virtue of their legislative power (which our
profound Lawyer says they have) and which they may, he averrs, exercise
without the Kings consent; and so by consequence they may rebel against their
Head, kill and murder His loyal Subjects, imprison and impoverish others, take
away His Imperial Dignities and Pre-eminences from Him, seize upon His Forts,
Ports, Magazines and Towns, and plague and oppress their fellow-English-men, by
seizing on their goods and estates, how and in what proportion and manner they
please, send armed men through perjury, to fight against their lawful
Sovereign, leave out the defense of his person out of their Commissions, impose
what cursed Leagues and Covenants they please (all actions of high treason by
the known Laws of this Land) without His Majesty's consent; sell and imprison
Him, until He agree to their imperious humors and demands, and Christen their
Actions too (like a pack of dissembling false hypocrites) with the title of
Reformation, Loyalty, Advancing the Glory, and promoting the kingdom of Jesus
Christ, yea play the devil for Gods sake, and all this they claim a right and
lawful authority to do, by force and virtue of their Idolized Diana, their new
Goddess lately come down from Jupiter, their phanatick, frenzical whimsie of
Legislative power. And because these things have been done, and justified with
impudence beyond example, by See Presbytery Popish, not Episcopacy, p. 6.
a Tumultuary Rabble that pretended to be a Parliament, and their graceless
adherents, therefore this Leaguer concludes the Lawfulness of the Act done, and
the Justifiableness of re-acting the same again; But A facto ad jus, non valet
argumentum, is an old and a true Position, To argue from the Action done, the
lawfulness thereof, becomes a subtle Sophister, a Trappanner and Cheater, more
then a sound Scholar or a Disputant.

As for the Two Houses Legislative power (so called) or their Co-ordinacy
therein with their (by them sworn) ONLY Supreme Governor, I have said so much
already concerning that grand delusive Cheat and Fiction, that a question will
now be enough against it; How can the two Houses be affirmed by any (having
regard to the Rules and Customs of the Realm) to have the whole, or a
Co-ordinacy, or share in that, which the very Prologues to the Acts and
Statutes denies them to have any right or claim to, either in Possession, or
Reversion?

As for the Protestation, I told you before, Silence gives consent, and his
Majesty's suffering such a thing to be done by them, under his nose, without a
Prohibition, argues plainly his Tacit fiat to it, but yet proves not at all
their supposed Legislative power, or Coordinacy in the same with their Head,
nor the legality of their exercise of it, without the Kings consent. It Is true,
the Bishop tells you; It was precarious and personal, upon this just Ground and
Foundation, P. 278.
That the two Houses had not power to make, or take, or impose any Oath
contrary to the Laws of England, which they were trusted to observe, not break,
nor yet to abrogate or change, without his Majesty's consent: And that the
House of Commons have not power to require an Oath of any (except perhaps of
their own Members.) And you in opposition to him affirm, That the Resolves of
the House declare it to have been Authoritative; very good. I pray answer me
then, Was not the detestable Rebellion against the Carolian Martyr, Resolved to
be Authoritative too, and (O strange parcel of nonsense!) to be Loyalty, and
Obedience, and in the then blind Conscience of your profound Lawyer, to be
lawful and necessary, both in point of Law and Conscience? Was not their Votes
of Non-Addresses to be made or had, to or from their Supreme Lord and Governor
(with its immediate attendant, unmatchable perjury) Resolved to have been
Authoritative too? Did they not Resolve all the Villainies, Murders,
Blasphemies, Sequestrations, Imprisonments, and utter Ruin of his Majesty, and
his Noble Adherents; and in fine, all their Actions from beginning to end, to
be Authoritative too? Was not his execrable and perfidious Murder, Declared to
have been Authoritative, when that Perjured, perjured, perjured, Infamous Lower
House (next door to Hell) Declared and Adjudged, 10. January, 1648 for a
New-years-gift to the Nation, That by the Fundamental Laws (which was the
creator of the two Houses fictious Legislative power) it is Treason in the King
of England for the time being, to levy War against the Parliament and Kingdom?
Was not the lawfulness of their Perjuries, and violent Murders, Oppressions,
and lawless Actings Justified, and Declared to be Authoritative too, when by a
couple of Traiterous Votes three days after they had the impudence to tell the
Nation, 1. That themselves being chosen by, and representing the people, had
the Supreme power in the Nation; and 2. That whatsoever was Enacted or Declared
for Law by the Commons in Parliament, has the force of a Law, and the people
concluded thereby, though consent of King and Peers be not had thereunto? Alas,
Mr. Crofton! Its not the Resolve, or Vote of a Party (much less of that dismal
black Faction in the long Parliament) that can make their Treason and
Rebellion, their Perjuries and Blasphemies, their unparellel'd Murders,
Violence, and Oppressions, seem the less wicked and abominable, or pretend to
be more lawful and Authoritative, either by the Divine, or English Royal Laws.
It is not the Thieves justification of his action, that will any whit the more
extenuate the nature of his horrid crimes, nor the Turbulent spirit's
applauding his Faction and Sedition, speaking evil of Dignities, and declaiming
against the Legal Supremacy of his Prince, and then cry out with his Brother
Jehu, See my zeal for the Lord of hosts, and think that all this while he is
beating down the enemies of the Lord Jesus, that will make his Rebellion less
odious, or his blind zeal without knowledge, to be ever a whit the more
rewardable; but the Laws of God and man must be the Touchstone, the Judge to
justify or condemn their respective actions, according to their different
ways of obedience, or neglect and refusal to obey: So that to conclude this
particular, I say, Its not the Resolves of the two Houses that will make that
to be lawful and Authoritative, which neither the Laws of God, nor of this Land
declare to be justifiable and blameless; their Votes and Resolves you speak of,
do proclaim nothing else but their matchless Treason and Rebellion.

You tell us further, That the Privileges of Parliament, That the King can
take no notice of what is debated or voted, ordered or acted, until it be by
themselves Formally presented unto his Majesty; And the very nature of
Coordinate power (if the Doctor understands it), (What, do you think the
Doctor to be such a learned Coxcomb, such a Legislative dreamer as your self,
that you question his understanding of a Coordinate power, with an If?) with
their actings, in case of his absence by Minority, or otherwise, does determine
it. What It, does it determine? Oh! you mean, I suppose, your so much adored
Diana, the Legislative Fiction, placed in the two Houses. You are an egregious
Arguer, but like all the rest of the Scotized party, arguing from the momentary
prosperity of an execrable Rebellion, the Legality of the Traitors actions: and
because in the contriving, and devising of a Statute, the two Houses have a
Privilege excluding the Kings taking notice of them, till such time as it is
finished, and presented for the Royal assent; (for without that, its no Law)
Therefore this wilful Sophisticator concludes, or would have others believe
that from thence it follows, by good consequence, That the Rebellious two
Houses, after they had taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, (which
bound them to assist and defend the King against all his enemies) might by
virtue of their Legislative whimsie, take and impose a Negative Oath, and
stoutly swear (with Perjury in their brazen brows) not to assist the Forces
raised by their Gracious Sovereign, for his own defense, against his Rebels,
against the Treasons and villainies of themselves, who had the face without his
presence or consent, to call themselves A Parliament; That they might by virtue
of such Privileges raise a Rebellion, and swear to extirpate the Legal
established Government of the Church, justify their Members in their
Conspiracies and mischiefs, send armed men against their Prince, to fight with,
and shoot at him and his Loyal Subjects, and other Abominations not to be
parellelled (like their Matchless Covenant) and all this without, and against
the Kings consent; because, as I have said, they have a Privilege to be free
in their debates and consultations about the devising of a New, or repealing of
an Old Law, without the Kings taking notice of it, until such time as they
present it to him for his Fiat. Truly, Sir Presbyter, you are fitter a great
deal to dispute with Females, with a rod of Correction in your hand, then to
prate with a Reverend Prelate with such shallow arguments as these, which
discovers nothing else, but the Authors folly on the one side, as well as his
high imperious spirit on the other. As for their Co-ordinacy in the Legislative
power, (which our godly Rebel jabbers so much of) and their actings, in case of
his Majesty's absence, by Minority, or otherwise, which he fondly supposes
does determine the truth of his bold frantic assertion: If the (I say so) of
himself will be taken for a sufficient proof thereof, the business then I must
confess is clear, beyond any contradiction; but that they cannot Legally act
any thing (for I do not come here to contradict the prosperous Rebels actions
when they hold the murdering sword of lawless Treasons and murders in their
hands, instead of the sword of Justice, but I say, that they cannot Legally act
any thing) in the time of the Regal Minority, without a Protector, nor in the
interim of his absence, without Deputed Nobles under the great Seal (both which
are purposely appointed to supply the place of such Regal absence for the time)
is manifested plainly by what I have already said, and, in my weak judgment,
so clear a truth, that it is not in the power of any Factious Presbyter to
contradict me, that keeps in the way of verity; and therefore I shall not
trouble my Reader with any further answer of it.

Well; We have seen now the Presbyters Allegations concerning the two Houses
exercise of the Legislative Fiction, without the Kings consent; and weighing
them in the balance of right Reason, and Laws, and Customs of the Realm, have
found them to be too light and weak to bear that stress and burden, which our
filthy Dreamers lay upon them. I Will now try what he says of those
Long-Parliament- Legislative Thieves exercise, of their whimsie against the
Kings consent: and here we find him foreseeing a palpable Treason, in
asserting an Affirmative Proposition; and yet that we may perceive his
willingness to have an Affirmative maintained, he thus breaths forth his
doubtful fancy: As to the exercise of it against the Kings consent, I shall
conclude nothing, but commend Mr. Pryn's Sovereign power of Parliaments to your
serious study. What a Seditious mind, and Treacherous heart this Crofton is
possessed of? We are beholding to a wise King, and a lawful Parliament, for his
avoiding of his Cackling, and concluding of nothing in the case at this time.
His faint-hearted seeming Negation of the Legality of those Rebels exercise of
their Usurpation, is just like the Olivarian-Machiavelian-Pro-Traytors denial
of the Kingly Title, even full sore against his will: He would not say AY, for
fear an Ax, or an Halter might presently attend him; nor will not say NO neither,
lest his seared Conscience should look him in the face, and contradict him with
a Truth, That a Negative, was by No means agreeable with his Classical
rebellious spirit; and therefore very cunningly commends another man's
unreasonable Jangling (as full of Treason and Rebellion, as a Toad is of
poison) to the Bishops study. If he had commended it to the Bishops, and every
man's study, and detestation, and abhorrency thereof, when they had read it, as
well as indignation against the Treasonable venom of the Authors heart, he had
spoke more truth, then a Presbyter is wont to do. What that book is, and how
worthy to be Commended to a Bishops reading and study, I leave to every one to
conclude something (seeing Crofton will conclude nothing) by that just Sentence
and Condemnation, which the learned Mr. Duncomb (upon ferious study thereof)
past in these words against both the Author, and the Book it felf. His book
(says he See his Royal buckler, or a Lecture to Traitors p. 240.
) is such a Rhapsody of nonsense, a bundle of Rebellion and Treason, a
Pamphlet so Seditious, Pernicious, Sophistical, Jesuitical, Traiterous, and
Scurrilous, that I want Mr. Pryn's Epethites to give his own book its deserved
odium. Truly, I must needs say, That the Author of that heady, Traiterous
discourse, (who (as the same judicious person says) sets P. 243.
the body above the head, maintains that the two Houses, or the Major part,
have the Sovereign power, may act without the King, levy War against him, and
kill him too, by defending themselves) has very little or no cause to return
thanks to his Seditious Brother, for the courtesy he has done him, to
conclude nothing in the argument himself, but commend the others Book to his
Reverend Antagonists serious study, the true English whereof, amounts but to
this conclusion, I dare not maintain such a Treasonable Position as that my
self, for fear of having my reward on a block, or a Triple tree; but I Will
commend a book to you, wherein it is asserted and justified, and made known to
the world by a deluding Trap-door of the Sovereign power of Parliaments. Its
but a sad commendation of Mr. Prynne (especially from a Brother of the Sacred
Covenanting Tribe too) to do as good as tell the world, that his Book is the
Storehouse of Seditious, and Treasonable Principles; The Shop to furnish
others with what, and as much as the Rebel pleases; For if the justification of
an Affirmative in the controverted point, be not to be found in that putrid,
loathsome hospital of Traiterous diseases, in that which the deluding Author was
pleased to term, The Sovereign power of Parliaments, To what end or purpose do
we hear of a Citation, or Commendation thereof to the serious Study of his
Reverend Opponent? And if it be therein justified, (as who doubts but it is?)
the Conclusion that I have made, does naturally flow from the Premises; and
therefore I say, how much the one is bound to thank the other, I leave to both
their considerations to decide the controversy between themselves at their
next meeting; and in the mean time seeing this man of fancy, our windy
Croftonian disputant, does as it were in the dark, confess the truth of a
Negative herein. I shall proceed to his next Dream, where he Magisterially
affirms, That

The Legislative power of their Votes, Debates, Resolves, orders, or Ordinances
were never gainsaid by His Majesty. Here Is a rare spiritual man for you now,
one that peremptarily determines a notorious falsity for a truth; And what an
incomparable mistake it is, His Majesty's own words shall make appear: In his
noble Answer to the 19 Tyranical Propositions of those Legislative Traitors, p.
1. (who so often have made it their Godly work to establish iniquity by a Law)
we find him declaring, and telling of the English Nation of those pious
Theives having thought fit to remove a troublesome Rub in their way, The Law; To
this end (says he) (That they might undermine the very foundations of it) A
new Power has bin assumed to interpret and declare Laws without us by
extemporary Votes (mark) without any case judicially, before either House
(which is in effect the same thing as to make Laws without us) Orders and
Ordinances made only by both Houses, (tending to a pure Arbitary power) were
pressed upon the people as Laws, and their obedience Required to them; Their
next step was to erect an upstart authority without us (in whom, and only in
whom the Laws of this Realm have placed that power) to command the Militia, by
a See his Majesty's Speech to them, July 21. 1642. In Reliquiae sacrae
Carolinae.
pretended Ordinance, which His Majesty told the Knights, Gentry, and
Freeholders of the County of Lincoln, That as the same was against the known
Laws, and an invasion of his unquestionable right, and of their liberty and
property, so I do now declare (says the Sacred Speaker) That the same is
imposed upon you, against my express consent, and in contempt of my Regal
Authority, And I doubt not, but you will sadly consider, That if any Authority
without, and against my consent, may lawfully impose such burdens upon you, it
may likewise take away all that you have from you, and subject you to their
lawless arbitrary power and government; At another time telling the Gentry,
etc. of Leicester of his defending their Religion, their Liberties, their Laws
with his life, I mean ( See his Majesty's Speech to them, July 20. 1642.
says he) the good known Laws of the Land, not Ordinances without my consent,
which till within these twelve months was never heard of from the foundation
of this kingdom) In his message from Oxford to those insinuating serpents at
Westminster of the 12th of April 1643, he justly terms the Declarations,
Ordinances or Orders of one or both Houses illegal: And lastly (not to tire my
readers patience too much) His Majesty was pleased to tell the inhabitants of
Flint and Denbigh at Wrexham, That See his Speech to them, Sep. 27. 1642.
By their power (i. e. that of the housed Rebels) the Law of the Land (their
birthright) is trampled upon, and instead thereof (says he) they govern my
people by Votes and arbitrary Orders. These I find in those very few pieces of
his late Glorious Majesty, which I have had the happiness to take a cursory
view of, and yet enough to set forth Crofton in his proper dark colors, to
evince the Regal gainsaying of the Legislative power (as our Presbyters
nickname the Chimaeraes of their brains) of the Two Houses illegal,
extemporary, and arbitrary, lawless Votes and Orders, which as it was the sole
intent in my Citation, so they are an apparent proof of the notorious falsehood
of Croftons heady affirmation, and perverse disputings; Who sees not that his
Seditious, and 2 Timothy 6. 5
Rebellious principles declare him to be a man of a corrupt mind? Who perceives
not that his emitting to the English Nation his Legislative falsehoods, do make
apparent, that he is also destitute of the truth, and too much inclined to
dreams and fancies?

. 38. The Doctor having justly termed Croftons urging by a Presbyterian
pertness the present Kings taking the Oath in Scotland, p. 149.
bold and odious, no less then fallacious: Crofton cries out, p. 24.
How bold and odious soever it may seem, none but a proud Pashur and shameless
Shemaiah (Who is the Raker in the puddle of Railing now O Presbyter?) could
count it odious in Jeremiah to say to the King, Keep the Oath, and thou shall
be delivered (Observe his Traitorous and shameless addition) from that
distress, which may too late engage His Majesty to send to his faithful Monitor
to pray for him; Goodly! Goodly! how delicate sweet rebellion smells in the
nostrils of a Covenanter? What damnable Seditious spirits possesses them with
the impudence of threatening distress to his Sacred Majesty for not keeping of
that National plague, the Covenant? He that can make any other of this, then
Sedition, let him lend me his spectacles; I wonder what day or hour it is,
wherein these Sacred Covenanters may be found deficient in their endeavors of
See the slight healers of public hurts p. 29.
drawing on Rebellion, perjury, innocent bloodshed and Sacrilege with the
shoeing-horns of Religion and Reformation, of setting up the Gospel of Peace
with unguentum armarium, the sword of war? Our Canting Presbyter not only
threatens His Majesty with distress, but also by his venomous speeches implies
the approach of mischief, when it will be too late for His Majesty to send to
him to pray for him; Nothing is to be looked for here but destruction, and
damnation hereafter it seems, if that brat and spawn of the serpent (that
primary deluding rebel) the Covenant (which being hatched in Sacrilege and
Rebellion, was at length brought forth into the world in blood and confusion)
be not carefully looked to and provided for; See Archbishop Bancrofts,
dangerous positions. p. 51.
Those Kingdoms and States, who defend any Church Government save this of
Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons, are in danger of utter destruction, says
Martin Junior in the time of Queen Elizabeth. The Parliament in her time, for
tolerating of Bishops in stead of their new Government, were told by others of
the then factious party, p. 50.
That they shall be in danger of the terrible mass of Gods wrath, both in this
life, and in the life to come, and that if they did not then abrogate the
Government by Bishops, well they might hope for the favor and entertainment of
Moses (that is the Curse of the Law) but the favor and loving countenance of
Jesus Christ, they should not see, nor never enjoy. Birds of a feather will
flock together, all Cuckoe-like singing the same tune of destruction and
distress to their Sovereign Princes, if they will not bow down and worship the
Golden Calf of their Presbytery; But why too late, Mr. Crofton? Is not the
Murder of one King enough, but you must harp upon the Rebellion against,
Imprisonment, and godly consequential murder of another? Satia te sanguine
Cyre; More Gunpowder Mines still to blow up Regality? Is there another
Rebellion a contriving amongst the Saints, that must needs have Sata as
canonizing stamp upon it? Too late! Are you in serious Combination with the
party, to stir up an execrable Rebellion against the Son for his ruin in this
world, as formerly your Cursing party did against His Martyred Father? And all
for not keeping of an Antimonarchical horrid Confederacy and Conjuration,
called, The Solemn League and Covenant, These expres-pressions deserve a
sharper Answer then my Pen is able to make, being filled brim-full of
covenanting-rebellious Malice.

But why Faitful Monitor? You live far from neighbors sure, that you are fain
to crown your seditious pate with laurels of praise for a Faithful Monitor,
which is as fit for you, as a Saddle is for a Sows back, or the Epethite of
Godly was for the peerless Cutthroats of the Carolian Martyr; He that was so
impudent as to tell the King to his face, He was a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer,
and a public and implacable enemy to the Commonwealth, was just such another
Faithful Monitor as your self: But for what? merely for the chastising and
crucifying of both. But what must His Majesty send to him for? why it seems to
pray for him. Alas good Covenanter! what are all your prayers but for the
destruction of Princes, and stirring up their subjects to rebel against them,
if they will not preserve your hellish Trap-door, and as the ends of that, set
up and maintain your Trojan Horse of Ecclesiastical Discipline? Their worth are
weighed down with a nut-shel, if they be like those which are in your Book;
which prayer of yours, and your practice (like true religion, and your
irreligious destructive Covenant) at at drawn swords with each other, even in
the very writing of a few sheets of paper? They had need of a bird (as the
saying is) that give a groat for an Owl; They must needs be in great want of
prayers sure, who send to such a bold confident Kirker as you for that end, who
can one while cry, The Lord deliver me from rendering railing for railing, and
yet rayl your self for several times, in several pages, against that very
person whom you so strangely exclaim against for the very same thing, which
clearly manifests an (...), a notorious self-condemnation, and brings you
within the reach and lash of the Apostles sentence, which in his Epistle to the
Romans he pronounces with a Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, who ever
thou Romans 2. 1.
art, that judge, for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self,
for thou that judge, do the same things.

. 39. But Crofton has not done yet, but continues belching forth his own
wickedness and folly against the Reverend Prelate, with a Page 51.
Thus he supposes the Two Houses into a nonentity as to their Supreme
Legislative power by the temper they were Page 52
then in, and the absence of the King, though they were animated by an express
Statute Law, which some upon good grounds and reasons (beyond the reach of Dr.
Gauden or little Mr. Crofton to resolve) have openly averred to continue them
yet in being. And thus he profoundly supposes a Parliament, swearing qua
Parliament, in the fullest formality and profession of their National capacity,
was a personal Covenanting. Bless me! what does this Presbyter prattle thus for
of things (he lets us know by his fanciful jabbering) he has no more skill or
knowledge in, then his near acquaintance, the Ass? The man is out of his
element sure; he is got into a wrong way, and fancies to himself that he is
going the direct right way on to his journeys end, and therefore I Will do what
lies in my power to manifest his error and mistake unto him; And therefore
first, Does the Doctor suppose such a thing? Does he suppose nothing to be
nothing, that to be a nonentity which never had a being! A terrible cause
indeed of a Presbyters exclamation! for we find, that the Supreme Legislative
Bauble of the Two Houses, is the very, very Loadstone that draws up a
sanctified Puritans zeal and affection to them, to show us a Presbyters
inclinations more to fictions and whimsies, then to those which are visible
undoubted Truths; Supreme! What Gimcrack, or New-nothing have we got here? That
the Body should be affirmed to be above the Head? The Legs, Arms, and Trunk of
the Body indeed (as Judge Jenkins See his Lex Terrae p. 49.
says) are greater then the Head, and yet not above, nor with life without it.
Certainly the man has a mind to show the profound depth of his skill in
Corah's art of murmuring and rebellion against the Supremacy of the Prince and
Priest. He tells us of an Observation in his Book, That it has been the fatal
chance of the Bishops of England, Page 25.
to run themselves into a praemunire. If he speak of any since the Reformation,
I defy him to show me one example of any Protestant Bishop that ever since
then proved disloyal, either in words or actions, to either King or Queen,
except Bishop Williams, when he began in his old age to dote, and lean too much
on that rotten prop of Presbytery, which taught him to fortify his House
against his Gracious Sovereign; I do not mean those pretended premunire's for
which the incomparable Laud was so infamously murdered, nor by which sundry
others of the Royal Adherents were the very same way dealt withal, as Traitors
against His Majesty, and the Bauble (which they called The Parliament) for
assisting him, by that Black Cabale, that Assembly of Treacherous Men before,
in, and after the year 1644. But certainly there is none but can observe, the
Presbyters Loyalty is good enough, when they are deficient in power, that is to
say, when they cannot help it; for it is as clear as noonday, that a Puritan
never wants a will to rebel, if he has at any time any power and opportunity,
and that the Magistrate refuse to set up the Consistorian Slavery, which made
the Learned Dr. Pierce cry out, See his Self-Revenger exemplified, p. 100.
Blessed and happy is that Nation, where such men's Loyalty consists in their
want of power or opportunity to make resistance. In good earnest Mr. Crofton,
I Will for once make answer by a retortion, and ask you your own questions (you so
weakly and impertinently (to say no worse) propounded Page 25.
to the Bishop) Sir, have you not stretched too far, and stepped into a praemunire?
I should fear to be made less by the head, as guilty of Treason, Sedition at
the least, should I thus confront the King and Loyal Parliaments, in what all
their Statutes and an Oath of Supremacy declare to be the peculiar Prerogative
of the King? And that they do so, need no further demonstration then that which
follows, even the words of the Lord Chief Baron (now Lord Chief Justice)
Bridgeman, in his Speech to the Grand Jury at the Regicides Trial, where we
thus find his learned Language; Gentlemen, Let me tell you what our Law Books
say, for there is the ground out of which (and the Statutes together) we must
draw all our conclusions for matter of Government. How do they style the King?
They call him, The Lieutenant of God, and many other expressions in the Book of
Primo Henrici Septimi. Says that Book there, The King is immediate from God,
and has no Superior. The Statute says, That the Crown of England is
immediately subject to God, and to no other power. The KING (say our Books) He
is not only Caput Populi, the Head of the People, but Caput Reipublicae, the
Head of the Commonwealth, the Three Estates; And truly thus our Statutes speak
very fully; common experience tells you, when we speak of the KING, and so the
Statutes of Edward the Third, we call the King, Our Sovereign Lord the King:
Sovereign, That is, Supreme. And when the Lords and Commons in Parliament apply
themselves to the King, they use this expression, Your Lords and Commons, your
faithful subjects humbly beseech; I do not speak any words of mine own, but the
words of the Laws: Stat. 24. Hen. 8 cap. 12. Whereas by diverse, sundry, old,
authentic Histories and Chronicles, it is manifestly declared and expressed,
That this Realm of England is an Empire, and so has been accepted in the
world, governed by one Supreme Head and King, having the Dignity and Royal
Estate of the Imperial Crown of the same, etc. 25 Hen. 8. cap. 21. There it is
the people speaking of themselves, That they do Recognize no Superior under God
but the Kings Grace. Thus that learned Person.

To the Judge, let me add Mr. Duncomb, who telling us, See his Royal buckler,
or a Lecture to Traitors p. 108.
That the Law of Nature shall perish, and the heavens and earth shall pass away
before Lex Terrae, the Law of the Land shall deny this Oracle, Omnis sub Rege,
and ipse sub nullo nisi tantum sub Deo, All men are under the King, and the
King is under none but God. This (says he) is that divine Sentence, Quod nec
Jovis ira nec ignis, nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas, which
neither angry Jove, nor fiery Vulcan, neither devouring Age, nor bloody sword,
a worse devourer then that, shall ever expunge out of our Law Books, or explode
out of the memory of every pious man. Thus he.

Bracton cited by the Reverend and Learned Judge Jenkins, tells us, Rex non
habet parem in Regno suo, That the King has not an equal in his kingdom; if
not an Equal, then certainly no Superior, and so by consequence shows the
fiction of the Two Houses Supremacy. There has been so much already cited for
the Supremacy of His Sacred Majesty over all persons in his Dominions, by Judge
Jenkins, Mr. Diggs, and several others, that I need not trouble the Reader with
any more repetitions thereof, but refer the dissatisfied to their several
Writings, and conclude this point with a word or two concerning the Oath of
Supremacy, which every Member of the two Houses must take before he sits in the
House, or else according to Law, he stands a person to all intents and
purposes, as if he had never bin elected or returned; which clearly declares
the King to be the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other His
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
things (or causes) as temporal, and so certainly by undeniable consequence,
over the Two Houses in Parliament causes; For why was the exclusive Particle
Only inserted, but to cut off all pretenses of co-ordinacy or share in the
Regal Supremacy? And truly if he be Supreme, there is neither Major, nor
Superior, says the Learned Lord Bridgeman in his Speech aforesaid. Was this
Oath (think you Mr. Crofton) composed by the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
in the time of Qu. Elizabeth, and at their suit by Eliz. c. 1
Act of Parliament made high Treason 5 Eliz. c. 1
for a subject to deny to take it, for to be evaded and treasonably denied, and
the subject matter thereof ascribed to the Subjects themselves, who were fain
to take it, ere they could have the least color or pretense, perjuriously to
claim or usurp it from the rightful owner, and this too by such a Shadow of a
Disputant as your fanciful self, who have armed your self with so much
confidence, to bawl out these seditious Assertions, which deserve nothing else
but the utmost rigor of the Law for a confutation? Nothing but
self-condemnation? No other way left you to save your credit, but by writing
sedition, and throwing your poisoned darts of malice against your Superiors,
for the pretended denial of that, the truth whereof your own whimsical self is
found to be a real disclaimer? Cannot you dig a pit for another, but you must
presently fall into it your self? These shabbed courses of yours, forces me to
deal with you by a retortion, and ask you once again some more of your own
questions, Where is, Sir, the Kings Prerogative over all persons in all causes?
What is become of the Oath of Supremacy? Has a Gracious King lately pardoned
you, and your Delinquent party for your former misdemeanors, really to debase,
nay dethrone Him by your impudent and traitorous entituling his sworn Subjects
with His Only Supremacy? Truly, Sir, I cannot blame you much now for your
words in your Preface, where you tell us, That side 2.
having animadverted this Anti-Baal-Berith (i. e. the Bishops Book) you find a
necessity to apologize for the very act of your Animadversion, and fear nothing
more then to be bound to your good behavior, in misbehaving your self so much
as to answer (not according to what your confidence helped you to prate, A fool
according to his folly, wherein you may seem like unto him, but) a learned
reverend Prelate with whole mouth-fuls of sedition and rebellion, wherein you
are the perfect image of all the traitorous Conspirators that have been before
you; why else do you divide non dividenda? make a division in that wherein none
without perjury, ought or can be? make two sharers and partners in the
Supremacy, which the legal Oath and Statute-Laws of this Realm (by which we
must steer our course, and not by your horrible frightful dreams) declare to
center, and to be the peculiar right and Sovereignty of one alone, and that
inseparable from his person too? The goodly aim and end of all your Jabbering
for the Two Houses co-ordinacy in the Supremacy, is but to fulfill the Martyrs
words, See Eikon Basilike in 24. P. 47.
That the Majesty of the Kings of England might hereafter hang like Mahomets
Tomb by a Magnetic charm, between the power and privileges of the Two Houses
in an airy imagination of Regality.

But the Two Houses usurpation of the Supremacy, it seems will not serve Mr.
Croftons turn, if they cannot swallow up the Legislative power too from the
Royal Owner; In his Analepsis p. 12.
he called them then only Coordinate and Sharers in the Legislation of
England, now he grasps for the Suprem Legislative power alone for those long
Parliament Legislative theives, (that made it their precious saintly work to
make their strength the Law of Justice,) robb and pillage and murder the
Subjects of their Sovereign, by their cursed illegal Orders, quirkes and
devices: and then show them the Law of their uncontrollable atheistical wills
for it, sic volo, sic jubeo, stat proratione voluntas; I am persuaded the man
has a huge fancy to go higher and higher in his Seditious and treasonable
language, till he comes to make his last ascent at the Sacred Gallows, or else
he dreams with the Fifth kingdom Rebels, That notwithstanding any thing he
says or does, yet that not a hair of his head shall perish. I shall not stand
long upon answering him in this fiction and dream of his, but shall quickly
dispatch him, by adding to what I have upon this point already said, that which
now immediately follows; And therefore for that which he terms the
Legislative power, (and because he is just like the Cuckoe repeating over and
over, one and the same thing to lengthen his Book) Let Us hear a little what
Justice Hide told the Blackening Regicide Harison, at his Trial in the Old
Bailey. I am sorry (says he) that any man should have the face and boldness to
deliver such words as you have. You and all must know That the King is above
the Two Houses; They must propose their Laws to him; The Laws are made by him
and not by them; by their consenting, but they are His Laws.

That either or both Houses, or any assembly or people in this, or any other
Nation Governed by Monarchy, has, or ever claimed (says See the Royallists
defense. p. 39.
another in 1648.) to have a Legislative power, or so far to represent the
Kingdom, as to make new Laws, and change the old, without the personal consent
of the King (as they must certainly have, if what Croftons dreaming fancy
suggests to him be true, That they have the Supreme Legislative power) is such
a ridiculous Bull, as never was heard or thought of until this frantic
Parliament: Therefore when either or both Houses, without the King, take upon
them to make Laws, they extend beyond the bounds of their Commission, they
thereby act of their own head, not as Representatives. And as he says in
another place, p. 109.
These things are done by the Members, not in their Politic, but in their
Natural capacities; they are not Acts of Parliament, but unlawful Facts of
Parliament men. Thus that Author.

If he be King of a kingdom (says g Mr. Duncomb) then all the people jointly
or severally in his kingdom, are under his command, and if under his command,
then he only has power to give them Laws, be they in one Collective body, as
in Parliament at the Kings House, or Simple bodies, at their private dwellings.
Le Roy fait les Leix avec le consent du Seigneurs et Communs, et non pas les
Seigneurs et Communs avec le consent du Roy, Is the voice of the Common Law,
the King makes Laws in Parliament, with the consent of the Lords and Commons,
and not the Lords and Commons, with the consent of the King.

Virg. 7. Aeneid. Hoc priami gestamen erat, cum Jura vocatis More daret
Populis. -- And 5. Aeneid. -- Gaudet Regno Trojanus Arestes Indicitque forum
and patribus dat Jura vocatis. The Lords and Cowmons have power only to
propound and advise, it is only the Kings Le Roy le vieult, which makes the
Law; their Propositions and advice signify nothing, if the King says, Le Roy
se Avisera. It would be strange if the Assembly of the Subjects together,
should make them Masters over their Sovereign, who gave them power to assemble,
and has power to turn them home again when he pleases. Legum ac Edictorum
probatio aut publicatio, quae in Curia vel Senatu fieri solet, non arguit
imperii Majestatem in Senatu vel Curia inesse, says Bodin, De Repub. lib. 1.
cap. 8. The publishing and approbation of Laws and Edicts, which is made
ordinarily in the Court of Parliament, proves not the Majesty of the State to
be in the said Court or Parliament; It is the Kings Scepter which gives force
to the Law, and we have no Law, but what is his will. Thus far he.

That there is enough already cited to prove, that all our Presbyters prating
about the two Houses Co-ordinacy and share, (and yet their Supremacy too) in
the Legislative power, Observe this puddle of Treasonable, Lawless
contradictions, but Sharers in a thing, and yet Supreme, which admits of no
Co-ordinacy.
are mere nullities (as King James told Cardinal Perron See his Defense of the
Right of Kings, p. 14.
upon another account) Chimerical projects, matters of a floating imagination,
and built upon false pre-suppositions, is evident enough to my shallow
understanding, whatever it may be to those of deeper reach; and unless Mr.
Crofton thought he should meet with none but Notorious blockheads P. 195.
more blunt witted then a Whetstone (as King James tells the Presbyters Compeer
the Cardinal upon the Common account, for the Popes and Discipliniarians power
over Kings) he would never have endeavored to draw people to believe by his
persuasion, that the two Houses are not only Coordinate and sharers, but also
rightful owners of the Supreme Legislative power. But that I may hasten to a
final period of my discourse, I shall in order thereunto consider Mr. Croftons
ready consent to that Seditious Book, which the Dreaming Author entitused, The
long Parliament revived, set forth by his Sacred Malignant Brother Drake, under
the disguised name of Thomas Phillips; which first implies the Seditious and
Treasonable nature of the subject matter of it, and his being ashamed, or at
lest fearful to own or avow, by setting his right name to it. And then
Secondly, his carrying on his Factious ends and purposes with colorable
pretenses of Loyalty, according to the constant practice of the Covenanting
Party, ( See Pres. bytery Popish, not Episcopacy P. 7.
The credit of whose false Doctrine (is well enough known from Dan to
Beersheba) was the very leaven, wherewith the people were first molded into a
sour lump of armed malice against their Sovereign;) for he knew well enough,
nothing could be more destructive to his Majesty's interest, then that
Pestiferous Pamphlet he then set forth, which being Examined by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament in the month of November, 1660. was found (as the
Journal says) to be Scanda'ous and Seditious, and a charge by them ordered to
be drawn up against the Author, and the Book to be burned by the hand of the
Common Hangman. So easy and usual is it for Presbyters to gainsay the truth of
what upon serious consideration of the whole loyal body of the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, was voted Seditious, and to be burnt by the hands of
Sacred Doctor Dunne, (the only Phisician for a certain infallible cure of a
Covenanters brainsick disease of Sedition and Rebellion:) and yet so ready to
brand others with the black mark of Malignant, Popish vipers, Illiterate,
Ignorant, Injudicious Court Doctors and Lawyers, and Anti-Parliamental
Momusses, who should so far dare to be honest, as to resist a Covenanter, in
standing up in the defense of the good old English Laws, and rejecting and
disalowing of the Legislative power (so called) of the Illegal Arbitrary Votes
and Orders of that unparellel'd Rebellious Faction in the two Houses of that
Long Parliament, which is so Seditiously affirmed to be Revived, to embrew the
Nation again in Treason and Rebellion, in Murder and King-killing, for the
enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. As for his disloyal fancy of the
Long-Parliament-Rebels continuance (nothwithstanding the Murder of their Only
Supreme Head and Governor) let him but read Judge Jenkins at large proving
before the Regicide, what I shall give now but the heads of in brief, k That
the two Houses did not then act by the Kings Writ, but contrary unto it, and so
their Acts were null. That the Act for continuing the Parliament so long as
both houses please, is void; because it is, First, Against Common right, for
thereby Parliament men will not pay their debts; and they may do wrong to
others Impune: besides the utter destruction of all men's actions who have to do
with Parliament men, by the Statute of Limitations, 21. Jac. Secondly, Against
Common reason; for Parliaments were made to redress public grievances, not to
make them. Thirdly, Impossible, the death of his Majesty For the King was then
alive.
(whom God long preserve) dissolving it necessarily. Fourthly, Repugnant to the
Act for a Triennial Parliament, and to the Act for holding a Parliament once a
year: That the end of continuing that Parliament, was to raise Credit for three
purposes. That those ends were ended: take away the end, and the means thereto
are to no purpose; and therefore the three ends of the Act being determined, it
agrees with Law and Reason, the Act should end, the Law rejecting things
unprofitable and useless. That the Writ of Summons, was the Basis and
Foundation of the Parliament; that those men would be called a Parliament,
having abated, quashed, and made nothing of the Writ whereby they were Summoned
and Assembled; that if the Writ be made void, the Process is void also. That
that house must needs fall, where the Foundation is overthrown; that Sublato
Fundamento, opus cadit, the Foundation being taken away, the work falls, is
both a Maxim in Law and Reason. And let him but seriously meditate on the
Arguments used by the learned Author of the Royalists defense, to prove, that
The persons at Westminster, who call themselves the Parliament of England, are
not the two Houses, nor so much as Members of the Parliament, and then tell me
whether he is of Drakes mind still, That the Long-Oppressive Tyrants, are yet
in continuance, and not legally dissolved by their cursed Regicide. Nay, Mr.
Prynne himself (whom he styles by an Emphasis, That Profound Lawyer) is clearly
against him, and Drake too, not only holding with Judge Jenkins, their Legal
dissolution by the Kings Martyrdom, but also tells us, That the Kings Personal
absence from his Parliament heretofore, and of late, was reputed very
prejudicial to it: and his calling away some Lords, great Officers, and other
Members from it, in his life time, a high way to its present Dissolution, which
also gives a Bastinado, and word of Correction to Croftons frantic denial of
the Kings Presence or his absence, to add or abstract to the Authority of
Parliament. Mr. Prynne, Lawyer-like, tells us also in another place, That the
Act for the continuance of the Long-Perjured Treasonable Plotters, and
Contrivers of Murder, Sacrilege, Treason, and Rebellion, was made by the
King, as their Sovereign Lord, Declaring and Enacting (mark that) and the Lords
and Commons as jointly assenting thereunto, which absolutely confounds Croftons
other Whimsie of the two Houses Supreme Legislative power. See his True and
perfect Narrative, Page 27, 37. Buzze! Buzze! Mr. Crofton, Where are you? Do
you honor a person so far, as to adorn him with the Epethite of Profound, and
yet not believe him, but go on in your simplicity, breathing forth deceit (the
folly of fools) when he has done you the honor of a Profound Confutation?
Surely, you mind so much his Sovereign power of Parliaments, which he wrote in
the time that his Zeal without knowledge had overpowred him, (because pleasant
and delectable reading for your Seditious mind) that you care not for
considering his subsequent Treatises, which be sent forth into the world, when
the Puritanical zeal began to leave him. And thus Mr. Crofton supposes the two
Houses into a Non-Entitie, as to their damnable Treasons, and Enormous
Practices by the temper they were then in; by their being Parliament men, and
having some certain Privileges, which were not time after time answered by the
Royal Grant, to learn them Absaloms Trepan of Rebellion against their King,
with a Sacred Covenant betwixt their teeth, nor yet to teach them to be
unparellel'd Seditious Corah's, under a visard and masque of Sanctity: And thus
he supposes the two Houses into an Entitie, as to their yet Legal continuance
by virtue of their being animated by an express Statute Law, which one openly
averring to continue them yet in being, was immediately sought after and
caught, and by an Order of the whole Body of the two Houses, was Voted
Seditious, and his openly averring to be burnt by the New-turn'd Presbyter,
Doctor Dunne.

But Crofton has another dart to shoot at the Bishops, but its so pitiful
blunt and dull, that let him aim never so well at his mark, yet there is no
great fear of hurt to be received by it, and what should it be but this; And
thus he (i. e. the Bishop) profoundly supposes a Parliament swearing qua
Parliament in the fullest formality, and profession of their National Capacity
was a personal Covenanting:) Say ye so? The Bishop did but (as you say) plainly
suppose the former, but you tell us he does profoundly suppose this latter; And
why pray now is it such a profound supposition? Because the Bishop affirms the
swearing of the Absolonian Tribe, the factious part of the Two bloody Houses
without and against the consent of Majesty to be but a personal Covenanting
(for that the true English of the Bishops undeniable assertion?) It Is a profound
cavil indeed of yours, I must confess; Certainly the Bishop might well suppose
your black Cabale into a nonentity by that one Law, The Petition of Right as
to their legal swearing without his Majesty's consent as easily and truly, as
assert this irrefrageable proposition that the Body cannot act without the
Head; But because the prattles of a Parliament swearing qua Parliament (as if
he would out face the Sun with his mistakes and juglings) I shall bring this
subsequent counter-poyson, as an Antidote against the venom infused by an
ungodly seditious pack of Puritanical knaves, into the peoples minds to keep
them fast to themselves against their Prince, with Treasonable delusive
principles, and that is, first, The Two Houses when every one met together and
assembled in the House (much less your remaining half of them) are not a
Parliament (but only a part thereof) without the Kings presence or
concurrence; And secondly, That this Belials brat (the Covenant) was sworn and
taken by but a part of them too, when the rest were (like Loyal Subjects) gone
out of their bloody denns to the service of their Master, and so the meaning of
his words bears but this diminutive conclusion, That the Covenant was taken,
and sworn but by a sad part of a part of a Legal Parliament, which verifies the
words of the learned Judge Jenkins, That by the abuse and misunderstanding of
this word Parliament you and your cross grain party, have miserably deceived
the people. That the Bishop supposes the swearing of the rotten putrified
members, the stinking part of a part of a rightful Parliament (who were tainted
above measure with Treason and Rebellion) without the consent, and concurrence
therein of the Only Supreme Legislator, to be but a personal Covenanting, (and
what can we term a Covenant sworn without, and against authority but personal,
and with the due Epethite Rebellious annexed unto it?) I am ready enough to
grant you; See p. 51. of Crofton Book.
But that the Bishop does any where affirm a Parliament swearing qua
Parlialiament (that is the King and all the Lords and Commons) to be but a
personal Covenanting, Is the Sophistical groundless inference of him who
knows the Bishop does not so much as mention it; but give a Presbyter an
inch, and he will be sure to take an ell; If the King gives him but Liberty of
Conscience in the wearing, or not wearing of a Surplice in all Churches, and
places throughout the Nation, excepting his own Royal Chapel, Cathedrals, and
both the Universities, they must have the Customary Rigor suspended, and
Liberty of Conscience allowed them there too, or else all the fat's in the
fire, their queazy stomachs cannot bear it, and their Consciences (poor
harmless lambs!) they think will be thereby over burdened and oppressed, but let
truth come somewhat might them for once (which has bin such a stranger to
them) and tell them to their faces, That they have possessed themselves of
Cauterized Consciences, that are oppressed with
the sight of a garment, and eased with the practice of sedition, which stumble
at strawes and swallow a Camel, that cannot away with a piece of Holland, and
yet make no bones of Rebellion, who can by no means endure to bow at the name
of Jesus, and yet fall down and worship their own Inventions; And thus Mr.
Crofton profoundly supposes, That a bloody faction of the Two Houses swearing
an Oath without, and against the concurrence of their Princely Head, had a
Parliamentary Authority to make their Oath legal, and themselves that took it,
to be no Rebellious Covenanters.

. 40. Errors (says Squire See his History of K. Charles, p. 268.
Saunderson) grow fastest in hot brains; and the most reverend Archb. Bancroft
in his excellent Survey of the pretended holy discipline has also told us of
Beza's Page 53.
applying himself altogether to strengthen and encourage his factious old
acquaintance, (i. e. The Disciplinarian Canker-wormes then here in England) in
their froward and perverse obstinacy. The first is made evident by the
frightful language of this Hot-brained Sheba, The second is also proved by the
open averring of one of the near Allies of those Puritanes, and rash Heady
Preachers, that King James of blessed memory has well informed us of) who
think it their honor to contend with Kings, and to perturb whole kingdoms; And
to what end can any man think was the Sea his preface to his Basilicon Doron.
wicked errors of his ways made public by a press, but to encourage his
factious proselites, and Holy-prophane Leaguing brethren to persist in their
froward and perverse obstinacy in their old crooked paths of Schism and
Sacrilege, of blood and confusion? And all this under a color and pretense to
advance the power of Godliness too; But what said one once; Men (says See the
Subjects sorrow or lamentations upon the death of Britains Josiah, K. Charles,
p. 40.
he) profess they know God, yet in their works they deny him; using the name of
God and Religion (as Conjurers in their incantations) to perpetrate those
things which are most contrary unto God, and destructive unto Religion; for as
the devil never does more hurt then when he appears in the likeness of an Angel
of Light, so are men never so mischievous, as when they drive on wicked Designs
under the show of Godliness.

And thus have we found this Covenanting Corah, first praying to be delivered
from rendering railing for railing, and yet rake in that puddle himself for
several times together, after he had told us he did not delight to rake in it;
Mangling, and Clipping the words of his Reverend Antagonist, so long, till he
made his own way the more easy to catch others in; to make his Puritanical
Gang to believe him to be some rare kind of Phoenix, at the very time when a
faithful Monitor will sooner compare him to a Prattling Cuckoe, for his idle
repititions, and leaving out, like a perverse Disputer, the Principal Verb, the
chief words of the Bishops Sentences, See King James his Preface.
for speeds sake putting in the one half of the purpose, and leaving out the
other; not unlike the man that alleged that part of the Psalm, Non est Deus,
but left out the preceding words, Dixit insipiens in Cord suo. Stating of
damnable Doctrines of Sedition and Rebellion, for the Honor and Happiness of
the Kings Majesty and his Posterity, That the Common Prayer Book was expelled
by a lawful Authority; That neither the place of his Majesty's retirement, nor
reason of his absence, does add or abstract to the Authority of Parliament;
That the two Houses are not only Coordinate, and Sharers in the Legislation of
England, and may exercise it without the Kings consent, but also have the
Supreme Legislative power, directly contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this
Nation, and to the Oath of Supremacy, which by the Particle Only, cuts off,
and excludes all Rivals and Sharers therein; and which by an express Statue
Law, is made High Treason for a Subject to deny to take, and this affirmed by
him, That the world may bear witness, that he has no thoughts or intentions to
diminish his Majesty's just Power and Greatness, Threatening distress, and that
so sudden too, for not keeping of the Covenant, as may too late engage his
Majesty to send to his faithful Monitor to pray for him, and no less then twice
affirming, with an If, the yet legal continuance of those long Athenian Tyrants
at Westminster, notwithstanding their undoubted Dissolution by their
unparellel'd Murder of their Prince, That the world may bear witness also,
with his Conscience of his Loyalty; This, this is the person that would bewitch
the world with the Bishops premunires, and Sedition against their Sovereign
Princes. But Quis tulerit Gracchos de Seditione Quaerentes? Who can with
patience endure to hear the devil correcting sin? Traitors, and seditious
persons, exclaiming against the fictitious Sedition of others; Sacrilegious
Rebels, against the Sacrilege of others: I say, Quis tulerit? Who can without
indignation entertain any thoughts of a Covenanters speaking against Sedition,
Sacrilege, Treason, King-Deposing, and Rebellion? For See the Bishop of
Canterburies Speech at the censure of Burton, etc. p. 5.
it is most apparent to any man that will not wink, That the intention of these
Fiery, Turbulent Presbyterians, and their Factious abetters, was ever, and is
still, to raise a Sedition, being as great Incendiaries in the State (where
they get power) as they have ever been in the Church. The thoughts of whose
Seditious Principles, and Anti-Monarchical Practices, made one in 1574. cry
out, See The defense of the Ecclesiastical Regiment, p. 40.
God of his mercy abridge their power, and continue the shortness of their
horns, or else grant them greater measure of his grace, and moved another to
commend to his Readers consideration, this one Caution, See the Postscript to
the Right Rebel, p. 164.
That as ever they desire, intend, and expect to escape, they withdraw
themselves from the Society of Rebellious persons, and take heed they give no
entertainment unto any Rebellious Opinions, or Principles, whatsoever
extraction they be of, whether Popish, Presbyterian, or Popular, if it be not
more proper to refer them all to one Original, the Mystery of Iniquity, as
their Common Mother; For I make account (says he) That Popery, Presbytery, and
Popularity, (rightly understood with respect to their rebellious Principles)
are but as so many several Dialects in the language of that Beast, which Rev.
13. 11.
had two horns like a Lamb, and spoke as a Dragon. And this likewise was the
reason of that Conclusion of the most Reverend Primate of Armagh, to his
excellent Fair warning to take heed of the Scottish Discipline, which shall
also put a period to this discourse; I would to God (says he) we might be so
happy, as to see a general Council of Christians, at least a General Synod of
all Protestants, and that the first Act might be to denounce an Anathema
Maranatha, against all broachers and maintainers of Seditious Principles, to
take away the scandal that lies upon Christian Religion, and to show that in
the search of Piety, we have not lost the principles of Humanity: In the mean
time, let all Christian Magistrates (who are principally concerned) beware how
they suffer this Cockatrice Egg to be hatched in their Dominions, much more
how they plead for Baal, or Baal-Berith, the Baalims of the Covenant; It were
worth the enquiring, whether the marks of Antichrist do not agree as eminently
to the Assembly General of Scotland, as either to the Pope, or to the Turk;
This we see plainly That they spring out of the Ruins of the Civil Magistrate;
They sit upon the Temple of God, and they advance themselves above those whom
the holy Scripture calls Gods.

Vivat in eternum Rex Carolus Secundus, quem Deus nunc and in secula seculorum
defendat, oro. Lectoribus, Doctis and Indoctis.
INdocti non damnent, quod ipsi nesciunt; Docti non invideant, quod ipsi novum
putant; ab utrisque peto, si alicubi Erratum sit, illud Castigent, non Culpent;
si quid ab illis merui, ut Deo, non mihi, gratias rependerent. Apud Aditus ad
Logicam.

Page 57. l. 40. for Covenant, r. Court. p. 80. l. 3. for the, r. he. l. 40.
for might, r. nigh.

FINIS.

