Roman Catholic Doctrines NO NOVELTIES: OR AN ANSWER TO Dr. PIERCE'S
Court-Sermon, Mis-call'd The Primitive Rule of Reformation.

By S. C. a Roman Catholic.

1 PET. 3. 15. Parati semper ad satisfactionem omni poscenti vos rationem de ea
quae in vobis est spe, cum modestia and timore, conscientiam habentes bonam, ut
in eo quod detrahunt vobis confundantur. MDCLXIII.

TO THE Queen Mother.
MADAM,
IT cannot be doubted but your Majesty has of late been a great Sufferer, in
being forced to hear frequent and loud Triumphs for a supposed Victory, which,
by a Court-Sermon, scarce an hour long, the English Protestant Church at one
blow, and without any resistance, pretends to have a gained over the Catholic.

But your sufferings were much more increased, when you saw the immediately
following effects of that and several other Sermons of the like style, which,
by concert, at the same time proclaimed destruction to that very Christianity,
which first expelled Paganism out of our Nation.

Your Majesty has oftentimes heretofore been wakened and affrighted with such
Alarmes: But then the Trumpets were blown by men whose Profession and Religion
obliged them to renounce all humanity toward us, and all respect to Monarchy.
Whereas this last unexpected blast proceeded from those, who, even but
yesterday, promised us, as a reward for our common sufferings, a security from
those our common Enemies, whose malice and rage we only apprehended.

God forbid we should be astonished, as if some strange thing happened to us, to
see our Religion persecuted: It is impossible it should be otherwise, because
the great Enemy of Truth and Charity will never be reconciled to live at peace
with either. Yet when we see so wonderful and so sudden a change in formerly
professed Friends, when not only the hands, but the voice of Jacob, are become
the voice and hands of E^au: And when we, examining our selves, can neither
find nor suspect any demerit to provoke our Protestant Friends against us; nor
so much as imagine, what advantage they can gain by our ruin, but rather an
apparent harm to themselves: This being a Case of suffering, for the
entertaining which we have no Pattern to prepare us, and for mitigating which,
all rational means are uneffectual, we cannot forbid our selves a little to
wonder at it: Yet this great Blessing we may reap from it, that thereby we are
even forced to our own happiness, by having recourse for comfort and
deliverance to God only, who, when the World goes farthest from us, Himself
approaches nearest to us, and looking fixedly on him, we shall discover, by his
Divine Light, how our unexampled ingratitudes have extorted from him unexampled
punishments.

So many years of oppressions, and such vicissitudes in them, have not
diminished, much less changed the constancy of our affections to Creatures; we
have passionately loved the World, even when it was bitter to us; When God
called us to mourning and penitential humiliations, we dissembled the taking
notice of it: In the midst of persecutions we contended in pride and vain
jollities with our Oppressors: Yet now we see how mercifully God deals with us,
lest our former miseries should prove beginnings of eternal ones, he has
brought upon us these new and unfore-seen afflictions, for a last Trial whether
his mighty hand can humble us, or no. He has seen that the fideli^y we
performed to our Temporal Governors, and the charitable assistance we afforded
to our fellow suffering Brethren we perhaps expected should be recompensed by
them in this life. Therefore he will have us continue the same Duties more
cordially, now that we know and see that himself only must be our reward. Our
complaints and prayers (which are so far from mitigating, that they rather
incense some spirits against us) he will force us to address to himself only;
which if we do as we ought, and mend our lives under his correction, we shall
certainly pacify him, and, when he sees it for our good, conciliate men to us
also; since for this last, which only can be doub^ed, we have no less
engagement than that of his own Word: When the ways of a man please our Lord,
Prove. 16. 7.
he will convert even his Enemies to him.

Madam, these reflections I can with much more assurance represent to your
Majesty's consideration, because, though hitherto the too common in sensibility
of Catholics to God's Visitations, has been much aggravated by our neglect to
follow so Christian an example of humiliation, penitential austerities,
contempt of worldly vanities, and delight in solitary retraits to converse with
God, as your Majesty has afforded; yet it is now at last to be hoped, that in
the present dispersion of Catholic Pastors, if your Majesty could join your
Authority with your Example, they both together would prove forcible means to
invite all Catholics to a serious compunction for their former miscarriages, to
an acknowledgment, not only of the justice, but even mercifulness of our Lord's
Visitations, to a willingness in suffering for him, and an expectation of
deliverance only from him.

Never certainly did our Nation, nor perhaps any other afford two Catholic
Courts such perfect Schools of Piety, in which there are two such Mistresses,
of most peculiarly Christian, though seldom found to be courtly, virtues; such
are Humility, Mortification, Penance, zeal for true Religion, equanimity in
Sufferings, assiduous and unwearied Devotions, etc. But in a Generation so
perverse as this, it must be somewhat more then Example, that can render these
virtues fashionable abroad also. Insensible, vain, tepid, and negligent
Catholics must see themselves reprehended by the severity of your Majesty's
looks, and if need be, condemned by your charitable reproofs. Bravery and
curiosity of Attires, precious time misspent in vain Conversations and Visits,
magnificence in entertainments, dissolution in dancing, etc. are justly to be
esteemed crimes unpardonable in those upon whom the hand of our Lord lies so
heavy.

There is no joy now seasonable, nor indeed excusable among Catholics, but a
Joy in suffering for truth and fidelity; For we never had, till now, so
comfortable a refreshment to our afflictions. It is now made evident that ^ur
only fault is that which is our greatest glory. We are threatened more severely
then ever, whilst we are declared most innocent. In former Edicts for execution
of Laws the principal motives were a care for safety of his Majesty's Person,
and the security of the State and Government; Withdrawing of Subjects from
their natural Allegiance; contriving of Seditious and Treasonable practices;
maintaining of rebellious principles, etc. were formerly our pretended crimes.
Such was the style in which the late desolating Parliament represented to our
most Excellent King of glorious memory, a necessity of persecuting and
destroying his most faithful Catholic Subjects, when, God knows, both His
safety and security of the Government was at the same time in design, and
shortly after in effect, destroyed only by the Representers themselves.

But now Treason is left out of our charge: Nor is there any apprehension of
the least danger from us to his Majesty's Person or the State: Nay, so
publicly and constantly have we asserted the innocence of our Religion in the
Point of fidelity to Princes, and such unquestioned proofs thereof have we
given by our actions, that the Honorable Peers of this very Parliament were in
an immediate preparation of mind to antiquate all the Sanguinary Laws against
us: God Almighty give repentance and pardon to the unhappy obstructors of that
grace.

Yet for all our innocence, Preachers must be satisfied: They cry aloud their
fears of the increase of Popery; when as, for one new-professed Catholic, who
forsakes their Churches, hundreds of all other Sects relinquish both their
Churches and Allegiance too. They impute as a Crime to us, what all other Sects
impute to them, and themselves glory in, that we receive our Ordinations from
Rome, that is, that we are not a separated Sect, but members of the true
Catholic Church. For if there be indeed a Catholic Church, Ordinations must be
derived into particular Countries from a Common Principle and Fountain,
otherwise the Cement of Union and Subordination is dissolved.

But what esteem our former Princes had of this pretended Crime, will appear by
a late example given by his Majesty of happy memory; Sanderson's Hist. page
349. out of the Records of the House of Commons, 1640.
He had graciously reprieved a Priest condemned at the Old Bailey. Hereupon the
Commons in the late unhappy Parliament A. D. 1640. by Mr. Glyn, request the
Lords to join in a Petition to his Majesty, to be informed who should dare to
be instrumental in retarding Justice in the face of the Parliament: To which
the King by the Lord Privy Seal (28 January) tells them the cause of the
reprieve was, because the man was found guilty, as being a Priest only; upon
which account neither King James, nor Queen Elizabeth ever exercised the penal
Laws. Notwithstanding, his Majesty left the Prisoner to their wills, to live
or dye, according to their Votes; and thereby he escaped; for even they had not
the courage to say, Let this man's blood be upon us and our Children.

This, MADAM, is our condition: A condition, though, according to the World's
estimation, to be bewailed, yet if we look up to Heaven, it is a condition to
be triumphed in. Now we are sure a reward in Heaven expects us, since we are
thus recompensed upon Earth. It becomes us all therefore, bending the Knees of
our Hearts, to give infinite thanks to our gracious God, since it is now
evidently and confessedly for him only, and the Catholic verities revealed by
him, for the unity of his Mystical Body and the religious fear we have of being
guilty of Schi^m, that we do, and shall hereafter suffer.

This, Madam, is now our only crime, and this I am now actually committing,
and am so far from being ashamed [ except only of the imperfect manner of
executing it] that I have assumed the boldness to desire and hope your
Majesty's approbation and defense both of the crime and criminal Person: it is
our whole common Faith, delivered by God to the Church, that both at Court, and
all over the Nation, has been publicly traduced; some Doctrins have been
charged to be contrary to the honor and safety of the State; others to be
Doctrins of Devils; all of them to be Novelties and usurpations; our whole
Catholic Church is made to pass for a Sect, a separated Schismatical
congregation; But from what other Church, neither can our Accuser tell, nor any
one imagine.

Perhaps the present temper of the Times, and delay of an Adversary appearing,
had encouraged the Preacher to think his Sermon un-answerable, not for any
weight in his proofs, but, because it may be in his power to reply with an
Instrument sharper than his Pen. Notwithstanding, as Prudence did justly
restrain that impetuosity, which zeal to Gods truth might move in the hearts of
Catholics to retort this Cartel of Defiance, which he has published against His
Church: so to remain utterly silent after so many reimpressions of that Sermon
in several forms and after such diligent Translations of it into foreign
Languages, after that incredible avidity with which so many thousand Copies of
it have been snatched out of the hands of the Readers, and from the Stalls of
the Sellers, this would be a confession of our own guilt, and a distrust in our
Cause, as public as his challenge and provocation has been, this would be
indeed to be ashamed of Christ and his truth before men.

For this reason, shutting my eyes to all external frights or discouragements,
I presumed to undertake an Answer to his Allegations, hoping that some others
of my Brethren would do it with greater efficacy and fruit, than I dare promise
to this imperfect work: And having this resolution, I took the boldness to
inscribe your Majesty's Name in the Front, being assured that nothing could be
more acceptable, nor a greater refreshment to your most tenderly Christian
heart, (which bears an equal share in this our common oppression) then to see
that Faith, which you value above Crowns, at least not betrayed, and, truly I
confidently hope, demonstrated to remain unprejudiced by any thing alleged in
that Sermon. With this persuasion, I most humbly beg leave to cast at your
Majesty's feet both my self and Work, which, as it was undertaken, not upon my
own single judgment, so that it may not appear in public, without your
Majesty's approbation and protection, is the most humble Suit and only Petition
of,

14 May, 1663. MADAM, Your MAJESTY'S Most humbly Devoted Servant in our Lord,
S. C.

CHAP. I.
Of Doctor Pierce's Sermon in General: What was probably the inward design of
it.

I Cannot forbid my self to wonder that a Book so universally esteemed, so
often reprinted, and not only reprinted in our own, but translated into foreign
Languages, should yet lie open to so many and so plain Exceptions: Not one
period can I find that seems to me Extraordinary; Not one Instance but has long
since been often objected both with closer Reason and neater Rhetoric: So that
now by experience, as well as faith, I see it is true that the Scripture says,
Eccles. 9.
The Race is not to the Wise, nor the Battle to the Strong, nor favor to men
of Skill, but Time and Chance happens to them all.

2. And are we not come to a fine pass, when not only a dozen perhaps of the
greatest and subtilest Controversies in Religion shall be crowded into a short
Sermon; but expressed with such vanity and affectation of exotic and abstruse
Phrases, as if the end of Preaching were nothing but to talk an hour of hard
things in harder words? Ask the great Auditory of Lords and Ladies, that heard
this Doctor (Persons of clear and ingenuous apprehensions, who like good sense,
though not delivered in Greek, who penetrate into the connection of Things,
though they have not misspent their lives in studying Words) Ask that
Illustrious and Noble Assembly, what they think of the (...) of the Emperor
Zeno; or of the itching to be as old as the Julian period begun before the
Protoplast. Some of them perhaps may have heard of the Palladium of the
Conclave; but for the Embroidery of the Theopneust Aholiab, or the Antiquaryes
Keimeliah, I believe the Ladies at least, were a little puzzled on the sudden
how to understand them; yet if those pompous Sounds were translated into plain
English, not one of them but would easily see the sense, without other
Dictionary than their own Cabinet.

3. As for the Doctor's profession in his Epistle Dedicatory, That his
Resolution was, the Sermon should never have been exposed to the World, had not
his Majesty commanded it. I readily believe him; for a Victory is easily and
very cheaply got, if a Controversy be to be decided by a flourishing Speech,
confidently pronounced by a Person in esteem for Learning and Sincerity, in a
Place where none must contradict, especially when he protests he has Proofs
unquestionable for all his Assertions. But till those Proofs be examined, the
Conquest is only over the Hearer's passions not their reason: It may be, (and I
pray God this Sermon was not meant so) a good preparation to usher in the
Calvinistical zeal for executing severities on innocent Persons, who sincerely
abhor the crimes deserving such Rigors, and the unchristian Principles, the
Fountains of those Crimes: that is, on Persons against whom the Lawgivers
themselves have publicly professed they never intended those punishments. This
kind of Justice he may hope for from his Sermon, but a rational conviction will
never be the effect of it.

4. Truly Doctor Pierce must not blame us, if we fear he had some such thoughts
in his mind, when he preached this Sermon, so differing from the style of
Court-Sermons in the times of his Majesty of glorious memory, and of the late
(as he styles him) immortal Archbishop. But have we since those days deserved
such a change in the Tongues and Pens of any Protestants, especially the
Clergy? By what crimes? Is it because we have ever since been ready, and are so
still, unanimously to sacrifice our Blood and Fortunes for his Majesty, by
which also their Church has been maintained and settled against all the
irreconcilable enemies both of monarchy and It? Methinks they might forgive us
this fault, both for past and future: For we shall fall into it again, if they
do not take care, by destroying us, to prevent it.

5. This suspicion of ours is much increased, when we reflect on that bitter
passage in his Epistle Dedicatory, where he says, I suppose my discourse,
however innocent in it self, will yet be likely to meet with many, not only
learned and subtle, but restless Enemies; men of pleasant insinuations, and
very plausible snares; nay such as ar^ apt, where they have power, to confute
their Opponents with fire and faggots.

Indeed it is possible his Sermon may somewhere fall into some such hands: But,
unless he will renounce all Charity, justice and humanity, he must not impute
particular men's actions to Catholic Religion, and, for their faults, expose us
to the common hatred and violence. Let all the received Canons of the Church be
searched, and if one be found that justifies the shedding of blood simply on
the account of Religion, he may have some pretense for such an indefinite
odious reflection upon innocent suffering Christians.

Let all the practices of the World be examined, and it will clearly appear,
it is not Catholic Religion that is chargable with these Excesses, since in so
many places both they are not, where it is; and are, where it is not.

And, though for some few of these later Ages, the Civil Magistrates of some
Countries have exercised a greater severity, then an^iently was used; Yet now
even they have entertained a more calm and tractable Spirit, and seem to hope
by other Arguments sufficiently to secure their Religion. However, why must our
England imitate the rigidest of other Nations, against whom, for that very
reason, we so loudly exclaim; rather than the moderate proceedings of those,
who are nearer us both in situation, temper, and interest? Why thus
continually be harping upon one string that jarres, and never touch the rest
that move in harmony?

6. Our late unhappy wars have made the Preacher and many others besides him
Travelers; We appeal to their consciences and experience, if they would be
pleased to speak, as Persons of honor and integrity; Did they in any Catholic
Countries, even ROME it self (though here much spoken against for cruelty) ever
apprehend any danger for their opinions, or refusal to join in the exercise of
Catholic Religion? so they would abstain from public scandalous affronts to
the Church, they had freedom not only with all quietness to enjoy their
consciences, but civilly to justify their Doctrines. All expressions of
kindness, tenderness and compassion they received from their Catholic
Opponents, but surely not the least hard usage that might imprint terror in
their minds.

7. Thus much may be permitted us to allege in our own Defense upon this
occasion gives us by the Preacher; especially, considering we are the only
persons exposed to the public hatred and rigor, though we only, of all the
Dissenters from the Religion of the Kingdom, least deserve it: For; we are no
Innovators, but Professors of the same Religion that made this Nation
Christian. A Religion, though now too generally decryed, yet in those times
confirmed by great Miracles, as even Protestants acknowledge: A Religion, which
for almost a thousand years was only known and professed here. When the
Reformation entered, though almost all Subjects were Catholics, yet seeing the
change was introduced by a Supreme Authority, no opposition was made to it by
any other A^mes, but Prayers and Tears: Whatsoever Treasons have been acted by
a few wretched persons, even our Princes themselves have acquitted the
generality of Catholics thereof, and our Religion from allowing them. There
cannot be framed any Forms of professing or acknowledging due Supremacy and
Allegiance to our Kings, but we are ready to subscribe them in the same sense
that the most learned Protestants themselves ordinarily say they intend them.
Public atttestations of our fidelity and zeal, in serving and defending our
Princes, and even the Religion of the Kingdom (almost destroyed by a Conspiracy
of all other Dissenters) have been made in our behalf, even by some, who now
are most sharp against us: Yet after all this, of them who are not able to
allege any one of these excuses for themselves some are rendered in a capacity
to Triumph over our Sufferings; unrepentant Traitors are among our Accusers;
though it is known, the thing which most enrages them, is our fidelity; their
Invectives, how false soever, are believed, and they hope to become popular for
their attempts to destroy us.

CHAP. II.
Eleven Novelties charged on Catholics. Schism imputed to Catholics. Why
necessary the Sermon should be refuted by Catholics. The Answerers protestation
of sincerity.
1. THe Doctors Sermon, for as much as concerns us Roman Catholics, pretends
a double Design. First, Confidently enough to assert that the Doctrines in
which we differ are on our parts mere Novelties, and that Primitive Antiquity
both of Scripture and the four first General Councils stands clearly for
Protestants. Secondly, In consequence to this, that not they, but the Roman
Church alone is guilty of Schism.

2. As to the first Part he exemplyfies in these following Points of Catholic
Doctrine, which he says are Novelties, and undertakes to calculate the precise
time of their Nativity 1. The Supremacy of the Pope. 2. The infallibility of
the Church. 3. Purgatory. 4. Transubstantiation. 5. The Sacrifice of the Mass.
6. Communion under one Species. 7. Worship of Images. 8. The Scriptures and
public Divine Service in an unknown Tongue. 9. Invocation of Saints. 10. The
forbidding Marriage to Persons in holy Orders. 11. The allowing Divorce for
other causes besides Fornication.

3. Then concerning the other part of his general Design about Schism, he
acknowledges that a real Schism there is, but that the cause of it came from
the Roman Church, which made erroneous Novelties, new Articles of their Creed,
which errors the Reformers were obliged in conscience to reject, and reject
them they did by warrantable and legal Authority: So that though they separated
from the then present visible Church* yet they ought not to be called
Schismatics, but that Church is to be esteemed Schismatical, which caused them
to separate.

4. This is in gross the substance of what in his Sermon he alleges against
Her, that heretofore was this Churches Mother, and a great proportion of whose
kindness she still enjoyes, the Roman Catholic Church. Now considering with
what triumphing applauses this Sermon was heard, and with what a general
greediness thousands of the printed Copies have been bought up, even by those
that formerly have not been curiously inquisitive after Court Sermons for any
good they meant the Preachers. Would not Protestants themselves in their hearts
condemn Roman Catholics, if, being confidently persuaded, (as truly for my
part I am) that there is not so much as one single allegation among all his
replenished Margins that reaches home to a concluding proof of what he pretends
to, they should out of a treacherous fearfulness be utterly silent, as
acknowledging that now they have a prostrated cause. And therefore if it be but
only out of fear of losing their good opinion, something must be said by us to
acquaint him with his mistakes.

5. Now in my Remarks upon this Sermon, I will follow his own order before
summarily set down: And both in the Points of Doctrine and Schism I will select
his Arguments, adjoining to each Point respectively* the Quotations or
Authorities of Fathers related to in the Margins: And having done this, I will
sincerely discover the grounds upon which I think I can Demonstrate, That he
has neither rationally concluded any of our Catholic Doctrines to have been
Novelties, nor freed his own Church from the just imputation of Schism.

6. And, knowing very well what candor, sincerity and charity Almighty God
requires from those who undertake his cause, and the cause of his Church; I do
here call Him as a witness upon my Soul, that my purpose is studiously to
avoid all cavilling distorsions either of Texts of Scriptures, or the holy
Fathers, and much more those falsely called pia^ frauds, corruptions of either:
And both in my Answers and Objections, I will allege nothing but what I am
persuaded is both pertinent and efficacious to conclude that for which it is
produced, that is, I will bring nothing as a proof, which I for the present
think can be answered.

7. I am informed that he in his Sermon made the like Protestation. If he did,
I am very glad for his own sake, that he forbore to print, what he then spoke:
because though I must not charge him with wilful sincerity, yet I believe he
will find by this short Paper, that he did neglect to make use of his best
judgment and caution, which certainly, if ever, was most requisite, in a cause
so important, especially it being to be debated by one that professed to supply
the place of God himself in his own House, and who spoke to no meaner Person
than the KING, God's own Vice^erent.

8. But whether the Preacher in his Sermon, the subject whereof was nothing but
Controversies, and such as his Text neither invited, much less compelled ^im
to undertake, or however to debate them with such Invectives and exulcerating
digressions whether I say, herein he expressed that respect and duty he owed
his Majesty, that is, whether such a distempered Sermon was conformable to the
Injunctions touching Preaching, which his Majesty had lately commanded my Lord
Archbishop to communicate to the Clergy, I leave to the Preachers own
Conscience. If he resolved to transgress those Orders so becoming a Prince
who loved the peace of his Kingdoms, and still feels so much by their disunions
in Opinions: yet in reason he might have abstained from letting the Court and
Kingdom see, that he had the courage to disobey the King to his own face: The
University-^ulpit, or some City Congregations, where such behavior is in
fashion, might well enough have contented him.

CHAP. III.
Bishop Jewel's Challenge imitated by Doctor Pierce. Primitive Reformers
acknowledge Antiquity to stand for Catholics. The Doctor's notion of Beginning:
He is obliged thereto by an Act of Parliament, 5 Eliz. Five Questions proposed
touching that Notion.
1. What ground or motive the Preacher had to renew the vain brag of Bishop
Jewel, derided by his Adversaries, and condemned by his Brethren, it will be
less difficult for us to imagine, than for himself sincerely to acknowledge.
However, that, both that Bishop and He are singular in this matter of
challenging the concurrence of Antiquity for themselves, and imputing Novelty
to the Catholic Church, we have a cloud of Witnesses among the first Reformers,
both in gross and by retayl, through all the particular Points by him
mentioned.

2. In general let him consider what Melancthon writes: Melanct. in 1 Cor. 3.
Presently from the beginning of the Church, the ancient Fathers obscured the
doctrine concerning the justice of Faith, increased Ceremonies and devised
peculiar Worships. Pet. Mart. 1. devotis. p. 477.
In like manner Peter Martyr affirms, That in the Church errors did beg in
immediately after the Apostles times: Id. ib. p. 490.
And that presently after their Age men began to decline from the Word of God:
Id. ib. p. 476.
And therefore so long as we insist upon Councils and Fathers, we shall always
be conversant in the same errors. In so much as Beza had the arrogance to
write thus in an Epistle: Beza Epist. T^eol. 1.
I have said more than once, and I suppose not without reason that comparing
the ancient times of the Church, even those immediately succeeding the Apostles
with ours, they had better Consciences, but less Knowledge: On the contrary,
We have more Knowledge, but less Conscience. This is my Judgment, etc. These
are esteemed as learned Writers as the Reformation had; They spent their lives
in reading and examining Antiquity, and were as willing to make it speak on
their sides, as the Preacher was: But as ill Consciences as they had, they were
convinced and forced publicly to confess that the Fathers were against them,
and focus.

And in particular Opposition to his Claim of Antiquity, (like Bishop Jewels
for the first six Centuries) Doctor Fulk is so far from concurring with him or
Bishop Jewel, that he is so choleric at the suspicion of such a charge, that he
addresses himself to his Adversary in this civil language; Fulk in Rejoynd. to
Bristow. page. 4.
I Answer, says he, if he charge me with confessing the continuing of the
Church in incorruption for six hundred years next after Christ, he lies in his
heart.

3. One passage there is of that famous Andreas Duditius, which truly I cannot
read without extreme compassion and astonishment at the dreadful judgment of
God, and it may do Doctor Pierce much good, if he sadly reflect on it. Many
years he had lived in great esteem for learning and prudence, a Catholic
Bishop of Petscben in Hungary, called Quinque Ecclesiae; present he was at the
frameing the Decrees of the Council of Trent: But at last falling in love with
a Maid of honor in the Queen of Hungaries Court, to marry her, he quitted both
his Bishopric and Religion. This poor man in his declining Age could not
abstain from confessing in a Letter to Beza his unsatisfaction in his new
Religion, vainly hoping some either Cordial or Opiate for his distressed
Conscience, from one as deeply plunged, and by the very same motives engaged in
the same change. I pray observe his words: Andre, Duditius in Epist. Theol.
Beza. 1.
[ Si veritas est, says he, quam veteres Patres, etc.] If that be truth which
the ancient Fathers, by mutual consent have professed, it will entirely stand
on the Papists side: For if heretofore any Controversies out of a beat of
Disputation aros^ between the learned among them, an end was presently imposed
thereto by Decrees of Councils or even of the Pope alone. But what strange
people have we among us? They are always wandering, tossed with every wind of
Doctrine, and being hurried into the main Deep, they are carried sometimes this
way, sometimes another. If you would inform your self what their Judgment to
day is touching Religion, you may perhaps come to know it: But what it will be
to morrow on the same Argument, neither themselves nor you can certainly
affirm: Thus Duditius. And what Cordial against this scrupulous Melancholy
does Beza his good friend afford him? Take it from himself: Ibid.
[ Scio speciosum esse venerandae velustatis nomen, etc.] I know the name of
venerable Antiquity is very specious: But whence shall we fetch the beginning
of that Title, but from the Prophets and Apostles? For, as for Writers that
come after them, if we will take their own advice, we will believe them on no
other terms but as far as they shall evidently make good what they deliver, out
of the Holy Scriptures: That is in effect, have but the Christian modesty and
humility to prefer your own sense of Scriptures before all the Fathers and
Councils of Gods Church, and then nothing, they say, need to trouble you:
Antiquity, venerable Antiquity will be on your side: You may confidently say of
all your Adversaries Doctrins, From the Beginning it was not so.

4. Many other Confessions of the like nature might be added: but for
brevity-sake I will content my self with only one more, and that is (as it
seems to me) a secret acknowledgement of the Church of England in her public
Liturgy, directly contrary to the Preachers pretension and applications of his
Text, by which she, after a sort, imputes Novelty to her self, and confesses
the Roman to be that Church which was from the beginning. In the Order for
Morning-prayer there are these Versicles and Responds.

V. O. Lord save the King. Common Prayer Book.


R. And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee.

V. Endue thy Ministers with righteousness.

R. And make thy chosen people joyful.

V. O Lord save thy People.

R. And bless thine Inheritance.

Then follows a Versicle for Peace. Now these, as almost all the other Prayers,
are mafestly translated out of the Roman Office. But that which ought to be
observed, is, That in the Roman Office there is a Versicle and Respond
immediately following these, and going before the Versicle for Peace, which the
English Church has studiously left out; and that is this, Memento
congregationis tuae Domi^e quam p^ssedis^i AB INITIO.


V. Be mindful of thy Congregation (O Lord.)

R. Which thou did possess from the beginning.

Now the ground why this special Versicle or Prayer for the Church was left
out, is not so mysterious, but it may be very probably guessed at.

The first Reformers did not love to put God in mind of that Church which was
from the beginning: Or rather they were desirous the People should forget the
Church which was from the beginning: They had rather no Prayers at all should
be made for the Church, than for one that was from the beginning, because
apparently that could not be the Reformed Church of England, whose beginning
themselves saw.

5. Notwithstanding such plain Confessions of these Pillars of Reformation, yet
the Doctor confidently stands (with a little contraction and abatement) to
Bishop Iewel's Challenge: He indeed mentions 27. Points, of which 22. are about
circumstantial matters touching the Eucharist, and two more of them [ viz. 1.
That Ignorance is the Mother and Cause of true Devotion and Obedience. 2. And
that the Lay People (if he speaks of them in general) are forbidden to read the
Word of God in their own tongue,] are Calumnies. The other are three indeed of
the Preacher's points, viz. 1. Supremacy of the Pope. 2. Worship of Images. 3.
Common Prayers in a strange tongue, though the only fault he can find in this
last, is, That the later Church has adhered too close to Antiquity; that the
has not varied in the language of her Devotions from her Predecessors; and,
after A. D. 600. continued to say her Prayers in the same Language she did
before. But then this Bishop, (as being somewhat better experienced in
Antiquity than Doctor Pierce) had not the confidence in this his Catalogue to
reckon as Novelties either the Infallability of the Church, Invocation of
Saints, Purgatory, or Prayer for the Dead, Celibacy of the Clergy, or Sacrifice
of the Mass. So much more courage had the Preacher than even Bishop Jewel
himself. Well, between both, all antiquity is for them, and nothing but novelty
on our side. No doubt but his admiring and believing Hearers assured themselves
that some never-before-examined Witnesses, some hitherto unknown or un-observed
Records had been found out by their learned and confident Preacher, to justify
their deserted claim of Antiquity, I mean by way of aggression, and not simple
defense. But when the Sermon is published, nothing appears in the Text or
Margins, but Assertions and Quotations an hundred times before produced, and as
often silenced, many of which too (as he explains them) have no regard to the
public received Doctrine of the Catholic Church, but particular Opinions of
some Catholic Divines, as much disputed against by other Catholics as by
Protestants.

6. However to qualify a little the admiration that many Protestants have of
their new Champion, or Hyperaspista, as he calls it, something must be said thi^
hundred and one time to old allegations and new mistakes. And first, whereas in
all points now in debate between us, he so often repeats, From the Beginning it
was not so; He did very well to fix a notion and conception of this word
Beginning, or a distinct measure of time after which only whatever Doctrins are
broached, ought in his opinion, to be esteemed Novelties; Novelties of so great
importance, as to justify a separation from the external communion of all
Churches both Eastern and Western. And that is the time of the Apostles, and so
downward, till the fourth General Council inclusively: This he has don not out
of a voluntary liberality, but because an Act of Parliament obliges him,
wherein it is said: That such persons, (Laics or Ecclesiastics) to whom Queen
Elizabeth shall, Stat 1 Eliz.
by Letters patents under the great Seal of England, give authority to execute
any Jurisdiction spiritual, or to correct any Errors, Heresies, Schisms, etc,
shall not in any wise have authority to adjudge any matter or cause to be
Heresy, but only such as heretofore have been determined to be Heresy by the
authority of the Canonical Scriptures, or by the first four General Councils,
or any of them, or by any other General Council, wherein the same was declared
Heres^ by the express and plain words of the said Can^nical Scriptures, or such
as hereafter shall be judged to be Heresy by the High Court of Parliament with
the assent of the Clergy in their Convocation.

7. By this Proviso it appears, that, though in words the Doctor is more
liberal to us than the Presbyterians and other Sects, who will call all things
Novelties, which they think are not in express Scripture, yet the Law would
have allowed him a greater extent, for the might have enlarged the time beyond
the four first General Councils to any succeding Council, that (in the Opinion
of Commissioners) judged Heresy by express Scripture, or to future Acts of
Parliament, judging after the same manner: but we are content with, and thank
him for his allowance.

8. Only he must give us leave to propound a few Questions upon this occasion;
Quest. 1.
As first, Does he submit only to the four first General Councils, because they
had an Authority inherent in them obliging him thereto? Or because he judged
their Decisions conformable to God's express word? If the former, then he must
inform us, why only four Councils have such authority, which it seems the
Church lost as soon as the Fathers at Chalcedon rose? If the later, then he
deludes us, and with Presbyterians, Independents, Quakers, etc. makes Scripture
alone in effect th Rule of Reformation, and Protestants only the Interpreters
of that Rule: Because the Statute ties no further to any General Council, than
as that Council is believed to proceed according to express Scripture: which,
whether it does or no, who must be Judge, Doctor Pierce? To answer this
Question well will be a great Masterpiece: I am sure his late immortal
Archbishop found it a Task too hard for himself, as shall be seen before we
part: too hard I say to resolve so, that any rational man can be satisfied with.

9. A second Question is, Quest. 2.
Whether to judge of Heresy, that is to determine authoritatively what is
Heresy, and what is conformable to Scripture, be not an Act of Jurisdiction
parely Spiritual and Pastoral? (though it seems to reside notwithstanding
sometimes in Lay-Commissioners, but ordinarily in the Parliament) And this not
being possible to be denied, then he must be further asked, since by one of the
39. Articles it is affirmed, That General Councils may and have erred, whether
the English judge of Heresy (be it the King, as in the days of Henry the 8th
and Edw. the 6th. or the Parliament also, as in Queen Elizabeth's) be infallible
or no? If he acknowledge it infallible, he must resolve us, whether the Supreme
Temporal Authority, with the assent of the Clergy be infalli^le only in
England, or in other Countries also as Holland, Swedland? etc. If the former, he
must show what Promises our Lord has made to England alone. If the later, then
it will follow that that may, and certainly will be Heresy and contrary to
Scripture in England, which England it self confesses is not Heresy beyond Sea.
But if no such Authority be indeed infallible, then it will follow, that
Decisions, made by it, do not oblige in Conscience: and by consequence in his
Opinion there is no Spiritual Authority on earth that does so, I mean oblige,
not only to non-contradiction, but to internal assent. The consequences of
which Position he may imagine, and shall see anon.

10. A third Question is, Quest. 3.
Whether since Presbyterians and Independents, and all such Reformed Churches,
following the Heresy of Aerius, do directly oppose the Order of Bishops and
their Jurisdiction, (that is, the whole frame of God's Church) manifestly
asserted in the four first General Councils, and as is here affirmed, of Divine
Right by express Scripture; whether, I say, they be not, according to this
Rule formal Heretics, or however Schismatics; since to alter this Frame, they
relinquished both this Church and ours? And especally for their denying the
Supreme Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual Authority, to be in Temporal Governors,
which yet the Statute tells us, in effect, is the fundamental Cornerstone of
the English Church? If all this do not render them Heretics, or at least in the
highest degree Schismatics, what will become of this Act of Parliament, and his
Primitive Rule of Reformation? If they be such, what will become of the English
Church, which gives to Heretics and Schismatics the right hand of Fellowship,
and acknowledges them holyChristian^ Reformed Congregations? And on the other
side, since, notwithstanding the extremity of passion against Catholics, if was
never yet pronounced that Roman Catholics are Heretics, nor possibly could by
their own Rule and measute; how comes it to pass that we alone are punished
with death as Heretics, and this merely for Religion since we both often have
justified and still are ready to justify our Principles of Fidelity and
Peaceableness beyond all exception; which yet no other Diffenters from this
Church, though real Heretics and Schismatics, either have, or I fear will do?

10. A fourth Question shall be, Quest. 4.
how can the Preacher answer to God for abusing Scripture, and mis-applying,
through the whole Sermon, his Text, to the prejudice of his Church? He pretends
that our Savior's words are to be esteemed the Pattern, or Primitive Rule of
Reformation, and consequently, as our Lord demonstrated Pharasaical Divorces to
be illegal, because Ab initio non fuit sic: So the D^ctor pretends to prove the
Justice and Legality of the English Reformation, because, by the like
examinat^on, he finds that Roman Doctrins are (...) and that (...) initio non
fuit sic; Therefore they, as Jewish Divorces, are (...) abolished, and that
only to be confirmed, which God instituted from the Beginning. But he little
considers that our Saviors saying, It was not so, signifies, It was directly
contray to SO, as if he said, You allow Divorces, ob quamcunque causam, in
manifest opposition to God's Ordinance from the Beginning, who said, Whomsoever
God has joined, let no man put asunder: This is therefore a Novelty necessary
to be reformed. Now, if the Preacher would have made use of this, indeed,
perfect Primive Rule of Refermation, he by his Text was obliged to have
produced from the Beginning, that is either in Scriptures, or in the Fathers
within the four first General Councils, some express Authorities and Decisions
directly contrary to Roman Doctrines, which he calls Novelties: He ought to
have quoted out of Holy Scriptures, or some Councils or consent of Fathers,
such sayings as these: 1. St. Peter and his Successors never bad nor ought to
have any Supremacy of Jurisdiction. 2. The whole Church is a fallible Guide,
not to be relied upon against our private sense of God's Word. 3. There is no
state after death in which Souls may find refreshment by the prayers of the
living. 4. The body of Christ is not substantially present on the Altar. 5.
There is no true Christian Sacrifice 6. Both Elements are essential to the
Sacrament. 7. All respect to Images is forbidden. 8. Invocation of Sains is
unlawful. 9. The Scriptures must be given into all men's hands, without any
certain guide to interpret them. 10. Prayers not in a vulgar tongue, though
interpreted, are abominable. 11. To forbid the use of Marriage to Priests is a
Doctrine of Devils. 12. To separate Bed and Board among married persons, though
when, without danger of their lives, they cannot live together, is a practice
condemned by our Lord. And after all, 13. To break the visible unity of God's
Church, for Doctrines and Practices not in themselves causing Damnation, but
only said to be false, is the Duty of every good Christian. Such sayings as
these had been to some purpose, they would have been pertinent to his Text; But
no such appear. On the contrary, it serves his turn to say again and again,
From the Beginning it was not so: This is the burden of his Song: If he can
show that, because this is the first time, we hear or read such a Doctrine
(mentioned in any Ecclesiastical writer) as Origin, Tertullian, etc. therefore
it is a Novelty, it was never in the Church before, the says something to the
purpose.

But, let me ask him, was there no Doctrine at all in the Church before it was
written? Or was there no Doctrine in the Church but what was written? And
again, is all that is written in any Age still Extant, and come to our hands? Or
do those Fathers, who first writ it, say, That they, or their times first
introduced it? No: On the contrary, they expressly declaim against Innovations,
Noveltie is their Prescription against all Heresies; So that for them to bring
into the Church any Doctrines not heard of, or not received before, had been to
profess themselves Heretics, and there would not have wanted other Fathers
that would have condemned such Innovations: Which yet was never done to Origin
or Tertullian, etc, for any Doctrines mentioned by the Preacher: Whereas for
other Errors they were sufficiently proscribed. From whence it is evident, that,
through the whole Sermon there is a palpable misapplication of the Text, and
that the Preacher has been injurious to our Savior, in making his just
condemnation of the Pharisees, a warrant for him unjustly to condemn his
Church. Indeed, in all matters left indifferent, and no way commanded from the
beginning, nor contrary to any Divine Revelation, the Church of later times may
vary, as she thinks sit, either from the practice, or injunctions of the
former: For example, supposing Celibacy of the Clergy, (the 7th, Point the
Doctor instances in) had not been practiced or mentioned from the beginning;
yet, if God had not commanded the contrary, and the thing in it self be
feasible (of which more anon) the Church of a later Age may lawfully enjoin it:
The Rule therefore holds only for matters of Faith and Divine Revelation. In
which it is true, That the Later times may not vary from the former; But yet,
neither does the Rule hold in these, as to the express terms of every
Proposition that is matter of Faith, but only as to the sense and substance. It
is not necessary that ab initio, God the Son should be declared in express
terms Consubstantial with the Father, which was first put into the Christians
^reed by the Council of Nice: But only that that Doctrine can be showed ab
initio, which is identified in sense with this: Nor can I think the Doctor,
upon second considerations, will offer to gainsay so plain a truth.

But it is now time to Examine the particular P^ints which he charges on the
Church as Novelties, and of each of which be says as unwarrantably, as our
Lord, against the Jewish Innovations said justly, From the beginning it was not
so.

CHAP. IV.
The sum of Dr. Pierce's Discourse against the Pope's Supremacy enervated by
himself. The Churches Doctrine touching that Supremacy. The Text, Mark 10. 42.
cleared.

1. IN the Doctor's Catalogue of Roman Novelties, the first is, The Supremacy
of the Pope: Epist. Dedica^*
Concerning which, he tells his Majesty, he has spoken most at large, because
it is a Point wherein the honor and safety of his Dominions are most
concerned; And because, by Bellarmin 's Assertion, it is the chief, if not
only hirge on which does hang the whole stresse of the Papal Fabric.

This universal Superintendency or Supremacy of Sermon. page 10. Page 16.
the Pope (says he) has been a visible usurpation ever since Boniface the 3d.
to whom it was sold by the most execrable Phocas, the greatest Villain in the
world, except Cromwell and Pontius Pilate, not out of reverence to the Pope, but
in displeasure to Cyriacus, Patriark of Constantinople, etc.

2, In contradiction to this Usurpation, he adds, Page 17.
But from the beginning it was not so. For we find in Scripture the Apostles
were equally foundations of the wall of God's City, etc. They were all as St.
Cyprian says, Page 18.
Pari consortio praediti and honoris, and potestatis: And S. Hierom is as
express: And sure Paul, who withstood Peter to his face, was equal to him at
the least. And for any one Bishop to affect over his Brethren a Supremacy of
Power and Jurisdiction is a most impudent opposition both to the Letter and
Sense of our Savior's precept, Mark 10. 42, 43, 44. They that rule over the
Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, etc. But so shall it not be among you,
but whosoever, etc. Nay, by the Canons of the two first General Councils, Ibid.
every Patriark and Bishop is appointed to be chief in his proper Diocese, as
the Bishop of Rome is the chief in his. And a strict Injunction is laid on all,
the Bishop of Rome not excepted, that they presume not to meddle in any
Diocese but their own. Page 19.
And the chief Primacies of Order were granted to Rome and Constantinople, not
for having been the Sees of such and such an Apostle, but for being the two
Sea^s of the two great Empires: Witness the famous Canon of the General
Council of Chalcedon, etc. Nay, the immediate Predecess^r of Boniface the
third, Ibid.
Pope Gregory the Great, calls the Ti^le of Universal Bishop, a wicked,
profane, and blasphemous Title, importing that the times of Antichrist were at
hand, etc. Further adding, That if any one Bishop were universal, there would
by consequence be a failing of the universal, Church, Page 20.
upon the failing of such a Bishop: Which is an Argument ad homines, not easily
to be answered, whatsoever infirmity it may labor with in its self, etc. And
upon that occasion he makes an excursion about the Pope's infallibility, and
his falling into Heresy, etc. nothing to the Point. Lastly, He concludes, that
Whosoever shall read at large the many Liberties of the Gallican Church, Page
21.
and the published confessions of Popish Writers for more then a thousand years
together, touching the Papal Usurpations, and Right of Kings, he will not deny
that the Supremacy of the Pope is but a prosperous Usurpation.

3. This is the substance of his Discourse upon this Point of Novelty, the
Supremacy of the Pope. In answering which he must permit me, yet without any
prejudice to the Cause, yea rather for a better clearing of it, not to bind my
self to his Order: Assuring him, in the mean time, that I will not purposely
omit any thing material, either in his Reasoning or Quotations.

1. And first in general, he must give me leave to tell him, that by the
Conclusion of the foregoing Discourse, he has entirely enervated all that went
before. For by arguing and asserting, That the Gallican Liberties and Popish
writings against Papal Usurpations do demonstrate that the Supremacy of the
Pope (...) but a prosperous Usurpation: He clearly shows that his
forementioned Reasons do not touch the Catholic Cause at all: He acknowledges
those Writers to have been Roman Catholics: None can deny the French Church to
be a Member of the Roman Catholic Church, acknowledged for such by the Pope
himself, and professing a subjection to him, as to the Supreme Spiritual Pastor
of God's Church: Therefore it is evident that what they deny to the Pope, is
not simply his Supremacy in Spiritual matters, (which is all that will be
required of Protestants) but an extending of that Supremacy beyond what they
conceive the received Ecclesiastical Canons do warrant: (and this the English
may as well be permitted to do as the French.)

4. To the end therefore he may no longer mistake this so important an
Argument, I will clearly set down the Churches Doctrine concerning this matter.
This Doctrine is contained in that profession of Faith compiled by Pius 4. and
extracted out of the Council of Trent. Sess. 25.
I believe that the Pope is the Successor of St. Peter, and Vicar of Jesus
Christ on Earth: I acknowledge the Holy Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Church, as
the Mother and Mistress of all other Churches. And more largely in the Decree,
with great circumspection framed in the Council of Florence, and subscribed by
the Greeks. Council. Floren.
We do define that the Holy Apostolic See and Bishop of Rome does enjoy a
Supremacy through the whole world; And that the Same Bishop of Rome is the
Successor of St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, the true Vicar of Jesus Christ,
the Head of the Universal Church; the Father and Teacher of all Christians; and
that in the Person of St. Peter he has received from our Lord Jesus Christ
full power to feed, rule and govern the whole Church in such manner as is
expressed in the Acts of Oecuminical Councils and the holy Canons.

This is the Decision of the Council of Florence: The substance of the Doctrine
of which Decree, (by which the Pope, as Successor of St. Peter, is acknowledged
to have a Jurisdiction over all Christians, to be regulated by the
Ecclesiastical Canons) is so received even in France, notwithstanding all the
Gallican Liberties, that whoever denies it, will not be esteemed a Catholic.
See what Cardinal Palavicino writes touching the Cardinal of Lorrain and his
French Bishops proceedings about this Point in the Council of Trent.

5. This Jurisdiction the Preacher positively denies both to the Pope and St.
Peter, affirming It to be an impudent opposition both to the Letter and sense
of our Saviors forecited precept, Page 17.
Mark 10. But I heartily with Dr. Pierce would look well on this passage of the
Gospel once more, and ask his own reason, though he should not be able to
exclude all the fumes of passion from it; Is Ecclesiastical Authority in
Superiors, and Subordination of Inferiors forbidden in this Text? Will one that
calls himself a Regular Son of the Church of England, by virtue of this Text
pronounce the Sentence of Decapitation (according to his own pleasant
expression) upon his own Church, whosoever passes for the Head of it, whether
his Majesty, or my Lord of Canterbury? On the contrary, I dare pronounce that
(not the affecting, but) lawful exercising a Supremacy of Power and
Jurisdiction is so far from being an impudent opposition to this Precept, that
it is established by it. For in this very Text express mention is made of some
that are great, yea some that are the chiefest. And if he would have adjoined
the next Verse to his Quotation, he would have published to the most ignorant
of his Hearers of Readers his manifest abusing this passage of Scripture: Our
Savior immediately adding, Mark. 10. 45.
For even the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister. Surely
he will not deny, but that our Savior had Authority, yea a Supremacy of
Jurisdiction over the Church, and only here proposes himself as a Pattern of
humility to be imitated by his Apostles and their Successors. And what were the
Apostles? Church Governors without question. How then are they to imitate their
Supreme Governor? In renouncing Superiority? Did he himself do so? By no means.
Hebr. 5. 5. 6.
But as he did not glorify himself to be an High Priest: But he that said unto
him thou art a Priest forever after the order of Melchisedech: And being high
Priest he did not forget his meekness and humility, consistent very well with
the vigor of Spiritual Jurisdiction: In like manner his Apostles, (and all
that succeed him) are commanded not to affect Superiority, and when they are
lawfully invested with it, not to exercise it with such an arrogant pride as
Heathen Princes usually do, (...). Conc. Ephesians. 1. Can. 8. they must neither
(...), nor (...); neither ambitiously seek Superiority; nor after a secular
manner, 1 Pet. 5.
Lord it over the Flock of Christ.

6. And now let the Doctor say where is the impudent opposition of Supremacy
and Jurisdiction both to the letter and sense of our Saviors Precept? Such an
Argument as this, being Magisterially and confidently pronounced, might for
half an hour serve his present turn in the Pulpit: But I wonder he could have
the confidence to expose it to examination in Print. It Is time we come a little
closer to examine this his first great Novelty.

CHAP. V.
The Doctor obliged to acknowledge Submission due to the Pope's Authority, as
exercised during the four General Councils. Of the Title of Universal Bishop.
It is not generally admitted at this day.

1. HIs main Position in his forecited Discourse on this Argument is: That a
Supremacy of Jurisdiction challenged and exercised by the Pope, as Successor of
St. Peter, is a visible usurpation ever since Boniface the Third, to whom it
was sold by the Tyrant Phocas: that is, it began about the year 606. A. D. 606.
never before that time having been acknowledged in God's Church. To prove
this, all the foregoing Reasons and Allegations are produced by him: From this
usurpe^ Authority, his English Church (forsooth) has made a Secession, as he
demurely Phrases it, and not from any Authority (if any were) exercised by
former Popes, especially during the times of the four first General Councils. A
Primacy of Order he is content to allow him, but by no means a Supremacy of
Jurisdiction.

2. Whatsoever Authority then the Predecessors of Pope Boniface the Third by
consent of other Churches enjoyed, especially till the end of the fourth
General Council, he must grant is no usurpation, and therefore a Legal rightful
Authority, from which, without a formal Schism, they could not withdraw
themselves. He will not surely say with one of their learned Bishops, That they
take from the Pope his lawful Christian Authority, and give that (only) to the
King, not his unlawful and Antichristian. So that the Controversy between us is
reduced to this precise point, Whether before Boniface the Third's time the
Pope enjoyed a Supreme Jurisdiction over the Catholic Church. This he denies.
On the contrary I here engage my self not only to prove he had it, but
moreover, that not the least degree or Iota of Jurisdiction will be imposed on
them to acknowledge, for enjoying the Communion of the Catholic Church more
than the very same that Pope Boniface 's Predecessors within the times of the
four first General Councils confessedly exercised. I may add, that the new
usurped Title, (as he says) sold to him by Phocas, did not give him, neither
did he pretend to by it, any more authority than himself and his Predecessors
formerly enjoyed. And this is I be able to make good, then not all the water in
the Sea will be able to wash off his Churches Schism by his own confession.

3. Before I show what Supremacy the Predecessor's of Boniface the Third
exercised in the Church, it will be convenient to enquire into the Bargain
that, He says, Boniface made with Phoca^; what he gained by it; and why his
Predecessors St. Gregory the Great, and P^lagius refused it.

The Patriark of Constantinople, John, out of an humor of lightness and vanity,
proper to the Grecians, assumed the Title of [ Episcopus universalis, or
O^cumenicus] Universal Bishop, or Bishop of the whole World: A Title that the
Council of Chalcedon had in an Epistle given to Pope Leo, but which his
Successors like't not. Certain it is that John intended little more by it, but
to be a distinction of honor and preference above the other Eastern Patriarks:
For whilst he took that title, he still acknowledged the Pope's Superiority,
not only of place, but authority over him. But being Bishop in a City, wherein
the Emperor of the world resided, he thought it not unbecomming him to be
called the Bishop of the world, as the Emperor was the Governor. Perhaps indeed
his Successors, (if this ambition had been either approved, or but conn^v'd at
by the West) would have endeavored to make it not a mere empty Title, but
would have invaded an Authority, which the Title might seem to warrant.
Hereupon Pope Pelagius and after him Pope Gregory the Great did vehemently
resist this foolish ambition of John, though the Emperor himself, to gain a
dignity to his own City, favored it in him.

4. Now the Arguments that these two good Popes made use of against him, did
not so much combat John's present intention (though his mere vainglory and
affectation of Novelty deserved to be repressed) as the probable consequences
of such a Title, which might argue, that besides himself there were no Bishops
in the Church: For if he were the Universal Bishop, and the whole world his
Diocese, since by the Canons there can be but one Bishop in a place, it would
follow that all others were only Bishops in name, and by their Character had no
other office but as his Substitutes depending on his will, whereas the Apostles
received their Office and Authority immediately from our Lord himself: And so
their Successors, the Bishops, would never acknowledge a receiving their
Episcopal character and right of Jurisdiction from any but Christ himself. For,
as in other Sacraments, whoever administers Baptism, whether an Apostle or an
Heretic, Baptismus solius Christiest, says Saint Augustine: And again, Peter and
John (says he) prayed that the Holy Ghost might come on those upon whom they
imposed their hands, they did not give the Holy Ghost (Acts 8.) They, as his
Substitutes apply the outward Element, but the inward virtue of the Sacrament
is administered only by our Lord himself. And as a Subject that receives ^n
Office of Jurisdiction from the King, will not esteem he derives that Authority
from the Person, who presents him the Letters patents, or invests him
ceremoniously in the Office, but only the King. So though a particular Bishop
be ordained by a Metropolitan, a Primat, a Patriarc, or by the Pope himself,
and Jurisdiction given him, they indeed are the Ministers of Christ to convey
his Characters and Authority, they assign him the place in which he is to
exercise that Authority, but the inherent Authority it self Christ only gives
him.

5. Upon these grounds Pope Pelagius thus argues. Pelag. 2 Epist.
[ Vniversalitatis quoque nomen, etc.] Do not give heed to the name of
Universality that John of Constantinople has unlawfully usurped, etc. For none
of the Patritriarks did ever make use of so profane a Title: Because if [the
Bishop of Rome] the Supreme Patriark be called an universal Patriark, the Title
would be taken away from the rest. But God forbid this should happen, etc. It
therefore John be permitted to take this Title, the honor of all Patriarks is
denied, and probably he, who is called Vniv^rsal, will perish in his error, and
there will not be found one Bishop in the state of Truth. The very same
arguments he knows St. Gregory makes use of in several Epistles both to the
Emperor, to John himself, and others, which being already produced by him need
not be repeated. Yet for all this neither Pelagius nor St. Gregory,
notwithstanding their detesting this Title, did therefore quit their right to
the Universal Pastorship of the Church, and their Jurisdiction over all both
Bishops and Patriarks too: nay they assert it in these very Epistles, wherein
they are most sharp against that Title, as shall be showed.

6. The reason of this, it is manifest, the Preacher does not understand:
therefore let him not disdain to be informed. The like Order that is observed
in the Church of England, he may conceive, is observed in the Catholic Church:
that is, that the same person may be both a Bishop, an Archbishop, and a
Primat; I will add also the Supreme head of the Church, as the Archbishop of
Canterbury is among Ecc^esiasticks: [For as for his Majestys Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical affairs, it is not in this place to be treated of.] Now my Lord
of Canterbury is just like other Bishops, merely a Bishop in his Diocese of
Canterbury: He is likewise a Metropolitan in his Province to visit all Bishops
in it, but he is not a Bishop in the other Dioceses subject to him; for in them
none have Episcopal right but only the respective Bishops themselves, which are
not removeable by him, unless they incur crimes that by the Canons deserve it.
Lastly, he is a Primat over both Provinces, that is, the whole Nation, yet
without prejudice to the other Metropolitan, in whose office of Visitation and
Ordinations he cannot interpose; though he have a power to summon him to a
National Council, etc. And in this regard he may be styled the Universal Pastor
of England, and, by being so, makes the Church of England to be one National
Church, which otherwise would have two Episcopal heads. Yet if any one should
style* him the Universal Bishop of England, it would not be endured, because he
can exercise Functions properly Episcopal in no other Province or Diocese but
his own. By considering this well, the Doctor may more clearly apprehend how
matters stand in the Catholic Church.

7. For, though this Title of Universal Bishop taken in some sense, might draw
after it such ill consequences, yet being applied to the Supreme Pastor of
God's Church, it might innocently signify no more but such a general
Superintendency, as the Scriptures allow to St. Peter, and the Canons of the
Church also have acknowledged due to his Successors, and with such an innocent
meaning (as this Title was used long before in the 3d. Act of the Council of
Chalcedon, without any contradiction of the same Council to Pope Leo) Boniface
the Third did accept it from Phocas: yet having done so, it seems to me
apparent that he neither exercised nor challenged the least access of
Jurisdiction by it more than himself and his Predecessors had enjoyed. And of
this the Doctor himself shall be Judge. If he can find any proof to the
contrary, let him produce it, and I will immediately recall what I have said.

It Is true, as appears in the History of the Council of Trent, written by the
Illustrious and learned Cardinal Palavicino; Card. Palav. Hist. del. Conc. de
Trento. lib. 19. c. 15, 16, etc. lib. 20. c. 3. 9, etc. lib. 21. c. 4, etc.
that there was in that Council an earnest and constant opposition made by the
French Prelates against naming the Pope, Bishop of the Universal Church, who,
in conclusion, absolutely gained the silencing of that Title: But this happened
not because these denied to the Pope an Universal Superintendency over the
whole Church, or over all Churches taken disjunctively, for this they willingly
acknowledged; but they opposed this Title only as the Universal Church might be
taken in a collective sense, that is to say, as united in a General Council,
whereby a right of Superiority over a General Council may seem to be determined
to the prejudice of the Decisions of the Councils of Constance and Basil, which
in this matter they allowed.

CHAP. IV.
The absolute necessity of a Supreme Pastor in the Church. Supremacy of
Jurisdiction exercised by Pope Boniface the Third his Predecessors, viz. St.
Gregory, P. Pelagius, P. Felix, P. Gelasius, P. Leo. The 28th, Canon of
Chalcedon illegal. Of the 2d. Canon of the first Council of Constantinople.

1. BEing now to demonstrate (more than a Primacy of Order) a primacy of
Jurisdiction in the Predecessors of Boniface the Third, extending it self to
all Christians, all particular Prelates and Churches: yet a Supremacy not
unlimited, (for then General Councils, would be useless) but sufficient to
preserve unity in the Church: I will first, to make it appear reasonable,
declare the ground of the necessity of it, which in brief is, as the Preacher
will find by the succeeding Testimonies of the Fathers; because, since General
Councils (the only absolute Supreme Authority Ecclesiastical) either for want
of agreement among Princes, or by the inconvenience of the long absence of
Prelates, or great expenses, etc. can very seldom be summoned, it would be
impossible, without an Ordinary, constant, standing Supreme Authority in the
Church, to prevent Schisms, that is, it is impossible the Church should subsist.

2. For what effect against Schism can be expected from a mere Primacy of
Order, a (...), a sitting at the upper end of the Table, a privilege to speak
first, or to collect Votes? Therefore for a Protestant to deny a Primacy of
Jurisdiction to be necessary to conserve unity, as in a National Church, so in
the Universal, is to give up his own cause to the Presbyterians. For all the
subtilty of human wit, without such a Concession, can never answer the arguing
thus, Ius Divinum Ministr. Evang. in App^^d. prep. 5.
If ( according to the Doctrine of the Fathers) there be a nec^ssity of setting
up one Bishop ^ver many Fresbyters for preventing Schism: there is (say they)
as great a necessity of setting up one Archbishop ^ver many Bishops, and one
Patriark over many Archbishops, and one Pope over all; unless men will imagine
that there is a danger of Schism only among Presbyters, and not among Bishops,
Archbishops, etc. which is contrary to reason, truth, history, and experience.
But what expedient now, without such a primacy of Jurisdiction, can the
Presbyterians find out against the mischief of Schism? Truly no other, but by
rejecting that Article of the Creed in which we profess the (certainly
visible) unity of the Catholic Church, that is, by believing that Schism i^ no
such ill thing, as that much care needs be used to prevent it. But surely
English Protestants, not having blotted out of their Creed that Article, since
they acknowledge the constituting one Bishop necessary to the unity of a
Diocese etc. will find great difficulty to show a reason why one Governor is
not as necessary to the ^nity of the whole Church, to which only both unity and
Indefectibility is promised, and without which, the unity of Provinces or
Dioceses are but factions.

3. Certain it is, that the ancient Fathers thought so, as shall be showed. And
because new opinions arising do naturally cause debates and contentions, from
what causes soever they flow, and contentions are apt to generate Schisms,
since likewise Ecclesiastical Laws are made to be observed every where, if any
particular Church were Independent of the whole, there could be no remedy
against Divisions; hence it is, that the Holy Fathers do assert the necessity
of a Supreme Authority, and assign thereto these Acts. 1. Either to determine,
or at least silence Disputes about opinions. 2. In those which are called
majores causae, (as wrongful Depositions of Bishops, etc.) either by appeals or
consultations to restore the Persons wronged, and punish the wrong-doers. 3. To
take care that Discipline, established by received canons, be every where
observed. 4. To judge when there is a necessity of convening in General
Councils, and thereupon to summon all Bishops, and, as far as the Authority of
a common Spiritual Father may extend, to oblige Princes to permit their
respective Bishops to meet.

4. These things thus premised, now follow the Proofs demonstrating, that,
before Boniface the thirds time, suck like Acts of a Supreme Authority were
practiced by his Predecessors, and submitted to generally in the Church. I must
not write a Volume, therefore I will select a few examples in all Ages, which
will at least recompense the Doctors Anti-quotations, and when he shall require
it, many, many more shall be added.

5. To proceed therefore ascendendo; A. D. 590.
St. Gregory the Great, Predecessor of Boniface the third, though he would not
admit an Universal Episcopacy, yet at the same time he challenged and exercised
an Universal Superintendency: Hence, Greg. M. lib. 2. all Indict. 11. Ep. 3.
says he, it is notorious that the Sea Apostolic by Divine institution is
preferred before all Churches. And again more fully; The care Idem. lib. 7.
jud. 2. Epist. 64.
of the Church was committed to the holy Apostle, and Prince of the Apostles,
St. Peter: The care and principality of the Universal Church was committed to
him, and yet he is not called the Universal Apostle. Again, writing to the
Bishop of Syracusa, If any fault be found in any Bishops, Id. lib. 7. jud. 2:
Epist. 64.
I know no Bishop that is not subject to the Sea Apostolic: But when no fault
exacts it, we are all, in regard of humility, equal. And this subjection, says
he elsewhere, Id. l. 2. Indict. 2. Ep. 63.
both our most Religious Lord the Emperor, and our Brother (John) Bishop of the
same City do frequently protest. And in an Epistle to Natalis, Id. l. 2. Ind.
10. Ep. 37.
Bishop of Salona, If, says he, any of the four Patriarks had committed such
an act, so great a disobedience would not have passed without great scandal.
Moreover in another Epistle he declares how he had reversed the judgment of the
Church of Constaninople against a Priest of Chalcedon, where he says, Id. l.
5. Indict. 14. Ep. 24.
Do not thou know that in the cause of John the Priest against our Brother
and Colleague, John of Constantinople, he, according to the Canons, had recourse
to the Sea Apostolic, and that the cause was determined by our Sentence? A
world of like examples more may be added: And in these a primacy of
Jurisdiction is manifest, which therefore by his own confession is no
Usurpation.

6. In the next place the immediate Predecessor of St. Gregory, A. D. 577.
Pope Pelagius the Second, in the very same Epistle, in which he condemns the
presumptuous Title of Universal Bishop, assumed by John of Constantinople, has
this passage, writing to the Eastern Bishops, Pelag. 2. Ep. ^.
The Apostolic See is informed that John Bishop of Constantinople out of this
his presumption has convoked you to a Synod, whereas the authority of
assembling general Synods is by a special privilege delivered to the Apostolic
See of St. Peter; neither can we read of any Synod esteemed to be ratified,
which was not established on the Apostolic Authority. Therefore whatever you
have decreed in your foresaid Conventicle, by the Authority of St. Peter,
Prince of the Apostles, and the Speech of our Savior, who gave to Blessed
Peter the power of binding and loosing, I do command all things determined by
you to be void and repealed, etc.

Again his, A. D. 494.
not immediate, Predecessor, Pope Gelasius is a yet more full and convincing
witness to the Popes Universal Jurisdiction, upon this occasion. Pope Felix
the second, A. D. 484.
who possessed St. Peter's Chair next before him, had been appealed and
complained to by John Patriark of Alexandria, unjustly dispossessed by Peter an
Eutichian, whom the Pope in a Synod of 42. Bishops excommunicated. Moreover,
upon the complaints of the same John, he cited Acacius Bishop of Constantinople
to appear: And upon his contumacy excommunicated him likewise in this Form:
Take notice, says he, that thou art deprived of Sacerdotal honor, and Catholic
Communion, and moreover, that thou art segregated from the number of the
Faithful, having lost both the Name and Office of Priestly Ministry, being
condemned by us by the judgment of the Holy Ghost and Apostolic Authori^y. Yet
this Sentence, not having been, as the former was, denounced in a Synod, some
Eastern Bishops found fault with it. Whereupon his next Successor Pope Gelasius
justifies his proceedings in an Epistle to the Bishop of Dardania, Felix 2. in
Ep. ad Episc. Dard.
he shows that when any Heretic has bin once condemned by a Synod, (as
Sabellius, etc.) there was need of convoking new Synods for the condemning his
Followers: And that this was the case of Acacius, who communicated with Peter
and Timotheus, Bishops of Alexandria, Eutychians, which Heresy had been
condemned in the Council of Chalcedon. In consequence whereto he adds these
Words: Neither do we omit to signify, which the whole Church all the world
over knows very well, that the Sea of the blessed Apostle St. Peter, has a
power to loose whatsoever things shall be bound by the Sentences of any Bishops
whatsoever, as being the Church which has a right to judge every other Church,
neither is it permitted to any one to censure its judgment: Seeing the Canons
have ordained that appeals should be made to it from every part of the World.
Are these now marks only of a Primacy of Order, and not Supremacy of
Jurisdiction?

7. We will next enlarge a step to Pope Leo the Great, A. D. 440.
who began his Seat in the year 440. A. D. 451.
and in whose time the General Council of Chalcedon was assembled. How
courageous and constant an Assertor he was of his Supreme Jurisdiction, most of
his Epistles witness, and almost all Protestant Controver^ists complain. He in
his 53d. Leo M. in Ep. 53.
Epistle to Anatolius, Bishop of Constantinople; in the 54th. to the Emperor
Marcianus; Idem. Ep. 54.
and the 55th. to the Empress Pulcheria, Idem Ep. 55.
vindicates the Derivation of his Authority, not from the Imperial City, but
St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles.

8. Therefore, whereas the Preacher calls to witness the famous Canon of
Chalcedon, Sermon. page 19.
decreeing to the Bishop of Constantinople an equality of privileges with the
Bishop of Rome; not for any other reason then its having the good hap to be one
of the two Imperial Cities. If he had had a mind to dealingenuously, he would
have called it an infamous Canon surreptitiously made, says Liberatus, after
the departure of the Judges, Liberat in Brev. cap. 13.
the Senate, and of the Legates of the Sea Apostolic; and entirely nullyfied by
the protestation of the said Legates, Socrat. Hist. l. 2. c. 5.
and the Sentence of Pope Leo, without whose consent, according to the ancient
traditionary Law, nothing made in any Council could oblige the Church. A Canon
this was, so despised during that whole Age and more, that the memory of it
only remained in the Acts of that Council, but it was not inserted among the
other Canons, for as it appears by the most ancient Greek and Latin Copies of
that Council, by the collection of Dionisius Exiguus, Theodor. Anag. in Sing.
Can.
and by the Testimony of Theodoret Anagnostes a Grecian, the Council of
Chalcedo^ published only twenty seven Canons, whereas now this is reckoned the
28th.

Lastly, A Canon this was, that Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople (by whose
brig^ing with some Bishops, and violence to others it was compiled) was himself
both ashamed and sorrow for it, Leo. Ep. 55. ad Anat.
as appears by St. Leo's answer to him: And of which Pope Gelasius forty years
after affirms, Gelas P. Tom. de Anathem. Vinc.
That the Sea Apostolic never consented to it, the Emperor never imposed it;
Anatolius never made use of it, and the whole matter was put in the power of
the Sea Apostolic: And therefore what the same See confirmed, remained in
force, and that which it received not, could not have any firmness.

9. Now because this enormous Canon was pretended to be only a renewing of a
former Canon made in the second General Council of Constantinople, A. D. 381.
observe the false dealing of that Bishop and his Clergy, in citing that Canon.
For whereas it was thus conceived, Let the Bishop of Constantinople enjoy
((...)) prerogatives of honor after the Bishop of Rome: Conc. Constantinop. 1.
Can. 3.
These renewers of this Canon at Chalcedon, fraudulently thrust in the words
[(...)] equal privileges: As if, excepting only the sitting in the second
Chair, he was to enjoy in the Church all the prerogatives of the Sea
Apostolic: A fancy which never entered into the minds of those former Bishops.
And indeed de facto after the fourth Council of Chalcedon, the new Patriark, by
virtue of the exotic power given him, presumed to summon all the other
Patriarks and Bishops in the East to a Council; An attempt repressed by Pope
Leo.

And no doubt when afterward the usurped the Title of Ecumenical Bishop, they
would not fear to give the same Title of Ecumenical to their Councils too.

10. And as for the second Canon of that Council of Constantinople quoted in
the Margin of the Sermon, Sermon. page 18* Council. Constable. 1. Can. 2.
whereby the Eastern Patriarks are forbidden to meddle in Ecclesiastical
affairs beyond the limits of their Provinces, what is this to the Bishop of
Rome? He is not so much as named nor thought of in that Canon: Neither was
there ever any received Council in Gods Church that excluded him from an
universal Jurisdiction which the Doctor sees was ^rcised by so many Popes at
and after the Council of Chalcedon, and he will see more before it.

CHAP. VII.
The Pope's Supremacy confirmed by a Law of the Emperor Valentinian. Decrees of
Pope's had anciently the force of Laws: Yet with restriction. The Pope's
Supreme Jurisdiction confirmd by Examples in the Eastern Church. Appeals to the Sea Apostolic decreed at Sardica, where were present British Bishops. Of the
first Council at Arles, where British Bishops likewise were present. The sixth
Canon of the Council of Nice explained.

1. THere was an Imperial Law made by Valentinian the third, Novel. Theodos.
Tit. 24.
(who began his Reign A. D. 424. A. D. 424.
) directed to the Bishops of France, importing that Whatever had been, and
should be established by the Sea Apostolic, should have the force of a Law to
them and all others. And this the Emperor says is Secundum veterem
consuetudinem. Ibid.
Moreover to show the grounds of that Law, Ibid.
he further saie^, That the Supremacy of the Sea Apostolic has been established
both by the merit of St. Peter, who is the Prince of Episcopal Society, and by
the dignity of the City, and by the sacred Authority of a Synod.

2. Now if we shall consider the weight of such a public Testimony, and how
Christian Catholic Emperors never made Laws touching Ecclesiastical matters,
but by the advice of Bishops, and for the corroborating of former Church Canons
both touching Faith and Discipline, and by no means for introducing of new
ones, we shall find a greater proof can scarce be produced against the
Preachers pretention, That between the times of the four first General Councils
the Popes enjoyed only a primacy of Order, and not Jurisdiction.

3. Though this Law seems too excessively large, commanding That whatever had
been or should be, etc. Pope Leo, who lived in the same Age, limits the true
sense of it, when he commands That all the Decretals and Constitutions both of
Pope Innocent, Leo in Decret. T. 5.
and all other his Predecessors, should be observed; namely, such as are
published touching Ecclesiastical Orders and Canons: Or, Hilar. P. in Ep. ^d
Ep. Provinc. Vien.
as Pope Hilarious expresses it, What ever Constitutions have been made by Popes
for the quiet of all Gods Priests, the observance of Discipline and taking away
confusions.

4. Examples of such public Decrees of unquestioned Authority, even in the
judgment of the most learned Protestants, A. D. 385. to 418.
we find made by Pope Zosimus, Zosim in Decret. c. 1. 2 Innocent. in Decret.
c. 21. and tit. 45, 46, 47.
Pope Innocent the First, and Pope Siricius, who governed the Church between
the years 385. and 418. For as for the Decretals pretended to be made by
antecedent Popes, they do except against them, and perhaps not without ground,
He will not expect I should transcribe those authentic Decrees to weary both
him and my self unnecessarily. He knows very well where to find them. I will
only add, that such Decrees were actually received as Laws by the Churches of
Spain, France, etc. Hence it is, Conc. Tolet. 4.
that in the fourth Council of Toledo, the Bishops say, For what is to be
observed by us in such Cases, Let us be informed by the Precepts of the
Apostolic See, and not follow our own, but our common Fathers Instruction. And
the Council of Tours says, Conc. Turon. 11. Can. 20.
What Bishop shall presume to act contrary to such Decrees as have proceeded
from the Sea Apostolic? Notwithstanding, it was not forbidden to Bishops to
consider and examine such Decrees; for if they were made upon misinformation,
even Popes themselves have declared that the force of them should be suspended.
And much more, if against the ancient Canons; for says Pope Zosimus ( ap.
Gratian. 25. q. 1.) Even this Seat has not Authority to constitute or change
any thing contrary to the Statute of the Fathers.

5. As for the more Primitive times preceding these, I will content my self
with a few examples, but such, and of so great weight, that if the Preacher
will be ingenuous, they will even content him. In the recounting of them it
will not be necessary, I should observe exactly the Order of times in each of
them. And the first shall be a passage of the great Saint Basil, who writing to
St. Athanasius about suppressing Arianism in the East, has these words, It
seems convenient to us to write to the Bishop of Rome, Basil. Ep. 52.
to desire him that he would have regard to our affairs, and interpose the
judgment of his Decree, etc. Moreover, that he would give Authority to s^m
choice persons, who may bring the Acts of the Council of Ariminum for the
annulling of those things that were violently done there, etc.

6. Again, A. D. 343.
when the Synod of Antioch about the year 343. assembled by Arians to the
prejudice of the Council of Nice, had framed a new confession of Faith, it was
argued of nullity, says S^crates, Socrat. Hist. Eccles. lib. ^. cap. 5.
especially because Julius Bishop of Rome was neither himself present, nor sent
any to supply his place: Whereas (says he) the Ecclesiastical Canon commands
that no Decrees be established in the Church without the assent of the Bishop
of Rome* And this authority the same Pope Julius asserts; For writing to the
Eastern Bishops, who had condemned St. Athanasius, Apud Athanas. Apol. 2.
he says thus, [(...)] Are you ignorant, this is the custom that you should
first write to us, and after that determine just matters there? Therefore if
there were any ill suspicion against that Bishop [of Alexandria] you ought to
have signified it in the first place to the Church here.

7. Consonantly hereto Sozomen, Sozom. Hist. Eccl. lib. 3. c 9.
another Greek Historian says expressly, That there was received in the Church
a Sacerdotal law, declaring all things to be void that are done without the
sentence of the Bishop of Rome. Nay, which is yet more, this (which for ought
appears was only an unwritten Canon or Custom, for no Council mentions it, but
delivered by Tradition even in the Eastern Churches) was of such authority,
Novel. Theod. tit. 24.
that the foresaid Emperor Valentinian makes it a Law-Imperial: We decree, says
he, that according to the ancient custom nothing be innovated in the Church
without the sentence of the Bishop of Rome. Surely Dr. Pierce will acknowledge
these Testimonies argue more than a Primacy of Order; here is a Jurisdiction,
asserted, extending it self beyond the Dioces^n, Metropolitan or Patriarcal
limits of Rome.

8. I will add a few examples more: when some Eastern Councils had deposed
Athanasius, Patriark of Alexandria, Paul Bishop of Constantinople, Marcellus
Pri^at of Ancy^a, and Asclepas, Bishop of Gaza, The Bishop of Rome, Sozom.
Hist. Eccl. (...). 3. c. 2.
says Sozomen, (to whom for the dignity of his Throne the care of all things
does pertain) restored to every one of them their own Church. And he adds
further, That he commanded those who had deposed them to appear on a day
appointed at Rome, to give account of their judgment: threatening that he would
not leave them unpunished, if they did not cease from innovating. All this he
did, says Theodoret, Theod. Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 4.
[not by usurpation, but [(...)] following the Churches law.

9. Again, when the General council of Ephesus Cor^. Ephesians. p. 2. (...). 5 in
relat^d Calest.
was entering into debate about the cause of John Patriark of Antioch, the Bp.
of Jerusalem interposed, affirming, that according to the ancient custom, the
Church of Antioch^ as always governed by the Roman; Whereupon the whole
Council remitted the judgment of that Cause to the Pope.

10. Moreover, when Dioscorus, Patriark of Alexandria, in the Scismatical
Council of Ephesus had deposed Flavian Bishop of Constantinople, Flavian
appealed to the Pope. And this he did [(...)] according to the custom of
Synods, Epist. ad Theodos. in p^eamb. Conc. Chalced.
says the Emperor Valentinian.

11. Two examples more I will the rather add, because we of this Nation are
particularly concerned in them. The first is taken out of the famous Council of
Sardica assembled about twenty years after that of Nice. A. D. 345.
This Council was by Justinian called Ecumenical, because, though the Eastern
Bishops departed before the conclusion; yet the Canons of it were never
rejected by them. Council. Sardic. can. 3, 4.
In the third and fourth Canons of this Council it was ordained, upon a
proposal made by the famous Osius of Corduba, to this effect, That in any
Controversies between Bishops which could not be determined in their own
respective Provinces, the person aggrieved might appeal to the Bishop of Rome,
who might renew the Process and appoint Judges: And (by a second proposal of
Gaudentius a Bishop) in case any Bishop deposed should make such an appeal,
till the Pope had determined the cause, it was not permitted that another
Bishop should be ordained in his place. These Decrees the Council made to honor
the memory of St. Peter the Apostle.

12. Now at this Con^cil among other Bishops from all the Western Countries,
some came out of our Britany, as St. Athanasius an eyewitness assured us.
Athan. Apol. ^.
And therefore the General Superintendency of the Pope over all churches could
not have been unknown in this Nation long before St. Augustine the Monk, or the
Saxons had possession here. By which may appear the slightness of the late
found Welsh paper, though much bragged of, in which the Abbot of Bangor is said
to have refused the subjection to the Pope, which St. Augustine required of the
British Bishops. For what gross ignorance was it in this Abbot (if the Paper
relate truth of him) That after all that power exercised by that man called the
Pope over the whole Church of God, especially over the Western Provinces, and
so much respect returned him from them after the presence of the British
Bishops at so many famous Councils, and after so many holy Bishops sent for the
conversion of these Islands by the Bishops of Romes delegation, he should be
such a stranger to his person, or authority, or his titles, after the year of
our Lord 600? At which time also the Irish Bishops are found to have yielded
all obedience to this Roman Bishop, when the Britains thus denied it, as
appears Both in that they are said by venerable Beda (the South-Irish at least)
to have returned very early to a right observation of Easter Ad admonitionem
Apostolicae sedis Antistitis, Hist. l. 3. ^. 3.
and also in that about this time they sent Letters to St. Gregory then Pope,
to know after what manner they ought to receive into the Church such as were
converted from Nestorianism, to whom he sends his Orders concerning it directed
Quirino Episcopo and ceteris Episcopis in Hybernia Catholicis, Greg. 9 ep. 61.
as may be found in the Register of his Epistles.

13. A second Monument wherein we Britains have a peculiar interest, is that
most ancient first Council of Arles, celebrated according to Baronius and
Sirmondus (assented to by Sir Henry Spelman) in the year 314. about eleven
years before the first Council of Nice. A. D. 314.
The Canons of this Council are directed to the Bishop of Rome, as appears by
the first Canon in these words, First concerning the Paschal observation of our
Lord, Conc. Arlat. can. 1.
that it be observed by us upon one day and at one time through the whole
world; and that according to custom thou would direct Letters to all. And
moreover in the head of the Canons is inserted this Breviary of their Epistle,
To our most holy Lord and Brother Silvester, Marinus and the Synod of Bishops
assembled together in the Town of Arles: We have signified to your charity the
things decreed by common Council, to the end that all may know what they ought
for the future to observe. Here may be seen a Patriarchical council sending
their Decrees to the Bishop of Rome, as being the chief person from whom all
Christians are to receive information of what they ought to believe and
practice, and by whom no doubt they were to be obliged thereto. In which regard
St. Martin, Pope and Martyr, makes this the Popes most proper Title, that he is
Custos Canonum Divinorum.

14. At this Council were present three Bishops Representatives of the British
Clergy, Eborius Bishop of York, Restitutus Bishop of Lonidon, Adelphius Bishop
of ( Maldon, called then) Colonia Londinensium, with Sacerdos, a Priest, and
Arminius, a Deacon. And the Canons of this Council, were by Restitutus brought
into Britany, says Bishop Godwin out of Bale. By which also it appears that
neither the Pope himself, nor his place and authority in the Church were
unknown, nor un-acknowledged by the Britains long before St. Augustines days.

15. And now it will be seasonable to answer the Doctors great Objection
grounded on that famous 6 th. Canon of the first Nicene Council, by which he
says, Every Patriarch and Bishop is appointed to be chief in his proper
Diocese, Sermon. page 18.
as the Bishop of Rome is chief in his. This is now to be examined. The words
of the Canon are, [(...), etc.] Let the ancient Customs be still in force in
Egypt, Conc. Nicen. 1. can. 6.
Lybia, and Pentapolis, that the Bishop of Alexandria enjoy a Jurisdiction over
them all: In as much as such likewise is the custom of the Bishop of Rome. In
like manner both in Antioch and other Provinces, let the [(...)] privileges be
preserved entire to every Church.

16. The true sense of this Canon will best appear from the end for which it
was enacted, and that apparently was for the regulating and composing disorders
begun in Egypt by Meletius Bishop of Lycopolis, who rebelliously refused
obedience to the Patriark of Alexandria, presuming to ordain Bishops
independently on him. This Scismatical attempt the Council here represses,
commanding that according to the ancient custom the Bishop of Alexandria should
have entire Jurisdiction through all Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis; And the
Roman Bishop in his Patriarchat, and may say in his Metropolitanship too is
made the Pattern according to which this Regulation is framed not in regard of
his plenary right, and universal Jurisdiction in the Church of God, which (I
have showed already, and shall demonstrate the same yet further, even in the
times preceding this Council) is extended to the whole world, and was exercised
over the* Patriarcs themselves, But only of the custom and practice of his
calling Synods, correcting manners, and making ordinations according to his
Patriarkal and Metropolitical Jurisdiction: for those words in the sixth Nicene
Canon, Similiter autem and apud caete^as provincias, In like manner in the rest
of the Provinces, that is, those Provinces also that were not such where a
Patriarc resided, Honor suus unicuique servetur, Let every one's Honor be
preserved to him, compared with the second Canon of the first Council of
Constantinople, and the eighth canon of the Ephesian Council, show clearly
enough, that not only Patriarkical authority, but Metropolitical also is spoken
of in this canon, and the Roman Bishops authority also herein made a Pattern.
And upon this ground that the Canon intends not to equalize the Bishop of
Alexandria with the Bishop of Rome in his full Jurisdiction, De concord.
Sacerd. and Imperii, ^. 7. n. 6.
the most learned Marca late Archbishop of Toulouse observes, that those who
object it against the Popes Primacy, though they fortify themselves even with
Ru^^inus his interposition of suburbicarian Churches will gain but little by
it, for it signisignifies no more but that the Bishop of Rome did ordain either
immediately or by Commission all the Bishops in the Suburbicarian Churches, so
ought the Bishop of Alexandria to do in Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis.

17. But, though I mention this Version of Ruffinus, because it is much
applauded by our primitive Reformers, and I expect Doctor Pier^e, in his Reply,
will have recourse to it, yet it is a most groundless and senseless
Translation, or rather corruption of the Canon; His words are, Vt apud
Alexandriam, and in urbe Roma vetusta consuetudo servetur, ut ille Egypti, vel
hic Suburbicariarum Ecclesiarum sollicitudi^em gerat. Against which so much
has been written that it would be to lose time to repeat it, especially to the
Doctor, who cannot be unacquainted with what Erasm Pr^^f. in Hilar.
Erasmus and Scal^g. in Chron. Eusebius. Baron Spond. Annal. 325. Peron. rep. to
K. Iam. c. 33.
Scalager have observed of the Interpreter, that it is his custom to omit,
pervert and change the Text as he pleases; and what Others with much Learning
and Judgment have said to this interpretation. Not to speak of the Bishop of
Rome's jurisdiction as first Patriarc, whereby the other Patriarcs were
subordinate to him, being obliged even in this matter of their own Ordinations
to give him notice, sending withal a Confession of their Faith, upon the
approbation whereof, and of the legality of their Election and Ordination, He
confirmed them or otherwise deposed them, of which many examples may be
produced: Whosoever has but looked into Ecclesiastical History must confess
that His particular Patriarchat was far from being confined to the ten
Suburbicarian Provinces subject to the Vicariat of Rome: Nay, it is manifest
that it extended to the whole Western Empire, which, besides Italy, France,
Spain, Germany, Britany, the six Maritime Provinces of Africa, etc. contained
Illyricum, Macedon, Epyrus, Greece, and the Islands near it; And all this by
the confessions of Adversaries, Zonaras, Balsamon, Basil. Epist. 10.
etc. writing on this very Canon. Hence St. Basil calls the Bishop of Rome
[(...)] the head or chief of the Western Regious. August. l. 1. cont. Julian.
c. 2.
And St. Augustine says, that Pope Innocent did preside over the VVestern
Church. And St. Hierom, Hieron. Epist. 77.
Let them (says he) condemn me as an Heretic with the West, as an Heretic with
Egypt, Justin. Novel. 123.
that is with Damasus and Peter. And Justinian the Emperor affirms, that all
the Regions of the World are subject to the five Patriarcs, that is [(...)] to
VVestern Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Thepolis (or Antioch) and Jerusalem.
Now unless Hesperia signifies the whole West, to what Patriarc was France,
Spain, Africa, etc subject. Theod. l. 5. c. 23.
If not to Rome, how can all Bishops be said to be subject to five Patriarcs?
Hence the VVestern Bishops are by Theodores called (...); and by Sacrates
(...). Socrat. l. 2. c. 29.


CHAP. VIII.
Proofs of the Popes Supreme Jurisdiction before the first Council of Nice. How
all Apostles and all Bishops equal: and how Subordinate. St. Peter had more
than a Primacy of Order. Of St. Paul's resisting St. Peter. The Popes Supremacy
not dangerous to States. On the contrary, etc. Protestants writing in favor of
it.

1. BUt as yet our Proofs of Primacy of Jurisdiction in the Successor of St.
Peter, though they reach to the Beginning in the latitude fixed by the Doctor,
and truly I am persuaded to an indifferent Reader will appear more credible
than any his Margins furnish to the contrary: Yet they may be continued, till
we come even to the Presbyterians, Independants and Quakers Beginning too, that
is, the Gospels themselves. To demonstrate this, we will make a short enquiry
into the times of the Church before Constantin, whilst it was a mere suffering
Church, incapable of conspiring either in or out of General Councils: But
withal a Church less dispersed and torn by Heresies or contentions among
Bishops, and therefore less needing this Preservative against Schisms, Supreme
Authority.

2. In these holy peaceable times ther^ore before Silvester, I will content my
self with two or three examples to prove the acknowledgement of such a Primacy.
And the first shall be of St. Melchiades the immediate Predecessor of Pope
Silvester: A. D. 311.
St. Augustine will afford us a Testimony of his care and authority extended
into Africa, Aug Epist. 162.
whose words are, [ Qualis ipsius Melchiadis ultima est prolata Sententia,
etc.] Such an one was the last sentence Melchiades himself pronounced (in
judgeing the cause of Donatus:) by which he would not have the boldness to
remove from his Communion his Colleagues, (the Catholic Bishops in Africa) in
whom no crime could be proved: And having censured most deeply Donatus alone,
whom he found to have been the Original of all the mischief, he gave a free
choice of healing the breaches of Scism to all the rest of his Followers: being
also in a readiness to send communicatory Letters to those (subdivided
Scismatics) that were ordained by Majorinus (a Donatist Bishop:) in so much as
his Sentence was, that in whatsoever Cities of Africa there were two Bishops
dissenters (a Catholic and a Donatist* he should be confirmed in the
Bishopric, who was first ordained, etc. and that another Diocese should be
provided which the other should govern. O Son of Christian peace! and truly
Father of the Christian flock, says St. Augustine.

3. I will add to this three other examples, in which, though as to the use and
administration of the Superintendency some Objections have been made, yet they
suffice to confirm the acknowledgement of such a Superintendency in the Pope*
as the Preacher denies. The first is of Pope Stephanus contemporary with St.
Cyprian and his fellow in Martyrdom, A. D. 258.
concerning whom we read in Eusebius, Eusebius. Hist.
that he either inflicted, Eccles. lib. 7. c. 4. 6.
or at least threatened excommunication to some of the Churches of Asia that held
a necessity of Rebaptization after Baptism received by Heretics. And in the
same quarrel, between the same Pope Stepha^^s and St. Cyprian himself, Cypr.
Epist. 75
matters were almost brought to the like extremity: yet neither did St.
Cyprian, though wonderfully sharp, nor even that violent Cappadocian Bishop,
Firmilianus ever question the Popes Authority, though, as they thought,
unjustly employed*

4. The other is extant in the same St. Cyprian, who endeavored to peswade the
Pope to depose Marcianus a Metropolitan Bishop of Arles, siding with Novatian;
His words to Pope Stephanus about it are these, Id. Epist. 67.
Let Letters be directed from thee into the Province, and to the people of
Arl^s, commanding that Marcianus be excommunicated, and another put in his
place. And to the like purpose is another Epistle of his in a cause touching
two Spanish Bishops, Id. Epist. 68.
upon misinformation restored by the Pope.

5. The third is that so well known example of Pope Victor, A. D. 19^.
concerning whom Eusebius thus writes, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl.
Victor endeavors to cut off from the fellowship of Communion the Churches of
Asia, as declining into Heresy, and sends Letters by which he would divide
them all indifferently from the Ecclesiastical Society, etc. But there are
extant Letters of Bishops by whom Victor is sharply reproved, as one that was
careless of the commodity of the whole Church. Particularly Ireneus reprehends
him, telling him, that he did very ill to divide from the unity of the whole
Body so many and so great Churches. Now in such reproofs from Ireneus, and even
Polycrates an Asian Bishop, himself the ringleader of the party of the Quart^
decimani against St. Victor, it was not impu^ed to Victor that he exercised an
usurped Authority over Bishops not subject to him, but that the cause of
exercising his just Authority was ^ot sufficiently weighty.

6. Having proceeded thus far, our last step shall be to the utmost degree, the
very beginning it self, our Lord and St. Peter in the Gospels. And here we will
acknowledge what the D^ctor says, that all the Twelve Apostles were equally
foundations of the Churches building: Sermon. page. 18.
That the same Authority which was first given to St. Peter alone, sustaining
the person of the whole Church, was afterward given to the rest of the
Apostles; that as St. Cyprian says, the same that St. Peter was, the rest of
the Apostles likewise were [pari consortio praediti, etc.] endowed with an
equal participation of honor and power. And as St. Hierom affirms, that all
Bishops in all places whether at Rome or Eugubium, [Canterbury or Rochester]
are of the very same merit, etc. But he will give leave to the Scripture to
interpret it self, and to the Fathers to interpret both it and themselves. We
grant therefore that all the Apostles, and all Bishops their Successors, enjoy
the whole latitude of Apostolic and Episcopal Jurisdiction, for as much as
concerns the internal, essential qualifications of either: But for the external
administration there may be, and always was acknowledged, a subordination and
different latitude in the exercise of the same authority both among the
Apostles and Bishops. Let him not find fault with this distinction; for they
themselves have occasion sometimes to make use of it to the like purpose.
Archbishop Whitgift, in his Defense of the Answer to the Admonition, affirms,
that Archbishops, quoad Ministerium, do not differ from other Pastors, but
touching Government, page 303. And afterward page 386. Answering the same
Argument out of St. Hierom, who equals the meanest Bishop with the Pope, he
says, that they are equal quoad Ministerium, but not quoad polittam.

7. Let him take therefore an example illustrating this at home. What Function,
what Act of Jurisdiction can my Lord of Canterbury exercise (I mean according
to their Tenets) which the meanest of his subordinate Bishops cannot perform?
He can ordain Bishops and Priests; So can they; the former with him, the other
without him. He can visit his Pr^vince; they their Di^cesse. He can give the
Holy Ghost by Confirmation; So can they* He can assemble a Provincial Council;
They a Diocesan. He has a Canonical Authority over Bishops, etc. They over
Priests. He can absolve from Censures inflected by himself; they can do as
much. Yet nothing of all this excludes him from enjoying a special privilege
in the exercise of every one of these Acts and Functions, or exempts them from
Subordination to him as their Superior, yea, Supreme Pastor, Supreme not in
Order only, but Jurisdiction. Certainly the Doctor can easily apply this to St.
Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, or to St. Peter's Successors, and all
other Bishops.

8. Now if the Fathers may be believed, is was a privilege, and a great one,
that St Peter, for the merit of his Confession, had Christ's own Title, as
Christ was Governor of the Church, given him, of being called a Rock. For in
the Syrian language, in which our Lord spoke, the words have no different
termination, as in the Greek or Latin, Petrus, Petra; but the words were, Thou
art Gepha (a Rock) and upon this Gepha (Rock) I will build my Church. It was a
privilege that Peter, neither the eldest, nor first chosen Apostle, is always
in the Gospel first reckoned, and expressly called, (...), the First. It was a
privilege importing a greater latitude of Jurisdiction, when after our Lord's
Resurrection, St. Peter alone had in the midst of the rest a Commission given
him of indefinitly ^eeding Christ's Flock; And after the Descent of the Holy
Ghost, was peculiarly appointed the Apostle of the Circumcision, as St. Paul
was of the Gentiles: Yea that the Dedication of St. Paul's Office was performed
by St. Peter, who by immediate revelation was appointed to gather the first
fruits of the Gentiles, in the conversion of Cornelius, and his household, etc.

9. But, why among such Governors as the Apostles, was any Supereminency of
Jurisdiction given to one man? Certain it is, there never was less necessity
to provide against disobedience and dis-unions, then among the Apostles; every
one of whom was guided by a Divine unerring light, by which they knew all
Truth, and replenished with the Spirit of Charity and Vn^ty, which exempted
them from all ambitious, envious or malicious design^: Yet a Subordination, not
absolutely necessary to them, was established among them, for the succeeding
Churches sake, which without such order would in a very short time become a
mere Babel. Hence St. Hierom says, Hierom. cont. Jovin. lib. 2.
The Church was built upon Peter: though true it is the same thing is done upon
others, and that the strength of the Church equally rests upon all. But among
the twelve one is chosen, that a Head being constituted, the occasion of Schism
may be taken away.

10. To the same purpose St. Cyprian, Cypr. de unit. Ecclesiae.
notwithstanding the Sentence produced by the Preacher out of him, That all the
Apostles were pari consortio praediti honoris and potestatis; Yet in the very
same Book says, Ibid.
[Super unum aedificat Ecclesiam, etc.] Our Lord builds his Church upon one
Person. And, though after his Resurrection, he gave an equal power to all the
Apostles, saying, As my Father sent me, so send I you: Receive the Holy Ghost:
Whose sins you remit, etc. Yet that he might manifest unity, he by his
Authority disposed the Original of the same Unity beginning from one. Ibid.
(And presently after) Whosoever holds not the unity of the Church, does he
believe that he holds the Faith? He that opposes are resists the Church; he
that forsakes the Chair of S. Peter, upon which the Church is founded, does he
trust that he is in the Church? In like manner St. Optatus at Rome, Optat.
cont. Parm. lib. 2.
(says he) a Chair was placed for St. Peter, to the end that unity might be
preserved of all; and for fear the other Apostles should challenge to
themselves each one a particular Chair. So St. Chrysostom, Observe now, how
the same John, Chrysostom. in Act. Ap. cap. 1. hom. 3.
that a little before ambitiously begged a preferment, after yields entirely the
Supremacy to St. Peter. And again, Christ did constitute Peter the Master, Id.
in. cap. 21. Jo^n. hom. 87*
not of that See of Rome alone, but of the whole world.

11. Now, Sermon. page 17.
whereas the Doctor objects that St. Paul's contesting with St. Peter, and
resisting him to his face, argues that he did not acknowledge any Superiority
in him: August. lib. 2. de Bapt. cont. Donat.
Let St. Augustine, from St. Cyprian, resolve us, You see (says he to the
Donatists) what St. Cyprian has said, that the holy Apostle St. Peter, in whom
did shine forth so great a grace of Primacy, being reprehended by St. Paul, did
not answer that the Supremacy belonged to him, and therefore he would not be
reprehended by one that was posterior to him. And he adds, The Apostle St.
Peter has left to posterity a more rare example of humility, Ibid.
by teaching men not to disdain a reproof from inferiors; then St. Paul by
teaching inferiors not to fear, resisting even the highest, yet without
prejudice to Charity, when Truth is to be defended.

12. From all that has been said on this Subject, it will necessarily follow,
that whatever Superiority St. Peter enjoyed, and the Holy Fathers acknowledged,
was the gift of our Savior only, a gift far more beneficial to us then to St.
Peter. He was, as St. Chrysostom says, Master of the World, not because his
Throne was established at Rome, but receiving from our Lord so supereminent an
Authority, he therefore made choice of Rome for his See; because that being the
Imperial City of the World, he might from thence have a more commodious
influence on the whole Church.

13. Upon which grounds, whenever the Fathers make use of the Authority of
his Successors, Bishops of Rome against Heretics or Schismatics, they
consider that authority as a privilege annexed to the Chair of St. Peter, and
only for St. Peter's regard to the Sea of Rome. This is so common in the Fathers
writings, that I will not trouble him with one Quotation. Indeed John of
Constantinople, when he would invade an equality [(...)] in some sort with the
Pope, did wisely to mention only the privilege of the Imperial City, because
he could allege no other pretention for his Plea. But St. Leo, St. Gregory, St.
Gelasius, etc. produce their evidences for their Supremacy from Tues Petrus,
and super hanc Petram, etc. from Pasce oves meas, etc. Nay, St. Augustine and
other Bishops of the Milevitan Council, writing to Pope Innocent to join with
them in condemning the Pelagians, tell him their hope was those Heretics would
more easily be induced to submit to his Authority: Why, because of the splendour
of the Imperial City? No, but because the Popes Authority August. Ep. 92.
was [ de Sanctarum Scripturarum authoritate deprompta] deduced from the
Authority of the Holy Scriptures.

14. I might with reason enough, yet I will not omit to take notice of Doctor
Pierce's trivial reasonings against the Popes, (as he calls it) pretended
Headship; because such being sitted to vulgar capacities, and confidently
pronounced, do more mischief, then those that have more show of profundity and
weight. Thus then he argues: If the Pope be head of the Church, then the Church
must be the Body of the Pope: Sermon. Page 20.
And if so, then when there is no Pope, the Church has no Head: When there are
many Popes, the Church has many Heads: When the Pope is Heritical, the Church
has such a Head as makes her deserve to be behe^ded.

Whatever advantage the Doctor expects from such a Discourse as this, it must
flow from a childish Cavil upon the word Head, and whatever consequences he
here draws from thence against the Pope, may as well be applied to all kind of
Governors, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil: For they are all Heads within their
Precincts: A King is the Head of his Kingdom; and a Bishop of his Diocese.
When we call therefore the Pope, Head of the Church, we mean that among all
Governors thereof, he is the Supreme in the sense before declared: He is a
Head, but not so as Christ is in respect of his Mystical body, who by his
Spirit internally quickens and directs it. The Pope is only an external,
ministerial, visible Head, and, as it were, Root of Unity and Government.

All this, no question, the Doctor knew before to be our meaning: and by
consequence he knew that his inferences from thence were pitifully pedantic,
and insignificant, though many of his Court-hearers and Country-readers perhaps
wonder there can remain a Papist in England unconverted after such a Sermon has
been published.

15. When there is no Pope, says the Preacher, the Church wants a Head. It is
granted: For sure he does not think it is a part of our Faith to believe Popes
are immortal. But yet for all that the Papacy is immortal: The Government is
not dissolved: Succession is not interrupted. It is a Maxim in our Law that
Kings dye not, that is, the Regal Authority lives, though Kings in their
particular persons dye: Nor is there any substantial difference, as to this
point, between hereditary and elective Monarchy* And in this sense we may say,
that Popes die not, nor Bishops: Partly because when a Bishop or the Pope dys,
at least his Jurisdiction remains in the Chapter or Body of Electors. Hence it
is that in St. Cyprian we read Epistles of the Roman Clergy exercising
authority beyond the Diocese of Rom^: But principally because, when an
Ecclesiastical* Superior dies there remains by Christ's Ordination a [ vis
generativa] or virtue in the Church to constitute another in his place, and so
to continue the Government. There has been often times a long vacancy in the
Apostolic See, as well as in Dioceses and Kingdoms. After the death of Pope
Fabian (before there were any Christian Emperors) the Sea was vacant for above
a years space: yet neither did St. Iren^us, Optatus, Epiphanius, or St.
Augustine, when they objected the chain of Succession in St. Peter's Chair,
esteem that thereby the Chain had been broken: neither did any old Heretics
make use of such an argument to invalidate the Popes authority.

16. But what shall we say to the Doctors next inference, in a case of Schism?
when there are many Popes, then* says he, the Church is become a Monster with
many Heads. But he is deceived. As when, after the death of a King, several
pretenders to the Crown appear, there is still by right but one legitimate
Successor: all the rest are Rebels and Tyrants. It is so in the Papacy. Cypr.
Epist. 76.
In that case St. Cyprians Rule holds, If the Church be with Novatian, it was
not with Cornelius, who by a lawful Ordination succeeded Fabian. Novatian
therefore is not in the Church, nor can be esteemed a Bishop (of Rome.) Or if
it be uncertain to which of them the right pertains, so that some Nations
adhere to one Head, others to another: it is a great calamity: but yet the
Church remains, though wounded, yet not wounded to death: A General Council
cures all.

17. If the Pope, (according to Doctor Pierce his supposition) should prove an
Heretic, he infers very improperly, that the Church ha^ such a Head as makes
her deserve to be beheaded: For in that case, the Pope is so far from remaining
a Head, that he is not so much as a Member of the Church, but is deprived not
only of the Administration, but also the Communion of the Church, as other
Heretical Bishops are: So that then there is a pure vacancy. I shall not be so
severe as to take notice of the unhansom (not to say unmannerly) terms the
Doctor uses in expressing the last branch of this Objection.

18. Thus much concerning the Doctors first pretended Novelty of the Roman
Church, the Popes primacy. Now whether my asserting that Primacy or his denying
it to be a Novelty, and whether his proofs or mine are more concluding, I leave
to the Readers consciences. He will excuse my dilating on this Point, because
therein I follow his own example, Epist. Ded.
for he tells his Majesty, He has spoken most at large of the Popes supremacy
and his reasons given for such Largeness shall be mine too, though I believe
we shall have different meanings, yet without equivocation, even when we
deliver our reasons* in the same words. For i. I also acknowledge the Popes
supremacy to be the chief, if not only hinge on which does hang the stress of
(more than Papal) the Ecclesiastical Fabric, as being the Cement of the
Churches unity. Ibid.
2. Because it is a point wherein (say I likewise) the Honor and safety of his
Majesty's Dominions are most concerned. His meaning is, that no danger is to be
apprehended for England, but only from that Point. I am sure, on the contrary,
that whilst such a Primacy purely spiritual was acknowledged in England, the
Church here was never torn in pieces with Schisms, nor poisoned with Heresies:
The Throne was never in the least danger upon that account; never was a Sword
drawn for or against it. Some few little more than Paper-quarrels happened
between the English and Roman Court, about matters, not of Religion, but
outward Interests: in which generally the Pope had the worst at last: But the
Honor and Safety of these Dominions were far from being prejudiced. The Kings
of France always have been, and still continu as jealous and tender of their
temporal Regalities, as ever any Princes were: yet they account it one of the
most sparkling Jewels of their Crown, that they call themselves the eldest [and
most devoted] Sons of the Catholic Church. The acknowledging the Spiritual
Primacy of the chief Pastor they find a greater honor and defense to them than
many Armies would be: because it preserves peace and unity in that Kingdom, not
by the terror of Swords drawn and Muskets charged in their Subjects faces, but
by subduing their minds and captivating their consciences to Faith and
Obedience. And let Doctor Pierce be assured, without a Spiritual Authority,
which may have influence on the hearts of Christian Subjects, all their
preaching, and Laws too will prove but shaking Bulwarks for supporting Monarchy.

19. But we must not yet leave this passage without considering it a little
better. He says, That in the point of the Popes Supremacy of Jurisdiction the
honor and safety of his Majesty's Dominions are most concerned: his meaning is,
that it is both dishonorable and dangerous to his Majesty's Dominions, that any
of His Subjects should be permitted to acknowledge such a Supremacy. I would I
could oblige the Doctor by any exorcisms to discover sincerely the inward
thoughts of his heart upon this Subject. But, having no such power, at so great
a distance, I must be content to argue the Case with him once more, because it
is a passage, that reflects not only upon the honor of Catholic Religion, but
the safety of all Professors of it.

20. He cannot be ignorant, how often and how earnestly Roman Catholics here
have protested their renouncing any acknowledgement of the least degree of
Temporal power or Jurisdiction as of Right to belong to the Pope, over any
Subject of his Majesty's; It is therefore merely a pure Spiritual authority
that they acknowledge in their Supreme Pastor. Is this now dishonorable? Is it
unsafe? To whom? To all Supreme Princes, whether Catholics, or not? For
Catholic Princes, they protest against this Opin^on either of dishonor or
danger; If only then to other Princes or States which are dissenters from, and
enemies to Catholic Religion, then Nero and Diocletian had reason and justice
on their sides, when they persecuted a Religion dishonorable and dangerous to
the Roman Empire: For evidently, neither St. Peter, nor any other Apostle, or
Bishops, but were, as to their Spiritual Authority, independent on the Emperors.

21. Nay more, let the Doctor himself consider, lest He and his, both Brethren
and Fathers, the Bishops, be not more deeply involved in the guilt, for which
he desires the Catholics only should suffer. They themselves acknowledge, in
despite of so many Statutes to the contrary, a pure Spiritual Authority in
their Bishops, not derived from the King, they promise a Canonical obedience to
them* they do not so to the King, therefore they admit a Jurisdiction in
Bishops, of which the King is not the Root. Contrary to the Statute 37 Hen. 8.
c. 17. -- ^, Ed. 6. c. ^. -- and Reform. Leg. Ecclesiast. c. De Offici* and
Jurisdiction, p. 190.
For though for example, a public denunciation of Excommunication in their
Spiritual Courts: or the conferring of Orders, or determining points of Faith,
etc. without the Kings consent may expose them, in case they exercise such
Functions, to some danger from the Law of the Kingdom, yet they will justify
such acts to be in themselves valid, that is, performed with sufficient
authority; See Bishop Andrews Tort. Tort p. 366. -- Bishop Carleton of
Jurisdict. Reg. and Episcop. c. 1. p. 9. -- etc. 4. p. 39, 42. -- Bishop Bramh.
Schism guarded, p, 61, 63, 92. -- Answer to Bishop of Chalced. p. 161. --
Doctor Ferns Discovery of Episcopacy and Presbytery, p. 19. -- Doctor Tailor
Episcopacy asserted, p. 236, 237, 239, 243, -- Mr. Thornd. Right of Chapter c. 4.
p. 234. -- Epilog. l. 1. c. 8. p. 54. -- l. 1. c. 19, and 20. -- l. 3. c. 32.
Which Quotations if any intelligent Reader will take the pains to peruse and
consider, he may clearly see what limitations they make in the sense of that
Oath of Regal Supremacy, which Oath yet they freely take in the full latitude
of its words, though these express not any of the said limitations. Amatter,
which has not passed unobserved by Mr. Thorndyke in his Just Weights, c. 20.
who there conceives great reason why the Kingdom for this should enact a new
Oath.

22. But if I should address my Speech now to Presbyterians and their
Consistories, the Case is far more evident. They are so far from permitting to
the King a Supremacy of Authority in their Ecclesiastical Courts (if such
conspiracies may be called Ecclesiastical) that they will not so much as allow
him any authority at all in such transactions: Nay they will exempt him no more
than his meanest Subject from subjection to them. The like may be said of other
Sects, which though they are not guilty of the Presbyterian tyranny, yet are as
averse from granting his Majesty any Supremacy in matters of Religion, as
either Presbyterians, Protestants, or Roman Catholics. But I am now to deal
with the Preacher and his Protestants: I therefore desire them to compare
themselves and Roman Catholics together as to this point of honor and safety to
his Majesty and his Dominions.

23. Is it dishonorable either to the King or Kingdom, that a purely Spiritual
authority should be acknowledged in him, to whom this whole Kingdom from its
first conversion to Christianity together with the whole Christian world
submitted it self as to their Supreme Pastor? And is it Honorable, that the
same authority should be granted to more than twenty of his Majesty's own
Subjects? Again, is it unsafe that Canonical obedience for Christian Vnity's
sake should be professed to one Venerable Prelat a 1000. miles off, and is
there no danger in making the same Profession to so many at home, who, besides
their spitual authority, have a right to concur in the enacting and executing
Civil laws too; and who, we see, can either exalt or depresse, according to
their Interests, and advantages the Royal Prerogative?

2. To resolve such Questions, as these, but also so to resolve them as becomes
a Preacher of the Gospel of peace and truth would be a subject worthy the
stating in a Court-Sermon. But it must be don without transgressing the precise
limits of the question, that is, by comparing the state of Catholic Religion as
professed and practiced, for example, in France, Venice, Germany, etc. with the
reformed Religion in England; the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy of the former with
that of the latter; and then judging whether of the two bring more security and
honor to their Princes, and are more effectual upon the consciences of Subjects
to breed them up in peace and obedience. For my own part, simply as a Catholic,
my desire and prayers are, that Gods divine truth may prevail in all our
hearts, but so prevail by those ways of Charity, Patience, Justice and Piety
with which it first conquered the World. And as a Subject of the Crown of
England my Prayers are, that we may be all united in the profession of that
only Religion, which more perfect^y and most indispensibly gives to Caesar the
things which are Caesar 's, and to God the things which are God's.

25. I will row for a farewell, to these Testimonies of our Catholic Fathers,
add the Votes of the Fathers also of the Reformation, that he may see how far
more ingenuously they write then himself has done touching the Popes Primacy.
And first I will produce two or three, who, though they oppose it, as he does,
as a Novelty* yet allow a far greater age to it. Fulk against Bristows motives,
p. ^48.
Doctor Fulk (most unchronologically) says, that five or six hundred years
before Pope Leo and Pope Gregory (that is almost an hundred years before Christ
was born) the mystery of Iniquity wrought in the Sea of Rome, and then daily
increased; they were so deceived with long continuance of error, that they
thought the dignity of Peter was much more over the rest of his fellow
Apostles, then the Holy Scriptures do allow. Archbishop Whitgift assures us,
Wh^tg. Defense, cap. 59.
that the Papal Supremacy began with St. Peter, his words are, Among the
Apostles themselves there was one chief, that had chief authority over the
rest, to the end Schisms might be compounded. And this he quotes from Calvin,
who said, Ibid. p. 173.
The twelve Apostles had one among them to govern the rest.

26. I will now produce two, who will give this whole Cause to the Pope. The
first is the so famed Melanctho^, who writes thus: As certain Bishops preside
^ver particular Churches, Centur. E^ist. Th^ol. Epist. 74.
so the Bishop of Rome is President over all Bishops. And this Canonical policy
no wise man, as I think, does or ought to disallow, etc. For the Monarchy of
the Bishop of Rome is in my judgment profitable to this end, that consent of
Doctrine may be retained. Wherefore an agreement may easily be established in
this Article of the Popes Supremacy, if other Articles could be agreed upon.

The other witness is learned Doctor Covel, Covel. Exam. page 106, 107.
the Defender of Mr. Hooker, he having showed the Necessity of setting up one
above the rest in God's Church to suppress the Seeds of Dissension, etc. thus
applies it against the Puritans, If this were the principal means to prevent
Schisms and Dissentions in the P^imitive Church, when the graces of God were
more abundant and eminent then now they are: N^y, if twelve [Apostles] were not
like to agree, except there had been one chief among them: For says Hierom,
Among the twelve one was therefore chosen, that a chief being appointed,
occasion of Schism might be preven^ed; how can they think that equality would
keep all the Pastors in the World in peace and unity? For in all Societies,
Authority, which cannot be where all are equal, must procure unity and
obedience. Ibid.
He adds further: The Church without such an Authority, should be in a far
worse case then the meanest Commonwealth; nay almost then a Den of Theives; if
it were left d^stitute of means, either to convince Heresies, or to suppress
them; yea, though there were neither help nor assistance of the Christian*
Magistrate. Thus Dr. Pierce may see how these, his own Primitive Reformers,
either join with us in this Point of Primacy, or however they oppose him, in
calling it a Novelty begun by Pope Boniface the third.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Churches Infallibility. The necessity thereof, that she may be a
certain Guide to Salvation; And the grounds whereupon She claims it.

1. THe Second pretended Novelty of Catholic Doctrine, is the Infallibility of
the Church, called by the Preacher, Sermon. page 8.
The Pa^^adium of the Conclave, and derived from the Scholars of Marcus in
Irenaeus, or from the Gnostics in Epiphanius. Against which Infallibility his
unanswerable Arguments are, Ib. page 22.
1. Infallibility is one of Gods incommunicable Attributes. 2. The Church not
being omniscient, must therefore be ignorant in part, and consequently may fall
into Error. 3. It is confessed by the great Champions of the Papacy, that the
Heresy of the Novatians was hatched in Rome, and continued there almost two
hundred years. 4. Besides Arianism that overspread the Church, she was
infected with the Heresy of the Chyliasts, being deceived by Papias, which
Heresy found no contradi^^^^ for some Ages. 5. Yea, the whole Church in the
opinion of St. Augustine and Pope Innocent, ( during the space of six hundred
years according to Maldona^) thought the Sacrament of the Eucharist necessary
to Infants: yet the Council of Trent is of a contrary mind.

2. In order to the answering of this Disco^rse, he will sure acknowledge that
all Sect* of Christianity agree in this, that each of them has both a Rule of
their Faith, and a (...) also: But in both these there is difference among
them. To the Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, Socinians, etc.
the only Rule is the Holy Scripture. But both Catholics and English
Protestants, though they acknowledge Divine Revelations to be their only Rule,
yet they admit certain universally received Traditions, besides express
Scripture.

3. But as for the Guide from which we are to learn the true sense of this
Rule, the difference among the said Sects is far greater, and more
irreconcilable. The Socinians will have Scripture interpreted only by private
reason, a Guide evidently fallible, and therefore not to be imposed on others.
The Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, and Presbyterians too, pretend to an
Infallible Guide, Gods Holy Spirit; but with this difference, that the
Independents, Anabaptists, and Quakers, rationally acknowledge that this Guide
is only to direct those that have it, and perceive they have it, but cannot
oblige other men that have it not, nor can be sure they have it. Whereas the
Presbyterians by an unexampled Tyranny (at least in France) do oblige
themselves and their Posterity to a Profession, that by a Divine Illumination
they are taught to distinguish Canonic^l Books of Scripture from Apocriphal,
and by the same Guide to justify all the Doctrines by which they dissent from
all others: And moreover, by a most senseless inhumanity, will impose a
necessity on all others, to belie their own Consciences, and acknowledge the
same Guide; though they have never wrought any Miracles, which certainly are
necessary to oblige others to believe and follow the internal Guidance of that
Spirit to which they pretend.

4. As for Dr. Pierce, and the generality of English Protestants, (I speak of
them now, as hitherto they have bin, for what they must be hereafter, neither
they nor I know a special Guide of theirs, beyond Reason and Spirit, for the
finding out the sense of Scripture, and judging of Traditions received by them,
is the Primitive Church, or four first General Councils: But since those
ancient Fathers are now past speaking, and their Writings are as obnoxious to
disputes as the Scriptures themselves, a speaking Judge of the sense of all
these, I suppose, is their Ecclesiastical Synods, or Bishops, when Synods are
dissolved: but principally those that are to make, and determine the sense of
Acts of Parliament. And upon these grounds they find themselves obliged to
behave themselves differently to several adversaries. For against Sects that
went out from them, they use the help of Catholic weapons, the Authority of
the Church, Councils, etc. But against Catholics, they (renouncing the
Authority of the present Church in her Supremest Councils, of convening which
the times are capable, and (in the interval of Councils) in the major part of
the Governors thereof united with him, whom themselves acknowledge the prime
Patriark) will make use of a kind of private spirit or reason; or the judgment
of a most inconsiderable number of Church-Govern^rs, going against the whole
Body of the Catholic Church, and their chief Pastor, but this, as to assent
only, where it likes them, and so will be their own selves Judges of what is
the sense of Councils, Fathers, Scriptures and all: And great difficulty they
often find how to avoid being accounted Papists, when they speak to Sectaries,
and being even Fanatics when they Dispute with Roman Catholics. And truly the
Doctors whole Sermon, is in effect merely Fanatic: For though he flourish with
Greek and Latin^quotations of Fathers joynd to Scripture, which they do not;
yet since there is no visible Judge talked of in it, but himself, that is able
to speak; What is this but private spirit, having little measure of the gift of
Tongues more than Quakers have? So that let them preach as much as they will,
the result of all Dispute between them and us must come to this, Whether their
last speaking Judge in England, or ours in the whole Catholic Church, deserves
better to be believed and relied on.

5. It cannot be denied but that there is something of Truth in all these Sects.
The Guide which each of them respectively lays claim to, is a justifiable
Guide, though being alone not sufficient. For 1. To exclude Reason from guiding
us, would be to become Beasts. 2. To exclude Gods Spirit from directing us,
would be to cease being Christians. 3. To renounce the Testimony of Antiquity,
and Authority of General Primitive Councils, would be an arrogant temerity
unpardonable. 4. And last of all to deny a judging determining power to the
present visible Governors, I mean those Governors and Synods which are
Superior, in respect of all other Governors or Synods Inferior, would be to
make all Heresies and Schisms justifiable. Therefore not any of these partial
Guides must be neglected: Yet unless they all concur, that which we take to be
Reason, and Inspiration, and the sense of the Primitive Church may deceive and
mis-guide us.

6. Now, it is only the Roman Catholic Church, whose en^^re Guidance proceed^
from all these, and the effect of which Guidance in full satisfaction to each
man's Soul, and universal peace in Gods Church: which effects cannot possibly
flow but from a complication of all these Guides. Roman Catholics admit Reason
to judge of the sense of Scripture, (as the Socinians do:) but they give due
bounds to Reason, nay they silence it quite, when it would presume to judge of
incomprehensible Mysteries, and reject them because Philosophy cannot
comprehend them. When Reason has found out the sense of Scripture, they with
the Presbyterians, and even Fanatics, acknowledge it is Divine Inspiration that
moves the Soul to assent thereto, and embrace the verities contained in
Scripture, directing their actions accordingly. But because the Devil can
transform himself into an Angel of Light, neither can there be any Guide more
dangerous then false Inspirations, they conclude that all such pretended
Inspirations are indeed Diabolical Suggestions, which are prejudicial to
Honesty, Virtue, Piety, and the common Rules of Obedience, both Spiritual and
Civil; All Inspirations which which incite private, uncommission'd persons to
reform either Churches or State; all that nourish Factions or Commotions in the
Commonwealth: All that beget Pride, and an opinion of self-sufficiency, or an
humor of censuring others, especially Superiors. In a word, whenever the
spirit of single Prophets refuse to be subject to the community of the
Prophets, that is, Church Governors; such Inspirations in Catholic Religion are
rejected, detested, and sent back to the Infernal Father of them.

7. Moreover, Roman Catholics do willingly and confidently appeal to the
Primitive Church, the four first General Councils, and the holy Fathers. But
universal experience demonstrating it impossible, that any writing can end a
Debate between multitudes of persons interessed, and therefore not impartial or
indifferent, their last recourse is to the present visible Church; which cannot
declare her sense to us in any other way then as she is represented by her
Pastors out of all Nations, that is, by a General Council. All Catholics,
submiting to this Council, not their tongues only, but also their judgments, by
following the Church thus with humility, show, that they are guided both by
Reason, Inspiration, and Examples of Primitive Fathers. Hence St. Austin says,
We receive the Holy Spirit if we love the Church, if we rejoice in the name of
Catholics, and in the Catholic Faith. And elsewhere, [Contra rationem nemo
sobrius, etc.] No sober man will admit an opinion against Reason, no Christian
against Scriptures, no lover of peace and unity, against the Church. And this
only is the Guide that we say, and presently will demonstrate to be infallible.

8. Now, that the final Decision of all Controversies in Faith, can only be
expected from such a Guide, and consequently that all Christians under pain of
damnation, are obliged never to contradict this Guide, and always to assent
when it requires, we are taught, not by Reason only, but God himself also, and
this in the Law of Moses. The whole Nation of the Jews, (says St. Augustine)
was as it were one great Prophet; the policy of their Church was the Scheme of
the Christian, to the twelve Princes of their Families answered the twelve
Apostles, to the Seventy Elders the Seventy Disciples, to the several Courts of
Judgment, our Ecclesiastical Synods, to the great Sanhedrim, a general
Council, and to the High Priest, our Supreme Pastor. Now for our present
purpose, the Ordinance that God made in the Jewish Church for deciding
Controversies about the Law, ran thus, If there arise a matter too hard for
thee in judgment, Deuteronomy. 7, 8, 9.
etc. (that is, as we find in 2 Chronicles. 19. 8. between blood and blood, between
Law and Commandment, Statutes and Judgments, then shall thou arise and get
thee into the place which the Lord thy God shall choose: And thou shall come to
the Priests and Levites, and to the Judge that shall be in those days, and
enquire, and they shall show thee the sentence of Judgment, and thou shall do
according to the sentence which they shall show thee, etc. Thou shall not
decline from the sentence to the right hand or to the left. The man that will
do presumptuously, and will not hearken to the Priest, or unto the Judge, even
that man shall die, and thou shall put away the evil from Israel. Upon those
words in this passage [ unto the Judge that shall be in those daies] Ainsworth,
Ainsworth in Deuteronomy. 17. 9.
out of the Rabbis, observes, that if the high Synedrion had determined of a
matter, and after another Synedrion rose up, which (upon Reasons seeming good
unto them) disannulled the former Sentence, then it was disannulled, and
Sentence passed according as seemed good to those later; So that the present
Authority was always to take place, and no Appeals to be made from it. For if
any Disputes against the Sentence of living speaking Judges, upon any pretense
whatsoever, either of a private exposition of the Law, or the Authority of
preceding Rabbis were allowed, there would never want Contentions and Schisms
in the Synagogue. And observe that in this obedience was employed an assent or
submission of Judgment: For otherwise it would be against Conscience, in case
the party continued in a contrary opinion of the sense of the Law. It is just
so, and always has been so in the Catholic Church: The present Superiors
living and speaking must conclude all Controversies, their Interpretation of
Scripture and Fathers, their Testimony of Tradition must more then put to
silence all contradiction of particular Persons or Churches, it must also
subdue their minds to an assent, and this under the Penalty of an Anathema, or
cutting off from the Body of Christ, which answers to a Civil death in the Law.

9. If then an Obedience so indispensable was required to Legal Judges, who
might possibly give a wrong sentence: How secur^ly may we submit our judgments
to the Supreme Tribunal of the Church: And how justly will an Anathema be
inflicted on all gainsayers of an Authority that we are assured shall never
mislead us? And the grounds of this assurance, which the Preacher is not yet
persuaded of, are now to be discoverd.

10. The true grounds of the Churche^ Infallibility are the words of Truth, the
Infallibility of the promises of Christ, the Eternal wisdom of the Father.
These Promises are the true Palladium, not of the Conclave, but of the
Universal Church: Nor do we think Doctor Pierce such an Ulysses, as to
apprehend he can steal it away.

11. We do not deny however, Sermon. page 22.
that Infallibility and Omniscience are (as he says) incommunicable Attributes
of God: It is God alone to whose Nature either lying or being deceived are
essentially contrary, because he is essentially immutable as in his Being, so
in his Understanding and Will. Yet the immutable God can preserve mutable
Creatures from actual mutation: God, who is absolutely Omniscient, can teach a
rational Creature (...) Truths necessary or expedient to be known: So that,
though a man have much ignorance* yet he may be in a sort omniscient within a
determinate Sphere, he may be exempted from ignorance or error in teaching such
special verities as God will have him know, and has promised he shall
faithfully teach others. Our Savior, as man, was certainly infallible, and as
far as was requisite, omniscient too: So were the Apostles likewise, whose
writings Protestants acknowledge both to be infallible, and to contain all
Truth necessary to Salvation. Good Doctor, do you think it a contradiction that
God should bestow an infallibility, as to some things, on a Creature? What did
our Savior give St. Peter when he said, I have prayed for thee that thy Faith
fail not? Thus the Doctor, may see what a trifling Discourse he has made
against Gods Church.

12. Now, the infallible promises of our Lord to his Church, by virtue of which
she has always been believed to be in our sense infallible, follow: At least
as many of them as may suffice for the present purpose. 1. Our Savior has
promised his Apostles, Math. 28. 20.
That he would be present with them always to the end of the World: Therefore
since not any of them outlived that age, this infallible promise must be made
good to their Successors. 2. He has promised that When two or three of them
meet together in his Name, Math. 18. 20.
he will be in the midst of them; Surely to direct them. Therefore much more
when the whole Church is representatively assembled about his business only.
3. He has promised that he will lead his Church into all Truth; at least all
that is necessary or but expedient for them to know. Math. 16. 18
4. He has promised, that Against his Church, built upon St. Peter, the Gates
of Hell (that is Heresy, say the Fathers) shall not prevail: Therefore it
shall be infallibly free from Heresy. 5. He has commanded that, Math. 18. 17.
Whoever shall not obey his Church, shall be (cut off from his Body) as a
Heathen and a Publican: Therefore Anathema's pronounced by his Church are
valid. Our Lord indeed speaks of Decisions made by a particular Church in
quarrels among Brethren: Therefore if Disobedience to such Decisions be so
grievously punished, what punishment may we suppose attends such as are
disobedient to Decisions of the Universal Church, (called by the Apostle, The
Pillar and ground of Truth) made for the composing of public Debates about the
common Faith. 6. To conclude, the belief of the Churches Unity is an
unchangable Article of our ^reed: Therefore certainly the only effectual mean
to preserve Unity, (which is an un-appealable, and infallible Authority) shall
never be wanting in the Church.

13. All these Texts and Prmises we by the example of the Holy Fathers and
Authority of Tradition, produce as firm Grounds of an Infallibility in the
Universal Church representative, which has an influence over the Souls of men^
requiring much more than an external submission, which yet is all that
Protestants will allow to the most authentic general Councils. We hope now
Doctor Pierce will not fly to Mr. Chillingworths miserable shift, and say that
all these Promises are only conditional and depending on the piety of
Church-governors: For this is contrary to the assertion of all Antiquity, which
from these Promises argues invincibly against all Heretics and Schismatics, who
might otherwise, on Mr. Chillingworths ground, allege (as the Donatists did)
that the Church by the sins of some had lost all her Authority, and that Gods
spirit was transplanted from her into themselves. Nor yet that he will use the
plea of several other Protestant Writers somewhat more discreet, who are willing
to allow those Promises absolute, and to belong also to the Guides of the
Church some or other, that they shall in all ages continue orthodox, but not
alvvayes to the more superior, or to the greater bodies of these assembled in
Councils (because, thus, they see their cause will suffer by it.) But this plea
also is utterly unsatisfying; For whenever the superior and subordinate
Church Officers, or Ecclesiastical Courts shall contradict or oppose one
another, here the superior questionless is to be our Guide (otherwise we have
no certain rule to know who is so) and therefore to these, not the other, in
such cases, must bel^ng these promises, where they cannot possibly agree to
both.

14. These promises now being Yea and Amen, the Doctor must not seem to make
our Lord pass for a Deceiver, but apply them to his English Protestant Church,
since he will not allow them to the Catholic, for to some Church they must be
applied. But let him consider withal, he must condemn St. Gregory, Geg. M. l.
1. Epist. 24.
who professed that he venerated the four first General Councils of the
Catholic Church, as the four Gospels. He must condemn Constantine, who, in the
first Council of Nice professed, Act. Conc. Nicen.
that [(...), etc] whatever is decreed in the holy Councils of Bishops, that
ought to be attributed to the Divine will In a word he must by condemning all
the General Councils of Gods Church, condemn likewise (which is more dangerous)
the Act of Parliament, 1 Eliz. For manifest it is that all the Fathers in those
Councils did pronounce many Anathema's against all those that would not submit
to a belief of such and such Decisions of theirs, in some of which were new
expressions not extant in Scripture, but devised by the Fathers then present,
as the words (...), etc. Now I ask Doctor Pierce, were those Anathema's
lawful? were they valid? Or will he say, those first Councils (to which he
professes assent) usurped an Authority in this, not of right belonging to them?
If those Anathema's were valid, then the Councils had a just authority to
oblige Christians to an internal belief of verities declared by them, as the
sense of Divine Revelation, and this, under the penalties of being separated
from Christ: And can any Authority but such as is infallible lay such an
obligation upon Consciences under such a penalty? But, if those Anathema's were
illegal and invalid, then were the Fathers both of those Councils and of All
others, who still followed the same method, not only impostors, but most
execrable Tyrants over the Souls of men.

15. These Deductions surely are more effectual to demonstrate the Churches
infallibility, than any of his Quotations can be against it: Here we have
express Scripture, and universal consent of Antiquity: Nay here we have the
concession of the more judicious Writers of the Church of England (at least
before their late restitution:) Dr. Hamond of (...). sect. ^. n 1. sect. n. 15.
sect. 13. n. 2. sect. 14. n. 6. Bishop Bram^a^l Reply to Bish^p Chalced Prefa^e
and Vindic. ca. 2. p. 9.
who seem to agree that in the Controversies between our Church and theirs,
they would certainly submit to a future lawful General Council: Now, could they
lawfully make such a Promise and think such a Council could misguide them?
Therefore truly I cannot have the uncivility to judge, that, when one of your
39. Articles declares, that some General Councils have erred, Artic. 19.
the meaning should be ^ that any legal, legitimate General Council has erred,
but only some Councils that some Roman Catholics esteem to be General, concerning
which the Church of England is of another opinion: And if this be the meaning,
the breach made by it may be curable.

16. Now whereas the Doctor alleages, as against this Point, Sermon. p. 22.
the concession of Baronius, etc. that Novatianism was hatched and continued
two hundred years at Rome. I cannot devise how to frame an Objection out of it:
Can no Church be Orthodox, if Heretics rise and continue in the same City? Is
the English Church a Quaking Church, because Quakers first began, and still
increase at London? As for Novatians at Rome he cannot deny but they were so
far from being Members of the Roman Church, that they were continually esteemed
Heretics and condemned by it.

17. The like we say touching the Donatists. Ibid.
Indeed his objecting the Arians has more appearance of reason and sense [
Ingemuit orbis, etc.] The world (says. St. Hierom) Hieron.
sadly groaned and was astonished to see it self on a sudden become Arian,, that
is, after the Council of ^riminum. But how was it Arian, if it groaned? etc.
for it could not be really Arian against its will. But St. Hierom uses this
expression, because the great Council of Ariminum had seemed to favor the
Arian party against the Catholics. And true it was, that Catholic Bishops were
indeed persecuted, and many banished: But not one of them changed their
Profession of the Nicene Faith, unless you will accuse Pope Liberius, who for
a while dissembled it, and presently repented. Besides, the Canons at first
made in that Council were perfectly Orthodox, but afterward by the Emperors
Tyranny, and subtilty of two or three Arian Bishops a Creed was composed,
wherein though the Nicene Faith was not sufficiently expressed,. Yet there was
not one Article perfectly Arian, but capable of a good sense: to which may
Catholic Bishops out of fear subscribed, yet to nothing but what in their sense
was true* though defective in delivering all the truth; but presently after,
being at liberty, both themselves and all the rest renounced. And after all,
there remained but three years of persecution, for after that time the Arian
Emperor Constantius dyed.

18. Next concerning the objected Heresy of the Millenaries: It is very unjust
and a great irreverence in him to charge upon the Primitive Church the sayings
of two Fathers: and though one of them says, All that were purely Orthodox,
(that is, such as he esteemed so, because they were of his Opinion) held that
Doctrine yet he thereby shows, that his own Opinion was not universally
embraced by the Church: But the truth is, there was a double Millenary opinion,
the one that interpreted the reign of Martyrs with Christ for a thousand years,
in base, sensual pleasures, banquets, and women: This was the Doctrine of the
unclean Heretic Cerinthus, as Eusebius and St. Augustine relate: Eusebius. Hist.
Eccl. l. 3.
Against this St. Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria wrote an elegant Book, as St.
Hierom affirms: Hierom. Aug. l. 2. de Civ. D. c. 7.
And it is most deservedly detested by the Church. But there was another
Opinion, that the Martyrs should reign a thousand years with Christ in all
Spiritual delights, and ravishing consolation, in a blessed conversing with
him: And this Opinion might not unbecom Papias, St. Ireneus, Aug Ibid. Hieron.
l. 4.
and St. Justin Martyr: For St. Augustine and St. Hierom both profess
themselves unwilling to censure it, neither can the Doctor, I believe, show
that it was ever condemned by the Church.

18. To his last Objection touching the communicating of Infants, it is granted
that in St. Augustine and Pope Innocent's time, and many years after, such was
the common practice of the Church to communicate them Sacramentally (but withal
take notice, it was only in one species.) Again, it is confessed that from
that Text [ Nisi mand^caveritis carnem* Aug. l. 1. de pec. merit. cap. 20.
Innocent in Epist.
etc.] St. Augustine, etc. argue a necessity that Infants should participate of
the flesh and blood of our Lord, but this not Sacramentally, but Spiritually,
by such a participation as may be had in Baptism.

This appears first, From the constant Doctrine of St. Augustine, Aug. ^b. c.
19. 21, 22. and lib. 2. cap. 28. etc.
etc. the whole Church affirming that, Baptism alone may suffice to the
salvation of Infants. 2. From his interpreting his own meaning, in a Sermon
quoted by St. Beda and Gratina. His words are these, Bed. ad 1 Cor. c. 10.
Gratian Consecr. did. 2. cap. Qui passus est.
None ought by any ways to doubt but that every Christian by being made a
Member of Christ in Baptism, thereby becomes partaker of the Bo^y and Blood of
our Lord, and that he is not estranged from a Communion of that Bread and
Chalice, though being settled in the Unity of Christ's Body, he should depart out
of this World, before he really eat of that Bread, and drink of that Chalice.
For he is not deprived of the participation and benefit of the Sacrament,
whenever that is found in him which is signified by the Sacrament.

19. That therefore which the Church since, and particularly the Council of
Trent altered in this matter, was nothing at all touching Belief: For all
Catholics this day believe St. Augustin's Doctrine in that Point, but only an
external practice of the Church: And this was done out of a wonderful reverence
to those Holy Mysteries, which by fr^quent Communions of Infants could not
escape many irreverences and inconveniences. And many such Alterations even
the English Church observes and justifies, both in the administering of the
Eucharist and Baptism too.

To conclude this matter: For a further proof that these two instances about
the Millena^y Belief, and Infant Communion are not at all conducing to the
Doctors Design, I will refer him to the Judgment of Doctor Fern, of some
weight no doubt with him, who expressly says, and proves by Reasons not unlike
these, Dr. Fern in certain Consid. in Preface.
That nothing can be concluded by those two Instances to the prejudice of the
whole Church, as if thereby might be proved that the whole Church, Universally,
and in all the Members of it, may be infected with Error in Points of
concernment or prejudicial to the Faith.

CHAP. X.
Of Prayer for the Dead. Its Apostolic antiquity. Purgatory necessarily
supposed in it. The Doctor's Objections answered.

1. HAving treated so largely of the Preachers two pretended Noveltys; 1. the
Primacy of Jurisdiction of the Sea Apostolic; and 2. the Infallability of the
Church in her General Councils, I might rationally enough neglect examining the
following particular Dogma's which he likewise charges with Novelty, and betake
by self to the point of Schism: because if the Church have a spiritual obliging
Jurisdiction, taking its Original from the Chair of St. Peter; and again if
what the proposes to us to be believed, she proposes validly under the penalty
of being separated from Christ, since it is manifest that she so proposes the
said particular Doctrins, not in her Councils only, but universal practice,
wherein her Infallability is with an equal Aut^ority demonstrated; they ought
without contradiction be submitted to: Nevertheless having some reason to
doubt that in case any of his Novelties be omited, he, or at least some of his
over-credulous Readers will impute such an omission to a difficulty in
disproving him, I must be content to take a trouble on me, which is therefore
only necessary, because many Protestants are unreasonable.

2. His third pretended Novelty, is the Doctrine of Purgatory, Sermon. p. 8.
which he says, We have from Origin, or at the farthest from Tertullian, and he
from no better Author than the Arch-Heretic Montanus. Nor does Bellarmin mend
the matter by deriving it from Virgil, Tully, or Plato 's Gorgias.

3. It would have been a great courtesy both to his Hearers and Readers, if he
had informed them why he singled out a speculative Point touching Purgatory,
and omitted one of far greated importance, because obliging to Practice also,
which is Prayer for the Dead. His way of proceeding, doubtless does not want a
Mystery: And he must give me leave to answer his Novelty of Purgatory by
speaking scarce any thing at all of it, but only telling him nakedly the
Churches Doctrine about it; and by insisting on the confessed Antiquity,
Apostolic Antiquity of Prayer for the Dead; which being cleared, I defy all
his learning and skill, unless he can disprove this, to deny or so much as
question on the other.

4. Now the Doctrine of the Church concerning Purgatory and Prayer for the Dead
is contained in this Decree of the Council of Trent, There is a Purgatory:
Council. Trid. Sess. 25.
and Souls detained there are helped by the suffra^es of the Faithful, (that
is, by Prayers and Alms) and most especially by the most acceptable Sacrifice
of the Altar. By which Definition the Church obliges all Catholics no farther
than simply to believe that there is a place or state of Souls in which they
are capable of receiving help or ease by Prayers, etc. The Council tells us
nothing of the position of this place, nor what incommodities Souls find in it,
nor whether there be fire, etc. which are Points that St. Augustine says he
could not resolve: On the contrary, it forbids, (at least out of the Schools)
all curious subtle Questions concerning it, Ibid.
all discourses which are not for edification.

5. Having represented the Churches Doctrine, I will next transcribe the Form
of her Prayers for the Dead, extant in the Canon of the Mass. Can. Missae.
Memento.
Remember likewise, O Lord, thy Servants who have gone before us with the Sign
of Faith (i. e. Baptism,) and repose in the sleep of peace. We beseech thee, O
Lord, mercifully grant to them, and to all that rest in Christ, a place of
refreshment, light and peace, through Christ our Lord. And after the Canon, We
beseech thee, O Lord, absolve the Soul of thy Servant from all chains of his
sins, (...) Commun.
to the end, that in the glory of the Resurrection, he may respire by a new
life among the Saints and Elect, through Christ our Lord. Now if it can be
demonstrated that by the universal practice of the Primitive Church, such
Prayers as these were made for the Dead; it unavoidably follows, That the Souls
for whom they are made, are neither in Heaven nor H^ll: And if so, where are
they, Doctor Pierce? speak like an honest man.

6. To demonstrate this, let him view narrowly these passages of the Holy
Fathers, before, and during the space of the first four General Councils. St.
Denis the Areopagite, (or whoever was Author of the Book of the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, and who by confession of Protestants, lived within the second
Century after the Apostles) declares that the Priest does demand from the
Divine goodness for the person departed, Dion. Ar. de Eccles. Hierarchia. c.
ult.
a pardon of all sins through human frailty committed by him, and that he may
be conducted into the light and region of the living, into the bosoms of
Abraham* Isaac, and Jacob, into a place from which grief, sadness, and
mourning it banished. And presently after he testifies* Ibid.
that What he commits to writing concerning this Prayer pronounced by the
Priest for the Dead, he received by Tradition from his Divine Teachers (the
Apostles.)

7. Next Tertullian, Let the faithful Widow, Tert. de Mon. cap. 10.
says he, pray for the soul of her Husband, and make an oblation in the
Anniversary day of his death, begging for him refreshment and part in the first
Resurrection. And, to prevent the Preachers Objection, that the Father learned
this from the Arch-Heretick Montanus, let him answer for himself; Id. de Coron.
Mil. cap. 3.
We make, says he, Anniversary Oblations for the Dead, and for the [
Natalitia] of the Martyrs. And presently he adjoynes, Ibid. cap. 4.
Concerning these and the like Observances, if you require the Authority of
Scriptures, you will not find any: Tradition shall be alleged to you for the
Author, custom for the confirmer, and Faith the Observer.

8. After him follows his Scholar blessed St. Cyprian, Cypr. Ep. 66.
The Bishops (says he) that went before us, have ordained that not any one of
our Brethren at his death shall name in his Will for an Executor, or Guardian,
any Ecclesiastical Person; and if any one shall do otherwise, that no Oblation
should be made for him, and that the Sacrifice should not be celebrated for him
at his death: For such a one deserves not so much as to be named at the Altar
in the Priests Prayer.

9. Eusebius relates that, at the Obsequies of the Emperor Constantine, Euse.
de vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 71.
the People and Clergy unanimously sent up prayers to God, not without tears
and great groanings for the Soul of the Emperor. Likewise Epiphanius disputing
against the Heretic Aerius, reckons this among his heresies (as St. Augustine
likewise does) That he denied Prayers and Oblation for the Dead. Epiph. 3.
hae^^^.
In opposition whereto he says, Prayers made for the dead profit them, though
they do not blot out [(...)] entirely all (mortal) sins. Ibid.
And again, Who shall now have the ^oldnesse to dissolve the Statute of his
Mother (the Church) or the Law of his Father? (which Father he there interprets
to be the Holy Trinity.) Moreover St. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Philip.
c. 1. hom. 3.
It is not in vain that the Apostles have instituted this Law, That during the
celebration of the dreadful mysteries, commemoration should be made of the
dead: for they knew that great benefit and profit would thereby accrue unto
them. And yet more expressly in another place, Id. hom. in 1 Cor. c. 15. v. 46.
We must (says he) give our help and assistance to sinners departed, by our
Prayers, Supplications, Alms, and Oblations: For these things were not rashly
and groundlesly devised: Neither is it in vain, that in the Divine Mysteries we
make mention of these who are dead; and approaching to the Altar, address our
prayers for them to the Lamb placed there who took away the sins of the World:
But we do this to the end that some comfort and refreshment may come to them
thereby. Neither is it in vain that he who assists at the Altar at the time
when the dreadful Mysteries are communicated, cries out, Pray for all that are
dead in Christ, and for those who celebrate their memorials. For were it not
that such commemorations were profitable to them, such things would not be
spoken. For the matters of our Religion are no sport: No, God forbid. These
things are performed by the Order and Direction of Gods Spirit.

10. True it is, that anciently in the public Liturgies a commemoration was
made even of the greatest Saints, yes, and prayers were made for them: But yet
not such prayers as were made for the imperfect. But, since all future things
may be the subject of our prayers, it may become our charity to pray for
accession of glory to Saints already glorified, but which at the Resurrection
shall be in a yet better State. And therefore when St. Austin says, It is an
injury to pray for a Martyr, since we ought rather to commend our selves to his
prayers: he means such prayers, as we make for imperfect Christians, that is,
for remission of their sins, refreshment, etc.

11. Now, though some such prayers extant in the Holy Fathers did regard the day
of Judgment, and the glory ensuing; yet withal, that they thought, to some
Souls a present refreshment did accrue in the intermediat condition, is evident
both by the foresaid Testimonies, and many more that may be added: As where St.
A^brose says, he would never cease his Intercessions for the Soul of the dead
Emperor? till he found a deliverance by them. This is so apparent both out of
the Fathers and ancient Liturgies, that Bishop Forbes, Forb. de Pur^^. c. 3..
27.
Spalato, and other Protestant Writers, do acknowledge it, and refuse not to
assent to the ground of such a practice. The words of Spalato are these: There
would be no absurdity if we should confess, Spal. l. 5. cap. 8.
that some lighter sins which have not in this life been remitted (quoad
culpam) as to the guilt or fault, may be forgiven after death, and this
sometimes a little after the departure of the Soul, etc. by virtue of the
Churches intercession.

12* It cannot be denied, but that there are among the Holy Fathers great
varieties of Opinions touching some particular circumstances regarding the
state of Souls after death, and at the present some differences there are
between the Roman and Greek Church. In which notwithstanding it will appear to
any who will compare them, that the Roman Doctrine is far more moderate,
receiveable, and approaching to the grounds of Protestants, than that of the
Eastern Church. But however, it is without all controversy, that all Churches
who professed Christianity before the Reformation, do agree unanimously in the
practice of praying for the Dead, so as to beg forgiveness of sins, a bettering
of their state, an asswagement of their sufferings, etc. Which practice they
esteem not a voluntary offering, but a duty, to a necessary performance of
which, charity obliges all Christians. And therefore English Protestants
cannot be excused for their neglect of this duty, especially consisidering that
the Doctrine upon which this Practice is grounded, is not mentioned at all among
those Points which they account Novelties in the Roman Church. On the contrary,
the more learned among them have and do, though not in expression, yet in sense
agree with Bishop Andrews, conceding in his Reply to Cardinal Perron, P. 9.
-- That for offering does he not mean here, for offering the Christian
sacrifice of the Holy Eucharist for them, for what is more manifest in
Antiquity, than this?] and prayer for the Dead, little is to be said against
it. No man can deny, but it is very ancient. Since then the Church cannot be
thought, from the most ancient times thereof, to have offered up to God all her
prayers in all ages pro defunctis in vain, methinks I cannot here, but in this
respect also commiserate the condition of those poor Souls, who depart hence
un-owned by that Church, and without any share in her prayers (which only like
a true Mother, is so sollicitous and careful a Supplicant not only for her
living, but also deceased children) and who, after a life here not so well
spent, seeing themselves going hence only with an inchoated repentance, and an
unperfect reformation, and very unprepared to be immediately entertained in that
place of bliss, and glorious society into which no impure thing shall enter,
yet are content rather to lose the benefit of the daily prayers and oblations
for them of this careful Mother, than to render themselves capable thereof by
returning into her Communion. And surely much more uncomfortable must such a
death be, that is void of the hopes of any such assistance, than theirs is,
who, departing hence in the bosom of the Church, and in this blessed communion
of Saints with the request of St. Austins dying Mother in their mouth, Aug.
Conf. l. 9. c. 11.
Illud vos rogo, ut ad Domine altar memineritis mei: This I beg of you, that
at the Altar of our Lord ye make remembrance of me: are sure to enjoy the last
aid of this pious charity, and also the yet more efficacious sacrifice of the
Altar to be frequently offered to God in their behalf.

10. Lastly, to omit particular Quotations out of the ancient public Liturgies
of the Church, that of St. James acknowledged by the second General Council,
that of St. Basil, St. Chrysostom, etc. in every one of which are express
prayers and oblations for the Dead, demanding pardon of their sins, refreshment
of their sufferings, etc. I will conclude with a full convincing Testimony of
St. Augustine, Aug. Ser. 32. de verb. Apost.
whose words are these, That by the Prayers of the Holy Church, and saving
Sacrifice, as likewise by Alms expended for their Souls, our departed Brethren
are helped, that God may deal with them more mercifully than their sins
deserve, not to be doubted. For this the universal Church observes as a
Tradition of our Fathers, that for those who are dead in the Communion of the
Body and Blood of our Lord, Prayers should be made, when at the holy Sacrifice
their Names are in their due place rehearsed, and that it should be signified
that the Offering is made for them. And when out of an intention of commending
them to Gods mercy, works of Charity and Alms are made, who will doubt that
these things help toward their good, for whom Prayers are not in vain offered
to God? It is not therefore to be doubted but that these things are profitable
for the Dead* yet only such as before their death have lived so, as that these
things may profit them after Death. And again, Id. Enchirid. c. 110.
For Martyrs the Sacrifice is offered as a thanksgiving, and for others as a
propitiation.

14. The Doctor cannot but know in his Conscience, (for he is no Stranger to
the Fathers) what a great Volume may be written to confirm this: And that not
one expression can be quoted against it. Therefore whereas he said without any
ground, that Tertullian borrowed from Montanus; I would ask him, From whom did
he borrow the omission of this charitable duty to the Dead, but from the
Heretie Aerius? Nor is this to be considered as a voluntary courtesy don them,
which without any fault may be omited. On the contrary St. Epiphanius will tell
him, Epiph. l. 3. haer. 75.
the Church does these things necessarily, having received such a Tradition
from the Fathers. And St. Augustine, Aug. de cur. pro mort. c. 5.
we must by no means omit necessary Supplications for the Souls of the Dead:
For whether the Flesh of the dead Person lie here, or in another place, repose
ought to be obtained to his Spirit.

15. If these Souls were believed to be in Heaven would it not be ridiculous?
If in Hell would it not be impious to offer the dreadful Sacrifice, to make
Supplications* to be at charge in Alms for the obtaining them repose, pardon of
their sins, refreshment of their sufferings, a translation into the region of
Light and peace, and a place in the bosom of Abraham? But if they be neither in
Heaven nor Hell, where are they then? He cannot deny a third place, unless he
thinks them anihilated: He will not say that third place is Purgatory, because
the Church calls it so. But suppose the Church dispense with him for the Name;
I would to God he would accept of such a dispensation; one pretense of Schism
would quickly be removed.

16. To conclude; If all the Liturgies of the Church, all the Fathers have not
credit enough with him to persuade that this is no Novelty* yet greater
Antiquity for it he may find in the Jewish Church: an express Testimony for
which we read in the Book of Macchabees: He will say it is not Canonical: at
least let him acknowledge it not to be a Romance: and however, the universal
Tradition and practice of the Synagogue will justify it. From the Jews no
doubt Plato borrowed this Doctrine, and from Plato Cicero, and from both Virgil.
Nay even natural reason will tell him, that Heaven, into which no unclean thing
can enter, is not so quickly and easily open to imperfect Souls, as to perfect:
nor have we any sign, that merely by dying, sinful livers become immediately
perfect.

17. To fill his learned Margins, he quotes certain Contradictors of Bellarmin,
as the Bishop of Rochester, Polydor Virgil, Suarez, and Thomas ex Albiis; but
since both Bellarmin himself and all his Contradictors agree with the Church,
in contradiction to the Preacher, that there is a Purgatory; what other
inducement could he have to mention them* unless it were that his Readers
might see what his Hearers could not, that he was resolved to pretend, but was
not able indeed to produce any thing to purpose against the Catholic Church?

CHAP. XI.
Of Transubstantiation, or a Substantial Presence of our Lords Body in the
Sacrament. Justified by the Authorities of the Fathers, etc. The Preacher's
Objections Answered.

1. THe three next supposed Novelties of the Catholic Church all regard the
most holy Sacrament. That blessed Mystery, which was instituted to be both a
Symbal and instrument, to signify and to operate Unity, is, by the cunning of
the Devil, and malicious folly of men, become both the work and cause of
Disunion.

2. Touching this Subject the first of the three Novelties the Doctor says is
Transubstantiation Sermon. p. 9.
So far from being from the beginning that it is not much above four hundred
years old, Ibid. p. 23, 24.
that it was first beard of in the Council of Lateran. For in Pope Nicholas the
Second's time the submission of Berengarius imports rather a Con -- then
Transubstantiation. But evident it is, That it was never taught by our Savior,
since he in the same breath wherewith he pronounced, This is my Blood,
explained himself by calling it expressly the fruit of the Vins. and there needs
no more to make the Romanists ashamed of that Doctrine, than the concession of
Aquinas, who says, That it is impossible for one body to be locally in more
places than one: From whence Bellarmin angrily infers, that it equally implies
a Contradiction for one body to be so much as Sacramentally in more places than
one.

3. In order to the giving some satisfaction touching this matter, I will, as
before, set down the Churches Doctrine concerning this most holy Sacrament,
which will extend it self to all his three pretended Novelties. In the
Profession of Faith compiled by Pope Pius iv. Profess. Fid. Pii 4.
out of the Council of Trent it is said, I profess that in the Mass there is
offered to God a true proper and propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and
Dead: And that in the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist there is truly and
Substantially the Body and Blood* together with the Soul and Divinity of our
Lord Jesus Christ: and that there is a Conversion (or Change) of the whole
Substance of Bread into his Body, and of Wine into his Blood: which change the
Catholic Church calls Transubstantiation. Moreover I confess that under one of
the Species alone whole and entire Christ, and a true Sacrament is received.

4. And if he will needs have it so, let it be granted, that the Latin word
Transubstantiation begun commonly to be received among Catholics at the Council
of Lateran: Though there was a Greek expression exactly importing as much
[(...)] as old as his Beginning, that is, in the time of the first General
Council. But for God's sake let not a new word drive him out of God's Church,
as the word (...) did the Arians. He may observe with Cardinal Perron that the
Church only says, the change made in the holy Sacrament is usually called
Transubstantiation: So that on condition he allow a real Substantial change,
the word it self shall not hinder us from being good Friends.

5. The Doctor sees now what our Church holds concerning this Point. She
delivers her mind sincerely, heartily, ingenuously. But if I should ask him
what his Church holds, it would cost him more labor to give a satisfactory
Answer than to make ten such Sermons.

6. There are among Christians only four ways of expressing a presence of
Christ in the Sacrament. 1* That of the Zuinglians, Socinians, etc. who admit
nothing at all real here; The Presence, say they, is only figurative or
imaginary: As we see Bread broken and eaten, etc. so we ought to call to mind
that that Christ's Body was crucified, and torn for us, and by Faith (or a
strong fancy) we are made partakers of his Body, that is, not his Body, but the
blessings that the offering his Body may procure. 2. That of Calvin and English
Divines, Calvin in ^ Cor. cap. 11. 24.
who usually say, as Calvin did, That in the holy Sacrament our Lord offers
unto us not only the benefit of his Death and Resurrection, but the very Body
it self in which he dyed and rose again: Or, as King James, We acknowledge a
presence no less true and real then Catholics do; Casaub. ^p. ad. Card. Per.
only we are ignorant of the manner: [Of which it seems he thought that
Catholics were not.] So that this presence is supposed a Substantial presence,
but after a spiritual manner: A presence not to all, but to the worthy
receivers: Offered perhaps to the unworthy, but only partaken by the worthy: A
presence not to the Symbols, but the Receivers Soul only: Or if (according to
Mr. Hooker) in some sense the Symbols do exhibit the very Body of Christ, yet
they do not contain in them what they exhibit, at least not before the actual
receiving. 3. Of the Lutherans, who hold a presence of Christ's Body in the
Sacrament as real, proper and substantial as Catholics do, but deny an
exclusion of Bread. For Bread, say they, remains as before, but to and with it
the Body of our Lord (every where present) is in a sort hypostatically united:
Yet some among them d^ny any reverence is to be exhibited to Christ, though
indeed substantially present. 4. That of Roman Catholics, whose sense was let
down before; whereto this only is to be added, That believing a real conversion
of Bread into our Lords Body, etc. they think themselves obliged, in conformity
to the Ancient Church, as to embrace the Doctrine, so to imitate their practice
in exhibiting due reverence and worship (not to the Symbols, not to any thing
which is the object of sense, as Calvinists slander them; but) to our Lord
himself only, present in and under the Symbols.

7. Now three of these four Opinions, that is, every one but that of English
Protestants speak intelligible sense: Every one knows what Zuinglians,
Lutherans, and Roman Catholics mean: But theirs (which they call a Mystery) is
Indeed a Iargon, a Linsey-Wolsey Stuff, made probably to sui^ with any Sect
according to interests: They that taught it first in England, were willing to
speak at least, and, if they had been permitted, to mean likewise as the
Catholic Church instructed them, but the Sacrilegious Protector in King
Edwards days, and afterward the Privy Council in Queen Elizabeth's, found it
for their wordly advantage, that their Divines should, at least in words,
accuse the Roman Church for that Doctrine which themselves believed to be true.
But now, since the last Restitution, if that renewed Rubric at the end of the
Communion, be to be esteemed Doctrinall, then the last Edition of their
Religion in this Point is mere Zuinglianism, to which the Presbyterians
themselves, if they are true Calvinists, will refuse to subscribe. Thus the new
Religion of England is almost become the Religion of New England.

8. (...) remains now that I should by a few authorities justify our Catholic
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, or real substantial Presence, to be far from
deserving to be called a Novelty of ^our hundred years standing. By Catholic
Doctrine, I mean the Doctrine of the Church, not of the Schools, the Doctrine
delivered by Tradition, not Ratiocination: Not a Doctrine that can be
demonstrated by human empty Philosophy. On the contrary, it may be confidently
assorted, that all such pretended demonstrations are not only not concluding,
but illusory, because that is said to be demonstrated by reason, which
Tradition tells us is above reason, and ought not to be squared by the Rule of
Philosophy: The presence of Christ in the Sacrament is truly real and
Substantial, but withal Sacramental, that is Mystical, inexplicable,
incomprehensible. It is a great mistake among Protestants, when they argue that
we, by acknowledging a Conversion by Transubstantiation, pretend to declare the
modum conversionis. No; that is far from the Churches, or the Ancient Fathers
thoughts. For by that expression the only signifies, the change is not a
matter of fancy, but real, yet withal Mystical. The Fathers, to express their
belief of a real conversion, make use of many real changes mentioned in the
Scripture, as of Aarons Rod into a Serpent, of water into wine, etc. But withal
they add, That not any of these Examples do fit, or properly represent the
Mystical change in the Sacrament: Sense or Reason might comprehend and judge of
those changes, but Faith alone must submit to the incomprehensiblenesse of
this. When Water was turned into Wine, the eyes saw, and the Palate tasted Wine,
it had the color, extension, and locality of Wine; But so is it not when Bread
by consecration becomes the Body of Christ; For ought that Sense can judge,
there is no change at all: Christ's Body is present, but without locality: It is
present, but not corporally, as natural bodies are present, one part here, and
another there. The Quomodo of this presence is not to be inquired into, nor can
it without presumption be determined. This is that which the Church calls a
Sacramental, Mystical presence. But, that this presence is real and
substantial, a presence in the Symbols or Elements, and not only in the mind of
the worthy receiver, the Fathers unanimously teach: And indeed if it were not
so, none could receive the Body of Christ unworthily, because according to
Protestants, it is not the Body of Christ, but mere Bread that an impenitent
Sinner receives: And St. Paul's charge would be irrational, when he says, 1
Cor. 11. 29.
such An one receives judgment to himself in that he does not discern the Body
of our Lord. Besides, if the change be not in the Elements, but in the
Receivers Soul, what need is there of Consecration? What effect can
Consecration have? Why may not another man or woman as well as a Priest,
administer this Sacrament? What hinders that such a Presence may not be
effected in the mind every Dinner or Supper, and as well when we eat flesh, and
drink any other Liquor besides Wine at our own Table, as at that of our Lord.

9. Now, whether their Doctrine or ours be a Novelty, let Antiquity judge. If I
should produce, as he knows I may, hundreds of Testimonies that by conversion a
change is made of the Bread into the Body, and Wine into the Blood of Christ,
he would think to escape by allowing a change to be made, but only in the Act
of worthy receiving. Therefore I will only make use of such Authorities as
demonstrate this change to be made before communicating; that it remains, when
the Sacrament is reserved, and that immediately after consecration, before any
participation of the Symbols, both the Priest and People did perform an act of
Adoration to Christ, believed to be really and substantially, though
mystically, present.

10. In all ancient Liturgies (as Blondel Blondel.
himself, though a Huguenot, confesses) the prayer in the consecration of the
Elements was, That God would by his holy Spirit sanctify the Elements, L^turg.
S. Basil. Cyril. Hier. Catech. Mist. 5.
whereby the Bread may be made the Body, and the Wine the Blood of our Lord.
And, that before communicating, whilst it was on the Altar, it was esteemed and
worshipped as the true Body of our Lord, St. Chrysostom will witness, Chrysostom.
in. 1 Cor. 10. hom. 24.
Let us, says he, who are Citizens of Heaven, imitate but even the barbarous
Magi, (who worshipped our Lord an Infant, etc.) Thou see him not in the
Manger, but on the Altar. Thou do not see a woman holding him, but the Priest
standing by him, and the Spirit with great virtue hovering over these
(Mysteries) proposed. Thou not only see the Body it self, as the Magi did,
but thou know also the virtue of it, etc. The same Body which is the most
precious and most honored thing in Heaven, I will show thee placed upon Earth,
etc. Neither do thou only see it, but touchest and eatest it, and having
received it, thou returnest home with it, Opta^. lib. 6.
etc. Hence Optatus says, What other thing is the Altar, but the Seat of the
Body and Blood of Christ. A yet more irrefragable witness hereof is the
General Council of Nice, wherein (Act. l. 3. c. de Divina mensa) are these
words, In this Divine Table let us not abase our intentions so as to consider
the Bread and Wine set before us, but raising up our mind by Faith, let us
understand that upon that holy Table is placed the Lamb of God, which takes
away the sins of the World, which is unbloodily immolated by the Priest, and
receiving his precious Body and Blood, let us truly believe that these are the
Symbols of our Redemption.

And, that the Elements, once consecrated and after reserved, yet remain the
Body of Christ though not participated, St. Cyril of Alexandria expressly
^ectifies, I hear (says he) there are others who affirm that the Mystical
Eulogy, Cy^il. Al. Ep. ad Calosyr.
if any thing of it remain till another day, does profit nothing to
sanctification. Bur they are mad who say these things: For Christ is not
altered, neither is his holy Body changed; but the virtue of Benediction and
quickening grace perpetually remains in it. And as touching Ad^ration of our
Lord, as acknowledged substantially present on the Altar, St. Ambrose expressly
asserts it, Adore the footstool of his feet. Therefore by the footstool is
understood the Earth; Amb^. de Spis. lib. 3. cap. 12.
and the Earth the flesh of Christ, which at this day also we adore in the
Mysteries, and which the Apostles adored in our Lord Jesus. And from St.
Ambrose the same is taught as expressly by St. Augustine, discoursing on the same
Text, Aug. in Psalm. 98. 5.
Adorate Scabellum pedum ejus: Who moreover adds, Christ has given his flesh
to be eaten by us for our* Salvation: Now no man eats this, except he first
adore it. Yea, moreover he says, We do not only not sin by adoring it, but we
should sin if we did not adore it, And in an Epistle to Honoratus, he affirms,
Id. Epist. 120.
That the rich of the Earth and proud are sometimes brought to the Table of our
Lord, and there receive of his Body and Blood, but they only adore it, they
are not satiated with it, because they do not imitate him (by humility.) For of
the humble it is said, Edent pauperes and saturabuntur.

11. The same may be inferred by the wonderful niceness and scrupolosity
observed in the Primitive Church in the handling, communicating and reserving
these Mysteries; what a crime was it esteemed in the Primitive times, if but a
crum or drop of the consecrated Elements should fall to the ground? For fear of
that, till about the year six hundred they were received by the Communicants
not in their Fingers, as among the Reformed, but in the inside plain of their
hands, and in a silver Pipe, etc. But I will conclude this point with a brief
Answer to the Doctors Allegations.

12. Whereas therefore he says, It is evident that Transubstantiation wa^ never
taught by our Savior, since in the same breath wherewith he pronounced these
words, This is my Blood, he explained himself by calling it expressly the Fruit
of the Vine. On the contrary I do confidently pronounce it to be evident, that
those words were neither spoken by our Lord in the same breath after the
Consecration of the Chalice, nor had they any regard to the Sacrament. It Is
true they are mentioned by St. Matthew after the Consecration, but he knows
that in St. Luke, who promised to write (...), those words are mentioned before
any Consecration began, and the occasion of them is evidently the eating of the
Paschal Supper etc. For this is his Narration: When the hour was come he sat
down, Luke 22. 14, 18.
and the twelve Apostles with him. And he said unto them with desire I have
desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer. For I say unto you, I
will not any more eat thereof until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God. And
he took the Cup and gave thanks, and said, Take this and divide it among your
selves, For I say unto you I will not drink of the fruit of the Vine, until the
kingdom of God shall come. Now after all this follows his own last Supper, the
Mystical consecration and communion of his blessed Body and Blood. For the Text
thus continues, And he took Bread saying, lbid. 10. 19, 20.
This is my Body, etc. likewise also the Cup after Supper, saying, This Cup,
etc. This being the order of the words, no Text can possibly with more evidence
con^ute the Doctor than this which himself cites: for what can be clearer, if
before Consecration our Savior said, He would drink no ^ore of the fruit of
the Vine? then that what he drank after was not of the fruit of the Vine? But
besides this, though our Lord should have called it, after Consecration, the
fruit of the Vine, as Saint Paul calls the other Symbol Bread: this does not
argue against a Change in their nature; For Moses his Rod, after it was changed
into a Serpent is called a Rod still, because it had been one [Exod. 7. 12.]
and [Io. 2. 9.] it is said, That the Master of the Feast tasted the Water that
was made Wine.

13. Is not now the Doctor's Insincerity evident his insincerity even in the
Pulpit? has he not palpably mis-inform'd his Majesty and so illustrious an
Auditory? And though he should still continue to prefer St. Matthews order of
Narration before St. Lukes, yet what St. Luke writes cannot possibly be applied
to the Sacrament: For, though those special words, Matthew. 26. 29. (...)
I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine until, etc. if they
stood alone, might seem applicable to the consecrated Chalice: yet those other
of Saint Luke, I will not any more eat of this Pass^over, until, etc. cannot
possibly be applied to the consecrated Element of Bread: and therefore since
both these Sayings were manifestly intended of the same Subject; It is more
than evident they were meant only of the Paschal Supper, and not at all of the
Sacrament.

14. Sermon. page 14.
As for Bellarmins quarrel with St. Thomas his affirming that one Body cannot
be locally in two places: and his revengeful inference, that neither then ca^
they be Sacramentally: All I will say hereto shall be, that if there be any
quarrel on Bellarmins part, which truly I do not find to be such but may very
friendly be composed. Yet however since it is only about a Scholastical Notion
of Locality, Circumscription, etc. and it is apparent, that both these Doctors
held a true Substantial presence of our Lords Body in the Sacrament, as the
Church teaches, I will not, by troubling my self about composing the matter
between them, invite the Doctor hereafter to unnecessary excursions: It is only
the Churches Doctrine that I engage my self to justify.

15. Sermon. page 25.
In the last place, touching Berin arius his submission, if the Form were the
same mentioned in the Doctors Margin from Floriacensis, there is nothing
appears in it favoring Consubstantiation. Certainly, it was sufficient, if he
spoke sincerely, to acquit him from any suspicion of holding only a Figurative
Presence of Christ's Body: and that only was his business. As for his
Expressions that Our Lords Body, not only in Mystery, but Truth is handled,
broken and chawed with the teeth of Faithful Communicants, unless they be
understood Sacramentally, they are far from being justifiable. And so are all
the Capharnaitical Objections that Protestants make against Catholic Doctrine
in this matter. We acknowledge more than a Spiritual, an Oral Manducatian, but
without any Suffering or Change in the Divine Body it self: We acknowledge it
is Nourishment to us, but not after a Carnal manner; Christ is not changed by
Digestion into our Bodies; yet sanctifies even our Bodies also, as well as our
Souls: Greg. Nyss. orat. Catech. c. 37.
Because in Saint Gregory Nyssen his Expression, Insinuating it self into our
Bodies, by an union with our Lord's Immortal Body, We are made Partakers of
Immortality.

CHAP. XII.
Of Communion under one Species-Confirm'd by the practice of the Primitive
Church in private Communions. The Preachers Objections solved.

1. HIS fifth pretended Novelty, imputed to the Catholic Church is, Sermon. page
9.
Communion under one Species, no older, says he, then since the time of
Aquinas, unless they will own it from the Manichees. Ibid. page 25.
But we find our Savior intended the Chalice to every guest: Drink all of
this, says he. And St. Paul speaks as well of drinking the Mystical Blood, as
eating the Body of Christ.

2. To the substance of what is here alleged, we readily subscribe. We
acknowledge our Savior instituted this Mystery in both kinds: That the Apostles
received it in both kinds: That St. Paul speaks as well of drinking, etc. That
most commonly in the Church till a little before the times of Aquinas, in the
public Celebration of these Mysteries, the people communicated in both kinds:
All this we agree to.

3. But the general Tradition of the Church, at least from his beginning, will
not permit us to yield, that the receiving in both kinds was esteemed by the
Church necessary to the essence of the Communion, or integrity of the
participation of Christ's Body and Blood, or that it is fitly called by him a
half Communion, when delivered and received only in one kind. On the contrary,
we appeal to Dr. Pierces own Conscience, whether, if we should yield this, we
should not be overwhelmed with the Depositions of the most ancient Fathers
against us: As evidently appears in Communions anciently practiced under one
kind only, and this upon many occasions: As during the times of persecution in
Domestic Communions mentioned by Tertullian, Tertull. lib. 2. ad Uxo.
St. Cyprian, and others, in which the holy Eucharist was delivered to the
Faithful under the species of Bread alone, Cypr. l. de lapsis.
and by them carried home, to be reverently participated by them, Ambr. orat.
1. in obitu frat.
according to their particular Devotions: Aug. lib. 2. lit. Petil. c. 23.
The same was practiced in communicating Infants, or innocent Children of more
years, Eusebius. lib. 5. and lib. 7.
(witness besides the said Fathers, the practice of the Church of
Constantinople mentioned by Nicephorus: Beda in Mart. ad 15. August.
) In communicating the Sick, and Penitents at the point of death: Niseph. hist.
lib. 18. cap. 6.
In communions at Sea: In communions sent to other Provinces, etc.

4. In all these Cases the Communicants were esteemed to be partakers of ^ntire
Christ, nor did they think they received more of him at public Communions in
the Church, when the Sacrament was delivered in both species, then when at home
in one only. They believed it was Christ entire which they received in every
divided particle of the species of Bread, and every divided drop of the species
of Wine: and that the flesh of Christ could not be participated without a
concomitance of his Blood, nor the Blood without the Flesh, nor either of them
without a concomitance of his Soul and Divinity. Ambr. de ils qui Myster. c. 9.
Hence St. Ambrose, Christ is in that Sacrament, because it is the Body of
Christ. Con^yl. Ephesians. in Ep^st. ad Nestor.
And the Council if Ephesus, That those who approach to the Mystical
Benedictions do participate the Flesh of Christ, not as common mere Flesh,
August. in Psalm. 33.
but truly quickening Flesh. And St. Augustine, That Christ, [ferebatur in
manibus suis] did carry himself in his own hands: and this in a litteral sense.
And St. Cyril of Alexandria says, Cyril. Alex. lib. 12. in Joan. cap. 32.
By the unparted Garment of Christ was mystically signified, that the four
parts of the world, being brought to salvation by the Gospel, did divide among
themselves his Flesh without dividing it. For (says he) the only begotten Son
of God passing into, and, by his Flesh, sanctifying the Soul and Body of each
of them severally and in particular, is in each of them entirely and
undividedly, being every where one, and in no sort divided.

5* These things thus premised (which are certain Truths, and cannot by the
Preacher be denied) since he will needs make a quarrel with the Catholic Church
upon this Subject, he must necessarily take upon him to demonstrate, 1. Either,
that these Communions under one species, allowed and practiced on so many
occasions in the Primitive times, were half Communions, sacrilegious
Transgressions of the Institution of our Lord, contrary to the teaching of St.
Paul, conspiring with the Heresy of the Manichees, etc. And doing so, he will
contradict himself, whilst he pretends half Communions to be a Novelty since
their times. 2. Or, if these Practices were justifiable, and that the Church
had warrant and authority to do as she did, he must prove that such an
Authority could be extended only to private Persons or Fanilies, and by no
means to public Congregations: That the same was a whole Communion in a
Chamber, and but a half Communion in a Church: That a sick man, or one at Sea,
etc. broke not the institution of Christ whilst he communicated under one kind,
but did break it when he was in health or upon firm ground.

6. Till these things be proved by him (which will be ad Graecas Calindas he
must of necessity grant, that here is no Nove^ty at all, no change in the
present Catholic church as to Doctrine: And that the change which is made in
external Discipline, is of so great importance, that Protestants (who would not
have separated from her Communion; if she had given them leave to break our
Saviors Institution only privately) will renounce her, because she thinks and
knows that a private House and a Church cannot make the same action both lawful
and unlawful, and therefore since she had authority within doors, she cannot be
deprived of it abroad.

7. Nay further, Doctor Pierce's task does not end here: for though he should
be able to prove all this, yet if this be one of the provocations, and causes
of their separation, he cannot justify that separation till they have made a
trial, whether the Church will not dispense with them as to this point of
Discipline, and after trial, been refused. For surely he will not esteem Schism
a matter so inconsiderable, as to expose themselves to the guilt of it, because
others besides them are obliged and content to receive under one species,
whilst themselves are left at liberty: They will not unnecessarily make tumults
and divisions in the Church by disputing against others, when they themselves
are not concerned. Now, that such a dispensation may possibly be had, does
appear, in that the Church by a General Council has either given to, or
acknowledged in her Supreme Pastor a sufficient authority to proceed in this
matter according to his own prudence, Conc. T^id. Ses^. 22. in fin.
and as he shall see it to be pr^fitable to the Church, and for the spiritual
good of those that shall demand the use of the Chalice.

8. As for us Catholics, we are bread up to the Orders established by Gods
Church: And being assured that our Lord will not forget his Promises, and
consequently his Church shall never mislead us to our danger, we do not think
it our duty to question the Churches prudence, or set up a private Tribunal to
censure her Laws: We are not sure we know all the Reasons that induced the
Council of Constance to confirm a practice almost generally introduced by
custom before. Yet some Reasons we see, which truly are of very great moment
for that purpose, to wit, the wonderful increase of the numbers of
Communicants, and wonderful decay of their Devotion: From whence could not be
prevented very great dangers of irreverences and effusion oft-times of the
precious blood of our Lord, considering the defect of providence, and caution
to be expected in multitudes, little sensible of Religion.

It is probable likewise that the Heresy of Berengarius, who acknowledged no
more in the Sacrament, than the mere signs of the body and blood of our Lord,
might induce the Catholics publicly to practice what the Primitive Church did
privately, to the end they might thereby demonstrate, that though they received
not both the Signs, yet they were not defrauded of being partakers of all that
was entirely contained under both the Species, which was whole Christ, not his
body only, but also his blood, etc.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Sacrifice of the Mass. Asserted Universally by Antiquity. The true
Doctrine concerning it explained.

1. Sermon. Page 13.
HIS sixth supposed Novelty (which is the third that regards the blessed
Sacrament) is the Sacrafice of the Mass. But how is this proved to be a
Novelty? Ipse dixit. Not one Text, not one Quotation appears in the Margin; and
why? Alas! where should he find any? Since there is not a Father in Gods Church
from the very Apostles, but acknowledged a Christian Sacrifice; nor any old
Heretic ever denied it. Nay, who besides himself calls it a Noveltie? I am
sure Dr. Fulk Fulk. con^ut. of Purg. page 362, etc.
expressly confesses that Te^tullian, Cyprian, Austin, Hierom, and a great many
more do witness that Sacrifice, yea, Sacrifice for the Dead is the Tradition
of the Apostles. And Mr. Ascham acknowledges that the Sacrifice of the Mass is
so ancient, Ascham. Apol. pro c^na Dom.
that no first beginning of it can be showed. Yet Dr. Pierce would fain have
proved it to be a Novelty Gladly would he have applied to this, his From the
beginning it was not so: But could not find one Word in Antiquity for his
purpose. However, for all that it must not be omitted. His Auditors would have
wonderd to hear the Church accused, and the clause touching the Sacrifice left
out of the Indictment.

2. To please therefore popular ears, he named it, as an ill thing: But coming
to print his Sermon, he leaves that Margin empty: For what could be in the
Fathers to fill it? It was not for his purpose to quote St. Ignatius's saying,
Ignat. Ep. ad. Smirn. cent. 2. cap. 4.
It is not lawful either to offer, or to immolate the Sacrifice or (...)
without the Bishop: (Which, (say the Centurists) are dangerous words, and seeds
of Errors) Or St. Ireneus, Iren. l. 4. c. 32.
who tells us that our Lord, consecrating the Mystical Elements, Taught us a
New Oblation of the New Testament, which the Church having received from the
Apostles, offers to God through the whole World. Cypr. Epist. ad Cyril.
Or St. Cyprian, whose words are, Who was more a Priest of the most High God,
then our Lord Jesus Christ? Who offered a Sacrifice to God the Father? and
offered the very same that Melchisedech had offered, that is, Bread and Wine, to
wit, his own Body and Blood, etc. and commanded the same to be afterward done
in memory of him. That Priest therefore does truly supply the place and
function of Christ, and imitates that which Christ did, who undertakes to offer
according as he sees Christ himself offered. In which one Epistle he calls the
Eucharist a Sacrifice, seven times, and above twenty times he affirms that the
Symbols are offered in it.

3. The truth is, in the writings of Antiquity, the celebration of these
Mysteries, is scarce ever called by other name, but Oblation, Sacrifice,
Immolation, etc. And because the Fathers may be said to speak figuratively and
rhetorically, the Canons also of the Church, which ought to speak properly,
scarce ever use any other expression. See the third among the Apostolic Canons;
The 58 th. Canon of the Council of Laodicea: The 20 th. Canon of the first
Council of A^les: The 40 th. Canon of the Council of Cart^age: And the 18 th.
Canon of the first General Co^ucil of Nice, in which are these words, The Holy
Synod is informed, that in some places Deacons administer the Eu^harist to
Priests: A thing which neither any Canon nor Custom has delivered, that those
who have no power of offering should give the Body of Christ to those who
offer. Whole volums may be transcribed to this effect: I will only therefore
refer him to St. Hierom on Titus, Hier. on. Ti^. cap. 1. Chrysostom. 21. hom.
and St. Chrysostom on the Acts, where he will find the Eucharist not only a
Sacrifice, but a Sacrifice for remission of sins,; a Sacrifice for the Priest
that offers; a Sacrifice for the multitude; a Sacrifice for the procuring of
plenty, etc. sutably to the modern and ancient Liturgies.

4. If after all this he will not allow any of these expressions in Doctors,
Canons, Liturgies, etc. to be proper and litteral, St. Augustine will contradict
him: Who says, Presbyters and Bishops are now in the Church properly called
[Sacerdotes] sacrificing Priests. Aug. lib. 20. de Civ. D. cap. 10.
And because the fancy which Protestants have entertained against the term
Sacrifice, Oblation, etc. proceeds from a mistake of the true sense in which
the Church intends it; for ordinarily the conception of a Sacrifice, is
supposed to import an immolation, shedding of blood, killing, etc. and no such
matter appearing here, but only a commemoration of a former real immolation and
shedding of Christ's blood, therefore generally among all Sects, divided from
the Church, the title of Sacrifice will not be endured.

5. To prevent therefore for the future such a misunderstanding, let them be
pleased to take notice that all the Sacrifices of the Law were shadows and
types of the Sacrifices of our Lord, and the Legal Priesthood a type of his
Priesthood: But above all other Sacrifices and functions of Priesthood, those
were most lively figures of our Lord, which were performed on a certain day,
only once every year, for the sins of the whole Congregation: In the solemn
celebration of which Sacrifice, besides the immolation of it on the Altar, the
High Priest alone was appointed to carry of the blood of that Victime into the
most holy place within the Veil, and there to sprinkle it before the
Propitiatory or Mercy-Seat. This is that Sacrifice which St. Paul especially
applies to our Lord, and shows that Christ, as a Victime, was once, and but
once immolated on the Altar of the Cross for the sins of all mankind: And that
for the merit of his obedience to the death even of the Cross, he was raised
from death, and made a Priest after the order of Melchisedech, a Kingly Priest,
a Priest who had power given him in Heaven and Earth, to apply the merits of
his own Sacrifice: And that the proper function of his Regal Priesthood, was
the entering with his immolated Body into the Sancta Sanctorum, the highest
Heavens, there appearing before his heavenly Fathers Throne, and presenting
that most precious Victime to him. This function of Priesthood, far more
august than the immolation, he does, and will continually exercise to the end
of the World. By virtue of this he is made Head of the Church, he has the power
of sending the Holy Ghost, etc. and hereby he perfects Redemption.

6. And withal, knowing of what infinite value and virtue this function of his
Priesthood is, he has been pleased to execute, as it were by proxy, the same
function on Earth, that himself immediately performs in Heaven. For which
purpose he has instituted Bishops and Priests to be not only his Ministers, but
Substitutes and Vicegerents on Earth, giving them power to consecrate, and by
cosecrating to place upon the Altar that very Body and Blood which was
immolated on the Cross, and is now present before his Father in Heaven. This
body and blood they Sacrifice, this they offer, this they with the People
participate. It is not a Sacrifice of immolation, in that mistaken sense, for
nothing is slain, the Victime suffers nothing: It is but a Commemorative
Sacrifice of Immolation: But it is, in the most proper rigorous sense, an
Oblation, the very same, of the very same body and blood that our Lord now
offers in Heaven: And the same virtue it has, the same effects it produces,
propitiation, remission of sins, participation of the graces of Gods holy
Spirit, and all blessings both spiritual and temporal. So that in a word, as
under the Law the Legal propitiation was said to perfected by the High Priests
offering the blood in the most holy place: So by this Oblation of Christ's bood
in the Heavenly Sanctuary, perfect Redemption i^ obtained, and by the
Commemorative Oblation of the same body and blood by his Priests in our earthly
Sanctuaries, an application of the benefit and virtue of that only meritorious
Sacrifice once offered on the Cross, is then procured unto us for remission of
our sins, and the donation of all other benefits, spiritual and temporal.

7. In regard of this sublime function of the Priest it is, that the holy
Fathers exalt his office before that of Princes, yea even of Angels: in this
regard they call the oblation it self the most dreadful Mystery* at which the
Angels themselves assist with reverence and astonishment. To which purpose I
will content my self with only one or two passages of St. Chrysost^m: When the
Sacrifice, says he, is brought out of the Quire, Chrysostom. in Ephesians. cap. 1.
hom. 3.
Christ himself the Lamb of our Lord immolated; When thou shall hear the
Deacons voice crying, Let us pray all in common, when thou see the Curtains
and Veyls of the Gates drawn, then think the Heavens are opened and the Angels
descend. And in an other place: Id. l. 6. de Sacerdot.
When the Priest has inv^cated the Holy Spirit and perfected the Sacrifice full
of terror and reverence, touching and handling with his Fingers him who is
Lord of all things, to how sublime a rank is he elevated, etc. In that time the
Angels assist the Priest, and all the Celestical powers send forth cries of
Joy, all the places about the Altar are filled with Quires of Angels in honor
of him who is offered. This we may have ground to believe, if we only consider
the super-eminent greatness of the Sacrifice then performed. But moreover I
have heard from the report of one who learnt the story from the mouth of an
admirable old man, to whom many rev^lations of divine Mysteries have been
revealed from Heaven: How God was graciously pleased to honor him with a Vision
of these things, and how in the time of the Sacrifice he sau suddenly appear,
with as much splendour as human sight could support, a multitude of Angels
clothed with white Robes encompassing the Altar, and having their heads
inclined in the same posture, as we often see the Soldiers in the presence of
the Emperor. Thus Saint Chrysostom.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Veneration of Images. The Roman-Churches approved practice of it most
suitable to Reason.

1. THe seventh Novelty produced by the Preacher is the worshipping of Images:
but it being only named, without any proofs or quotations, I will spare them
too: And to show that the term of worshipping is none of ours, but invented by
Protestants to render a most innocent Doctrine odious, and moreover to
demonstrate the no grounds such Preachers as he have to accuse the Catholic
Church of* I know not what, Idolatry in this matter of Images, I will presume
to borrow from an Author (who will not be angry with me for it) a passage
touching this Point, by which he will see, that Catholics do no more than every
man's own reason will justify, in the respect they give to sacred Images. It is
the namelesse Author of an Answer to Mr. Bagshaw's Treatise of Infallibility:
where he will find this following passage, Answer to Mr. Bagsh. p. 70, etc.
in which there are some glances, that regard only such furious impertinents as
Mr. Bagshaw, which therefore I am far from thinking applyable to Doctor Pierce.

2. ^hus then writes that Author, intending to demonstrate that in the
veneration of Images taught by the Catholic Church there is nothing at all
swerving from common reason: Give me leave, says he, to propose to such a
sober man as you are, altogether compounded of Reason, some few Questions.
First then suppose there were represented to you while you were thinking of
other matters, or talking, a Picture of our Lord ha^g^ng on the Cross: could
you p^ssibly avoid the calling to mind who our Lord was, and what he had done
or suffered for you? And if not being able to forbid the entrance of such
thoughts into your mind on such an occasion would your reason dictate to you
that you had done ill in changing your thoughts from the World to God, would
you repent of it, asking pardon of God, and praying that such a tentation might
never befall you a^terwards? Does your enlightened reason suggest ^his to you?
Truly it i^ do, I believe you are of a temper of mind, almost specifically
different from all mank^^d besides, and they must change their nature before
you make them of your persuasion, or Church. And yours is no a common sense, if
it either tell you, that by your beating down of Crosses and breaking Church
windows, our good Countrymen think more of God than they did while those
Remembrances were standing: or if they think less, that it is better for them
to forget him.

3. To make a step further, Let it he supposed that at the same time you saw
before you several Pictures of several Persons in a contrar^ manner regarded by
you, as of St. Peter and Judas, of our late Severaign and Bradshaw: Or put case
you had in one hand a Bible, and in the other the infamous story of Pantagruel:
does not your common sense and reason tell you, that such Pictures or Books
force upon you quite contrary thoughts and affections, which regard those
Pictures or Books not simply considered, but as representing such Persons, and
containing such matters? Which thoughts being just, and not at all harmfull to
you, and withal almost impossible to be avoided, I cannot find any reason why
Reason should forbid them: I am sure common sense will not.

4. If then it be according to reason, and common sense, and likewise
unavoidably to admit such different thoughts: will not reason also warrant you
to express outwardly by words or actions, whatever you may without any fault
think inwardly? For my part I cannot imagine any scruple in this. If then I may
and must think reverently or contemptuously of the Objects, I may as well
speak, or behave my self externally after the same manner to them respectively;
For whatsoever is ill or good in words or actions, is so likewise in thoughts.

5. Now to show that such thoughts or affections regard not the Persons only
but the Pictures also as representations of such Persons, ask your own heart
and you will find that you would not place St. Peter's picture, or the King's
in an unclean, dishonest place. If any one should spit upon either of them,
your heart would rise against him, and tempt you to strike him ^ which it would
not do, if the same contemptuous usage were showed to the picture of Judas or
Bradshaw. Now this is so naturally imbibed in the hearts of all Mankind, that
in all Kings Courts a respect and outward mark of reverence is requird to the
Chamber of Presence, or Chair of State: and a refusal of it, much more a
contemptuous behavior, would be criminal. To apply this to the forementioned
Books: You could not bring your reason to permit you to tear out a leaf of the
Bible for an unclean use, as you could without the least remorse do to the
story of Pantagruel or Aesop's fables..

6. Let us now consider what kind of respect this is that we express to such
Images. Comparing the Images of St. Peter and our Sovereign's together, we find
that a respectful regard is had to both, and a contemptuous usage of either
would displease us: Yet it is not the same kind of respect: For St. Peter's
Image we consider as of a man that puts us in mind of Heaven ann Heavenly
things, one highly favored by Almighty God, a principal Courtier in his
Kingdom, and one that by his writings and example has been a great instrument
of promoting our eternal happiness. We do not so esteem of every good King.
Therefore to show the difference of our respect to each, we would choose to
give St. Peter's picture a place in our Oratory, and the Kings in our Gallery.
But what Names to give these different respects is not easy to determine. It is
plain, that which is given to the King's picture is purely a civil respect. But
what shall we call that which is given to St. Peter's? If we say it is
Religious, you will quarrel, as derogating from God. Let us therefore call it a
sacred Veneration, or honor: For since all things, that are appointed on
purpose to mind us of God, of Heaven, and the salvation of our Souls, we call
Sacred, this Name may well be applied to such a Picture. But moreover, because
there are not invented such variety of Names as there are things, and there are
far fewer sorts of outward postures of our Bodies denoting respect, than there
are Names or Words: Hence it comes to pass that when we would express a Civil
and a Sacred, yea a Religious respect, we are forced to to use the same outward
behavior of bowing, kneeling, etc. to Fathers and Magistrates, which we do to
God himself: 1 Chronicles. 29. 20.
Yea we find in the Scripture Kings adored, and a prostration of Bodies paid to
them. Yet for all this no man will suspect that thereby any dishonor was
intended to God, or the Honor due only to him was paid to Creatures.

7. In the next place let reason and common sense give judgment of the
distinction between the respect that may be paid to the Picture of St. Peter,
and that which ought to be paid to Himself, in case he appeared to us glorified
as he is. A Divine respect we pay to neither, though sometimes we use such
postures as we do when we pray or worship God. It is then a Sacred Veneration
only: But yet there are some expressions of respect which we would use to the
Person, that would be ridiculous to the Picture, as reverently to speak to him,
to beg his Prayers to God for us, to ask a Question, etc.

8. Our last Enquiry shall be into the difference of regard (if any there be)
to our Savior's Picture and St. Peter's, the former representing to us him
that is both God and Man, the later merely Man. However we shall find that the
regard to both the Pictures is of the same species and nature, that is, only
Sacred: because a Picture we never look upon, but as an instrument to put us in
mind, or to call to our memories an object: And therefore it being of our own
framing, is not capable of any respect beyond that which is due to so material,
inferior a thing, what ever the object represented by it be. True it is, that
the internal affections and thoughts occasionally raised in our minds will be
infinitely different, for we shall think upon Christ with Adoration, Love,
Resignation and Obedience due to God only: Not so of St. Peter: But the
Pictures themselves will be treated by us as Sacred Pictures only, that deserve
a respect proportionable: And since it is eviden^ they are capable of a sinful
dis-respect, consequently a due respect may be paid to them. I say ( may) not
always ought to be: For then it would never be fit to put on ones Hat, etc. in
a Room where there hangs a Crucifix.

9. To sum up briefly our meaning in this whole matter: We find minds too apt
to be distracted from meditating on Divine things: Therefore we help our selves
by such as will call to our memories, and fix our thoughts upon objects good
for our Souls: Such are holy Pictures both in times of prayer and out, we find
this benefit by them. Being such sacred things, we must renounce our reason, if
we deny a respect may be due to them: But by honoring with an outward regard a
Picture, we intend only to give a testimony what respect we beat to the person
or holy thing represented: And though for want of variety of postures, we show
some part of the same outward Reverence to the Pictures of St. Peter and our
Lord, yet that signifies, we only venerate St. Peter, as a glorious Saint, yet
a Creature, but that we adore Christ, as God: And no man that sees or knows us,
can think otherwise. So that unless it be a fin to show outwardly what we are
obliged to think inwardly, there is not the least fault committed.

10. And now (Mr. Bagshow) give me leave to acquaint you with your mistakes.
First, this respect called by the Church, Honor and Veneration, which we affirm
may be paid to Sacred Images, you call Worshipping of Images, merely to make in
odious to your ignorant Proselites; For worship is commonly taken to be that
honor which is due only to God, and which we abhor to give to Images. But
Secondly, You give it an other name more abominable, calling it Idolatry, such
as God punished in the worst of Pagans. Once at least in your life speak your
Conscience: Do you think, or only suspect, that we Roman Catholics worship
false Gods, and true Devils? Do we consider our Images, as they did their
Idols, to which by Magical conjurations they annexed an evil Spirit to do
wonders, and to extort Devine worship from the seduced people? Taketheed Sir,
how you persist in so unjust a Blasphemy against Gods Church A time will come
that you will be called to a strict account for it: It concerns you therefore
to make some reparation.

11. But after all this take notice that the Catholic Church, though it declare
that such a veneration may fitly be given to holy Images, as common reason, and
human nature cannot choose but allow: Yet it commands none to afford them even
so much. You may be a Roman Catholic all you life, and never be obliged to
perform any external respect to an Image. There is not in Catholic Countries a
Groom or Kitchin-Maid so ignorant, but would rather burn an Image, then afford
it any honor due to God only. And shall those that think thus, and do only what
human reason generally approves, and cannot hinder, be esteemed and published by
you the only Christians in the World, fit to be thrust out of all Christian
Kingdoms, and executed as Traitors, though otherwise they be acknowledg^most
faithful, peaceable men, and obedient Subjects? Are you not afraid of, In quo
judicio judicaveritis, judicabimini?

12. You see Sir, how sinee you will not admit of Authorities to justify the
Belief and Practice of Roman Catholics, but only common sense and reason, I
have complied with you: And now in one world tell you, that you must never hope
to make any sober man believe that Roman Catholics are Idolaters, or even
faulty in the matter of Images, till you can demonstrate, 1. That it is
unlawful to make use of our seeing faculty to put us in mind of God. 2. That he
dishonors the King that shall with reverence, bare headed, and in a kneeling
posture receive a Letter or Mandate that com^^ from him. 3. That it is a
contempt of God to go through a Church with ones head uncovered. 4. And that it
is unlawful and irreligious to make a scruple of using a Leaf of the Bible in
the house of Office.

13. For a Farewell, I will conclude this Point with a Story, the truth whereof
several Gentlemen, Protestants too, in this Town are able to justify. In the
Year 1651. a devout Italian Friar, being appointed to preach in the Great Dome
at Padua, the Archbishop present, and having been informed that among his
Auditors there were some English Protestants, who in discourse had earnestly
objected (as you do) Idolatry to Catholics: He therefore that he might
encounter such a scandal, made choice of the Doctrine concerning Images for the
subject of a great part of his Sermon. And when he came to that Point, holding
in his hand a Crucifix, he could his hearers, That that Image did in one glance
lively represent, even to the most ignorant beholder, our Lord Jesus, God and
Man, and almost all the Circumstances of his most bitter and accursed death, so
patiently and willingly suffered for us. Thereupon with great Passion and
Rhetoric he magnified the love of our Lord hanging on the C^oss, earnestly
pressing his Hearers to return a proportionable Love and Duty to him. And
during this Discourse, he often, with great reverence and tenderness of
affection embraced and devoutly kissed the Crucifix. Having said much to this
purpose, after a little pause he pursued his Discourse, telling them he could
not believe or suspect that any one who had heard and seen what he had said and
done, could reasonably imagine that he had any intention to dishonor our Lord,
by that which he had done to the Crucifix which represented him, much less
that he adored it, as if he thought it a kind of God, that he put his trust in
it, as expecting any good from it, as if (he knew not what) Divinity, Virtue
or Sanctity was in that carved piece of wood. Notwithstanding, because he had
heard that such a scandalous imputation was by some misperswaded persons laid
on the Church, he would then and there undeceive them. Thereupon he spit upon
the Crucifix, threw it scornfully to the ground, and trampled it under his feet.

14. You see, Mr. Bagshaw, what kind of Idolaters the Papists are. Against this
Idolatry, let us see what express Scripture you can produce. This is the great
crime for which there can be no expiation but oppressions, Imprisonments, and
Gallowses. Now if what has been here said give you no satisfaction, in case
you have a mind to reply, do not practice your old way of snatching a phrase or
expression out of a single Author, a School-man or Controvertist, making the
whole Church answerable for one man's indiscretion. But search what the Church
her self has declared in the Council of Trent: Imagines Christi, Conc. Trid.
Sess. 25.
etc. in Templis praesertim retinendae, etc. Images of Christ, etc. ought to be
retained in Churches especially, and due honor and veneration exhibited to
them, not that there is believed any Divinity or Virtue in them, for which they
ought to be worshipped, or that they are to be petitioned for any thing, or any
confidence to be reposed in them, but because the honor exhibited to them is
referred to the Prototypes they represent. Dispute against this as well as you
can; and be assured you shall either be answered, or told you are unconquerable.

CHAP. XV.
The Roman Churches Prudence in restraining the too free use of Scripture from
the Unlearned. The miseries of this Kingdom justly ascribed to a defect in such
Prudence. Of Prayers not in a Vulgar Tongue; The Causes and Grounds thereof.
That practice not contrary to St. Paul.

I. DOctor Pierce his next (which is a double) Novelty, regards not any
Doctrines, but only a Point of Discipline in the Church, Sermon. page 26.
which is, The withholding Scripture from the Vulgar, and practicing public
Devotions in an unknown Tongue. Concerning the former, he says, The Scriptures
were written in Hebrew, the mother tongue of the Jew: and in Greek, a Tongue
most known to Eastern Nations: And afterward were translated into the
Dalmatick by St. Hierom, into the Gothic by Vulphilas, into the Arminian by
Chrysostom, etc. and the Vulgar Latin was anciently the Vulgar Language of the
Italians, etc.

2. Truly the Doctor has, if it be well considered, made choice of a very
proper season to renew a quarrel against the Roman Church, upon this Point, and
to endeavor the engaging his Majesty in it, as if the calamities already
happened, both to the Royal Family, and the whole Nation, were either too little,
or not to be imputed chiefly to that Error. He, and all Christendom, has seen
the blessed effects that this prostituting Scripture to the passions and lusts
of the rude and common people of all Conditions, Ages and Sexes, has wrought
the last twenty years in this Kingdom. What was it but Scripture (as it was
used, and of which ill use themselves were the first causes, and hereafter will
never be able to prevent) that justified Discontents against the Government,
both Civil and Ecclesiastical; that put Swords and Guns into the hands of
Subjects against their Kings, and all that were faithful to them; that
dissolved the entire frame of the Kingdom; that encouraged men to Plunder, and
all manner of Rapines; that Arraigned and Murdered our last most Excellent
KING, that endangered his now living Son, our most gracious Kings life, and
forced him into a long necessitous banishment; that has revived and given
strength to old and new Monsters of Heresies, to the astonishment of Mankind,
some of which are no where else to be seen, and the rest in no where place so
venomous, as in England: Let but the Doctor remember how much mischief the
perverse interpretation of this one Text, which none but the ignorant could
mistake, produced in this Nation: Having a form of godliness, but denying the
power thereof How did this ring in their ears, and stir them up to reject and
hate all set-forms of Prayer! How, with this Text alone, often repeated, and
industriously enlarged, and zealously applied by the holy Lecturers, were their
very hearts set on fire to burn the grand Idol of the Common Prayer Book! And
yet, after all this, the Doctor makes or renews quarrels with the Roman
Catholic Church, because she is unwilling, by imitating them, to give a birth
from her bowels to such mischiefs as these.

3. Yet cannot be denied, that Doctor Pierce was subtle, for having a design
(in recompense of the service Roman Catholics have done them) to expose them
to the common rage of all these Monsters, he could not make choice of a subject
more proper for his purpose than this, in which alone they were all interessed,
not for the good they reap by Scripture, but because without it, they would not
have the advantage to do half so much mischief.

4. Yet must he not think he can so blind men's eyes, but they know well enough
that English Protestants are in their very Souls grieved, That it is now too
late for them to e^deavor how they may imitate both the Prudence and Charity of
Catholic Churches in the dispensing of Scripture. Our Pastors do not, as he
wrongfully seems to charge them, forbid the Translation of Scripture into
Vulgar Tongues, since there is scarce any Nation but has it. There are
Catholic Translations of the Scripture into English, French, Dutch, Italian,
Spanish, etc. for the use of those of the Laity, who are by their Spiritual
Guides judged such, as that they may reap benefit and no harm by the reading
thereof. And what more does the Preacher show in the practice of the ancient
times, in saying that the Holy Scriptures were then translated into the
Dalmatick Tongue by St. Hierom, then I show in justification also of the later
times (which he would here condemn) in saying as truly, that the Holy
Scriptures are also found translated long ago in Wicliffs the Reformers time,
by the allowance and Authority of the Catholic Church (of which thus Dr. F^lk)
That the Scriptures were extant in English both before and after Wicliffs time,
and not of his Translation, beside your conjecture out of Li^d^ood, it is
manifestly proved by so many ancient ^riters Copies of the English Bible
differing in ^^anslation, yet to be showed, of which Wicleffs Translation could
be but one. Or in saying, That the same Holy Scriptures have been Translated
also of late, since Luthers, a second Reformer's time, with the allowance of
the same Church Catholic, by the industry of the Rhemish Divines.

But Catholic Governors, knowing how impossible it is for ignorant Persons to
understand it, and for passionate minds to make good use of it, esteem it more
conduceing to their edification and the common peace, that such easily misled
Soul^ should be instructed in their Du^ies, both as Christians and Subjects, by
plain Catechisms and Instructions prudently and sufficiently, with all
plainness gathered out of Scripture, then that the Bible should be put into
their hands, a Book, the tenth part whereof scarce concerns them to know, and
in which the several Points wherein they are concerned are so dispersed in
several places, so variously, and sometimes so obscurely, and so dubiously
expressed, that all the learning and subtilty of Doctors, since it was written
till these days, have been exercised in enquiring, comparing, discussing
several Texts, and clearing the true Doctrine of them fit for the conception of
vulgar capacities. The whole Direction, necessary to govern Pastors in their
permiting others to read the Holy Scripture^, is fully and excellently containd
in that on: Text of the Second Epistle of St. Peter, 3. 16. Wherein (the
Epistles of St. Paul) there are certain things hard to be understood, which the
unlearned and unstable pervert (as also the other Scriptures) to their own
perdition. Two sorts of Rea^ers are here plainly forbidden by the Apostle; for
certainly none o^ them who we know are apt to pervert the Scriptures, should be
permitted to read them. Consider then how far these two words reach, unlearned
and unstable: I doubt, to ninety nine of every hundred in England: Which if
admitted, not above one in a hundred, were good discipline observed, would be
allowed to read the Bible.

Nor can it be Objected (as usually Protestants do) that the Scriptures are
safely clear to every one in Fundamentals, and mistakable only in Points of
lesser consequence, since the very Text says, they are both hard to be
understood, and pervertible to the perdition of their Readers; and if such
Points as import Salvation or Damnation be not Fundamental, I Am utterly
ignorant of the meaning of that word. Let then the Learned, and the ste^dy
Christian read, and study, and meditate the Bible as often and as long as he
will, every Catholic will commend him, but by no means should that liberty be
given to the unlearned and unstable, lest the Scripture it self condemn it, as
a boldness that may endanger their eternal Salvation.

And it is observeable in King Henry the 8 th. who, after he had caused the
English Bible to be published, so as to be read by all without any restraint,
was forced again, after three years experience (wherein he saw the many strange
and horrid opinions rising among the ignorant people by occasion thereof) by a
new Act of Parliament to abridge the liberty formerly granted, See Inj^nctions
A. D. 1536 1538. ( Fox. p. 1000.) set forth by Cromwell. Stat. 34, 35. Hen. 8.
c. 1.
and to prohi^it upon the penalty of a months Imprisonment toties quoties, that
any Woman, Husbandman, Artificer, Yeoman, Servingman, Apprentice or Iournyman
Labourer, etc. should read them to themselves or to others, privately or openly.
See Stat. 34, 35. Hen. 8. 1. Because (says the Preface of that Statue) his
Highness perceived that a great multitude of his Subjects, most especially of
the lower sort, had so abused the Scriptures, that they had thereby grown and
increased in diverse naughty and erroneous Opinions, and by occasion thereof
fallen into great Divisions and Dissentions among themselves. And if you say,
the Opinions the King calls here erroneous, were the Protestant Doctrines,
discovered by the Vulgar from the new light of the Scriptures, you may see the
very Opinions, as the Bishops collected them in Fox, page 1136. un-ownable by
any sober Protestant or Christian. A thing perhaps not unworthy the serious
consideration of the present Governors, who have seen the like effects in these
days.

5. But as for other Lay-persons of better judgment and capacities, and of
whose submission to the Churches Authority, and aversion from Novelties
sufficient proofs can be given, our Ecclesiastical Governors are easily enough
entreated, yea, they are well enough inclined to exhort them to read the
Scriptures themselves in their vulgar Tongues, and are forward to assist them
in explaining difficulties, and resolving doubts that may occurr.

6. And now let Doctor Pierce speak his Conscience, if he dare do it; Is not
this way of managing the Consciences of Christ's Flock and this prudent
dispensing of Scripture very desirable, yea actually in their hearts here in
England, that it may be in practice among them? But it is now too late: Their
first Reformers found no expedient so effectual to call followers to them out
of God's Church, as by wastfully pouring this Treasure into their hands, and
accusing the Church for not doing so, not foreseeing, or not caring, if, in
future times, that which was an instrument of their Schism, from the true
Church, would be far more effectual to multiply Schisms from their false one.
For the making an ill use of Scripture by ignorant or passionate Laics is not
altogether so certain or probable to follow in the Catholic Church, where men
are bred up in a belief and most necessary Duty of Submission even of their
minds to her Authority for the delivering of the only true sense of Scripture:
Whereas in such Churches as this, in which not any one Person ever was or can
be persuaded that the sense of Scripture given by them can challenge an
internal assent from any, or that it may not without sin be contradicted; to
give the Scripture indefinitly to all who can read or are willing to hear it
read, without a Guide to tell them the true sense which they are bound to
believe, is to invite them to ascend into Moses Chair, which such Reformer's
themselves have made empty and vacant for them.

7. The second Part of this pretended Novelty concerns Public Praying in an
unknown tongue: Sermon. p. 9.
which, says he, may be fetched indeed as far as from Gregory the Great (that
is, ever since this Nation was Christian:) But is as scandalously opposite to
the plain sense of Scriptures, Ibid. p. 27.
as if it were done in a mere despite to 1. Cor. 14. 13. etc. And, besides
Origin, it is confessed by Aquinas and Lyra, that in the Primitive times the
public Service of the Church was in the common Language too. And as the
Christians of Dalmatia, Habassia, etc. and all Reformed parts of Christendom
have God's service in their vulgar tongues, so has it been in diverse places by
approbation first had from the Pope himself.

8. I will acknowledge to D^ctor Pierce, that this is the only Point of Novelty
(as he calls it) of which he discourses sensibly, and as it were to the
purpose: But withal I must tell him, it is, because he mistakes our Churches
meaning. For he charges the Catholic Religion, as if one of its positions were,
That Gods public Service ought to be in an unknown Tongue, or as if it forbad
people to understand it. And truly if it were so, we could never hope to be
reconciled with that passage of Scripture out of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 14. 13, etc.
But all this is a pure misunderstanding. Therefore I desire him to permit
himself for once to be informed how the matter stands in this Point with the
Roman Catholic Church.

9. We Roman Catholics (I.) do willingly acknowledge, that in the Primitive
times the Public Service of God was (generally speaking) performed in a Tongue
better understood than now it is, yet not then for many places and Countries in
their vulgar, or native, or best understood tongue; For it is evident by St.
Augustine that in Afric it was in the Latin tongue, De Doctr.
not in the Punic, Christ. l 2. c. 12, 13. Exposit. Psalm. 123. Exposit.
incho^ta Epist. ad Romanos.
which yet was the only Tongue the Vulgar understood. So the Liturgy of St.
Basil was used in the Greek Tongue in most parts of the Eastern Churches. And
yet it appears as well out of later History, as out of the Acts 2. 8, 9, 10.
etc. 14. v. 11. That Greek was not in those ancient times the vulgar tongue of
many of those Eastern Countries, no more than Latin was of the Western. 2. We
profess it was not, nor yet is the intention of the Church that the Public
Devotions should therefore be in Latin, because it is not vulgarly understood:
but this has happened as it were by accident, besides her intention, and only
because the Latin Tongue, in which it was first written, by revolution of times
and mixture of Barbarous Nations in Europe, has been corrupted, and ceased to
be a so commonly understood Language by unlearned people; for indeed probably
it was never so well understood, as that other native Language which they used
before it, or with it.

10. Matters standing thus, yet the Church does not think fit to change with
the times, but continues Gods public Service as it was at first: And this we
may conceive she does. 1. Because no example can be found in
antiently-established Churches, that any of them changed the Language of Gods
public Service entirely. The Greeks now use the Ancient Mass of St. Chrysostom
written in pure Greek, as much differing from the Vulgar, as Latin from the
Italian, Spanish, etc. The like may be said of the Syrian, Cophtites, etc.
among whom the Mass is celebrated in the o^d Language, far from being vulgarly
understood. Yea, the Jews continue their Devotions, to this day, in the Hebrew,
understood by few among them. 2. Because, though the Latin be not now in any
place a vulgar Language yet there is no Language so universally understood in
Europe as that: And a great fitness there is that the most Public Service
should be in the most public Language, in which all Nations may join every
where. And by those who most frequently recite the Divine Service in the
Catholic Church, viz. the Clergy, and other Religious (for whose proper use a
great part of this Service was composed) the Latin Tongue is well understood.
3. Because the Latin ^ongue now that it is not vulgar, being thereby become
unchangeable, the Churches Doctrins contained in her Lit^rgies are so much the
more freed from the danger of being innovated. Whereas vulgar Languages almost
in every age become un-intelligible, or at least sound very unpleasing in men's
ears, as we now see in King Edward the sixth's Common Prayer Book: would it not
seem an odd translation now to read, that Saint Philip baptized the Gelding?
and Paul the Knave of Jesus Christ, yet this was once the English Scripture;
Nay more, within this twenty years we find many words and phrases have quite
changed their former sense: So that all Nations must be ever and anon altering
their Liturgies, to the great danger of changing the Churches belief; And
(which is not altogether inconsiderable) for the present good husbandry of the
world, to the infinite expen^es of moneys in printing etc.

11. I doubt not but he will reply that not any one, or all these commodities
can answer and satisfy for an express, and, as he calls it, a scandalous
opposition to the plain sense of Scripture, 1 Cor. 14. I grant it: All these
commodities are to be despised, rather than so to oppose the Apostles Doctrine.
But what is his Doctrine? For I evidently perceive the Doctor has not well
searched into it, much less, rightly applied it. The Apostle says. If I pray
in an unknown tongue, my Spirit prays, but my understanding receives no
benefit, etc. And how can an unlearned Person say Amen to such Prayers? In
which passage seems involved a tacit prohibition at least of public Prayers
in an unknown tongue. All this is granted: but yet with this exception
mentioned by the Apostle himself, unless either he that prays, or some other
interpret. Therefore before he took on him to charge the Catholic Church with a
scandalous opposition to this passage of Scripture, he ought to have examined
better her doctrine and practice: otherwise he himself will be found guilty of a
Scandalous opposition to God's Church.

Now for a trial of the Churches sense, let him observe the Ordinance of the
Council of Trent touching this very Point: the words are these, Though the Mass
contain instruction for Gods faithful people, Conc. Trid. Ses^. 2^. cap. 8.
yet it seemed not expedient unto the Fathers that it should be celebrated
every where in the vulgar tongue; wherefore retaining in all places the
Churches ancient Rite, approved by the holy Roman Church* the Mother and
Mistress of all Churches; lest Christ's Sheep should hunger, and Children
asking bread, none should be found to break it to them, the Holy Synod commands
all Pastors and all that have care of Souls, that during the celebration of
Mass, they should frequently either by themselves or others, expound some part
of those things which are read in it; and among other things let them explain
the mystery of this most Holy Sacrifice, especially on Sundays and Feasts. The
Preacher here may see that the Church does not make such a secret even of the
most sublime Mysteries of her Office, as the Court believed upon his report.

12. Likewise between this speaking in an unknown tongue, mentioned by St.
Paul, and the Churches public Latin Service, there is this great disparity,
that this later is always a known Language to several of those present, if not
to all, and there are always those who understandingly say, Amen. And again
being a known set-form in one set-language, recurring continually the same
according to the Feast, those who are ignorant of it at first, need not
continue so, but by due attention, and other diligence may arive to a
sufficient knowledge at least of the chief parts thereof, they having also in
their Manuals, Primers, Psalters, etc. ready translated both the Psalms, Hymns
and Prayers, etc. and there being several Books both in English and all vulgar
languages, that expound the Church Service even to the meanest capacity.
Neither is the Latin tongue, by reason of its affinity with many vulgar
tongues, and of the constant use hereof, a language unknown to such a degree in
Catholic Conntries, as our English Nation imagine it, and therefore is so much
scandalized: Neither is there the same motive for some dispensation of a change
in those places, as perhaps would be in a Country less acquainted with the
Latin, and of a Language more remote from it. Yet our venerable Beda in his
History says, Bed hist. l. 1. c 1.
That in his time to these Northern Languages of ours, English, Scotch,
Britans, Picts, the Latin Tongue, by perusing the Scriptures, was made common
to them all. The usual Language therefore wherein the Scriptures were delivered
in his times was Latin, and by this that Tongue rendered common, and not unknown
even to these Northern people.

13. Besides all this, several Popes, Patriarks, etc. have approved the
Translation of the Missal, etc. into the vulgar Languages, as Pope John the
Eighth, Hist. Boem. cap. 13.
who was induced thereto by a Miracle related by Aeneas Silvius (afterward Pope
Pius the Second) likewise Pope Innocent the Third, Pope Leo the Tenth,
Balsamon, Patriarch of Antioch, etc.

To conclude, since the Doctor confesses that Popes have given leave to some
Churches that the Divine Office should be in a vulgar Tongue, he ought not to
have made a Quarrel of this to a Separation, till it could be showed, that
their first Reformers had demanded a dispensation, and been refused.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Invocation of Saints: Proved out of Antiquity. Concessions: Deductions: And
Objections answered.

1. THe next supposed Novelty is the Invocation of Saints departed: which says
Doctor Pierce, Sermon. p. 9.
is no doubt an aged error, though not so aged as they would have it, (for the
gaining of honor to the invention) because St. Augustine does deny it to have
been in his days.

2. Though perhaps the Preacher may for some ends be unwilling, yet that other
Protestants may see the Innocence of the Church in this Point, and how free she
is from any intention of deterring any one from having access in Prayer to our
Lord immediately; or of diminishing the all-sufficient virtue of our Lords
Merits and Intercession; or of i^ducing men to security by relying on the
holiness and intercession of others, and neglecting the means of Salvation
themselves, etc. (which are generally the grounds upon which Protestants
condemn this practice:) I will first set down the Churches Decision: And next,
in order to demonstrate the reasonableness of it, I will show, for preventing
such prejudices, what concessions are generally made by Catholics. Thirdly, I
will confirm the Churches practice by the Testi^onies of the Primitive times.
And lastly, answer the Doctors only argument.

3. First, then touching the Churches Doctrine, contained in the Council of
Trent, Conc. Trid. Se^s. 25.
The Holy Synod commands all Bishops and others who sustain the Office and care
of teaching, that, according to the use of the Catholic and Apostolic Religion
received from the primitive times, the consent of the Holy Fathers, and the
^ecrees of the Sacred Councils* especially touching the intercession and
invocation of Saints, etc. that they diligently instruct the Faithful, teaching
them, that the Saints reigning together with Christ, do offer their Prayers to
God for men, and that it is good and profitable hum^ly to invocate them, and to
have recourse to their Prayers, help and assistance for the obtaining of
benefits from God by his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who alone is our Redeemer
and Savior. Let them likewise teach, that those who deny that the Saints,
enjoying eternal felicity in Heaven, are to be invocated; or who affirm either
that they do not pray for men, or that the invocating them to pray for us in
particular also, is Idolatry, or that it is repugnant to Gods word and contrary
to the honor of the one Mediator between God and Men Jesus Christ; or that it
is a foolish thing to supplicate with words or mind to them reigning in heaven
[impie sentiunt] are impiously persuaded.

4. In the second place, in conformity to the doctrine of this Decree, Catholics
believe and acknowledge. 1. That we have only one Mediator Jesus Christ, to
whom only belongs the Merit that by it is just worth redeems us from eternal
Death, and purchases for us eternal life: As likewise that as his Merits by
satisfaction, so also his Intercession is all-sufficient by way of impetration,
to obtain all blessings for us. 2. Yet cannot it be denied but our Lords
intercessi^n is not actually and absolutely beneficial to all, but that some
Duties and qualifications on our part are necessary both that his Merits, and
the benefits of his Intercession should be effectually applied unto us. 3.
Among these Qualifications we are to reckon not only our own Prayers for our
selves, but mutual Prayers for one another: which therefore we may beg from one
another, as St. ^nkes. 6. 19.
Paul himself did from the Ephesians, Colos. 4. 3. 2 (...) 3. 1.
Colossians, etc. 4. Because the more holy any person is, the more effectual
will his Intercession be with God, therefore we may beg of known Saints their
Prayers to God for us with greater hope of success. 5. Such begging of Prayers
is far from Idolatry, Superstition or diminution to Christ's honor, since holy
Persons (living or dead) are not invocated as Donors but Fellow-beggers with
God for us. 6. Though a Christian may be saved who prays to God alone, and
requests not the prayers of others, yet to refuse the assistance of those,
whose Prayers God more willingly hears, is a neglect at least of using all
means helpful to us. 7. Chrysostom. hom. 23. in Genes.
Nevertheless we say with Saint Chrysostom, God will bestow salvation much
rather on us praying for our selves, than for others* praying for us: And we
are much more safe by our own Devotions (without others) then by others
(alone:) And therefore we ought not to be slothful and secure, depending on
other^s merits. For the prayers and supplications of Saints have indeed very
great force with God in our behalf, but it is then truly when we with penance
and humiliation beg the same thing also of God. And therefore says the same
Saint, Knowing these things, Id. ^om. 1. in 1 These.
let us neither neglectingly contemn the prayers of Saints, nor cast our selves
wholly upon them.

5. Whatsoever has been hitherto said, may indifferently be applied as well to
Saints departed, as to Saints alive: If the Prayers to Saints departed be
prejudicial to the merits and intercession of our Lord, so is the beging of the
prayers of those alive: If one be unlawful, so is the other: nay, most certain
it is, that if both be lawful, the prayers of Saints departed will be
incomparably more effectual, and therefore will better deserv to be made use of,
than the other. Therefore, notwithstanding most of the Arguments of Protestants
against the Doctrine of the Church touching Invocation of Saints departed, do
prove full as much against Prayer to the Living, and therefore are evidently
unconcluding: Yet those, who are most learned and sober, and will not wilfully
mistake Catholic Doctrine, do free us from all imputation of Idolatry,
superstition, or doing injury to Christ, and reduce the Controversy to a short
point: For they question not whether the Saints pray in general for us, but
rather willingly acknowledge it; yea they will not positively deny but they may
and do pray personally for their former known acquaintance, as St. Augustine
believed his Mother did for him: Likewise they will grant that though they be
in Heaven, they may either by Gods revelation, or by relation from Angels be
informed of the Prayers made to them by any others on earth: and that supposing
such a knowledge, they will become Intercessors for them in particular.

6. But, you will say, since there is no general certainty, that they understand
our Prayers or wants, or interesse themselves in the particular necessities of
the living, Therefore though it be not unlawful, as prejudicial to the honor
and duty we owe to God, to invocate them in particular, yet it may be called
unlawful, in regard it is uncertain.

To this Scruple, Catholics acknowledge the Church by no Decision has declared
that the Saints generally hear all the particular prayers of us on Earth: And
consequently that it is not any Article of our Faith to believ they do so: Yea,
several moderate Catholics refuse to say peremptorily that it is so; yet in all
Catholics Opinion this does not, nor ought to hinder them from acknowledging
that the practice of Invocating Saints by name, is very beneficial to us,
though they should have no particular knowledge of your Prayers.

7. And the grounds to prove this to be rational are these, First, Because
though it were so that the Souls of glorified Saints did not hear our prayers,
or know our particular necessities, yet at least, it is certain the Holy Angels
are continually present with us on Earth, and that it is by them we are
defended from the Devils malice, who otherwise, having such a wonderful
strength exceeding ours, would destroy us all in our sins. Now, since God does
not ordinarily interpose his power immediately in natural actions, nor substract
his universal influence on his Creatures, it cannot be imagined (since the
Devils will not be hindered by any Law or prohibition) by what other power, but
that of Angels, they should be restrained from executing their malice against
us. Add to this, that History tells us Magicians have the Devils always ready
to come at their call* Why then should not Angels be witnesses of our actions,
and especially our prayers, which, as the Scripture says, They offer as
Incense to God, being always assistant in the houses of Prayer. This being
supposed, we are not to imagine that those holy Spirits stand upon niceties, and
will not do any good unless particularly called upon: But on the contrary,
will be charitably officious in helping and delivering us, whenever we
implore the assistance of any of their fellow Citizens. And it is upon this
matter that St. Aug. l. de ^ur. pro mort. cap. 26.
Augustine, not doubting at all that great good arrives unto us by invocating
the Martyrs, etc. (for the beginning of his Discourse is, Although that
Question does exceed the power of my understanding, How Martyrs succor those
which certainly are in effect aided by them, etc.) very subtly Disputes
whether the Saints themselves hear us, or the Angels for them: And whether,
when they seem to appear unto us, it be not the Angels which take their shape.

8. Again, How great the Sphere of the activity of the Saints glorified may be
in respect of this whole visible World, we know little. That it is finite we
know: But how far it may be extended, viz. their faculties of seeing, hearing,
and operating, especially since the Ascension and Glorification of our Lord, we
know not. Thus the Archbishop of Spalato, no great Patron of Invocation of
Saints: Spalat. de Rep. Eccl. l. 3. c. 6.
I do not think it unprobable, says he, that there should be assigned to every
Angel and beatified Soul very vast spaces both of the Superior and Inferior
World, wherein they may operate: And perhaps the whole sensible world may be no
more to one of them, than its proper body is to a humane Soul informing it. And
thus Vossius interprets St. Hieroms Speech of them; Voss. Disp. Hist. 2. These.
^.
That he held beatified Souls present at their Tombs, and like Angels passing
most swiftly through spaces wonderfully distant; moreover, that they there know
the necessities, and hear the request of those who have recourse to them. But
suppose their agency and intelligence, as Spirits, confined only to the Circuit
of Heaven, yet how great the knowledge of these Saints, standing continually in
Gods presence, may be by way of Revelation of things absent or future, of man's
thoughts, etc. in the same manner, (though in a higher degree,) as also some
special Saints have on earth, who can determine? If God said of Abraham, a
Pilgrim on earth, Shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I do? Genesis 18. 17.
How much more may we imagine that he hides not the mighty works of his
Providence, Mercy and Justice here on earth from those his Domestic Servants?
So we read, not only an Angel, but every one of the Twenty four Elders to have
in their hands golden Censers, Rev. 8. 3. -- Ibid. 5. 8.
and Vials full of odors, which are the Prayers of Saints; that is, of their
Brethren on earth.

9. Again, though there were no certainly in this, that even the Angels are
present to us, and execute the things we pray for, yet the practice of
Invocating Saints ought not to be neglected; because, considering the
unquestionable proofs of a world of miraculous effects of such Prayers, both in
modern and ancient times, recorded by the most Learned, Prudent, and Holy among
the Primitive Fathers, of many of which themselves were eye witnesses, and the
rest confirmed by Testimonies irrefragable; Miraculous effects I say, not only
of Prayers here directed to God, with relation to the acceptablenesse and
Intercession of such Saints; but also of Prayers directed to the Saints
themselves, as appears by the Quotations below: We may be assured that this
practice pleases Almighty God, and is very benefical to us. Among other
witnesses of this, I will only name St. Gregory Nyssen, Greg. Nyss. or de S.
Theod, Theodo. l. 8. de Mart.
and Theodoret for the Greek Church, and St. Augustine for the Roman. The first
of these in his Oration on the Martyr St. Aug. l. 22. de Civ. Dei. cap. 8. etc.
Theodorus: The second through his whole 8 th. Book entitled of Martyrs; and
St. Augustine in his 22th. Book de Civitate Dei, through several Chapters, show
both that frequent Addresses were made to, and many wonderful Miracles
performed by the Intercession of Saints, especially Martyrs, which Miracles
were showed rather in the places, where those Martyrs were particularly
honored, and where their Relics reposed, then in others; and upon those, who
Invocated their Intercession and assistance, then on others, etc. which are
demonstrative proofs that the Veneration and Invocation of them are acceptable
to God. De Civ. Dei. l. 22. c. 8.
St. Augustine relates that the multitude of Miracles which were done at Hippo,
the Seat of his Bishopric, at the Memory of St. Stephen, and that within the
two first years, after some part of his Relics were brought thither from
Jerusalem by Orosius, was so great (who also caused them to be enrolled, and
for God's and the Saints glory, to be recited to the People the next Festival
after they were done, of some of which also he was himself an eyewitness) so
great I say, as that those that were registered amounted to near 70. (whereof he
sets down a considerable number in that 8 th. Chapter) and those done at Calama
to a far greater number. It is not yet two years since the memorial at Hippo
Regius was erected, whereas the Books delivered in to us concerning these
miraculous effects (yet many other, as we are most certain, not being given in)
even to the time when I am writing this, amount to some seventy. But at Calama,
where the Memorial was set up sooner, and the Books brought faster, they are
incredibly more in number. At Uzala too, a Colony adjoining to Utica, we have
been witnesses of sundry things of note done by the same Martyr; whose Memorial
was erected there by Bishop Evodius, long before ours. And St. Theodoret also,
(who was a member of the 3 d. and 4 th. General Council) speaks of the peoples
frequent repairing and presenting their requests to the Martyrs for so many
Miracles received by them on this manner -- Neither do we resort hither once or
twice, or five times in a year, but frequently in them we keep our Festivals,
yea, oftentimes for many days together, we sing Lauds and Hymns to the Lord of
these Martyrs. Where such as are in health petition the Martyrs for the
continuance thereof; such as are sick petition them for health, etc. Not
conceiting that they approach to Gods, but praying to these Martyrs of God as
Divine men, invocating and petitioning them for their Intercessions with God.
And that such, who have devoutly and faithfully invocated them, do obtain their
requests, those several gifts do witness, which such, obliged by their Vows,
do bring thither, being clear evidences of their unfeigned cures. For some hang
up their Tablets of eyes, some of feet, others of hands, made of gold or
silver. These things therefore exposed to the view of all, do evidence the
driving away of their diseases: These I say do demonstrate, what the power of
those Martyrs is, which are buried there, etc. Thus Theodoret, whom, though some
of the Reformed (upon a negative Argument, because Nicephorus mentions not this
Book amongst others, but so he omits some which Gennadius (mentions) deny to be
the Author of this Book, yet Rivet is more candid, saying, Rivet. Crit. Sacr.
l. 4. c. 21.
Libris de Graec. affect. curand. nonnulla addita esse malim dicere, quam de
Authore dubitare. And lastly, St. Gregory Nyssen speaks thus on the same
Subject -- After one has thus delighted his eyes with the building, he desires
further to approach the Monument it self, believing the very touching thereof
to bring a benediction and hallowing along with it. But if any be suffered to
take away any of the dust gathered from off the Martyrs Sepulcher, such dust is
taken for a great gift, and this very Earth laid up as a precious Treasure.
But if at any time such a happiness befalls any, as to have the privilege to
touch the Relics, how earnestly such a thing is to be wished and desired,
being the reward of much importunity, they know well, who have sought and
obtained it. For then they view and embrace this body, as if it were alive and
fresh; apply it to their mouth, their ears, and the other Organs of all their
Senses: Moreover, pouring out tears of du^y and affection upon the Martyr, as
if he appeared to them sound and entire, they offer up their humble prayers,
that he would intercede as an Advocate for them, begging of him as a Courtier
of Heaven, and invocating him, as one that can obtain any thing he pleases. To
what Prince is there such honor given?

10. In the third place I will adjoyn further express Testimonies out of the
ancient Fathers, all living within the Doctors determinate times, and showing
the lawfulness and usefulness of this practice of Invocating the glorified
Saints. Thus then says St. Basil. Orat. 40. Mart.
Basil: Whosoever is in any pressure, let hin fly to the assistance of these
Martyrs: And again, whoever is in a state of joy, let him pray to them: The
former, that he may be delivered from misery: The latter, that he may be
preserved in prosperity. Chrysostom. Homil. 66. ad pop. Antioch. and Hom. 26. in 2 Corinthians.
Thus St. Chrysostom, The Emperor, who is clothed with purple, takes a journey
to visit these Sepulchers [of St. Peter and St. Paul] and laying aside his
pomp, presents himself to make supplication to them, to the end they may
intercede to God for him, be whose Temples are encompassed with a Diadem,
prays to a maker of Tents, and a Fisherman, as his Protectors. And to the same
purpose, Ruffin. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 23. Ambr. de vid.
of the same Emperor, speaks Ruffinus. Thus St. Ambrose, We ought to pray to
the Angles which are given us for guards: We ought to pray to the Martys, whose
Bodies seem to be as it were gages and hostages, that we may challenge their
Patronage and protection, etc. Let us not therefore be ashamed to employ them
as Intercessors for our Infirmity; for they themselves by experience knew the
infirmity of our bodies, even then when they surmounted it. This St. Ambrose
writ not, as Bishop Andrews imagins, when he was a Neophite, but a Bishop. See
Voss. de Invocat. Disp. 2, These. 1. and Forbs de Invocat. cap. 3. their more
candid concessions concerning this Father. Hilar. in Psalm. 129.
Thus St. Hilary, It is not the nature of God, but our infirmity that stands
in need of the Intercession of Angels: For they are sent for the benefit of
those which shall inherit Salvation, God himself not being ignorant of the
things which we do, but our infirmity needing this mystery of a spiritual
intercession for the imploring and obtaining for us (what is good for us). In
which Testimony so much is clear, that the Angels know our necessities, etc.
And this is sufficient to infer the lawfulness of requesting them also to
intercede for us. To these, many more Testimonies may be added out of other
holy Fathers, as likewise the actual Prayers to Martyrs made and recorded by
St. Basil, St. Gregory Nyssen, St. Gregory Nazianzen, St. Ephrem, Theodoret,
St. Hierom, St. Paulinus, Prudentius, etc. To which, I hope, Dr. Pierce will
forbear to return the usual evasion, that all these are but Rhetorical
Apostrophe's: Since other expressions of the same Fathers, viz, That they are
well persuaded that those Saints to whom they address these Requests, Nazianz.
Orat. de 8. Athan. Basil. O^^t. de 40. Mart. Nysien. Orat. de S. Theodoro Mart.
have an inspection from Heaven on their affairs. That they do relieve the
necessities of those who supplicate to them. That the people make addresses to
these heavenly Courtiers, as to those who obtain gifts from God when they
please. And that if the Lamb be every where, these Saints which are with the
Lamb, ought to be believed to be any where, (or every where) as they please:
Since, I say, these expressions do not consist with such a pretense of their
invocating them only in an empty flourish; And since this is a put-off too
vain, to get any credit with sober men, to say that such grave and holy
Bishops, when preaching to the people, would make petitions to these Saints to
exercise their Rhetoric, and yet without any cautioning their hearers, that
they did it in such a manner; which, if done seriously, would have been an
injury to God, to Christ our Redeemer, ye^, Idolatry, etc. And lastly, since
the Doctor may find Vossius and Forbes, for some of them at least, condemning
this evasion.

11. To these Testimonies, I may adjoyn the express confessions of
Protestants, That Invocation of Saints was commonly in use in the Greek Church
long before the 3 d. and 4 th. General Councils. For which, besides the
confession of Chemnitius, Chem. exam. Conc. Trid. p. 3. de Invocat. S. S.
Vossius Disp. 2 These. 1.
Vossius also is clear, whose words are; About the year of Christ, 370. those
to whom the care of instructing the people was committed, did by their practice
lead them to invocate the Saints departed. And indeed, in the Greek Church the
first, or at least very near the first of those which gave such Examples were
Basil, Nyssen, Nazianzen: And in the West, at the same time, Ambrose of
Millain, a diligent Reader and Imitater of the Greeks, followed the same
custom. Now, since Dr. Pierce professes so ready a submission to the Judgment
of the four first General Councils, and must grant, that several of these
Fathers, whom Vossius acknowledges to have been Patrons of Invocation, and to
have used it even in the public Assemblies, (for which they were never
censured) did precede many years two of these General Councils; I would gladly
know if such a Question had been made before the third or fourth Council,
concerning Invocation of Saints, as was, before that of Trent, Whether he can
persuade himself, that those Fathers would not have justified such Invocation
for lawful in those Councils, which they practiced as lawful out of, and before
them, and would not have produced at least as high a stating of that Point, as
the Council of Trent did? And indeed a particular knowledge and agency of Saints
deceased in in human affairs seems to be acknowledged in the fourth General
Council, and Invocation in the third Person: Act II. Conc. Chalced.
Whose words are, Let Flavian be had in everlasting memory: Behold Vengeance,
[i. e. on his murderers.] Behold the Truth! Flavian lives after death! Let
Flavian the Martyr pray for us.

12. It remains in the last place, that an Answer be given to the only A^gument
out of Antiquity, produced by the Doctor against this Doctrine, and to prove
it is Noveltie. For, says he, Sermon. page ^. Aug de Civ. D. lib. 22. c. 10.
St. Augustine denies invocation of Saints to have been in his days: And his
only proof that he does so, is from those words of his, The men of God (that is
Sain^s departed) are named indeed in their due place and order, but they are
not invoked by the Priest who Sacrifices.

12. To this passage, our Answer it, 1. That sure the Preacher had forgot he
was to reckon, presently after, the Sacrifice of the Mass among Novelties,
introduced after the fourth General Council, when he produced this Testimony
that expressly proves the contrary: Here is a Sacerdos brought in, and here he
is brought in both praying and Sacrificing and yet, says the Doctor, no such
thing as any Christian Sacrifice. Or, if a Sacrifice, only a Sacrifice perhaps
of praise and thanksgiving. But St. Augustine will contradict him, who as has
been said, calls this indeed a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving in regard of glorified
Saints commemorated in it: but a Sacrifice propitiatory in regard of the
faithful departed with some stains of sins remaining,

2. The same thing St. Augustine means here (i. e. That Saints are not
soveraignly invocated by way of Sacrifice, as the Supreme Donors and Fountain
of all good that descends to mankind,) is taught by the Catholic Church even
where she professes Invocation of Saints in the same sense as St. Augustine
allows it, that is, as of our fellow members and citizens, making efficacious
intercessions for us to this Supreme Deity to whom we Sacrifice. For thus says
the Council of Trent, Conc. Trid. Sess. 22. cap. 3.
Although the Church be accustomed to celebrate Masses sometimes in the honor
and memory of Saints; yet she does not teach that the Sacrifice should be
offered to them, but to God alone who has crowned them: And hence it is that
the Priest is never wont to say, O Peter, O Paul, I offer this Sacrifice to
thee, but to God, to whom he gives thanks for their Victories, and implores
their patronage, that they may vouchsafe to intercede for us in Heaven, whole
memory we celebrate on earth. A part of which Decree is taken out of S. Aug. de
Cir. D. l. 8. c. 37. and lib. 20. cont. Faust. M. c. 21.
Augustine himself in the same Treatise quoted by the Preacher.

3. Dr. Pierce could not possibly have made a worse choice of a place from
whence to select a Testimony (as he would have us believe) denying all
Invocation of Saints, whenas in the two Chapters of the same Book immediately
preceding this, many stories are largely recounted to certify the great good
that Christians had found by the intercession of Saints, and all this, whilst
in their Oratories they begged their intercession.

4 Perhaps he will not yet be content: but with Bishop Andrews Resp. ad Apolog.
c. 1. page 46.
will urge, it is not here said by St. Austin, That the Saints are not
Sacrificed to, but that they are not so much as invocated at the Altar. And if
it be unlawful to invocate them there, it will be as well unlawful any where
else. Hereto it is answered, That all this, taken in a right sense, is granted.
For first, To this day in the Mass there is no kind of Invocation of Saints;
yea more, according to the Council of Carthage, 3 Conc. Carth. cap. 23.
till the Consecration be perfected, there are no Prayers directed to the Son
of God, nor to the Holy Ghost, but only to God the Father. 2. But this argues
not that (if the Church had so ordered it) it might not have been lawful even
at the Altar to have Invocated the Saints by such an inferior Invocation or
Compellation as the Church has determined, which is only according to Card.
Perron [prier pour prier] to desire them to pray for us: As even in the Mass
it self, the Priest requests the Assistants, saying, Orate fraires, ut meum ac
vestrum Sacrificium acceptabile fiat apud Deum, Ord. Missae.
etc. To whom the people Answers, Suscipiat Dominus Sacrificium de manibus
tuis, etc. 3. But as for the Supreme sort of Invocation, which St. Austi^ only
intended in this passage, and which he calls Culium latriae, this is only due
to God, and without impiety cannot be made to Saints: And thus St. Austin
writing against Faustus, Aust. cont. Faust. l. 20. c 21.
the Manichean, fully justifies what he says in this passage.

5. But after all this, that St. Austin allows Invocation of Saints in an
inferior way, do but examine only these places in him -- c. 4. De cura pro
mortuis (a Book which he wrote in Answer to a Quere of Paulinus, Whether it
does benefit any one after his death to have his body buried in the Memorial of
some Saint) -- When as (says he) such consolations of the living are looked
after [that is, of burying their Friends in such sacred places] whereby their
pious affection may appear to their Friends. I see not what advantages may
accre^ [hereby] to the dead, except this; that whilst they call to mind where
the Bodies of those who are dear unto them are laid, they with their Prayers
commend them to the same Saints, as it were to Patrons, that by them they may
be helped with our Lord, which also they might do, although they could not
inter them in such places. -- Whenever therefore the mind recounts, where
the body of some dear friend lies buried, and straight the place occurs
renowned for the name of some Martyr, the devotion of him, who thus remembers
and prays, forthwith commends this beloved soul to the same Martyr.

-- There was here in Hippo (says the same Father) a certain old man called
Florentius, De Civ. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 8.
poor but pious, and a Tailor by Trade. He had lost his Cloak, and had nothing
wherewith to buy him another. He prayed with a loud voice, to the twenty
Martyrs, whose Monument here among us is very famous, to reapparel him. Some
scoffing young men by chance being near hand, overheard him, and at his going
away followed him jeering him, as if he had begged of the Martyrs fifty half
pence to buy him clothes. -- And afterward, -- The Cook ( says he) cutting up
the Fish, found in the belly of it a gold ring, which, moved with pity and
piety together, he straightway delivered to the poor man, saying, See how the
twenty Martyrs have furnished you with clothes.

De diversis Sermon. 32. and 33. (unquestioned that I know of, and which appear
sufficiently to be S. Austins, by comparing these with the conclusion of cap.
8. l. 22. de Civit. Dei. -- A certain woman (says he there) lost her son, a
sucking Infant, being as yet a Catechumen only. -- Full of faith she took the
dead child, and ran to the memorial of the blessed Martyr Stephen, and began
of him to demand her son, and to say, Holy Martyr, you see I have no comfort at
all left me; For I cannot so much as say that my son is gone before me ( to
Bliss) whom you know is utterly perished ( because dying unbaptized). You see
the cause of this my dessolate grief; restore me my Son, etc.

-- De Baptism. l. 7. c. 1. -- and l. 5. c. 17. being compared, This Father
supposes the Martyr Cyprian to know his affairs; and, in his handling that
Controversy of Rebaptization, contrary to St. Cyprians former judgment, (in
which Point he presumes that Saint now fully illuminated) yet hopes for his
favor, and requests the assistance to him herein of his Prayers -- Let him
help us therefore (says he) with his Prayers, laboring here in in the
mortality of this flesh as in a dark mist, that by Gods help we may, as much as
we can, imitate the good things that were in him.

6. Upon these grounds Bishop Forbes grants, De Invocatione Sanctotum. c. 4. n.
2.
that St. Austin does allow Invocation of Martyrs; commends Bishop Montagues
candor in acknowledging it; and there also censures Bishop Andrews for denying
it, in these words: The Bishop of Ely wrongfully affirms that St. Austin
disallowed the Invocation of Saints, the contrary whereof is apparent in his
Bood De cura pro mortuis, etc. And afterward he adds, Truly I am sorry, that
so just a cause is given to John Barclay of expos^ulating with the most learned
Bishop of Ely, who speaks thus concerning him -- Here I have a desire to tell
the King of Great Britain's Almoner: The King believes him, and so do many
others; and yet he is as often in fault, as he makes others to be so. Let him
therefore consider, how erroniously he denies that St. Austin approves the
Invocation of Martyrs. Add to Bishop Forbers, and Bishop Montague, the
Testimony of Dr. Fulk long ago in his Rejoinder to Bristow -- I acknowledge
(says he) St. Ambrose, Page 5.
St. Austin, and St. Ierom held Invocation of Saints to be lawful, which is an
Error -- And the Testimony of the Bishop of Spalato, Republ. Eccl. l. 7. c. 12,
n. 25.
who numbers this Father among many others that allowed Invocation of Saints:
The Fathers (says he) without any hesitancy either Invocate Saints, or grant
they may be invocated: the Latin; Hilary, Ambrose, Ierom, Paulinus, Maximus,
Prudentius, Augustinus, -- And the Testimony of Chemnitius also, who, Exam.
Council. Trid. 3. p. 197.
upon the former Quotation taken out of St. Austin de Baptismo, l. 7. c. 1.
says, Thus St. Austin speaks without ground of Scripture, yielding to the
times and common custom. Yet for all this, a confident pronouncing that St.
Austin knew nothing of this Doctrine or Practice served the Preachers turn*
Many of his Auditors knew nothing to the contrary, and therefore believed him,
and, according to his desire, detested Roman Catholics the more for this
Novelty. And that was enough then; but what will it be when the Righteous Judge
shall call that Sermon to a second account?

CHAP. XVII.
Celibacy of Priests. Vows of Chastity: The Doctrine and Practice of the
Church in both. Objections Answered.

1. THe Doctors tenth pretended Noveltie, is the Roman Churches prohibition of
Marriage to Priests and others in holy Orders: Sermon. page 27.
Which, says he, is by some derived from the third Century, by others from the
eighth; and in the rigor that now it is, Ib. page 9.
from Pope Gregory 7. and by Roman Catholics themselves, it is dated but from
Pope Calixtus. But (says he) both in the old and new Testament, Priests were
permitted to have Wives: The Apostles were married: Besides marriage of Priests
was asserted by Paphnutius in the Council of Nice: And by one of the Apostolic
Canons: And the forbidding of Marriage, with Saturninus and the Gnostics, is
worthily called by the Apostle the Doctrine of Devils.

2. Indeed if the prohibition of Marriage to some certain states of men or women
be the Doctrine of Devils, the Preacher has reason rather to separate himself
from a Church that enjoins such a Diabolical virtue as Continence, than from a
wife that will not permit it, and who perhaps and therefore a great influence
upon his zeal, more warm in this Novelty than any of the rest. Though it is not
only permitted him, but esteemed meritorious to blaspheme the Church of God,
yet let him take heed how he blasphemes the Apostle, who, in the same Epistle
out of which the Doctor quotes his Doctrine of Devils, forbids marriage to
Widows, who had consecrated themselves to our Lord's service: Younger Widows
refuse (says he) for when they have begun to wax wanton against Christ, 1 Timothy
5. 11, 12.
they will mary: Having damnation, because they have cast off their first
Faith. Aug. in Ps. 95. Id. de bon. Vid c. 8.
What means this phrase [They have cast off their first Faith] (says St.
Augustine?) [Voverunt and non red did e^unt. Id. de Sanct. Virg. c. 33, 34.
] They vowed (perpetual continence) but they kept not their vow: Id. de ^^ult.
Conjug. l. 1. c. 24, 2^.
and therefore they have damnation. Id. Epist. 70.
This is St. Augustin's constant Doctrine and interpretation of that place of
the Apostle, Epiph. hier. 43, and 61.
as may be seen by examining the quotations in the Margin. Hieron. l. 1. Cont.
Iovin. Id. in Ep. ad Fu^ia^. Fulg. Ep. 1. c. 6. Conc. Carth^g. 4. c. 104.
The same is taught by St. Epiphanius, St. Hierons, Fulgentius, the fourth
Council of Carthage, (at which St. Augustine was present) etc. And it is not
contradicted by any one Ancient Doctor, nor any, except ancient Hereties,
Iovian, Vigilantius, etc. And this surely will suffice to demonstrate it, no
Novelty in God's Church, much less that it was esteemed a Doctrine of Devils,
to forbid Marriage to Persons consecrated to God's service. Forbid it; I say,
not the Gnostics, Manichees, etc. forbad it, as an unlawful thing in it is
self, but only as an impediment and distraction in a spiritual Vocation. Now
whether Widows are esteemed by the Preacher to be more nearly and perfectly
consecrated to the Divine service, by the Office of Deaconesses, then men by
Priesthood, it is expected he should declare.

3. But for better clearing of this Point, touching the prohibition of Marriage
to persons in holy Orders, etc. in charity I must suppose the Doctor will not
profess the Heresy of Iovinian, who taught that Virginity does not excel
Matrimony. An Heresy so contrary to reason, that (as St. Augustine tell us) it
was presently extinguished and never could attain to the deceiving so much as
one Priest. Aug. in. Haeres. 82.
This Heresy formally contradicts St. Paul teaching thus, 1 Cor. 7. 34.
There is difference between a wife and a Virgin, The (Virgin) unmarried woman
cares for the things of our Lord, that show ay be holy both in body and
spirit: But she that is married cares for the things of the world, how she may
please her husband. Which saying of the Apostle certainly at least declares a
state of Virginity and continency much more advantageous to promote the service
of God and keep the mind fixed on spiritual and heavenly employments, than a
Married state, encombred with worldly cares, and carnal appetites. Thus much I
doubt not will by the Preacher be granted.

4. But now the Question must be, whether Eunuchism for the Kingdom of Heaven,
that is, a perpetual abstinence from Marriage and all carnal lusts may lawfully
be by Priests, etc. made the matter of a Vow? That it is a Council of
Perfection is evident from our Saviors speech, Qui potest capere, capiat. But
upon supposition that Continency is a special gift of God, not bestowed on all,
and that it is infinitely difficult for any one certainly to know he has this
Gift: for these and such like reasons the Roformed Churches, in opposition to
the Roman Catholic, have generally condemned the practice of such Vows, at
least considered as extending it self generally to any whole Order or state of
men, and especially an Obligation imposed on them to this practice.

5. On the other side the Roman Catholic Church, though she acknowledges
Continence to be a special Gift of God, and that there may be some difficulty
to attain and preserve it, yet esteems not these to be grounds sufficient to
relinquish the obligation of C^libacy in Priests, etc. which she submitted to
from the Preachchers Beginning, that is in the primitive times of the Church,
at least within the four first General Councils.

6. It is granted then, that Continency, (that is an ability to abstain (not
from all motions of Concupiscence but) from putting in execution all motions,
either by a voluntary morose delectation in them, or much more by outward
unclean practices of them) is a Gift of God, a fruit of his Holy Spirit, and
cannot by natural means be obtained so as to be practiced in obedience to him.
But so are all Christian virtues: So is Faith, so is Repentance, so is Charity,
all which notwithstanding, we vow in our Baptism. And why do we vow a practice
of those virtues which are pure Gifts of God? Because we are assured the same
God, who commands that Vow, will not be wanting to supply strength to perform
it, in all those that sincerely beg those Gifts of him by earnest Prayers made
in Faith, and by avoiding all known, and possible-to-beavoided impediments to
the practice of those virtues.

7. But it will be said, that great difference is to be made between that
Continence which is a Christian virtue necessary to all; Obj.
viz. a Continence from all unlawful Lusts; and such a Continence as is now
treated of, which is an Abstinence from Marriage, that is from the lawful
Remedies of unlawful Lusts, which Abstinence is so far from being necessary to
all, that it is no more than a Council to those that aspire to perfection,
which are but few, even in the opinion of the Roman-Church. This Abstinence
certainly is a far more special Gift of God, say they, and not too easily and
commonly to be presumed on.

8. All* Sol.
this likewise understood cum grano Salis, is acknowledged by us. Yet withal
Protestants know that even this Abstinence from Marriage, or from exercising
the lawful Acts in Marriage is a Gift bestowed on very many, and in some cases
necessary to almost every one. For otherwise it would be utterly unlawful for
Parents to keep their children unmarried after the time they are capable, and
thereby to expose them to unlawful lusts, since it seems they are not sure they
have such a Gift: it would be unlawful for Merchants and Travelers to make
long voyages abroad, and leave their Wives at home deprived of the necessary
lawful Remedies against Lust and Temptations to which they are exposed. All
Statutes of Colleges ought to be repealed, which forbid Marriage still to all
Fellows, and heretofore to all Presidents, upon penalty of forfeiting their
whole subsistence. A long Sickness inflicted by God on either of the married
Couples, would be far more dangerous to their Souls than their Bodies, so as if
such an Abstinence, as is now spoken of, were such an extraordinary Gift of
Perfection, England would have more Saints, or more Adulterers, etc. than she
is aware of. And here good Doctor I desire you tell me a thing that perhaps you
have not thought on, yet will easily perceive its meaning as soon as you think
on it. What is the reason that the Ministers of England generally marry not till
they are above thirty years of age? Can they abstain all that while, when their
passions are stronger, and their reason weaker, and then, after so long a
Continency begin to plead it is impossible for them to hold any longer, unless
they had the gift of Chastity, which God bestows not on every one? shall I give
you my Conjecture? I doubt they force themselves to live single till they have
a Benefice, and then, as soon as they can maintain a wife, they get one: is not
this mere hypocrisy to talk of Marrying out of tenderness of Conscience, to
allay their Concupiscence, when the danger is almost all past; and make no
provision to prevent the sins of the unrulyest part of their age? Methinks they
should either marry earlyer, when they may justly suspect their Chastity,
before they have tried themselves; or live longer Batchellors, when they may
prudently hope by the grace of God to persevere after so much experience of
their continency.

9. Catholics therefore, though they confess this continence to be a special
Gift of God not bestowed on all, because all do not use the means, yet resolve
it is such a special gift as is denied to none, who rightly seek it, and
conceive, it also may be made the matter of a vow by those, who have a steady
purpose to use the necessary means to attain and conserve it, and by those who
by humble and due examining themselves, are persuaded that God calls them to a
state of greater Perfection, and being in that state depend on his grace for
performing their Vow, seeking his assistance by constant Prayers,
watchfulness, and necessary penitential austerities. Now those may be
confident they are called to such a state, either in a Monastical or
Ecclesiastical Profession, who betake themselves thereto, not out of any
worldly respects, for gaining a subsistence or preferment, or other temporal
invitations, but purely to avoid the tentations, solicitudes and distractions
of the world and flesh, and to devote themselves more to the service of God,
and advancing their Souls in virtue and piety. In this state of Perfection, and
in complying with this Council of Perfection, those, who duly undertake that
state, may as undoubtedly promise to themseves Gods assistance whilst they use
the means to obtain it, as generally all Christians may after the vow of
Baptism. St. Augustine writes thus, Aug. in Psalm. 131.
David vowed, as having the matter in his own power: And yet he beggs withal
^f God that he may perform what ^e vowed. Here is the devotion of one that
vows: here is the humity of one that prays. Let no man presume on his own
strength, as if he were able of himself to perform what he shall vow. He that
exhorts thee to vow [saying Vovete and reddite] the same God helps thee to
perform what thou have vowed.

10. If then it be lawful for private persons to vow Celibacy, surely it is
lawful for the Church to enjoin it: her Doctrine being, That Goddenies not the
gift of Chastity to them who ask it aright, Conc. Trid, Sess. 24. Can.
nor suffers us to be tempted above what we are able. Which Doctrine is the
ground why the Church enjoins Celibacy to Priests: So that Chastity is called a
special Gift, not in this sense, as it all men, though using what means ^oever,
are not capable of it: But it is such a Gift as many men never actually receive
from God, because they do not use the means: and such a Gift as few also will
endeavor to use the means to attain, because these means are harder than those
by which other Gifts may be attained. That the undertaking by Vow such a life
of Chastity, and abstinence from Marriage, yea in Marriage it self, has been
approved, commended, and practiced in Gods Church from the very beginning, if
the Preacher will not believe us, let him not suspect at least partiality in
his own best Friends. Chemnit. exam. part. 3. p. 41.
We are not ignorant, says Chemnitius, that the Fathers did approve the vows of
perpetual Celibacy, P. Mart. de vot. page* 490.
and acknowledge them to be obligatory. Profession and Vows of Chastity (says
Peter Martyr) were extant among Christians in the time of Clement of Alexandria
[that is about the year 170. Id. ib. p. 524.
] Again, I know, says he, that Epiphanius with many of the Fathers erred in
this, that they said it was a sin to violate such a Vow when it was requisite,
and that he did ill in referring it to Apostolic Tradition. Danaeus con^r.
Bellarm. part* 1. part. a^^cra.
Danaeus says confidently, That St. Augustine and all the Bishops in the Council
of Carthage abused manifestly the word of God, saying, upon the Apostles words,
If any widows how young soever have vowed themselves to God, etc. and
afterward shall go to secular Marriage, they shall according to the Apostle
have damnation: because they dared to make void the vow of Chastity made to
God. The Centurists affirm it to be manifest by the Epistles of Ignatius, that
in those times men began to have too much liking of the Profession of
Virginity: for he says, Let Virgins consider to whom they have consecrated
themselves.

11. And as for the Doctrine of Devils mentioned by the Preacher, he may do well
to sit him down and consider the words of the Apostle, and the comments of the
Fathers on them a little better. First he will find the Apostle, in his
opposing those, who in the latter times should forbid to marry, and command to
abstain from meats, to argue against them thus: That every Creature and
Ordinance of God is good (according to Genesis 1. 31. and 2. 23, 24.) and
therefore, being sanctified first by the word of God and Prayer, may lawfully
be used. (See 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4, 5.) which plainly shows, that St. Paul means such
Apostates as abstain from, or prohibit Marriage and Meats as in themselves
unlawful and unclean and contaminating. Which thing can neither be objected to
the ancient nor modern Church-practise, using abstinence from some meats for
the chastisement of the body, not for any uncleanesse in the food, and not
forbidding Marriage to any single person absolutely, but only upon his
voluntary undertaking such an employment, with which they imagine a married
condition not so well to suit. In which case, if necessary abstinence from
Marriage be a fault, the Apostle himself may seem to comply with it in those
expressions of his forementioned concerning the Widows, 1 Ti^. 5. 11, 12. 2ly.
He will find it manifest by experience, that this prophecy of the Apostle was
most eminently fulfilled in other persons of these latter times (whom these
Fathers even in these points most vehemently resisted) they affirming downright
all Marriage, especially with reference to procreation of children (therefore
the married were advised by them in such manner to use their Wives, as to avoid
this: See S. Aug. De Morib. Manich. c. 18.) to be unlawful, and the work or
dedesign of the Devil, as likewise flesh-diet to be unclean and defiling. They
forbid living Creatures as detesting them, Haeres. 47.
says Epiphanius, not in respect of preserving continency, or a virtuous life,
but out of fear and fancy, that they might be defiled by eating such living
Creatures. Wine they use not at all, saying, it is Diabolical. And S. Aug. con.
(...). l. 30. c. 5.
Austin, Contra Faust. l. 30. c. 5. Ye call the Creature unclean, because the
Devil (ye say) frames flesh out of the more feculent part of natural matter.
Such were some of the G^osticks, Eucratites, M^ntanists, Marcionites, and in
the last place the Manichees, who, not holding all things to have been created
by the same good God, but this lower world by an evil Principle, or by the
Prince of Darkness, as they call him, affirmed in the begetting of a man, that
the Soul, which they account to be a part of the substance of God himself,
becomes fertered and imprisoned in the walls or handiwork of the Devil, i. e.
the body, and therefore was marriage, as occasioning such imprisonment, forborne
by all their Elect; and though this was permitted to their Auditors, yet (says
S. Austin) it was not by telling them it was no sin, but by showing favor to
the persons thus sinning, because they allowed them maintenance.

3. Conc. Faust. Man* lib. 30.
Again he will find, that when they were accused by the Fathers for such
errors, it was ordinary with them to recriminate the Orthodox with the same
things, both for their frequent abstinences from flesh, and some other Fruits,
and for their (to some Persons at least) recommending Virginity, who in this
matter were answered by them after the same manner, as the Protestants,
objecting the same things, are now by the Church Catholic. See Chrysostom,
Ambrose, and lastly Doctor Hamond on this place of Timothy, understanding it of
the same Heretics. Lastly he will find that Fa^stus the Maniches made the very
same Objection to prove professed Chastity to be the Doctrine of Devils. To whom
St. Augustine thus answers, Aug. Cont. Faust. Man. l. 30. c 4.
I am now afraid in the behalf even of the Apostle himself, lest he should seem
to have introduced the doctrine of Devils into Iconium, when by his Speeches be
enflamed a young Maid already betrothed, to a love of perpetual Virginity, and
when he pronounced damnation to Widows transgressing their Vow.

12. To come home to the Celibacy of Priests in particular, whereas the Doctor
build much on the Authority of Paphnutius, and the mind of the famous first
General Council of Nice thereupon, let him consider what an Author (not partial
he may be sure for the Roman Church) has said of that Point, Cartw in ^d.
Reply, part. 1. p. 4^^.
that is, The Patria^e of Presbyterians, Mr. Cartwright, The Council of Nice
(says he) did affirm and teach that to those who are chosen to the Ministry
unmarried, it was not lawful to take any wife afterward; only, being married
before intrance into the Ministry, it was lawful for them to use the benefit of
that precedent Marriage. And Paphnutius shows that not only this was before
that Council, but was an ancient Tradition of the Church, in which both himself
and the rest of the Council rested, for a motion being made by some in the
Council, that the married Presbyters (such as were married before made
Presbyters) should after their Ordination be separated from their Wives, this
Paphnutius, a Reverend Bishop and a Confessor, though himself never married,
opposed, saying, Grave jug^m, -- This was a heavy yoke, etc. and that perhaps
such a strict rule of Continency could not be observed by all Clergy-mens
wives. [But now mark what follows]. That it was sufficient that those who had
entered into the Clergy before they had married Wives secundum veterem Ecclesiae
traditionem, according to the Churches ancient tradition, 'should afterward
forbear from marrying: But yet that none ought to be separated from his wife
that he had married before, when yet a Laick. The story is in Socrates, l. 1.
c. 8. and in Z^zomen, l. 1. c. 22. Thus the Preacher gets not much advantage
from Paphnutius.

13. Now for as much as concerns the Controversy touching Marriage of Priests,
Bellarmin will grant, Bellarm. l. 1.
That the vow of Continence was annexed to Holy Orders only by the Churches
Decree: (...) Cleric. c^p. 18.
and consequently that it may be dispensed with. Ibid.
Moreover that the Roman Church in several Cases has permited the Grecian
Priests the use of their wives to whom they were married before their
Ordination. And indeed, considering the temper of the Eastern Countries, far
more inclined to such passions, than that of the Europeans, we find the Eastern
Churches gave themselves far greater liberty than the Western. Yet no ancient
Canon ^f either of the Churches can be ^ound that permitted Priests to contract
Marriage after Ordination: And even among the Grecians, a cohabitation with
their Wives was forbidden to Priests, who attended the Altar.

14. But what the universal belief and practice of the Western Churches was,
our Preacher may collect from the following Testimonies. Therefore not to
insist upon the generally esteemed and resolved unlawfulness for Bishops and
Priests after their Ordination to contract Matrimony, (of a dispensation from
which not one example can be given); It appears, that a Matrimonial use of
wives to the formerly married, was forbidden, 1. By the Second Council of
Carthage, express in this Point: It was agreed unto by all the Bishops, Conc.
Carthag. Can. 2.
that Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and such who dispense Sacraments, should be
Observers of Chastity, and abstain even from their own wives, that so what the
Apostles taught, and Antiquity observed, we likewise may keep. Conc. African.
cap. 37.
2. The Second African Council thus decreed, Whereas Relation was made of the
Incontinence of certain Ecclesiastics, though with their own Wives, this
Council thought good that, according to former Decrees, Bishops, Priests and
Deacons should contain even from their Wives; which if they do not, let them be
removed from their Ecclesiastical Office. As for other inferior Clarks, they
are not compelled hereto. But let every Church observe their own custom. 3.
Saint Ambrose witnesses the same, You, (says he) who with pure bodies, Ambr.
l. 1. de Offic. c. 1. ult.
uncorrupted modesty, and being estranged even from Conjugal conversation, have
received the grace of the holy Ministry, know well that we must exhibit the
same Ministry without offense, without stain, neither must we suffer it to be
violated with any Matrimonial Act. This I have not omitted to speak because in
certain remote plates, some have pr^created children, when they exercised
Priesthood. And again, the Apostle speaking of a Bishop, says, having
children, not getting them. 4. Saint Hierom writing against Vigilantius, says,
What shall the Churches of the East do? Hieron. lib. cont. Vigilant.
What shall the Churches of Egypt do? and of the Sea Apostolic? all which
receive Clerks, either such as are Virgins or Continent, or if they have wives,
such as cease to be husbands to them. The like is said in the Conclusion of his
book against Iovinian. Id. Epist. ad P^m^chius.
And he writes to Pamachius thus, If married men like not this, let them not be
angry with me, but with the holy Scriptures, with all Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, who know they cannot offer Sacrifice, Aug. l. a. de Adult. conjug.
cap. 20.
if they use the Act of marriage. 5. We are wont (says Saint Augustine) to
propose to them the continence of Ecclesiastics, who for the most part are
compelled against their wills to undergo this burden, and yet having received
it, they, by Gods assistance, bear it to their end. I will conclude with the
Spanish Council of Eliberis, more ancient then St. Augustins time, nay,
ancienter then the First General Council of Nice, The Council has thought
good, Council. Elber. Can^ 33.
that it should be absolutely commanded to Bishops, Priests, Deacons,
Subdeacons, to abstain from their Wives, and not to beget children.

15. That the Eastern Churches took to themselves anciently a greater liberty,
is to be understood not generally; for in many of them a^ great a strictness
was observed: as, besides the forecited t^stimony of S. Hier^m, concerning the
Churches of the East and of Egypt, Orig. hom. 23^ in number. E^seb. de them. Evang.
lib. 1. cap. 8.
appears from Origin, Eusebius, and Epiphanius, who all require continence in
Priests, even from their wives, if they have any; And particularly, S. Ephesians.
Haer. 59. and in fine operi^.
Epiphanius says, That to do otherwise is not to observe the Canons, but to
follow our natural inclinations, soon weary of such a burden. And ^ow the
Doctor may do well to consider what a Novelty he has found out to entertain his
Auditors with; especially, since all the forecited Canons and Practices (Which
are within the time of the four first Councils) were in force in England at the
Reformation, as England was a Member of the Western Patriarchat, and therefore
could not, without a transgression of all Ecclesiastical Order, be repealed by
this single National Church: much less could this Church without a criminal,
formal Schism, make such a generally received practice a pretense for
separation.

16. His Allegation out of Clemens of Alexandria, that some of the Apostles had
wives, is granted: But did they, after their executing their Office of
Priesthood, lie with them? Did they leave any young Apostles behind them? As
for the Apostolic Canon which forbids Priests, etc. to cast off their Wives:
what would he infer from hence? Does he think married persons are husbands and
wives only in the night? That which the Canon intended was, that Ecclesiastical
persons should not make their office a pretense to cast off the care of
providing for their wives, or to be divorced from them: that is, such as ^ere
married, and had wives before they entered into Orders, who afterward must not
refuse cohabitation with them, except when they officiate, unless with their
wives consent, in the Eastern C^urches, That the Priests under the Law were
married, cannot be denied: since Priesthood necessarily descending by
generation, marriage was thereore necessary. But sure he does not think such a
carnal, umbratick Priesthood, is fit to be a Pattern for our Christian
Priesthood, wholly spiritual, and withal Elective. Yet he may take notice, that
even in that Legal Priesthood, at the times when they solemnly attended on the
Altar, they had no Matrimonial Commerce with their wives: They came not reeking
out of their beds into Gods Sanctuary, as may be gathered from 1 Samuel 2. 4. and
the prohibition in Exodus 19. 15, 22. Be ready the third day, and cannot at your
wives; On which place St. Ambrose discourses thus, S. Ambr. Offic. l. 1. cap.
50. Zach. 7. 3. 1 Cor. 7. 5.
Filios susceperunt and id tanquam usu veteri defendunt; There are Priests and
Deacons in some secret places that defend their use of marriage by the Practice
of old, when the duty of sacrificing had its interval of days. And yet then
even the people were sanctified by abstaining from their wives two or three
days before, and wash^d their garments, that they might approach pu^^ unto the
Sacrifice, Si tanta in figura observanti^ quanta in veritate, If the
observation [of ch^stity] were so strict in the figure what ought i^ to be in
the truth, Disce sacerdos atque Levi^ quid sit lavare vestimenta tua ^t mund^m
corpus (...) lebr and is exhibeas Sacramentis.

17. To conclude, Celibacy to the Clergy being only enjoined by an
Ecclesiastical Law, as being a thing at the least no way repugnant to the
Divine Law, nay, much recommended therein; it is certainly lawful enough,
though from the beginning it had been otherwise: For the Church has liberty of
making Laws concerning such things from time to time, as she sees fit, and her
subjects are obliged to obey them.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Divorce. The Practice of the Roman Church manifestly mistaken by the
Preacher.

1. THe Doctors last Novelty is, the Church of Romes allowing Liberty of
Divorce betwixt man and wife, Sermon. page 19.
for many more causes then the cause of fornication, contrary, says he, to the
Will of our blessed Savior, revealed to us without a Parabl^, as if they meant
nothing more then the opening a way to rebel against him. A heavy charge: But
for the Legality of it, he alleges in the Margin an express Canon of the
Council of Trent, which, whether he reads a toto, or a toro, says nothing at
all to his purpose, proper Divorce being therein not so much as thought of. And
he himself saw and proved, it made nothing to his purpose, yet served his turn,
because Chemnitius, a malicious Lutheran, said falsely and ridiculously* That
the Papal separation from Bed and Board (...) in many ways a dissolution of the
Conjugal Tie. He would ^ain have Maldonate thought to speak on his side too,
but it is apparently otherwise.

2. Truly this is a Quarrel so properly al' Alamand, that one would think the
Doctor took only an occasion thereby to let the Court see his critical
diligence in observing the false and true Impressions of the Canons of the
Council of Trent, in some of which he has read [^ toto] which makes no sense:
and in others [ a to^o] which only could be the Councils ^xpression. But we
hope an undiligent Prin^ter (who for all that may be good Roman Catholic) shall
not make the Roman Church it self causally Schismatical, and thereby excuse the
Preachers separation.

3. It is pity to lose time about such a trifle, which, I think, never before
this Sermon, was by any English Protestant reckoned among the pretended
Criminal Novelties of the Roman Church. (Yet I may be mistaken, for there are a
world of Sermons and Treatis^^, like his, in intrinsic value, which never had
the fortune to be made so current.) However, left he should be angry if so
materlal a part of his Sermon be neglected, a little pains shall not break
squares between us.

4. He may therefore take notice, that in the business of Marriage there are,
among Catholic Writers, distinguished four sorts of Separations: 1. A Jewish
Divorce, which in Latin we seldom call Divortium, but Repudium. 2. A Christian
Divorce, properly so called. 3. A Separation a toro. 4. A Separation both a
toro and cohabitatiore.

5. Touching the first, if we have regard to the direct intention of God and
his Servant Moses, it was no other, nor ought to have been put in practice upon
other grounds then the Christian Divorce, allowed by our Savior, that is, for
Fornication only. But by the permission in the Old Law, Deuteronomy. 24^
there might follow that Divorce, a second Marriage by either of the parties,
whether innocent or guilty: Yet not upon every cause a^ the Jews practis^d it,
but besides Adultery only propter turpitudinem, for some notorious uncleanness
extremely distastful. Now, notwithstanding such permission, which was merely
for the hardness of Jewish hearts, their Divorce ^or any other cause, and
especially their second Marriage after it, was not excused from sin, but only
from a legal punishment: And the principal motive was, left worse effects, as
poisoning, or any other way of murdering, etc. should be practiced by the
discontented party, in case a total separation might not be permitted. This
Supremest Degree of Jewish Separation (or Repudium) does not entirely dissolve
the Matrimonial Contract, which being consummate of its own nature i^
indissoluble; for the parties, being by Matrimony become One flesh; and one
Principle of a new stock, cannot by any following act or accident, but only
Death, become two again, so as to be in the same capacity as they were before
they were married* And for this reason the Jews, though permitted to marry
afterward, yet sinned in so doing against the primary Precept of God. Those
whom God has joined, let no man separate.

6. Much less does the second species of Separation, or the proper Christian
Divorce dissolve this tie. The only lawful cause of which Separation is by our
Savior allowed, and by the Catholic Church acknowledged to be Fornication,
(that is indeed, Adultery:) under which are likewise comprehended, as our most
learned Doctors say, other more grievous sins of unn^tural Lusts. And the
reason why only such sins may (not must) cause such a perpetual separation is,
because they alone are directly contrary to Conjugal Faith* By this separation,
whenever it is caused by the crime of the one party,) neither of them, (not
the innocent party) are permitted to betake themselves to a second Marriage:
for then they could no be reconciled but by a new Marriage: And here the
Preacher may do well to consider what (...) Patron he has betaken himself to,
which (...) Chemnitius, who, against our Saviors Law (as all Antiquity, and
the practice of the Englis^ Reformed Church interpret it) contends for the
lawful Marriage of the innocent party, so teaching formal Adultery. This
separation for such a legal cause is perpetual, that is, the innocent persons
may deprive the others of the right they have over their bodies, and are in a
free condition even after the faulty persons repentance, whether or no to
receive them again into their former condition: Neither can it be imputed to
the innocent person, if the criminal should by such a separation fall into the
sin of adultery.

7. The other two Separations (not Divorces) one whereof is only [ a toro] from
the Bed, the other from Cohabitation also, may be made for other causes,
besides fornication. As for s^m very infectious diseases; for almost
irreconcilable quarrels, for attempts of killing or wounding one another, etc.
Such Separations are not so perpetual as Divorces, each of the parties being
bound; as soon as these impediments of conjugal conversation are removed, to
return, as before, to a Matrimonial Amity and Correspondence; And till then, I
would ask the Doctor, whether he have the courage to admit into his Bed, or
even his house, a Serpent not only full of venom, but ready and attempting to
kill him with it? Or if he have not this courage, whether he will acknowledge
such a separation so necessary, even to the preservation of life, to be a
Divorce damnable, because not for fornication? What he will answer, I know not;
But what he must, if he go about to maintain his Assertion, I am certain will
be very irrational.

8. Let him reflect on the practice of his own Church, where he cannot but have
heard of the common distinction of Divorces A Vinculo Matrimonii, and a mensa
and toro: these two are both allowed in England: now I ask the Doctor, of which
does our Savior speak? If he say of the first, then clearly the Husband of an
Adultresse may marry again; which is contrary to the Law: if he say of the
second, still ^e contradicts his own Law, which every day allows a separation
for other Causes, besides that of Fornication. Can we believe the Doctor never
read the ordinary Cases wherein Di^orses are granted, as Pre-contract, Fear,
Frigidity, Consanguinity? etc. all which dissolve the very Marriage it self,
and yet in all these the Marriage was valid, till actual divorce, and the
children shall bear the Fathers name, and inherit his lands, if there never
happen an actual divorce; this the wise men of our Nation do, and never think
they open a way to rebel against Christ. Page 29.
Something like this, for the second branch of the distinction, 1 Cor. 7.
St. Paul himself does, and sure he cannot be opposite to the will of our
Savior; If, says he, the Unbeliever depart, let him depart, a Brother or
Sister is not subject in such cases, that is, the Innocent may remain separate:
and why may not the laws of a Nation regulate that liberty, which the Apostle
allows to every private Person? or why may not a General Council determine such
points as well as the laws of a particular Nation? Thus I conceive it cleared,
that You and We are in this particular either Both innocent, or Both guilty.

CHAP. XIX.
Of SCHISM. The unpardonableness of that Crime, acknowledged by Antiquity, etc.
No cause or pretense can excuse it.

1. HAving followed the Doctor through all his vainly pretended Novelties of
Doctrine: We are at last arrived to the most concerning Point of all, Schism:
Most concerning certainly; for there is not any one of the forementioned
Doctrines, which in themselves considered, would absolutely destroy Souls,
though they erred about them; But Schism alone, whatsoever Error of Doctrine,
yea though no Error of Doctrine, were either indeed, or pretended to be a cause
of it, will be inevitably damning to every Soul guilty of it; which damnation
neither rectitude of Faith, nor any good Works, nor even Martyrdom it self will
be able to prevent. Aug. de Symb. ad Carech. l. 4. c. 10.
For this cause, (says St. Augustine) our Christian Creed concludes with the
Articles touching the Church, because if any one be found separated from her,
he shall be excluded out of the number of God's Children: neither shall he have
God for his Father, who will not have the Church for his Mother. It will
nothing profit such an one that he has been Orthodox in belief, done so many
good works, etc.

2. This is a Truth generally testified by the ancient Doctors of God's Church,
and not at all questioned by the more sober Writers of the English Church who
have written of Schism, etc. They all are ready, in words at least, to say with
St. Denis of Alexandria, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 6.
That we ought rather to endure any torments, then consent to the division of
God's Church, since the Martyrdom to which we expose our selves by hindering a
division of the Church, is no less glorious, then that which is suffered for
refusing to sacrific^ to Idols. Pacian ad Sympr. Epist. 2.
And with St. Pacian, Though (the Schismatic) Novatian has been put to death
(for the Faith) yet he has not been crowned: Why not crowned? Because he died
out of the peace, concord and Communion of the Church, separated from that
comm^^ Mother, of whom, who ever will be a Marly^ must be a Member. Iren. l. 4.
c. 62.
And with St. Iren^us, There cann^t possibly be made any Reformation of such
importance, as the mischief (...) Schism is pernicious, etc.

3. But I do not find that Protestant Doctors have endeavored to penetrate
into the true grounds, why, above almost all other sins a Christian is capable
of committing, Schism, that is the setting up an Altar against an Altar, or the
relinquishing the external Communion of the Church, the making Collects or
Assemblies without, yea against the consent of Bishops or Church Governors,
etc. should be a sin so unpardonable, that no ignorance (unless supposed such
as is invincible; which I fear much fewer then is ordinarily imagined, of
those, who have any liberal Education can pretend to, in that great evidence
and light which they have of the continued succession, unity of Doctrine,
perfect obedience to their spiritual Superiors, penances, and retirements from
the world, and several other signal marks of the One, Holy, Catholic,
Apostolic Church) no ignorance, I say, no surreption, provocation, etc. can
excuse it. Some may be more deeply guilty, and obnoxious to a heavier damnation
then others, as Ringleaders more then followers; but damnation is by the
Fathers generally denounced as the portion of all.

4. The true Reason whereof may be deduced from the example of all other
Governments whatsoever. The greatest offense a Subject can commit against
Monarchy, is an actual attempt, or rather the attempt executed, by which
Monarchy is disolved: Inwardly to condemn the Laws of such a Government, to
entertain Principles, which if put in practice, would withdraw Subjects from
their due Obedience, is an offense of an high nature, but the actual
cantonising of a Kingdom, and the raising in it Courts, or Iudicatories
independent on, and opposite to the Common Tribunal of the Country, is the
utmost of all crimes: both the Seducers and Seduced are not only deprived of
the privileges belonging to good Subjects, but pursued by Arms as the worst of
all enemies.

5. It is so in God's Church; The main thing our Creed teaches us to believe of
it, is its unity, without which it is not a Church: Now if Unity, then Order,
then Subordination of Governors, etc. what therefore is the great sin against
this fundamental constitution of the Church, but Schism? a dissolving the
Communion and connection that the members of this great Body have among
themselves, and with relation to the whole? We all willingly acknowledge, that
the great sin of the Synagogue, the sin that filled up the measur^ of the
crimes of the Jews, was their murdering our Lord. Chrysostom. ad Ephesians. hom. 11.
Now says St. Chrysostom, We shall not merit and incur^d less cruel
punishment, if we divide the unity and plenitu^ of the Church (the mystical
Body of our Lord) then those have done which pierced, mangled and tore his own
Body. Cypr. de unit. Eccles.
And the very like expression has St. Cyprian.

6. There are very few Heresies (that is, only such Errors as are formally
destructive to those very few verities or Articles of Faith, without an
explicit belief whereof no man can be saved) which do in themselves, simply,
as false opinions, universally destroy Salvation: Indeed, if they have the
formality of Heresy joined to them, and be maintained with a knowledge that
they are contrary to the sense and authority of the Church, then they have
involved in them something of Schism, or at least they are in an immediate
disposition to Schism, and in that regard all Heresies, though in Points of
themselves less important, are damnative. But Schism alone, though there be no
Heresy joined with it, immediately divides from the Body of Christ, and
consequently from Christ himself.

7. But may not ignorance excuse the guilt of Schism? No: on the contrary in
some regard it aggravates it. For though Pride and Malice be far greater in the
Leading Schismatics, persons of wit and learning: yet ignorant souls and
idiots seem more to contradict human reason; because the more ignorant they
ought to know they are, and being confessedly no Pastors, the more ought they
to submit their judgments to Authority, and consequently the preferring their
own conduct; or the conduct and direction of particular men or Churches, before
the universal Authority of the Church, the excommunicating (as it were) the
whole Church of God, the esteeming all Christians, both Pastors and Flocks, as
Heathens and Publicans, is a presumption so contrary to human nature and
reason, that their want of learning is that which will most condemn them. I
speak not now of persons absolutely idiots, who scarce know there are any other
Pastors, or any other Church then their own, who pretend not at all to pass
their judgments on other Religions; but know only what their Pastors teach
them, having no ability, by reason of their condition, to examine Scriptures
and Churches: For such no doubt, may by their simplicity and absolute
invincible ignorance, escape the malignity of Schism. But I speak of inferior
Tradesmen, of Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, who have a capacity of being rightly
instructed, and better informed of that spiritual authority to which they owe
their subjection, and yet who, by their own perverseness, become trouble^ of the
Church, and who, because they ca^ read the Scriptures, take upon them to judge
of the sense of them, both for themselves and their Pastors, etc. Such as these
no doubt have drunk in the very gall of Schism, by usurping an authority, which
express Scripture says belongs only to Pastors.

8. Some learned persons (particularly Doctor Steward) attribute much to the
temper of the English Church, which he says is like St. Cyprians, Neminem
condemantes, aut a communione separantes: and this alone they suppose will
exempt Protestants (as it did St. Cyprian) from the imputation and penalty of
Schism, to which other violent Calvinistical Congregations are more obnoxious.
But the case is not the same: This indeed did exempt St. Cyprian, because as
St. Augustine says, the Church had not then decided the dispute, to whose
decision St. Cyprian would certainly have submitted. The case of Protestants is
evidently different. If a Province in England had withdrawn it self from the
public civil authority, would this excuse serve them to say, We do not intend
to quarrel with those that continue in obedience to the King, we mean neither
him nor them any harm, they shall be welcome to come among us, if they will, we
will be good friends, we will not meddle with their doings: But we will be
governed only by our own Laws and Magistrates etc? I believe not: Their
civility in their rebellion, will not change the Title of their crime, nor free
them from the punishment due to it: it may perhaps qualify the Princes
resentment; but the civillest Treason is Treason.

9. Being to examine the Doctor's Plea, touching the Point of Schism, I thought
requisite to premise this consideration of its heynousness, that both he and my
self also, should consider it as the most important of all other, in which the
least mistake will prove mortal. I will add a bold word, and undertake to
justify it: Though it were far more probable that the Catholic Church had
been guilty of Innovation in all the Points mentioned by the Doctor: yet since
by the Protestants confession those Points are not fundamental, their voluntary
separating themselves from her Communion, will be in God's esteem very Schism.

CHAP. XX.
How the Preacher vainly endeavors to excuse his Church from Schism. Of the
Subordination of Church Governors and Synods. The breach of their
Subordination, is the cause of all dis-unions and Schisms. The unappealable
Authority of general Councils, acknowledged by Antiquity.

1. IN this point of Schism, to the end the Doctor may clear Protestants, and
lay the weight of so great a crime on the Catholic Church, he argues thus,
Since besides corruptions in practice (which yet alone cannot justify
separation) there were in the Roman Church so many corruptions in Doctrine
likewise intrenching on Fundamentals, the Schism could not be on the Chruch of
Englands side, which was obliged to separate, so just a cause being given, but
on theirs, who gave the cause of the separation? Now, that particular Nations
have a power to purge themselves from corruptions without leave from the Sea of
Rome, appears 1. By the concession of the most learned Popish Writers. 2. From
the ancient practice of the Kings of England, who were (...). 3. Likewise from
the Codes and Novels of Justinian, the capitulare of Charlemagne, and the
endeavors of two late Emperors. 4. From the examples of the Kings of Juda. He
concludes, that had the Pope been content with his Primacy of Order, they would
never have cast off the yoke, which never had been put upon their necks; whence
appears, says he, that the Usurper made the Schism. This is the substance of
his Discourse.

2. In answering this, I will proceed according to this method. 1. I will show
out of Antiquity, from the example of all orderly Governments, from evident
reason, etc. what obedience every Christian is obliged to perform to Church
Governors, in the obstinate refusal of which, consists Schism. 2. I will apply
this to the present controversy, between the English and Roman Church. I will
consider the validity of his allegations, and leave it to any indifferent man's
conscience to judge whether they are sufficient to justify the separation.

3. Touching the first Point, I take it for granted, that we both agree that
our Lord has placed in his Church, Ecclesiastical Governors, to continue by a
legitimate succession, to the end of the world: And that the exercise of their
Authority, consists partly in proposing Doctrines to be believed, partly in
making Laws for Discipline and Order. And that the Doctrines are to be no
other, then such as either are expressly, or at least, in their immediate
necessary Principles, contained in Divine Revelation: no innovation, no change
must be in them; whereas orders for Discipline may, according to the prudence
of the Church, sometimes admit alteration. Likewise I believe, we agree that
this lawful Authority of Church Governors, or Bishops, may be differently
exercised, that is, either by their single persons, or in conjunction with
others, meeting in Synods Diocesan, Provincial, National, Patriarkical, and
Ecumenical: The Authority of which Synods, is by degrees respectively
increased, according to the quality of them; the lowest degree among these,
being Diocesan, and the Supreme unappealable authority being in Ecumenical
Synods. To deny this in gross, is to make them ridiculous Conventicles; and the
more plenary they are, the more dangerous and destructive of unity will they
be, if they may be repealed by others less plenary.

4. Thus far we agree; but when we come to a precise declaration of the quality
of that Authority, by both sides agreed on in the general, here we begin to
differ; wherefore to the end, indifferent Readers may be enabled distinctly, to
view and judge on which side Justice and Truth lies; I will, besides what has
already been said of infallibility, plainly set down the Catholic Doctrine
concerning this matter, with the exceptions, which the most learned
Controvertists of the English Church have interposed against it.

5. Clem. Constit. l. 6. cap. 14.
There is in St. Clements Constitutions, a saying, that to every Bishop is
entrusted [(...)] the Episcopal Office Universally. In like manner St. Cyprian
says, [Episcopatus unus est, cujus a singulis in solidum pars tenetur] The
Episcopal Office is but one, Cypr. l. de. unit. Eccles.
of which every Bishop holds his portion in common. The meaning of which
speeches is not, that every particular Bishop is, in regard of his
Jurisdiction, an Ecumenical Bishop: But since the Church in general is truly
and perfectly one Body, each Bishop in it is so to administer his Charge, as
that he must have an eye to the whole. Dioceses and Provinces, etc. are not to
be esteemed as so many Secular Principalities independent and absolute, which
can publish Declarations and Laws without any regard to their Neighbors
profit, or liking: It is not so in the Church; But every Bishop, in executing
his Episcopal Office, ought much more to be sollicitous of the general Unity,
Peace, and Edification of the whole Church, than of his own Diocese: So that if
any Law, Custom, or Doctrine in it be discordant from, but especially if it
condemn what is by Law in force in the Province, Patriarchat, or much more the
Universal Church, such a Law ought not to be made, or being made, ought to be
Repealed.

6. As for the Authority of Bishops in Synods, particularly in declaring
Doctrines, (for in that we are at present principally concerned) Such Authority
may be conceived to extend it self either to the notout-ward-contra-Profession
only, or to the inward assent, etc. Between which two there is a great
difference.

7. The common received Catholic Doctrine teaches, that whereas in General
Councils (the only Tribunal which is by all acknowledged to be infallible)
there may be either, 1. A Declaration of Traditionary Doctrines, which formerly
before such Declaration did not evidently and ^niversally appear to be
Traditionary: 2. Or a Decision of Debates about clear and immediate
Consequences of such Doctrines. In both these the Church is infallible,
Infallible I say (not to enlarge Disputes beyond the present exigence) at least
in all points any way necessary to our Salvation; and this grounded upon those
sure Promises of our Lord made to these Guides of his Church mentioned before,
Cap. 9. 11, 12. And hence such both Declarations and Decisions are to be not
only not contradicted, but submitted to by an internal assent; the undiscovered
refusal of which assent, though it does not render the refusers Heretics in
the judgment of the Church, as upon contradiction or refusal of assent would
(for Ecclesia non judicat de internis:) Yet since such Declarations and
Decisions are always attended either with express, or at least implied
Anathemas to contrary Doctrines, the contrary internal Judgments are Heretical.

8. Of the acknowledged Infallibility of the Representative Church in
Declarations of Traditionary Doctrines, we have sufficient Testimonies from
Antiquity. St. Athan. Ep. ad Epict. Epiph. Haer. 77.
Athanasius, quoted also by St. Epiphanius, professes, That he wonders how any
one dares move a question touching matters defined in the Nicen Council, since,
the Decrees of such Councils cannot be changed without error; Therefore they
are unalterable, and in our sense infallible. Nor can there be any doubt, but
those matters defined, were Ancient and Traditionary Doctrines. Aug. Epist.
162. id. lib. 4. de Trin.
And St. Augustine says, The last Judgment of the Church is a General Council.
The same holy Father, treating of Rebaptization formerly held by St. Id, lib.
1. de Bapt. cont. Donat, l. 1. c. 7.
Cyprian, and after by the Donatists, says, That for that Doctrine (which was
truly Traditionary) the Donatists were Heretics, but St. Cyprian not: Why?
Because it was permitted to the former Fathers and Bishops to debate, and,
without breaking Communion, to determine oppositly to one another in Provincial
Councils: Till in a General Council, the true Orthodox Doctr^ne were without
all further doubts confirmed. Ibid. l. 2. c. 4.
Which Authority (says he) St. Cyprian, if it had been declared in his time,
would without any doubt at all have believed.

9. In the next place, as touching Decisions of Controversies about (not
expressly Traditionary Doctrines, but) clear and immediate consequences of such
Doctrines, it is absolutely necessary oft-times, for the Church to make such
Decisions; for otherwise the Devil would have power to undermine a great part
of our Faith, if permission were given to maintain freely, any thing that does
not appear to any one expressly, either in Scripture or in Tradition. Thus, many
of the Articles of the Nicen, Constantinopolitan, and Athanasian Creeds, are
only the clear and immediate Consequences of express Traditions, which
Articles, in the Terms wherein they were there conceived, were not absolutely
necessary to be believed, before the arising of Heresies, forced the Church
further to explain the Faith. And hence it is, that the Enlargements and
clearer Explanations of our Faith, in many Doctrines, otherwise not necessary
to be so generally known, must and will increase to the worlds end, in case New
Heresies arise.

10. Now such Decisions are truly de fide, or objects of our Faith: For though
it be most certain, that the Church neither has, nor pretends to have any New
Revelations; of Christian verities, but the same Faith which was delivered by
the Apostles, is still the Faith of the Church, and no more: There are no
Additions made, no new Articles invented: Notwithstanding the same Articles, by
occasion of Heresies arising, may in succeeding times be further explained, and
the Truths implicitly involved in them may be discovered.

In like manner, some Traditionary points conveyed by the general practice of
the Church, when they come to be questioned or denied by Heretics, are often
explicitly declared in Councils to be Traditions, by which Declaration, there
is no new thing taught, but that which was formerly involved, is more clearly
manifested, and that which was taught by practice is declared by words, and
that which was known to the learneder part of Christians, becomes extended to
all: Thus the Doctrine of Purgatory, Prayer for the Dead, Invocation of Saints,
etc. have been in later Councils made Articles, not de novo, (as the Doctor
misapprehends) but they are lately testified to have been so anciently
believed; and so are all other new decisions of later Councils, Points of
ancient Faith, either in themselves explicitly, or in their necessary
principles implicitly. And if, after such decisions of Councils, there arises
a new obligation; that none can dissent from them without incurring the guilt
of Disobedience, so was there before an obligation of non-dissenting from the
same Points without falling into Error; and that in a matter of Divine
Revelation. Such Points were always matter of faith, if we would believe, in
those particulars, what was Divine Truth; though now indeed more necessary
matter of our faith, out of the obedience also and submission that we owe to
the Church's judgment; to which judgment we could have no obligation, before
she declared it. Neither can this be avoided when ever the Church is by new
risen Errors necessitated to state or declare such a Divine Truth, but that
such a new obligation will arise to Christians, in relation to Her, of
believing it; else to what end does the state it? Which obligation is also a
restraint of our former liberty indeed, whereby we might then believe an error
in divine matters, without the guilt of disobeying the Church; but this
restraint is much for our benefit in our knowing and holding some truth now,
which perhaps we did not formerly, and that in a time, when we are in more
danger, from Seducers, of falling into the contrary Error. And now behold,
these necessary decisions are called the Church's new Articles of Faith; this
is her chief accusation; and the same clamor now raised by the Preacher
against the Council of Trent for this matter, as was anciently by the Arrians
against the first General Council, who cried out against the new Article and
word Consubstantiality, which was not found in their former Creed; as was
anciently by the Nestorians against the third General Council, and by the
Eutychians against the fourth. And therefore, why may not the Council of Trent,
for its defense, return the same answer to the Preacher, as the fourth General
Council, which he professes to allow, did to the Eutychians? Conclus. of the
Synod ad Marcianum Imperat.
-- A not-much-discussed explication of the faith is sufficient (say they) for
the benefit of sincere Believers. But for those who endeavor to pervert the
true Doctrine, it is necessary to make opposition to all those things which they
erroneously broach, and to provide fit remedies to their objections. For if all
would willingly acquiesce to the establishment of the [Nicene] Faith, and would
disturb this clear way of Piety with no innovation, it were meet, for the
posterity of the Church, to excogitate [in their Councils] no new additions.
But because there are many that decline from this right line, through the
crooked paths of error, we are confirained with new discovery of truth to
reduce them, and to refute their straying opinions with wholesome additions [i.
e. to the former Doctrines of the Church.] Not, as if we were ever seeking out
some new thing tending to Godliness, as though the former faith were defective,
but that we may seek out those things which are judged salutary and beneficial
in opposition to those things which are innovated by them. Thus that Council,
whose words clearly demonstrate, that Councils may define, not only
traditionals in matters of Faith, but any new conclusions which are necessarily
and evidently derivative from them. And here let the equal Reader judge,
whether the Doctor has more reason to complain of the Councils new Articles,
or the Council of his, and his Predecessors new Errors. Out of which evil yet,
the wisdom of God, in the several ages, brings this good (as Evagrius ^
accutely observes to the Pagans, Hist. 1. lib. 11. c.
scandalized at the divisions and novelties of opinions that arose amongst
Christians) that by occasions of Heresies the Orthodox dogmes are more
accurately polished, and more entirely compiled, and that by this means the
Church every day increases in knowledge: i. e. by having the explicit
Articles of her Faith more and more enlarged. As we see how much even in early
times the Athanasian Creed (by the springing up of several Heresies in those
days) had enlarged the Apostolic.

11. All these Declarations and Decisions framed by General Councils, we Roman
Catholics do esteem our selves obliged to the assent unto, which is far more
then not to contradict. And this obligation is founded on the Infallible
Authority which we acknowledge in the Catholic Church, derived from the
promises of Christ, whose Spirit shall lead her into all Truth: The denial of
which assent we affirm to be formal Heresy: and an open contradiction to which
Authority; is formal Schism.

12. This we are taught concerning our Duty and Submission to General Councils.
And hereto we must add, that considering the present distracted state of the
Christian world, and especially the Schism pertinaciously persisted in by the
Eastern Patriarks, who live under the Tyranny of the Turk, and therefore will
never probably be permitted to convene for the general Union of Christendom, it
is almost become impossible that such General Councils should now be assembled
with all formalities, as the four first were, wherein all the five Patriarks
were present, at least by their Deputies. Yet, notwithstanding all this, we
cannot without infidelity doubt that God will be wanting to his Church to
preserve it in Truth and Unity. Since therefore such an Ecumenical Council
cannot be expected, as was during the times of the Roman Empire, the Supremest
that can now be had, ought to have the force and virtue of obliging, which the
former ones had; the Anathemas of it must be as valid; the Decisions of it as
much to be submitted to, and a renunciation of its Doctrine and Laws as
heynously Schismatical, as of any Council that ever went before: Therefore
Doctor Bramhal, Lord Primate of Armagh, in the Preface of his Reply to the
Bishop of Chalcedon, declaring that he submits himself to the Representative
Church, that is, to a free General Council, most rationally adds this clause,
or to so General, as can be procured.

13. Thus of General Councils. As for inferior subordinate Councils, though
their Decrees touching Doctrines and Laws for Discipline are not unappealable,
yet an obligation, in both these respects, they impose on Christians living
respectively within their Precincts. The Decisions of a Provincial Synod are to
be internally assented to, except they be evidently erroneous, or contradictory
to those of a Superior Synod, so that without Schism they cannot be openly
contradicted. Yet the same Decisions may be annulled by a Patriarchical Synod:
And all by an Ecumenical, of which alone all the Decisions and Laws are
irreversible, because there is no Authority upon earth superior to it, and in
all Governments an inferior Authority can never reverse what has once been
established by a Superior, especially if that establishment has been actually
submitted to: For, if a Provincial Synod could annul the formerly received Acts
of a National, or a National of a Patriarchical, there must of necessity follow
a Dissolution of all Government and Unity, as to the whole Catholic Church,
yet we profess in our Creed, Vnam Catholicam -- Add to this, that in all Synods
the Major part always must decide: so that the fewer, however they may be
esteemed the better or more learned, must submit to them: These likewise all
use of meetings and consultations will be evacuated.

14. This fundamental Rule of all Government and Unity is the only true,
unering Touchstone, by which a judgment is to be made concerning Schism; If
Doctor Pierce can furnish us with a better, let it be produced: but that being
impossible, he must give us leave to make use of this to examine the cause
between the Roman Catholic Church, and all other Congregations that call
themselves Reformed. But indeed it is lost labor to apply such a Rule as this
to any Calvinistical, Independent, or Fanatic Congregations, because they
renounce both all such Laws, and the whole Authority and Offices of those that
made them: Therefore (leaving them to the severe judgment of him who said,
Where are those my enemies that will not have me to rule over them? Luke 19.
) I will consider the Controversy, as the Preacher stated it, between the
Roman Catholic and English Protestant Churches, I say [ as he has stated it]
because being to treat of Schism, he has given the right notion of it, and not
misspent time and paper, as some others have done, with vain discourses of an
Internal and External separation, etc. as if there were no danger in external
Schism or dividing of Communion, unless men also have, with the Presbyterians,
etc. lost all even appearance of charity to all Christian Churches before them,
damning all who believe that Artiticle of our Creed concerning the Unity and
Authority of the Church.

CHAP. XXI.
The Fundamental RULE of Church Government. Limitations of the Authority of Gen
Councils. Their Grounds made by Arch Bishop Lawd, Dr. Field, etc. Of Points
Fundamental, and Non-fundamental. Protestants allow not so much Authority to
Genesis Councils, as God commanded to be given the Jewish Sanedrim. Of the
pretended Independence of the English Church, from the Example of Cyprus.

The foresaid fundamental Rule of all Government, That no Laws can validly be
repealed by an Authority Inferior to that, by which they were Enacted, is a
Rule not now invented to serve our present purpose, but written in the hearts
of all mankind, that consider what Government is; and it is, as to
Church Matters, particularly taken notice of by St. Augustine, when he declares
the Order that is in the Church, and which alone can keep it in unity;
Particular Writings of Bishops, Aug. de Bapt. cont. Donat. l. 2. c. 3.
says he, if any Error be in them, may be corrected by others more learned, or
by Synods; and Synods themselves assembled either in Provinces, or Regions
ought without any tergiversation to yield and submit to the Authority of
Plenary Councils; and oftimes former Plenary Councils, may be corrected by
other following Plenary Councils.

2. This most Irrefragable Rule, is that by which Schism may most certainly,
and undeniably be discovered. And therefore though in gross it be admitted by
Protestants, (I mean the wisest and most learned among them) yet out of a
necessity of maintaining the grounds of the English Reformation, they put such
restrictions and exceptions to it, as utterly take away all use of it. For
whereas S. Augustine makes the Supreme Authority of the Church, to reside in
plenary or general Councils, because he withal implies, that such Councils may
be corrected, they therefore take the liberty to reject them, at least in
decisions in their esteem of less importance, and by that means altogether
inervate their Authority: Not considering that in case the Decisions, which he
says, may be mended, should regard matters of belief, which perhaps, upon
better consideration, may be expressed more commodiously, and so, as that they
may be less liable to misconstruction; yet it belongs not to any particular men
or Churches to correct them, but only to succeeding Councils of equal
Authority. To demonstrate this, I will here set down what Authority learned
Protestants, such as Doctor Field, the late Archbishop Lawd, etc. acknowledge
in general Councils, and withal, how they circumscribe the same Authority.

3. These agree, that the Universal Church is infallible in fundamentals: Hence
says the Archbishop, Archb. Lawd, Conser. Sect. 37. Numb. 3.
The visible Church has in all ages taught that unchanged faith of Christ in
all Points fundamental: Doctor White had reason to say this, etc. Id. ib. sect.
21. n. 5.
Again, The whole Church cannot universally err in absolutely fundamental
Doctrines, therefore it is true also that there can be no just cause of making
a Schism from the whole Church. Ibid.
Again, quoting Kickerman, he says, That she cannot err, neither in the
Faith, nor in any weighty point of Faith. And from Doctor Field he asserts,
Ibid.
That she cannot fall into Heresy, etc. That she may err indeed in
superstructions and deductions, and other unnecessary Truths, from her
curiosity or other weakness. But if she can err either by falling away from
the Foundation totally, or by heretical error in it, she can no longer be holy:
(for no Assemblies of Heretics can be holy:) And so that Article of the Creed,
[I believe the holy Catholic Church] is gone. Now this holiness, says he,
Errors of a meaner allay take not away from the Church. Id. sect. 33. a. 14.
The same Archbishop likewise acknowledges, that a General Council de post
facto is unerrable: that is, when the Decisions of it are received and admitted
generally by Catholics.

4. Thus far goes the Archbishop, attended by Doctor Field, Doctor White, etc.
But being necessarily obliged to maintain the separation of his own Church from
the Roman, etc. he (treating of that point) extends most enormously the Errors
of the Church in non-Fundamentals; for then, forgeting his former phrases of
unprofitable curiosities, unnecessary subtilties, unnecessary Doctrines, Id.
Sect. 21. n. 5.
to which her curiosity or weakness, may carry her beyond her Rule, he says,
Id. Sect. 37. ^. 5. 6.
The Roman Church held the Fundamentals literally, yet she erred grossly;
dangerously, nay damnably in the exposition of some of them: That she had
Errors, though not Fundamental, yet grating upon the Foundation, etc. Now what
he speaks of the Roman, is manifest, must as well be applied to the Eastern
Church too; and so to the whole Church Catholic at Luthers discession, for
most of the Doctrines found fault with by Protestants in the Roman Church,
themselves see to have been, and still to be taught by the Eastern, etc. with
an accession on of other Errors, from which the Roman is free.

5. Hitherto these Writers speak of the Authority of the Church only in
generals: The Church, say they, cannot Err in Fundamentals; She may Err in
non-Fundamentals: But who is to discern between Fundamentals and
non-Fundamentals? And who is to judge of the Churches Error in non-Fundamentals?
Doctor Field will tell us to this purpose, Dr. Field of the Church cap. 5. p.
666.
That no particular man or Church, may so much as profess publicly, that they
think otherwise then has been determined in a general Council, except with
these three limitations. 1. Unless he know most certainly the contrary to what
the Church has determined. 2. If there be no gainsaying of men of worth, place
and esteem? 3. If there appear nothing that may argue an unlawful proceeding.
And the Archbishop briefly to this effect, Lawd Sect. 33. con. 5. n. 1.
states the Point: That General Councils, lawfully called and ordered, and
lawfully proceeding, are a great and awful representation, and cannot err in
matters of Faith, upon condition. 1. That they keep themselves to God's Rule,
and not attempt to make a new one of their own. 2. And they are with all
submission to be observed by every Christian, where Scripture, or evident
demonstration come not against them.

6. These are their limitations, and sure it was a very great necessity, that
forced such wise and learned men, to grant so licentious a liberty, for
annulling what ever has been, or shall be determined by the Supreme Tribunal
in Gods Church. A liberty never heard, or thought of from Doctor Pierces
beginning, I am certain. A liberty manifestly destructive to all their own
Articles, Canons, and Acts of Parliament: For sure they will not say, that
these are of more sacred and inviolable Authority, then those of the whole
Church: Do none pretend to know most certainly the contrary to those
determinations? or do none of worth, place, and esteem, gainsay them, when all
the Christian world Reformed, and non-Reform'd, except a little portion of
England, absolutely reject them? Lastly, does nothing appear, that may argue an
unlawful proceeding in Hen. the Eighths first Reformation, or K. Edwards, or Q.
Elizabeth's? But there was no possible avoiding the concession of this liberty,
apparently ruinous to themselves; because they have usurped it against the
whole Church, could not refuse it to any that would make use of it to destroy
their own.

7. Let us here briefly examine these Grounds, laid by the Archbishop, etc.
viz. 1. The Church is unerrable in Fundamentals, but subject to error in
non-Fundamentals. 2. The Decisions of General Councils, are to be observed,
where Scripture, or evident Demonstration come not against them.

8. In these Assertions is included a Supposition not denied by Catholics,
That even among Doctrines determined by the Church, there are some which are in
themselves fundamental, others not so: but yet withal those Doctrines which in
themselves are not fundamental, being once determined by the Church, are
necessary to be assented to by all Catholics, to whom they are so represented,
for in those circumstances, Obedience is a fundemental duty. But though
Catholics allow this distinction in general, they withal profess, it is
impossible for any particular persons of themselves to determine among all the
Churches Decisions, and say, this or this Point is necessary and fundamental,
the others not. And the reason is, because the terms Necessary, Fundamental,
etc. are relative terms when applied: for that is necessary to be believed and
known by one, which is not so by another: Many Doctrines are necessary to
Churches for their well ordering, which are not so to any single persons,
Parishes, etc. etc. For this reason all Decisions of the Church are sacred to
them; no permission to question any of them is allowed: and by this means the
Church is continued in unity, and by assenting to all Decisions, they are sure
never to dissent from those that are necessary. Whereas Protestants taking a
liberty of discerning between fundamentals and non-fundamentals, and of
dissenting in non-fundamentals at least, wherein they think the Church
Catholic may be fallible (though they have no Rule by which to judge so) are,
besides a certainty of disunion, exposed to errors even in fundamentals.

9. The ground upon which those learned Protestants conclude a fallibility even
in the universal Church as to Doctrines not fundamental [besides the manifest
interest of their own Church] is because the end why Christ made such promises
of leading his Church into all Truth, was, lest the Gates of Hell should
prevail against her, which can be done only by Heresies against fundamental
Doctrines: and therefore God's assistance for other Points not fundamental, is
not to be presumed on.

10. But, though this Position in general were allowed them, That the Church is
fallible in unnecessaries, this will not excuse them for dissenting from the
Church in any particular Doctrines actually decided by a General Council.
Themselves acknowledge that all dissenting even internal is unlawful without a
certain demonstration, that the Church has actually erred in such and such
Doctrines. But which way possibly can any particular, person, or Church, arrive
to such a demonstration? It must be by producing express Scripture, or
universal Tradition, formally opposite and contradictory to what the universal
Church has declared. Who can think, who dares believe, that those supreme
Guides of all Christians, who were by our Lord placed in the Church, and graced
with such promises, who are the only Guardians of the Scripture it self, and
only unappealable Judges of the sense of it, should conspire to propose
Doctrines formally and manifestly contrary to express Scripture or evident
demonstration? And as for universal Tradition, there can be no Judge of it, but
the whole Church: particular persons, or Churches, are utterly incapable of
making such a judgment, especially in opposition to the whole Church.

11. It were happy therefore, if Protestants, considering the Promises of
Christ, and the necessity of unity in the Church, would allow but as much
submission to the Supreme Tribunal of his Church, as God obliged the Jews to
perform to their Sanedrim, to which no such Promises were made. For then,
though in Thesi they did affirm the Church to be fallible, yet they would
acknowledge, that not only all declaration of non-assenting is forbidden, but
an internal assent is of necessary obligation to every one of her Decisions.

12. Let them seriously consider the passage of Deuteronomy heretofore
produced, Deuteronomy. 17.
in which God commands the Jews under the penalty of death, to obey whatsoever
sentence should be pronounced by the present Judges of those days in any
Controversies touching the Law. This Precept argues that the Supreme Council of
the Jews was infallible in Fundamentals. And indeed God had promised that the
Scepter should not depart from Judah, Genesis 49. 10.
nor a Lawgiver from between his knees till Shiloh (that is the Messiah) came.
By virtue of which Promise the Jewish Religion could not fail in Fundamentals:
and the effect of this Promise was manifestly performed: For as to the outward
pro^ession and practices of the Mosaical Law, it was always continued, in so
much as our Savior himself enjoined Obedience to all the Commands of those who
sat in Moses his Chair. Matthew. 23.
I say as to the outward practices of it: For in the Spiritual sense of it, the
Jewish Ecclesiastical Magistrates were horribly perverted, so far as to oppose
and Murder the Messiah himself, typified therein; But now Shiloh was already
come, and God's promise of Indefectibility rested in this New High Priest, and
his Successors.

13. Notwithstanding all this, yet Errors might creep in about
non-fundamentals, as the Rabbis confess, when they suppose a future Sanedrim
might annul the Decisions of a former Council; in which case the Ordinances of
the later must take place, and without all tergiversation be obeyed. So as
though they, being indeed in such things fallible, should command any thing
contrary to the true sense of the Law, the Jews were under the utmost penalty
obliged to obey them, which obedience required a submission of Judgment and
internal assent to such Commands, that they were agreeable to God's Law,
because it would be utterly unlawful to obey any commands of men, which the
Subject believed to be contrary to God's Law. Now the reasonableness of this
Command of God appears in this, That it was a less evil and inconvenience that
some Legal Precepts of no great importance should be transgressed, than that
Contentions and Disputes should be endless 14. From this pattern Protestants
may be instructed, that though they should allow a General Council no more
obliging Authority, than the Jews did to their Sanedrim, which was infallible
in fundamentals, but subject to Error in non-fundamentals, they can never have
a warrant to Dissent from any Decisions of such a Council, but ought to submit
their internal Judgment to them. For, since it is impossible they should have
any demonstrative proofs that such Councils have de facto erred, I mean in
matter of Doctrine; all other inferior Judgments, all only probable Arguments
against them, ought to cease; the Judgment of the whole Church rendering all
contrary opinions altogether improbable. So that though (upon their Supposition
that the Church in non-fundamentals is fallible) she should have erred in such
not-much-concerning Decisions, and by consequence their assent would be
erroneous, yet that small incommodity would be abundantly recompensed with the
most acceptable virtue of Obedience, humble submission of Judgment, love of
Peace and Unity which accompanies it. Besides, that both Truth and Error in
such things lies only on the Churches, and not at all on their account.

15. But since Protestants find an extraordinary difficulty more than
Catholics, to submit their Judgments to Authority, and are apt to think all
their opinions and persuasions to be certain knowledges; Let it be supposed
that their first Reformers not being able to persuade themselves to renounce
their Opinions, should thereupon have been excommunicated by the Church: In
this case they ought to have suffered such Censures with patience, and not
voluntarily forsake her Communion; and much less ought they to have set up, or
repair to an Anti-communion: For that was in the highest degree a Formal Schism.

16. In all this discourse touching the Infallibility of the Church, and the
unlawfulness of separation from it; I do not mean a Church of one denomination,
no, not the Roman, as such, for so we ascribe not Infallibility to her: But I
intend the Universal Church, which we call Roman Catholic, because all true
Orthodox Churches (an union of which, constitutes the Universal Church,
acknowledge the Roman Church, to be the Root of their Unity. Therefore
Protestants, in vain, seek to excuse their separation, upon pretense it was
only from the Roman, not from the Universal Church: because, 1. A separation
from the external Communion of any one true Member of the Catholic Church, for
Doctrines which are commonly held by other Churches in communion with that
Member, is indeed a separation from all Churches; which is manifestly the case
of the English separation. 2. Because it is evident, that the pretended
Reformed Churches, really separated themselves a toto mundo. A thing which
Calvin confesses in an Epistle of his to Melancthon, in these words, Nec non
parvi refert, etc. For it does not a little concern us, that not the least
suspicion of any discord risen among us, descend to posterity: For it were a
thing more then absurd, after we have been constrained to make a discession
from the whole world, if we, in our very beginnings, should also divide from
one another. And which Chillingworth also confesses in several places, cap. 5.
sect. 55. As for the external Communion of the visible Church, (says he) we
have, without scruple formerly granted, that Protestants did forsake it: that
is, renounce the practice of same observances, in which, the whole visible
Church before them, did communicate. And sect. 56. What do you conclude (says
he) from ^ence, but that seeing there was no visible Church, but corrupted,
[where note, that he must affirm not only corruptions in manners, but also in
Doctrines and Laws, for from several of these, he will not deny Luther to have
made a discession] Luther forsaking the external Communion of the corrupted
Church, could not but forsake the external communion of the Catholic Church.
Well, let this be granted; what will come of it? That Luther must be a
Scismatick? By no means. I say, it is evident (as these confess) that the
pretended Reformed Churches really separated themselves from the whole world,
that is, from that holy Catholic Church which we believe is to continue so in
every Age: Since not one Church upon earth antecedent to their separation, can
be found out with which they are joined in external Communion, not one which
has Laws, or Governors in common with them, not one that will join with them,
or with which they will join in public Offices, Lyturgies, Sacrifices and
Synods. The English Church does not pretend a Communion with Churches
manifestly Heretical, as the Armenian, Coptite, Abissine, Nestorian, Iacobite,
Georgian Churches, etc. And for the Grecian, the Reformers, at their first
separation, were actually divided from her; and sure they will not say, that by
separation from the Roman, they became ipso facto in communion with the
Grecian; or if they would say so, the Grecian would protest against them, as we
see their Patriark Hieremias did, etc.

17. And that is but a very ineffectual Salve, Dr. Bramhall.
which a late learned Protestant Writer in his discourse of Schism, insists
upon, when, seeing clearly the English Church could not pretend a Communion
with any other Ancient Churches in the world, he therefore claims privileges
of the English Church, equal to those ancient ones of Cyprus; which was a
Church independent of all other, and exempted from the Jurisdiction of the
Eastern Patriark of Antioch: For though this pretention could be made good,
which is impossible, yet this would not serve their turn, considering the
English Church, ever since her Conversion, acknowledged her self a Member of
the Western Patriarchate: But though she had indeed such a privilege, and
never renounced it, who will say the Cyprian Church, (because exempted from
certain Acts of Patriarckical Jurisdiction, as Ordinations, Visitations, etc.)
could therefore independently of all the world, frame or change Articles of
Faith, or be excused from subscribing to the Decisions of Councils, though
only Patriarckical?

CHAP. XXII.
The limitations of the Churches Authority, made by Archbishop Lawd, etc.
examined. Objections against the Proceedings in the Council of Trent, answered.
Manifest Illegality in Q. Eliz. Reformation. Secular and Carnal ends in it.

1. HAving showed the indispensible obligation of even an internal assent that
Roman Catholics acknowledge due to the Decisions of General Councils, as being
infallible, and which Protestants ought also to perform, though they
acknowledge such an infallibility to extend only to Doctrines Fundamental;
since the Church her self has not declared which of her Decisions are
Fundamental, and which not, for she has affixed Anathemas to many, which in
themselves are not Fundamental, and has said only, si quis dixerit (not) si
quis non crediderit, concerning Doctrines which are unquestionably Fundamental
and necessary: We will now examine the forementioned Limitations or cases in
which it is said particular persons or Churches may and ought to be dispensed
with for yielding an assent to Decisions of General Councils touching matters
not Fundamental, or even for not contradicting them; which limitations have
been fixed by Archbishop Lawd, Doctor Field, etc.

2. In the first place, An assent even internal, say they, is to be given
indispensably to all Decisions of General Councils touching such Doctrines
(only) as are Fundamental, or Points of necessary Faith, because so far and no
farther their Infallibility extends. But who shall, or can judge what Points
are or are not of necessary Faith with respect to all particular states of men
or Churches, when the Church her self has not made any distinction between
them, and perhaps cannot? Surely Prudence, and a most necessary care of our own
Salvation, by continuing in the Unity of the Church, would dictate to us, that
since the Church is as to Fundamentals infallible, and therefore cannot mislead
us to our danger, there can be no safety but in assenting to all her Decisions,
as if they were of necessary Faith, for only by doing so, we can be sure not to
err in necessary Points, and we shall be certainly free from all danger of
Schism.

3. Secondly, As to Decisions made by General Councils of Doctrines not
necessary (if we could find them out) the same internal assent, say they, is
due, except in two cases. i. Unless Scripture or evident demonstration come
against them, whereby we know most certainly the contrary to what they have
determined, in which case it is unlawful to assent, yea it is permitted rather
to contradict and separate. But let any Christian man's conscience judge,
whether this be to be admitted as a fitting, respectful, or even possible
supposition, that the whole Church should conspire to frame Decisions in
matters of Christian Doctrine, against which express Scripture or evident
demonstration can be produced. This license being admitted, who shall be judge,
whether that which is pretended to be a Demonstration, be really one, or no? Or
whether a person do know most certainly the contrary to what the whole Church
has decided? None can judge of the thoughts of another: So that upon these
grounds, whoever shall say he is certain the Church has erred, must be
believed, or however cannot be found fault withal for his renouncing obedience
to the Universal Church. What Presbyterian, writing or disputing against
Episcopacy or other Doctrines of this Church, will doubt to say, that he does
most certainly believe and know such Doctrines to be Errors? And if he say so,
who can demostrate, that he does not think so? And if he think so, he may
question, contradict, and make parties to reverse all the Laws, Decisions, etc.
both of the English and God's Church too, by the Archbishop's warrant; for he
taking notice ( page 245.) that such an Objection will be made, resolves it
thus, That a General Council (he means another (General Council) must decide,
whether it be a demonstration or not; Hence it will follow, 1. That when any
one cries a Demonstration, he cannot be reduced to obedience till another
General Council be called. 2. But if another General Council must decide it,
why has not the last General Council, which he disobeys, decided it? Or if
this may not oblige him, why should the next? But this is not yet judged to be
dispensation enough; For according to the foresaid limitations, One may be
excused from assenting to Decisions of General Councils, about Points not of
necessary Faith, in case they be gainsaid by men of worth, place and esteem: So
that if any such persons do contradict General Councils (whether in or out of
the Council, He mentions not) ignorant men may lawfully join with them, and in
comparison esteem all other Pastors of God's Church to be of less worth, place
or esteem. What a broad Gate, yea how vast a breach have these Doctors, with
all their learning and prudence, made in the walls of God's Church, to let in
all manner of confusion? Can any Protestant now deny Sme^^ymnuus, Mr. Prinn,
the Rump Parliament to have been persons of worth, place and esteem? At least
the generality of England once thought them so, and themselves challenged those
Titles, and whilst they were the strongest, enjoyed them. To what miserable
straits a necessity of justifying the English Separation reduced such wise and
learned men?

4. In the third place, according to the same Writers Position, all manner of
Decisions made by Councils, both in necessary and unnecessary Doctrines, cease
to be obligatory, in case something appears that may argue an unlawful
proceeding in the Council, out of passion, interest, want of liberty, etc. But
still who shall be judges of Councils proceedings? Among Catholics, when there
are perhaps suspicions of some irregular proceedings, yet if the Points decided
be embraced by the particular Catholic Churches, generally speaking, they then
have the force of unquestioned Catholic Doctrines. But as for those, who are
enemies to Councils, in which their Doctrines have been condemned, such will be
sure to charge them with unlawful proceedings. For did not the Arians urge that
Plea against the Council of Nice? The Nestorians against that of Ephesus? The
Eutychians against that of Chalcedon?

5. This clause in all probability was put in to exclude the Authority of the
Council of Trent; against the proceedings of which therefore, very loud and
very unjust clamors were made by Protestants, imputing especially to the Court
of Rome many policies and attempts either to intimidate the Fathers of the
Council, or to induce them to favor, and enlarge the Grandeurs of the Pope.
But who ever shall unpassionately read the History of that Council, compiled by
the most learned and eminent Cardinal Palavicino from authentic Records yet
extant, will be satisfied. 1. That the liberty of the Bishops was only
straightened by their own respective temporal Princes, and not by the Roman Court.
2. That the Pope was so far from gaining an access to his Authority, that when
a far greater number of the Bishops would have concurred thereto, the Pope
himself forbad it, merely because the French Bishops, inconsiderable for their
numbers, did join to oppose it.

6. But there is no necessity that Catholics should trouble themselves with
making Apologies for that Council. 1. Because all the Doctrines of it, opposed
by Protestants, as Novelties, were manifest in the general Writings and
Practice of the Western Church long before that Council; and most of them in
the Eastern. 2. Because they are now actually embraced by all Catholic
Congregations, as Declared Doctrines of the Church: in which case by the
Archbishop's own Concessions, they are to be esteemed infallibly true. 3.
Because the principal Doctrines, censured in the Preacher's Sermon, had been
expressly determined by former either General, or at least Patriarkical
Councils, admitted in this Kingdom: as Transubstantiation, Veneration of
Images, Prayers not in a vulgar tongue, Communion under one Species, Celibacy
of Priests, the universal Jurisdiction of the Pope, etc. 4. And lastly,
because, in condemning the Protestant Doctrines opposite to them, the Bishops
of the Council of Trent are found, even by See the English Edition of that
History, concerning Transubstantiation and Adoration of the Eucharist, page
324, and 326. -- Concerning the Mass, that it is a Propitiatory sacrifice, p.
544, 545, and 738. -- Concerning the Lawfulness and Sufficiency of
Communicating in one kind, page 324, 325, 519. -- Concerning Purgatory; the
Lawfulness of Invocation of Saints, and of Veneration of Images, p. 799, 803.
-- Concerning the Lawfulness of not using some part of the Divine Service in a
vulgar Language, p. 573, 574. -- Concerning Priests not Marrying; and the
universal Capacity of the Gift of Chastity; and the Lawfulness of Vowing it, p.
783, 747, and likewise, p. 678, 679.]
Padre Paulo's Relation (no favourer of that Council) unanimous in their
Judgment; which the Reader may there see, if he please to examine their Votes
concerning those Points. Neither did, nor needed the Pope, or his adherents, to
use any artifice herein to gain the Suffrages of a Major part: And this is, in
that History of his, only pretended to be done in other matters of Contest
among Catholics themselves.

7. Therefore it would certainly be much more for the good of Conscientious
Protestants to reflect seriously on the method of their Reformations: and then
let them be Judges of the legality of their proceedings, and the
disinteressedness of their first Reformers. I speak not now of Presbyterian
Reformations, which in all Countries have been ushered in with Tumults,
Rebellions, Murders, Rapines, Dissolution of Monarchies, etc. but of the
English Reformation only, which though free from such horrible Crimes, yet how
legal it was, how free from worldly and carnal Interests, let their own
Historians be Judges.

8. And first, This Relation is made of it in general by Dr. Heylin; Reform.
Justified, page 37.
In Queen Elizabeth's time (says he) before the new Bishops were well settled [I
need not mind the Reader here, that all her former Bishops, save on, had
deserted her] and the Queen, assured of the affections of her Clergy, went that
way to work in Her Reformation, which not only her two Predecessors, but all
the godly Kings and Princes in the Jewish State and many of the Christian
Emperors in the primitive times had done before her, in the well ordering of
the Church and People committed to their care and government by Almighty God.
And to that end she published her Injunctions, Ann. Dom. 1559. A Book of
Orders, 1561. Another of Advertisements, 1562. All leading unto the
Reformation, with the Advice and Consent of the Metropolitan, and some other
Godly Prelates who were then about Her [these were those newly Ordained, the
former Bishops being ejected] by whom they were agreed on, and subscribed unto,
before they were presented to Her. But when the times were better settled, and
the first difficulty of her Reign passed over, she left Church-work to the
disposing of Churchmen, who, by their place and calling, were most proper for
it; and they, being met in Convocation, and thereto authorized as the Laws
required, did make and publish several Books of Canons, etc. Thus that Doctor;
the sum of which is, That the Queen, finding no foundation to build upon,
because all the Innovations begun by her Father and young Brother, had been
utterly demolished by her Sister Queen Mary, and withal perceiving the main
Body of her Clergy, as well as her Bishops, except such as the caused to be
made de novo, to be generally averse from her proceedings, was fain to do all
the Ecclesiastical work her self, assisted with some of her New Bishops,
without the Concurrence of any Synodal Authority; till, having first by her
Orders sufficiently purged the Clergy, she saw, she could securely now do
Church-work by Churchmen.

9. But Mr. Fuller Fuller Hist. l. 9. p. 54.
is more punctual in delivering the retail of these her first proceedings,
which he extracted out of the authentic Synodals, 1559. He tells us then, That
in the beginning of her Reign, the Queen called both a Parliament and a
Convocation of the Clergy: Which Convocation unanimously persisted in a
resolution not to forsake the old Religion restored by Queen Mary, and
publicly declared against such an intended Reformation. Particularly the body
of the inferior Clergy composed certain Articles of Religion, which they
tendered to the Bishops, and the Bishops in the Name of the whole Clergy,
presented them to the Lord Keeper. The said Articles were these five, 1. Of the
real substantial presence of our Lord's body after Consecration. 2. Of the
non-remaining of the substance of Bread and Wine. 3. Of the Propitiatory
Sacrifice in the Mass. 4. Of the Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction of the Pope.
5. That the power not only of defining, but even treating and ordering of
Ecclesiastical matters touching Doctrine and Discipline pertains only to
Spiritual Pastors, and not at all to Lay persons. A little after this, during
the same Convocation, there came from both the Universities a Writing signed by
a Public Notary, by which they both signified their Concurrence to the
aforesaid Articles, only with a little alteration of the last.

10. I have thought fit to annex here the very words of that Convocation, as
Dr. Fuller transcribed them out of the Synodal Book, 1559.

Reverendi in Christo Patres as Domini Colendissimi.
QVoniam Fama Public^ referente ad nostram nuper notitiam pervenit ^ multa
Religionis Christianae Dogmata publico and unanimi gentium Christianarum
consensu hactenus recepta and probata, atque ab Apostolis ad nos usque
concorditer per manus deducta praesertim Articulos infra scriptos, in dubium
vocari. Hinc est, quod Nos Cantauriensis Provinciae inferior Secundarius Clerus
in uno (Deo sic disponente, ac Sereniissimae Dominae nostrae Reginae, Decani
and Capitali Cant: Mandato Brevi Parliamenti ac monitione Ecclesiastica solita
declarata id exigente) convenientes, partium nostrarum esse existimavimus, tum
nostrae, tum eorum, quorum cura nobis committitur, saluti, omnibus quibus
poterimus modis prospicere. Quocirca Majorum nos^rorum exemplis commoti; qui in
similia saepe tempora inciderunt, fidem, quam in Articulis infra Scriptis veram
esse credimus, and ex animo profitemur, ad Dei laudem and honorem, Officiisque,
and aliarum nostrae curae commissarum animarum exonerationem, presentibus,
duximus, public afferendam, affirmantes, and sicut Deus nos in die Iudicij
adiuve^, asserentes.

1. Quod in Sacramento Altaris, virtute Christi verbo suo a Sacerdote de^ite
prolato assistentis, praesens est realiter sub speciebus panis and vini
natural Corpus Christi conceptum de Virgin Maria. Item naturalis ejus sanguis.

2. Item. Quod post Consecrationem non remanet substantia panis and vini, neque
ulla alia substantia, nisi substantia Dei and Hominis.

3. Item. Quod in Miss^ offertur verum Christi corpus and verus ejusdem
sanguis, Sacrificium propitiatorium pro vivis and defunctis.

4. Item. Quod Petro Apostolo and ejus legitimis Successoribus in sede
Apostolica tanquam Christi Vicario data est suprema potestas pascendi and
regendi Ecclesiam Christi militantem, and fratres suos confirmandi.

5. Item. Quod authoritas tractandi and definiendi de iis quae spectant ad
fidem, Sacramenta, and disciplinam Ecclesiasticam, hactenus semper spectavit
and spectare debet tantum ad Pastores Ecclesiae, quos Spiritus Sanctus in hoc,
in Ecclesia Dei, posuit; and non ad Laicos.

Quam nostram assertionem, affirmationem and fidem, nos inferior Clerus
praedictus vestris Paternitatibus tenore praesentium exhibemus; humiliter
supplicantes, ut quia nobis non est copia hanc nostram sententiam et
intentionem aliter illis, quorum in hac part interest, notificandi, Vos qui
Patres estis, ista superioribus ordinibus significare velitis. Qua in re
officium charitatis ac pietatis (ut arbitramur) praestabitis, and saluti gregis
vestri, ut par est prospicietis, and vestras ipsi animas liberabitis.

But what effect had these Declarations and Protestations of the whole
representative Clergy and Universities? All that could be got was a
Disputation, the orderly proceeding whereof, and conclusion, may be seen in Fox
and Camden, A. D. 1559.

Neither can the salvo used by M. Thorndick, who proceeds somewhat otherwise in
this point, then the Archbishop, or Dr. Field, be rationally admitted here.
Right of Church in a Christian s^ate p. 247. 248. etc.
Who first yields, that if the Clergy of that time when the Reformation began,
(he means the Clergy in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign) had been
supported in that Power, which by the premises [in his Book] is challenged on
behalf of the Clergy, the Reformation could not have been brought to pass, and
grants, Ibid. p. 251.
that secular power gave force to that which was done contrary to the Rule,
wherein the Unity of the Church consisted: But yet justifies the Reformation
thus, Page 273, etc.
He says, that as the power of the Church (obliging Christians to their
Dicisions) is a Law ordained by the Apostles, for the Unity and edification of
the Church, etc. So, also there are abundance of other Laws given to the
Church, by our Lord and his Apostles: And that therefore, if by injury of the
times, the practice (of the Church) become contrary to these Laws, [given by
Christ and his Apostles]; or if those, whom the power of the Church is trusted
with, shall hinder the restoring of such Laws; (of Christ and his Apostles)
the Sovereign Power being Christian, may and ought to suppress their power,
(though he grants this their power to be an Ordinance of the Apostles,
necessary to the Unity of the Church); that so their power may be committed to
such as are willing to submit to the Superior Ordinance of our Lord and his
Apostles. A thing (says he) Page 275.
thoroughly proved, both by the right of Secular powers in advancing
Christianity with penalties, and in establishing the exercise of it, and in
particular, by all the examples of the pious Kings of Gods people, reducing the
Law into practice, and suppressing the contrary thereof. Thus Mr. Thorndicke
takes this way of freeing the English Reformation from Schism, upon the just
Reforming power of the secular Prince against all, or most of his Clergy, when
he judges them to teach or practice against the Doctrine of our Lord and his
Apostles. But all this while, he never so much as asks the question, what if
the Prince be mistaken in these Doctrines which he calls of our Lord and his
Apostles; Or be mistaken in what the Ancient Church, and primitive times have
delivered for such? And what if all the Clergy which he opposes be in the
right? Nor this, What if our Lord has committed this to the Clergy, and
Successors of the Apostles, to judge and decide for ever (when any doubt or
dispute arises) what are the true Laws of our Lord and his Apostles? Or, what
ancient Tradition has delivered to posterity for such? But he discourses so,
as if the Christian Prince were herein infallible, when yet he supposes, that
all his Clergy may be herein deceived: As if Queen Elizabeth understood the
Scriptures, and ancient Tradition, aright in these Laws, whilst her Bishops
and Convocation erred in both, till she had newmoulded them. Is not this a
strange way to justify a Church-Reformation?

For the Kings of Judah, it shall be spoken to by and by, Chap. 23. n. 7.
and as to what he urges concerning the power of Kings, it is by no means
denied, that these have Supremacy proper to them, to command obedience from all
their Subjects, and that as well from a Clergyman, as any other, to the Laws
of Christ and his Apostles with the civil Sword, and with temporal penalties (a
Supremacy to which the Church lays no claim). But when any doubt or
controversy arises, what, or which these Laws be, (as there was in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign in many points) Secular Princes as well as
others, are Sons of the Church, and are to learn this from the Expositions of
their Spiritual Fathers, the Churchmen. I mean that body of them, which has
the just and Superior Authority of deciding such controversies. And let this
suffice to show the legality of the first proceedings of the Reformation, in
opposition to the unanimous Votes of the whole Clergy, or of those therein, who
clearly had the decisive power of Ecclesiastical Controversies either
concerning the sense of Scriptures or Truth of ancient Tradition.

12. Then comparing this Reformation with the Council of Trent, in regard of
worldly or carnal interests, let any indifferent man judge between them. Was
not the liberty obtained by King Henry the Eighth, to bring into his Bed, a new
handsome Wife, instead of his former virtuous Queen, a very carnal Interest? Was
not his invading all the possessions and treasure of Monasteries a great
secular Interest? was not the dividing the said Lands, among the Nobility and
Gentry at very easy rates, a very great interest? In King Edwards days, was
not the Protectors seizing on the remainder of Church-spoils a great Interest?
Was not the freeing of Clergymen, from a necessity of saying daily, and almost
howerly, long Ecclesia^^ical Offices, from lying a lone without bedfellows,
etc. Matters of great, both carnal and secular Interests? Was not the exempting
of all, both laity and Ecclesiastics from the Duty of confessing their sins,
and submitting themselves to penitential satisfactions; from rigorous Fasts out
of Conscience and Religion, and other austerities, a matter of considerable
interest, to flesh and corrupt nature? Can any such interests as these be
proved to have been operative in the Council of Trent? How far all these
interests of the world and flesh, had influence on the first godly Reformers,
we may rationally suspect, but God only knows, and themselves long before this
time feel; God is not mocked.

13. By what has been hitherto said appears but even too clearly, how that
Fundamental Rule of all Government and subordination was utterly neglected in
England, at the time that the pretended Reformation was contrived and executed.
Here is a new and through moulding of a Church, both a Doctrines and Discipline,
called a Reformation, wherein all the Synodical Acts of this Church, since
Christianity entered among us, are as to any obliging power by their Authority
reversed: wherein all the Decisions of Patriarchical Councils, yea of
Ecumenical Synods are called into examination; all their Laws, so far as
seemed meet reformed, the whole regard that England had to all other Catholic
Churches, as a Member of the whole, is utterly broken by one National Church:
Nay not so much, but by one luxurious King, by one Child, and by one Woman,
even when the whole Body of the Clergy protested against it. And yet after all
this, Page 35.
if Doctor Pierce may be believed, thus to reform was to write after the Copy
which had been set to the Reformers in his Text, by the blessed Reformer of all
the World; which was so to reform as not to innovate, and to accommodate their
Religion to what they found in the Beginning: In the mean time accusing the
Church of Rome (as he expresses it, but indeed the whole Catholic Church, as
he must, and as others grant) of not only horrible corruptions in point of
Practice, but hideous errors in matters of Faith too, and such as trench upon
Foundations.

14. But the Preacher must not expect his confident asseveration without proof
can seduce the judgment of any considering man to believe him against evidence
and experience. Page 12.
Nothing is more plain then that the Catholic Church, by observing the
foresaid Fundamental Rule, is and will be eternally free from danger, either of
causal or formal Schism. And as plain it is, that no Churches can be separate
from the Catholic Communion but by transgressing that Rule: For if Diocesan
Churches and Synods would submit to Provincial; and Provincial to National, and
these to Patriarchical, and all to Ecumenical, how could Unity be dissolved?
But on the contrary, if subordinate Councils shall take on them to reverse the
Acts and Decisions of Superior ones, especially of Ecumenical; how can Schisms
possibly be avoided? And with what show of reason can any particular Churches
thus breaking Ecclesiastical Orders, charge other Churches with Schisms,
because they will not break them too?

CHAP. XXIII.
An Answer to the Doctor's Proofs alleged to justify the lawfulness of the
English Separation: As, 1. From the Independent Authority of our Kings. 2. From
the Examples of Justinian and other Emperors. 3. From the practices of fourteen
of our Kings. 4. From the Examples of the Kings of Juda. In what sense New
Articles of Faith are made by the Church in the Council of Trent.

1. IT remains now that I answer the examples produced by the Preacher to
justify their Separation to be no Schism; he says, Page 33.
That by the concessions of the most learned Popish Writers, particular Nations
had still a power to purge themselves from their corruptions, as well in the
Church as in the State, without leave had from the Sea of Rome: This is
willingly granted. But do those Writers concede such a purgation as their first
Reformers administered to this Kingdom? not only without, but against the
consent of the Sea of Rome, nor only of Rome, but of the whole Catholic
Church? A Purgation from the whole Faith and Discipline, in any thing they
judged fit to be rectified, that by the Authority of Councils and Laws of
Princes had been received and in force ever since the Nation was Christian: and
by which they declared themselves Members of the whole Catholic Church? On the
contrary, from the beginning of Christianity he will not be able to produce one
example, either of States or Princes, except professed Heretics, (such as the
Emperors Constantius, Valens, Zeno, etc.) that ever made any Laws to repeal any
Doctrines declared or Disciplines established in the Church. The Purgations
conceded and executed by Princes truly Catholic was to extirpate all
Innovations in Doctrine, all transgressions of Discipline that swerved from the
Decrees and Ordinations of the Church, and no other.

2. Surely the Doctor does not think Christian Princes, as such, cease to be
sons of the Church, they must be saved as well as their Subjects, and therefore
are not dispensed from that speech of our Lord, Qui vos audit, me audit. They
are not Pastors, but Sheep. Yet Catholic Religion obliges us to acknowledge,
that their Civil power extends it self to all manner of causes, though purely
Ecclesiastical; so as to make use of the Civil Sword in constraining even their
Ecclesiastical Subjects to perform that duty which either the Moral and Divine
Law (according to the Churches exposition thereof) or the Laws of the Church
require. Such a power, yea a Supremacy in such a Power we acknowledge to be in
Princes. But withal we cannot find either in reason or Antiquity any ground to
apply to Princes that Commission which our Savior only gave to the Apostles
and their Successors [ Sicut misit me Pater, etc.] As my Father sent me, so
send I you: Receive the holy Ghost, etc. Teach all Nations, etc. No promise
has been made to Princes, that God's Spirit shall lead them into all Truth,
any other way, then whilst they follow the direction of their Ecclestical
Pastors, to whom only that Promise was made.

3. Nay, that very Argument by which he would assert his cause, is a
Demonstration against him. He says, and that very truly, Our Kings are as much
as any in the world, Sermon. page 33.
(...), they hold their Regal Authority immediately from God, without any
dependence on any other authority on earth. The like must be said of other
absolute Princes too. Now this independency of Princes demonstrates, that the
regulation of their power in Ecclesiastical matters, must of necessity be made
according to an Authority and Jurisdiction purely spiritual common to them all,
which is in the Church. For otherwise, being independent and absolute, they may
perhaps be able to preserve a kind of Unity in their respective Kingdoms, by
forcing from their Subjects an Obedience to a Religion and Church-policy framed
by themselves, contrary to the Law of the Catholic Church: But how shall the
whole Church be preserved in Unity by this means? Other Princes are independent
as well as they; and therefore may frame a Religion which they may call
Reformation, as well as they: So that if there be not a spiritual Director and
Ecclesiastical Laws common to them all, and submitted to by all, what will
become of Unity? Which of these Independents will make himself a Dependent on
another? Shall there be Patriarchicall, or General Councils of Kings meet
together? Who shall summon them? In such Royal Synods there must be order:
which of them shall challenge a Primacy, even of Order? Doctor Pierce may see
what consequences naturally and unavoidably flow from his Positions.

4. Touching the Code and Novels of Justinian, Page 34.
and the practice of Charlemain (for the Emperor Zenos (...) we leave to
himself) he may please to cast a serious eye on their Laws, and will find they
were all regulated by the Law of the present Church in their Times: The
Churches Faith and her Canons for Discipline they reduced into Imperial Laws,
to the end their Subjects might be more obedient to the Church, more averse
from innovations in Doctrine, and irregularity in manners. And does all this
suit with the case of English Protestants? Can he justify King Henry the
Eighths Oath of Supremacy and Head-ship of the Church: or King Edward the
Sixths Reformation legum Ecclesiasticarum, or Q. Eliz. new Articles and Canons,
by these Laws of the Code or Capitulare? Let the Emperor Justinian pronounce
his Sentence in this matter [ Sancimus vicem Legum obtinere, Justin. in
Authent. de Eccles. Tit. and Privileg.
etc] We ordain and command that the holy Ecclesiastical Rules declared and
established by holy Councils shall obtain the force of Laws: For their
Doctrines we receive as the Holy Scriptures themselves, and their Rules we
observe as Laws. Add again, to show that the Laws, enacted by him, touching
Ecclesiastical matters, were intended not as Acts of an absolute Ecclesiastical
Supremacy, but as consequences of the Churches Authority, Id. in Authent. ut
Cler. ap. prop. Ep. 10. Conven.
he says, Our Laws disdain not to follow the holy and Divine Rules (of the
Church). These were indeed Laws of Reformation, fit for glorious Princes,
devout Sons of the Church, to make but surely very incommodious patterns for
the Preachers purpose.

5. What the late Emperors, Fardinand the first, and Maximilian the second
did, neither his Sermon, Sermon. page 34.
nor Margin tell us, but only that something was done, which he, it seems,
thought for his advantage; I Will tell him what it was: Their Reformers in
Germany were grown very powerful; yet not so, but that they made a show of
hearkening to some composition. Those worthy Emperors, for peace sake, made
several consultations with learned and moderate Catholics, (some indeed too
moderate, as Cassander, etc.) how the Church- Doctrines and Ordinances might be
qualified. Hereupon diverse expedients were proposed, Treatises written, etc. by
which the Emperors were in hope debates might be ended, But how? By betraying
the present Churches Faith? By renouncing the Popes Jurisdiction, or consent to
a composition? Far otherwise; For when they saw no agreement would please the
Lutheran Electors and their Divines, but such as was derogating from the
Authority of the Supreme Pastor, and prejudicial to the Laws of the Church,
they surceased all motions of reconciliation; rather choosing to expose
themselves to all the dangers that might come from their arms and Rebellion.

6. Touching the many Kings of England, as he says, Ibid.
in Popish times, whose actions in his opinion, showed, that the work of
Reformation, belonged especially to them in their Kingdom: His Margin, indeed,
quotes the Names of fourteen of our Kings since the conquest, as if he would
have the world believe, the pure Reformed Religion were almost six hundred
years old: But what Reformations were made by any of them, either in Religion
or Church Discipline, neither I, nor himself can show, except by the last King
Henry the Eighth, who was indeed a Reformer of the new fashion. It Is true, the
former Kings had frequent quarrels with the Court of Rome, touching
Investitures, procuring of Bulls for determining causes belonging to the Kings
Courts, usurping a disposal of Bishoprics, and other Benefices, etc. But what
is all this to Religion? Such debates as these, he may see at this day, between
the Roman Court, and the Kings of France, Spain, etc. in all which, commonly
the Pope is but little a gainer; yet, notwithstanding all these, he will not
sure deny, but that the Kings of France and Spain; and it is as certain, that
all those former Kings of England, except one, were perfect Roman Catholics;
not any of them ever did believe, that their Supremacy could allow them to
alter the Religion of their Forefathers: even King Henry the Eighth, for all
his Headship, never pretended so far. Cokes 5. Report.
Of this I dare accept, as Judge, even Sir Edward Coke himself, Balsamon.
and Balsamon likewise, though a malicious Schismatic, therefore the fitter to
be quoted by him; yet all he says is, That the Emperor has an inspection over
the Churches, that he can limit or extend the Jurisdiction of Metropolitans,
erect new ones, etc. which, whether by the ancient Laws of the Church, he can
do or no, is little for the Preachers purpose: I am sure he is not able to
prove it, or if he could, it is a Reformation which will not serve his turn.

7. His last Examples of Reformations made by Princes, is that of the Kings of
Judah, in which indeed Religion it self was Reformed. But withal, the Doctor may
do well to take notice. 1. That those Kings are no where said to have reformed
all the Priests, or the High Priest, or not to have found him as Orthodox as
themselves. See 2 Chronicles. cap. 29. 4. 12. 16. Ibid. cap. 34.
2. They are not said to have reformed the people against the Priests. 3. Or
without the Priests. 4. Yea in several places we read, they were by the Priests
assisted in their Reformation. And therefore Bishop Andrews, who was willing to
make as much advantage of this example against the Roman Church, To^t. To^ti.
p. 365.
as might be, says only, that those Kings did reform citra or ante,
declarationem Ecclesiae, but he says not, contra. And, to make good his citra
or ante, has only the strength of the weakest of all Arguments, a Negative,
thus, There is recorded no such Declaration of the Church in Scripture, ergo
there was none. The infirmity of which argument is much more visible, if
applied to such a short History as that of the Kings and Chronicles, containing
a relation of so many hundred years, and chiefly of the actions of Kings, not
of the Clergy.

8. It cannot indeed be denied, but that in such public changes, the Power of
Kings is more Operative and Illustrious then of the Priests, because their
Civil Sword awes more than the others Spiritual* and therefore no wonder, if
their part in such Reformations is more spoken of, especially in so very short
a story. But certainly, Mal. 2. 7.
according to Gods Institution, the Priests lips are to preserve knowledge, and
it is from their mouths that (Kings) are to learn Gods Law, and what they are
to Reform, because they are the Angels of our Lord. Now, for Reformations, or
other Ecclesiastical Ordinances made by such Kings as David, Solomon, etc. who,
besides a Regal Authority, were Prophets likewise, immediately inspired and so
employed by God, I suppose the Doctor will not draw such into consequence, to
justify the actions of a King Henry the Eighth, the young child his Son, or
youngest Daughter; no Prophets surely.

9. To these examples alleged by Doctor Pierce, but very insufficient to
justify the English Reformation, I will in the last place take notice briefly
of one great motive, which, as he says, set on work the English Reformers (of
happy Memory); which was their observing that in the Council of Trent, Sermon.
page 13.
the Roman Partisans, were not afraid to make new Articles of Faith, commanded
to be embraced under pain of Damnation, as it were in contempt of the Apostles
Denunciation, Gal. 1. 8.

10. But to omit his contradictions, charging us with hideous errors in Faith,
Page 12.
which yet he dare not say are Fundamental, Page 8.
lest he ruin his own Church: To omit his uncivil language to the Bishops of
that Council, persons of too honorable a quality, to be called, by a little
Doctor, contemners of the Apostles denunciation, conspirators liable to a
curse: Page 13.
To omit his commending the first English Reformers, our Kings, etc. that they
consulted not with fleth and blood, then which, what could be said more
unluckily to himself? Did not our first Reformer consult sometimes with flesh
and blood? Was Henry the Eighth so wholly spiritual? Do not your self confess,
that Sacrilege and Rebellion helped Reformation? Page 35.
To omit his petty Quibble, that the Church of Rome is but the younger Sister
to that of Britain: Directly contrary, not only to many of his brother
Divines, but to the Head of his Church, King James, who, in a public Speech to
his Parliament, says, I acknowledge the Church of Rome to be our Mother Church.
Stow. p. 840. Anno. 1603.
-- To omit all these, and more, I shall desire the Doctor to take notice, that
neither what the Church has done in the Council is any Novelty, nor is it a
Novelty that the Churches Adversaries should make such an objection: concerning
which, the Reader may please to review what has been said before, chap. 20.
Sect. 9. 10. and 11.

11. Protestants must impute this to their first Reformers, that the Church
has been forced to make such (as they call them) new Articles of Faith. For
what would they have advised the Council of Trent to do, when the Churches
ancient Doctrines and Traditionary practices were questioned and condemned by
Innovators? As yet such Doctrines, etc. having never formerly been opposed,
except by inconsiderable Heretics; Such as Iovinian, Vigilantius, etc. whose
Errors (before any Council could take notice of them, soon after they appeared,
withered away again) were visible only in the consent and practice of
Catholics. But now it was necessary to declare Conciliariter, that they were
unjustly questioned, either of Error or Novelty. Must there be no decisions in
God's Church after the four first General Councils? For fear of new Articles,
must liberty be given to new Heresies? Old Articles, such, as the Church had
formerly occasion from time to time to mention in her Creeds and Canons, will
not serve the turn explicitly to condemn them, therefore new ones must be
excogitated says the Council. Conc. Chalcedon. ad Imperat. Marcian.
New ones, that is, Old ones further explained: Or, Old Practices newly
declared to be Traditions.

12. But surely these which are mentioned by the Doctor, and related to in his
margin, are no new Articles; Most of them had been expressly declared in former
Councils; and all were as old at least as Christianity in England. For even St.
Gregory, who sent St. Austin hither to Preach the Gospel, is accused by learned
Protestants of all, or most of these very Novelties which the Preacher objects.
Doctor Humphrey In Jesuitism. Part. 2.
accuses him and St. Austin the Monk -- Quod invexerunt in Angliam
Purgatorium, etc. that they brought into England Purgatory; Oblation of the
salutary Host, and Prayers, for the Dead; Relics; Transubstantiation. To which
Epist. Hist. Eccles. Cent 6.
Osiander adds, -- That the same Gregory vehemently urged Celibacy of the
Clergy; Invocation and Worship of Saints; nay, that the Idolatrous Veneration
of Images also was by him approved, excused, defended. To which Carrion, in his
Relation of the state of the CHURCH in those days, adds, That, when he
tragically exclaimed, that he abhorred the Appellation of Universal Bishop; yet
at the same time he sufficiently declared his vehement desire of the thing
which this Title signifies, in his assuming to himself such Authority over
other Churches. Here then are Seven of the Doctor's Novelties, confessed by
Protestants themselves, to have been the Doctrines of St. Gregory, which the
English here received with their Christianity (which also sufficiently appears,
to those who are yet unsatisfied, out of Bede's Ecclesiastical History of
England, written about an hundred years after St. Gregory: of whom the same
O^iander also relates, That he was involved in all the Romish Errors concerning
those Articles wherein (says he) we dissent at this day from the Pope: And for
the Two others of the Doctor's Points, 1. Public Prayers in an unknown Tongue,
And, 2. Infallibility; himself confesses the first of these to have been in
Gregory's time; For thus he, Sermon. page 27.
The Public Prayers of the Romanists have been a very long time in an unknown
Tongue, even as long as from the time of Pope Gregory the Great. And the second
he must grant to have been pretended to before Gregory, in that the Preacher
allows the proceedings of the Four first General Councils; for these required
several Points not before determined to be believed by all Christians under
pain of Anathema, and also inserted them into the body of the Christian Creeds.
Which thing the Doctor sometimes thinks unreasonable, that any fallible
Authority should assume to it self. For surely upon this ground it is, that he
condemns the Council of Trent for presuming to make new Articles of Faith,
though they have put none such in our Creeds.

13. By which it appears, that this Sermon, and all the severity practiced
against us in consequence of it, might as justly have been preached and
executed against our first Apostles, St. Gregory and St. Augustine the Monk, as
against us. And if against them, then against the Universal Church both Eastern
and Western; since it is evident that in St. Gregory's time they were in
perfect Unity both for Doctrine and Discipline; And consequently, if such
pretended new Articles can justify the English Separation from the present
Church, the same Separation ought to have been made from the universal Church
above a Thousand years since. I might go higher, but this is even too too much.
That man surely must have a prodigious courage, who dares venture his Soul and
Eternity rather upon Scripture interpreted by an Act of Parliament, or the 39.
Articles, than by the Authority and consent of the Universal Church for so many
Ages.

I will conclude this so important Argument of Schism by a closer Application,
which may afford more light to discover on which side the Guilt lies. And this
shall be done by making some Concessions, and proposing some other
Considerations, etc.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Causal and Formal Schism or Separation; and the vanity of their
Distinctions. Considerations proposed for a clear Examination on which side the
Guilt of Schism lies. The manifest Innocence of the Roman Church.

1. FIrst, As to the Preacher's so commended Distinction of Causal and Formal
Schism, it is borrowed from the late Archbishop: The former member whereof only
he applies to the Roman Catholic Church, the later to no body: He must give me
leave to propose to his Consideration a Saying or two of St. Aug. Epist. 43.
Augustine, thus writing to the Donatists, Si possit, quod fieri non potest,
etc. If any could have, which really he cannot possibly, a just cause for which
he should separate his Communion from the Communion of the whole World, How do
you know, etc. And again in the same Epistle, There is the Church where first
that (Separation) was made which you after perfected, if there could be any
just cause for you to separate from the communion of all Nations. For we are
certainly assured that no man can justly separate himself from the communion of
all Nations, because not any of us seeks the Church in his own Justice or
Holiness (as you Donatists do) but in the Divine Scriptures, where he sees the
Church really become, as she was promised to be, spread through all Nations, a
City on a Hill, etc. Hence it is, that the same Saint, though he wrote several
Books against the special Doctrines of the Donatists, yet whenever he treats
of their Schism, he never meddles with any of their Opinions, but absolutely
proves their Separation unlawful from the Texts of Scripture, and Promises of
Christ, which are absolute and unconditional: So that the alleging Causes to
justify Separation, for which there can be no just one, is vain and fruitless;
And this way of Arguing is far more forcible against English Protestants, than
it was against the Donatists, because all their sober Writers acknowledge the
Church of Christ was, and always will be unerrable in Fundamentals; and this
as she is a Guide: And further, that the Roman is either this Church, or at
least a true Member of it.

2. But Secondly, whatever becomes of this Distinction, Page 32.
his concession is, That really a Formal Schism there is between us: nay more,
that the Protestants made the actual departure, and indeed they must put out
their eyes, who see it not. The visible Communion between the now English
Church, and all other in being before it beyond the Seas, is evidently changed
and broken. The same Public Service of God, which their first Reformers found
in God's Church all the World over, they refuse to join in, for fear of
incurring sin: Most of the Ecclesiastical Laws, every where formerly in force,
they have abrogated, and without the consent of any other Churches have made
new: they were formerly Members of a Patriarchical Church* (which they esteemed
the only Orthodox Universal Church) to the Government of this Common Body they
acknowledged themselves subject: And a denial of subjection to the Common
Governors of this Body, and especially the Supreme Pastor, they judged to be a
formal Act of Schism: Lastly, the common Doctrines of the Church they formerly
embraced as of Divine Authority, Traditionary, only ancient and Primitive: Now
they called Apostatical Novelties. Any of those changes conclude a Schism on
one side or other, but all of them more then demonstrate it. A Schism then
there is, therefore one of the parties is guilty (not of causing, but) of being
Schismatics, properly, formally, Schismatics. Now would it not be hard for
the Doctor to speak his conscience, and declare once more at Court, which of us
two are properly Schismatics? It could not indeed be expected he should answer
as a young maid did to my old Lady Falkland, when she asked, if she were a
Catholic? No Madam, (said she with a low curtesy) if it please your Ladyship,
I thank God I am a Scismatick; but withal, his tongue would not readily
pronounce Roman Catholics to be Schismatics from the English, Reformed Church.

3. That which is opposed to Schism, is Catholic Communion. August. Collat
Carth. c. 3.
We show, says Saint. Augustine, by our Communion, that we have the Catholic
Church. Therefore in discourse of Schism, Sermon. page 32.
one while to talk of Innovations of Doctrine, or of making a secession from a
Church, twelve hundred years since, etc. and perhaps, charging us with causal
Schism: And on the other side, to acknowledge that the actual departure was
indeed theirs, yet they are not Scismaticks, they left the errors of
Catholics, rather then them: Is indeed to act the very part of the Donatists,
who, as Saint Augustine says, affirmed that the word Catholic was not derived
from the universality of Nations, Aug. Brevic. Collat. lib. 3.
but from the plenitude of Sacraments, that is, from the integrity of Doctrine.
And in another place, writing to a Donatist, Thou think (says he) that thou
have spoken acutely, Epist. 48.
when thou interpretest the Name Catholic, not of Universal Communion, but of
observation of all Precepts, and Divine Mysteries. And hence it was that the
Donatists called their Bishops, Bishops of Catholic Verity, not of Catholic
Unity, as St. Augustine says in the same Epistle.

4. I desire to know, whether before their Reformation, our Church was
Schismatical, or it began afterward so to be? If it was so before, where was
that Church from which we separated? no where on earth sure: And by consequence
either a separation may be from no body, or the whole Church failed, the gates
of Hell (contrary to our Saviors promise) prevailed against it. Again, if our
Church became Schismatical, after their deserting us, because she would not
immitate them, or because she would communicate with those who held such
Doctrines; then it will follow (since the Church that was then, did in this,
nothing vary from it is predecessors in a former age) that a Church remaining
the same without any alteration at all, may be the only true Church of Christ
to day, and the Synagogue of Satan to morrow. These are Riddles unconceivable.

But, to demonstrate that, even in Protestants opinion, we are not
Schismatics, there needs only this Proof, that generally Protestants, yea even
Hugenots, acknowledge, that Salvation may be had in Our Church; which no man,
charging us with Schism, can say, if he knows the nature of Schism; how
grievous and unpardonable a crime it is, that cuts off from the Mystical Body
of Christ.

5. On the other side, That the crime of Schism is truly and only to be charged
on them (besides the visible marks of leaving Communion, changing Government,
Laws, etc.) may be demonstrated thus. There is no particular true Church, which
is a Member of the Catholic, but thereby has a power validly to excommunicate
all those that desert her Communion, transgress her Laws, etc. And whoever are
so excommunicated by her, are esteemed excommunicated by all other Catholic
Churches. So that, if another Bishop or Church, after information of this,
shall receive them into their Communion, that Bishop, etc. ipso facto incurs
excommunicaion himself. Which excommunication, being according to the Laws of
the Church, is valid and ratified in Heaven. Now suppose an English Bishop
should excommunicate one of his Subjects for a total renouncing Episcopal
Government and Ordination, and the person so excommunicated should adjoyn
himself to a Congregation of Presbyters in Scotland, France, Holland, etc. They
would no doubt receive him: and being so received, he is, even in the Bishop's
own judgment, in as undoubted (though not so straight) a way to Heaven, as he
was before: because the Bishop himself acknowledges Presbyterian Congregations
to be true Reformed Churches of God: so that by their Excommunication he is not
cut off from Christ, but from preferments only. The late Act of Uniformity does
far more validly excommunicate Non-Conformists, then all their Bishops Courts.

CHAP. XXV.
The Doctor's desire of Reconcilement, and the conditions of it. The necessary
preparations thereto. Of the Court, and Church of Rome.

1. AFter all the Doctors triumphant Invectives* against the Catholic Church,
he yet concludes his Sermon in a less tempe^tuous style* Page: 36.
He says, he has the Charity to wish for Reconcilement: That they departed
with higher Degrees of Indignation from the insolent Court, then Church of
Rome. That Court which proudly trod upon Crowns, and made Decrees with a
non-obstante to Apostolical constitutions, etc. That they were called
Protestants, because they protested not so much against the Church, as against
the cruel Edict made at Worms, etc. But yet when they wish a Reconcilement,
they do not mean by compliance with any the least of our defilements, but by
our Harmony with them in being clean.

2. If Doctor Pierce has indeed the charity, and if he does any more then with
his tongue say, they wish for Reconcilement; they, that do so, will not want a
reward from God for so much charity: And I doubt not there are a world of
English Protestants (with him) who heartily wish the same. And they that have
charity, will easily believe we wish so too. So that both parties being so far
on the way to agreement, as to wish it: the next step must be to endeavor to
procure it. Our frequent endeavors, they know, have been to little purpose; We
have often in vain protested, that our Doctrines, practices, etc. have been
misunderstood: we still persist in the same protestation: and perceive by this
very Sermon that they are still misunderstood: And whilst they are so, that
condition of Reconcilement which he makes is not unreasonable, that they will
have no Reconcilement by a compliance with our defilements. Therefore to take
away this misunderstanding, let them obtain that for us, which we yet could
never be able to do, a permission to be heard speak for our selves.

3. We pass for Traitors, but cannot obtain to be informed wherein our Treason
^ies, nor what we must do to prove our selves no Traitors. If the
ackowledgement of his Majesty's Supremacy in as high a degree as they
themselves will allow, with exclusion of all manner of Temporal Authority in
any other, be no Treason: If the exposing our lives as willingly for Monarchy
as they can do, be no Treason: If there be not any proof of faithfnl Allegiance
which is refused to be submitted to by us, what suspicion can they have that we
are Traitors? But our present a la mode Treason is, that our Priests receive
their Ordination from Rome: and do not they so to? I am sure we cannot anger
them worse, then to question or doubt whether the Church of England has
received her Mission, Orders and Jurisdiction from the Roman Church.

4. For our Doctrines: I am persuaded, if only this poor Answer fall into the
hands of any ingenuous Protestants, who will seriously consider the several
Points so Tragically declam'd against by the Preacher, they will think even the
Church of England little beholding to him for his Sermon, and Truth much less.
But since small effect can be expected from such (...) Treatise as this, bound
up to his blundering method; therefore, unless it be their interest, or as they
may think, their safety, that our innocence should be stifled and oppressed, if
they have the charity i^deed to wish for a Reconcilement, let them procure for
us a peaceable authorized Conference, in which the only Design may be by
consent to enquire and set down clearly upon what terms a Reconcilement may
follow, and without which it must not, nor ought to be expected. Let us
understand one another Churches; let us know one another essential Doctrines:
If there be any mistakes, any misinterpretations on either side, let them be
cleared: But till this be done, and it can only be effected by them, they must
pardon us, if according to the temper of calamitous, unjustly oppressed
persons, we suspect that this last seemingly moderate passage of his Sermon, is
in effect the most severe and bitter against us, as declared to be persons with
whom all Reconcilement is unlawful.

5. Certain I am this zealous Preacher is far from the prudent temper of King
James, whose authority (being his Supreme Governor in all spiritual things as
well as temporal) should surely have more then an ordinary influence over him;
That learned King in his before mentioned Speech, Stow. Chron. page 84.
has these remarkable words, I could wish from my heart it would please God to
make me one of the Members of such a general Christian union in Religion, Anno
1603.
as, laying wilfulness aside on both hands, we might meet in the midst, which
is the Center and perfection of all things; For if they (of the Roman Church)
would leave and be ashamed of such new and gross corruptions of theirs, as
themselves cannot maintain, nor deny to be worthy of Reformation; I would f^r
my own part be content to meet them in the midway, so that all novelties might
be renounced on either side. See the condescence of this great King, and
compare it with the stiff humor of this little Doctor -- He Will not comply with
the least of our defilements; not he, Page 36.
Softly, good Sir, do you not as ill, when you comply with the Lutherans, who
surely are not without some little stains? Do you not. as ill, when you comply
with the Hugenots, who are not at so perfect a harmony with you in your being
clean? Look soberly into your own rashness: you began the Separation (that has
bred so many wars, and so much licenciousness both in faith and manners) upon
points which your selves confess are not fundamental; and now you solemnly
protest to continue it without complying in the least difference between us. Go
now, and close your Sermon with a few soft words -- Your arms are open to
embrace, etc. your hearts are wide open to pray to God to bind up the breaches,
Page 36.
etc. of his divided, defiled, disgraced Spouse -- And when all is done, you will
not stir an inch toward the peace you so gloriously talk of. If this be
Hypocrisy, remember, Doctor, the woes that attend it, if not, express your
self so sincerely hereafter that we may not suspect it. For my part of all the
faults in a Sermon, to that of dissembling I here declare a Vitinian hatred, as
you learnedly call it.

Much more moderate were Vives and Cassander, whom you commend for complaining
of some abuses in the Church (among other Authors which you there cite,
jumbling Protestants and Catholics confusedly together) for after all their
zeal they dyed quietly in her bosom, and did not, like you, tear in pieces the
seamless Coat of our SAVIOR, and reject all terms of peace, unless every
pretense of yours be satisfied to a tittle.

I remember too a dogged word you gave us, Page 7, 8.
not far from the beginning of your Sermon; where after you had reckoned up
Socinians, Antinomians, Ranters, Solifidians, Millenaries, Reprobratarians,
etc. (a fine Peal to make a Pulpit ring) to all which you yield more antiquity
then any will allow your Reformation, you pass them over with the gentler names
of Heresy and Usurpation, but when you come to the Pontificians, you
immediately grow high and rage, and resemble them to the Mahometans, etc. --
blind and impertinent Passion! Do you not see abroad a civil and learned
portion of Christians in Communion with the Bishop of Rome, and are they no
better than Mahometans? Do you not see, in your own Country, and at Court too,
Persons so qualified, that you should blush at your own unmannerliness to
compare them to Mahometans?

6. If their chief quarrel be against the Court of Rome for proudly treading
upon Crowns, and making Decrees with a non-obstante to, etc. This might perhaps
have been more seasonable five or six hundred years since. But surely they know
Catholic Princes are wiser now, and the Court of Rome too. This needs not be
the least hindrance to a Reconcilement: On the contrary by a Reconcilement this
Church and Kingdom would receive from the Court of Rome, only what France,
Spain, etc. find extremely advantageous, both to the honor and safety of their
Churches and States. And as for Decrees with a non-obstante, he mistakes the
terms of Apostolic Constitutions, by which is intended Constitutions not made
by the Apostles, but former Popes. Page 35.
And touching the Decree of the Council of Constance in his Margin, let me ask
him a Question or two: Do not Protestants in Baptism use sprinkling instead of
dipping, non obstante that our Savior and his Apostles instituted it
otherwise? Do they not think themselves obliged to communicate fasting,
non-obstante, that our Savior instituted the Sacrament after Supper? Do they
not without scruple eat Black-puddings, non-obstante the Apostles gave a
command to the contrary? All this they do, because they think these things not
essential or unalterable, but left to the prudence of their particular Church:
Let them permit therefore the same liberty to a General Council.

And here give me leave to insert some few Citations concerning the
Protestant-acknowledgments of the Authority of Councils. Act. Mon. page 1288.
Mr. Ridley says, Councils indeed represent the Universal Church, and being so
gathered together in the Name of Christ, they have the promise of the Gift and
guiding of the Spirit into all Truth. Doctor Bilson plainly confesses, Perpet.
Gov. p. 372, 373.
the Presence and Assistance of the Holy Ghost for Direction of General
Councils into all Truth; And after fairly says, Page 374.
The Fathers in all Ages, as well before as since the Great Council of Nice,
have approved and prastis'd this of Councils as the surest means to decide
Doubts. -- Hooker professes, Pref. to Eccl. Pol. page 28.
The Will of God is to have us do whatever the Sentence of judicial and final
Decision shall determine, yea, though it seem utterly to swerve from what is
right in our opinion. -- Their Authority (General Councils) is immediately
derived and delegated from Christ, Dr. Potter. page 30.
says Potter. -- And if Doctor Pierce agree with these his Brethren, I might
say Fathers, in this Point, I shall not easily fall out with him about it, but
rather endeavor a further approach by offering this fair Proposal; I will not
require of him to hold that the Fathers meet in Council to make question of the
matters of Faith, for those they were taught from their Childhood; but to
consult about their adversaries proofs, and what arguments should be alleged
against them; to consult how to express the Catholic Doctrine in such words as
might best instruct the people, and prevent Heretics from abusing them; Hence
it was St. Athan. in Ep. de Syn.
Athanasius said, We meet here, not because we wanted a Faith, i. e. were
uncertain what to hold, but to confound those who go about to contradict the
Truth. Which Rule, if Councils observe, I think the Doctor would scarce refuse
to obey them; and our only difference in this point, I hope, is, he thinks they
do not observe this Rule, and I think they do.

CHAP. XXVI.
The Preacher's boasting. Catholics cannot justly be obliged to show from
Antiquity Evidences of their Doctrines. Conditions necessary to be Observed by
the Doctor, in case he Reply. Of the Name Protestant.

1. THus I have gone through, and examined (except to those who love to be
contentious) sufficiently, all the pretended Novelties imputed by Dr. Pierce to
the Roman Catholic Church; I have likewise brought to the Test all the
Allegations made by him, either to excuse the English Churches Separation from
the Roman Catholic, or at least to persuade us not to call it Schism: And it
seems to me, I have demonstrated him unsuccessful in both. Nay more, (which is
a great misery, if he would consider it with that seriousness, which Eternity
deserves) I think I have proved that the fearful crime of Schism will lie
heavy upon his Church, though he had showed all the Points by him mentioned,
to be Novelties. And having done this, I must say with St. Augustine, Vtinam
verba ista infuderim, and non effuderim. But considering the present temper of
this Age, I doubt, I shall have reason to fear, according to the same holy
Father's expression, lest, when I beg them to afford their ears, they should
make ready their teeth.

2. However I hope the Doctor will no more be believed with any reason to
complain (as he does in his Sermon) of one remarkable infirmity in the Popish
Writers, -- They ever complain we have left their Church, Page 14.
but never show that Iota as to which we have left the Word of God, or the
Apostles, or the yet uncorrupted and Primitive Church, or the Four first
General Councils. Truly, this Speech of his seems to me so vain, and rash, and
shameless a boast, that I cannot but blush for him, when I read it, and tremble
for him when I see Truth so little considered by a Preacher, sustaining God's
Person, as he pretended.

3. But perhaps I understand not his phrase of [ sh^wing that Iota as to which
they have left, etc.] If he mean we have not demonstrated their deserting
Antiquity, or, that we believe not, even since we have seen their Answers, that
our demonstrations are unanswerable; there are extant whole Libraries of our
Controvertists, sufficient to overwhelm him. Particularly, before he say so
again, let him enquire out and consider a Book, written by Simon Vogorius,
Counselor to the French King, entitled, An Assertion of the Catholic Faith
out of the Four first Ecumenical Councils, and other received Synods within
that time. Or even, let him review what is quoted against him here Cha. 17.
Sect. 10.
concerning one of his own Points, Celibacy of the Clergy, out of the Four
first General, and several other, as ancient, Provincial Councils. Before all
which Councils there is found an Injunction of it as high as Calixtus his days
about A. D. 220. which also Doctor Pierce mentions. Page 9.
Does not this prohibition of the Priests from Marriage amount to the magnitude
of an Iota with him? How comes it then to be one of his Grievances in this
Sermon, and that under no milder a phrase than the Doctrine of Devils? Or will
not such Antiquity pass for Primitive, and Antiquity Antique enough (to use his
words)? Unless he will shrink up Primitive Antiquity from the 6th Age to the
4th, from the 4th to the 3d. (where few Writings being extant, less of the
Churches Doctrines and Customs can be shown in them) Or from the 3d to the 1st
Age and the Apostles times (as the Presbyterians, in the Plea of Antiquity,
treat the Prelatists.) For on this manner even the most learned of the
Protestant Writers, when they are straightened with proofs, are wont to retire. So
Bishop Jewel long ago made a bold challenge to be tried by Antiquity for the
first 600 years.

But after many hot Encounters between the Controvertists, and after Antiquity
better discovered to the later Pens on the Protestant Party than to the first,
A. Bp. Lawd, more cautious, contracts the Protestants Challenge somewhat
narrower to the Fathers of the first 400 years, or thereabouts, The Protestants
(says he Sect. 28. p. 217
) offer to be tried by all the ancient Councils and Fathers of the Church
within the first 400 years, and somewhat further. And, since the A. Bp. Doctor
Hammond makes his Plea of Antiquity yet shorter, viz. for the Fathers of the
first 300 years; For the particular Doctrines (says he Of Schism, c. 8. sect.
7.
) wherein we are affirmed by the Romanists to depart from the Unity of the
Faith, we make no doubt to approve our selves to any that will judge of the
Apostolical Doctrines and Traditions by the Scriptures, and consent of the
first 300 years, or the Four General Councils. -- And again, We profess (says
he Ibid. c. 9. sect. 7.
) to believe so much, and not to be convinced by all the Reasons, and
Authorities, and Proofs from Scriptures, or the first Christian Writers, those
of the first 300 years, or the Four General Councils. Where by submission to
the Four first General Councils, he means only to the bare decisions of these
Councils in matters of Faith concerning our Savior and the Holy Ghost, not
obliging himself also to the Authority of those Fathers, who flourished in the
time of these Four Councils, and sat in them. For, though the last of these
Councils was held in the middle of the 5th Age, yet he claims a trial by the
Fathers only to the end of the 3d Age. Again, by this submission to the Writers
of the Three first Ages only, he bars most of the chief Fathers, and all those
that are more large and Voluminous, from bearing any witness against
Protestants, and leaves scarce half a score Authors of Note now extant, and
several, writing only some short Treatises or Epistles, whereby they are
content to try all the Doctrine and Discipline of Antiquity.

4. But these were timorous Souls that would fain be thought to deal civilly
with antiquity; let us hear two or three bolder spirits, that speak plain and
freely: What says Doctor Willet? Willets Survey of Common Prayer. p. 18.
Let not your Majesty be deceived by the Popish Arguments of supposed
antiquity, as Joshua was with the old and moldy bread of the Gibeonites; and
the reason is given, for Antichrist began to reign in the Apostles days, in
St. Paul's days. What says Acontius? Strange. li. 6. page 296.
Some of us are come to that, that they will fill up their Writings with the
Authority of the Fathers, which I would to God they had performed with
prosperous success, as they hopefully attempted it, etc. I only think this
custom is most dangerous, and altogether to be eschewed. What says the witty
Whitacre? Contr. Dur. lib. 6. p. 423.
The Popish Religion is a patcht coverlet of the Fathers Errors sewn together.
And again, to believe by the Testimony of the Church (not excepting any Age) is
the plain Heresy of the Papists. Idem. lib. 1. de script p. 39.
To conclude (for I might quote all day long upon this Subject) what says the
Patriark of Protestancy, Luther, Luth. in Act. Apost. ca. 15.
There never was any one pure Council, but either added something to the faith
or subtracted. And now, what shall we say our selves in this confused variety?
Against some of our Adversaries, we must cite antiquity, or else we do nothing;
against others, if we cite all the antiquity that ever was baptized, we do
nothing. God deliver them from their cross and uncertain wanderings, and me from
the weariness of following them in their wild chase.

5. But, if the Doctor means by [ showing that Iota, as to which, etc.] that we
have not so showed it, as to stop their mouths, or to force them to confess and
repent of their fault, then there can be no showing any thing by any one party
to another, as long as the dissension lasts between them. In this sense they
have never showed one Iota to the Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Quakers, etc who
(after all their Books, Canons, Acts of Uniformity, etc. which those Sects call
Antichristian, tyrannical Popery, as the Protestants did ours) still persist in
separation from them. Then neither the Apostles, ancient Fathers, or Councils
ever showed one Iota to ancient Pagans or Heretics: because, for all their
showing, others remained Pagans and Heretics afterward. And yet, even in this
particular, though a very unreasonable one* we Cath^lics can confidently
affirm, that we have defeated this bravado of the Preacher. For evident Truth
on our side has extorted from the mouths and pens of a world of the most
learned among the Reformed Writers, a Confession both in general and in every
particular Controversy, that Antiquity declares it self for the Roman Church
against them. Thousands of such proofs may be read in the Protestants Apology,
the Triple Cord, etc. Books written on purpose to reckon up such Confessions.
This is truly, if well considered, an advantage strange and extraordinary* for
I believe never did any of the Antie^t H^reti^s so far justify the Catholic
Church. No such confessions of theirs are recorded by the Antie^t Fathers:
which shows that, above all former examples, the Heretics and Schismatics of
this last Age are most properly [(...)] condemned by their own Consciences.

6. But withal the Doctor must take notice of this one thing, That it does not
belong to us Catholics to be obliged to show that Iota, in which they (who have
set up a new and separated Church from us but the other day) have left the word
of God or Primitive antiquity, or the four first General Councils; a^ it
belongs to them, who have thus divided themselves, not only to show, but to
demonstrate first most clearly, that there is such a discession from those
Scriptures, Fathers, and Councils, by that former Church (which they deserted)
not in an Iota but in some grand principle of our Faith, which admitted no
longer safety to them in her Communion; because the Roman Catholic Church is in
possession: and, by our Adversaries own Confession, has been unquestionably so
for above a Thousand years, of all or most of her present Doctrins for which
they have relinquished her. See cap. 23. Sect. 13.
Particularly the Pope has enjoyed an Authority and Supremacy of Jurisdiction a
longer time, than any succession of Princes in the world can pretend to; A
Jurisdiction acknowledged as of Divine Right, and as such submitted to by all
our Ancestors, not only as Englishmen, but as Members of the whole Western
Patriarcha^, yea of the Universal Church, and this as far as any Records can be
produced. He is now, after so many Ages, questioned and violently deposed from
this Authority by one National Church, nay by one single Woman and her Counsel
(the universality of her Clergy, protesting against her proceedings) and much
more against her destroying a Religion from the Beginning established among us,
and which had never been questioned here in former times but by a Wiclef, or a
Sir John Oldcastle, etc. manifest Heretics and Traitors. Now it is against all
Rules of Law, Justice and Reason, that such as are Possessores bonae fidei,
should be obliged to produce their evidences: This belongs only to the
Plaintiffs* and no Evidences produced by them against such a Possession can be
of any force, except such as are manifest demonstrations of an Usurpation, yea
such an Usurpation as cannot either be exercised, or submitted to without sin.

7. The Doctor is likewise to consider, tha^ if, ex super abundanti, we should
yield so far as out of Ancient Records of Councils or Fathers to allege any
Proofs to enervate their claim to them, and justify our Possession: Such
Proofs of ours, though considered in themselves, were only probable, yet in
effect would have the force of demonstrations against English Protestants: But
on the other side, unless they can produce from Scripture or Antiquity evident
demonstrations against us, they are not so much as probabilities: all this by
their own confession. For, as has been showed, they lay it for a ground, and
acknowledge the Catholic Church (of which according to their own Doctrine the
Roman is at least a Member) to be in all fundamental Points infallible: and
that in all other Points, now in debate, which are not fundamental, it would be
unlawful for particular Churches to profess any dissent from her, without an
evident demonstration, that she has actually and certainly erred in them; yea
moreover, that she will admit none of the Dissenters into her Communion, except
such as (though against their Consciences and Knowledge) will subscribe to her
Errors; Errors so heinous, as to deserve and justify a separation.

8. These things premised, my last care must be to provide, that, in case a
Reply be intended to this Treatise, it may not be such an one as may abuse the
world. The Preacher must consider it is not such another blundering Sermon that
will now serve his turn to give satisfaction, so much as to any Protestant, who
has a Conscience guided by the light of Reason, or thinks Schism not to be a
slight P^ecadillo. Therefore that he may know, what Conditions are necessary
to render an Answer not altogether impertinent and insupportable* I here
declare, that, in case he shall undertake a confutation of what is here
alleged by me to disprove the charge of Novelti^^ by him laid on the Roman
Catholic Church, and the excusing of Schism in his own, he will be a betrayer
of his own Soul, and the Souls of (...) those that rely on him, unless he
observe the Conditions following.

9. The first is, since if Protestants have in truth an evident demonstration
that the Roman Doctrins, for which they separate, are indeed such pernicious
errors and Novelties, we readily grant they are not obliged to subscribe them;
And it being supposed by the Archbishop, etc. that, without such a certainty.
it would have been unlawful for Protestants to question or censure such former
Doctrins of the Church; The Doctor is bound, and ^here adjure him to declare
expressly. as in the presence of Him, who is. Supreme Head of the Church, and
will revenge severely all calumnious persecutions of it, that he is
demonstratively certain, that in all these Points, charged by him on the Church
of later times as Novelties and Errors introduced since the four first
Councils, she is manifestly guilty: and that nothing appears in this, or any
other Catholic book of his Acquaintance, which deserves to be esteemed so much
as a probable proof to the contrary. For my part I here protest on the other
side, that I find not any one concluding allegation in his Sermon, nor believe
there can any be produced; which can warrant him to make such a Declaration.

10. The second Condition is, That in like manner he profess he can or has
demonstratively proved by Scripture or Primitive Antiquity, the main grounds,
upon which they pretend to justify their separation to be no Schism, to wit,
these. 1. That the universal Church, ^epresented in a Lawful General Council
may in points of doctrine not fundamental so mislead the Church by errors, that
a particular Church, etc. discovering such errors, may be obliged to separate
externally. 2. That a particular Chr^stian or a Congregation Diocesan may
lawfully reverse Decisions formerly made by a Nationa^ Synod, and assented to
by it; and that a Nationa^ Council may do the like in regard of a
Patriarchical, or any of them, in regard of an Ecumenical formerly accepted
and admitted. If these Ass^ri^ous he Innovations, as in our persuasion they
are, it is clear they destroy all possible unity: If they be not, let some
demonstrative Proofs and Examples be produced out of Antriquity, that a
reversing of such order and subordination has been practiced and approved in
the Catholic Church. 3. That a particular Church, etc. in opposition to the
Universal, can judge what Doctrines are fundamental or necessary to all Persons,
(...) Communities, etc. and what not: And that a Catalogue of such Doctrines be
given by the Respondent, or demonstrative reasons alleged why such an one is
not necessary.

11. Thirdly, if he will deny the Church of England has separated externally
from the present Universal Church, but only from the Roman; then, to make this
good, he is obliged to name what other visible Member of the Universal Church
they continue in Communion with, in whose public Service they will join or can
be admitted, and to whose Synods they ever have, or can repair. And, since at
the time of their first Separation, they were only in Communion with the
Roman-Catholic Church, and the Members of it, be must show how, when, and where
they entered into any other new Communion. Lastly, Since the English Church, by
renouncing not only several Doctrines, but several Councils acknowledged for
General, and actually submitted to both by the Eastern and Western Churches,
has thereby separated from both these, he must find out some other pretended
Members of the Catholic Church divided from both these, (that is, some that are
not manifestly heretical,) with whom the English Church communicates.

12. A fourth Condition is, that he must either declare other Calvinistical
Reformed Churches, which manifestly have no succession of lawflly Ordained
Ministers, enabled validly to celebrate and administer Sacraments, to
consecrate, confirm, preach God's Word, etc. to be no heretical or Schismatical
Congregations: Or if they be, he must demonstrate how the English Church can
acquit her self from Schism, since her Bishops and Divines have authoritatively
repaired to their A. D. 1618. at Dort.
Synods, and a general permission is given to any Protestant Writers to
acknowledge them true, reformed, and sufficiently Orthodox Congregations.

13. The last shall be, that he abstain from imputing to the Catholic Church
the opinions or sayings of particular Writers. The Church her self having
sufficiently declared her Doctrines in her Councils, especially that of Trent.
If he will combat against her, there he has a fair and open field, and charity
requires that he affix to her Decisions the most moderate and best qualified
sense: Otherwise he will declare himself as one, who is sorry his Mother should
not be ill reputed. Now in exchange, I for my part am extremely willing to
proceed in the same manner with the English Church. I would sain charge her
with nothing but her own declared Doctrines and Decisions. But truly I know not
where to find them, except only in the little Primmer and Catechism for
Children. For the 39. Articles, being almost all Negatives, may as well be
reputed the Doctrines of Jewish, or Turkish Congregations, since these also
deny the Sacrifice of the Mass, Purgatory, Infallibility of Councils, etc.
other Reformed Churches have published reasonably large Professions of their
Faith, they have declared their own positive sense in almost all Points of
Christian Belief, as the Huguenots in France, etc. the Lutherans in Germany,
etc: only the English Church seems to have made a secret of her Faith; upon
what motive I am unwilling to guess.

14. These Conditions in themselves so reasonable, and even according to
Protestants grounds also, so necessary, if the Replyer shall refuse to perform,
he will, in the judgment of all discerning Readers, be himself the Answerer and
Con^uter of his own Reply; and withal, will show it is not Truth or Peace he
aims at, but the satisfying his own, or others interests, passions and revenge
against those who least deserve it. All subterfuges, all involved intricacies
in answering, all discourses which are not open, candid, and sincere, will be
confessions of guilt: He may perhaps hide the weakness of his cause from
credulous Women, Tradesmen, or possibly the more unlearned part of our Gentry;
but to all considering Readers, his Art of hiding will be his most manifest
discovery. Aristotle says, the Sepi^ is the wisest of all Fishes, because she
conceals her self by casting forth round about her a black humor, which
hinders the sight of her. But on the contrary, Julius Caesar Scaliger affirms
she is of all Fishes the most imprudent, Quia cum se putat latere, prodit
seipso latib^lo; for the Fishermen are sure to find her under her inky humor.

15. And now having finished our Answer to the substance wherein we differ, let
us conclude with the Name that distinguishes us: He puts us in mind of the
reason why the Lutherans, and from them other Reformerd took the name, Page 36.
Protestants, for protesting against the bloody Edict of Worms, Spires, etc. we
find little ground why the Reformers in England should borrow that title.
Against what Arms or Armies did they ever protest? What Edicts were made
against them? We Catholics might rather assume such a title, if it were of any
special honor, having seen (and felt too) Edicts of another and far more bloody
nature made against us: Nay (thanks to such Sermons) we see at this day Edicts,
severe enough, published, and worse preparing, not against Subjects in Arms and
actual Rebellion, as the Lutherans were against the Empire, but against such,
as the Lawgivers, and Law-perswaders know mean no harm; against such as would
be both most watchful and assisting to establish the peace of the Kingdom:
Edicts, to draw all the remainder of blood out of our vein^, which have been
almost emptied in our Kings and Countries Cause; though our hope is still in
the mercy of our gracious Sovereign, and the prudent moderation of those about
him.

16. Yet sanguinary Sermons are greater Persecutions than sanguinary Laws; for
Laws may and sometimes are qualified by the equity of Judges, and in particular
those against Roman Catholics have often been allayed by the gracious clemency
of our Kings. But the uncharitable Sermons, that call for blood, inspire fury
into men's hearts, make compassion esteemed unlawful, and the most savage
cruelty the best Sacrifices of Religion. The truth is, Pulpits have been the
Sources whence so much blood has flowed in this Kingdom, which Sources, if they
had been opened by such as Smectymn^us, whose vocation is Rebellion against the
Princes, and barbarous inhumanity to all that are not of their fiction,
Sustinuissemus utique -- and so we shall do still with the help of Grace, by
whose hands soever Almighty God presents us this Cup. Quod voluit factum est,
and quod fecit bonum est. Sit nomen Domini benedictum. AMEN.

PSALM. 108. 3. and 73. 2. Pro co ^t me d^ligerent, detrahebant mihi:
Ego autem or aham,
Memento Congregationis tue, quam poss^disti
AB INITIO.

FINIS.
The CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
OF Doctor Pierce's Sermon in general. Sect. 1, 2. What was probably the design
of it. 3, 4. Catholics persecuted, though their best friends. 6, 7.
CHAP. II. Page 8.
Eleven Novelties charged on Catholics. 2. Schism imputed is them. 3. Why
necesssary the Sermon should be refuted. 4, 5. The Answerers Protestation of
sincerity. 6, 7.
CHAP. III. Page 13.
B. Jewels Challenge imitated by the Doctor. 1, 5. Primitive Reformers
Acknowledgment. 2, 3, 4. The Doctors Notion of Beginning, 6. Questions proposed
touching that Notion. 8. 9, 10, 11.
CHAP. IV. Page 29.
The sum of the Doctors Discourse against the Popes Supremacy enervated by
himself. 1. 2, 3. The Churches Doctrine therein. 4. The Text, Mark 10. 42.
cleared. 5, 6.
CHAP. V. Page 36.
The Doctor obliged to acknowledge submission due to the Popes Authority, as
exercised during the Four General Councils. 1, 2. Of the Title of Universal
Bishop. 3, 4, 5. Not generally admitted at this day. 6, 7.
CHAP. VI. Page 44.
The absolute necessity of a Supreme Pastor in the Church. 1, 2, 3. Supremacy
of Jurisdiction exercised by Boniface III. his Predecessors. 4, 5, 6, 7. The
28. Canon of Chalcedon Illegal. 8. Of the second Canon of the Council of
Constantinople. Sect. 9, 10.
CHAP. VII. Page 54.
The Popes Supremacy confirmed by a Law of the Emperor Valentinian. 1, 2.
Decrees of Popes, their Ancient force. 3, 4. The Popes Supreme Jurisdiction
confirmed by the Eastern Church. 5* 6, 7, 8, 9. Appeals to the Sea Apostolic
decreed at Sardiea; British Bishops present. 11, 12. Of the first Council at
Arles. 13, 14. Sixth Canon of the Nicene Council explained. 15. 16, 17.
CHAP. VIII. Page 67.
Proofs of the Popes Supreme Jurisdiction, before first Council of N^ce. 2, 3,
5. How all Apostles and all Bishops equ^l, and how subordinate. 6, 7. St. Peter
had more then a Primacy of Order. 8. 9, 10. Of St. Paul's resisting St. Peter.
11, 12. Objections Answered. 13, 15. The Popes Supremacy not dangerous to
States. On the contrary, etc. 18, 20, 22. Protestants writing in favor of it.
25, 26.
CHAP. IX. Page 89.
The Churches Infallibility. 2, 3, 4. The Necessity thereof. 8, 9. The Grounds
whereon she claims it. 10, 12, 14, 15. -- Objections Answered. 16, 18.
CHAP. X. Page 109.
Prayer for the dead. 3, 4, 5. Its Apostolic Antiquity. 6, 7, 9. Purgatory
necessarily supposed in it. 11, 12. Objections Answered.
CHAP. XI. Page 121.
Transubstanti^^ion. 2, 3, 4, 6, 8. Justified by Authority of the Fathers. 10.
Objections Answered Sect. 12, 14, 1^*
CHAP XII Page 137.
Communion under one Species. 2. ^onfirm^d by the practice of the Primitive
Church in private Communions. 3, 4, 5, 6. No cause of Separation. 7, 8.
CHAP. XIII Page 143.
The Sacrifice of the Mas^. 1. Asserted universally by Antiquity. 2, 3, 4. The
true Doctrine concerning it explained. 5* 6, 7.
CHAP. XIV. Page 151.
Veneration of Images. 1. The Churches Approved practice of it most suitable to
reason. 2 -- 13.
CHAP. XV. Page 163.
The Churches prudence in restraining the too free use of Scripture from the
unlearned. 2. 4, 5. Our late miseries justly ascribed to a defect in such
Prudence. 6. Of Prayer not in a vulgar Tongue. 7, 8. The Causes and Grounds
thereof. 9. 10. That Prac^ise not contrary to St. Paul. 11, 12, 13.
CHAP. XVI. Page 178.
Invocation of Saint^. 2* 3, 4, 5, 6. Proved out of Antiquity. 7, 8, 9, 10.
Concessions, Deductions, and Objections Answered. ^1. adult.
CHAP. XVII. page 201.
Celibacy of Priests. 2, 3, 4. Vows of Chastity. 5, 6. The Doctrine and
Practice of the Church in both. 9, 10. Objections Answered. 10, 13, 14, 15,
CHAP. XVIII. page 219.
Dovorce, and the several kinds of it. 2. 3 -- 7. The Practice of the Roman
Church manifestly mistaken by the Pr^^cher. 8 to 17.
CHAP. XIX. page 225.
Of Schism. Sect. 1. The unpardonableness of that o^ime acknowledg^d by
Antiquity. 2, 4, 6. No cause or pretense can excuse it. 7, 8.
CHAP. XX. page 233.
The Preacher vainly endeav^rs to excuse his Church from Schism. 3, 4, 5. and
chapter 21. Sect. 15, 16. Of the Subordination of Church Governors and Synods.
13 The unappealable Authority of General Councils acknowledged by Antiquity. 8.
Of the decisions of later Councils. 9, 10, 11, 12.
CHAP. XXI. page 249.
The Fundamental Rule of Church Government. 1, 2 Limitations of the Authority
of General Councils. 5, 6. Their Grounds made by A. B. Lawd, Dr. Field, etc. 3,
4. Of Points Fundamental and non -- 7, 8, 12, Protestants allow not so much
Authority to General Councils as God commanded to be given the Sa^hedrim. 13,
14. Of the pretended Independence of the English Church from the Example of
Cyprus. 17.
CHAP. XXII. page 265.
Limitations of the Churches Authority, by A. B. Lawd, etc. examined. 1, 2, 3,
4. Objections against the proceedings in the Council of Trent answered. 5, 6.
Manifest Illegality in Q. Eliz. Reformation. 7. 8, 9, 10, 11^ Secular and
carnal ends in it. 12, 13.
CHAP. XXIII. page 28^.
The Doct^rs Proofs alleged (...) justify the English Separation, answered.
1, 2. 1. From the independent Authority of our Kings. 3. 2. From the Example of
Justinian and other Emper^rs. 4, 5. 3. From the practice of fourteen of our
Kings. 6. 4. From the Example of the Kings of Judah. 7, 8. In what sense new
Article^ of Faith are made by the Church in the Council of Trent. 10. 11, 12,
13.
CHAP. XXIV. page 291.
Of Causal and For^al Schism: and the vanity of their distinctions. 1, 2.
Considerations for a clear Examination, on which side the guilt of Schism lies.
3, 4. The manifest Innocence of the Roman Church. 5.
CHAP. XXV. page 298.
The Doctors desire of Reconcilement, and the Conditions of it. 1, 2, 3. The
necessary Preparations to it. 4, 5. Of the Court and Church of Rome. 6.
CHAP. XXVI. page 307.
The Preachers boasting. 1, 2, 3. Catholi^ks cannot justly be obliged to show
from Antiquity Evidences of their doctrines. 6, 7. Conditions necessary to be
observed by the Doctor, in case he Reply. 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14. Of the name
Protestant. 15, 16.
FINIS.
ERRATA
PAge 11. line 15. read wllful (...)* p. 15. (...)


