A JOURNEY INTO THE COUNTRY; BEING A DIALOGUE Between an English PROTESTANT
Physician AND AN English PAPIST: WHEREIN The proper State of the Popish
Controversy is discoursed.

With Reference (only) to the Government of ENGLAND in Church and State.

In some Answer to Peter Walsh, and pursuant to the Directions of a Person of
Honor.

Papa stupor Mundi, non Deus, non Homo, sed utrumque. Gloss. in proem. Clem.
Moscan. de Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 11. LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun
at the West End of St. Paul's. M DC LXXV.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THIS ensuing Discourse seems to be wrote about the time, when (by
Proclamation) Papists were not to reside within ten Miles of London; and it is
not yet out of Season, nor will be, till our Controversies with the Papists be
thoroughly and truly stated; after which it cannot be long ere they be ended: I
see not how English men have to do with the Romish Church or State, their Laws,
Doctrines or Discipline; therefore while they have been exercising us with
Disputes about those things, they had two Ends, (viz.) Either to lead us into
some Precipice, or to Lap-wing us from the proper tendency of our Enquiries,
which in truth is our home Concerns, and so a Controversy only between English
Papists and English Catholics (called Protestants for Distinction) with
reference to their Prince, who governs by Laws diverse from all the Nations
of the World, and so is not to be argued out of his Right by any Parallel from
other Kingdoms: But as a Person of Honor has lately begun, so this Author has
set forward the proper Contest (still meaning) between English Papists and
English Protestants, the latter of whom affirm as follows.

1. That the King of England is Emperor and sole Monarch of England, and
established by a Law diverse from all other Nations.

2. That the Church of England has all the Rights of a Patriarchal See, from
which lies no Appeal to any other Patriarch.

3. That all Church Authorities and Jurisdictions (with reference to this life
and the ends of Government) are rightfully derived from the King of England,
being naturally in him as a mixed Person, and Custos utriusque tabulae,
according to Romans 13.

4. That he is a Traitor that denies this, or affirms any foreign Prince,
Prelate or Potentate, to have any Jurisdiction in England, etc. or diminishes
the Kings Legal Style.

5. There was naturally no difference between Church and State, as to
Jurisdictions, until Christian Monarchs divided Jurisdictions, and delegated
Civil and Ecclesiastical Persons to take Conusance, and judge of Causes
separate, and those Jurisdictions are called Civil and Ecclesiastical in
respect of the Delegates only, and not in respect of the Causes whereof they
take Conusance and Judge.

6. The King has power (naturally) within his Dominions (by such his delegates
respectively) to declare what are Articles of Faith according to Scripture and
not otherwise, and to make and interpret Laws for the Government of Church and
State, to appoint Forms of Worship and Discipline, not against the word of God,
to add to such Laws, Sanctions, to punish Offenders against such Laws.

7. These Rights and Powers of the King are Inherent in him, as Essential
Flowers of his Crown, as ancient as the Crown it self, in which his Subjects
are so interessed with reference to their Propriety in his personal Government
by Original Constitutions, as the King cannot (by any rightf^l Act he can do)
grant them away to any Foreign Power, Person, or Potentate, or to others but
by way of delegation, as to the declarative and executive Part.

8. What ever of these Rights and Powers any King of England has at any time
allowed to the Pope, has been so allowed against the Fundamental Law of the
Land, and so was utterly void, and not obliging to any Successors Kings of
England, etc.

9. That all Papists, denying the Jurisdiction of the Pope here, both in Civil
and Ecclesiastical matters, yet holding Communion with the Church of Rome in
matters of worship, against our established Laws, are grievous Offenders.

10. That passive Obedience, is no Obedience: In as much as true Obedience must
be spontaneous, entire, active, and with respect to the Law of Nature
(antecedent to the Kings Command) which injoyns entire Obedience to the Kings
lawful Command, for the Lords sake, not barely for the Command sake.

11. That the King cannot dispense with, or free the Subject from such natural
Obedience, but only from the penalty added by, and annexed to, his Command.

12. That the King cannot tolerate here the Exercise of the Popish Worship, the
same being superstitious and idolatrous, and against the Established Laws.

13. That no English man whatsoever (how far so ever they pretend to differ
from or disown the Pope) can give reasonable security for the Preservation of
the Peace of the Church or State by them, unless they swear due Allegiance to
the King, and by Oath declare his Supremacy in the Church, and by that Oath
renounce all the Popes Authority whatsoever over them, and his Power to
dispense with that Oath, and that they will be obedient to all the Kings Laws.

14. That an English man in Priests Orders from the Church of Rome
^xcommunicated or censured by tha^ Church, and yet holding Communion with that
Church, i^ not to be trusted here, although he takes the Oaths above mentioned*
In as much as he is of no Church, being wilfully divided from ours, and by
Censure divided from the other, and so disobedient to all Governors, a lawless
and perjured Person, and so in a present State of Damnation, nor is any Romish
Priest to be trusted here, though he takes the said Oaths, in as much as he
has taken a former Oath to the contrary not renounced.

15. That since no English understanding Papist does absent, or at any time
has absented from our Communion and Worship out of pure Judgment and Reason:
But purely by reason of the old inhibition of the Pope in Q. Elizabeth's time
(for before that they joined with us and were called Church Papists) and at the
same time they (in opposition to our Kings Laws) do so firmly yield to that
Inhibition, and disobey several other Commands of the Pope, even in some
matters of Faith; It Is referred to the wisdom of the King with the advice of his
said Delegates, whether such co(...)ious Offenders be with any safety to be
tolerated, or even con^iv'd at here.

16. That the Church and Court of Rome are so incorporated together, that if
Communion with that Church be admitted or tolerated, here it must* necessarily
be introductory of that Courts Usurpation.

17. That there are now great differences of opinion among the English Papists
themselves with reference to the Pope: And if they were all of the mind with
the most moderate Pretenders, yet what Security can be given, that they will
always be so, or that they shall be succeeded by others of the same Judgment,
or is it possible, that the Pope will grant Orders to such, as he now censures,
as these are, so that an Admittance of these few straggling Pretenders to
favor, as it is against Religion to tolerate Persons in their present
desperate State, so it is certainly against all Christian Prudence and Policy
of State to allow the unaccountable pretenses, to accept the faithless
Engagements, or to credit the unintelligible Faith of those Papistical Nothings.

These things our Author points at in this Discourse, all which (if opposed or
doubted of) will be more at large maintained, and the matters of Fact therein
cleared by another manner of Testimony, then that of bringing the Virgin Mary's
Chapel from Nazareth to Dalmatia, and from thence to Loretto; nay, let any one
of the five hundred Native Priests, that Peter Walsh says lately were in
England, undertake any one Link of this Chain, which conduces to the End of the
Controversy, and the whole Cause shall depend on the success: So that this.
Book serves to state the Controversy aright, and in some measure to confirm the
reformed Catholics, to convince the Heteroclite Adversaries and to justify our
Kings necessary Cautions against the Invaders of his loyal and established
Authority.

A JOURNEY INTO THE COUNTRY, etc.
PAPIST, Well overtaken Sir, how far travail you this way?


Physician, Truly Sir, I cannot well tell; I know the place I am going to, but
know not how far it is thither.


Pap. Perhaps then two such Travailers have seldom met, for I know how far I am
to travail, but know not the place I go to.


Phy. Methinks Sir, you undertake an odd Journey. Pray what occasions it, and
the uncertainty thereof.


Pap. Sir, have you not heard of Ogilbies Wheel, that has run over all the
great Roads in England?


Phy. Yes, that was to ascertain the Miles for Travailers, and is to be
inserted into his Britannia, being one part of his Atlas now coming forth, a
very laborious and useful Work.


Pap. Whether the design was to advantage Travailers or the Post Office, I Will
not determine, but sure I am it is become prejudicial to me; for here is the
Case, I am obliged to go ten miles from London, and so thought to have gone to
Rumford: But it seems by that Wheel, Rumford is made 12 miles off from London,
and then if I stay 2 miles short, what know I where I shall lodge:


Phy. I believe Sir, your head is full of Proclamations, and that troubles you
more then the Wheel.


Pap. I can bear the Proclamation patiently, and be obedient to the Kings
Command as well as any Subject he has.


Phy. Say you so? were I in your Case I should choose to go to Rumford, and not
take up at Cold lodging, for while you are commanded to go ten Miles from
London, you may go as far as you please beyond it.


Pap. If I had not been commanded to go ten miles, I would not have gone it,
and being commanded to go so far, I am not such a fool as to go further, for
something that I know.


Phy. What think you then of what is said, If any one compels you to go with
him a Mile, go with him twain.


Pap. Would you think it reasonable, if one going five Miles for a Physician,
that another should compel him to go ten Miles another way.


Phy. No, but it is meant if any by the power of the Magistrate compels you to
go a Mile, show your Obedience to the Magistrates Command in doing more rather
then less, or not at all, for so the word in the Original for Compel signifies,
and you may see a Sermon on that Text. 13. Romans


Pap. Well Sir, make what Interpretation of it you please, I know who can do it
better, and I have a surer Guide to trust to, that cannot Err.


Phy. I think I understand you Sir, and what persuasion you are of.


Pap. Pray then, Sir, let me understand who you are, and what occasions your
Journey.


Phy. Why, I am a Protestant Physician, going to visit a patient some Miles
onward to Rumford.


Pap. Methinks then, Sir, you should make more haste; strange! how lazy and
indifferent are Physicians grown in the great Concernment of men's Lives: And
all this Evil is occasioned by the Reformation, as it is called, which might
better have been in Physic then Religion.


Phy. As for the Reformation in Religion, I see not how it affects the Practice
of Physic; but for my not making more haste to my Patient you must know First,
That too violent Motions may irritate the pungent and saline particles hid in
the Nervous Juice, and cause a Fermentation in the Serum of the blood, which
preying on the vital Spirits will conclude in a malignant and putrid fever:
But by a Sedate Managery of the parts, the morbifick matter remains
undisturbed, until it may be exterminated by proper Evacuations ( viz.)
Emeticks, Diuretics, Sudorificks, or ordinary Purgations. Secondly, The
Distemper my Patient labors under appears by the Symptoms, indicated by the
Vein, to be a Chronick Distemper, and become Cathectical, and so not to be
accosted by Acute Medicines, and cured of a sudden. Thirdly and lastly, a
Physician, who makes too much haste after a Patients Summons, gives thereby the
Patient occasion to think that the Physician has but few to look after, but
small Practice, so will have but mean thoughts of him, and hinder the operation
of the Physic, whereas confidence in the Physician does half the Cure, and
(which is worst of all) a small Fee will be thought sufficient for him: And I
see no reason, why I should not put a value on my Medicine, as well as you on
your Mass: But, Sir, I pray why are you so penurious of your Obedience to the
Kings Commands, that you will go but just ten miles, though to your Detriment.


Pap. Why Sir, I Will tell you, the King shall see, that I will obey him exactly,
though to my own prejudice, and my opinion is, that whosoever of the Roman
Catholic Religion, that live under the Kings protection, should prefer the
peace of the State before his own Advantages, and so I have learnt from wise
men of this Nation.


Phy. Well Sir, omitting that this Minute Testimony of your Obedience conduces
nothing to the peace of the State, in as much as the going above ten Miles is
no breach of the Kings Command, tell me, I pray, why you did not mention the
peace of the Church, as well as of the State which you prefer to your own
Advantages?


Pap. I must declare to you, I am a Catholic of the Church of Rome, and not of
the Court of Rome, mind that, for this distinction has much in it, and I ow as
much Allegiance to the King as any Protestant of you all, and am ready to take
up Arms to defend his Royal person, as many Catholics did in the late Wars.


Phy. I am satisfied, that many Catholics were in the late Kings Army, and did
Service there; but I always was satisfied also, that it was for their own sakes
principally, and for the Kings sake only; inasmuch as they hoped for more
Indulgence from a merciful Prince, then from a Herd of men, who could not be
content to shave their Fathers beards, but must cut their throats: Yet Sir, I
am satisfied. Its true, that you (as you say) Owe great Allegiance to the King,
but I never could be satisfied, that ye paid so much, nor no more then utmost
necessity compelled from you, and I am now in greater dissatisfaction, by the
story of the ten Miles, and no more.


Pap. You may still Sir, rest under the same dissatisfaction, and must so do,
until you understand thoroughly the Distinction I before mentioned.


Phy. As for your distinction of the Church of Rome and Court of Rome Papist,
what ever was intended by the Inventer of the Knack, I take it to be a (...)
Notion set up to stifle due Reflections on old Errors, for most certainly an
English Papist, as Papist, abstracted from doctrinal opinions, is a Traitor to
the King of England.


Pap. Hold Sir, you intend not to quarrel me on the road sure, and begin with
such rude Language.


Phy. Pray, why may not I call an English Papist Traitor, as well as you call
an English Protestant Heretic the crimes are both Capital.


Pap. If you understood any Distinction you would answer your self.


Phy. You cry Distinction, Distinction, Court of Rome, Church of Rome; but
what is all that to the Church of England: I suppose the Author of that so much
magnified Distinction might mean, tha^ by n^^ being of the Court of Rome he may
hold, That the Pope ha^ not right to any temporal Jurisdiction in our Kings
dominions, but that our King is absolute Monarch there, that is something indeed
and diversifies him from a de fide man and Jesuit, who hold the contrary: But
yet he by being of the Church of Rome, must hold that the Pope has right to
some spiritual jurisdiction within our Kings Dominions, which to affirm is to
take away part of his Imperial Crown, and as it is against all truth, so by the
Laws of this Realm is Treason; besides while he holds the Pope Head of the
Church, and so infallible, he obeys him well, who believes not what he says:
For while the Church of Rome Papist says our King is lawful King of England,
Scotland and Ireland, he gives the Lie to his Infallible Holiness, who has
continued the old Interdiction of these Kingdoms, the Excommunication of our
Kings, and has declared our King to have no right to his Kingdoms: And
therefore in anno 1662. as well from Cardinal Barberin, as from the Popes
Nuncio at Brussel, a severe Reprimand was sent to the Irish Nobility, who had
subscribed a Remonstrance, testifying their Allegiance to our present King, the
Pope declaring it as an Injury to the Faith, and a denying of his Supremacy:
And in anno 1648. when the Papists to prevent banishment declared, That the
Pope cannot absolve them from their Obedience, That he cannot depose any
Heretical (as it is called) Magistrates, that he cannot dispense with Oaths made
with (such) Heretics: This was at Rome condemned as Heretical, the Parties
summoned to appear at Rome, and Censures and Prisons prepared for them; and in
the same Case is your Man of Distinction with the Irish Papists, for
subscribing their formulary to that purpose: so that I see nothing from your
distinction to arise, but a Monster of Aequivocal generation, an Hermophrodite
in Religion, part Romish, part English Catholic, whose seminal Virtues are to
exert themselves, as either powers prevail.


Pap. I verily believe, that the Catholics of the Church of Rome are good
Christians, and true Roman Catholics, though they are not of the Court of
Rome, and they endeavor to reform that Church, and distinguish it from that
Court.


Phy. You say well distinguish, for it may be distinguished in Notion, but can
never be separated in Deed; the Court and the Church of Rome being so
interwoven, and although some few Straglers thus distinguish, yet in reality
all our Contests concern the Court of Rome, in that all the interest of that
Church is dependent on that Court, and they are incorporated together, so that
if we should ever join in Communion with that Church, we must in a little time
submit to the Usurpation of that Court. Jurisdiction of Church and State, being
in the same hands cannot be severed; unless some Sir Solomon among you can
divide Pope, Cardinal, Prelate, as great Solomon would have done the Child,
which the two Mothers claimed? And as to your irregular and feeble Endeavors to
reform that Church: Pray, by what Authority do your true English-Roman
Catholics endeavor to reform the Roman Catholic Church? For your Confessors
tell you at the first Principle, that ye must believe as the Church believes;
yet they themselves believe not so, but would reform that Church in its
Articles of Faith.


Pap. Sir, they know well enough what they have to do, and we believe them, who
have good Authority to instruct us in our belief.


Phy. You have said all that is permitted to silly misled Ignaro's to say: But
have a care and inquire after such Reformers, who in single private Capacities
unauthoritatively undertake Reformation of Churches: At one time undertaking
the Reformation of the Romish and British Churches: Our Church was reformed by
due Authority according to the most ancient Laws of this Realm; It having all
the Rights of a Patriarchal See: But can a few Renegado-dandi-prat Papists
think to unhinge a Church or State under a pretense of Reformation: These
Reformers of yours, I fear prompted our late Pretenders to Reformation, who
first would reform the Court, then the established Church, by Presbytery, then
Presbytery by Independent, then Independency by Subdivisions of Atomical Sects,
till with Quaker and Millenaries Government was reformed quite out of doors;
such Reformers (as is said) are like the Hobling Erastian, and run like Badgers
with variating and unequal Motions, and if they can keep where the ridge of
secular Power goes highest, their Reformation turns into Rebellion, and Papist
Reformers are as various and diverse from their Church of Rome, aye, and from
themselves.


Pap. You mistake us much, for the Reformers, I mean, go not about to reform
the whole Church, or to unhing it; but to reform in their private Practices and
Judgments and teach us so.


Phy. They are good Members of that Church in the mean time, that are wiser
then their whole Church, not only to differ from their Church in their private
Practices and Judgments, but to teach all others to do so too: Right Roman
Catholics, I Will warrant them.


Pap. What, pray, do you think of Father Paul, who wrote the Council of Trent
so disadvantagiously to the Romish Interest, and yet he died a steady Catholic
of the Church of Rome.


Phy. I Will tell you what I think of him, I think first, That he was no English
man, and so nothing to our purpose, for I have nothing to say against
Foreigners, let them use what Religion their Superiors there enjoin them: But
against English men, who, in opposition to the Religion of State, distinct from
that of Faith, which is ordered by the proper Legislative Power, such as your
Church of Rome Papist is, for ought I can yet see: If your Father Paul was
such, I think him either a fool or a Knave, for if St. Peter's Successor did
behave himself well in that Council, your Paul was a Knave to traduce him, if
contrary, he was a fool to leave a well ordered Church to follow the Dictates
of such a faulty Guide; yet were he a Subject of Rome, he was much too blame so
openly to reproach his Prince, and yet was religious to dye a steady Cath^lick
of that Church, while he was obliged to hear the Pharisee sitting in St. Peter's
Chair.


Pap. Well, Sir, say what you will, I say, I am a true Roman Catholic as to
the other World, and a true English man as to this.


Phy. Sir, you offered a Distinction lately with a witness (viz.) Father Paul,
and now comes a Distinction with Paulo majore, and as to this I say; it is a
Distinction well becoming a Romish-Church-Catholick but not a true English man:
for it looks two ways, for if Chequer Papist, party per pale, half true
Papist, half true English will not do, then it is to be interpreted, True
English man for life, and after true Roman Catholic, and so it has something
of Policy, but more of Romish Guile: In as much as it serves to secure
Protection and Preservation, here during life, and after in the other world;
True Roman Catholic goes for it to St. Peter, God a mercy good Distinguisher;
he dares as well be hanged as tell the Pope this, how he cheats the Pope all
his life, and cheats the King at his death; this Distinction dares not appear
at Rome, no more then peaceable Mr. Walsh, Mr. White, or Mr. Sergeant, who
non-conform from the Church of Rome, more then our Independent from the Church
of England.


Pap. But Sir, if the Distinguisher (as you call him) explains himself, and
says he owes Allegiance to the King actively, as to Matters of State, and
passively as to Matters of Church, and so differs from your Church in pure
Judgment only, and no more then Presbyterian or Independents there, who are
good Subjects, nevertheless owe Allegiance, and claim protection, etc. what say
you then, etc?


Phy. First I say, that Church and State were all one before Christian
Emperors divided them, and causes were all derived from the same Fountain, the
King, but as some were put into the hands of Ecclesiastics, and were called
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, so others delegated to Civil Magistrates were
called Civil, thence arose the two Jurisdictions, which are naturally one, as
in our King, and by Delegation only made two. -- But I further say, if you be
in earnest, it is the first time I ever heard Papists to fight with
Presbyterian weapons, and I mean by earnest, real, for sad Experience has
showed, that it is not the first time by thousands, that the Militants of the
Romish Church have used the unhallowed Artillery of the spurious English
Natives to fight withal against us: Yet not in earnest or real as such, but in
Masquerade, and if your Distinguisher be so half witted to tender this
peace-meal Obedience: I say further, It Is the proper Result of Romish
Ignorance, for such Notional Obedience is indeed none: True Obedience ought to
be entire, and is due to the lawful Magistrates Commands by the Law of Nature
antecedent to any Command by the Magistrate, for the Lords sake, who injoyns to
obey, not barely for the Commands-sake, which injoyns to do: And there is more
Religion in such Obedience then in all your Worship: But, Sir, I would
willingly be resolved, whether the Romish Church* Catholic dissent from us in
Church matters in pure Judgment, or by reason of some Command from the Pope?
next, whether there be not a great difference between Protestant and Popish
Dissenters: Inasmuch as the former, whatever he thinks concerning the power of
his Prince in Church matters, and perhaps would have him mend his Discipline
according to mistaken Rule of Scripture, yet he takes it not from our Prince,
and lodges it in a foreign Prince, or Prelate, which last makes it Treason:
Let this be answered, and I Will promise you not to take such an uncouth Travail,
as at present gives occasion of our Discourse.


Pap. Pray, Sir, is there any harm, if I prefer the Pope to the Archbishop of
Canterbury?


Phy. None at all, as the former is a Temporal Prince, and the latter but a
Subject, nay more, the Archbishop of Rome shall have my Vote to take
Precedence of the Archbishop of Canterbury, at a general Council, when it
happens, but not in England unless by Curtesy: And if you prefer the Pope
before the Archbishop of Canterbury as to any power of Spiritual Jurisdiction
in our Kings Dominions, you are unmannerly to the Archbishop, who is
Apostolic and Patriarch here, as Pope Urban the second allowed, and you are a
Traitor to the King, by, and under whose undoubted, inherent Right and
Authority the Archbishop is Primate in this Patriarchate.


Pap. But do you think in your Conscience, that the Pope has no Right to
Spiritual Jurisdiction in England?


Phy. Aye, I do in my Conscience verily believe that the Pope has no Right to
any Jurisdiction whatsoever in our Kings Dominions.


Pap. Pray, what Grounds have you for it?


Phy. The Grounds I have for it is from the certain Testimony of Records,
continued in Succession for many hundred years, which are to be seen in the
Tower, and some of them are transcribed by the Lord Coke, and cited in the
Report of a Law Case, called Cawdries Case, and in Mr. Prins Collections,
whereby it plainly appears that in all ages, wherein the Pope laid claim to
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England, and offered to put the same in
Execution, it was always opposed by Parliaments and Councils, as derogatory to
the just Rights of this Crown.


Pap. But how are you certain of the truth of these Testimonies?


Phy. Sir, as to the matter of Certainty, I shall not use the notions so much
contended about, viz. Moral Certainty or sufficient Certainty, so much as the
Nature of the thing is capable of, there being three absolute Certainties, by
which we come to the knowledge of things. 1. A sensible Certainty. 2. A
Mathematical Certainty. 3. An Historical Certainty, and all these are in their
kinds respectively absolute. The Certainty of Sense makes me absolutely Certain
of what I see, hear, etc. The Certainty of Demonstration makes me absolutely
Certain, that one and one makes two, and three and three makes six: The
Certainty of History continued uninterrupted and undoubted, and by unanimous
Consent of succession of Ages, and Historians, makes me absolutely certain,
that there were such Kings of England, as Kenulphus, King Edwin, Edw. the
Confessor, William the first, Hen. 1. Hen. 3. Edw. 2. Edw. 3. Rich. 2. Hen. 4.
Hen. 5. Hen. 6. Edw. 4. Rich. 3. H. 7. H. 8. and also that in their several and
respective Raigns, the Popes claim to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction here in
England was declared null, even by those of the Romish Communion, and that the
King was acknowledged to be the Vicar of the highest King, complete Monarch,
Head of the whole body of the Realm, to govern and rule the Kingdom and People
of the Land, and above all things the Holy Church, and defend the same, to give
Authority to his Clergy, to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in this Realm,
according to Canons and Laws made for that purpose, and that all Dignitaries of
the Church derive their preferments from the King and no other, exclusive of
the Popes Authority in all Cases whatsoever.


Pap. How can you call that an absolute Certainty, when there is at the same
time a Possibility that the same may be false, for there is a Possibility, that
all Historians may be mistaken, and all Histories forged?


Phy. So is there as much Possibility, that the Air may become an
unproportionate Medium, and disturb my Certainty of sight, and so the Sense
deluded; so may I have a Delirium, and my Intellectuals at some time disturbed
in their Mathematical Activity, and so confound all absolute Certainties: But
until there appear an absolute Certainty of such Interruptions of such means of
absolute Certainties, the three absolute Certainties remain such, for it is not
enough to suppose a Possibility to the contrary, that makes them less certain,
but there must appear as high a Certainty to the contrary: And while my
Understanding is fully satisfied of such Certainties, it is impossible to
believe a Possibility to the contrary: and in case of Historians reporting a
matter of Fact diversely, the greater and more valuable Testimony is, to my
understanding, absolute, the other not; as if, Mr. Cressey affirms in his
Church History, that this Kingdom of England was for One thousand years
absolutely subject to the Spiritual Jurisdiction of the Pope, and all the
Testimonies before mentioned (which are Records kept and preserved inviolate
and sacred in the Archives of the Kingdom, with the care equal with the
Evidences for the Crown and Concerns of the King and People) say the contrary,
I take it this last Testimony is of absolute Certainty, the other not.


Pap. But notwithstanding all these Records, Popery was in all those Kings
Raigns used in England.


Phy. It was so, and Hen. 8. dyed one of your steady Roman-Church Catholics;
but whatsoever powers the Pope had in any, or all those Kings Raigns in
England, was merely by the Concession of such Kings, and not otherwise, and at
their will and pleasure only, and which they might at any time resume at the
like pleasure, which other Kings have done since: And I must tell you, that
although such Concessions have been, yet they ought not to have been, for the
King cannot grant away any Inherent Flower of the Crown, such as Jurisdiction
is, no more then he can grant away the Crown it self: And whereas the timorous
King John, the very black Patch of the English Race, laid down his Crown at the
Infidel Ambassadors feet, and afterward allowed it Tributary to your Italian
Usurper: It was more then he by the Law of this Realm could do, and his Acts
therein were wholly void, but the King may appoint or alter a Discipline and
Worship, not contrary to Gods Holy Will and Appointment.


Pap. Well, but what if the King should appoint a Liturgy and Form of Worship
the same with that of the Catholic Countries?


Phy. If he should, what then? would that satisfy the true Catholics of the
Church of Rome, and make them true English men?


Pap. I believe it might, for while you have so good Authority against the
Popes Jurisdiction here, I cannot see at present what more they can have.


Phy. I vow, I see such kind of arguings as these will soon bring these
Controversies into a narrow Room, and (being pressed forward and home) to an
End.


Pap. Hold there, for though I cannot at present answer your studied Arguments,
yet I may upon Deliberation; however there are them, who are able to do it,
whom I shall consult, and then talk with you further.


Phy. There are them? Very well, who are them with a Mischief? What blind leads
the blind? Credulity and Ignorance are the Pillars of your Church: But come
Sir, let me give you some Advice; The Service of God ought to be a reasonable
Service* that is, Logical, according to the word in the Original reasoning, or
your reason ought to be primarily concerned therein: You are a person endued
with rational Faculties, and some stock of Improvements? You are thereby
distinguished from Brut^, you are not to act, in things of Religion, out of
Custom, Precept or Example merely, but to be a wise Berean, more noble than
those of Thessalonica, to search the Scriptures, and try whether what is taught
you be according thereto; do not pin your Faith on other men's sleeves (as the
saying is) admire not persons ignorantly, nor things for persons sakes: It was
not a justifiable saying of him, who had rather be in an Error with Plato, then
in the truth with any other. There was one Farrel an active Presbyterian in
Geneva, after whom the People flocked: In so much as one became so bold as to
say, he gave greater honor to Farrel then to Paul, and another said of Calvin,
that were Paul and Calvin to preach together, he would leave Paul to hear
Calvin: So that many men profess this or that Sect of Religion, not so much for
Religion sake, as for the sake of the Sect Leaders: Imitate St. Austin, who
having a long time followed St. Cyprian (an Orthodox Father of the Church) in
the interpretation of a place of Scripture, afterward met with Ticonius (an
Heretic) interpreting that place, which he closed with, conceiving it best.


Pap. Truly, Sir, I deny not but your Advice is wholesome, and perhaps
seasonable, I shall think of it: But, Sir, what if the Roman Catholics should
declare, that they believed and owned the Kings Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction as
well as Temporal in all his Dominions, and disowned the Popes right to any
Jurisdiction whatsoever here, would not that be Security sufficient for the
public Peace, and prevent severe Laws against us?


Phy. I think in such case our King might well say of such Papists, as the Duke
of Saxony, said of the Lutherans, viz. what they believe now I know, but what
they will believe next year I know not: And you may deny the Popes Jurisdiction
here, as the Papists in France, did the Popes power of Princes, yet hold it so
at Rome: And you may own Allegiance, and Supremacy, to be in the King, as
Vauinus wrote for Providence, yet denied a deity. But I do think that an Oath
to that purpose well Penned and well taken, would conduce somewhat to the Peace
of the Nation, provided, ye by the same Oath declared, that the Pope could not
dispense therewith. And if the Pope himself would also declare so, That would
certainly conduce to make your true Roman Catholic a true English man; and
until both be so done, I cannot promise security to the peace of the Nation:
But I pray, why are you so in love with the Romish Liturgy and Worship, that
you would have it established here?


Pap. For these Reasons, 1. For that it is for the Honor of the Christian
Religion, that the same way of Worship might be observed in all Christian
Churches. 2. For that the way of the Romish Worship, has been used in all
Christian Ages, and in all Christian Kingdoms and Places, till of late, and is
still used in some Kingdoms, where the Popes Jurisdiction is not allowed.


Phy. Sir, as to your first reason, I agree it would be exceedingly for the
Honor of the Christian Religion, if such Harmony and Agreement could be used
in religious Worship, as that one God might be worshipped in one way; but as
that never was, so, I fear, never will be, till all things be no more: As to
your second reason, I deny that the Romish Worship, as now is used, was in any
Christian Age or Kingdom used for above five hundred years after Christianity
came into the world, nor do your true English Roman Catholics, as you call
them, now agree with any other Christian Kingdom, Church or Place whatsoever,
if they belie not themselves.


Pap. Well, it has been so long used, and with so general a Consent and
Approbation, as may well Entitle it to a preference, to this new upstart way of
Worship, which this Nation has had not above 100* Years.


Phy. As to the Argument of Antiquity, and long Usage: It may be good, in cases
of Politic, and Civil rights and Interests, and become determinative, provided
it be not against positive Laws, natural Equity or reason; And in these
Exterior parts of Religion, it can obtain no more: For a way of worship
repugnant to the positive Law declared in Scripture, or repugnant to the
positive Law of the supreme Magistrate, ought not to be exercised by any
Subject living under the protection of that Supreme Magistrate, without sin and
breach of Allegiance: And Sir, I must tell you further, that this Notion of
Antiquity (though of great veneration in it self, yet) has been often used to
the disadvantage of truth, and made a Stale to dangerous mistakes, and corrupt
purposes. You know who was reproved for not walking after the Traditions of the
Elders. 7. Mat. 5. and who were so zealous for the Traditions of the Fathers.
1. Gal. 14. Against whose Arguments of Antiquity, it was only opposed search
the Scriptures* 5. John 39. and you may see 17 Acts 19. who scoffed at the new
Doctrine, as you at this new upstart way of Worship, though indeed elder to
yours: So the Antiquity (barely as such) is no Argument for one, or against
another, or that the more ancient (as such) is to be preferred before the late;
but again, I say, search and try, which is the best, and adhere to that, for
the Improvement of your own (not another man's) Talent must enrich you.


Pap. This despising of things ancient, and entertaining of things Novel in
Religion, has not only made a lamentable breach in the Catholic Church, but
this Nation more particularly and dolefully has felt the direful Effects
thereof, in your Divisions and Subdivisions in the matters of Religion, and the
vvayes of religious Worship; witness all your Sects and Dissentions, that have
lately overrun the Nation.


Phy. As this Objection is of some standing, so it is nere the better, nor
stronger for it, for new Answers have fully confounded it, as well to the
reason of the thing, as to a returning it with abundant additions on the
Romish Church, wherein are many more Divisions, Sects and Dissension then in
ours, as Doctor Stillingfleet has learnedly and faithfully made out in one
Chapter of his Book against Idolatry, etc.


Pap. Pray then tell me a reason, why may not I or another so persuaded, with
good conscience, use the Romish Way of Worship and Devotion, and not the
English Way of Worship, if I allow the Kings Supremacy, and disallow the Popes?


Phy. Laying aside the reasons urged against the irrationality, foppish,
feigned Superstition, Incredibility, and Idolatry, at large discoursed by Dr.
Stillingfleet in his Book against their Idolatry and Fanaticism, and it is
Vindication, a Book called Reflections on the Romish Devotions; another, the
Triumphs of Rome over despised Protestancy, two others, viz. the Funeral of the
Mass, and the depth and mystery of the Mass, which I vvish you to read and
others; I Will tell you another reason, ( viz.) because the King has commanded
the contrary.


Pap. Why, can the Kings Command bind me in my way of Worship? is it not
sufficient if I disown the Pope?


Phy. You disown the Pope only by half, yet such disowning may be well done,
and if we could be assured it was well done might give some Security to the
King against Foreign, Civil Pretenders, but still you give him no Security for
perfect Obedience, as a true English man, and against breach of the peace of
the Church, if you conform not to his lawful Commands in his ways of Worship.


Pap. Pray, how come the King to have power to impose a way of Worship
according to his own Will?


Phy. The King has as much Power to impose a way of Worship here, as the Pope
has in his Dominions, but neither has Power to impose a way of Worship
absolutely, according to his own Will.


Pap. What? has the King Power to impose a Way of Worship, and yet not
according to his own Will? pray according to whose Will does he so impose, etc.


Phy. He imposes it according to the Will of God?


Pap. How can that be, for the Protestants say that no Way of Worship is
expressly appointed in Scripture, and they allow no Revelations to holy men to
be credited.


Phy. This is the rule they go by, whatsoever in Religion is not of the essence
of Christian Religion entitled by our Savior himself, or declared or advised
to be practiced by the Apostles, is lawfully looked on as Religion of State, in
that it may be altered or improved, or abolished by the Sovereign power, for
the better Advancement of those ends which are essential; the same power may
remove Errors, Inconveniences, Scandals and abuses therein; and of that Nature
is the way of Worship, and so within the Power of the King: The King has no
Power over the kernel, but over the shell he has, and by his Sovereign power
that is preserved inviolate.


Pap. Well, but if he has such power, why could he not keep the Old shell, but
make a New one?


Phy. Our King has not made a New shell to keep the Old kernel in, but he has
amended the Old shell, for the better preservation of the Old kernel.


Pap. I apprehend what you mean by kernel and shell, you may continue the
Metaphor, and tell me wherein our King contributes to the preservation of the
Old kernel more then his Holiness.


Phy. Why then, I Will tell you, this kernel and shell first grew in Palestine,
which was a land as fruitful, as that mentioned, Deuteronomy. 8. and more for
fruit trees (especially Figs there) never leave bearing the old Figs,
continuing till the new come, which resolvs 14 Mark 13. But for shell fruit
(especially such as we talk of) Dr. Heylin says, little is there, but what
comes from Damascus: And as to this shell fruit of ours, some Indignities being
offered thereto by untoward Neighbors, viz* the Essens, Saducees, Scribes,
Pharisees, Herodians and Galileans: It was thought fit to be transplanted. And
one St. Joseph an honorable Counselor planted it in England; where it
continued and did thrive exceedingly, the Kernel flourishing, keeping its
native Vigor, Sap and Color, the Shell fine, thin, well favored, and as hard
(one would think) as a Rock, and so it continued near five hundred years,
afterward by the Luxuriancy of the Soil, and the over officious, and too
critical Appointments and Trials of some Supervisors, and too lazy and
superficial of others, on this well colored, thin, and hard shell, a kind of
false Rind grew and covered it quite over, till you could not see the true
shell; this Rind was maintained, as engendered, by something foreign, nothing
from the Kernel: It happened that a great Wind arose once upon a time, about
the time of Lent, I think it was a westerly Wind, and as easterly Winds bring
in Autumn Ascarides, to destroy Orchards and Garden Fruits, so in Lent this
westerly Wind brought an infinite number of Vermin (of equivocal generation to
be sure) into our Land, they were of several shapes and colors, all of them
but of two legs, divellish beaks like birds of prey, some were red, some
russet, some black, and some of all colors, and Sir, this sort of verminous
Breedlings (after that the gross putrid Air, that was their Parent and Vehicle
hither* became somewhat rarefied, and so not so full of luscious support) got
into this scurvy Rind, and there dug their Mansions, and for many years
lived on the adventitious juice which supplied the Rind, which strange Animals
(swarming to too great a number) could not be preserved with fatness in the
Rind, but lay gnawing on the shell, made holes therein, and (as I Am credibly
informed) had almost endangered the kernel, whereupon the Matter was inquired
into, and found out by skilful Workmen, who quite pared off the Rind, and so
destroyed the Nests of those Caterpillars, and have endeavored to keep the
shell, well favored, thin and hard, as it was at first, yet (it is strange)
though one sort of Vermin be scraped off, another kind of Vermin like Mites
will fall on, if not warily looked after; but for the whole Matter, we keep it
now pretty well, only now and then washing it over with a little water and Salt.


Pap. Well Sir, if you mean by the Kernel, the Christian Religion, by the
Shell, Discipline on Worship, and by the Rind some Super additions thereupon,
in which, or upon which the Romish Priests and Regulars lived, and by the
paring of the Rind, the Reformation, and by the Mites, your own Sectaries, and
by Water and Salt, paenal laws, as I think you do: What if all this be true,
which I deny, yet how come your Kings to have any thing to do in Reformation of
the Church?


Phy. Our Kings have power to reform the Church of England, etc. by a Power
inherent in them, as Emperors within their Dominions.


Pap. How, Emperors? sure you will not make that out. When were the Kings of
England styled Emperors?


Phy. Whether any of our Kings were actually styled Emperors is not the point:
But they were so ever since they wore an Imperial Crown, and that is ever since
there was first a King of England.


Pap. But how does that make him Governor of the Church?


Phy. That makes him not Governor of the Church, but God made him such, and
That is Evidence, that God made him such, the Crown of England never being
rightfully dependent, as to any Jurisdiction, on any foreign Emperor, Prince,
Potentate or Patriarch, and so is his Crown Imperial, and his power absolute,
according to the most ancient Constitution and Laws of this Realm, in all
matters Civil and Ecclesiastical. Our King is by our fundamental Laws a person
sacred, and mixed with the Priesthood, and at his Coronation by a solemn
Consecration and Unction, he becomes a sacred and Ecclesiastical Person, for as
he has put upon him the regal Crown, as Emblem of his Kingship and Power in
Temporals, so has he a Sacerdotal Vestment, commonly called Dalmatick, as a
Levitical Ephod, to signify his Power in Spirituals; and accordingly our Kings
have always (on occasion) called a National Synod (called here a Convocation)
consisting of the Clergy-Lords and Commons, appoints a Primate to preside
there, and they consult together, and prepare Canons for ordering such Church
matters, as the King appoints, and no more, which the King afterward Enacts,
and makes to be Laws by his Royal Assent; What can your Pope say more for
himself?


Pap. He can say much more for himself.


Phy. I believe he can say enough, but he cannot prove half he says.


Pap. He can prove that his way of Worship has been used longer then yours.


Phy. More shame, that it has been suffered so long, but let it be what it will
in other Countries, still I say it ought not to be so here, since the Laws of
the Land command the contrary, the Pope having no Right to any Jurisdiction
here, as before is said. And I must tell you, and can make it good, That the
King of England has been styled Vicar of the highest God, long before the Pope
became a Prince or Pope.


Pap. These (Methinks) are odd things, and contrary to the Law of God.


Phy. Pray, Sir, let me ask you a few Questions, viz. first, whether Peter* had
any thing to do here in England, when Joseph of Arimathea was here? Or when
Paul was here? Which was before he was at Rome, and Joseph came hither with his
twelve holy Accomplices after Stephens death: The first Christian Church was
built by Joseph at Glassenbury, here was three Archbishops and twenty eight
Bishops before Austin the Monk came hither, who refused to keep Easter as it
was kept at Rome, to baptize by their Ceremonies, or to join in preaching with
the Anglo-Saxons, I say, pray in all this time, which was some Hundreds of
years next after our Savior, what Jurisdiction did St. Peter or his Romish
Successors claim in England: Pray, where was Pope or Supremacy either, before
they were given to Boniface the third, anno 606, by Phocas (that Adulterous
Assassine) who slew his Master Mauritius, the Emperor; before that, Pope was
usual to other Bishops, then Volumus and Jubemus came in the room of I beseech
ye Brethren. Romans 13. and (which is remarkable) Mahomet the Grand Impostor
broke then out also, when the Pope became a Temporal Prince by the Gift to him
of the Kingdom of the Lombards by Pippin, Son of Charles Martel. Another
Question is Sir, whether our King is not as good a Successor to St. Joseph, as
a Lay Pope is to St. Peter: Pope Constantine the fourth being opposed by the
Council of Lateran, as being a Lay person justified himself, and showed for
President Sergius Bishop of Ravenna, and Stephen Bishop of Naples; and when the
Pope said first Mass in the City of Constance, King Sigismund in Deacons habit
read the Gospel out of St. Luke 2. there went out a Decree from Caesar
Augustus, etc.


Pap. Well Sir, let us not talk too much of these matters; for I may be drawn
into a snare in seeming to lessen the Kings Authority, from whom I expect
protection, and desire the Exercise of my Religion after my own Judgment.


Phy. Your own Judgment? I like the words well, and wish you guided by your own
Judgment, rightly improved by due Inquiries into things, and not by the
Judgment of others, without a rational satisfaction, why or wherefore, but only
you must do, because you are bid to do so, and until that, you may expect and
desire long enough before it be granted.


Pap. Why should you be so severe against us, who promise all due Obedience to
the King, and not to disturb the peace of the Nation?


Phy. You may promise due Obedience, but then you tell not what that due
Obedience is. Also men of your persuasion have always promised fair, but no
Age can testify their suitable performances, if fit occasion be offered to the
contrary.


Pap. Why, then will you condemn all for some?


Phy. How shall we distinguish ye? Will ye Rendevouz on black Heath, and divide
into parties?


Pap. I gave you a Distinction before of the Church of Rome and Court of Rome
Papists, the latter only are proper to be called Papists, the former true Roman
Catholics.


Phy. Why? Then I am no Protestant, but a true English Catholic?


Pap. Yes, though you be not a Lutheran Protestant, nor a Calvinian Protestant,
yet you protest against the Church of Rome.


Phy. So though you be not a Jesuit Papist, a de fide Papist, yet you are a
Papist, owning the Popes Authority against the Church of England.


Pap. Well, then you acknowledge us not to be so dangerous, as some other
Papists are?


Phy. Truth, I cannot acknowledge ye so, for, for ought I know, or perhaps your
selves, you may be as ill as the worst: And whilst you make a Party disclaimer
of the Popes Authority here, that may be but a pretense, and you may have the
Popes Authority for so doing: It Is not a new thing that Dispensations have been
given by the Pope (and frequently they are) not only to Church with us at
large, but to communicate with us also, and some have had Indulgences to
worship Idols in proper Countries. And this is your holy Stratagem, like that
of Cromwell, who banished some hence, to betray the King beyond Sea: And it is
to be remembered, That Watson (of whom your Peter Walsh speaks so well, and
called himself Puritan Papist, and was of the same opinion with him in all your
Distinctions and professions of Allegiance and Obedience to our King) proved in
conclusion a most notorious open Traitor.


Pap. I cannot tell, but I protest if the Pope should invade ENGLAND, to
disturb the Peace thereof; I would draw my sword as soon against him, as I did
against Cromwell.


Phy. So I have heard others (greater then you) to have said, but pray deal
fairly and heartily with me, what is it that you would have?


Pap. That Is a Strange Question at this time of day?


Phy. It Is not strange: while I judge by your uncertain Discourses, you know
not well what to have.


Pap. Why? I would have Liberty to exercise Religion according to the Church of
Rome.


Phy. That Is diverse from what you asked before; for the Religion of the Church
of Rome is, that the Pope has power over our King, and how consists that with
your Protestation to fight against him (if he Exercises that power) equally as
against Cromwell; this is one of your Romish Equivocations, and it may be you
did not draw your Sword against Cromwell, or that you intend the Popes personal
Invasion of ENGLAND, which is likely, for the Pope by his Authority given to
his Emissaries invades ENGLAND, and disturbs its peace every day?


Pap. I intend it as fully as can be intended of any sort of Invasion, or
disturbance of peace by himself or others, for it suffices me to Exercise the
Roman Catholic Religion, after the manner used by the
true-English-Roman-Catholicks.


Phy. Would you Exercise a Religion after such a manner, as is not used or
exercised in any one Country whatsoever? Pray Sir, give me leave to ask you
another Strange Question, as you call it? viz. Do you think it necessary to be
of the Communion of some Church or no?


Pap. It Is strange indeed: Yes, I do think it absolutely necessary to be of the
Communion of the Church of ROME, and I am so.


Phy. Very well: Why are you so?


Pap. Because my Superior is so.


Phy. Who is your Superior?


Pap. Your pardon for that Sir.


Phy. Is he an ENGLISH Roman Catholic Priest now residing in ENGLAND?


Pap. He is; and what then? I hope you intend not to inveigle me into a
Discovery of him to his harm.


Phy. No indeed, I wish them all well, well informed, or well out of harms way,
but my aim was by that to tell you what I think, viz. That, that very Superior
of yours is not now, nor has he been for many years last past, himself a Member
of that Church, or of that Communion, or if he be, he is but a lame Member.


Pap. Sir, you think strangely, and I must tell you, that he is Professor of
Divinity, and a Priest of the Order of St. Francis.


Phy. Let him be what he will, or can, I say still as I did before, and will
Justify it, that is more; but We Will let that alone till anon, and I Will be hold
to ask you another question, which may not seem so Strange as the former, and
that is, how near does your Church of Rome agree with our Church of England in
the business of Excommunications.


Pap. What your Church of England intends by Excommunication, you know best;
but our Church of Rome holds, That when a Man is Excommunicated by our Church,
he is quite cut off from the Church and its Communion, and delivered over to
Satan, until penance be done and absolution given to him; and for it is power
I Will tell you, the Abbey of Fusuiack was infested with Flies, the Abbot
Clareval, said Excommunico eas, and they were all dead immediately. A white
loaf by Excommunication turns as black as a Coal, and being absolved turns just
as it was; one Robert Brook being Excommunicated, the Dogs would not take bones
from him.


Phy. Why then you have proved your Professor of Divinity, your Franciscan
Priest, to be, not only in a woeful condition, but not of the Church of Rome,
nor of its Communion: For he is, and has been a long time Excommunicated by the
Pope, for those very distinctions that you and others dote upon, and have
mentioned in this our discourse.


Pap. Sure it cannot be so?


Phy. Do you know Obedient Peter Walsh?


Pap. I have good reason to know him, and love him, and honor him; for he is a
Learned Pious and Peaceable minded man.


Phy. Why, he it was that tell'd me of the Excommunication I mention.


Pap. I cannot believe it.


Phy. I verily believe he tell'd it you too.


Pap. On my Credit he tell'd it not to me.


Phy. Why, he tell'd it to all the English and Irish Roman Catholics, and writ
a Letter to them all, and printed it, and says so in that Letter, page 5. 47.
48. So then he is disabled to officiate as a Priest, and while he remains so
disabled, and others of the same opinion, as Mr. Walsh says, there are five
hundred in England. What Confessors have you, and who can make new ones but the
Pope? and will he make any more of the same Opinion, or such as are not of his
Faith? and what if Priests be changed, or change their opinions? as to our
State, what security can be given against it? As for ye poor Blinds, ye are
already in the Snare, and how to get out, how know ye? for ye must not dispute
(nor can ye for want of knowledge, which is necessarily kept from ye) Nor (if
ye could) must ye dispute with your Superiors, but ye must believe as the
Church believes* Yet the reason of such belief, ye must not inquire into, for
the Pope is to Explicate all Matters, and all other Explications are declared
void and Null, by Pope Pius the Fourth, in a Bull for that purpose, which Bull
all Priests are sworn to obey, however your dispensing Priests may wheedle with
ye. And in truth it comes to this, that either such a True Roman Catholic, as
your Confessor pretends to be, must commit Treason, or renounce some Articles
of Faith, holden by that Church, which he advises and conjures ye to believe.


Pap. Then I hope, such a man deserves protection and favor here, who for his
Allegiance to the King runs such a bazard?


Phy. I cannot see what protection, or favor he deserves, for such Allegiance
or hazard, nor can I tell how far such a one is to be trusted, who is a
Heretic at Rome, and called, True Roman Catholic in England, and cannot agree
with the King, if the King should agree with him. Let the King do as he
pleases. Why? is it to be thought that he should yield due Obedience to our
King, to save his Neck, who refuses due Obedience, to his supreme head of his
Church to save his Soul?


Pap. Judge not too rashly? for the Franciscan you speak of is accounted a Man
--


Phy. Let him be accounted what he will, and make what profession of Allegiance
and Obedience he pleases, this I know, That the Pharisees (Christ's utter
Enemies) called themselves so, as holy Seperalists, as others have called
themselves the Family of Love, the Saints, etc. The Saduces who denied the
grand Article of Faith, the Resurrection, so called as the righteous. The
learned Gnostics, and the Robbers Zealots, and Peter Walsh says, there are
Indifferents, Zealots, Bigots and Hypocrites among them, so call these
Interpendents between Pope and King, what you please: I know what to call them,
as before, and while I think it not safe for them to be in either place, ROME
or ENGLAND, etc. I advise them to hasten to a Locus tertius, and be sure they
dye in belief of Purgatory.


Pap. It Is time for us to have done; I see you are an angry Protestant.


Phy. I Am glad you can see me something, and of some Church. I cannot see
what, or of what Church you are, or would be.


Pap. But Sir, Do not you think we have travailed ten miles from London?


Phy. Truly, yes, I take it you have travailed full ten miles.


Pap. Then at yonder Sign I Will stay and consider a while.


Phy. Sir, if you stay an hour there, I Will come and drink a glass of Wine with
you.


Pap. Content. Sir.


Phy. Farewell.


THE Second PART.
PHY. How now Sir, what? mounted already? I had hopes to have drank a Bottel of
Wine with you, and made haste accordingly?


Pap. Sir, I have stayed a full hour here, my Landlord affirms so, and that is
as much as you desired.


Phy. Sir, I perceive you are a Person that stints your self in the Duties of
Religion and Conversation.


Pap. As long Sir, as I fulfill all Commands, I fulfill the Law.


Phy. You may be said to fulfill the Law, and yet at the same time not to be
obedient to that Law: For, if a man fulfils the Law to save the penalty which
the Civil Sanction annexes, that is done by force, when as all Obedience is
spontaneous, and ought to be made from the reason of the thing in Morals, for
the reason of the Command in Indifferents, yet not for the Command sake, but by
Law natural, which injoyns such Commands to be obeyed, as before I said.


Pap. Sir, you are a strange man, thus to arraign me in my Morals.


Phy. I find good cause so to do, for what ever Huffs and Bragadocho's some of
your Clergy make about Demonstration, I find as they understand not, so with
you of the Laity, you take all things on trust.


Pap. What reason have you to say so? you know not on what Grounds we go.


Phy. Yes, since I Have met with you, I have well learnt how to judge of you, and
that you take things on trust, as for Example,

1. You took it on trust, that Ogilbies Wheel had declared it twelve Miles to
Rumford.

2. You took it on trust from me (of a different Religion) that you had
travailed ten miles.

3. You took it on trust from your Landlord that you had stayed a full hour for
me.

4. You took it on trust, that your great Franciscan was of the Communion of
the Church of Rome: In all which you may be mistaken, and in the last doubtless
are for the reasons before.


Pap. But pray, whither travail you now? Faith, I have been considering of
somewhat you said before, and now you hint at again, i. e. If any Priest be
excommunicated, how can he be a true Roman Catholic? therefore, for ought I
know, I am none neither, and so not within the Proclamation, and so may return
back again to London; however I Will go and inform my self better of these things
you have mentioned. (I do not doubt, but at another time to answer them all
fully) if I cannot, I know who can?


Phy. You had need be better informed indeed. I wish you good Information,
better then your excommunicated Friar can give.


Pap. I Will tell you since you and I parted, I was thinking of you, and of your
profession, and wondered that you stuck so long on Religion, since you are
counted Atheists.


Phy. Perhaps some may count us so, for looking into natural Causes and
appointing natural Remedies; perhaps the Vulgar may count us so, because we
seldom go to Church, the reason of which is manifest from the urgency of our
Concerns, being on life and death, and not to be neglected.


Pap. Yes, truly I have heard the Urgencies are often so great and so many,
that a man is appointed to come frequently into the Church to call out the
Doctor, without cause, and so he cheats God, himself, and the whole
Congregation.


Phy. What some men may do I know not, this I am sure, the worst of us all
cheats not so much as the best of your persuasion.


Pap. I believe I know the reason why some Physicians are so angry with our
Religion.


Phy. I beseech you, why are Physicians angry with your Religion, more then
others, while even now they had none?


Pap. Let their Religion be what it will, they will pretend any Religion rather
then ours, for Pope Greg. 15. anno 1622. prohibited Catholics to use heretical
Physicians.


Phy. If you have heard of a Book called Religio Medici, you will there find
good Religion, and the Exterior part thereof such, as may deserve kindness from
a Puritan Papist, yet containing himself within the just bounds of an English
Protestant.


Pap. It is that very Book came even now into my mind, and I remember he says
there, that he thanked God, he did not live in the time of Christ and his
Apostles: And a witty Animadverter (a Roman Catholic I will warrant him) said
it might be, because his practice would have been spoiled, for Christ and his
Apostles cured gratis; and On my Conscience, that makes your Profession so
angry with our Religion?


Phy. Pray, are Papists so charitable as to cure for nothing? I Am sure I know
some Physicians of that persuasion, who take as much money as they can get.


Pap. All Catholics are not of one mind, but I remember you talked much of
your Records, and I Am sure we have better Records of more good done by the
Physic of the Church, then by the Physics of your College and Universities.


Phy. The Physic of the Church? I thought England had now been Master of all
the Methods and Systems of Physic extant, yet among them I have not met with
the Physic of the Church.


Pap. It is a curing after the Hermitical way.


Phy. Hermetical? I have read Hermes Trismegistus, that excellent Philosopher,
and I think am acquainted with all Medicines and Recipe's Hermetical,
Empirical, and Chemical.


Pap. Sir, you mistake me. I confess, that the Science of Physic, in all Rules
of Art, is more refined in England, then was ever before, but I say not
Hermetical but Hermitical.


Phy. Pray unfold your self.


Pap. Why there is it now? The unfolding of this Notion Hermitical, will make
you understand the Physic of the Church.


Phy. Oh! I think I take it now. You mean some found out in the Cloisters,
which you call Church Physic.


Pap. I do so, and the use of the Physic would break Doctors, Apothecaries and
Surgeons.


Phy. Pray tell's some of it.


Pap. Some of it? why I could entertain you from hence to London with it.


Phy. Come, faith, we have been serious long enough, now make me merry.


Pap. Hold ye there; I Am better appointed, then to sport with things sacred:
yet what I shall tell you, may occasion a religious mirth, were you rightly
disposed?


Phy. Sir, I can demean my self answerable to any Entertainment, and shall
frame my self to your Conversation: pray begin.


Pap. Sir, I can tell you how to cure Childbed Griefs, by praying to St.
Marquerite, how St. Marus Bishop of Tryers cures Palseys and Convulsions, St.
Nicholas cures dangers at Sea, St. Venisa Green-sicknesses and Women's Diseases,
St. Lucy Unchastity; and (which is remarkable) St. Cosma and St. Damian, both
Physicians, cure all Diseases gratis, and purely upon humble request: And St.
Appollonia being prayed unto, cures the Toothache, which never a Doctor can do;
and I doubt not but (when St. Austin said he was cured of the Toothache by
prayers) it was by praying to this Saint: And the Arm of St. David cures the
Plague, without the help of Doctor Hodge's book: And if I should tell you all I
could, especially of the three Kings of Collen, viz. St. Jasper, St. Melchior,
and St. Balthazar, you would wonder.


Phy. I might wonder indeed, and so I did, when I read the late Book, called
Reflections on the Romish Devotions, and I wondered again and again, that
rational men (in any Age, much less in this Age, and in this Climate, where
Learning and Knowledge is so much refined, improved and sublimed) should so
nightmare their Vitalities, with a -- rudis indigestaque moles of ridiculous
Trash, and suffer themselves to be blind-folded, waving their proper Conduct of
Reason, and following they know not whom, they know not how, they know not
whither, especially in their Devotions. And therefore Sir, you may forbear your
Hermitical Dispensatory, for I am weary of that, and of my Journey too,
therefore let us hasten.


Pap. Sir, I could in a short Discourse sufficiently make good the Devotions of
our Church to the Saints, and enough to convince any rational man.


Phy. Truly Sir, I must confess you may tell a great many pretty Tales, that
might cozen my thoughts of the badness of the ways, and the uneasiness of my
horse, and may be so far acceptable; but my Judgment will be no way moved to
think them so much as probably true. And Sir, the Saints to whom those
pretended Miracles are by your Church ascribed, are all of ancient time; and I
hear not of any modern Saints, that are endowed with such powers: So that it
should seem your Church has been of late very barren of Saints, or else your
Saints have been very lazy, and I wonder that the Relics of no late Pope
Saints are found.


Pap. As to that Sir, I must confess that these Saints I have mentioned, lived,
and were famous under the Government of the Catholic Bishop of Old Rome, and
since that the Christian Faith is settled, there is no need of extraordinary
ways.


Phy. But you know many of the other were not for great ends, but trials of
skill, and now is more need to believe then ever: But why Old Rome, I hope you
do not mean Pagan Rome?


Pap. No, I mean old Christian Rome, when Christianity was first planted there.


Phy. You do well to appoint them to Ages so long ago, that the truth cannot be
inquired into: and I will tell you my Conceit how these Fables first came up.
The Heathens, being guilty of Idolatry, worshipping stocks, stones, Images,
imaginary Deities and Devils, the ignorant Christians in those dark times, to
draw them into the Christian Religion by degrees, might use a kind of a pious
fraud, in altering the then Worship from those Objects, and substituting in
their room the Images of the Trinity, Angels, Saints and holy Christians: So
came the vain repetitions of Prayers, as the Heathens use 6, Mat. 7. And
perhaps Dominus Deus Papae so succeeded Deus Antoninus, and Dominus Deus
Domitianus; and because Dea Pecunia had a Temple in Rome, Money has been since
as much worshipped there as Juno Moneta, and the votivae tabulae hung up in
your Churches to the Virgin Mary and Saints, etc. after Diseases cured, were
the same as was done among the Pagans, ( viz) to Isis in Egypt, and so in
Rome, like our late Mountebanks Catalogues of Cures, which might take by the
semblance of their Worship, and so by degrees draw them quite off to the true
Christian Worship. Which design not only took effect, but the succeeding Ages
proving sottish and unlearned, contented themselves with what an Infant
Christian Age had done, and continued that worship, part Heathen, part
Christian, and grew into a belief, that the fabulous Mousetraps, made to catch
Pagans and bring them into the Church, were the true Gospel Engines to bring
Christians to Heaven: So the Inquisition was first invented as a Trap against
Moors, after a snare for sheep; which senseless Dotage has ever since bewitc^ed
the foolish Romans, and has the face to confront this inquisitive Age, just
like the man, that by frequently telling of a Lie* came at last to believe it.


Phy. Truly, Sir, your conceit may have something of Truth in it, as to the
conversion of the Heathens into the Christian Religion by the Catholic Church
of Old Rome: But that the way of Worship and Devotion, continued by them for so
many hundred years, should deserve your harsh and profane language* I
understand not, for the primitive Church was (doubtless) as wise as the Church
at any time since.


Phy. That the primitive Catholic Church, was as wise as the Church has at any
time since been, I agree; and so was the Primitive Romish Church, when St. Paul
and St. Peter were there, but I know when it failed in its Wisdom and Worship;
and you your self admit, it is not so wise now, by your distinction of Old Rome
and New Rome. Pray unfold that a little.


Pap. The Catholic Bishop of Old Rome never pretended to an Universal
Monarchy, both in Spirituals, and Temporals, over the whole Earth, as the
Bishop of New Rome does, and to be Superior to other Sovereign Princes in civil
matters, and as to that point I call this New Rome, from this New Doctrine,
which I oppose as strongly as any Protestant.


Phy. Sir, I should have thought, that the difference you make between Old
Rome, and New Rome, had been with reference to Physic, for that Old Rome was
contented with the renowned Aescalapius, who cured diseases after the method we
now use, and New Rome (it seems) fancies curing after the Hermitical way, as
you say; But pray, Sir, did your Priest adopt you into the Communion of Old
Romes, or New Romes Church? Or, did he tell you the difference between the
Doctrines and Worship of one or the other? I doubt not. Yet, you say true in
saying it is a Doctrine, and a New Doctrine, for it was made such, by the
Council of Lateran, and the Council of Lions, and not before. So it is that the
Pope may dispense with Oaths, and in execution of that Article in Queen
Elizabeth's time, such dispensations were intercepted in their journey, to the
Steady Roman Church Catholics in Scotland, pretending as your Superiors do,
and by those dispensations the Roman Catholics (in general) were allowed to
promise, Swear, Subscribe, and do what else should be required of them, so as
in mind they continued firm, and did use their diligence to advance (in secret)
the Roman Faith? The remembrance of which occasioned King James, to provide as
he did against Aequivocal professions, and pretenses of Allegiance. Now then,
how can one be of the Communion of that Church, who differs from that Church in
point of faith (if the Pope or his Councels may be believed to determine
Articles of faith) if Mr. Cress^y faies true in his Book, in which he gives
account of his conversion to the Romish Communion; (viz.) That it is impossible,
that Catholics should differ in point of Faith, or that Schism should be in
their Church, which is grounded on singular reason; for if he differs in Faith,
he ceases to be a Catholic, and when one is Schismatic he ceases to be of
that Church.


Pap. Well, True Roman Catholics do hold so; and that makes all of your Church
Heretics and Schismatics, and out of our Communion.


Phy. In good time, good Fellow Travailer, does it so? Why? then that very
thing (if so) makes your True English Roman Church Catholics, Heretics,
Schismatics, and not of the Communion of the Romish Church, to which they have
so generally and undistinguishingly profelyted you, and endeavor to inveigle
others. Judge ye now therefore, whether these Phanatick Papists mean good faith
to you, or to their Natural Prince, when they pretend Allegiance to their Liege
Lord, and do deny Supremacy to the Pope, in Civil and Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction here, and accuse their Church to Err in such pretenses, and in
some matters of Faith, to their utter severance from that Church Communion, and
Protection; and yet at the same time, with all Subtilty and wilely Arts are
Discipling English Men, in the Faith and Communion of the Church of Rome,
generally without any Restriction or Limitation.


Pap. It is enough for us (of the Laity) to believe as the Church believes, in
matters which concern us, as Practice and Worship, etc. And for the difficult
points of Faith and Disputation, let out Superiors (whose duty it is) look to
them, for we shall answer for no more then we know, or are Taught.


Phy. Know? or are taught? Will ye suffer your Ears to be stopped, and excuse
your not hearing, not knowing, and not being taught? and lay all on him who
stopped your Ears with your own consent? Come, Sir, consider, whether it will
add any pleasure to your Travail, to go to Hell on another man's back? Or, if
you say to the Devil he brought me hither, pray let me go back to whence I
came, and keep him: will Old Nick release you? No* Therefore get out of your
Fetters and duress, break forth from your Ignorant Shackles, search and try,
whether your Pope in Church, and Pope in Court agree, then whether your
Confessor agrees with Pope or Court, or Church, or with the Communion of any
one Country Catholic or other, and you will easily find him to be so far only
like unto the Pope, as an Heteroclite in Religion, either deficient or
redundant, and not to be brought under any rule? Then consider further, and use
due and utmost searches according to your circumstances with the aid of Divine
Assistance, whether it be not better to be guided by the Pope within you, (
viz.) your own reason so informed, which was placed there (as was said) to
distinguish you from a Brute, that can, go, stand, do, etc. as he is taught, or
at least by a Church, in whose Conduct you may have rational satisfaction in
all the points of its profession: So then if your Pope, your Councils, your
Church, do err (as your true English* Roman Catholics say they do) in
Doctrinals in matters of Faith, How can you be assured, that your Runigate
Priests do not err* in the matters they inculcate into your easy heads? and in
that unintelligible Faith, which is against sense and reason and their own
Judgments? And how can you then be assured they err not in worship, which is of
less weight?


Pap. Constant Usage and Approbation are sufficient grounds for me in that.
However you may see, that we Roman Catholics of this persuasion, submit our
selves to the Laws of the Land, are willing to give security for not disturbing
the pe^ce, and of our Allegiance to the King, and so in Justice are entitled to
the Kings protection, and deserve not to be liable to the penal Laws, intended
purely against the Papists of the Court of Rome.


Phy. Very well, we are now come to the end of the Journey whence we began, and
so in our Discourse, ( viz.) to the Distinction of Church of Rome and Court of
Rome Papists, and I am still of opinion, that neither ought to be suffered
here: For were it possible to believe, that all the English Romish Catholics
were such Mungrel Papists, as you pretend to be, that is, to obey the Pope in
part, and our King in part, as has been said, as is plain they are not, as
appears by the opposition of most of them to the formulary or remonstrance
mentioned by Peter Walsh; yet even they are not to be trusted here with safety
to the King. For what security can there be given, that the Roman Catholic,
who is false to the Pope, should be faithful to the King, that one can serve
two Masters, pretending to Equality with equal faithfulness, that one who is
excommunicated by his own Church should keep faith with another Church, that
one who is notoriously perjured should be believed: That one who is of the
Church of Rome, should be bound by that Oath, which his Church condemns, and
frequently dispenses with, and he owns: that one who is so easy as to believe
the ridiculous Fables of Old Rome, may not as easily be drawn over to the
rebellious faults of the New Rome; and Peter Walsh's assurance for his party is
just as valuable, as his partner Cressy's, for the Jesuits, and what Credit can
be given to one who brake his Oath to this Church, and then did as much to the
other, and is now possessed with, or by, the Devil, being delivered over to
Satan? Besides it is obvious, how dangerous it is to indulge that: sort of
people, by the stir they have lately made in public declaimings against the
Religion of this Kingdom, and the disturbance of this Churches peace, which is
an ill requital for the Kings gracious Clemency, and has awakened those laws,
which otherwise might have slept still. And how can that Papist be believed to
be true and faithful to that King whom he takes to be an Heretic, and will
infallibly be damned? How can a Popish Fanatic, who believes all the
Enthusiasmes allowed in the Romish Church ( viz.) the Revelations of Mother
Juliana, the Preface to Sancta Sophia who thirsts after the lights which do
expel all Images of Creatures, and calm all manner of passions to the end that
the Soul being in vacuity may be more capable of entertaining God, in the pure
fund of the Spirit, who is in possession of the Deiform fund of the Soul, which
is the simple Essence of the Soul stamped with Divine Impress, from whence
arises a superessential life, being a way of knowing without thoughts, of
seeing in darkness, of understanding without reason^, of unknowing God by
perceiving, of being melted and brought to nothing first, and then being lost
and swallowed up in God, by which means all created being is put off, and that
which is only Divine put on, being changed into God as Iron heated into the
nature of fire, which is attained to by seeking God in the Obscurity of Faith,
with a more profound introversion of the Spirit, which is the State of
Nothingness, or of Totality, or the unica of Nothing with Nothing, by which the
Soul comes to a feeling of her not being, and by consequence of the not being
of Creatures? I say how can such a one, who must first be mad before he can
know he is in his wits, expect any better Entertainment in England, then the
three late Yorkshire Quakers had at Rome (viz.) as being dismissed as Madmen:
They being in France shaved to cure that Frenzy, which often by shaving is
occasioned, and such as this, are some of your. Romish Church Catholics, nay
even the Superiors, as they have testified to the World in Print, and why may
not such a Romish Church Quaker, who attains knowledge after a Mystical way by
the Impulses of the Spirit only, extravagate soon into civil affairs as well as
Father White, who never read Mathematics (as he says) and without the Help of
Humane Learning, attain to the perfect knowledge of the Quadrature of the
Circle? And how are these Formulary men to be believed, while they can (to the
Pope) excuse their remonstrance of Allegiance to their King, by saying that
they only acknowledge, but do not swear it? that they do not Condemn the
opinion contrary to the Oath, nor do they declare that the Pope cannot dispense
with the Oath or any part of it? Let any one Judge now, comparing their
remonstrance to the King, and their Declaration to the Pope, what manner of
Allegiance, and Obedience, the King may expect from them, especially it being
declared by the Council of Toledo, in the time of Innocent the sixth, That laws
as to Ecclesiastical persons bind not ad culpam, but ad poenam; And by Aquinas,
Monks are only bound to profess, not to keep the rules of St. Benedict: just so
are our True English Roman Catholics bound to profess and owe (as you call it)
Allegiance, but how, or when, to keep or pay it, who can he assured thereof?
And their stories tell us, That the Devil appeared to Friar Ruffin in form of
Christ. And what security is there by that Oath taken by them, while the same
persons taking that Oath, can confidently assure the Pope, That they do not
condemn the opinion contrary to that Oath, nor do they declare that the Pope
cannot dispense with that Oath, or any part of it, which is as much as to say,
and believe, that the Pope can dispense therewith, which they may more easily
believe, then that the Pope can dispense with St. Paul's Epistles, with the New
Testament, with the Old and New Testament, with the whole law of God, and (to
complete the Popes power) He can in a manner do all things that God can do,
which several Tenets, are holden by true Roman Catholics, and others have
affirmed that the Pope is, above Law, against Law, without Law, and can do all
things, and that in all Oaths the Popes Power is excepted: And lastly, if some
of your Superiors should be true to their word or Oath, such as it is and so
commenced upon, and explained as before, what Assurance can be given, That such
Mushrom Papists as you, shall be always guided by them, and not at sometime or
other procreate or transmute into Hornets and Wasps, Garnets or Venners, or
that under color or pretense of meek Nothings, who live by the Effects of
supernatural Inactions of God, Rapts and Ecstasies, other Baronian wretches may
not intrude, using the same vizor for a while, and when occasion and
opportunity shall serve, then cry aloud as some have done, Our Lord God the
Pope which have all power in heaven and earth. Then (in earnest) would be
advanced the most illustrious name of British and Irish Catholics, that name
of names, and most glorious of Titles, as indeed it is but venerated by that
great Franciscan with that nick name Roman, and especially Walshes Letter, etc.
p. 5. against all which (I hope) Sovereign Notice and Caution will arm it self,
and that before it be too late, for (as Plantus) Qui cavet ne decipiatur, vix
cavet, cum etiam cavet, quando enim cavisse ratu^ est, sape is Cautor captus
est.


Pap. You talk of Madmen, I think you will show your self such, I Am glad I am
near my journeys end; I shall part with you here at Bow-bridge, and go the back
way, I like not your company now, and shall not trust my self with you in the
City, least you discover me.


Phy. Truly Sir, I have made as much discovery of you as I desire, and I
discover (besides your Religious impertinencies) your Obedience to the Kings
commands to be just, as much as that of Mr. Ogilbies wheel, viz. mearly to
measure so much of the road as the driver pleases and no more: I wish you
(again) better informed and so farewell. But Sir, pray stop but a little while,
and I Will tell you a significant piece of Religion of a Soldier of the Bishop
of Rome, Old Rome, older then your Bishop of old Rome, Caesar, who seeing this
Soldier fighting with most accurate valor, beset with many Foes, yet forced
his way through them all, and escaped through great mires, waters and great
difficulties, with only the loss of his shield, ran to the Soldier to embrace
him and to encourage and reward his incomparable prowess; the true hearted
Soldier, out of Sense to his Duty and Obedience, which by the Law (written in
his heart) he owed to his Prince, was so far from being transported with the
glory of his Action, or the value set thereon by Casar's Approbation, that
(with Tears in his eyes) he asked pardon of him, that he had left his Target
behind him.

And Sir, before we part, I have another thing come in my head, and that is, I
have a desire to send you a memorable Record, which I have in my Study; it is
the Opinion of the Judges, Nobility and Clergy of England, concerning the Kings
Supreme Ecclesiastical Power, with reference both to Papists and Puritans,
pray, how may I direct it to you?


Pap. Sir, I shall give it the perusal; you may enclose it in a Paper, directed
to Mr. Justin Hide, and leave it at the Booksellers at Graies-Inn Gate.


Phy. I shall Sir, and once more Farewell.


THE RECORD OF 2o. Febr. 2. JACOBI.
MEmorandum, that by Command from the King, all the Justices of England, with
diverse of the Nobility, ( viz.) the Lord Ellesmere Lord Chancellor, the Earl
of Dorset Lord Treasurer, Viscount Cranborn Principal 2 Croke 37. Moore 755.
Secretary, the Earl of Nottingham Lord Admiral, the Earls of Northumberland,
Worcester, Devon and Northampton, the Lord Zouch, Burleigh and Knowles, the
Chancellor of the Duchy, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London,
Popham chief Justice, Bruce Master of the Rolls, Anderson, Gaudy, Walmsley,
Femier, Kingsmith, Warberton, Savel, Daniel, Yelverton and Snigg were assembled
in the Star Chamber, where the Lord Chancellor after a long speech, made by
him concerning Justices of Peace, and his Exhortation to the Justices of
Assise, and a D^^ouse concerning Papists and Puritans, declaring how they both
were Disturbers of the State, and that the King intending to suppress them,
and to have the Laws put in Execution against them, demanded of the Justices
their Resolutions in three things: First, whether the Deprivation of Puritan
Ministers by the high Commissioners, for refusing to conform themselves to the
Ceremonies appointed, by the last Canons was lawful? Whereto all the Justices
answered, That they had conferred thereof before, and held it to be lawful,
because the King has the Supreme Ecclesiastical Power, which he has
delegated to the Commissioners, whereby they had the power of Deprivation by
the Common Law of the Realm: And the Statute of 1. Eliz. which appoints
Commissioners to be made by the Queen, does not confer any new Power, but
explain and declare the ancient Power: And therefore they held it clear, That
the King without Parliament might make Orders and Constitutions for the
Government of the Clergy, and might deprive them if they obeyed not: And so the
Commissioners might deprive them; but they could not make any Constitutions
without the King; and the divulging of such Ordinances by Proclamation is a
most gracious Admonition, and for as much as they have refused to obey, they
were lawfully deprived by the Commissioners, ex Officio, without Libel, and ^re
tenus convocati. Secondly. Whether a Prohibition be grantable against the
Commissioners upon the Statute 2 H. 5. if they do not deliver a Copy of the
Libel to the Party? Whereto they all answered, That the Statute is intended
where the Ecclesiastical Judge proceeds ex Officio and ore tenus. Thirdly.
Whether it were an offense punishable, and what punishment they deserved, who
framed Petitions, and collected a Multitude of hands thereto, to prefer to the
King in a public Cause, as the Puritans had done with an Intimation to the
King, That if he denied their Suit many thousands of his Subjects would be
discontented: Whereto all the Justices answered, That it was an Offense
finable at Discretion, and very near to Treason and Felony in the Punishment,
for they tended to the raising of Sedition, Rebellion and Discontent among the
people. To which resolution all the Lords agreed; And then many of the Lords
declared, that some of the Puritans had raised a false rumor of the King, how
he intended to grant a Toleration to Papists, which Offense the Justices
conceived to be heinously finable by the rules of the Common Law, either in the
Kings Bench, or by the King and his Council, or now since the Statute of 3 H.
7. in the Star. Chamber: And the Lords severally declared, how the King was
discontented with the said false Rumor, and had made but the day before a
protestation unto them, that he never intended it; And that he would spend the
last drop of bloo^ in his Body before he would do it; And prayed that before
any of his Issue should maintain any other Religion then vvh^ he truly
professed and maintained, that God would take them o^ of the World.

FINIS.

