TO THE Right Honorable and Honorable THE Lords Commissioners OF HIS
Majesty's Treasury.
Sir WILLIAM CREAGH of Newcastle upon Tine,
Most humbly shows,
THAT taking notice of the great inequality of the Customs in England and
Scotland, on COALS transported beyond the Seas, by which His Majesty's Revenue
(as to that Branch) is much impaired, the English Navigation in a great measure
discouraged, and that ancient Corporation of Newcastle in danger of being
ruined: He thought it his Duty, to let slip no opportunity whereby he might be
instrumental to stop the current of so great Evils.

And though the fatigue of a long troublesome Journey from Newcastle hither,
might be a bar to his said undertaking, yet he valued his Duty to the King and
the Public, above all, and came from Newcastle to London, now the third time
upon the same Errand.

The first time was in October, 1684. and in November following, he presented
the Commissioners of His Majesty's Customs, with a State of the Foreign
Coal-Trade, herewith following the Letter -- A

Together with the ensuing Authentic Certificate from France, following the
Letter -- B

Both which being debated before the said Commissioners, were afterward sent
up to the then Lords of the Treasury, and made known to his late Majesty of
Blessed Memory, who, together with the said Lords and Commissioners, seemed
inclinable to grant the Abatement set forth in the said State, till one Mr.
George Robinson, one of the Sub-Farmers of the 4s. per Chalder, under my Lord
Townsend, obstructed the same, by dissuading his Partners from consenting
thereto, and for his so doing, he gave the Commissioners a Paper of groundless
Reasons, herewith following the Letter -- C

Which are fully refuted by the said Creagh's Answer thereto, following the
Letter -- D

However, since the said Sub-Farmers would not bear their share of the
Abatement, the said Lords of the Treasury and Commissioners thought it not
reasonable the King should bear the whole, and they reap half the Benefit: And
thus the Business fell till February, 1685/6. That the said Creagh seeing those
Evils like to increase, and having an opportunity by Proposals made to him from
France (upon encouragement) to improve that Branch of His Majesty's Revenue
very considerably, he came the second time to London, and presented His present
Majesty with a second State of that Affair, a Copy whereof is here annexed, and
follows the Letter -- E

And of which another Copy was likewise delivered to my Lord Rochester, then
Lord Treasurer, and the said Creagh being called out of Town before any
Reference could be had upon it, he left a Friend to solicit the matter; and
though it was sent to the Commissioners after he was gone, yet his Friend could
get no other Answer to it, than a Copy of the said Robinson's groundless
Reasons. This put him the said Creagh upon procuring stronger Proofs for what
he asserted, and after the Expense of Time and Money, he at last got an
Authentic Certificate from Scotland, a Copy whereof follows the Letter -- F

Which he hopes will be sufficient to show what Prejudice the said Robinson's
and Partners Obstinacy has done the King, the Navigation, and the Town of
Newcastle, which I doubt so small an Abatement will not now prevent, after the
Trade is almost settled in Scotland, as it would do in the beginning, when there
was not much of that: Insomuch that raising the Custom in Scotland to some
equality with the Custom in England, would prove more effectual; and this is
conceived may be done by the King and Lords Commissioners of the Exchequer in
Scotland, as appears by the Preamble to the Scotch Book of Rates, whereof a
Copy is also herewith following the Letter -- G

Especially in a Matter that occasions so National a Prejudice: But till that
be done, some Course is requisite to be taken to prevent the aforesaid apparent
Evils.

And as an addition to the Ruin of that ancient and considerable Corporation
of Newcastle upon Tine, there is one of its own Members (called Sunderland)
that contributes thereto in a high degree, and that in the Custom saved in the
difference of measure, by which His Majesty loses 30 per cent. of His Customs,
which the said Creagh is ready to make out, of his own certain knowledge, having
loaded Ships there, and found that every 7 Chalders in Sunderland, made out 10
Newcastle Chalders, and paid the Kings Custom but for 7 Chalders, and as a
further demonstration, they sell their Sunderland Chalder of Coals most
commonly for 14 s. and 14 s. 6 d. per Chalder, when Newcastle cannot sell for
above 8 or 9 s. per Chalder, though as good or better Coals; so that the
Measure is apparent to be the cause, by which a great share of that little
foreign Coal Trade in England (which otherwise would come to Newcastle) comes
to that Port, which is like wise a great Prejudice to the Navigation, by reason
none but small Vessels come there, whereas in Newcastle, Ships of any Burden
may fitted.

There is one thing more burthensom to Newcastle in reference to its Members,
whereof no mention would be made, if the said Members were not like to destroy
the Head, and that is the 12 d. per Chalder, which comes to a considerable
yearly Sum, which is not in the least grudged, provided the said Members paid
the like, and not have 30 per cent. abated in the Custom more than the head.

May it please your Lordships, Mr. Anthony Isaacson, Collector of the Customs
in Newcastle, and one who has had above Twenty Years experience in that Port,
is now in London (who may if your Lordships please) be interrogated as to the
Premises; to whose testimony, and your Lordships consideration, is referred
what is here set forth by

May it please your Lordships, Your Lordships most Humble, most Obedient, and
most Faithful Servant, W. CREAGH.
LONDON, April the 1687.
A
THE PRESENT STATE OF THE Foreign Coal-Trade, Humbly offerred to the
consideration of His Majesty's Commissioners of the Customs, BY WILLIAM CREAGH,
Of Newcastle upon Tine, Merchant.
THE said William Creagh says, That a Company of French Merchants of the City
of Rouen in the Kingdom of France, about Three Months ago, writ him, that they
made a Contract with the French Farmers, to import great Quantities of Coals
into the River of Rouen by English Shipping, and thereupon gave the said Creagh
orders to Freight (with all possible speed) as many English Ships as could take
in 800 Chalders of Coals, declaring, that the next Spring and Summer they would
import as many Coals to the said River of Rouen, and continue yearly so to do,
as would supply the whole Kingdom of France; whereupon, and in pursuance of the
said Order, the said Creagh freighted Nine Ships of considerable Burden, and
loaded them off; but before he could complete Shipping the said Number of 800
Chalders of Coals, he receives a Letter from the said Company, acquainting him,
that the Truce being then as good as ratified betwixt France and Spain, their
French Ships which formerly used to come for Coals to Newcastle, were then all
going for Scotland, by reason of the great Discouragement they met with at
Newcastle by the high Duties and Tonage there, which on French Ships is 30 s.
sterling per Chalder, on Dutch Ships 20s. per Chalder, and on English Ships 8s.
per Chalder, that they could do no good thereby; whereas in Scotland, no
foreign Ship pays more than 10 s. Scotch Money (which is but 10d. sterling) for
their great Scotch Chalders that makes about Five Newcastle Chalders; so that
by that computation, they pay but at the rate of 2d. sterling per Chalder
Newcastle Measure: And besides a Ship of 200 Tons may clear there for 40 or 50
Tons; so that the Scotch Duty upon Coals duly considered as it is now
collected, is next to nothing.

This encouragement in Scotland being so great, most of the French Ships went
thither, and some of them being lately returned to the said River of Rouen,
they brought with them a new sort of Scotch Coal, which gave as good a Price in
Rouen Market as Newcastle Coals, though heretofore, Newcastle Coals used to
give 10 French Crowns in every 100 Barrels of Coals Rouen Measure (which is
computed to be about 6 Newcastle Chalders) more than the Scotch Coals: But now
the one giving as good a Price as the other, if some speedy care be not taken,
His Majesty's Revenue in the said Port of Newcastle will be mightily impaired,
and the English Navigation in a great measure discouraged: All which is most
humbly referred to the consideration of the said Commissioners, that they may
find out some speedy Remedy to prevent all the foregoing Evils. And that the
said Creagh may not be wanting with his weak endeavors, he humbly conceives,
that ballancing the Scotch Coal-Trade with the English, would do the work; that
is to say, to raise the Duty of the Scotch Coals in some measure equal to the
English. But since that must be (if at all) a work of much time, and likely to
meet with great opposition, he the said Creagh thinks that an Abatement of 5
Chalders in every Score, or an allowance of 25 per cent. (joint with the
difficulty of the Scotch Navigation) may in the mean time keep the said French
Project (which otherwise will fall off) on foot, to the increase of His
Majesty's Revenue by the said Over-Sea Coal-Trade, in the said Port of
Newcastle, and Members thereof, and great encouragement of the English
Navigation. All which is most humbly submitted to the determination of the said
Commissioners, by their most Faithful and most humble Servant

LONDON, November. 3. 1684. W. CREAGH.

B
THE French CERTIFICATE.
PARDEVANT les Notaires Gardenotes Royeaux a Rouen soubsignez, se sont comparus
and presentez les Sieurs Pierre Locquet Prieur and Juge Consul, anne present,
Jean le Boucher second Juge Consul, and Robert Nouflard Syndic des Sieurs Juges
Consuls des Merchands a Rouen; les Sieurs Eustache le Canu and Compagnie,
Jacques Delamare, Thomas Fulgent, Louis Bouffier, Jean le Testu, and Anthoine
Mallet, Tous anciens Juges, Consuls and Marchands, en cette Ville y demeurans
lesquels apres qui leur a este represente un Estat des Charbons de Terre venus,
d'Escosse entrez par le Burreau de Rouen, depuis le premier d' Octobre 1683.
Jusques and Compris le dixhuictieme Decembre 1684. Certify veritable par
Monsieur Nozereau Directeur General des cinq Grosses Fermes de France le. 2.
Janvier an present 1685. Duquel Estat la Teneur s'ensuit.

Estat des Charbons de Terre venus d'Escosse entrez par le Burreau de Rouen
depuis le premier d'Octobre 1683. Jusques and Compris le 18. Decembre 1684.
Barils. Du 8. Octobre 1683. Au Vaisseau de Jean Gardinier. Francois Venue de
Celse. A Alexandre Hamilton un Grenier contenant -- 647. Charbon de Terre.
Ditto an Vaisseau de Guilleaume Barjolle. Francois venant d'Escosse. A Estienne
Ernault un Grenier contenant -- 580. Charbon de Terre. Du 22. ditto an Vaisseau
de Guilleaume Fallouart. Venant de Honfleur ayant allege le Navire de Pierre
Huet Francois.

Venant d'Escosse.

A Louis Hays un Grenier contenant -- 441. Charbon de Terre. Du 26. ditto, an
Vaisseau de Pierre Huet Francois venant de Limequel en Escosse. Audit Sieur
Hays un Grenier contenant -- 547. Charbon de Terre. Ditto an Vaisseau de Gills
le Hot. Francois venant de Limequel en Escosse. A Alexandre Hamilton un Grenier
contenant -- 950. Charbon de Terre. Du 3. Juin 1684. au Navire de Robert
Scales. Escossois venant de Litz en Escosse. A Thomas Cholwich un petit Grenier
contenant -- 42. Charbon de Terre. Du 2. Aoust 1684. au Vaisseau de Pierre
Martin. Francois, venant d'Escosse. A Jacques Mel un Grenier contenant -- 536.
Charbon de Terre. Du 3. Novembre 1684. au Vaisseau de Jacques du Pas. Venant du
havre ayant allege les Navires d'Andre Bisset Escossois.

Venant d'Escosse and du Captain Dixon Escossois venant de Neufchastel.

A Eustache Canu un Grenier contenant -- 326. Charbon de Terre. Du 13. ditto,
an Vaisseau d'Abraham Leeman. Hollandois venant d'Escosse. A Jacques Mel un
Grenier contenant -- 502. Charbon de Terre. Du 5. Decembre, 1684. au Navire du
Sieur Jacob Smith Hollandois venant de Limequel en Escosse. A Jacques Mel un
Grenier contenant -- 893. Charbon de Terre. Du 9. Ditto, an Vaisseau de Charles
Gouin Francois venant d'Escosse. A Louis Hays un Grenier contenant -- 450.
Charbon de Terre. Du 11. Decembre 1684. au Vaisseau de Jean Maillard. Venant de
Honfleur ayant allege le Vaisseau de pierre Potteuin Francois

Venant d'Escosse.

A Estienne Ernault un Grenier contenant -- 302. Charbon de Terre. Du 19.
Ditto, an Navire de Pierre Poitteuin, Francois venant d'Escosse. A Estienne
Ernault un Grenier contenant -- 1150. Charbon de Terre. 7368. Barils en Tout.

Total des Charbons contenues an present Estat Sept Mil Trois Cents Soixante
Huict Barils and plus bas est Escrit le present Extrait tire des Registres de
la Roman, and certify veritable par moy Directeur General des Cinq grosses
Fermes soubsignez ce 2. Janvier 1685. Sign Nozereau un paraphe. Tous lequels
Charbons de Terre venus d'Escosse and mentionne audit Estat arrivez en cette
ville faisant ensemble 7368 Barils, les dits Sieurs dessus Nommez out declare,
jure, affirm, and atteste que les dits Charbons de Terre out este vendus an
prix Courrant depuis le dit mois d' Octobre 1683. jusques an mois de Decembre
1684. a pareil prix que celuy venant de Neufchastel qui est de 275l. jusques a
277l. dix Sols le cent Barils mesure de Rouen, don't de tout ce que dessus les
dits Sieurs devant Nommez out requis la presence Act pour valoir and servir
qu'il appartiendra, fait and pass a Rouen le 5. Janvier, 1685.

Pierre Locquet, Jean Boucher, Rob. Nouflard, Eustache le Canu, Jacques De
Lamare, Thomas Fulgent, Louis Bouffier, Jean le Testu, Anthoine Mallet,
Notaires Royea^^^ Gruchett, le Peletier,



C
Mr. GEORGE ROBINSON's Answer To the foregoing Present State.
The Commissioners of His Majesty's Customs may please to take notice,
THAT Whereas it has been suggested a sort of Coal was lately found in
Scotland, (not much inferior to the Coal of England) and from thence Exported
to France in French Vessels, paying little or no Custom for the same, and
whereas it was also alleged by Letters from France and Holland, etc. That the
Foreign Markets were of late years extraordinarily supplied with Coals from
Scotland, in Strangers Ships, to the great prejudiee of the English Navigation
and damage to His Majesty's Customs here, upon which allegations some of the
Traders (His Majesty's Subjects) of England, in that Commodity, humbly desired
(by proper application) a seasonable remedy for such an Evil, either by an
equality of Duty to be paid by Strangers in Scotland, or by some encouragement
or favor to the English in the Duty here: which suggestions and seeming good
reasons, made not only deep impressions, but great inclinations to endeavor a
present Abatement of the Custom on Coals Exported from England in English
Shipping, for a short temporary experiment, till the Duty in Scotland could be
raised higher, if the King should so please.

Now having since farther well examined the Premises, there seems nothing
more certain therein than,

I.
That the Custom in Scotland is indeed next to nothing, and the defect (such as
it is) there.

II.
That there are no better Coals in Scotland now, than in former and later
years, in which the Duties in both Kingdoms have been as now they are; and yet
the Exportation from England far greater than that of the last year, from
whence it seems evident that the greater or lesser Annual Exportation of this
Commodity, has not been occasioned by any extraordinary Coal found in
Scotland, or the difference of the Custom, but Peace, War, Plague, etc, does
influence the same. And some years the Foreign Markets (as well as London
Markets) are over stocked with this Commodity, the Custom of Anno 1679. was
better than 1678. about 5000 l. the year following was worse than that by about
2000 l. 1681. was near as good as 1679. 1682. was somewhat better than 1680.
1683. was about 1500 l. better than 1682. and Anno 1684. is not so bad as 1678.
by near 2000 l. neither were the years before 1678. (though not altogether so
good as since) less subject to variation, and yet the Coals of Scotland, and
the Duties of both Kingdoms, the same as now, for any thing yet proved to the
contrary.

III.
That the advices from Holland of the increase of this Scotch Trade now want
Confirmation, and the abatement from 8 to 6 s. per Chalder, is chiefly
projected by the Factors, or Traders of France, and that for account of the
gross Farmers of the Customs of that Kingdom, who (as Strangers) ought by the
Book of Rates here to pay 14 s. per Chalder for Coals Exported in English
Shipping; so that instead of 2 s. this project will abate them 8 s. per Chalder.

IV.
That by that sensible Letter to Sir John Buckworth of the 2/2 Instant from
Rouen, touching this matter, it seems apparent, That if the French could be
without our English Coal, or the Scotch Coal were so good as is alleged, and
could be brought from Scotland in French Ships within 2 s. per Chalder as cheap
as English Coal, the French would not be so kind to our Navigation as to employ
them in this Trade to the neglect of their own Shipping: or on the other hand
in the same Letter, it would rationally be proposed, that if French Ships may
be permitted to fetch out Coal at English Custom, they will be willing to pay
the French Tonnage of 5 s. which will amount to 18 s. per Chalder; a Newcastle
Chalder being more than two Ton: Now if the Market at Rouen will afford to pay
that 18 s. per Chalder, and produce good profit to the Merchant, as the said
Letter sets forth, it seems not necessary to abate the Custom, and to let
them have a Commodity from us, which they cannot be without (for the reasons
aforesaid) at 6 s. per Chalder.

V.
If it be said in favor of all Foreign Markets as well as France, that the
cheapness of a Commodity supposes an increase of Consumption: it will also be
remembered that the supposition will utterly fail in Commodities not subject to
Luxury. If Salt were at a penny a Bushel, it would not (for its cheapness)
augment the Consumption. And if all the English Custom on Coals were taken off,
it would not amount to above 1 d. a Bushel, in the price of Coals cannot make 6
d. difference in 5 l. worth of Manufacture, and the dearer we sell a Commodity
abroad which the Stranger cannot be without as aforesaid, the more we bring
back to enrich our own Nation.

VI.
And as to the English Navigation, the same will appear to be very little
advantaged by the desired abatement to 6 s. per Chalder, when it shall be
computed that the whole Foreign Coal-Trade is not part of the Annual quantity
brought only into London, of which the bare Duties, first and last, amount to 6
s. 6 d. per Chalder, and if the said abatement should take effect, the French
should not pay so much Duty as we. The Parent is not kinder to Strangers than
to his own Children.

VII.
Therefore it is conceived, that if any advantage can accrue by the desired
abatement, it will be to the Coal Owner, who knowing the necessity the French
have of the Commodity, will at least share (by the raising the Price of the
Coal) in the profit of what the King shall please to abate of the Customs so
prudently Established by his Laws.

VIII.
And for these Reasons, and much more which might be said on this subject, as I
humbly conceive, the said abatement not to be for His Majesty's service, or the
benefit of the English Navigation; so I find all my Partners (with whom I am in
Covenant) now unwilling to join with me in any consent thereunto, for what
relates to the Lord Townsends Interest in the premises. All which is humbly
submitted.

Dated the 20th. of December. 1684. George Robinson.

D
A Reply to Mr. George Robinsons groundless Answer to the Present State of the
Foreign Coal-Trade.
I.
THat the Custom in Scotland is next to nothing, (as by the said Present State
is set forth) is owned by the Answerer; so needs no further proof nor
enlargement.

II.
To say there are no better Coals now in Scotland than in former years is not
denied (though a cunning insinuation.) But the best and richest Coal both in
England and Scotland, being the most fit for Domestic use, are the worse for
Foreign Consumption, where no other use is made of that Commodity but for the
Forge and Furnace; therefore the question is not whether they be better or
worse in the general, but that a better sort of Coals for Foreign use, viz. a
small Cakeing Coal, and of less value than that called the best, which is a
large open burning Coal, that will not Cake, has been of late years found in
Scotland, purchased there on easy terms, plentifully Transported from thence
to Foreign parts, and there sold at as high a Rate as Newcastle Coals, to the
lessening His Majesty's Customs, and the English Navigation, is what has been
offered and proved by as Authentic a Certificate as could be devised, whereof
the Copy follows the Letter -- B. And as to the Answerers promiscuous way of
jumbling the Increase, and Decrease of several years Product, after the Rule of
false Position: it is no way pertinent, but rather a blind to hinder Men from
discerning the true State of the Case, which is this,

I.
His Majesty's Revenue is diminished notwithstanding that later years have
produced more than formers; this may seem paradoxical, but it shall be made
out: for what His Majesty might have by good management, and lost by bad, is a
lessening of His Revenue, good management might hinder so many Fleets to pass
by for Scotland to fetch a Commodity which they might take up half way, and
thereby considerably increase His Majesty's Revenue: therefore the want of that
good management has diminished it.

II.
As to the English Navigation, the prejudice is apparent, for instead of 30 s.
that used formerly to be paid for the Freight of a Chalder of Coals from
Newcastle, to Havre de grace in France, Ships may now be plentifully had for 16
s. per Chalder for the said Voyage, occasioned purely for want of Employment,
since Scotland is able to furnish Foreign Ships with Coals fit for their
purpose, and in a manner Custom free.

III.
That the Advices from Holland want no confirmation, if Letters may be
Credited, whence likewise Authentic Certificates may be had, were it worth the
Charge, or that the Matter in question were put upon that Issue; and as to the
abatement, it is all one by whom it is projected, if it be proved to be for the
good of the King and Kingdom.

IV.
That the sensible Letter to Sir John Buckworth of the 2/2 December, 1684. from
Rouen, confirms the Certificate aforementioned, as to the quantity of Scotch
Coals Imported to the River of Rouen, and nothing is more clear than that the
French could be without English Coals, since they may be furnished from
Scotland upon such easy terms, as is alleged. And if so great a Work as the
cutting of the River Eure, were not set on foot, which required a speedy
supply, and which of necessity (in the beginning) must Employ some English
Ships to fetch English Coals, the said Ships being of greater Burden, and the
said Coals nearer hand: but it is to be noted that at the same time their own
Ships go for Scotland, and that when they have once a Stock by them to keep the
Men at Work, then will they supply themselves from Scotland, so as Newcastle
shall hardly see any more of them, or receive any further Orders to send them
any more Coals in English Ships: as to the French Ships, being willing to pay
10 s. per Chalder Tonage, provided they may pay no more than 8 s. per Chalder
English Custom, which would make in all 18 s. per Chalder. It is confessed they
would gain very well by it, and four times more than by paying only 6 s. of the
English Custom, for it is to be noted that a French Ship pays in all 30 s. per
Chalder, whereof 10 s. being for Tonage, they pay no fifty Solx per Ton at
home, which English Ships must do in France; so the Tonage must be paid either
in French Ships in England, or English Ships in France, therefore no benefit to
the Merchant by that Article. Now I leave any body to judge whether it were not
better for the French to pay the full English Custom, being 8 s. and the said
Tonage, than to pay the 20 s. remaining of the 30 s. though the desired 2 s.
were abated of it, and how Mr. Robinson can make it out otherwise is not
understood.

V.
How absurd it is to say that the Stranger cannot be without our Commodity,
when at the same time he may have it as good, and a great deal cheaper from
another place, is obvious to the meanest capacity.

VI.
As to the English Navigation his Argument bears as little weight as the
former; for if there be no encouragement to Trade, there will be as little to
Build Ships, and if that encouragement fails, Navigation in a small process of
time must fall in Course, which already appears in that ancient Nursery of
Navigation (Newcastle) where of ten Ships that used to be Built, there is
hardly one now, there appeared no less decrease in the buying of Foreign
Bottoms, even before the Act of Parliament: so that this and the fall of
Freights, is a plain demonstration; and though it is very true that it is the
London Market that mostly governs our English Coal-Trade, yet when that is at
an ebb, it is no policy to knock down all other helps for Company: and
therefore Mr. Robinson's witty home Charity is not so meritorious, when the
Parent starves himself and his Children, by shutting out the Stranger that
brings them Bread.

VII.
As to Mr. Robinson's Conception of the abatement desired, to be for the
benefit of the Coal-Owner: it will be made appear to be a very false
Conception, and so incapable of bringing forth any thing that is good, that it
will prove Abortive; for in the first place he himself owns that the Coal-Trade
is governed by London, if so, it must be the London Market that causes a Rise
or Fall in the Price of Coals: therefore the Foreign Trade being so
inconsiderable as he makes it, cannot be the cause. It may be considered
likewise, that none that comes to Buy will give more than the Current Price,
which is publicly known, but very often may Buy under the Current Price from
necessitous Men, who will undersel rather than want money, though contrary to
the Orders of the Hostmen Company, whereof they are Members, and which by their
Freedom Oath they are bound to observe, that the Company may enjoy an equal
benefit of the Trade. And further that the said Sir William Creagh, who deals
most in the said Foreign Coal-Trade may clear himself of this false suggestion;
he declares that he is not, nor ever was Owner of any Coals that went over Sea,
otherwise than by paying others his ready money for them after they were Shipped
off and sent away; so there is no room left to think him guilty of so foul a
practice: if any of Mr. Robinson's Acquaintance be, it were fit he were made to
discover them. And if it should be thought strange why the said Robinson should
thus oppose a business wherein he and his Partners would gain as much as the
King, it were not amiss to know his reason for giving the late Sir William
Blackett (one of his Partners who dealt much in the over Sea Coal-Trade) some
years ago, order to clear his over Sea Ships for the Cost, which I am sure did
not look like a benefit to the King nor his Partners, but he is best able to
answer the meaning of that Practice.

VIII.
And for these Reasons, and much more which may be said upon occasion, I humbly
conceive than His Majesty's Revenue, the English Navigation, and the Town of
Newcastle has suffered more by the said Mr. Robinson's refractoriness, than he
will be ever able to make amends for, all which is most humbly submitted to
your Lordships, by

May it please your Lordships, Your Lordships Most humble Servant WILLIAM
CREAGH.

E
THE PRESENT STATE OF THE FOREIGN COAL-TRADE, Most humbly offered to His
MAJESTY'S Consideration BY Sir WILLIAM CREAGH, Of Newcastle upon Tyne, Knight.
THE said Foreign Coal-Trade from Newcastle and its Members (whence arises most
of His Majesty's Revenue by that Trade) and known to be the greatest Nursery of
His Majesty's Seamen, has been much discouraged by the inequality of the
Customs laid upon Coals in England, and Scotland, as follows, viz.

In England one Chalder of Coals Newcastle Measure, pays for Custom, Tonage,
and petty Duties, viz.

Sterling In a French Ship -- 30 shill. In a Dutch or any other Foreign Ship --
20 shill. In an English Ship -- 8 shill.

Whereas in Scotland they pay no more than 8 d. or 10 d. per Chalder in any
sort of Ships, and the Ships clear generally for a third, or a quarter of their
Burden, so the Custom is reckoned in a manner nothing, and the Coal Owners
there do generally Sell their Coals clear a Board, to make things more easy to
the Buyer, and to smother the inconsiderableness of the Duty and Clearing, and
by this means begins to draw the Trade from Newcastle, especially since the
finding out of a new sort of small Coals within these late years, which has
been plentifully Transported to Foreign Markets within these two or three years,
as by a Certificate appears, and sold there at as high a Rate as Newcastle
Coals; whereas formerly Newcastle Coals sold for 8 s. per Chalder more than
Scotch, and that, and the length of the Voyages, did in a manner balance the
inequality of the Customs: but now that the Scotch Coals gives as great a price
abroad as those of Newcastle, the said Foreign Coal-Trade from Newcastle will be
wholly destroyed and laid aside, to the great discouragement of the English
Navigation, and diminishing His Majesty's Customs in a very high degree,
especially at a juncture of time when there never was such an opportunity of
encouraging the one, and augmenting the other: for since the Project of cutting
the River Eure, and carrying on the Works at Versailles were resolved on, the
said Sir William Creagh had Commissions proposed to him by the Undertakers in
France, for no less than a hundred thousand Chalders of Newcastle Coals, which
were to be Shipped for the River of Rouen, besides what might be Transported to
other Foreign Parts; but before a thousand Chalders of the said number could be
Shipped off, there went so many Scotch Coals to the River of Rouen, and other
parts, that the said great Commission lies now Dormant, and will not be awaked
if some means be not found to balance the Customs in both Kingdoms, by raising
the Duty in Scotland, or making some abatement here. The first is conceived may
be done by the King, and the Lords Commissioners of His Treasury in Scotland,
as by the preamble to the Scotch Book of Rates, whereof a Copy is herewith,
appears: and as for the latter, it is left to His Majesty in His Royal Wisdom,
to consider whether it be not better to make some reasonable Abatement, than to
let slip by the said Commissions alone, Sterling. l. s. d. If Laden in English
Ships -- 40000 00 00 If in Dutch, or other Foreign Ships -- 100000 00 00 If in
French Ships -- 150000 00 00

All which is most humbly left to His Majesty's Determination, by His Majesty's
most Faithful, and most Dutiful Subject and Servant, WILLIAM CREAGH.

F
The Scotch CERTIFICATE.
An Account of what Coals have been Shipped off, and Transported beyond the
Seas to France, Holland, and other Foreign Parts, from the underwritten Ports
in Scotland, for the space of one whole year, commencing the first of December,
1685. and ending the first of December, 1686. as by the Account given by the
several Stewards, and Factors of the said Ports appears, viz.

Ships. Tons. From Carron Water 21 Containing 2900 From Cockney 64 Containing
4300 From Grainge-Pans 74 Containing 4500 From Airth 3 Containing 350 From
Alloway and Clackmanan 29 Containing 4750 From Culross and Valey-field 3
Containing 475 From Lyme-kills 40 Containing 2755 From Kirkaldy 8 Containing
607 From Dysert 22 Containing 1800 From Carrin or Tory-burne 3 Containing 450
From the Weymes and Methall 44 Containing 3300 From Borrowstonness 30
Containing 3600 In all 341 Containing 29787 Tons.

We whose names are underwritten, Stewards and Factors in the above several
Ports, do hereby Certify to all whom it may Concern, That the above quantity
of 29787 Tons of Coals (every Ton computed to be two thousand pounds Amsterdam
weight) were Shiped off, and Transported as aforesaid, within the time
aforesaid. As Witness our Hands and Seals, in Edinbrough, Cockney, and
Barrowstoness respective, the 5. 14. 20. 22. and 31. days of January, in the
year 1687.

For Cockney James Watt. For Grainge-Pans Daniel Hamilton. For Airth and Carron
Water John Willson. For Borrowstonness John Artbone. For Clackmanan, Alloway,
Valey-field and Tory-burne John Neilson. For the Weymes and Methall Andrew
Krhie. For Dysert John Hamilton. For Kirkaldy William Anderson.

Certified, Attested, Signed, and Sealed, before me George May, Notary Public,
as Witness my Hand and Seal in Edinbrough, and the other Towns above mentioned,
upon the respective days and year above written.

Copia Vera. George May, Notary Public.

G
Charles R.
CHARLES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To Our Lovits, Our Heralds, Pursivants, Macers, and
Messengers: Forasmuch, as by the 57th. Act of the first Session of Our first
Parliament of our Kingdom of Scotland, the Lords Commissioners of Our Exchequer
are thereby Warranted to establish a New Book of Rates for Our Customs; as also
by the 27th. Act of the third Session of Our said Parliament, It is declared,
That the ordering and disposal of Trade with foreign Nations, does belong to Us
and Our Successors, as an undoubted Privilege of Our Crown; and that by virtue
hereof, We may so order and dispose of foreign Trade as We shall think fit, for
the good of Our said Kingdom: And being desirous that the Trade thereof be so
ordered, as may be most for Our Interest, and the good and ease of Our
Subjects: And considering how necessary it is for that end, that the Rates or
Customs which have been heretofore most unequal, by reason of the great
difference of the true value of Goods at present, and of late, from what they
were many years ago, should be now regulated and stated, as We may have Our
Custom paid, and Our Subjects may not only be ascertained what they have to
pay, but also, find a considerable ease of the Proportion of the Customs,
formerly due from the Native Commodities of Our said Kingdom, at the
Exportation thereof: Therefore We, with the Advice and Consent of the
Commissioners of Our Treasury and Exchequer, having taken the Rates of Our
Customs into Our Consideration, and having also had therein the Opinions of
some Persons of good Knowledge and Interest in the Trade of Merchandise have
thought fit to Settle and Determine the Rates of Our Customs to be in all time
coming, according as they are set down in the Alphabet thereof; and such Goods
and Merchandise as are contained therein, that they pay Twelve Pence upon each
Pound value, and that the same Rates be raised and managed conform to the Acts
of Parliament and Instructions subjoined to the said Alphabet. And to the
effect all Our Lieges may have timous notice thereof, It is Our Will and
Pleasure, that these Presents, with the Rates of Customs and Instructions, be
Recorded in the Books of Our Exchequer, and Printed and Published at the
Market-Cross of Our Borough of Edenborough, and other Places needful.

Given at Our Court at White Hall the 4th day of March, 1670. and in the 22d
Year of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command. LAUDERDAILL.


