CHARITABLE ADVICE: In a Letter to the French Protestants, Into whatsoever
Parts of the World Dispersed, By Reason of their Present SUFFERINGS AND
PERSECUTIONS, From the Hands of the ROMAN CATHOLICS.

First Written for the Use of the French Protestants, by STEPHEN CRISP, one of
the People called Quakers: And since Translated out of the French, for more
Public BENEFIT.

Mat. 5.12. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your Reward in Heaven:
For so Persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.

Mark 13.13. And ye shall be hated of all Men for my Names sake: But he that
shall endure to the End, the same shall be saved.

With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed by G. L. at the Two Swans without Bishopsgate. 1688.

To the READER.
THE following Papers, though designed only by the Author for the Use of the
French Protestants, yet containing in them so much excellent and wholesome
Advice, I deemed it would not be altogether unacceptable to make them speak
English, that our own Countrymen may have before them a fresh Idea of that Poor
Peoples Calamities, which may at once excite their Charity to them, and hearty
acknowledgments to Almighty God, that still preserves us in prosperity and
quietness. And no one need suggest to himself from these hints any fear to the
contrary; For under God, we have an Infallible Security, a Royal and Gracious
Sovereign, Promising and Resolving to protect us in the exercise of our
Religion in Peace, Plenty and Credit, for which may he find at the hands of the
Lord Mercy and Blessings here, and a Happy Life hereafter.

I have no more to desire of the Reader, but that he will, pardoning the faults
a hasty Translation, seriously mind, what is here said, and heartily put it in
practice; so that if (which God forbid) it should chance to be our turn, to
fall under the like sufferings, we may not be ashamed of Christ and his Cross,
and the Good Cause of our Forefathers, but after those blessed Examples may
manfully despise and patiently pass through all tribulations in this Life, in
hopes of that happy share in the Heavenly Mansions, which God, that cannot lie,
has promised to such his Servants and Followers. And that God will give us his
Grace, to enable us thereto, is the daily Prayer of

Thy hearty Welwisher and and Brother in Jesus Christ, J. F.

CHARITABLE ADVICE: By way of Letter to the French Protestants, Into what Parts
of the WORLD soever Dispersed, etc.
DEAR FRIENDS,
IT IS by the Inspiration of the Spirit of God, and the Holy Motions of Love
which it produces in my Heart, that I am prompted at this time, to Write to
you: And I do by the same Spirit of Love and Charity entreat the good God, that
it will please him by his invisible Power to open your Hearts, to receive this
short Word of Advice which I present you with, and which concerns only your
Everlasting Felicity. It is Evident, that your Sufferings are great, and the
noise of them has reached many Provinces, Kingdoms and Countries; by which
means, a great part of the World has been able to make Reflections upon the
Cruelty of your Persecuters, and at the same time, to lament your Miserable
Estate, which has so nearly affected most men, that they have not been content
only to be touched with the greatest Compassion for you, but have stretched
forth their Hands to lift you up, and assist you in your Necessities; showing
themselves thereby truly affected to Christianity; it being the indispensable
Duty of all Christians, to do what good they can one to another, or (in the
Phrase of the Apostle) To do good unto all Men, but especially to those of the
Household of Faith.

These Motives prevailed upon me to visit you in this your Day of Tribulation,
with a few Lines of Counsel and Advice, which you will do well to accept with a
sincere Heart and Humble Spirit; for you cannot but reap some Advantage from
them.

I. To begin then, Consider seriously in the first place, what could be the
cause of your Sufferings, and why the Lord permitted these times of Trial and
Affliction to come upon you?

Where by the Way, I would not have any Man think me so presumptuous, as to
pretend to judge you, or to conclude, That God is always angry with those whom
he suffers to lie under the greatest Afflictions: No, God forbid! For who ever
underwent such Afflictions, as the most dear Children of God? But though many
have born severe Sufferings for the Trial of their Faith, and to be thereby
Purified and prepared either to serve as Witnesses of God's Holy Name, among
the Sons of Men, or to possess his Heavenly Kingdom, into which nothing that is
filthy and unclean can enter: Yet nevertheless, it cannot be denied, but that
there are many who suffer, for having provoked the Lord to Anger by their
Disobedience. Now, which of these Reasons was the Subject of your Sufferings,
you cannot better understand, than by that Light of Truth, which shines in
your Hearts, and manifests it self in your Consciences.

For doubtless, whoever of you will set your selves seriously and attentively
to consider your Ways and Manners in times past, will quickly find how it
stands between GOD and your own Souls; For the Lord God has a Faithful and
True Witness in the Consciences of every one of you, which has Enregistred and
kept in Order, all the Actions you have done from your Childhoods. This Witness
will help you to Recollect, how you walked with the Lord, in the days of your
Prosperity and Liberty, in your own Country, when ye sat every Man under his
Vine, and every Man under his Fig Tree.

How little have you answered the Kindnesses and Bounty of God to you? How
little did ye prize that Light of Understanding which God gave to you, in
greater measure than to your Countrymen? So that although it were as offensive
to the Eyes of God, for you to follow and obey the Lusts and evil Passions of
your Hearts; as for your Neighbors to be Prostrated to, and Adore their Images
of Wood and Stone: Yet how great were your Luxuries, your Debaucheries, your
Quarrels and Jealousies, one against another? How did the greater Part of you
content your selves with a Religion, differing indeed in Form, from that of the
Country, but in Life and Conversation almost the same; giving your selves full
Career and Liberty, in all sorts of unlawful Pleasures, Vanities and
Concupiscencies of the Flesh? Was it not a thing most disagreeable to the
Spirit of God, to see you at that same time call upon him with your Lips, and
Dishonor him by your scandalous Lives; which yielded Occasion to your
Adversaries, of reproaching you and your Religion? And it has been a great
while the Observation, that most Travelers into your Country have made, that
there was little Difference between the Protestants and Papists of France, as
to matter of Life and Conversation; unless it were, that the latter frequented
the public Churches, and the others had their more private Congregations.

What was then become (my Dear Friends) of your Talent of Knowledge? Did ye not
know, that as ye had received greater Understanding and more Light than others,
your Lives and Conversations ought to have shined with the greater luster, and
to have been the more exemplary for Sobriety, Temperance and the Fear of God,
to the Honor of his Holy Name, and confusion of his Enemies? For this would
have had more efficacy and success in converting your Adversaries, than all
your Arguments formed by the Help and Rules of Logic, Rhetoric, or Philosophy.

These things, when the Spirit and Witness of God in your Consciences, shall
have recalled to your minds, and you shall be made sensible of the mis-spence
of your past Lives, you will see great reason profoundly to humble your selves,
and prepare your hearts to say (as Saul once did) to the Lord, What will thou
have us to do? And the Lord, on his part, will not fail to draw nigh to you in
a strange Land; I mean, to those who seek him diligently: For all Nations are
alike to him, since every Nation or People which fears him, and does that
which is righteous, is accepted by him through our Lord Jesus Christ, and (as
David says) he teaches the Humble, and instructs the Meek in his ways.
Pardon me, I pray you, dear Friends, if I tell you, in plain terms, that the
reason why you are such Strangers to the divine and inward motions of the
Spirit of God, is, because ye are not enough humble and poor in Spirit; which
renders you insensible of your own wants and necessities; so that you choose to
you Teachers to please your Ears only, whereby you are diverted from a diligent
and earnest search into the ways of God, and from harkening to those holy
motions of his Spirit, by which he reproves you, in your hearts.

II. In the Second Place, it is a matter of the greatest consequence to you in
the world, diligently and attentively to consider, what should be the occasion
of your falling under so many Afflictions. You will tell me, perhaps, that it
was because ye could not in Conscience subscribe to certain Articles, as ye
were required, nor practice certain things which ye did believe to be
altogether contrary to the Will of God, etc.

Ye say well; but, my Friends, if Conscience be to be regarded and obeyed in
these respects; why is there not the same reason, to hearken to, and follow it,
in the whole course of our Lives and Conversations? If our Consciences are
enlightened, it is by the Light of Jesus Christ, who lights every man that
comes into the World; and if our Consciences are governed by this Light, and
we give up our selves to the conduct of our enlightened Consciences; we are by
the same Law of Conscience, which is Light, forbidden the committing any thing
that may offend God: For the same Light which does convince my Conscience, That
it is a sin to fall down and to worship an Idol, or adore a Crucifix; does also
convince me, that it is as much a sin to Lie, to Swear, to forswear, to commit
Fornication, to speak any vain or idle Words; or to let proceed out of my mouth
any foolish, ridiculous or insolent speeches. Oh! what happiness would ye find,
what peace of Conscience would your hearts enjoy, would ye observe this
throughout your whole Lives? And indeed the same reason should oblige you to
it; for, if the dictates of Truth in the Conscience, are (as ye confess) to be
followed in some things, why not in all, and especially in those wherein we are
as equally enlightened and convinced?

I would also demand of you, If there be any one among you, who is not fully
and entirely convinced in his Conscience, that Drunkenness, Swearing, Lying,
Hypocrisy and Pride, are as contrary and disagreeable to the Holy and Pure
Will of God, as are the Adorations and Services that are paid to an Image or
Crucifix; or as are any subscriptions to the most superstitious Articles, that
can be exacted of you? I believe there is not; for the same Light of Truth
which manifests the one, discovers the other also; as says the Apostle,
Whatsoever is reproveable is manifested by the Light, for that which
manifests it is Light.

But, by the way, it will not be impertinent to put you in mind, that there are
diverse Operations in the Consciences of Men; for all men do not make the same
Scruples of Conscience, in matters of Religion, nor are induced thereto by the
same Reasons and Causes; for were it so, they would be all of the same Opinion
with Christ, the Apostles and the Primitive Christians; who while they had
their Consciences governed by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, continued alike, and
were all of one heart, and one mind. But there are three things chiefly which
divert the Consciences of men from this Universal Rule of Holiness, Faith and
Charity; leading them out of the Road of a Holy Life, dividing them in their
Faith, and rendering them cold in their Charity. These three Points I will in a
few words treat of, to the end that every Soul, that is willing to search
diligently, may find some helps, whereby he may know if any of them have the
Government and Conduct of his Conscience.

They are these three.

1. Education. 2. Worldly Interest. 3. A blind subjection of the Conscience, to
the government of another, whereby it becomes passionately devoted to his
interests, and vehemently enamored with all his inordinate affections.
I. As to the first of these, we must consider Education in a twofold respect,
1. Good, and 2. Bad. A good Education has a grand influence upon the Spirit, in
regard of Doctrines, Principles, Forms, Manners and Ceremonies of Divine
Worship: Not that this is the only means whereby the Life and Power of Religion
are conveyed from the Teachers to the Disciples; no, that is reserved to the
immediate operation of the Power and Spirit of Jesus Christ; and it is,
therefore, the Duty of every one, how-good-soever his Education may have been,
and whatsoever pure and solid Doctrines he may have received, to desire, wait
for, and entertain this Divine Operation on his heart, that he may be thereby
rendered pure and holy, and fit to bear witness to the Truths that he shall at
any time hear delivered by word of Mouth; for otherwise, all his Religion will
be but dead and formal, and without any inward Life to animate his Actions; and
so he may be without any Oil in his Lamp, although his Teachers be never so
well provided; and yet such a person as this, though destitute of the life and
virtue of Religion within himself, may make great Conscience of this or that
formality of Religion, and prefer the way wherein he was born and bred, before
any other whatsoever; but will, for all this, be never the better Christian,
and it will stand him in little stead, in reference to the great and principal
end of man, which is the Sanctification of his Soul, and Reconciliation of it
to God; to have been only a professor of such points of Doctrine, though they
were never so pure, holy and orthodox.

Because, they that have had a bad Education, and have been brought up in ways
of darkness, and full of the errors and corruptions of this World, invented by
sinful man, have also a Conscience, though stained and defiled by the aforesaid
Darkness, and the ill precepts of their Teachers; they pride themselves in
their Errors, and would fain have them pass for so many Truths; embracing
Darkness instead of Light, and walking by the Light of that fire which they
themselves have kindled; crying aloud, Thus did our Forefathers; and alleging
Antiquity for a Cloak to cover their Errors and Abominations: All which,
nevertheless, is far from justifying them; for, on the contrary, it renders
them the more blameworthy. But this is not all; these Consciences, thus
deceived, have most commonly this property, That they employ their utmost
endeavors to make every man's Conscience comply with theirs; and when they
cannot compass their designs by persuasion, nothing is more grievous to them;
as they also esteem it the greatest piece of Religion, to persecute and destroy
all who will not be of their persuasion. All which is a manifest token that
they are the Children of the Destroyer, and are about his work; of such our
Savior Christ prophesied truly, when he said, They shall think they do God
good service when they kill you. And yet even these men will plead their
Consciences for what they do; but, alas! they make it appear by their Deeds,
who has the government and conduct of their Consciences: They cannot be so
impudent as to say it is the Lovely and Sweet Spirit of Jesus Christ; but must
needs confess it to be the force of a corrupted Education, nourished and kept
up by the continual inspirations of the Devil.

II. The next thing that is apt to get dominion over the Consciences of men, is
worldly interest; those who are led away by this, are such as do not heartily
embrace any Religion, but take the liberty to form in their imagination such an
idea of Conscience as may best suit their Profession, and contribute to their
Worldly Profits, Pleasures and Advantages; so that it is plain, they are
Christians without a Cross; and consequently no true Disciples of Jesus Christ,
who did in express Terms, Deny all those to be his Disciples, who would not
deny themselves, and take up their Cross and follow him. But alas! How
difficult is it to such men to make any Scruples of Conscience, or to be
faithful to their Consciences, who if any worldly Loss happen to them, or any
danger threaten their Gains or Pleasures, what earnestness and care will they
not make use of, to force their Consciences to comply with any Side? What
Methods will they leave untried? What Way will they not turn themselves, though
all their carnal Arguments cannot make them believe otherwise, than they do in
Effect believe? Yea, moreover, they do oftentimes for Interest-sake, force
themselves to Profess such things, as they do not nor cannot believe, which is
certainly the highest Abomination in the Eyes of God. Such Men are most
commonly Encompassed with the thickest Darkness, and Abandoned to a reprobate
Spirit; because for worldly Ends, they preferred Darkness before Light, and
must therefore expect to dwell therein for ever.

III. The third and last way by which Men's Consciences are deceived, is, When
they give up their Consciences to the Governance and Management of others: Such
may be said, Not to have the free Exercise of their Consciences, because they
are engaged to another Man; besides, they ntirely inca^pacitate themselves, to
receive any Illumination by the Inspiration of the Spirit of God in their
Hearts, and so continue Vassals and Bondslaves to him, whom they have subjected
themselves unto, and from him, they receive their Precepts and Instructions,
though he may prove to be the most wicked Man in the World. They do not
Consider that the Lord heretofore complained in this wise, The Way which they
should walk in to come unto me, is taught them by the Precepts of Men; from
whence it is plain, They ought rather to have chosen God himself for their
Teacher: But, Oh! In what a miserable Condition are these poor Souls? And with
what Uncertainty do they follow that, which Abandons them to the Government of
another, who must order and direct their Thoughts, their Faiths, their Lives
and Actions? Not considering, that if he fall into a Ditch, they must fall also
with him. But this is not all, he who has thus blindly submitted himself to
another's Conduct, is no more Master of himself, nor free in the Lord, but
Servant to another Man; and so we may see that Error, Darkness, and Blindness,
are far from that Spirit which Jesus Christ sent according to his Promise, To
guide his People into all Truth; and which he said, the World could not
receive: For we see Men do all they can to hinder themselves from coming, and
harkening to the Instructions of his Spirit, choosing rather to build their
Faith upon a Priest's or Fryar's Sleeve, than trust themselves in God's Hands;
though all the while they do not own these men to be Infallible, either in
their Doctrines, Lives or Actions: For every Day one may observe their base
Failings and Mistakes, their Wicked Life, their Cruelty, their Hypocrysie and
their Pride: But how should it be otherwise with them, when they will not
preserve themselves from, and Watch against the Ambushes of Satan, who is their
principal Director? How can any Man be so Blind and void of Understanding, as
to think he can have Pardon and Remission of his Sins from such an one, who is
not able to deliver himself; but suffers himself daily to be led away by the
Suggestions of the Devil, to Evil Lusts and Concupiscences; and who has himself
as much need of another, and he again of another Ghostly Father? Ah! Where now
is the pure Light of Christ in the Conscience, which should govern it in one
Man as well as in another; to teach them to keep their Consciences void of
Offense toward God, and toward all Men? O! Would to God Men would hearken to,
and seriously reflect on these things! O that they would not forget to deal
with the Holy Spirit, as God has appointed them!

It Is this that would nourish, and fortify all the good that has been
Implanted by a good Education; and would moreover, cause all the Knowledge we
can acquire, to flourish in Virtue and good Manners: This would chase away, and
banish all the Evil that has been sown by a bad Education: This would teach you
to quit all Wordly Interest, and give up your selves entirely to the Lord, to
be taught and directed by the Spirit and Light of Jesus Christ, which would so
open your Eyes, that you would become more Learned and Knowing than your
Teachers, in the Mystery of Regeneration; without which, all Divine Service,
all Religious Worship, all Confessions and Absolutions, all Alms and Prayers
are nothing worth: For, Unless a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom
of Heaven.

And you my Dear Friends, who at this time are under so great Sufferings,
dispersed here and there in several Countries, only because ye could not
conform to a Religion which ye judge to be Idolatrous: You, I say, cannot
Exercise your Minds to better Purpose, than in an exact and faithful View and
Examination of your selves and your own Souls, to find out what were the
Reasons and Motives of such your Refusal: Namely, whether your Education, or
worldly Interest, or Dependence upon another; or some mighty Empire and
Authority of others over your Consciences: Or, lastly, whether it was only the
Light of the Word, and Spirit of Jesus Christ; directing your Hearts, and
guiding your Understandings, to perceive the Errors and Idolatries of the
People of the Land, that so inclined your Consciences to obey God, and his
Grace and Truth; and did finally give you Courage, rather to abandon the Land
of your Nativity, and all your Worldly Endearments, than defile your
Consciences, by sinning against that Light and Grace, which the Father of
Lights had bestowed upon you.

If there be any among you that know this to be their Case, what Consolation
have these Men under all Adversities? With what Joy must they needs be filled,
when they feel the Testimony of God in their Consciences, bearing them witness,
that it is only upon this Account that they undergo all these Sufferings and
Persecutions? O! What Advantage will ye reap, as many of you as give up your
selves to this way of Conduct, in all things? In the mean while, try, search
and examine, if there be not yet something in your Consciences, contrary and
repugnant to that Light which shines in your Hearts; if there be not something
that is heavy and cumbersome to your Souls, and which hinders your
Reconciliation with God: The more ye set your selves after this manner, to
sound, prove, and search your Words and Actions, by this Light which shines in
your Hearts; the more clearly will ye see the Necessity which ye have to amend
and reform your Ways, your Manners, and your Lives, in the sight of God; and
will also be so far from believing, that ye have done enough in obeying the
Spirit of God in one particular, that you will not cease to go on and
persevere, in bearing your Crosses all your days, until ye have vanquished and
surmounted all that stands in Opposition to the Holy Will of God; so that in
the end, ye lose not the Reward of what ye have hitherto done: For it is not
Faithfulness in one thing only, that will be accepted and approved by God; but
he expects, and absolutely wills, that we be obedient to him in all Things: And
thus Moses heretofore Prophesied of Jesus Christ, And it shall come to pass,
says he, that the Soul which hears him not in all things, shall be cut off.
The most sure Way then to have Peace with God, and to be reconciled to him, is
to follow the Lord entirely, as did Joshua, without any Reservation or Excuse;
that is to say, Ye ought to forsake, quit and abandon all that is Evil in your
selves, as well as the Idolatry of others, who would have you run with them to
the same Excess of Riot.

In the second Place, I would advise you to consider, what good Effects your
present Sufferings have had upon you, in Order to your Sanctification; for this
is the great Care and Concern of a truly Christian-Soul, to grow better, under
what Degree of Afflictions soever God shall think fit to send; to Kill and
Crucify in his People, whatsoever is contrary to him, that they may be like
Gold tried in the Furnace of Tribulation. It will be not a little advantageous
to you to consider now, if you seriously set your selves about the Work of
MORTIFICATION, and to Examine, Whether that Vain and Giddy-headed Temper, which
Reigned so much in you, in your own Country, prompting and persuading you, to
follow and Embrace all the Modes and Customs of a Corrupted World, be not still
living in you at this Day? And if ye have not too earnest Inclinations, to suit
and fashion your selves to the Wicked and Degenerate Modes, Ways and Manners of
the Countries whither ye are scattered?

O my Friends! Had ye a true Sense of your Estate and Condition, What Gravity,
Modesty and Sobriety, would ye not express in all your Words and Actions? This
would easily persuade those among whom ye now live, that it was out of a good
Principle of Religion and Holiness, that ye abhorred the Superstition and
Idolatry of your own Country; and not merely upon the Account of some Forms
and Ceremonies of Religion not agreeing with yours: For ye are not ignorant,
that Religion consists not barely in Forms and Ceremonies, since by them one
Man is not made better than another: Moreover, ye cannot but remember that ye
have read, That the Apostles and Primitive Christians, would have no
Communication with those Men, who, though they observed the same Rites and
Ceremonies, would not be obedient to the Power of Godliness. And indeed, herein
lies the Essence and Life of Religion, and the Glory and Crown of all
Sufferings, that one can undergo for the sake of Religion; to wit, when those
who are afflicted, feel in their Souls, during the time of their Sufferings,
the Power and Life of him, for the Love of whom they bear up manfully, under
all their Torments and Agonies; and do wholly abstain from the defilements and
pollutions of the world. Thus did the ancient Disciples of Jesus Christ behave
themselves, who were by Persecutions driven from one Coast to another, into
Asia, Cappadocia and Bithynia; but were not content only to undergo great
sufferings, but were also accompanied with a remarkable savor of life; for we
read, That the Word thereby grew and spread it'self abundantly. But what
advantage will a Protestant have above a Papist, so long as they both continue
the Subjects of the Prince of the Air, who rules in the hearts of the Children
of disobedience, of what Religion, Profession or Sect soever they be?

Wherefore I pray and exhort you, by all the compassion that the love of God
can suggest, not to vaunt and boast your selves of the small Reformation
already among you, but rather to observe and consider what yet there is behind
to be reformed and corrected before ye can arrive at that end, toward which ye
should always direct your aim, to wit, a life altogether pure and conformable
to the blameless life of God himself: in whose presence ye hope one day to
appear and dwell for ever. Now since we cannot attain hereto by good works, but
only by Grace, all those therefore who are subject to the Pure and Free Grace
of God, are hereby engaged, on the one side to renounce all sort of impiety and
concupiscence, and on the other side to live righteously, soberly and godly in
this present evil world. Tit. 2.11.

Try then, and examine well your selves, and see how your Lives, Manners and
Coversations answer that Grace and that Light of the Truth which has been
communicated to you by Jesus Christ the Fountain of all Grace and Light; and
according to what I have before told you, ye may know by your own souls how to
make a true judgment, for they will dictate to every one of you, in what a
condition he is, in the sight of God.

I have but one thing more to put you in mind of, which is to excite you to all
humble acknowledgments and thanksgivings to Almighty God; that it has
graciously pleased him to open the hearts of many Kings and Princes, to
entertain and assist you, as also of a great part of the world, to succor you
in your necessities. This, as ye ought to esteem it a great mercy of God's, so
ought the serious consideration of so many kindnesses infinitely to oblige you,
to put your whole trust in the Lord, and to serve him Religiously in all
places, where God shall appoint your Lots, in requiting, as much as in you
lies, his love and bounty: For his mercies and loving-kindnesses should
strongly engage your hearts to love the Lord above all things in the World, by
which also the hearts of all others who love him, will be more and more
enlarged, to assist you in those things which ye shall have need of, both
Spiritual and Temporal. Truly, my dear Friends, I have often looked upon you
with great sorrow, considering you as a people under great afflictions and
trials, and wishing these sufferings and persecutions would have had better
effects upon you than, I fear, they have produced: Upon this account it was
that I thought fit to visit you, as I do at this time, with these few
Considerations, being moved thereto by the pure love of God, and hoping that
most of you will accept my Advice with the same love and sincerity that it was
indicted: And, I pray God, that what I have said, may, in some measure, engage
and affect your hearts, with a desire of those Spiritual Qualifications, which
ought constantly to be your aim. But if, on the contrary, any of you shall
slight or reject my good Counsels, and shall spend his time in cavelling and
criticizing either upon my Person, or the style in which I express my self, let
such a one know he can do me no harm, but only his own Soul; and I cannot be
any way affected thereby, unless it be with grief for such a person; for I have
not said any thing, but faithfully to discharge my own Conscience: My reward I
expect of the Lord only, who has taught me by his Holy Spirit, to love all
men, and do what in me lies, for the good of every one: for I know full well,
it is not the will of God, that any one should perish, but that all should come
to repentance and the knowledge of the Truth, that they may be saved.

FINIS.

