Her Royal Highness Mary of Este Duchess of Albany and York.


THE HISTORY OF THE House of Este, From the time of Forrestus until the Death
of Alphonsus the last Duke of Ferrara: With an Account of the pretended
devolution of that Duchy unjustly usurped by Clement VIII. Wherein likewise
the most considerable Revolutions of Italy from the year 452. to the year 1598.
are briefly touched.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Rich. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St Paul's
Churchyard, M DC LXXXI.

TO HER Royal Highness MARY of ESTE Duchess of ALBANY, etc.
Madam,
THe Zeal I find run through the whole Nation to express its high value for
your Royal Highness, has begot in me an ambition to promote so Noble a Design;
and since the appearance of so mean a person at Court could add nothing to its
Luster, I have set my thoughts at work how to contribute somewhat toward it in
my retirement.

At Your first coming among us, our Loyalty to our Sovereign, and our Duty to
his only Brother, disposed us to do every thing in our power that might be
acceptable to so great a Princess: But Your Royal Highness's condescending to
the simplicity in which we live, Your affable deportment toward all that have
the honor to come near Your Person, and Your seeming pleased with our weak
endeavors to serve You, do justly challenge that respect as due now to Your
self, which we must however have paid to Your Quality.

When we reflected how long we had been strangers to a Court, we could not but
think our selves ill fitted to receive a Princess Born and Bred in the Paradise
of the World; One whom the Greatest Courts of Christendom had admired, and who
had been used to nothing below the best of our British Accommodation: only as
we then knew Your Royal Highness came prepared to bear with the plainness of a
Northern Climate; so we since find you are in some measure delighted with it:
and we begin to flatter our selves, that the happiness of so illustrious a
Guest, which was procured to us at first by Your Obedience, is now continued to
us by your choice.

These things having already gained Your Royal Highness the hearts of all this
Kingdom, I thought I could not employ my self better than in endeavoring to
confirm our Veneration for Your person, by an account of Your Family; and as we
easily imagined it to be no Ordinary One, so upon an exact search, I find that
Italy has nothing more Ancient or Great to boast of.

Your Heroic Ancestors have been shares in all the Memorable Transactions of
Italy these twelve hundred years and upward: They have oftener than once rescued
it from the Barbarous Nations; their Reputation for great Generals has set them
since on the Head of most of the considerable Armies of Lombardy, and no Blood
has been more prodigally sacrificed in their National Quarrels, than that of
Este. Nor has Italy alone been the Theater of their Glorious Actions, or the
Seat of their Greatness; Germany is able to bear testimony of both. The Ancient
Dukes of Bavaria, so famous in History, were Princes of Este; and their
Offspring, the present Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburgh, who in Birth yield
to no German, and who have had the Imperial Crown in their Family, yet seem to
glory, Madam, in their being descended of Yours. To all this we must add the
great Alliances by which the Princes of Your most Serene Family have wisely
kept up their Grandeur, as appears by their matching into the Houses of
Austria, of France, and of Arragon, and to most of the Royal Families of
Europe; so that I may with much assurance say, That there is no Nobler Blood in
Christendom than what runs in Your Royal Highness's Veins, and that the
Greatness of Your Birth is not inferior to that of Your Condition, it being
but suitable that a Princess of a Family next in Dignity to those of Crowned
heads, should be set next a Throne.

So great an Argument deserved, I confess, to have been managed by a better
Pen; yet how much soever it may suffer in my hands, I am infinitely beholden to
the negligence of others, that reserved to me the honor of paying You this
Tribute, which I offer with all humility to Your Royal Highness. If you
vouchsafe it Your Gracious Acceptance, my Pains are excessively rewarded, and I
shall hereafter glory in what I dare not yet own without rashness; for seeing
the work is more likely to lose than gain reputation by so obscure an Author, I
have not the confidence to make my self public by any other Name, than that of
being,

MADAM, Your Royal Highness's most humble, most obedient, and most dutiful
Servant.

THE PREFACE.
AS the Invention of Printing proved very Instrumental toward the rescue of
the world from the Ignorance which overrun it in former Ages; so the great
excesses of the Press at present are like to give a deadly blow to all manner
of Learning. When the hard purchase of good Manuscripts had made, that
Knowledge was long engrossed into a few, and those but ill hands; no wonder, if
upon the Presses enlightening Europe, its productions were received with
greediness: News from the Fairs of Francfort were then as curiously enquired
after, as we in this Politic and busy Age do after intrigues of State.
Ancient Authors purged from the rubbish of illiterate Copists were published
with great care; every year likewise brought forth some new Piece of solid
Learning, and our Fathers in little more than one Century retrieved what their
Ancestors had lost in many.

But men grew soon weary of so much application, and resolved either to attain
unto Knowledge upon easier terms or not at all; whereupon the French, who
pretend to give Laws to the world in every thing, have set up a modish sort of
compendious Learning, which requires no great study, as it gives no deep
impression; and thus have loaded us with a vast number of empty Books: and
though it must be allowed they have given us some incomparable pieces of late
upon several Arguments; yet these bearing no proportion in number to the others
which are more commonly put into strangers hands, they have the ill luck to
pass generally for superficial Authors. In our Neighbor Nation the Politics
are so in vogue, and so much money and time is consumed in them, that any thing
of more valuable Learning is too much laid aside: their Term Catalogues are
stuffed with idle Pamphlets; it is thought but a barren week that brings not
more than one Treatise to light; nay, I am informed they are now come to that
pitch, that the Curious must be with their Bookseller once a day to see what
new things are come out that morning: and most of these like Mushroms, as they
are hatched in one day or week at most, so they seldom survive another, and
then like things antiquated and out of date, they are justly condemned for
waste paper. So that by the constant recruits of these ill digested pieces,
which are set off with all the advantages of specious Titles, men scarce know
what to read; and many being drawn in by such charms, and finding afterward by
their ill choice much of their time mis-imploy'd, are too apt to conceive a
prejudice against all Books. In short, Printing being now a Trade upon which a
great many others depend; and the Stationers who manage it, looking no further
than their present advantage, there is just ground given us to apprehend, that
this ungoverned License of the Press may bring the next Age under as great an
aversion for Books, as the former had curiosity about them.

The world being thus overstock'd in Authors, and most men thinking themselves
imperfect in their profession till they make a shift to be in print, it may
seem strange that here among us We contribute so little toward this general
abuse, and are so far from this vanity, that like people bred long in the
Country we have not confidence to appear in the crowd, even when we are
invited to it; but suffer the Press to lie idle, as if we were resolved by our
obstinate silence to let the world grow unacquainted with us, and after this
manner to lose the reputation we once had for Learning and vivacity of Spirit.

When Learning was restored, and men began to have a more refined taste of
Books, our Nation produced some who did advance as early toward the ancient
Purity of Writing as any other, the Italians only excepted. Hector Boethius if
he had not been obscured by greater Lights that came after him, had past for no
ordinary man: It is true, his too much affecting to imitate Livy, put him often
upon making long dull speeches in Councils and Armies; and the humor of that
age being no less for believing and reporting extravagant things than the
Heathens were, he almost out-does Livy in relating unusual, if not incredible
events: yet with all that alloy it cannot be denied that he writ as well as any
of his Contemporaries. Next to Boethius comes Lesly, whose temper and way of
writing are excellent, only his style, though in the main strokes it be good,
yet in many places wants finishing, and is not altogether free from errors.
Buchanan excelled not only all that went before him in his own Country, but
had scarce his Equal in that Learned Age wherein he lived; he spent the first
flame and rage of his fancy in Poetry, in which whether he did imitate Virgil
in Heroicks, Ovid in Elegiacks, Lucretius in writing Philosophy, Seneca in
Tragedies, Martial in Epigrams, or Harace and Juvenal in Satyrs, he copied
after those great Masters so perfectly, that nothing ever approached nearer the
Original; and his Immortal Paraphrase on the Psalms does show, that neither the
constraint of a limited matter, the darkness of expression, nor the frequent
returns of the same or the like phrases could confine or exhaust that vast
Genius. At last, in his old age, when his thoughts were purified by long
reflection and business, and a true judgment came in the room of one of the
richest Fancies that ever* was, he wrote our History with such beauty of style,
easiness of expression, and exactness in all its parts, that no Service nor
Honor could have been done the Nation like it, had he ended so Noble a Work as
he began and carried it on till King James the fifth's death: but being
unhappily engaged in a Faction, and resentments working violently upon him, he
suffered himself to be so strangely biased, that in the relations he gives of
many of the transactions of his own time, he may rather pass for a Satyrist
than an Historian: Notwithstanding this great blemish, few durst venture to
continue so elaborate a Work, or write of our Affairs after him; yet this must
be said of Johnston, that nothing makes him so little considered as his coming
after Buchanan. Dempster was like to have escaped me, who of all others shows
the greatest zeal and industry in recovering every fragment of Antiquity, which
may either help to illustrate the darker Ages of our Church, or raise the Glory
of our Nation; but a strain of bigottry that runs through every Line of him,
does much weaken his Authority amongst us. In our own Language Drummond, if his
inclinations to Poetry had not carried him too far in a florid way of writing,
had been more deservedly valued: But Archbishop Spot swood by affecting the
other extreme, and using an inimitable plainness of style, has something in him
that is great, and takes highly with all discerning people.

I only mention those who have done themselves and their Country credit
bywriting of our own Affairs; for if with the two Barclays, whom France does
envy us, and the wonderful Creighton whom Italy cherished and admired as a
second Picus, I should bring in those of our Nation that have been eminently
Learned in their several Professions, they would make a pompous show: But I
confess I can take no pleasure in numbering up our Glorious Ancestors, or in
boasting of our past merits, being truly sensible how unhappy we have been of
late. We meet with none of our refined Wits in the Courts abroad, nor of our
Eminent Professors in their Universities to welcome us in our travels, as
formerly; and the learned men we have at home will only be known for such to
their friends in confidence, as if there were danger in their being discovered.
And while the French and English by a fondness natural to most People, admire
too much their own Writers; we seem to be without the reach of this temptation:
for except one Noble Lawyer, whom his own Elegant Pen does commend much beyond
any thing I am able to say, and one Extraordinary Divine, who having gratefully
sacrificed the first fruits of his labors to his own Country, has since
deserved of our Neighbors to be advanced amongst their choicest Historians; We
have not, that I know of, any else whom we can with any reason admire. It may
therefore be no improper part of a Preface, to consider what should bring us
under such a scarcity of Writers, when all other Nations seem to be cloyed with
too great abundance.

I should be thought an ill Apologist for my Country, and a worse Arguer, to
insist much upon the coldness of the Climate, or the barrenness of the soil,
which have been the same in our most flourishing condition: But there are two
things remarkable in our present Circumstances, which I shall presume to offer,
as the true reasons of the decrease of Learned Writers amongst us: The one is,
that Divines, who have in all Ages been the chief Preservers and Improvers of
Knowledge, are here so unhappily distracted by the divisions now on foot, that
they have no heart to undertake or advance any considerable design in Learning.
When controversies arise that give occasion to great and solid debates, these
quicken the industry of the contending Parties to discover such things as may
be for the advantage of their cause: but as our differences are such as can
never admit of a Learned Confutation, so there is no encouragement for any man
to go about it who knows our present temper. For it is plain, that an obstinate
resolution to continue the breach, scorns to yield to the strongest conviction
of reason; yet this unaccountable Schism has raised so violent heats, and
brought our Clergy under such contempt, that we cannot reasonably expect great
things from them; and which is indeed more deplorable, men of better Genius's,
seeing the difficulties with which they struggle, do follow other employments:
so that if our condition be bad on this account in the present Age, it is like
to be worse in the next. Besides, though great care has been taken in the
Constitution of our Church to preserve the inferior Clergy from poverty; yet
there are not those advantages of Books and privacy for encouraging
extraordinary persons in their studies, with which other Nations abound.

But that which beyond all other things has set us so far back in learning, is
our having no more the great incitements, which a Courts residing among us
would afford: We do indeed rejoice with our King that his Empire is so
considerably enlarged by the accession of a double Crown; we acknowledge also
with all grateful Duty, that our Princes indulgent tenderness for their
Ancient and Native Kingdom ever since their departure, has made them careful
to continue to us our former happiness in every thing save in their Royal
presence. They have left their Revenue to circulate among us for the support of
the Government, they have never given us up to the uneasy domination of
Strangers, under which we sufficiently smarted in the short time of our Union
with France; we have been admitted to a share in the best Offices of England
and Ireland, and made no small part of our Princes Court; and if of late for
want of paying our attendance there, we are not so frequently advanced to high
Stations, yet we are sensible that all the trusts, honors and advantages of
our own Country remain entire in our hands, so that no additional Kingdom, no
not Arragon it self, with all its high privileges, has less reason to complain.

But after all this and much more that might be added of the Justice and
Goodness of our three last Kings, which well deserve the enlargements of a
Nobler Pen, we are still unhappy, because deprived by our Princes absence of
all the advantages that accrue to Learning from the nearness of a Court: We
have no foreign Ministers among us, nor send we any beyond Sea, by which we
might keep correspondence with the world abroad; strangers now have no occasion
to come within our borders and we seem to be in all respects cut off from the
Society of Mankind: We complain not of Nature for casting us into a corner of
the world, into a lean soil, and a Climate remote from the Sun; it is our Kings
distance from us we more heartily lament than the Suns: His Ancestors benign
influence made us easy under all the inconveniences Nature exposed us to, and
his person is a happiness which we envy our Neighbors much more than their
southern situation. The chief reason then why we languish in Virtue, and the
Muses grow barren among us, is, because of late we neither feel the dew, nor
the warmth of Royal Patronage; for certainly nothing can give so effectual a
check to great and aspiring minds, or keep them from that generous Contest, who
shall deserve best of the Government by any Learned undertaking, as to see
themselves almost without the reach both of the Princes eye and of his hand.

Of all this the following History gives us a signal instance. While Ferrara
was happy in its Dukes and their Court, it was one of the Noblest places of
Italy, Learning had such encouragement there, that not only the Natives saw
their Interest in studying, but strangers from all places were attracted by the
bounty of those Princes. When Rome did most shamefully neglect the Greek
Professors, Ferrara and Florence cherished them, and to the glorious protection
of the most Serene House of Este, and that of Medici, Italy chiefly owed its
increase of knowledge: But since by the Popes unjust usurpation Ferrara is
turned an accessory principality to that which is called St Peter's Patrimony,
the world hears no more news from thence; that University which was formerly so
Famous is seldom now mentioned, and the spirits of the Inhabitants are sunk
with their City almost into rubbish.

Having thus pointed at what a better Writer could more fully describe
concerning the true causes of the decay of Learning amongst us, I now come to
give an account of the Reasons and Design of my present undertaking. I observed
that the English had taken care to furnish us by way of Translation with the
general Histories of Countries, but lesser Principalities lay still neglected,
though in such we often meet with curious and great transactions that are not
commonly known. After I had therefore resolved to make some attempt of this
kind, my acquaintance with Italian Authors inclined me most to Italy, which has
always been the Theater of the most memorable Actions; and there the Princes of
Este presented themselves as best deserving my pains, in regard of the great
influence they have had upon the Affairs of that Country for many Ages: but
that which fully determined my choice was a hearty desire of making some small
acknowledgement of the Honor which her Royal Highness the Duchess of Albany
now does our Nation; and I had reason to believe that nothing could be more
grateful to my Contrymen, or more suitable to the Veneration they have for
her Highness, than an account of that Illustrious Race of Princes, of whom she
is descended. I have affected the simplicity of an Historical style, which next
to fidelity and exactness, I look on as the chief Ornament of such a Work.
After perusing carefully all the Historians of the Family, I chiefly consulted
Sigonius, Jovius and Guicciardin, and found some trouble in digesting my matter
into so short a compass. If I am approved of by judicious or discerning
persons, so that this Essay is favorably received, it will encourage me to go
on with the second part, where together with what immediately relates to the
Dukes of Modena, I shall take occasion to treat more largely than hitherto I
have done, of what has past of late in those parts; but if I have the luck to
be little read, or much censured, as this is my first Essay, so it is like to
be my last.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THe Rise of the House of Este, and the share it bore in the great
Occurrences of Italy, during the Invasion of the Huns, Vandals, Alains,
Herules, and Ostrogoths. Page 1 CHAP. II. The progress of the Family under the
Reign of the Lombards. p. 12 CHAP. III. The advancement of the Family under
Charles the Great and his Successors, until the settlement of the Imperial
Crown upon Otho the first. p. 22 CHAP. IV. The most Remarkable Actions of the
Counts of Este from Otho the Great to Henry the third. p. 41 CHAP. V. The most
material passages of the Life of Azo the fifth, and of Matildis Countess of
Este. p. 58 CHAP. VI. An Account of what past, as well in the German as in the
Italian branch of the Family from the death of Matildis, till Otho of Este Duke
of Brunswick was chosen Emperor: p. 87 CHAP. VII. The irreconcilable
differences of the Guelphs and Gibellins, with the Marquess of Este's getting
Ferrara, and the death of the most infamous Tyrant Actiolin, and of his Brother
Albericus. p. 118 CHAP. VIII. A continuation of the differences betwixt the
Guelphs and Gibellins until the death of Rinaldus the second. p. 141 CHAP. IX.
A brief account of what past in Lombardy from Opizo's advancement till that of
Borsius the first Duke of Ferrara, and of the Council held at Ferrara, to unite
the Greek and Latin Churches, under Eugenius the fourth; with several other
memorable transactions. p. 161 CHAP. X. The Life of Borsius the first Duke of
Ferrara and Modena. p. 189 CHAP. XI. The Life of Hercules the first, the second
Duke of Ferrara, etc. p. 201 CHAP. XII. The Life of Alphonsus the first, the
third Duke of Ferrara. p. 213 CHAP. XIII. The Life of Hercules the second, the
fourth Duke of Ferrara. p. 226 CHAP. XIV. The Life of Alphonsus the second, the
fifth and last Duke of Ferrara. p. 233 CHAP. XV. The pretended devolution of
the Duchy of Ferrara, Clement the Eights manner of proceeding with Duke
Caesar, and his retirement to Modena. p. 247 Ristretto delle Ragioni che la
Serenissima Casa d'Este, etc. p. 267 An Abstract of the Rights of the most
Serene House of Este, against the Apostolical Chamber in the time of Urban the
8th, by which it will appear, that Clement the Eights pretense for seizing upon
Duke Caesar's Territories was most weak and unreasonable. p. 279
ERRATA.
PAge 26. line 1. read, could have been, p. 35. l. 19. r. Gisela, p. 43. l. 8.
r. Otho, p. 44. l. 8. r. Almericus, p. 47. l. 23. r. formed so strong, p. 75.
l. 18. r. afterward have enjoyed, p. 93. l. 22. for and r. while, p. 96. l. 1.
r. affecting, p. 103. l. 21. r. he having, p. 104. l. 22. for standing r.
stood, p. 111. l. 19. r. to declare for, p. 124. l. 4. r. but that the, p. 124.
l. 5. r. should not, p. 127. l. 28. r. his own ruin, p. 128. l. 8. r. Legate
and Count Boniface, p. 129. l. 4. r. Marquess, p. 132. l. 17. r. to form, p.
138. l. 23. r. but being, p. 139. l. 20. for that r. until, l. 26. after
injured r. was so great that, p. 139. l. 25. r. done to satisfy the vengeance,
p. 160. l. 10. r. this as necessary to, p. 165. l. 25. for himself r. him, p.
168. l. 4. r. who was, p. 170. l. 13. r. Belluno, p. 170. l. 23. for coming r.
came, p. 170. l. 25. r. and turned, p. 170. l. 26. for and put r. putting, p.
173. l. 17. r. Sforza, p. 184. l. 9. r. Saluzzo's, p. 191. l. 25. r. sat upon,
p. 192. l. 1. r. who were placed, p. 200. l. 3. r. sick persons, p. 207. l. 23.
r. King at Alexandria, p. 209. l. 25. r. Francis Rangoni, p. 214. l. 18. r. so
prevented, p. 246. l. 14. after Court put a full point (.) l. 18. after Court
dele (:) p. 258. l. 26. for decreed r. desired.

THE HISTORY OF THE House of Este.
CHAP. I.
The rise of the House of Este, and the share it bore in the great Occurrences
of Italy, during the Invasions of the Huns, Vandals, Alains, Herules, and
Ostrogoths.

NEAR the Euganean Hills, betwixt Verona and Padoua, lies Este, a place of some
account with the Romans, but better known since their times for giving the
denomination to the most illustrious Family of which I am now to treat. The
Atii if we give credit to ancient Records, retired from Rome while yet a
Republic, and settling here, laid the foundation of their future Greatness
under the Emperors long before the barbarous Nations attempted the Conquest of
Italy. But lest by going too far back we be apt to mistake the way, where so
few footsteps remain to direct us, I shall begin only about the middle of the
fifth Century, whence the prospect downward is clearer; and do judge this
sufficient to assert the antiquity of the House of Este, without borrowing the
help of doubtful conjectures to raise it higher.

Atila's March toward Italy, made those who were most in danger, think of
putting themselves in some posture of defense; and the general rendezvous being
appointed at Padoua, the first man that appeared there with any considerable
Train, was Forestus of Este, whose forwardness we find rewarded with the
Command of the Forces sent to relieve Aquileia. In his March thither he put
sixteen thousand Huns to flight, by whom Atila having notice of his approach,
and guessing at his Design, did what he could to prevent him: But Forestus,
animated by his former success, forced his passage through some part of the
Army, and got safe into the City with the choicest of his Troops. His courage
and vigilance at first disappointed Atila in all his attempts, till in a Sally,
by the treachery of some of his Soldiers, he was drawn into an ambush, where
it is believed he fell by Atila's own hand.

His Son Acarinus equally concerned to defend his Country, and revenge
Forestus's death, brought such supplies to the besieged as helped to delay the
Fate of the City; but famine and the Besiegers obstinacy cutting off at length
all hopes of deliverance, after a long and vigorous resistance they retired by
night to Grado, where they were scarce well arrived, when the flames began to
appear that in a few hours buried Aquileia in its Ashes, as a lasting Monument
of Atila's cruelty.

The next place of importance after Aquileia was Altinum, built upon the Brink
of the Adriatic, which Atila presently gave order to block up: yet his great
expedition could not keep Acarinus from supplying it with men and provision,
nor from going thither in person to see that nothing were wanting for its
defense: but finding all endeavors prove ineffectual, he got together what
Boats and Shallops the neighboring Villages afforded and conveyed the
Inhabitants safe to the Islands of Boran, Mazorbo and Torcello, leaving the
bare Walls to the mercy of the Conqueror who treated Altinum as he had done
Aquileia.

Those of Treviso, Padoua, and Vicenza, not willing to trust Atila's clemency,
nor yet in a condition to resist him, were advised by Acarinus to shelter
themselves at Malamoco and several other little Islands near enough to be
furnished with necessaries from the Land, and yet secure from the Huns attacks;
and he himself perceiving how successful he had been in advising his
Neighbors, thought it high time to provide for the safety of those who were
more immediately under his care and protection, returning therefore to Este
before the Huns could reach it, he conducted his people to Palestrina, and
Chiozza, near the mouth of the Po.

Every place afterward yielding to Atila's victorious Army, the Country was
soon overrun; and he loaded with the spoils of so many Cities, thought fit to
go home, and disburthen himself, resolving to return the next year; but a
sudden Death occasioned, as some say, by poison; or as others, by drunkenness;
put a stop to this torrent, freed Italy from the apprehension ofa second
invasion, and the World from such a scourge of Gods wrath as former Ages had
not felt.

This drew Acarinus back to Este with thoughts to repair the Walls, had not
fresh troubles diverted him. The Empress, full of resentment against Maximus
for procuring the death of her Husband Valentinian the III. called in Genserick
King of the Vandals, who waited only for such an invitation. Wherever the
Vandals came they left greater marks of their cruelty than ever the Huns had
done; the only comfort was, they made no long stay, but went back into Africa,
and in requital of the Empresses kindness carried her and her two Daughters
with them as Trophies of their Victory.

Italy had not time to breathe after such a terrible blow when the Alains who
had hitherto contained themselves in France and Spain, crossed the Alps to
seize upon what the Vandals Acarinus had made retire unto the Islands of the
Adriatic, finding things every day grow worse, chose rather to struggle with
the inconveniences of those barren habitations than to be exposed to fresh
dangers; and then did the repeated Calamities of Italy give the first
beginnings to the City and Republic of Venice, which have since proved its
greatest Ornament, as well as the maintainer of its Liberty: So that in this
alone Italy must own it self sufficiently rewarded for what it then suffered,
and all may here trace the admirable methods of Divine Providence, which made
use of those barbarous Nations to raise this bulwark for after Ages against the
encroaching greatness of the Ottoman Power, more formidable to Italy and to all
Christendom than ever were Huns, Vandals or Alains.

But to return to Acarinus, his merit was now too well known to be long without
employment. Severianus the Emperor having raised an Army to chase away the
Alains, made Richimer Commander in chief, and Acarinus General of the Horse,
the next place in dignity and trust under him; and in this he did behave
himself so well, that the success of that great battle near Bergamo, in which
the King of the Alains was killed, his Army irrecoverably lost, and Italy
thereby once more freed from slavery was chiefly due to Acarinus's conduct.
Whereupon he was made Governor of all beyond the River Athesis, as the fittest
person to guard the Frontiers against the barbarous

All the rest of his life he enjoyed this great trust which few had either
merit or courage to aspire to; at last Odoacer King of the Herules considering
to what a weak pass the Empire was brought, ventured to tread the footsteps of
the Alains, and found Acarinus ready to oppose him. After several skirmishes
they came to a general Engagement, not far from Lode, where Acarinus,
overpowered by number, and refusing to yield, sealed all his generous
undertakings for his Country with his life. He being killed, Odoacer met with
little more resistance; but having taken Augustulus Prisoner, he became Master
of Italy. And thus was the Western Empire utterly abolished, which by Foreign
Invasions and Civil Broils had been in a languishing condition of a long time.

Acarinus had two Wives, the former was Gardena Queen of Damascus, who
accompanying Atila in his Expedition was persuaded to exchange her Crown for
the Christian Religion. By her he had Atius, so named from his Family; and by a
second Wife he had Constantius.

Though Odoacer's Government proved more gentle than was expected, yet Atius
(or Azo, a great name since in the House of Este) and his Brother Constantius,
not thinking themselves secure, retired into Germany; and coming into the Court
of Theodo Duke of Bavaria, had a reception from him full of respect and
kindness, Azo.

When Zeno was created Emperor of the East, as he was concerned for his Title
to Italy, though not able to make it good, so being willing likewise to find
employment for a Warlike Prince abroad, whom he looked upon as a dangerous
Neighbor, he declared Theodorick King of the Ostrogoths his General against
Odoacer. Theodorick clothed in this Expedition with the Emperors Authority
found many Friends, and none more zealous than Azo and Constantius. In the
three several Battles where Odoacer was overthrown, and at the Siege of
Ravenna, where he was glad to yield up a part of his Kingdom to save the rest.
These two Brothers were eminently Theodorick; and as he had found them most
active in his Establishment, so in his long and glorious Reign none shared
deeper in his favor and bounty than both of them did.

In the life of Azo we find little afterward remarkable, but his Brothers last
action, far surpassed all that he had formerly done. For when Theodatus
imprisoned Amalasuntha Theodorick's Daughter, Constantius mindful of his
obligations to that Family, Constantius, that he sent immediately to Justinian
the Emperor to give him an account of the tragical end of the innocent Queen,
and to implore his aid against the Murderer, assuring him of his and his
friends assistance, if he would espouse so just a cause. The Emperor embracing
the invitation, invaded Italy, and Constantius who made good his promise, had
the satisfaction to see Theodatus dethroned and killed. With much ado he
escaped the fury of Vitiges, who looked upon him as the chief Author of this
war, and lived not long enough to see the progress Bellisarius made.

Basilius his Son, and Boniface his Cosen, who accompanied Bellisarius in his
first expedition, were upon his being recalled in danger of falling into
Totila's hands; nor do we hear any more of them till Narses came to accomplish
what Bellisarius had twice begun. The reputation it seems of this General
encouraged them to take Arms, for both of them assisted in that great battle
where Totila was killed, and the Goths overthrown; and here Boniface fighting
valiantly upon the Head of the Auxiliary Troops received a wound of which he
soon after dyed, leaving his Son Valerian with his Cosen Basilius, to help
Narses in prosecuting this War, which ended in the extirpation of the Eastern
Goths after Italy.

CHAP. II.
The Progress of the Family under the Reign of the Lombards.

BAsilius and Valerian seeing Italy thus reunited to the Empire after so long a
Train of miseries, were expecting to taste the fruits of peace and of Narses's
bounty, when on a sudden the Lombards, a people not yet known in the Western
Parts of the World, threatened them with a Lombard's invasion fix it upon
Narses, who after having recovered Italy to the Emperor, expected to receive a
treatment suitable to his merit; but Justin the Second, governed by his
Empress, as Justinian had been all along by Theodora, slighted the service
which he could not sufficiently reward, and was so ill advised as to make known
his displeasure against Narses before his return: whereupon Narses, as the
Latins write, called in the Lombards; but, grieved for what he had done, dyed
before their arrival. The Greeks, who allow great weakness and ingratitude in
the Emperor's carriage in suffering a General to be exposed to the affronts of
his Empress and her Women, who had deserved so well the honor of a triumph,
with every thing else that the Emperor could do in acknowledgment of his
extraordinary merit; say nothing of his being privy to the Lombard's Design:
but on the contrary highly extol the prudence, courage and piety of Narses,
which certainly they would never have done, had they known his last action to
be so black.

Whoever they were that betrayed Italy to the Lombards, we are sure Basilius
and Valerian of Este had no hand in it, they being the only persons who had the
courage with a few Followers to stop Alboinus in his passage. In this they
followed the example of their glorious Ancestor Forestus, but came short of his
success; for their Forces bearing no proportion to the Lombards in number, they
were glad to give way to Alboinus's Fortune, and make the best terms for
themselves and their Subjects they could. And as the Country which submitted to
this Yoke has ever since been known by the name of Lombardy; so Italy upon the
other side of the Apennin must have expected no better Fate, had not the Queen
for being forced to drink out of her Fathers Scull, seasonably revenged this
barbarous affront by the death of her Husband Alboinus, before he could finish

Clephis, who succeeded him, was likewise killed after eighteen Months Reign,
and the Lombards, not agreeing upon a new choice, divided their whole Dominion
among thirty of their chief Officers with the title of Dukes. Basilius and
Valerian, glad to see them cantoniz'd after this manner, got together a small
Army, with which they fought Agisulphus Duke of Friuli, who narrowly escaped
being made Prisoner upon the defeat of his Army. The neighboring Dukes, of
Trent, Bergamo and Brescia, alarmed at this success, and jealous of their
growth, entered into a confederacy Basilius and Valerians proceedings.

The Emperor Justin not able of himself to give the Lombards great
disturbance, took occasion from their late incursions into France, to engage
that Nation against them; but the behavior of the French in this action, did
neither answer their forwardness nor the opinion the world had of them, for
they scarce enduring one charge of the Lombards, turned their backs, and left
many of their Chief Officers dead upon the place: among the rest we find
Valerian of Este here lost his life, fighting for the Liberty of his Country,
as his Father Boniface had done many years before in the War of Narses against
the Goths.

The Family having lost Valerian, Basilius by what we can learn, was then dead
or unfit for action. Agisulphus Duke of Friuli mindful of the defeat given him
by Valerian judged it now no hard matter to be revenged upon his Son.
Montselice which belonged to the Family of Este, and which of all the places in
that part of Italy, could only boast of never having received a Lombard within
its walls, was the prize he aimed at: but young Aldoardus Heir to Valerian's
courage as well as his fortune, did so bravely defend it, that Agisulphus
retired with confusion, leaving the place to the just owner.

This Action which sufficed to have raised Aldoardus's reputation, was in a
short time backed with many other proofs of his valor and conduct; at length
Ariovaldus King of the Lombards Aldoardus's friendship satisfied him in all his
pretensions; and further to unite Aldoardus to his Interests, gave him the Duke
of Fruili's Daughter in marriage. Aldoardus by this means freed from the
apprehension in which his Ancestors had lived ever since the first Invasion of
the Goths, past the rest of his time in great tranquillity, and dying without
Children left his Cozen Eribert heir to a plentiful fortune.

All the Family of Este had been Eribert, whose inclinations suitable to his
Education were all for peace. This the Lombards well understood, and were ready
to put the design in practice which they had been long hatching against him,
but happily his death prevented Ernestus, who resolved not to part on so easy
terms as his Father was like to have done, with what his Ancestors had
purchased so dear: the Lombards seeing the occasion lost, thought fit to
compose all differences, and to renew with Ernestus the friendship formerly
made with Aldoardus.

About this time the Sclavonians Adriatic, and making incursions into Friuli
with such numbers, that many were afraid it would in a short time come to a
formed Invasion: The Lombards had an Army sufficient to oppose them, but either
because they had no person among them fitly qualified, or because the
enterprise was so dangerous that all their Captains declined it: Ernestus was
chosen General, and did discharge this great trust much to the satisfaction of
those that employed him, for having beaten the Sclavonians in several battles,
he brought them to the Lombards terms.

This success removed the Lombards jealousies of a Foreign Power, yet while
Ravenna had an Imperial Garrison under an Exarch, as an Evidence of the
Emperors Title to what they possessed, there wanted not matter for fears: here
was kept a fire which though stifled at present might one day break out to
their destruction; and therefore they thought their Arms could not be better
employed than in reducing it; but Ernestus, instead of countenancing this
design immediately declared for the Ravenna.

Gregory the seconds bold Usurpation in pretending to free Italy from Leo
Isaurus had over it, because that Emperor fiercely opposed the worship of
Images, which Gregory was then introducing, proved more favorable to the
Lombards designs, for by this unjust sentence the Emperors Ministers were cast
out of most places, and that shadow of Authority left him, was quite lost, and
they encouraged to undertake the siege of Ravenna the second time: But
miscarrying again in their attempt, they set upon Rimini, which they had scarce
well invested when a Venetian Army under the Conduct of Ernestus gave them
battle, and after a hot dispute forced them to retire with great loss, leaving
their Kings Nephew prisoner to be led by Ernestus Venice.

All these disappointments did more inflame the Lombards against Ravenna, upon
which the fate of Rimini and the other places under the Emperor depended. And
Ernestus judging it the true interest of Italy that the Emperor should keep
this Key to open a passage for his Army when ever the occasions of his Friends
required it, did earnestly solicit the Pope to repeal the severe sentence he
had past, and to come to some accommodation with the Emperor, lest the
Lombards taking advantage of their difference, might e're long become Masters
of that Important place which hitherto had kept them from fastening their
chains harder upon Italy. But no arguments how weighty soever, being able to
work upon the Popes obstinacy, unless the Emperor would consent to the
erecting Images in Santa Sophia at Constantinople, as he himself had done in St
Peter's at Rome; Ernestus made have to Ravenna, where the Lombards were
assembling themselves from all hands; nor did he ever abandon the place during
its long and close

The fatal consequence of the Popes unjust dealing with the Emperor, was the
same that Ernestus had foretold; for the Lombards being now absolute Masters,
grew insupportable under King Astolphus; nor did any find their yoke heavier
than the Popes, who well deserved it by cutting off that arm which was most
likely to protect them, and it was remarkable, that God prolonged the injured
Emperors life, till he received the news of the Lombards having sacked Rome,
and in requital of Gregory the seconds favors, carried away all the Images of
Saint Peter's Church, which his superstitious zeal had with excessive charge
there placed. Nor is it to be doubted, but Leo's prejudice against Images was
more confirmed when he perceived the hand of God visibly join with him in
opposing them. After his death his Son Constantine Copronymus, though earnestly
courted by the Pope, yet could never be brought to meddle with the affairs of
Italy, being mindful of the ill usage Leo had met with; but France was more
Pepin began the War with his Son Charles the Great, finished by the destruction
of the Lombard Monarchy, renewing the Western Empire in himself and his family.

CHAP. III.
The advancement of the Family under Charles the Great and his Successors,
until the settlement of the Imperial Crown upon Otho the first.

DUring Pepin's Invasion we find no mention of Henry the Son, or as some
Writers will have him, the Grandchild of Ernestus; the only War I observe from
Atila down to this time, in which we cannot prove, that any of the House of
Este had part. Seeing the Historians silence leaves us to our conjectures, it
seems most probable that the unhappy death of Ernestus, and the incontroulable
Power of the Lombards after they got Ravenna, might keep Henry from engaging
till he had a certain prospect of their ruin; and therefore when Charles the
Great came, he first appeared upon the head of the Venetian Troops sent to
assist the French against the Lombards. Ernestus had been formerly their
General at Rimini, which made them the more willing now to employ Henry: Nor
could he decline so fair an occasion of being revenged upon the Lombards.

How well Henry behaved himself in this War, or how much his own merit, joined
to that of his Family, made him regarded, can best be proved by Charles the
Great's Bounty to him, after Desiderius King of the Lombards was taken
Prisoner, and the Army dismissed: For besides the confirmation Treviso given
him, the Country also of Scodosia, with the Title of Count, and his Son
Berengarius was invited to Court, as the fittest place for his education.

No sooner was the Emperor gone, but those who retained any kindness for the
Lombards began to hatch new Projects how to restore Adalgisius the Son of
Desiderius to his Fathers Throne. The great Contriver of this was Rodigaud Duke
of Friuli, who being jealous of their placing Henry at Treviso upon the Skirts
of his Country, as a Spy upon his actions, concluded that nothing could be done
till he were dispatched; by the Dukes instigation then the factious Party in
Treviso pretending the breach of some privileges, suddenly took Arms, killed
Henry, imprisoned his Wife and Children, and forced those of his Train to leave
the Town. Their success here gave encouragement to insurrections in other
places; so that it was like to have broken out into an open Rebellion, had not
the Emperors return confirmed his Authority, and given him occasion to enquire
into the Authors of such practices.

Rodigaud being found guilty of the Murder of Henry, lost his head, those of
Treviso were severely dealt with, Henry's Wife and Children were set at
liberty; and to secure the peace of that Country, Berengarius, Henry's Son,
being high now in the Emperors favor, was left in his Fathers place, and did
in every thing answer the good opinion the Emperor conceived of his zeal and
fitness for his service.

While Berengarius lived at the Emperors Court, his winning carriage made him
to be highly regarded by all, and particularly by Prince Lewis the Emperors
Son, who, succeeding Charles the Great, invited Berengarius into France. At his
arrival he found the purple had no way changed the Princes former inclinations;
and after some stay at Court, an occasion was offered by which he was assured
of the Emperors confidence in him, and the Emperor likewise of his fidelity.
Charles the Great had declared his Grandchild Bernard King of Italy, but he
being young and ambitious, suffered himself to be persuaded by his Favorites,
That the Imperial Crown did of right belong to him, as the Son of Lewis's Elder
Brother. This, with the invitations sent him from the disaffected Party in
France, did soon engage him in a War against his Uncle. Upon the News of
Bernard's March toward France, the Emperor, who was jealous of most about
him, gave the Command of his Army to Berengarius Count of Este, who, without
hazarding a Battle, being afraid of the treachery of his under Officers, who
either were or easily could be corrupted, did so manage the business that King
Bernard, disappointed of the French that were to join him, and abandoned by
most of those he brought from Italy, was persuaded by Berengarius to come in
person to the Emperors Court, there to own his rashness, and to humble
himself to his Uncle; But the barbarous usage he had, did much lessen the Glory
of Berengarius's action: For the poor Prince, when he expected only a gentle
rebuke, and leave to return home, was cast into a loathsome Prison, after

Upon King Bernard's death the Emperors Son Lotharius was sent into Italy, and
because he was young and not acquainted with the customs of the Country.
Berengarius by his Fathers Order did accompany him thither, to advise him in
all affairs of moment. Berengarius, proving more useful to the Emperor in
Italy than he could be elsewhere, continued there several years; and by his
credit ordered things as he pleased. Some sparks of jealousy afterward
appearing betwixt the Emperor and his Children, were industriously blown up
into a Civil War by those who could never forgive King Bernard's death.
Berengarius, ever true to the Emperors interest, upon the first report of his
danger made what haste he could toward him, yet came too late; for the
Emperor was already stripped of his power, and confined to a Monastery, where
they intended he should have past the rest of his time in expiating by a rigid
penance the

If they had dealt more gently with him, it is likely he had never been able to
weather so violent a storm; but however strange it may seem, his being brought
so very low was the occasion of his speedy re-establishment. For that popular
fury which at first he could not withstand, was presently turned to compassion,
and the Emperor again put in a condition to call his Sons to an account while
they were at variance among themselves. We have reason to believe this
unexpected change was not wrought without Berengarius: For we find he had no
inclination to return again into Italy, where Lotharius governed, but spent the
rest of his life at Court, had his share in those troubles which came thick
upon the Emperor in his latter days, and died at Paris with the repute of one
of the wisest and greatest Captains of his Bernard's ruin, which if he had
foreseen, no doubt he would have declined the employment.

He left his Son Otho so young that he never appeared at the Court of
Lotharius, who besides had no kindness for his Family; but when his Son Lewis
the Second came to the Empire, Otho got as much into his favor as Berengarius
had done into that of Charles the Great, or of Lewis his Son. He had been
trained up in Military Discipline under his Father, for which the Emperor made
him General of the Horse; and this charge requiring his constant attendance at
Court, the management of his affairs in Italy was left to his friends. He had
the City and Territory of Commachio given him as a reward of his and his
fathers services done to the Imperial Crown; which is evident by the Grant from
the Emperor yet to be seen among the ancient records of Este. Nor does this a
little aggravate the injustice of Clement the 8th to the family of Este, who
seizing upon the Duchy of Ferrara in the Year 1598. upon a pretended
devolution took from them at the same time the City of Commachio with its
Territory, which they only owed to the Emperors bounty, and to which the Pope
or Church could not pretend any Title: but truly the carriage of Clement in
this whole business was most illegal and tyrannical, as I question not, before
I conclude this History, to make appear to all who are not highly partial.

The Venetians who were ever jealous of their growing Neighbors, did what they
could to keep Otho's Son Marinus from taking possession of Commachio; and
failing in this employed fresh arts to thrust him out. Marinus heard of their
practices, and had secret information that the Doge's Brother was to pass
within a few miles of Commachio, in his way to Rome, to treat with the Pope
about it: Marinus to prevent this, took a rash and injustifiable course; for
having laid wait for the Ambassador, he brought him to the City, and made him
there swear, that neither he nor his Brother should ever attempt any thing in
prejudice of Commachio or of what belonged to his Father.

The Venetians highly resenting the affront they here received in the person of
the Ambassador, sent immediately their Navy against Commachio, which being ill
provided, could not long hold out, Marinus retired first to Ferrara, then into
France, where having given an account to his Father of what had happened, he
soon after fell sick and died. But the Emperor concerned to make good to Otho
Venetians, saw him possessed of Commachio, and renewed the ancient friendship
betwixt the Republic and the family of Este.

Whether Otho continued in the same station at Court, after the death of Lewis
the second, we cannot certainly learn; but it is plain he lived to the latter
end of the Reign of Carolus Crassus. He was married to Friuli's Daughter, by
whom he had four Sons, two of which were Vbertus and Sigifred: the Saracens had
long infested Italy, and never wanted encouragement from such as preferred the
revenge of their private quarrels, to the weal of their Country. Most of the
Cities put themselves under the protection of some person of courage and
interest, which made Parma, and Luca choose Sigifred, they of Luca had suffered
much of late by those Infidels, whom Albericus Marquess of Toscany had called
in out of Malice to the Pope, upon condition they would not meddle with any of
his Subjects; but as soon as Sigifred was engaged, both Luca and Parma found
themselves as much out of danger, as those that belonged to Albericus did, and
upon much more honorable terms owing their safety wholly to their Generals
courage, without making that base contract of freeing their own Estates at the
charge of their Neighbors. Vbertus was Count of Este and Commachio, the
History of whose life the writers of that age, have thought fit to leave us in
a few, yet so weighty words, that if there were extant a perfect Journal of his
actions, we could not thence form a more glorious Panegyric or a compleater
Idea of his worth, he treated always his Subjects, say they with the same
tenderness, as if they had been his Children, by which he did so gain upon
their affections, that they were rather loath than afraid to offend him, and his
discreet indulgence preserved his Authority more than severity could have done.

Italy reaped no benefit by its union with France; the Imperial Crown had of
late been set upon some Heads that did ill fit it: For the Race of Charles the
Great was strangely degenerate, and almost spent; the late Emperor Carolus
Crassus, who at first filled the Empire with the expectation of an
extraordinary Prince, was afterward laid aside for insufficiency, and brought
so low as not to have a servant left him, nor any thing allowed for his
maintenance except what flowed from the Bishop of Mentz's Charity. Arnulphus
who came after him found more business in Germany than he could well deal with;
and Lewis of Provence was making haste toward Pavia, nothing doubting the
Conquest of Italy. Most of the Italians therefore being weary of a Foreign Yoke
began to think of choosing a Prince of their own Nation, a blessing they had not
enjoyed of many Ages. Vido Duke of Spoletum, and Berengarius Duke of Friuli
both descended of Charles the Great by their Mothers, thought their quality
equal, and their title better than that of Lewis, whom they forced to return
into France, and agreed the matter so, that Vido should be Emperor, and
Berengarius King of Italy. Vido miscarrying in his attempt fell Berengarius,
dispossessed him of all, and Berengarius, with some of his most trusty friends,
among whom was Vbertus Count of Este, took Sanctuary at the Court of Arnulphus,
whom he engaged in a War against Vido: At their coming into Italy they found
Vido dead, and his Son Lambertus in his place; and after great variety of
successes, and much bloodshed, Berengarius was again restored; but before he
was settled, had new disturbance given him from Lewis of Provence, countenanced
by Tuscany, who could not endure to see any Italian greater than himself, and
by the Marquess of Eporoedia, though he had married Giscla the Daughter of
Berengarius. Notwithstanding all their endeavors Berengarius had the better,
and made Lewis enter into a solemn vow, never to return more into Italy:
Afterward Lewis not valuing this oath, which he said was extorted, undertook a
third invasion, in which his success did justly answer his perfidy; for being
taken prisoner, according to the barbarous resentment of that

Berengarius as soon as he was eased of the fears of so dangerous a Rival,
disposed of what he could among his friends, and none had a larger share either
in his bounty or affection than Vbertus, who never had deserted him in all his
troubles. Vbertus by his last Will committed his Son Albertus to the Kings care
and protection, which thing succeeded happily to the Family; for Giscla the
Kings Daughter being divorced from the Marquess of Eporoedia her former
husband, for his siding with Lewis of Provence, was given in marriage to
Albertus.

The ancient root of Este was at this time conspicuous in its branches,
Sigifred whom I mentioned before, was still alive, both loved and obeyed by
those of Luca and Parma, which were grown considerable under his Government.
Almericus Cousin German to Albertus was invited to Ferrara to be Rector, for so
they named the Chief Magistrate in that City; but his equity in the decision of
all their differences, and his zeal in uniting them in one common interest,
prevailed upon them so far, that they soon abrogated the Office of Rector as
too mean and precarious, and declared him their Prince. Giscla had also
enriched the Family, with two Sons Hugo and Azo, and a Daughter, who was
afterward married to Petrus Candianus Doge of Venice.

Albertus being thus happy in his Kinsmen, happy in his Offspring, and above
all, in his Father in Law, lest the world in good time before the scene
changed: For Berengarius after twenty years glorious reign was murdered Verona,
and leaving no Male Issue, Berengarius, Giscla's Son by her former husband laid
claim to his Grandfathers Crown. The Princes of Italy having no great Opinion
of his merit, being unwilling likewise to submit to one of the same rank with
themselves, called in Rodolphus King of Burgundy; presently weary of Rodolphys,
they sent to Hugo of Arles, with whom Rodolphus adjusted all differences, by
giving his Daughter Adeleidis to Lotharius Hugo's Son, and Italy. Lotharius
proved but a weak Prince, and this put Berengarius again in a condition to
dispute his Title, which he did to so good purpose, that getting the Power into
his hands he left Lotharius only the empty name, nor did he ever rest till
Lotharius was killed, and thereupon had himself created Emperor, and his Son
Albertus King.

He came to the Crown by the same difficult steps his Grandfather Berengarius
the first had done, which made many hope he would imitate him in his Princely
Virtues, and restore to Italy that Government which they were not sensible of
while they enjoyed it. Yet his carriage presently discovered that he designed
nothing less, seeing he neglected those whom the ties both of nature and
gratitude ought to have made him regard. What in all outward appearance could
have been more for the Interest of Hugo and Azo of Este after their
Grandfathers death than to have their Brother Emperor; but it proved much
otherwise, for Berengarius, either jealous of Hugo's aspiring to the Crown,
whom he knew to be popular and bold; or still angry when he reflected how much
he and his Brother were caressed at Court in their Grandfathers time, took all
occasions to slight and discountenance them. Hugo could hardly bear such ill
usage, and just when his long-stifled anger was ready to break out, as fair an
occasion of being revenged upon Berengarius presented it self as Hugo could
have desired.

Adeleidis the Wife of Lotharius, who by her excellent deportment had strangely
insinuated her self into all peoples affections, promised not to leave Italy in
the condition whereunto Berengarius had brought it, and he knowing how little
he was beloved, designed her for his Son Albertus, hoping by this means both to
strengthen his interest, and keep her from any other match which might prove in
the end fatal to him and his Family. But Adeleidis in her heart hated
Berengarius as the Author of her husbands death, and rejected Albertus upon his
Fathers score. Berengarius resolving to gain by threats her, who was proof
against all allurements, confined her first to Pavia, then to a more narrow
prison, whence there was no hopes of deliverance but by consenting to a
marriage with Albertus.

Hugo who knew nothing to be more natural to Berengarius than cruelty, being
sensible of the Queens danger, whom he judged not likely to yield, generously
ventured all to rescue her, and oblige Otho King of Germany, for whom Adeleidis
was designed before her imprisonment. Having therefore got without suspicion
into the Castle where she was kept in the midst of a Lake, by the help of a
Priest, of whose fidelity and courage he had formerly experience, the Queen was
let down out of a Window, and conveyed away in a Boat which lay ready for that
purpose, into the next Wood, where she continued several days with Hugo, the
Priest furnishing them with such entertainment as he could procure from the
neighboring Villages. Notice being given to Otho of the Queens escape, his
Army presently advanced toward Italy; and this put all in such a
consternation, that Hugo and the Queen got without any further danger into the
Castle of Cannossa, where Azo expected them.

Otho having received his Queen Hugo her Deliverer, marched on toward
Berengarius, whose tyranny had now rendered him so odious, that being deserted
by all his friends, he delivered himself up Prisoner with his Son Albertus; and
Otho without much trouble possessed himself of the Imperial Crown which has
ever since continued in the German Nation. No reward seeming too great for the
person to whom he owed his Queen, Hugo was made Governor of all that Country,
which is now known by the name of the Duchy of Milan, the Duchy of
Montferrat, Piemont, and the territory of Genoua, and Berengarius was carried
Prisoner into Germany.

CHAP. IV.
The most remarkable actions of the Counts of Este from Otho the Great to Henry
the third.

AFter a short confinement Berengarius had leave to return into Italy with the
title of King, but much limited in his Authority, which he was too apt to
abuse; scarce was he well settled when forgetful of the Emperors clemency and
his own engagements, being enraged at those who had helped to humble him, he
behaved himself more cruelly than ever. Hugo whose splendid way of living did
eclipse him, was the chief object of his wrath, but too powerful for him to
meddle with. After Hugo's death he took occasion to fall out with his Brother
Azo about their Mother Giscla's inheritance, and their difference ended in
Azo's being turned out of all he had, and forced to fly for his life into
Germany with his

With them must the family of Este have perished, had not the hopeful Issue of
Sigifred Prince of Parma supported it, Sigifred himself was dead; but his
eldest Son Azo entering upon his Cousins desperate fortune in spite of the
Tyrant maintained his right, and confirmed his younger brothers in theirs at
Parma and Luca.

The loud cries of Berengarius's oppression, and the complaints of such as
every day fled from Italy, reaching the Emperors ears, brought his Son
Lodolphus with an Army from Germany against the Tyrant. Lodolphus being
suddenly killed, Azo the third happening to be then in the Camp, was chosen
General in the Princes room. In this station he had not continued many days,
when engaging the enemy he obtained a signal victory, and reduced several
places to the Emperors obedience. Wherever he came the people crowded to
welcome him as the deliverer of his Country, Piacenza and Regio desiring to
live under his protection, presented him with their keys, many Cities being
weary of their late sufferings, were making have to free themselves from the
yoke of Berengarius, who on the other hand was using all diligence to raise
forces, and to put a stop to Azo's success. But Otho's appearing the second
time with a strong Army after some few skirmishes rather than fights, took
Berengarius prisoner, and sent him into Germany, there to endure perpetual
imprisonment for the miseries he had brought upon his Native Country.

Otho's occasions requiring his speedy return into Germany, he resolved to put
the Government of Italy into sure hands; and none having deserved so well of
him, nor being so able to do him service as Azo, he committed all to his trust,
with the title of Vicar of Italy: This unlimited Power Azo discreetly employed
for the establishment of the Emperors Authority, yet not without giving
satisfaction to those he governed, by which he added greatly to the former
luster of his family.

Azo left several Sons, the eldest was Albertus the second, Otho's chief
Favorite, whom some of the Italian writers call Albertatius; the second was
Thedaldus, whom the City of Ferrara mindful of its former happiness under a
Prince of the house of Este, chose in the place of Almaricus lately dead. After
the death of his Father and Uncle he had likewise Regio, Parma and Luca, by
which he laid the foundation of that Power and Riches which his Grandchild,
the Countess Matildis so famous in the Histories of those times, did foully
mis-imploy in setting up the Papal Authority against that of the Emperors; as
we shall relate hereafter.

The vast possessions fallen to Albertus by his Fathers death might have
invited him home, had he not been deeply engaged at the Emperors Court. From
the time of Charles the Great, the Family of Este had been dignified with the
title of Counts, which Otho changed into that of Marquess; and thinking he
could never too well requite Hugo's kindness in rescuing Adeleidis from the
hands of Berengarius, he gave his Daughter, by Adeleidis named Alda, in
marriage to Albertus, with ten Castles in Lombardy, and the City of Friburgh in
Germany.

Upon the death of Otho the Great, dissensions arose about the Succession, for
his Brother Henry of Bavaria trusting in his Interest, with the neighbor
Princes, endeavored to wrest the Imperial Crown from his Nephew Otho the
second. But Albertus being zealous for the young Prince, engaged so many in his
behalf, as made good the Justice of his Cause against the Usurper. This did
beget him the irreconcilable hatred of Henry, which he little valued, while he
was so fast united to the Emperor. Harald King of Denmark was one of those
that declared for Henry, and brought an Army to the Fields to over-aw those who
should offer to oppose him; but Albertus with the Emperors Forces gave him
such a blow, that all his threats ended in a peace with Otho upon very unequal
terms.

Things thus settled at home, Otho the second went to free Naples from the
Saracens, whom the Greeks had called in; the flower of the German Nobility
accompanied him in this Expedition; and Albertus hoping his absence might then
be dispensed with, stopped in Lombardy to look into the concerns of his Family,
which the Emperors Affairs had made him long neglect. Otho gave the Saracens
battle under the walls of Benevent, where by the treachery of the Romans his
Army was overthrown, and he himself made his escape most miraculously after
having been sometime, though unknown, in the enemies hands. Albertus having the
news of the Emperors defeat hasted toward him with what Troops he could
raise, and came in time to help to reunite the Emperors scattered Army, which
thereupon made head against the Saracens when they least expected it; killed
all that made any resistance, and then pursuing the advantage, never gave them
time to breathe till they had chased them out of Naples; from thence had Otho
the title of Saracenicus given him. At his return to Rome, he treated those who
had betrayed him with the utmost severity, and was going on to see deeper every
day into their indirect practices, when he was seized with a desperate fever
which killed him in a few days.

Otho the third came to the Crown so young, that Henry of Bavaria's ill success
formerly did not discourage him from a second attempt; he had got the young
Prince into his hands, pretending he was his Guardian, and that till he were of
age none ought to question his Right to Govern. Albertus who well understood if
Henry succeeded in this, so long as he lived, Otho was never like to enter upon
the Government, showed no less concern now than he had done formerly for Otho
the second. Others who remembered that he had been too hard for Henry, were
encouraged to join, and formed a strong confederacy in defense of Otho, that
Henry seeing the difficulty of the enterprise, with the doubtfulness of the
success gave it over.

Albertus lived to see Otho the third in sure possession of the Crown which he
had been so eminently instrumental in setting both upon his, and his Fathers
head. Never did any man promote the interest of Princes more than Albertus did
that of the three Emperors under whom he lived, nor have we any ground to tax
them of backwardness in acknowledging his merits. He was honored with Otho the
first's Daughter in marriage, under Otho the second, and Otho the third, he had
the chief trusts of the Government committed to him, and had such a strange
influence upon all their Counsels, that nothing but the assurance of his
integrity could have justified their prudence in placing any man in so high a
sphere.

Alda brought him three Sons, the eldest was Hugo the second, who succeeded his
Father, not only in his Possessions and Title, but which is a rare thing, in
his Interest at Court. About this time Rome grew big with a new project of
setting up an Italian Monarchy in opposition to the Emperors. The severity, or
as some termed it, the cruelty of Otho Romans conceive an unalterable prejudice
against his Family and his Nation, and those who expected to advance their
fortunes by a change, did most carefully foment these humors. The great Engine
which moved all was one Crescentius, who according to the character given him
by the Italian Writers wanted none of the qualifications necessary for such an
undertaking: Upon all occasions he did inveigh against the Emperor with equal
boldness and eloquence, complaining how much his Countrey-mens spirits were
debased from those of their Ancestors, in suffering a dull phlegmatic People,
and a Priest (the Germans he mean'd and the Pope) to keep the Mistress of the
world thus in slavery. Being created Consul he endeavored to retrieve some of
the lost Power to that empty name, and began with the Pope whom he chased from
Rome, that so he might order things as he pleased.

Otho had notice of all that past; and judging it a business of too great
consequence to be neglected, set forward toward Rome, accompanied by his
Cousin the Marquess of Este, and many of the German and Italian Nobility. In
his march he had advice of the Popes death, which made him create a Kinsman of
his own, and a German, Pope, by the name of Gregory the fifth, whom he sent to
Rome before him to see if they would acquiesce in his choice. Crescentius and
the Romans to divert the present danger, received the new Pope with much
outward respect, confessed their rashness in calling the Emperors Authority in
question, and readily promised entire submission for the future, though it soon
appeared they intended nothing less: for scarce was the Emperor gone when the
former project being again set on foot, Gregory was rejected as an Usurper; and
John Bishop of Piacenza a Greek by Nation, friend to Crescentius, and the
richest Prelate of Italy, placed in the Chair.

Otho enraged at their proceedings made what preparation he could for a new
Expedition, resolving not to be put off a second time with fair words; with the
German Army, and the Troops that Hugo of Este had raised in Italy, the Emperor
invested Rome, which Crescentius having fortified, refused to deliver; but
there being neither Provision nor Forces sufficient to hold out a long siege,
the City was taken, and in it the new Pope, who had his eyes put out, his nose
and ears cut off, and with his face backward, was afterward carried upon an
Ass round the City in triumph. Crescentius retired to the Castle of St Angelo,
which he defended with such obstinacy, that the Emperor seemed glad to agree
to what terms he would; but he was the more liberal in his promises, because he
never designed to perform them: for Crescentius after having suffered many
indignities in his person, was sentenced to end his life upon a Gibbet. He was
a person of rare endowments, and might have deserved a more honorable death,
had he employed himself in a better Cause. In short, Crescentius had truly the
fate of all unsuccessfull Traitors, to be infamous to Posterity for miscarrying
in his attempt; but if his Fortune had bore any proportion to the greatness of
his mind, we had found him ranked among the Worthies of Italy.

All must own that Crescentius did not make good his promise to Otho; yet this
could not vindicate Otho's breach of his Royal word, or secure him from the
subtle contrivances of the Romans, who vowed the death of Crescentius should be
revenged; and they had so ordered the matter, that when the Emperor fancied
himself free from all danger, he must have fallen into their hands, had not his
Cousin Hugo of Este disappointed them, by conveying him away by night. The sense
of so narrow a deliverance, with Hugo's great performances in this and the
former expedition, made Otho Create him Marquess of Italy, a Title Hugo so
conspicuous, that the Histories of those Times call him the Marquess without
any further distinction, as we gather from Arnulphus of Milan, and
Scafnaburgensis, and even down to the time of Villani and Dante; when they
spoke of the Marquess, he of Este is to be understood, as having a particular
right to this Title above all the Families of Italy.

Though Hugo had helped the Emperor to humble the Romans, and by discovering
the Conspiracy against his person, seemed to have brought things to that
hopeful pass, that there remained no further ground for fears; yet the
restless attempts of Otho's enemies at length succeeded, for some Roman Gloves
were presented him by Crescentius's widow, in which the richness of the perfume
did cover such a deadly poison as killed him before his Physicians knew he was
infected: this the ambitious Woman was said to have done, not so much upon her
husbands account, as for the affront done to her self, whom the Emperor
promised to marry, but afterward changed his inclinations, which her haughty
Spirit could not digest.

Otho the third dying without Children, Henry of Bavaria came to the Crown,
which his Father had so much coveted in the minority of the two late Emperors;
and was as I have already mentioned, opposed in it by Albertus of Este; nor did
their quarrel end with their lives, but was entailed upon their Sons, as might
be seen in Henry, who from the beginning discovered a dislike to Hugo's
management of the affairs of Italy, and let drop some expressions that he
designed to remove him from all Public Trust, as soon as he found himself
settled. This preposterous resolution lost him Italy for some years, because
Hugo having notice of it engaged his whole interest to exclude Henry and set up
Ardoinus Marquess of Eporoedia, who supported likewise by most of the Nobility
of Lombardy came without much opposition to be chosen King at Pavia. The
success he had at his entry upon the Government against Henry's Army put him in
peaceable possession of his Crown, the disturbances of Germany not allowing
Henry to look any further at present. The only person Ardoinus could never gain
was the Archbishop of Milan, who ceased not to solicit Henry till he brought
the Germans again into Italy, and then did Ardoinus part with his Kingdom upon
as easy terms as he had got it; and Hugo was fain to retire to the Greek
Emperors General in Naples, whither Henry pursued him, and took him prisoner
with his three Sons.

Henry having got Hugo and his Sons in his power, did beyond their expectation
show a rare example of clemency; for when in them he might have extirpated the
family, remembering his rash expressions had in a Hugo to whatever he formerly
possessed, renewed his Commission of Vicar of Italy, and dismissed his Sons with
great expressions of kindness. Hugo to show himself worthy of the Emperors
confidence, did make it afterward the whole study of his life to promote his
Service, and effectually recovered him by his gentle Government the hearts of
the Italian Nation, which the severity of Otho the second, and Otho the third
had alienated. He lived to a great age, was universally lamented at his death,
and proposed to posterity as the true pattern of a worthy Magistrate, who could
advance the Princes Authority, without invading the Peoples Rights.

Azo the fourth succeeded him about the same time that Henry the second dying
without Children, left the Imperial Crown to Conrard Duke of Franconia; who out
of a particular value he had for Azo, promoted his match with Cunigunda the
Duke of Bavaria's only Daughter. By her Azo had a Son called Welpho, who
inheriting all his Grandfather the Duke of Bavaria's Territories, gave the
first rise to the most Illustrious Family of Brumswick and Lunenburgh, which is
thus descended of the Family of Este. The Abbot of Vrspergh writes that the
Original of that Family was from an Italian Marquess who married in Germany;
and this Marquess, both the Records of Este, and Aventinus in his History of
Bavaria, prove to have been Azo Hugo's Son, of whom I now treat.

Cunigunda died young, leaving this only Son Welpho; who was plentifully
provided for in Germany: Afterward Azo married, as some write, the Emperor
Conrards Daughter; as others, Azo the fifth, after his own name, who if the
Pope had not showed himself most unjust in the matter of his marriage with his
Cousin the Countess Matildis, was in a fair way to have been one of the richest
Princes of that age, as I shall now make appear, and hope to give the Reader
some satisfaction in treating of Matildis, whose double Relation to the Family
of Este, both by Blood and Marriage, makes her naturally fall under our
consideration in this place; and if I do enlarge, the great influence she had
upon all the remarkable transactions of that age, seems to require it.

CHAP. V.
The most material passages of the Life of Azo the fifth, and of Matildis
Countess of Este.

THedaldus (whom I made mention of) a younger Brother of this Family, and Uncle
to the great Hugo, had raised himself to vaste wealth; this his Son Boniface
did so much enlarge, that none in Italy came near him. He was called Marquess
of Tuscany, and had Ferrara, Modena, Mantoua, Regio, Parma and Luca, and upon
his Marriage with Beatrix the Emperor Conrards Daughter, he had Verona, and
that which is since called the Patrimony of St Peter given him; all which after
the death of his little Son Frederick fell to his Daughter Matildis, under the
tuition of her Mother Beatrix.

Beatrix being left so rich by Boniface, though her Father Conrard was dead,
yet under her Brother, Henry the third did manage Italy as she pleased; but her
disposing of her self and her Daughter Matildis to Godfrey Lorrain and his Son,
without the Emperors consent, justly offended him; seeing by this she gave
footing in Italy to a Powerful Family, which might have given the Empire
trouble if there had been any Issue by either marriage. Yet that which made
Henry most jealous was lest these Princes should join with the Popes, who of
late were become very troublesome; for taking advantage of the Emperors
absence, they did every day make some encroachments upon them: and were then
come to that pass, that instead of allowing the Emperors Prerogative in
confirming them which had been always practiced, Benedict the ninth took upon
him to deprive Henry the third of his Right of Succession, and gave the
Imperial Crown to Peter King of Hungary, upon condition he would depend upon
him and his Successors.

Henry to give a check to an Usurpation of so dangerous consequence, and
likewise to remove the great scandal occasioned by three Popes, all Reigning at
once, passed into Italy, called a Council at Rome, where Benedict the ninth,
Sylvester the third, and Gregory the sixth being convicted of several Crimes,
were all laid aside, and Clement the second chosen Pope; and for preventing
such abuses, it was Decreed, That none should be admitted for the future,
except such as the Emperor approved of; all that were present at the Council
confirmed it by Oath; and during the rest of the Reign of Henry the third, this
method of Election was observed: But Henry the fourth being left young under
the Government of his Mother, the Romans when there was nothing to apprehend
forgot their Oath, and made choice of Stephen the ninth, without consulting the
Emperor: Soon after they openly declared, he was not to meddle either in the
nomination or approbation of Popes; and this Doctrine never openly taught
before, in a short time by the Empresses connivence, and the countenance it had
from Matildis and her Mother, was so universally received, that Henry when he
came of age, found his challenging it as a right the source of all his
calamities.

Matildis gave early proof of her blind attachment to the Pope, which her
Husband (either to secure a party upon occasion against the Emperor, or to
comply with Matildis's inclinations) did much encourage at first, and grew
sensible of his folly in it too late, when he saw her forget not only her duty
to her Sovereign the Emperor, but likewise to himself who was her husband.

The person that bewitched Matildis was Hildibrand, afterward Gregory the
seventh, to whose Councils she gave her self up so entirely, that her Forces,
her Money, and her Interests were all at his disposal. Hildibrand was of mean
extraction, the Son (as Cranzius an accurate writer says) of a Smith, and
designed for a Monk; but being more inclined to business than devotion, or a
retired life, he abandoned the Cloister, and went to Rome, where his natural
subtilty and ambition, masked with an appearance of virtue and a public
spirit, raised him in a few years to such a pitch, that whatsoever Pope they
chose without his consent, was soon dispatched; and even those whom he
advanced, if they proved not for his purpose had no better luck, as Benno and
other of their Writers inform us. By the means of one Brazutus his old
acquaintance in the Magic School, no less than six Popes were poisoned in
thirteen years. Every one could easily discern how well Matildis was like to
thrive in such hands.

The Pope that immediately preceded Hildibrand was Alexander the second,
formerly Bishop of Luca, whom he had set up in opposition to the Emperor, but
eased him of the trouble of governing; the Bishops therefore of Lombardy not
longer able to see Henry's Authority thus contemned, the decree of their
Council slighted, and their oath broken, persuaded the Emperor to call a
Council at Basil, where Alexander was declared an Usurper, and Cadolus Bishop
of Parma chosen Pope by the name of Honorius the second; most of the Prelates
and Nobility of Lombardy accompanied Honorius in his journey to Rome; but
Matildis at the head of an Army opposed him and the Emperor, in behalf of
Alexander and Hildibrand. After many contests both parties agreeing to hold a
Mantoua, the Emperor, though there present was betrayed; for Matildis by
Hildibrands direction corrupting one part of the Council, and over-awing
another in her own City, had Honorius cast, and Alexander confirmed: And
Hildibrand not satisfied with the Popes Authority, and his Revenue, procured a
dose to be given Alexander to make way for himself.

From one raised by such steps they could not but expect extraordinary things;
at first he seemed to apprehend the Emperors resentment of his illegal
election, but Matildis offering to sacrifice Life and Fortune in his Cause,
quickly removed his fears, and Rome, there to answer in a Synod to such
Articles as were brought against him, threatening that if he refused to come, he
would pass to the sentence of Excommunication. The divisions of Germany made
the Emperor unwilling to come to a breach with the Pope, who he knew had made
sure of Matildis; yet no reasonable condescension being able to satisfy
Gregory, they advised the Emperor to take the start of him, and to assemble a
Council at Worms to look first into Gregory's actions. At the opening of this
Assembly, strange were the accusations brought in against Gregory, and none
plainer than those of Hugo, one of his Cardinals, who presented Letters from
Rome, signed by many persons of unsuspected integrity, showing at large his
Crimes, both before and after his coming to the Papacy; and how the Election
was carried for him by Matildis and her Guards, whose acclamations served him
to better purpose, than the Votes of those who were to choose. All which being
impartially examined and considered, Gregory, as the Abbot of Vrspergh relates,
was declared an Usurper, an introducer of dangerous Novelties, and a person of
a scandalous life that had no right to his dignity, and was no longer to be
obeyed. The news being brought into Italy, several of the Lombard Bishops at
Pavia confirmed what had past at Worms.

Matildis and Gregory all this while were very hard at work, she in raising
Forces to defend the Pope, if any should attempt to dispossess him, and he in
laying out her treasure among the Bishops, that things might pass against
Henry, according to their minds in the Synod appointed at Rome. Little did they
think that any durst have proclaimed the Decree of Worms in an Assembly
composed of Gregory's own Creatures, and where he in person did preside,
guarded by Matildis's troops: but one Roland a Priest of Parma coming boldly
up, without paying him any respect, required him, in the name of the most
Religious Emperor, and of the most Reverend Bishops of Italy, France, and
Germany, to resign the Sacred Charge, into which by craft, simony, and other
evil arts he had thrust himself: declaring that he was no true Shepherd, Father
nor Pope, but a Thief, a Wolf, and a Tyrant: and while all were in a
consternation to hear such words, Roland happily made his escape.

Matildis was now become a widow by the death of the Duke of Lorain, and had
indeed lived as such for several years past; her jealousy of the Dukes being
no friend to Gregory made her afraid to be advised by him, or to allow him
leave to meddle in her affairs; and her Husband upon the other hand seeing
himself neglected and no gainer at all by his great Match, retired into his own
Country full of trouble, and survived his Father but a few years. Gregory
judging it against his interest to have Matildis married to any foreign Prince,
in whom he could have no confidence, proposed to her Azo Marquess of Este, who
was the only person of all the Lombards that had never countenanced Honorius
the second, but adhered to Alexander and him: Matildis readily accepted of
Gregory's choice of her Cousin for a Husband, nothing doubting but he would
espouse the Popes concerns as much as she had done; and Azo seemed glad
likewise of so rich a purchase as he hoped Matildis might prove. Yet both
parties were frustrated of their expectation, as we learn by what followed.

But to return to the Synod at Rome, there Gregory carried things with a high
hand, thundering the sentence of Excommunication against the Emperor and his
followers, freeing his Subjects from their Allegiance, and exhorting the
Princes to come to a new Election; nor did he stop here, but encouraged by the
party he had made in Germany, declared he would meet a Synod at Ausburgh, that
what had past at Rome against the Emperor might be confirmed there, as the
Sentence of Worms against him had been confirmed in Italy. Great preparations
were made for his journey, his affairs in his absence were recommended to the
care of Matildis, who he knew would never fail him; and she with her Army
intended to see him safe within the borders of Germany.

The Emperor observing the ill effects these proceedings already had upon the
factious party, durst not venture the issue of Gregory's journey, but resolved
to prevent it by humbling himself to any terms; and thereupon with a small
train posted toward Gregory, who was not yet got out of Italy.

The Pope upon the first news of the Emperors approach would trust himself no
where but with Matildis in her strong Castle of Cannossa; upon better
information, guessing at his errand by the meanness of his train, he flatly
refused to see him, purposely that the Emperor might apply himself to
Matildis, and become her debtor for his reconciliation; no intercession but
hers could have obtained him the favor of access, which yet was clogged with
such hard conditions as never were required of any Crowned head: And every one
thought strange that Henry a proud and a warlike Prince, could be brought to
prostitute his honor after this manner, and appear not so much like an humble
supplicant as a criminal; a posture which ill became a Roman Emperor, and the
first Potentate of Christendom.

Nor was it less strange to see Matildis the Emperors Cousin-German by her
Mother, enriched by his and his Fathers bounty, so easily to forget both the
ties of Nature and gratitude, and to support the Pope in all these
extravagancies. If she believed ill things of the Emperor while yet in
Germany; and that he would not agree to any reasonable proposals, none can much
wonder, who considers her information came only from the Pope; but to see him
so ignominiously treated at her own house, and to approve of it, showed in her
little sense of honor, and great want of discernment.

It proved much otherwise with her Husband Azo, who hitherto had likewise been
abused; but being an eyewitness of Gregory's insolence, he did afterward serve
the Emperor all he could; this cost him dear, for Gregory perceiving it, used
arts to alienate the affections of Matildis from him, and then grounded a
divorce upon their being within those degrees of consanguinity to which the
Canons deny marriage. While Azo continued of Gregory's party this was never
questioned, and being now of the Emperors, it was too late to hope for a
dispensation.

It seems strange that Baronius should be at so great pains to persuade the
world, that Matildis was never married to Azo, when the strongest of his
Arguments amount to no more than a few Chronological scruples which cannot
weaken the testimony of so many approved Authors that writ before him. It is
observed he had an excellent faculty of raising doubts, which would any wise
make for his purpose, and it appears plainly in this, because he designs it to
help Matildis to pass for a Virgin, but her marriage first to the Duke of
Lorain, and afterward to the Duke of Bavaria, leave no color for this
pretense: And if we give credit to the Histories of those times, though she had
never been married, the freedom she was pleased to allow Gregory, put her out
of the category of Virgins. How much would the Abbot of Vrspergh,
Scaffnaburgensis, Benno, Lambertus and others, have pitied the ignorance, or
rather partiality of our age, had they imagined Matildis was to be set up for
either Virgin or Saint amongst us. But we cannot lay any blame upon them, who
spared not to represent her to posterity in her true colors.

The Emperor had no benefit by his submission, the Rebels in his absence
having crowned Rodolphus Duke of Suevia King, whose Election Gregory confirmed,
and thereby made the breach wider than ever. But though the Pope declared for
the Usurper, heaven favored the better Cause. Rodolphus was overcome in four
several battles, and received a mortal wound in the last, together with the
loss of his right hand, which being brought to him alittle before his death, he
confessed Gods Justice in the manner of his punishment, because with that hand
he had signed the Oath of Allegiance to his Sovereign, and afterward
perfidiously lift it up against him. While Henry was employed to maintain his
Right in Germany, Lombardy lay exposed to Matildis, who heavily persecuted the
Loyal Party, especially Gilbertus, Archbishop of Ravenna, Chancellor of
Italy, and the Emperors best friend.

A little before Rodolphus's death Henry called a Synod at Brixina in Bavaria,
where thirty Bishops did again depose Gregory, and choose Gilbertus Pope. Among
the Crimes laid to Gregory's Charge, I cannot but observe two; the former is
that of Heresy, as being one of Berengarius Disciples, and of the same
Sentiments; but those of his party need not labor much to vindicate him in
this particular, seeing none I presume will endeavor to bring Gregory the
seventh in as a witness to the truth, or a forerunner of the Reformation. The
Doctrine of Berengarius had stronger Pillars in all Ages to support it, than
the Infallibility of such a Pope, under whose Patronage Truth it self might
have been suspected; nor could Satan more effectually recommend an error to
all well-meaning men, than by procuring Gregory the seventh to oppose it. In a
word, if Gregory really embraced this truth, no wonder if it then proved
unsuccessfull, God reserving it for better times, and for better instruments.
The other Crime which they had better reason to fasten upon him, was his
separating Wives from their Husbands; and in this undoubtedly they had an eye
to Matildis, whom he had first parted from the Duke of Lorain, and afterward
most unjustly divorced from Azo of Este, a thing really worthy of the
cognizance of that Synod.

Henry being now at leisure to call Matildis and Gregory to an account for
their cruelty to his friends, and to see Clement the third Enstall'd, bent his
whole Forces against Italy, and Matil is endeavors, went directly to Rome,
nothing except Florence giving him any stop. Rome against which the chief
design was laid, wanted neither provision nor troops, and Gregory was there in
person performing all the parts of a good Officer during the siege. Upon the
surrender of the City, he retired to the Castle St Angelo, and from thence to
the Normans in Naples, whom he had engaged in his quarrel; but finding them in
no condition to restore him, nor the Romans disposed to receive him again, who
had for many years behaved himself so imperiously among them: and last of all,
the passage for Matildis being so shut up by the Emperors Forces, that she
could not come to his assistance; trouble and anguish, when he saw he was thus
deserted in his old age, occasioned a fever, which in a few days put a period
to his life.

He was Canonized after his death, as Baronius informs us in his Roman
Martyrology; but whence they had the proofs, either of the sanctity of his
life, or the miracles he wrought, we cannot guess. The Characters not only
given him by his Contemporaries who writ of him, but by the Synods of Worms,
Pavia, Mentzs and Brixina did little countenance this design; his apparent
Miracles, if any such were alleged, did flow from the same source with those
of the Egyptian Magicians, in whose studies he had spent some part of his
youth, he pretended to the spirit of prophecy when he foretold the Emperors
death, of which he thought he had made sure; but his Instruments failing him,
he was fain to save his credit by an equivocation: And to say no worse, their
thrusting Gregory the seventh in among the Saints, gives us just ground to
suspect their Catalogue is not so pure as it ought to be; and that all to whom
they address themselves, are not in so happy a state as their mistaken
superstition is willing to suppose.

It was hoped Gregory's death would have calmed the storm, and that the
Emperor might afterward enjoy his Crown, and Clement the third his dignity
without disturbance, if grief had killed Matildis at the same time as it was
like to have done: But Gregory by his last Will recommending his party with
much earnestness to her protection, the war and the Schism were continued.

Welpho Duke of Bavaria and his Son of the same name, Rebels formerly with
Rodolphus, began to sow new divisions in Germany; whereupon Urban the second,
the true, though not immediate successor of Hildibrand, judged the young
Prince a person fitly qualified for a Husband to Matildis; and the match was
quickly made up, where the parties both aimed at the same thing, that is, the
Emperors depression. This did further declare their great injustice to her
former Husband, for Welpho was a Grandchild of the House of Este, nearly
related to Matildis as well as Azo, only there was no cause to suspect him of
being in the Emperors confidence: But such indirect courses were justly
blasted, and Welpho reconciled after some time to Henry, by which he lost
Matildis, whose love to her Husbands was always grounded upon their devotion
to the Pope; he could not both be the Emperors friend and Matildis Husband,
and therefore a new pretense was found out for a divorce. A greater Title was
designed for Matildis by the Greek Emperor, who sent an Ambassador to court
her in his Name; but Urban who could promise himself no good by sending her so
far from home, dissuaded her from any such thoughts: And now her zeal growing
with her years, no Title pleased her so well, as to hear her self every day
called the Daughter of St Peter, the pillar of the Truth, and the Protectress
of the Church: names invented by the Court of Rome, to gratify the humor of a
bigoted Woman.

There remained still one expedient to ruin the Emperor, which was to
persuade his Son Conrard that he owed him no Duty, but that he might take up
Arms against him, and seize upon the Crown, which his Father by being cut off
from the Communion of the Church, had forfeited long ago. Thus did Urban stir
up a Rebellion more unnatural and black than any Gregory had attempted; and
what the Popes Words made lawful, Matildis Army made practicable: so Conrard
coming into Italy received the Crown, but justly was he punished with a short
reign, for his usurping that which with honor and security by the course of
Nature, he might e're long have expected.

Conrards death did break all their measures, yet they could not despair while
the Emperor had another Son, Urban was dead, and Pascalis in his place who
debauched Henry from his Matildis had corrupted. A meeting of all the Emperors
enemies being held at Mentz, the Archbishops of Mentz and Collogue were sent
to the Emperor to demand his Crown for his Son; the Emperor understanding the
business for which they came, desired to know the reason why they proceeded so
severely against him; it was answered, because he had made a Schism in the
Church, had exposed Ecclesiastical dignities to sale, and had not observed the
Canons in his choice of Bishops. To this the Emperor smartly replied, If you
pretend I have sold Dignities, what had I, pray, from either of you for the
Arch-bishopricks of Mentz and Collogne, the greatest and richest of Germany?
You who turn accusers are best able to vindicate me, and ought to
discountenance those who are guilty of Rebellion against me their Sovereign:
Many other considerations he laid before them, but they still insisting, he
desired at least a day might be appointed in which he should resign his Crown,
that both for his honor and theirs, it might seem his own voluntary act: This
reasonable request also was denied, and the Archbishop of Mentz most
impudently coming up to him, snatched away his Crown, others by his example
stripped him of his Purple, and the other marks of Royalty, and carried them to
his Son, who was immediately declared King, and confirmed by the Popes Legates.
The Old Emperor retired to Liege: thither his Friends resorted from all hands
to assist him in the recovery of his Crown; with these he gave battle to his
Sons Army, and was at first successful: Yet money and large promises having
corrupted his party, he was abandoned by all, and in despair and necessity was
forced to make his application to the Bishop of Spire, that he might be
received a petty Canon in a Church which he himself had there founded; but this
small favor being also beyond example denied him, he died within a few days,
leaving to posterity one of the greatest instances, perhaps that any age has
afforded, of the inconstancy of worldly grandeur.

Those who were much wedded to the Interests of Rome, could presently discover
the immediate hand of Divine Providence, revenging in Henry's death the long
persecution he had carried on against them, little reflecting that Gregory the
sevenths dying outed of his dignity, and in a most forlorn condition several
years before, gave no less advantage to the Emperors party. Others therefore
who were not biased made no such inference from thence, knowing if there were
no surer arguments to direct men in their judgments than the undertakers
success, the best causes might oftentimes suffer, and the most palpable
usurpations be vindicated.

The Pope and Matildis after they had compassed what they long designed,
thought it now an easy matter to manage not only Italy but Germany also, and
the young Prince as they pleased: All the grievances of their Party were to be
redressed, and the pretended corruptions of the Clergy of Germany to be
reformed in a Synod at Ausburgh, where the Pope the better to confirm his
Authority among them, was to be present; but they were much disappointed in
Henry the fifth, who as soon as he was settled in his Throne, began to discover
a strong dislike to their proceedings with his Father, and as he heartily
wished, he had no ways been accessory to them; so to atone his guilt, his
whole thoughts were employed on maintaining the Dignity and Prerogatives of his
Crown, which had been so much violated by the late Rebellion.

There was little encouragement then for the Pope to appear at Ausburgh where
he was sure to be crossed in whatsoever he proposed; besides Henry had an Army
in readiness to go into Italy, there to receive the Imperial Crown. It frighted
Matildis to hear of his coming in this posture, yet dissembling her fears, she
was the first when he past the Alps who sent to welcome him: The Pope likewise
with great expressions of confidence invited him to Rome, because he knew he
could not hinder his coming thither. Upon the day appointed for his Coronation,
the Archbishop of Milan, by whom according to the custom he had first been
crowned King of Lombardy presented him to the Pope, who before he proceeded any
further in the Ceremony, required him publicly to renounce all pretension to
the collation or investiture of Ecclesiastical Dignities; this Henry flatly
refused to do, telling him he would not be tied to any such conditions, and
that he expected his Crown after the same manner that Charles the Great, and
Lewis his Son had received it; the contest lasted several days, not without
great heats, and threatenings on both hands, the Pope declaring upon Henry's
refusal to comply, that he must come to his spiritual Arms; and Henry letting
him understand that his Army was ready at a call; so that nothing could
persuade Henry to depart from this generous resolution, not valuing the Popes
Arms so much as the Troops he had brought with him from Germany: at length the
Pope was forced to yield that as a Right to the Son which had been denied his
Father, and which Matildis and the former Popes had made the ground of all
their wars. The Emperor prouder of retrieving this lost Prerogative than of
the Imperial Crown returned to Germany, where the first thing he did, was to
see his Fathers body enterr'd; a favor his enemies malice had not thought fit
to allow it.

No wonder if it pierced Matildis to the heart to see all her encroachments
upon the Emperors power for so many years brought to naught in a moment, and
the Papal Authority, which with so much cost, pains and danger she had highly
advanced, now reduced to what she had found it in the beginning of Henry the
fourths reign, and all this by one whom Pascalis and she had helped to set up
upon his Fathers ruins; grief then and old age cast her into a languishing
distemper which in the end proved mortal.

She had all along designed, that not only the Popes, in whose times she lived,
but their Successors also should reap the fruits of her bounty, which made her
easily hearken to those who judged it the securest way to put the Church in
possession of the best part of her territories, and that it must be a
particular satisfaction to see her own will executed to prevent the trouble it
might occasion after her death, and to hear the frequent Panegyricks of those
who extolled her munificence, and whose interest it was so to do. By these
insinuations they had already got into their hands that which is called the
Patrimony of St Peter, with several Cities in Tuscany. And now lest upon

I cannot find she was ever Canonized, but the best of their Pens have been
employed to celebrate her Virtues, and her memory is still more precious among
them than that of most of their Saints; of this Urban the eighth in our own
time, has given testimony by having her body, or what at least past for it,
translated from a Church near Mantoua to Rome where it lies buried in St Peter's
under a stately Monument erected 1635. at his charge, with an Inscription,
which expresses both his value for her Piety and Virtue, and his gratitude for
her protection and bounty; and if oftentimes both in speaking and writing of
her they call her a Saint, it is no strange thing, if one consider the style of
the Country, according to what Philip de Comines observed in his passage
through Milan; where wondering to read the name of one of their worst Dukes,
with this glorious Epithet of Saint upon the front of a Convent, a Priest
ingenuously told him, it was their custom to call all those Saints to whom they
were much obliged. In this respect then, envy it self must allow, never any
could lay juster claim to this title than Matildis, who deserved better of the
Popes than any that went before her, or that has been since her time: for let
them amuse men as much as they list with pretended donations from Constantine,
or from Charles the Great, it is plain, the Countess Matildis first set them
up, and it is her whom Rome must chiefly thank, and others blame for the Popes
bearing such a figure since, among the Temporal Princes of Italy.

The event did verify what was apprehended before, that Matildis actions would
be called in question afterward; for Henry the fifth declared he would not
agree to what she had done, because she could not dispose of what came to her
by her Mother Beatrix, but that by her death it returned to the Crown; and in
truth there seemed to be a great deal of reason in what the Emperor alleged,
seeing it was too much that she had abused while she lived, the power derived
from his Ancestors, without entailing it for ever upon his enemies; the Pope on
the other hand thought he had good right to what was left him, chiefly when it
was strengthened with possession: and betwixt these two powerful Competitors,
the Family of Este, whose Title certainly was best, had the least share.

CHAP. VI.
An account of what past as well in the German as in the Italian branch of the
Family from the death of Matildis, till Otho of Este Duke of Brumswick was
chosen Emperor.

HAving insisted more largely upon Matildis actions than so compendious a
History will well bear, I return to her Family, which she like an unnatural
branch, drawing sap from the root, and bestowing elsewhere, had almost
destroyed. Her Husband Azo, though he could never well digest the trouble
conceived upon his divorce, yet lived long after, and with his Brother
Bertoldus did meet Henry the fifth at his arrival in Italy, and had by the
means of his Kinsman Welpho Duke of Bavaria, Matildis last Husband, a reception
full of respect and kindness. The Emperor was not then to learn how much Azo
or his Family had suffered by adhering to his Father, and therefore enlarged
his privileges, and gave him assurances of his protection; whether at that
time he made known to the Emperor his just pretensions to a share of Matildis,
Estate no History that I have seen does satisfy me; but it appears Bertoldus's
Son afterward did highly resent his having no reparation made him, and
thereupon took Arms against the Emperor.

The concerns of the Family not dispensing with the absence of both Brothers,
Azo after some days spent with the Emperor, took his leave, and returned to
Este. Bertoldus accompanied him to Rome, where he and Welpho were the persons
who composed all differences, and made a perfect reconciliation betwixt the
Emperor and the Pope, upon the promise made by the latter, not to meddle in
the affairs of Germany, which he and his predecessors had for many years
embroiled; this gave Bertoldus great credit, and raised him so high in the
Emperors confidence, that had not his Brothers death called him home, he must
have gone into Germany; the rest of his life being spent in governing his
people, gives no great occasion to the Historians to mention him, only we find
at his death he left his Son Rinaldus very Milan against Frederick Barbarossa.

The other branch of the Family of Este raised to infinite riches and power in
Germany, calls us thither till Rinaldus comes of age, and if it be at all to be
called a digression, yet I presume it will be no unpleasant one to the Reader:
Henry of Este Duke of Bavaria married the Daughter of Lotharius the third, who
succeeded Henry the fifth, and after the death of his Father in Law made war
upon Conrard the third, for violating the Agreement made with him at his
Coronation; Conrard to ease himself of some part of the burden of the War,
required the assistance of the Princes of the Empire in a Diet assembled for
this purpose, in which he bitterly inveighed against Henry, yet contrary to his
design, gave ample testimony both of the antiquity and greatness of the Family,
as his Harangue still extant shows; he makes Henry an Upstart in Germany his
great Grandfather, being the first that settled there, but at the same time he
owns him to be of the blood of Este, descended of the Ancient Roman Family of
the Atii, swelled, as he says, with the Names and Titles of his Ancestors, he
puts the Princes in mind of the treachery of Henry's Ancestor Hugo, who stirred
up Ardoinus Marquess of Eporoedia against Henry the second: and last of all, he
charges him with a design of over-turning the Ancient Constitutions of Germany,
complaining that his Interest there joined to that of his kindred in Italy was
too like to effect it.

Henry's death gave him not leave to vindicate himself and his Family from
Conrards aspersions, but his Brother Welpho did it in another Assembly to the
satisfaction of all there present, that his Great Grandfather was a stranger
in Germany, being of the blood of Este, and of the Illustrious Family of the
Atii, he was not, he said, ashamed to own; but they all knew he was a German by
his Great Grandmother, and that by her he inherited the rich Duchy of
Bavaria: That Hugo of Este had countenanced Ardoinus was true, but the
Emperors resolution to ruin him, had put him upon that course to prevent it,
and that after their reconciliation no man did ever more faithfully or
successfully promote the Emperors Service: And lastly, Conrards accusation of
their going about to subvert the Laws of Germany, he retorts upon himself for
the unjust sentence past against his Brother Henry and himself, by which they
were deprived of all they possessed: He gives warning to all the Princes to look
to themselves, and hoped if they did not join with him in so Just a Cause, that
at least they would approve of his taking Arms for the recovery of his Dutchies
from Conrard, whom he looked upon as the real subverter of the Ancient Laws of
Germany.

The War then begun by Henry against Conrard, but being intermitted by his
death, it was renewed by Gwelfo, and kindled such a flame in Germany, as rivers
of blood could scarce quench; the Nation was divided betwixt them, though not
equally, for all the Princes that consented to the forfeiture of the Dutchies
of Bavaria and Saxony were engaged in honor to assist Conrard, and such as
enjoyed the fruits of it could do no less. Some few of the Princes who had
declared against Conrards severe proceedings with Henry, and the greatest part
of the Bavarians did join with Gwelfo: And what he wanted in Germany was made
up from abroad, for Roger King of Sicily supplied him with vast sums of money,
which drew foreign troops to his Service, and four of the Princes of the house
of Este raised what forces Italy.

Some Writers make those famous factions of Gwelfs and Gibellins which first
appeared in Germany, and for many ages rent Italy to have had their rise from
this War, those who were with the Emperor being called Gibellins from
Giblinga, the place of Conrards Nativity; and the others Gwelfs from Gwelfo,
the head of their Party: And though most will have the original of these names
to be of more ancient date, yet all must agree that they then began to be
generally used to distinguish the Imperialists from the Bavarians; and
afterward in the wars of Italy, by Gwelfs were understood such as favored the
Pope.

Gwelfo's Army was in the progress of the War so weakened, that not able to
keep the field he went to Winbergh whither Conrard pursued him, and shut him up
so close, that the best terms he could obtain was, that he with his followers
should continue prisoners of War, and the place was to be exposed to sack; but
Gwelfo's Princess who was there with her Husband, made it her humble suit to
Conrard, that she with the Ladies of her Court might first be permitted to
retire without any other baggage than what they themselves could carry; this
request being readily granted, they took their Husbands upon their backs,
declaring as they past through the Camp, that these were the only Jewels they
desired to secure from Conrard and his Army; this generous act of the Princess
and her Ladies did so surprise and please the Emperor, that he would see his
word made good, and thereupon not only pardoned but was reconciled to Gwelfo,
giving him back some part of his Brothers inheritance: Gwelfo afterward
accompanied Conrard in his expedition to the Holy Land, which the treachery of
the Greeks rendered insuccessfull; at his return he made ready an Army to go
into Italy to receive the Imperial Crown, and designed to carry Gwelfo with
him, of whose company he seemed to be very fond, because he durst not leave him
behind; but his journey being put off by his sickness, he lived not to receive
that honor, and though he left a Son, yet his Nephew Frederick Barbarossa
succeeded him.

Frederick's first work was to cement all the breaches of Germany, which he did
with so much equity and discretion, that he gave satisfaction to all parties.
His Mother was of the House of Bavaria, and this made him willing to restore
that Duchy to the Son of Henry, and to his Uncle Gwelfo he gave all that the
Emperors had recovered of Matildis Estate; which I confess was a doing right
in some measure to the house of Este, but not to that part of it that had
suffered most by her.

This brings us back to Italy, which we shall now find the chief Scene of
Affairs, and Rinaldus of Este of age to be the chief Actor, for whose sake we
must give a more particular account of things, as they then stood when
Frederick came thither.

The long absence of an Emperor had brought Affairs into great disorder,
especially in Lombardy, where every City formed it self into a sort of
Republic; and dissensions naturally arising betwixt them, there was no person
that had either Authority to determine their differences, or power to see his
determinations received. The City of Milan affected the Dominion over all the
rest, had already made some submit, and was every day encroaching upon others
with an insupportable insolence. Many complaints were brought to the Emperor
from most of the neighbor Cities, declaring, that they must submit to the
Queen of Lombardy, for so Milan styled her self, unless they had his
protection. The Emperor promised to make what have he could toward them, and
to put an end to all their quarrels. When he came to the Lago di Garda near
Verona, he received the complements of the Italian Princes; amongst others were
Boniface, Fulco, Opizo and Albertus of Este his Kinsmen by his Mother who had
all conferred on them special marks of his favor: But we find nothing of
Rinaldus the Chief of the Family, who it is thought absented himself, being
highly disgusted that Matildis Estate should be settled by Frederick upon the
German Line. The Emperor having rebuked those of Milan and Tortona for their
late carriage, and required them to make reparation for the injuries done their
neighbors, went toward Rome, and being Adrian the fourth he returned into
Germany.

Fresh troubles in Italy called him soon back, but as his presence converted
all their Rebellion into Humility and Duty; so his being reconciled upon too
easy terms to Milan and Brescia, the authors of discord encouraged them to
renew their practices when he was gone; and for Adrian if we honor him for his
Country, as being of our neighbour-nation of England, we must condemn him for
his malice against this great Emperor in fomenting their Rebellion. When
Frederick came to Italy the third time, Milan and Brescia had several other
Towns joined to them, and stood out a long siege; yet before he left them, they
were made to accept of what conditions he pleased to impose, which yet were
much more gentle than they, especially Milan did deserve, after having twice
abused his clemency.

About this time Adrian the fourth dying, the Election of two Popes, Alexander
the third, and Victor the fourth occasioned a new Schism more dangerous than
any of the former: both writ to the Emperor then besieging Crema, to confirm
their Election; but he out of pure zeal for the peace of the Church refusing to
declare for either, called a Council at Pavia, where they were summoned to
appear to have their Cause heard and determined by their Brethren the Bishops.
Victor came thither at the day appointed, but Alexander continued at Rome;
whereupon the Council offended at his contempt, and judging his not appearance
to flow from a diffidence in his Cause, gave it in favor of Victor, whom the
Emperor did then confirm, and sent Letters to the Kings of France, England and
Spain, to give an account of what was there concluded.

Alexander was excommunicated by Victor at Pavia, Frederick and Victor by
Alexander at Rome, and the parties being now irreconcilable, Alexander sent a
Legate to those of Milan to declare them absolved from the Oaths they had lately
sworn, and not obliged to make good the Articles which necessity had extorted
from them. Milan and the Confederate Cities took Arms immediately, and
resolving to carry on a formed War against the Emperor, invited Rinaldus
Marquess of Este to be their General, who thinking himself injured and
neglected by Frederick, did too readily undertake the Patronage of so unjust a
Cause.

The Emperor judging his Army too weak to deal with so many, gave order for
New Levies in Germany, which were finished, and sent with great expedition to
Italy, the Kings likewise of Bohemia, Denmark and Norway came in person to his
assistance with their choicest troops, so that when all his forces were united
he had no less than seventy thousand Foot, and forty thousand Horse; the
Confederates likewise had made great preparations, Rinaldus of Este their
General brought six thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse, Brescia, Bergamo
Piacenza, Verona, Vicenza, Padoua and Bologna, sent the numbers agreed on; the
general review was made at Milan, where according to most of the Italian
Writers, they were fifty thousand men well armed; the very first night the
Emperor sat down before Milan Rinaldus ordered a sally at four several gates,
which put the Imperial Army into such confusion, that the enemy was like to
have dispossessed them of their Camp.

Rinaldus perceiving the Confederate Army to dwindle away insensibly, partly by
Famine, and partly by Sickness, occasioned by their being shut up so close in
the hottest season of the year, called a Council of War, where it was resolved,
That all should be in readiness next morning to bring the business to an issue;
the whole Army being accordingly assembled in the great Market place, Rinaldus
led them out into the Imperial Camp a little before noon, where falling in upon
the Danes and Norvegians that were secure and unfit for action, by reason of
the great heat, he did so great execution, that no persuasion could make them
continue the siege longer, and their marching off did so dishearten the rest,
that the Emperor thought best to follow them; Rinaldus pursued him in his
retreat, but the Emperor not able to bear this affront, and considering his
Army to be still the more numerous, offered him battle; Rinaldus to make up the
disproportion in the number by the advantage of the ground, posted himself upon
a hill, dividing his Army into four parts; he gave the Van toward the plain to
his Son Azo and Torrisedi Governor of Verona, the Milan Troops were placed at
some distance behind, those of Bergamo, Brescia and Piacenza had the top of the
hill, and the General himself retired to the other side out of the enemies view.

The King of Bohemia commanded one Wing of the Imperial Army, the Kings of
Denmark and Norway another; Frederick with the Duke of Bavaria stood in the
middle.

The King of Bohemia's Wing began the fight about noon with Azo and Torrisedi,
and for a long time it was doubtful to which Party victory inclined, till the
King being wounded and carried back to the Camp half dead, his men retired in
disorder: Azo encouraged by this, and seconded by the Troops of Milan, bore all
down before him till he came to the main Body, where the Emperor with his
German Horse sustained his charge, killed those who led the Troops of Milan,
and took Azo prisoner. They upon the top of the hill who hitherto had no
occasion to act, seeing the rest in distress marched briskly down to their
assistance; and while the Imperialists bent their Forces that way, thinking the
whole Confederate Army was now engaged, Rinaldus came with such violence upon
their Rere, that they presently gave ground and marched off, with his own hand
he took the Imperial Standard, and followed the Emperor so close, that he was
obliged to the darkness of the night for his escape; but the news of his Sons
being carried off prisoner did much abate the joy of his success; nor could any
arguments prevail on the Emperor to give him up so long as his Father lived.
It is believed, if this advantage had been pursued, the Emperors Affairs in
Italy might soon have been brought to a weak pass; but the Confederate Troops,
as if they had already done enough, went all home to their own Cities to
receive the applause and carresses of their friends, and could never again be
united. Rinaldus also gave up his Commission, not willing to exasperate the
Emperor while he had such an Hostage from his Family; nor could the Emperor
make sure any other ways of one who did so unjustly head the Confederates,
that had so often violated their Duty, and failed in their promises to their
Prince.

Frederick had been always hitherto Victorious, and now his Fortune seemed to
decline, having after this manner besieged Milan several months to little
purpose, and at last retired with so great loss; but this blow did rather
hasten his success, for being doubtful what course to take, the news was
brought him of the Confederates being gone, and this encouraged him to return
to the siege of Milan sooner than they expected; the City seeing it self
abandoned sent to capitulate with the Emperor, but he absolutely refused to
agree to any terms, telling them that he expected to enter at a breach in their
Walls as a Conqueror, and to treat them accordingly; whereupon trusting to his
Clemency their Gates were opened; the Emperor then mindful how perfidiously
they had dealt with him, commanded all the Inhabitants to depart within three
days, and the City to be razed to the ground; and upon the fourth day after,
he entered at a breach with his whole Army to see his Sentence put in
execution; the neighbor Cities were forward enough to revenge the injuries
received in pulling down each a part; the wretched Inhabitants standing without
the Walls to express their sorrow in cries and tears when they saw the
deplorable fall of the City: Novara pulled down one quarter, Cremona another,
Como a third, and Lode a fourth, Churches and Convents, Hospitals and Palaces,
without respect two small Chapels of all that stately City was left standing;
the very Broglio or great Marketplace was sowed with Salt: And thus Milan
which had long aspired to the Sovereignty of Lombardy, and which for its
largeness, its beauty, and the number as well as riches of its Citizens began
to emulate Rome, felt in a few days this terrible desolation, as a just reward
of its insolence to its Neighbors, and of its perfidy to an indulgent Prince,
who had already three several times pardoned its rebellion.

The destruction of Milan, the submission of all the other Cities, and the
changing the Ancient Magistrates into Imperial Podesta's seemed to secure the
Peace of Italy for many years: Yet the haughty carriage of these new Ministers
in the Emperors absence, and the Arts of Pope Alexander drew on in a short
time a fresh Rebellion: they wanted only a Head, and knew by former experience,
that none could either do them credit or service like Rinaldus, but his
tenderness for his Son was such, that no persuasions could engage him again.

If Rinaldus of Este's denying to join with the Confederates, did at first
retard their motions, the baseness of Henry of Bavaria, one of the same Family
did afterward spoil the Emperors Affairs, when he was in a fair way to reduce
all; he was the Emperors Cousin, and had been restored to the greatest part of
his Fathers Dominions at the same time that his Uncle Guelpho had those of
Matildis given him in Italy: Yet upon a vain scruple arising from Alexanders
Excommunication he left him when he had most occasion for him and his Troops.
The Emperor went after him to persuade him to return, but no arguments nor
condescension in the Emperor could work upon an obstinate humor, cloak'd with
a pretense to conscience: Nor was it only the loss of him and his followers,
for his example was like to draw others away; so that the Emperor perceiving
the ill disposition of his Army infected by the very air of that rebellious
Country, sent to Alexander to procure his reconciliation; this he obtained
indeed, but upon such terms, that it is hard to say, whether Alexander the
third, or Gregory the seventh treated an Emperor with most insolence; what
Gregory did at the Castle of Cannossa only with Matildis, Alexander may be said
to have done solemnly in the face of the whole Senate and people of Venice.

The Emperor finding his kindness to Henry of Bavaria so little considered,
turned him out of all, and Henry who had married a Daughter of England, fled
thither for protection, where he stayed, till by that Kings intercession the
Dutchies of Brunswick and Lunenburgh were restored to him by the Emperor; in
this his former greatness was indeed much impaired, yet still he continued in
the first rank of German Princes, which figure his successors have ever since
sustained to the great honor of the Family of Este from which they are sprung.

Two years before died Rinaldus the most popular Prince, and the greatest
General of the Italian Nation together, and he had been successful in all his
undertakings, but the badness of the Cause he all along espoused did much
lessen the glory of his actions. The latter part of his life affords nothing
remarkable besides the taking Rovigo, because the Emperor knowing his restless
spirit, would never part with his Son, by whose confinement he was sure to bind
Rinaldus to his good behavior.

When the Emperor had the news of Rinaldus's death, he called to him Azo,
showed him how much his Father had been his Enemy, how ill Henry of Bavaria had
requited his favors, and how both being his near Kinsmen had been consequently
most of all persons obliged to promote his service and honor: Yet that the
former had been a great Instrument in the Rebellion of Milan, the latter of his
unseasonable accommodation with the Pope; but that the world might see he had
no design to destroy their Family, nor to revenge the Fathers guilt upon the
Son from whom better returns might be expected, he freely dismissed him, that he
might go and enjoy what Rinaldus had left, adding thereunto the Government of
Milan granted formerly by Otho the Great to his Ancestor Hugo. Azo's unexpected
advancement gave great joy to those who wished well to his House, but he died
before he could express his sense of the Emperors Generosity, and left this as
a debt upon his Cousin Opizo who succeeded him.

Opizo's rise did beget great emulation in the breasts of two powerful
Neighbors, and the most dangerous Enemies the Family of Este ever dealt with,
Salinguerra Taurellus of Ferrara, and Actiolinus of Onara, who had married
Rinaldus's Daughter: the former was a man of extraordinary parts, the latter a
stout Captain, and both of them were enflamed with ambition, which Opizo's
greatness seemed to check; Salinguerra possessed the people of Ferrara with an
Opinion that the Marquess of Este designed their ruin, whereupon they came to
acts of hostility with his Subjects without further examining the business.
Actiolinus raising a Title by his Wife to Rovigo seized upon it, agreeing with
Salinguerra to join Forces in case the Marquess proved too hard for either; the
difference with Ferrara was soon made up, when it appeared that Salinguerra had
created this misunderstanding, only to compass his own ends: And as ill
grounded jealousy when dissolved, makes sometimes way for the most lasting
friendship; so the Marquess, and those of Ferrara were hereby provoked to
mutual offices of kindness and confidence, the Marquess to confute
Salinguerra's calumnies did effectually intercede with Henry the sixth in
behalf of Ferrara to retrieve some privileges, which that Cities undutifull
carriage to his Father had lost: And this friendly act did so affect them, that
they never ceased till the Marquess sent his Son Azo to live among them: And
from that instant we may date the house of Este's taking sure footing in
Ferrara, which afterward proved so happy under its influence. Actiolinus was
more obstinate, refusing to restore Rovigo till Henry the sixth interposed his
Authority. Actiolinus afterward to secure the Emperors favor, and to
strengthen his party against the Marquess, declared himself Head of the
Gibellin Faction, which obliged Opizo to take upon him the protection of the
Guelphs.

These German Factions began in Italy during Frederick's War with Alexander the
third, and were by the sowers of Sedition improved to that degree under
Frederick the second, that they divided the whole Nation, they put all the
Families at variance with one another, and the Cities into Civil Wars within
themselves; and if any were indifferent in their judgment, for their own
security they were forced to declare themselves of either Party. Sometimes one
Brother would be a Gibellin, that is, for the Emperor, and the other a Guelph
for the Pope; and thereupon forgetting all the ties of Nature, would mortally
hate and persecute one another; robberies, assassinations, and all sorts of
violence and revenge were allowed against those of the contrary Faction: and
the breach being once made was too like to continue, seeing the ways of
uniting them were cut off, no man could expect reparation by Justice which lay
dead; and the Families of one Faction could hardly be persuaded to match with
those of the other: Their public meetings did for the most part end in
quarrels, and in the streets they used to point at one another as Traitors or
Renegadoes. Nor was the long duration less strange than the violence of these
Factions, for though the flame did not always burn with equal fury, being
sometimes stifled several years, and then breaking out again; yet it lasted
almost four hundred years (from Frederick Barbarossa's time till the Reign of
Charles the fifth) before it was quite extinct. Upon strict enquiry I find the
better sort can still tell which Families were Guelphs, and which Gibellins in
several places, but they have now laid aside all rancour or malice upon this
score.

Actiolinus was now grown a very nneasie Neighbor: with an Army of Padouans he
went toward Vicenza and Verona, pillaging and burning all where he came, the
People of Verona did in this strait cast their eyes upon Azo Opizo's Son, who
with such as followed him from Ferrara and Este fought Actiolin near Bachilio,
and took five hundred of his Party prisoners. It is probable Azo was chiefly
employed in this service, because Opizo did then lie ill, and died a few days
after.

This early proof of Azo the sevenths valor seemed to presage great happiness
under his Government, Este upon his return with extraordinary expressions of
joy; and there he continued some time till his friends at Ferrara troubled to
lose the only person that could curb Salinguerra, found a charm to bring him
back. His Wife the Count of Savoy's Daughter, by whom he had several Children,
was lately dead; they therefore proposed to him a match with a Lady of their
City, who for riches and interest exceeded, all that lived in those parts; her
Uncle was the Chief Magistrate, and the much richest Nobleman of Ferrara, who
besides what he had there, was also Hereditary Governor of the Mark of Ancona,
to all which having no Issue, his Niece was to succeed. This was too
advantageous a proffer for Azo to neglect, and Salinguerra's endeavoring to
hinder it, did bring it on the sooner; they were married privately, and
afterward received by the Magistrates and People of Ferrara at their coming
thither, with all the formalities of Princes.

Salinguerra highly enraged went to the Emperor who was then in Sicily, with
heavy Articles against Azo; first, that he designed to make himself absolute
Master of all the Cities near him, as he had already done of Ferrara, and that
with his ambition he discovered a hatred to the Emperor and his Government:
Secondly, that he could not forbear to express his resentment of their Families
having lost the Dutchies of Bavaria and Saxony; and thirdly, that of all his
Ancestors he did most extol Rinaldus, whom it was plain he intended to imitate
by making himself Head of the Guelphs his Majesty's professed enemies. These
words of Salinguerra, set out with all the advantage of Eloquence, of which he
was a great Master, did so work upon Henry the sixth, that it was thought, if
he had lived to come back it would have gone ill with Azo.

In the Election of a New Emperor Germany was divided betwixt Philip Henry's
Brother, and Otho of Este Duke of Brunswick a Nephew of England, nor could the
matter be accommodated till Otho marrying Philips Daughter waved his
pretensions to the Crown at present, upon condition he should enjoy it after
his Father-in-Laws death. Salinguerra at his return from Sicily renewed his
Confederacy against the Marquess by marrying the Daughter of Actiolinus while
Azo retired to Este upon the death of his Wife. No Salinguerra began to bear
sway after his old manner, and not content to be absolute at home by his Father
in Laws means he got to be Podesta of Verona.

Every one could easily guess what Actiolinus and he aimed at, but none in
Verona had the courage to oppose them, except Count Boniface, who told the
people plainly, they were hasting toward slavery, and that the only way to
save them, was, to seek to the Marquess of Este's protection: Most agreeing
with the Counts motion, they sent to Azo, who marched thither, encountered
Actiolinus and Salinguerra in the Marketplace, took the former prisoner, while
the other escaped; and restored the City to its Ancient Freedom. Upon advice
that many were fled to Pescera, he went and besieged the place, and upon its
surrender dismissed the Common Soldiers, but sent the Officers prisoners to Este,
with those that were taken at Verona, he set Actiolinus at liberty upon his
bare promise, not to give any disturbance afterward to him or his friends. The
news of Azo's success drew all whom Salinguerra banished to his Party, with
whom going directly to Ferrara he chased Salinguerra and his adherents thence,
and put the Government into the hands of his own friends, promising his
assistance upon the least notice of Salinguerra's being about to attempt any
thing.

Next year was yet more favorable Este by the advancement of Otho to the
Imperial Crown. In his journey toward Rome he was met by Azo and his Sons near
Verona, whom he received and treated as his Kinsmen, he composed their
differences with Actiolinus and Salinguerra, and desired that for his sake all
the prisoners at Este might be set at liberty. The Marquess continued with him
till the Ceremony of his Coronation was over, and then that the Family might
reap some advantage as well as honor by his digninity, he gave to Azo the
Principality of Verona, together with the final appeal of the Province, and
likewise the Government of the Mark of Ancona, with several Castles belonging
to Vicenza: Where among the motives inducing the Emperor hereunto, express
mention is made of their kindred, as appears by the Grant yet extant.

CHAP. VII.
The irreconcilable differences of the Guelphs and Gibbellins, with the
Marquess of Este's getting Ferrara, and the death of the most infamous Tyrant
Actiolin, and of his Brother Albericus.

THe Crown was not well settled upon Otho's head when Innocent the third gave it
away to Frederick the second, pretending that Otho had broke his Coronation
Oath, and forfeited his Dignity by invading the Dominions of Frederick, and of
the Church: Whether the Pope were more injust in setting Otho up to oppose
Philip, or in degrading him now to advance Frederick, whom he himself had
formerly injured, I leave to others to decide. But plain it is, that no Apology
can be made for Azo's behavior in this juncture, seeing he who had so lately
been owned for Otho's Kinsman, and had received so fresh marks of his favor,
was the most forward of all the Nobility of Lombardy to countenance the Popes
sentence, and declare for Frederick. By his means were Otho's Garrisons turned
out of most of the Cities of Tuscany; and so great was his zeal for the Cause,
and so entirely did the party confide in him, that he had the young Prince
committed to his trust till he got safe into Germany: This rendered him still
more considerable among the Guelphs, who were become too strong for the other
Party by Otho's depression; but while they were projecting how to model the
Government of Lombardy after their own way, Azo's death broke all their
measures.

Salinguerra hoping to find in his Son Aldobrandinus a person easy to deal
with, would not stand to the treaty made with Azo a little before his death,
complaining that he had been overreached in it; besides, he considered, if the
Marquess once got Modena and Regio into his hands, as he was like to do, with
what grief he must from the Walls of Ferrara see himself surrounded on every
side with the Territories of the House of Este, and therefore made what have he
could to come to a breach before he were in a manner shut up at home. Notice
being given to the Marquess of Salinguerra's intentions, he sent to Bologna the
guaranty of the Peace bebetwixt Salinguerra and his Father, to demand their
assistance; they who knew Salinguerra to be a man of a restless temper, that
observed no agreement longer than it made for his advantage, joined with the
Marquess, and marched toward Ferrara, which they took without great
resistance; and Salinguerra retired to a Castle belonging to Modena, from
whence by frequent excursions he did greatly annoy the other Party; but
perceiving them resolved to have the place, he engaged Bologna to intercede
with the Marquess, that upon surrender he might have leave to return to Ferrara
with solemn protestations, that he would give him no further disturbance.

The difference with Salinguerra was the sooner made up, because the danger
Este was in by Actiolin and the Padouans called for speedy relief from the
Marquess, who just got back in time to save it. A Party in the Mark of Ancona
commanded by the Count of Celano declared anew for Otho, pillaging and burning
every place that would not join with them. Aldobrandinus, to whom that
Government did of right belong, though the Counts of Celano always disputed
it, went thither, fought Otho's Party, killed the Count, for which Innocent
gave him the Title of Marquess of Ancona; and having thus in a short time
humbled Salinguerra, raised the siege of Este, and recovered his Authority in
the Mark: He died suddenly in the flower of his age, not without suspicion of
poison given him by one of his Servants, whom the Count of Celano's Brother had
corrupted:

The Enemies of the Family of Este got nothing by Aldobrandin's death, his
Brother Azo the eighth, or as some will have him the ninth who succeeded him,
being a person for his skill both in the Arts of Peace and War, well qualified
for those difficult times. The first thing he did after quelling an
Insurrection in Ancona, was to settle at Ferrara, that so he might have an eye
upon Salinguerra's motions, whom he knew ready to take advantage of every
change, and Salinguerras Opinion of Azo kept them several years on good terms;
but the flame that was smothered and not extinct, did too easily break out
again; and now all began to declare themselves openly Guelphs or Gibellins.
Salinguerra being gone Podesta to Mantoua, the Guelphs in a popular tumult
pulled down his Palace, destroyed his fine Gardens, broke his Statues in
pieces, and made havoc of every thing they met with. This news did so incense
him, that coming upon them unexpected, he killed every Guelph he found, and by
the help of the Gibellins forced the Marquess to leave the City to his mercy.
This Civil War which none can deny Azo's Party began, did for three years
plague Ferrara; sometimes the Marquess and the Guelphs had the better,
sometimes none were to be seen but Gibellins; those that prevailed were sure to
pull down all the good houses that belonged to the other Party; so that at last
the City lay in a heap of rubbish, and of thirty two Steeples that were in it
when Salinguerra went to Mantoua, not one was left standing.

The Marquess assisted by Verona and Padoua shut Salinguerra so close up within
Ferrara, that he seemed willing to come to any accommodation; but when Count
Boniface upon his Invitation went in to treat with him, most perfidiously he
kept him prisoner, telling him withal, that as Azo was obliged to the Troops
of Verona for the advantage he now had, so he expected his own terms before he
parted with him. Azo's tenderness for Count Boniface whom he judged in great
danger, made him yield to such things as Salinguerra durst never otherwise have
proposed; for it was agreed, that all the Gibellins banished by the Marquess as
well as the Guelphs by Salinguerra, should have leave to return, and be again
possessed of their Estates, and of the grounds where their houses had stood, for
very few of them were left entire, that all places and trusts should be divided
betwixt them, that Salinguerra should continue at Ferrara, but the Marquess
might not come thither above twice a year, and then he was to leave most of his
train without the Gates, and to stay only a few days. This Peace beyond all
men's expectation lasted fifteen years, which helped much to repair the ruins
of the City.

About this time Actiolinus, the declared head of the Gibellins, after having
long glutted himself with blood, cruelty and oppression, renounced the world to
dedicate the ruins of his old age to a Monastic life, leaving a Son of the
same name, who carried on the divisions of Italy, and Salinguerra could not
expect to better himself by falling out again with the Marquess; yet that he
might one day or other make work for him, he underhand employed all his
interest to get Actiolin the younger created Podesta of Verona, by which that
Party was much strengthened.

If things went ill with the Guelphs where Actiolinus and Salinguerra were in
Authority, the Gibellins made as great complaints of their hard usage in
Ancona, where the Marquess being absolute Master, was much encouraged in his
severities by Honorius the third, and Gregory the ninth; the latter seeing
Frederick engaged in the Holy War thought to seize upon the Kingdom of Naples,
and communicating his Design to Azo, found him too ready to engage in it; nor
could any thing but the Emperors speedy return have prevented them.

No wonder if Frederick were much offended with the Pope and Azo's proceedings,
and they conscious of their guilt armed the Guelphs, lest the Emperor should
attempt any thing against them, which made Actiolinus and his Party not think
themselves secure, unless they were in the same posture; so that for a long
time in formed Armies they lay in wait for one another, and put a stop not only
to all manner of Trade, which much impoverished Corporations, but also to
agriculture, upon which a Famine was like to ensue: Both Parties being at
length tired out, and their brutal fury in some measure spent, first a
cessation of Arms, then a Peace was concluded and sealed with the marriage of
Actiolins Niece to Rinaldus Azo's Son.

Andrew the second of Hungary in his return from Rome was entertained by Azo at
Este, where charmed with the beauty of Beatrix, Aldobrandin's Daughter, and her
Uncles Magnificence, he demanded her in Marriage, and Azo consenting to it, she
was sent after him into Hungary with a Noble Train; a few months after Andrew
died leaving the Queen with Child, and she apprehending her self in danger from
the next Heir of the Crown, retired to her Friends in Italy, where she was
brought to bed of Stephen, Father to Andrew the third King of Hungary. Her
younger Sister Alexina was married to Albert Duke of Brunswick.

The Peace betwixt Azo and Actiolin at best signified little, seeing their acts
of hostility were scarce ever discontinued; but Gregory the ninth, taking
occasion to quarrel with the Emperor for refusing to go again into Syria,
brought things to a worse pass than before: they had drawn the Guelphs and
Gibellins into bodies, openly defying one another; the Emperor upon his
Excommunication was marching toward Rome; and Salinguerra was entering upon
the last and most Tragical Act of his Life, which I must not pass in silence.

The Venetians required a certain acknowledgement for all goods carried up the
Po to Ferrara, which Salinguerra was not willing to pay; and their ships being
sent to lie at the mouth of the River to hinder any thing to enter, Salinguerra
with what Boats he could make came upon them, and after a sharp dispute had the
better, taking some, which he brought to Ferrara as Trophies of his Victory
over the Venetian Navy. The Republic not able to digest this affront, joined
with the Guelphs to be revenged upon Salinguerra, who suspecting some design
upon the City did hasten his ruin by commanding all of that Faction to be
gone, and receiving Germans in their place.

This was declared to be a plain breach of the Treaty with Azo, who thereupon
being chosen General against him, went toward Ferrara in the beginning of
February, accompanied by the Doge of Venice, the Popes Legate Boniface, and
many of the Chief Nobility of those parts; Salinguerra made for four months a
stout resistance, till Provisions beginning to fail, without any prospect of
supply, the Land Army having destroyed the Harvest; the Venetian Navy blocked
up the River, and the Germans growing mutinous, Hugo Rambertus, a man of great
Authority, did in the name of the City desire him to make peace with Azo.
Salinguerra had no disposition toward it, yet yielded to Hugo's importunity,
and upon the Generals, the Doges and the Legates promise, that he should be
permitted to return safe into the City, ventured out into the Enemies Camp to
treat.

The Legate was for seizing immediately upon Salinguerra, pretending that no
faith was to be kept to one that had broken his so often, but the Marquess
would by no means agree to it, at last it was concerted among them, that
leaving the General in the Camp with the Army, the rest should accompany him
safe into the Town to make good their word, and there make him prisoner; and
while Salinguerra entertained them at a sumptuous Banquet he was laid hold
upon, clapped in chains, and sent in a Galley to Venice, where he died soon
after in the eightieth year of his age. This we must say of Salinguerra, that
no man ever took more pains to bring trouble upon himself, nor used greater
address to be dis-intangled: Most of his actions show how little he was obliged
to Fortune, though much to Nature, being of a graceful person, affable, bold,
eloquent and bountiful, all which helped to make him popular; but those
blessings were overballanced by cruelty, dissimulation and ambition; that at
last he had hard measure cannot be denied; yet his treacherous carriage to
others made his fall the less pitied.

Salinguerra's death brought the Marquess a sufficient reward for all the pains
and danger undergon in behalf of Ferrara, the whole City in a body, with the
Bishop, declaring him their Prince, to whom they were willing to commit their
Lives and Fortunes, without tying him to any other Rules of Government than
what his Prudence and Goodness should judge most for the Cities advantage. The
Venetians for the charge and trouble they had been at in this Expedition, were
allowed to settle a Magistrate there, whose Authority in all their Councils was
for some time great, but after a few years limited by the Marquess to such
things as immediately concerned the Republic. The Popes Legate also took upon
him to confirm in his Masters Name the Cities choice of the Marquess* which at
first appeared no more than a matter of Ceremony, but was strangely made use of
afterward to prove the Popes Title to that City. This Azo's Successors found
by sad experience, when allowed only to be feudatary Princes, they were at last
forced to part with that to the Church, which they owed to the peoples Free
Choice; and in truth it was a high piece of injustice, by them called subtilty,
for the Pope to pretend to give away what was not his own, that so he might
call it back at his pleasure.

Actiolin had with grief beheld the fall of Salinguerra, and the ruin of his
Party in Ferrara, by the advancement of the Marquess, which he prevented as
long as he could, and waited only for an occasion to do mischief, which always
comes too soon. Gregory the ninth, Azo's best friend being dead, the Emperors
Arms threatening the Guelphs, and the Marquess being employed at Ferrara,
Actiolin upon a sudden falls into his Countries of Este and Rovigo, made prey
of whatever was worth carrying away, burnt the rest with the villages, and
killed without respect to sex or age, all the persons he met with, and returned
to Padoua which had for some time groaned under his yoke. The Marquess with his
Army went thither and sat down before it, knowing how much Actiolin was hated;
but this cost many of the Padouan Nobility dear; for being suspected to have
encouraged the Marquess in this attempt, without further proof, they were by
the Tyrants order most barbarously murdered. To relate all the particulars that
past betwixt Actiolin Guelphs and Gibellins of Lombardy, who acted nothing
remarkable but in their presence, or by their direction; I advise the Reader
then, who desires to be informed of the most remarkable passages of several
years, till we come toward Actiolin's death, form within himself Ideas of the
greatest confusion, murders and villainies pacticable, and in these look back
upon the deplorable state of Italy in that time.

Conrard after the death of the Emperor Frederick caused some to poison
Rinaldus Azo's Son, who had been many years kept prisoner in the Kingdom of
Naples; but his Son Opizo escaped to his Grandfather with the news of
Rinaldus's death. It was no strange thing that Conrard should deal thus with
the Son of his greatest Enemy, if it be true which is reported, that he helped
to dispatch the Emperor his Father; and this may in a great part excuse his
Brother Manfred for poisoning him.

Manfred did Arm mightily in Naples, and encouraged Actiolin to do the same in
Lombardy: his Neighbors to whom he was grown terrible without any other Army
than his constant train, knew what they might expect, if the Gibellins were
brought together under such a General; this made the Venetians, the Pope, and
the Ferrara enter into a strict Confederacy against Actiolin; and that Forces
might be raised with the more expedition, it was declared a Croisado, and
plenary indulgences were granted at Bologna, Ferrara and other places through
which the Popes Legate past, to such as should engage in so pious a War; and
indeed Actiolin had so laid aside all sentiments of humanity, that at Padoua
where he did most reside few days past without instances of signal cruelty, to
be only banished, though with the loss of Estate, was thought no small favor,
for by this means life was secured, which no innocence could do at home; his
fury oftentimes broke out against those who thought themselves most his
favorites, and who had really deserved best of him: In a word, all within his
reach, and he had then a long arm, did tremble under the apprehension of his
wrath.

Actiolin upon the news of the Confederates march, and of their design upon
Padoua, not willing to meet them, nor judging it for his reputation to be
besieged there, left the place with a good Garrison to his Nephew, and went in
person to besiege Mantoua, as if he had apprehended no danger behind him; but
this act of vanity lost him Padoua, which having made a short and a faint
resistance was taken by assault: Most of the Inhabitants, instead of seeking
for lurking places, as is usual upon such occasions, run to meet the Marquess
and Legate at their entry, falling down at their feet, ready to adore them, as
sent from God, to deliver their City from so horrid a Tyrant; and then walking
before in a Solemn Procession to the Great Church, with a good heart they sung
Te Deum. From the Church they went to the prisons, freeing fifteen hundred from
their chains in one place, six hundred in another, besides many Women of
quality, who had not seen the light, nor their friends, nor known how things
went in the world for several years. Upon the surrender of the Castle, the
whole City run to see that place of which next to hell they were most afraid,
it having been of a long time the infamous Theater of Actiolins cruelty: Upon
search, in the Dungeons above four hundred and sixty persons were found so
pined away with hunger, and covered with filth, that none present could know
them, either by their voices or countenances, though afterward most of them
proved to be Padouans. The great number and variety of Instruments of torment,
with the heaps of dead bodies that filled the corners of those loathsome
apartments, did strike the beholders with amazement. And indeed as other great
Men delight in stately Palaces, and fine Gardens, Actiolin's whole study was
employed in those hellish Inventions; his prison was a Laberinth in which he
commanded the person who presented him the Model to be shut first up to see if
it were so ingeniously contrived as he pretended; and it is certain, as many
thousands ended their days in it, so neither the unhappy contriver, nor any
other ever found the way out, to come and give the world an account of it, till
the Marquess and the Legate got thither.

While Padoua was expressing its joy for so unexpected a deliverance, it went
ill with the poor Padouans at Verona, Actiolin happened to arrive from the
siege of Mantoua at the same time with this unwelcom news; and the poor
Messenger who innocently reported it was by his order immediately put to death;
but it being in a few hours confirmed by many of his Officers who had made
their escape, Actiolin commanded his Army to be lodged within the City, and the
Gates to be shut up, and all the Padouans who were there, either under
confinement, or soldiers in the Army, or Officers of his House to be
apprehended and killed; and so punctually was he obeyed by his Guards, and the
other Ministers of his Cruelty, that in a weeks time, of eleven thousand only
twenty eight remained alive.

Having offered up such a bloody sacrifice to his wrath, as hardly any History
can parallel, he marched toward Padoua, but finding it was not to be recovered
at his return to Verona, those twenty eight, whom in regard of the singular
services done him, he had formerly exempted from the common butchery, were all
hanged in the Market place. Then joining with Pallavicino and some other
Gibellins, he beat the Legates Army, took himself prisoner, and got into
Brescia almost upon as easy terms as the Marquess and the Legate had Padoua:
But his allowing no share in the Conquest to those who assisted him, made
Pallavicino go over to the Marquess for whom the honor of ruining Actiolin was
reserved; for while he was attempting no less than the Conquest of Milan, the
Marquess and Pallavicino gave him battle, and having the advantage, they so
pursued it, that Actiolin with five horse only endeavoring to recover Bergamo,
was over-taken before he got thither, and so fell into their hands alive.

When the Soldiers heard Actiolin was taken, they crowded to behold the
Monster, whom they fancied not to be shaped like other men, it being a constant
tradition among the Common People, that a Devil clothed with a body, supplied
his pretended Fathers place when he was begotten; many of them calling to mind,
how much he had made them suffer in their persons, in their estates, or in
their friends, could scarce by the Generals Authority be contained from
offering him violence: but he being recommended to Pallavicino's care he was
conveyed first to his tent, afterward to Soncino, where giving little sign of
sorrow for the rivers of innocent blood he had split, and obstinately refusing
to have his wounds searched, or to eat or drink enough to keep him alive, he
thus helped to dispatch himself; nor could his greatest enemies have wished him
to fall by a more polluted hand.

The joy for Actiolin's death was soon allayed by the actions of Albericus his
Brother in whom he seemed still to live. His cruelties at Treviso, and other
parts of the Mark called for a new Croisado, of which the Marquess was again
declared General: Albericus had strongly fortified the Castle of St Zeno, and
provided it with all necessaries, resolving to make it his last refuge, and
thither he now retired with his Treasure, his Family, and a few of his most
trusty Friends, who helped him to keep it out so long beyond expectation, that
the besiegers engaged, that all in the place should be set at liberty, except
Albericus and his Family, who were to be given up, which being accordingly
done, the vengeance of such as he had injured, he was brought with his Wife,
his six Sons, and his two Daughters into the middle of the Camp, where, first,
the Sons, in his and their Mothers presence had their legs and arms cut off and
thrown at their Parents, their bodies were hewed in pieces and carried as
relics to the poor disconsolate Widows whom Albericus had deprived of their
Husbands much after the same manner before he left Treviso. His Wife and his
two Daughters, whose innocence and beauty deserved a better fate, were fastened
to stakes and burnt alive; and Albericus in the last place being tied to a
Horse tail, was dragged about the Camp, and all that would, had leave with hot
pincers to tear out his flesh, and what remained of his Carcass became a prey
to the Wolves of the next wood. After this dreadful manner was the Family of
Onara extirpated, which had for several Ages aimed at an Absolute Dominion over
that part of Italy: but the insupportable tyranny of the two Actiolin's and
Albericus drew the wrath of Heaven and Earth upon them, and has made their
memory odious to all posterity.

CHAP. VIII.
A continuation of the differences betwixt the Guelphs and Gibellins until the
death of Rinaldus the second.

THe loss of Actiolin to the Gibellins was repaired in Mastinus Scaliger, who
coming to be Created Podesta of Verona, declared himself head of that Party;
Most of the Italian Writers make Mastinus of a very mean extraction, raised to
great riches under Actiolin, and now to the chief trust in the City, which was
so managed by him, that he and his Offspring continued Absolute Princes there
for above a hundred years, till their Ambition and Insolence provoked their
Neighbors to arm to their ruin. The first thing Mastinus undertook was to
chase away Count Boniface and the Guelphs; but they going to Ferrara made known
the danger their Party was in from such a growing enemy, and Actiolin's
creature, and easily engaged the Marquess to assist them, but Mastinus upon
their approach, not thinking himself able yet to deal with him who had so
lately ruined Actiolin and his Family agreed to restore the Count, and those he
had banished, and kept himself afterward within the terms of moderation, as
long as the Marquess lived.

The support the Gibellins had from Manfred made Urban the fourth who was a
Frenchman offer the Crown of Naples to Charles Count of Anjou, a Brother of
France, which he accepted the more willingly, because he was much encouraged by
the assurances that were given him from the Marquess and the Guelphs of
Lombardy, but while preparations were making on all hands, the Marquess died
much lamented by his Party: He had been wonderfully successful in most of his
attempts, though he had to do with the greatest men of that Age, and that often
times upon very unequal terms; he cannot be much taxed, either with cruelty or
breach of promise, yet he wanted not his frailties, only the wickedness of his
Rival Actiolin both helped to cover them, and render his virtues the more
conspicuous. And upon the whole matter it must be acknowledged he was engaged
in the worst Party, seeing the Gibellins Cause, how ill soever they managed it,
was much the justest, they maintained the Emperors undoubted Rights, which the
Guelphs pretended the Popes Spiritual Arms had cut off.

Azo leaving his Grandchild Opizo too young to undertake the Government, the
Bishop of Ferrara under a pretense of the danger of the times that required a
Prince able to protect them, would have come to a new Choice; but such was the
respect the City generally had for the Family of Este, that the Bishops
practices served only to make them the more watchful in preserving Opizo's
right. In this Mantoua, Padoua, and the Neighbor places encouraged them,
offering their assistance if required toward Opizo's establishment; and the
Turcii a powerful Family, who with most vigor withstood the Bishop, were
appointed Guardians during the young Princes minority.

Clement the fourth, no less an enemy to Manfred than Urban his Predecessor,
sent to Charles of Anjou to make have if he expected the Crown designed him,
and finding the most decent, the most effectual, and withal the cheapest way
for the Church to make war was by Croisado's, where a red Cross, and a plenary
indulgence which cost nothing, made the good men of those days fight more
desperately than any pay. The War against Manfred was declared a Holy and a
meritorious Expedition, and none in Lombardy promoted it more than Opizo, or
rather his Guardians: The issue of all was, Charles and the worst Cause
prevailed, Manfred losing Benevent.

The Gibellins only hope was placed in Conrardin, Manfreds Nephew, and the
Grandchild of Frederick the second, whose journey into Italy Mastinus
Scaliger, Prince now of Verona, did as earnestly solicit as the Marquess did
formerly that of Charles. Conrardin came and past most of the winter with
Scaliger consulting about the method of carrying on the war while Opizo's
Guardians, and the Guelphs, nothing frighted by the enemies nearness, raised
what Troops they could for Charles: Early in the spring both Parties appeared
in the field, but the fate that pursued Barbarossa's Family soon overtook
Conrardin. The Germans and Gibellins were beat, the poor Prince made prisoner,
and in the eighteenth year of his age sentenced by Charles, not without the
Popes privacy and direction, to die as a common traitor by the hand of an
Executioner for endeavoring to recover what of right did belong to him.

The Guardians resigning the Government to Opizo now of age, he by his strict
Union with Charles covered himself from all the storms Mastinus Scaliger, and
the Gibellins raised. It is true, the extinction of Barbarossa's Family in
Conrardin had brought them so low, that for some time they durst scarce own the
name or the quarrel, however they wanted not ways to continue the division,
and Mastinus kept them in hopes of great things under a new Emperor; but when
application was made to Rodolphus Count of Hapsburgh, the first of the House of
Austria that had the Imperial Crown, no arguments could work upon him to come
into Italy, or to intrigue himself at all in the concerns of that Nation so
fatal to his Predecessors, whom, he said, he could trace going thither, but
could meet with no footsteps of their return: from him as Sigonius, and the
best Writers observe, Italy may date its liberty, seeing any City could
purchase of Rodolphus what Government it pleased; though if we look narrowly
into this thing, it proved rather a changing Masters than any true liberty, and
in many places a losing the protection of an Emperor to be under the lash of
some petty Tyrant, it made way for the greatness of the Church, established the
French, and in general, it fared worse with Italy afterward, though in some
places they fell into gentle hands, as happily Modena and Regio did when joined
with Ferrara under the same Prince.

The Church was soon sensible how little it had got by exchanging Germans for
French, who seeing themselves once fixed in Italy, could not be satisfied,
unless they had the spiritual power likewise; and according to the vanity
natural to most people in prosperity, but in a peculiar manner to the French,
they talked of nothing but a French Pope, a French Consistory, and to have all
new modelled in their way. This made Nicolaus the third a proud Italian of the
House of Vrsini who hated and contemned all Tramontani, and particularly the
French, vigorously bestir himself against Charles, and the first that found the
ill effects of his displeasure was Opizo, against whom he armed Albertus
Scaliger, and the Gibellins, that Lombardy, which Opizo kept up. We have not
the particulars of the War betwixt Scaliger and the Marquess, only it is to be
supposed it went not ill with Opizo, because the Articles of the Peace
afterward concluded are most favorable to him.

After the Peace was made up betwixt Opizo and Scaliger, the Popes Arts, and
the insolence of the French drew sudden ruin upon them in Sicily; for Peter
King of Arragon married to Manfreds Daughter, coming thither with his Navy, the
Sicilians, as it was before agreed on, at the hour of Vespers fell upon the
French in all parts of the Kingdom, and without compassion or respect,
massacred Men, Women and Children, and presently Peter with his Spaniards
landing, took possession of the Kingdom.

The Popes hatred against Charles, and Peter's success did not a little help to
set up the Gibellins again, who began in several places to return upon the
Guelphs the ill usage they had lately met with: But Opizo bore no Verona's
Daughter, and now he was so far from taking pleasure in heading a Faction, that
for the future he resolved to put on the person of an Umpire, and to use his
Authority in composing differences among his Neighbors. For his honor he was
the first man that thought of employing himself this way, because the
animosities they had been bred up to from their Infancy, had so heated and
sour'd their tempers, that their whole study was how to ruin one another,
looking upon this as the only method to secure themselves. Yet Opizo showed the
world, that as he could put off those Principles his Grandfather had infused
in him, so by his means others could be brought to righter apprehensions of
things, and differences be made up betwixt Families which were judged
absolutely irreconcilable.

An instance of this he gave at Milan, where he brought several Families which
had long lived in open defiance to an entire friendship; and scarce was he got
back to Ferrara, when Ambassadors from Modena and Regio, came to declare him
their Prince: The Emperor likewise approving of this choice, confirmed to
Opizo, and his Successors, the perpetual Principality of those Cities, which
continue to this day in their Allegiance to the House of Este, and have in
these latter Times given signal marks of their fidelity to their Princes,
beyond most people of Lombardy.

So great were the distractions of Modena, and Regio, when they chose Opizo for
their Prince, that it was thought strange they could ever be brought to agree
in any thing; yet the Opinion both parties had of his worth and justice, made
them not only unanimous in choosing him, but likewise in submitting all their
differences to his determination, and his Prudence and Authority soon put an
end to them: This was the last remarkable passage of Opizo's life, for at his
return to Ferrara he died. He was a prudent and a fortunate Prince, had in his
youth showed both resolution and conduct in several enterprises; but the latter
part of his life was still the most glorious, and he got also more in a few
years by promoting the peace of Italy, than his Grandfather had done all his
time by fomenting their unnatural divisions.

He left three Sons, the eldest was Azo the ninth, whom the French in Naples
highly caressed, knowing his friendship to be necessary for the support of
their interest in Lombardy: But the Padouans were like to have given him much
trouble by setting up his younger Brother Aldobrandin, had not the Patriarch of
Aquileia adjusted the matter before it broke out into an open war. The City of
Parma had more respect for Azo, and resolved to follow the example of Modena
and Regio; but Bologna did so deal with the Gibellins, that they could not be
brought to consent to it. This ill office the Marquess did much resent, and
thereupon began a war with Bologna, which lasted a Bologna sensible of the
danger, sent to the Pope and the Florentins, to intercede with the Marquess for
a peace. The Families of Visconti and Torriani had long divided Milan, either
of them affecting the Sovereignty by the ruin of the other; at last by the
favor of the Emperor Henry the seventh, who began again to meddle with the
affairs of Italy, neglected by his predecessors for almost sixty years,
Visconti not only prevailed but grew on a sudden so powerful, that he was like
to swallow up all near him; the Cities of Pavia, Vergelli, Novara, Cremona,
Crema and Bergamo, apprehending themselves most in danger, did with the
Marquess of Ferrara, Montferrat, and Saluzzo, enter into a confederacy to pull
Visconti down; and Azo being declared their General, did so successfully manage
the war, that Visconti was soon humbled, and might have been brought low
enough, had the League continued. After the conclusion of the Peace, Beatrix,
Azo's Sister was contracted to Galliazo, Visconti's Son, and the marriage
solemnized at Milan with such magnificence as Italy had not seen of late years.

Visconti being a little depressed, Azo was absolutely the greatest Prince of
Lombardy; for besides Ferrara, Modena, Regio, Rovigo, Commachio, with several
other places of less note, all his own, Bergamo, Cremona, Crema, and Pavia
lived under his protection, and were ready at a call: This made Charles the
second, King of Naples, willingly hearken to a match betwixt the Marquess and
his youngest Daughter, having married her three elder Sisters to two Kings, and
the first Prince of the blood in France: Such an Alliance we must allow was
highly for the honor of the House of Este, but proved unhappy in its
consequences; for the Neighbors grew jealous of Azo, as they had formerly been
of Visconti, and it was given out that the King of Naples and he designed to
Conquer, and then to divide Italy betwixt them; that Azo was to have all upon
this side, and the King all beyond the Appenin. Scaliger therefore of Verona,
with those of Mantoua, Parma and Bologna, by the Popes means declare war
against the Marquess, and Regio narrowly escaped being taken by those of Parma,
as Modena, likewise by those of Bologna, and both places after some time fell
into their hands by the treachery of a few disaffected Inhabitants, who by
night opened the Gates for the Enemy to enter at.

The loss of two Cities gave not so much discouragement to Azo, as the revolt
of his Brother, with others of Naples, and of some from the Swisses, together
with seven hundred Catalonian Horse did remove his fears, and put his affairs
in so good a posture, that it is believed, it would have gone hard with his
Enemies, if he had lived to finish that Campaign.

No wonder if Francis who durst rebel against his Brother, did dispute the
Title with his Son Friscus after his death; but it seems there was a Will
either found or feigned, in which Azo had declared him his Successor; by this
and the Legate of Bologna's help, he raised a tumult against Friscus, got
possession of the City of Ferrara, and was by the Magistrates and People
saluted Marquess. The Castle whither Friscus retired had a Venetian Garrison,
and made a stout resistance, till Friscus seeing things desperate, stole away
by night to Venice where he died, and left the Garrison to the mercy of the
Legate, who caused the eyes of all the Venetians to be pulled out: Francis
likewise had little reason to brag of his Conquest, for the Legate assuming the
whole Authority, sent him to reside at Rovigo, where by his order he was soon
after murdered.

The Pope, first by countenancing, and then by murdering this ambitious Prince
got Ferrara to himself; but such wicked practices did so alienate the hearts of
the People, that to preserve it from the Emperor he was advised to consign it
into Robert King of Naples hands: Robert, though Brother to Beatrix Azo's Wife,
kept it more by the strength of the Garrison than the affections of the
Inhabitants who retained an inward reverence and passion for the injured
Princes of Este, and waited but for an occasion to express it. One day it
happened that the Governor in his anger gave a blow to a Gentleman of Ferrara,
of which he died; whereupon in an instant all were in Arms, and he with the
Garrison, with much ado got to the Castle, which was ill provided to hold out
long: The news came immediately to Rovigo, where Azo the Son of Francis and his
Cousin German Rinaldus, Aldobrandin's Son then lived, who while they were
resolving with their friends what course to take, a solemn invitation from the
City of Ferrara, removed the fears of their not being welcome, and determined
them in their resolutions, so that they began their journey thither next
morning: Upon advice of their approach, all, besides those who were actually
employed in the siege of the Castle went out to meet them, accompanying them
first to the Church, then to the Palace, without the least disturbance; the
Garrison in a day or two came to capitulate, and were dismissed with their
Governor; and the City in a grateful remembrance of so unexpected a delivery,
kept every fifth of August a day of Thanksgiving, so long as there was a
Marquess or Duke of Ferrara.

The joy for the Princes Restoration was doubly allayed; first, by the death
of Azo, to whom Rinaldus Aldobrandin's Son succeeded, then by the Popes
procedure which could not have been more violent if Rinaldus had been accessory
to his Uncles death, whom the Legate murdered, or had been guilty of Usurpation
in accepting his own, he was presently excommunicated, and his Subjects
commanded in thirty days, under the like pain, to cast off Rinaldus and his
Ministers, and receive the Popes: But neither in Prince nor People did the Pope
meet with that compliance he expected, for Rinaldus could not be so easily
frighted from what he was sure he had so good a right to, and the Citizens
instead of rejecting him, did by an humble Address entreat him, that he would
not abandon nor give them up who had been so faithful to his Ancestors, and so
ready to shake off the Churches yoke to return to their Allegiance, assuring
him, that no threats nor allurements should ever debauch them from their Duty
to their Natural Prince. Immediately Ambassadors were dispatched to their
Neighbors, with an account of the Popes dealings, and the resolutions of
Rinaldus, and Galleazo of Milan, Canis Scaliger of Verona, with the great
Castrucius of Luca, and the banished Florentins enter into a League for the
defense of the Marquess of Ferrara, in case the Pope should proceed any further
in his unjust pretenses. But after many attempts for several years to little
purpose the Pope took off the sentence which he had so rashly and unjustly
pronounced against Rinaldus, and confirmed whatever was done at Ferrara during
the interdict.

A short time discovered the Popes Peace with the Marquess of Ferrara, and his
Brothers was intended only to disarm them, that so he might the better fall
upon the City: In order to it the Legate of Bologna made great preparations,
and notice being given to the adjacent places of Romagna, to be in readiness,
the whole business was carried on so closely, that the Legate invested Ferrara
with an Army of thirty thousand men before the Marquess suspected his design:
Every Gentleman of Ferrara showed as much concern as the Marquess could to
disappoint the Pope, who had so treacherously surprised them: and the place,
though ill provided, held out by this means beyond expectation, till the thing
being blazed abroad, Visconti from Milan, Gonzaga from Mantoua, Scaliger from
Verona, without exception of Guelphs or Gibellins in this common danger sent
Forces to relieve it. The Marquess having private information of their
approach, went out by night, leaving the place to his Brother Opizo, with Order
to make a Salley at such a time as he with the Confederates should advance
toward the Enemies Camp; which being accordingly performed, the Popes Army was
unexpectedly beset upon all hands, and received such a total overthrow, that
very few escaped being killed or taken prisoners.

The Marquess upon his return, according to the custom of that age, after any
signal military performance, was solemnly Knighted with his Brothers by
Taurisanus, the most reputed Captain of the City: This sort of Knighthood they
judged so honorable, that the greatest Princes were willing to receive it from
the hands of their own Subjects; an instance of this we meet with in Francis
the first, who thought it worth the while to send for the complete Chevalier de
Bayon, one of his Generals in Italy to be Knighted by him, as if he looked upon
this to make him somewhat more a Gentleman than the Crown of France did.

Not long after died Rinaldus, and Modena which he had besieged many months,
fell into his Brother Opizo's hands: To grace his first entry upon the
Government, this City having deprived it self for above thirty years of the
protection of the House of Este, tossed from one Master to another, could never
find rest till it took sanctuary there again.

CHAP. IX.
A brief account of what past in Lombardy from Opizo's advancement till that of
Borsius the first Duke of Ferrara, and of the Council held at Ferrara, to unite
the Greek and Latin Churches under Eugenius the fourth; with several other
memorable transactions.

NOthing is more entertaining than the History of the ebbings and flowings of
the Ruling Families of Lombardy in those days; when any one of them grew too
Great the rest combined to level it. Thus it had lately fared with the Families
of Este and Visconti, as I observed; and now Scaliger was to have his turn,
being the only object of their jealousy: for besides Verona he had ten more
Cities under him, kept five thousand Germans constantly in pay, affected the
Title of King of Lombardy, and was grown intolerably insolent. The first that
began with him were the two Republics of Venice and Florence; afterward
Visconti, the Marquess of Ferrara, and Gonzaga agreed to enter into the League,
both that they might be sharers in the Conquest, and thereby keep the
Republics from enriching themselves too much, and likewise when they thought
fit might stop the current before Scaliger were utterly ruined. In a short time
Scaliger lost seven of his Cities, which were divided among the Conquerours.
But the Florentins, for all their subtilty, and contempt of the Lombards were
outwitted by the Venetians and Visconti, and had scarce enough allowed them to
defray the charges of the War: the Hostages for performance of the Articles of
the Peace were consigned by all Parties into the hands of the Marquess, who
toward the latter end behaved himself more like a Mediator than an Enemy to
Scaliger.

Azo of Correggio not being able to keep Parma sold it to Opizo, and the City
it self, willingly came under a Prince of Este, having found it self so happy
when Governed by that Family four hundred years before; the people at Opizo's
arrival to express Visconti and Gonzaga both lay in wait for it, how uneasy a
thing it would be for him to keep it, there being no Communication betwixt this
and his other Cities, and how at best he must resolve to entail a War upon his
Posterity with these Princes, was persuaded to part with it upon the same terms
that he bought it.

Opizo past the rest of his time in great tranquillity, and having outlived all
his Brothers, left at his death seven Sons very young; this encouraged his
Nephew Francis that was supported by Visconti, whose Niece he had married, to
make an attempt upon Ferrara; but Aldobrandin the second, though he was not
then above seventeen years of age, and had none of his Family fit to advise
him, yet behaved himself so well, and found the Nobility so faithful, that
Francis seeing no likelihood of compassing what he designed retired to Milan,
and never afterward offered to give him the least disturbance.

The Wars betwixt the Republics of Venice and Genoua engaged most of the
Princes of Lombardy in their quarrel, Visconti declared for Genoua, and
contributed largely toward the charge; Aldobrandin, Scaliger and Carrara of
Padoua were for the Venetians. Visconti not knowing well how to come at the
Venetians, resolved to set upon their Confederates, and by the help of Bologna
laid siege to Modena, which was looked upon as the easiest enterprise; but
young Aldobrandin with thirty thousand Visconti's Territories called him home
to defend his own Country before he could take the City. His grief for being
thus treated by so young a Captain hastened his death; and soon after him died
Aldobrandin, the most hopeful Prince of Italy, being but in the flower of his
age.

When Nicolaus Aldobrandin's younger Brother found Barnabas Visconti like to be
as troublesome as his Father, he offered to the Legate of Bologna, to Gonzaga
and to Scaliger, whose Daughter he married to concur in keeping a standing Army
as the best expedient to bridle his ambition, by which Barnabas was so highly
provoked, that the first thing he undertook was to invade the Marquesses
Country: Nicolaus having secret advice of his design, made himself ready, and
gave Barnabas such a brisk reception, that many of his men being killed, and
several of the Nobility of Milan taken prisoners, he with the rest made a
shameful retreat. Barnabas then seemed willing to hearken to a Peace, offering
to refer all their differences to the Emperor Charles the fourth, nor could he
have wished for a more favorable Umpire than him whose Grandfather had first
set up the Visconti at Milan, who had himself made his Father Visconti Vicar of
Italy, and who had lately expressed great kindness for himself; yet upon second
thoughts, Barnabas concluded it not so well for him to make Peace with
Nicolaus, till his lost honor were in some measure repaired, which made him
prepare another Army against the Marquess; but the Emperor taking it ill to
have the business first referred to him, and then to have Barnabas think of
revenging himself, deprived him of the Title of Vicar, and of all other
Imperial Privileges, forbidding any of the Vassals of the Barnabas to wave
this storm accepted of what terms were proposed him.

This Peace it was hoped might have lasted a long time, but Barnabas still in
his heart hated Nicolaus as the occasion of the Emperors being displeased with
him; and Nicolaus could never be well reconciled to Barnabas, while he kept
Regio, which of right belonged to him: so that no wonder if both parties
watched only for an opportunity of falling out. After many and great disputes
too tedious to be set down, Nicolaus recovered Regio that had long been grew
too strong; but he chiefly employed himself in deciding their differences, by
which he got a great Name, and never wanted business, the Venetians and Carrara
of Padoua, the Cities of Bologna and Florence, with several others freely
submitted themselves to his arbitration.

When Nicolaus had spent many years in this desirable station, Galleazo
Visconti fell upon the Scaligers, chased away the Father, killed the Son, and
took Verona. It troubled Nicolaus to see the Family out of which he had married
a Wife, ruined in an instant, and to see Visconti, for whom of all other he had
the least kindness, so great a gainer by it; he solicited hotly the Princes and
Free Cities of Lombardy to take Arms against Galleazo, and brought them almost
to a resolution; but his sudden Scaliger made all endeavors to save it
ineffectual.

Nicolaus left but one Son, who entering into a Religious Order, resigned all
to his Cousin Albertus; Galleazo was now too great for Albertus to oppose, which
made him side with Galleazo, that so if he got nothing by the ruin of
Scaliger, he might at least save himself, that was most likely to suffer next.
This League they termed everlasting, though as the motives upon which it was
made, seemed to promise no such thing; so neither did it prove such in the
issue: for as soon as Galleazo was engaged in a War with Florence, his new
Subjects of Verona and Padoua revolted, and threatened to fall upon the
Marquess, unless he would join with them. Albertus being afterward at leisure
founded the University of Ferrara, whither his bounty drew some of the chief
Professors in all Arts and Sciences, amongst others Salicetus that most famed
Civilian; but when he thought to have dedicated the rest of his time, and no
small part of his Revenue to the Muses, his sudden death deprived the Learned
of the best Patron of that age.

By his Will he recommended his Son Nicolaus, being yet a Child, to the tuition
and care of the chief Families of Ferrara, ordering, that by turns they should
have the administration of Affairs till he came of age, that so all having some
share in the Government, they might the more heartily espouse their young
Princes interest. Most thought it a thing not practicable for so many persons,
sometimes to sit at the Helm, and then to return to their private stations, and
to own the Superiority of those whom they had lately commanded: But for several
years this course did wonderfully succeed, none while in Authority, showing any
other ambition than that of discharging their trust faithfully; and in
compliance to the Orders left by Albertus, giving up their Commissions at the
time limited, with the same cheerfulness that at first they received them.
During the Princes minority, Azo the Son of Francis, and a Grandchild of the
Family of Visconti, did by open force, as well as by poison, and other wicked
practices, attempt the death of Nicolaus, till happily he was taken and kept
prisoner, notwithstanding the endeavors used by those of Milan for his
enlargement. The obligation of being Azo's account, put the Government to so
great charge, that a considerable sum was borrowed of the Venetians, and
Rovigo given them in pledge for it. By this Republics means a match was
concluded betwixt Nicolaus and the Daughter of Francis Carrara, who now next to
Visconti was the most powerful Prince of those parts, he being then absolute
Master of Verona, Vicenza, Bellimo, Feltry and Padoua, most of which came to
his Family, first by the depression, and afterward by the ruin of the
Scaligers.

The Plague about this time breaking out in Ferrara, many of the Nobility
retired to their Countreyhouses; Carrara who had no liking to the Government
settled there by Albertus coming thither with a Train, that might rather have
past for an Army; he turned out the Nobility, and put the Prince and the City
into the hands of his Subjects and Favorites. Nicolaus fell ill soon after,
and if he had died, no doubt Carrara had kept that City; but upon his recovery,
being jealous of his Father in Law's ill intentions, he dismissed the Padouans,
and made use of those who had formerly served him.

The designs of John Galleazo, lately Created Duke of Milan by Wensislaus the
Emperor, tended plainly to the subversion of Lombardy; Bologna by the
slaughter of the Bentivoglio's was fallen to him; he had likewise Perugia and
several other places upon that hand; and if he had lived a few months longer,
Florence could not have saved it self. His death encouraged the Pope and others
to enter into a War with his Son, a Legate being sent to Ferrara to declare
Nicolaus General of the Church; but the Duchess Dowager of Milan afraid of
what might follow upon such a Combination, made earnest suit for Peace, which
she bought with the loss of Bologna, Perugia and Asizi.

The friendship betwixt the Venetians and Carrara ending in a bloody War, both
Parties courted Nicolaus, who at first was persuaded to declare for his Father
in Law; but foreseeing his ill management of Affairs, and his obstinacy in
refusing to yield up a little to secure the rest, must at length ruin him, he
made Peace with the Venetians, and Carrara having lost Verona, Vicenza, Feltry
and Bellimo, and being besieged at Padoua, was betrayed and delivered into the
hands of his Enemies, who carrying him prisoner to Venice, with his two Sons,
put him there to death: His Offspring are yet at Padoua, and of late have been
glad to be admitted among the Gentlemen of that Republic, which put their
Ancestors out of the Rank of Princes, in Carrara which made the Venetians first
considerable upon the Terra firma.

Regio was now in the hands of Ottobon of Parma, who resolved never to be at
Peace with the House of Este, till he had likewise Modena; but Nicolaus joining
with the Duke of Milan, and other Princes, procured Ottobon to be declared a
disturber of the Peace of Lombardy, and his Country to be exposed to all that
bore him any malice. For an Insurrection at Parma, Ottobon hanged sixty five of
the Chief Citizens; and dangers threatening him both at home and from abroad, he
seemed willing to give satisfaction to Nicolaus whom he had most injured, and
appointed a Conference with him, hoping by this means to have an opportunity to
kill Nicolaus: Advice being brought to Nicolaus of Ottobon's design, he came to
the place well guarded, and leaving his men at some distance, as Ottobon also
did his, both with a few trusty friends came together to discourse the
business: Franciscus Forza afterward Duke of Milan, being there with Nicolaus,
and observing some of Ottobons followers cast themselves into a certain figure,
which they were to do before they fell on, prevented them, by laying hold upon
Ottobon, and seconded by others, killed him outright; all his party deserting
him besides his Brother and one other Officer. Since Actiolins time there had
not been a more cruel Tyrant than Ottobon, yet they advised Nicolaus to
satisfy the world by a public Declaration, that what he did was in his own
defense; nothing but this being able to vindicate the killing any man after
such a manner.

While the Marquess lay before Regio, an Ambassador from Venice arrived in the
Camp to give him notice that the rest of Ottobons Family being fled thither, as
to the sanctuary of the oppressed, they sent to offer their mediation,
expecting he would proceed no further. Nicolaus thought it a little hard to be
required, not to meddle with what belonged to his Family; yet not being willing
to come to a rupture suddenly with Venice, he endeavored to gain time in
returning a smooth and ambiguous answer, and in a few days had both Regio and
Parma delivered him. When the Venetians understood this, they wisely declined
meddling any further in so desperate a business, withdrawing their protection
from Ottobon's friends, and owning the Marquess for their Confederate; this
Nicolaus took so kindly, that he never ceased, till by his mediation the Peace
was made up betwixt the Emperor Sigismund and the Republic, and the Articles
signed at Ferrara.

The Emperor was troubled to see the Church rent by so many Popes at one time,
and thereupon assembled the Council of Constance, where Benedict the
thirteenth, Gregory the twelfth, and John the twenty fourth were deposed; and
Martin the fifth chosen, and the new Pope in his return from Germany to Rome
passing by Ferrara, was with all his train sumptuously treated by the Marquess,
whom in the name of the Princes of Italy he thanked for the Peace concluded by
his means, betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians, and for his constant
forwardness in promoting the public good: Parma growing troublesome to him, he
sold it to the Duke of Milan, who at the same time renounced all his
pretensions to Regio. It was thought that Lombardy was then sufficiently purged
from all seeds of discord; when Philip Duke of Milan's seizing upon Genoua, and
threatening Florence, gave a fresh alarm, the Venetians offered the Florentins
their assistance; but Nicolaus though jealous of the Dukes greatness could not
be engaged till they declared him General, and by their Ambassador sent him St
Mark's Banner, with an unlimited Commission: after several battles, the Duke
having already lost Brescia, and being in a fair way to lose more, Nicolaus at
the Popes request proposed a Peace, Ferrara. The Duke of Milan not being able
to bear the loss of Brescia, without ever dismissing his Army, fell more hotly
upon the Venetians than before, yet with no better success, for after much
treasure spent to no purpose; instead of having the first Peace confirmed with
the loss only of Brescia, by this he was obliged to give up also Bergamo.

Who could have imagined, that after having thus smarted, the Duke should have
come to another breach; but the natural inconstancy of that Prince, the ill
grounded opinion he had of his own sufficiency, and the flatteries of those
about him, who when ever he miscarried, pretended he was betrayed, never
suffered him to live at ease; the Venetians on the other hand, understanding
perfectly with whom they had to deal, seemed to be afraid of his Power, that so
they might hasten a rupture, being sure always to gain somewhat by falling out
with the Duke of Milan: How hard a task then had the Marquess Sigismond, who
honored him with a Visit in his return from Rome, was treated at a rate
suitable to his greatness, and at his departure, he confirmed by a new Grant to
the Marquess and his Posterity, his Title to Modena, Regio, and the other
places, which he held of the Empire.

From the design then a foot to Unite the Greek and Latin Churches, I must beg
leave of my Reader to give a short account in the first place of their
differences, which were both about some speculative points; as that of the
Procession of the Holy Ghost, and also about Rituals, as the Consecrating
leavened or unleavened Bread; but that which chiefly made the breach so wide,
was the Contest about Supremacy. The Popes pretensions to Universal
Jurisdiction over all Christian Churches, are too well known to be much
enlarged on. Upon the other hand, the Greeks only allowed them to be Patriarchs
of the West, and said that the rise of their Dignity was not from the pretended
Succession to St Peter, but from Romes being then the Metropolis of the Roman
Empire, which clearly appeared by what followed upon the translation of the
Imperial Seat to Byzantium; the Bishop of that See, being declared in two of
the first four General Councils Equal in all things to the Bishops of Rome,
excepting only Precedence; because Constantinople was New Rome, expressing by
this what Opinion they had of the Rights old Rome then enjoyed, seeing they did
not ascribe them to a Divine Original, but to the Dignity of the City. Upon
this great disputes arose betwixt the Bishops of those Sees, while the one
would not acknowledge a Superior, nor the other an Equal; the Popes
endeavored to engage in their behalf the Patriarchs of Alexandria and of
Antioch, as ancienter than those of Constantinople, to whom they were not to
yield the precedence. From the days of the most learned Photius these unhappy
differences settled in a formed Schism, and gave no small advantage to the
Saracens and Turks over the Eastern Christians, in whose ruin the Popes seemed
but little concerned.

An Union betwixt the Churches had been long desired, and Eugenius the fourth,
Martin's Successor finding in this a plausible pretense to ruin the Council of
Basil then assembled, called another at Ferrara, where he knew he had a friend
in Nicolaus, and invited the Greeks with large promises thither. Nor could the
Pope have wished for a more favorable conjuncture, seeing the danger of the
two Eastern Empires of Constantinople and Trapezond, that were ready to be
swallowed up by the Turk, made them, in hopes of assistance from Italy, willing
to come to any accommodation. The Emperor of Constantinople, John Palaeologus,
to promote the business, resolved to be there in person; and Nicolaus upon his
arrival at Venice, went thither to welcome him, had him lodged in the Palace of
Este, and then returned to Ferrara to make ready for his reception. The
Emperor being accompanied by his Brother Demetrius, Despot of the Morea, the
Ambassador of Trapezond, and the most considerable Bishops of Greece, in all
seven hundred, were met by Nicolaus, and a Noble Equipage at some distance from
Ferrara: The Emperor was conducted directly to the Pope, who to show him, as
they pretended, an extraordinary mark of respect, would not suffer him to
kneel, but embraced him in his arms with great expressions of kindness;
afterward Nicolaus brought the Emperor to an apartment richly furnished for
him in the Palace, called Paradise, where he received the Complements of the
Cardinals, and other Chief Prelates.

The Patriarch of Constantinople who stayed at Venice till he had an account of
the Emperors reception, came to Ferrara a few days after, but refused a
public Audience of the Pope, because he would not observe the Formalities
required, and all disputes about Precedence being waved as much as possible,
they held the first Session with great solemnity. Here was an occasion for
Nicolaus to show his hospitality, and the splendor of his Court; and to do him
justice, though but a private Prince, he came much nearer the Magnificence of
the Great Constantine in his entertainments, than the Fathers of this Council
did those of Nice in the purity of their Doctrine, or in the sanctity of their
lives: There was never a Spiridion, nor a Paphnutius in this Assembly, and
scarce an Athanasius, unless in Marcus Bishop of Ephesus, who boldly defended
his Church against the Errors of Rome; but on the other hand, there were more
than one Eusebius of Nicomedia, and in Bessarion no ill Image of Eusebius of
Caesarea in his behavior, but the true reverse in his change, which unhappily
was for the worse: after fifteen Sessions the pretended fears of a Plague, and
really that of the War betwixt the Venetians and the Duke of Milan, who
favored the Council of Basil, made the Pope translate his to Florence, where
he carried things as he pleased. But the servile compliance of the Greeks
merely upon a prospect of interest did afterward appear, when being
disappointed of their expectations at their return home most of them
anathematized what they had subscribed in Italy. Bessarion and Isidorus only of
all the Greeks charmed with the dignity of Cardinals, and foreseeing the
approaching ruin of their Country, continued in the Communion of the Church
of Rome.

The Venetians in the beginning of this War with the Duke of Milan, gave the
Marquess back Rovigo without requiring the sum borrowed upon it; but besides
this, there were other motives to persuade the Marquess to befriend them, for
the Duke by the valor and conduct of his General Francis Forza, was like to
repair all his former losses, and to wrest the terra firma out of the Venetians
hands. Nicolaus knowing well the Dukes temper found ways to sow the seeds of
jealousy betwixt him and his General, which in a short time brought Forza over
to the Venetians, Brescia was presently relieved, Verona recovered, and the
Dukes New General Picininus beaten. The Duke was sensible of his folly in
disobliging Forza, and agreed to give him his Daughter in marriage,
recommending the management of the business to Nicolaus, who made up the match
betwixt Forza and the Lady, and the Peace betwixt the Duke her Father and the
Republic: This was the last remarkable action of Nicolaus's life, for going to
visit the Duke of Milan he died there, and in him did Italy lose the wisest
Prince it had bred of many ages; he came short both of the Venetians and the
Duke of Milan in power, but by turning the scale always toward the party for
which he declared, he raised himself as it were above both, his riches he
employed in living splendidly, and had entertained two Emperors, and three
Popes, besides many other Princes at his Court; his two Sons by the Marquess of
Saluzza's Daughter, Hercules and Sigismond, being yet but Children, he left the
Government to Leonel, to whose Mother it was believed he never was married.

Leonels first Wife of the House of Gonzaga being dead, and he raised to a
higher station, Alphonsus King of Naples accepted of him for his Son in Law;
and Leonel sent his Brother Borsius with the Venetian Galleys, to conduct the
Princess to Venice, where the Doge and Senate took occasion to express their
respect to King Alphonsus, and the Marquess in the great state with which they
received her. When she entered into the territories of Ferrara, the whole
Gentry a horseback, with the Ladies in rich Coaches, made such an appearance,
that the Prince of Callabria her Brother, who came to see her safe with her
Husband seemed equally pleased and surprised with the splendor of the Court of
Ferrara: The Prince in his return home was accompanied by Hercules and
Sigismond, recommended by Leonel to the King of Naples, at whose Court, he
said, his Father upon his deathbed desired they should be bred; but many
thought it an honorable and secure sort of banishment, while they were kept at
a Kings Court indeed, yet still under the eye of Leonel's Father in Law.

The Pope, the King of Naples, the Duke of Milan, the Venetians and Florentins
being all in War, Leonel in imitation of his Father, observed a perfect
Neutrality; and as soon as the Parties were disposed for Peace, offered his
Mediation which they accepted, and sent their Plenipotentiaries to Ferrara:
This, with the many Treaties held there in the time of the former Marquess made
Platina and Sabellicus term Ferrara the House of Peace, or as we find it in
some Letters, the Venerable Temple of the Quiet and Liberty of Italy. While
Leonel and the Plenipotentiaries were at work, the death of Philip Duke of
Milan, in whom the Race of the Visconti failed, put a stop to their
proceedings; the Duke leaving things in that confusion, as if he had designed
to entail upon Lombardy the divisions which he had all his life fomented.

The City of Milan weary of so Absolute a Government inclined to form it self
into a Republic, several other places were given up to the Neighbor Princes,
Leonel out of his kindness to Forza had given him notice of the Dukes death
when it was kept secret; and now Pavia and other places which sent to him,
desiring to be received into his protection, he turned over to Forza,
endeavoring to get for his friend what he had not courage to take for himself.
It is certain if Nicolaus had been alive he had ordered things more for the
advantage of the House of Este; but Leonel was not so well known, and every one
could see that his love for Peace, or rather for ease, did ill fit him for a
New Conquest.

The Venetians were of a much different temper, who having so fair an
invitation to enlarge their Dominions upon the terra firma, pretended that the
Duke dying their declared Enemy, they might seize upon what they could. Forza
by his Wife could set up no Title to the Duchy, she being a Bastard, yet
desirous to put in for a share, offered to be General of Milan against all who
had any design upon it, and under this plausible pretense questioned not to
advance himself, which he did. The Duchess Dowager knowing Forza's ambition,
endeavored to cross him all she could, and threatened to call in Savoy and
France to oppose him; but the Venetians jealous of France countenanced Forza,
though afterward they were sorry to see him become so soon Duke of Milan, and
their gains so small by so considerable a change: they solicited therefore
Leonel to engage the King of Naples in a War with the New Duke, which he was
not forward to meddle in, having helped to raise Forza to that greatness; and
while these designs were a foot, Leonel died with the reputation rather of a
good than an active Prince.

He was a great Patron of Letters, for besides the Learned Men, whom he kept
always about him, and who had plentiful provisions in his University,
Theodorus Gaza, Georgius Trapezuntius, Laurentius Valla, and several others at
Rome found the effects of his bounty, and much did such persons stand in need
afterward of so good a support in the time of Paul the second, and of Sixtus
the fourth, especially of the latter, to whom Theodorus Gaza presenting a Book
with a fine Dedication, after having bestowed what money his poverty could
spare in the neatness of the binding, the Popes liberality to him scarce
amounted to that charge. But Rome was then what an Ingenious French Writer
observes of it under a certain Heathen Emperor, when one pitiful Cook had a
larger allowance than fifteen excellent Orators: For it is certain, that if
those who fled from Constantinople and other places, with the ruins of the
Greek Learning, had not found a true friend in their Country man Bessarion,
never sufficiently to be commended upon this score, they had as good have
stayed in the Seraglio, as have come to the Vatican: They could have but
starved there, and so they might at the Court of Sixtus, if the Greek Cardinal,
and some other generous persons, such as the Princes of Este, and the House of
Medici, had not contributed toward their maintenance.

CHAP. X.
The Life of Borsius the first Duke of Ferrara and Modena.

LEonel was no sooner dead, but the Magistrates came to Borsius his Brother to
salute him Marquess, who though he made some difficulty at first upon the
account of his Brother Hercules, whose right it certainly was; yet they soon
wrought upon him to accept of the Government for some time, and when he was
once in possession, all parties appeared so well satisfied, that there were no
thoughts of removing him while he lived. In his Youth he had been bred up in
Arms, had made several Campagnes in the Venetian Army under Forza, and also in
the Milanese Army had behaved himself so well, that many thought that Duke
having no Sons, designed to have adopted him. The City of Luca hearing of
Leonels death took Arms, and seized upon some Castles belonging to Modena; but
the Troops dispatched thither by Borsius, soon recovered them, and he was going
in person to besiege Luca, when the Florentins at the request of that City made
up the business, giving full reparation to the Marquess for all the damages
received.

This success discouraged others from giving Borsius any further trouble, and
he seeing the occasion his Brother had of getting more by the Duke of Milans
death now lost, resolved to enjoy what he possessed, and in his way of living to
tread his Fathers footsteps. Frederick the third in his passage to Rome was
invited by Borsius to Ferrara, and treated there for a week most magnificently
with all his Train, consisting of above two thousand persons; he presented the
Emperor at his departure with forty of the finest Horses of Italy, besides
other rarities, the German Princes also and Nobility every one according to his
Quality carried away some token of the Marquesses generosity.

The Emperor wonderfully taken with the Noble Nature of Borsius, resolved to
advance him to the Dignity of a Duke, which was done at his return in this
manner; a large Theater being erected in the middle of the Piaza before the
Palace, and upon it a Throne of Cloth of Gold, the Emperor in his Imperial
Robes, with the Crown which the Pope had set upon his head some days before,
came thither, and being placed in his Throne, the King of Hungary sitting upon
his right hand, and the Count of Tirol his Cousin, or as some Writers say, the
Duke of Austria, upon his left; besides many Italian and German Princes placed
according to their Quality: Borsius being richly apparelled, and attended by
four hundred Gentlemen, dressed all in the same manner, began his Cavalcade at
the old Castle, and rid from thence toward the Piaza, three of the Chief
Officers of his Court carrying large Banners before him; the first of which had
the Imperial Eagle, with the Arms of the House of Este, in a field verd, and
immediately after them a Gentleman with a naked Sword; when they came near the
Theater and saw the Throne, all lighted, and Borsius advancing toward the
Throne, kneeled before it, and had his Ducal Robes put on by the Emperor, who
delivered him the first Banner for the Earldom of Rovigo, the second for the
Duchy of Modena and Regio, the third with the naked Sword, as a Badge of his
Absolute Authority, and then declared him Duke of Modena, and Regio, and Earl
of Rovigo, making him take his place by the King of Hungary: whereupon all the
Princes and Ambassadors came to the Duke to Complement him: The Emperor in his
Patent expressly mentions his doing now the same Honor to the House of Este,
which Frederick the second had done about two hundred years before, to that
branch of it that settled in Germany, meaning the Dukes of Lunenburgh and
Brunswick; he gave the Family a new Coat of Arms, and leave to seal with white
wax, a punctilio much observed among the Princes of Italy. The Ceremony being
over, they returned to the Palace where the Emperor was treated according to
the Solemnity of the occasion; and having stayed some days longer went for
Germany, Frederick and all his Court being fully satisfied that this great
honor was well placed upon Borsius.

Forza was now more considerable than ever the late Duke of Milan had been, for
though he had not enlarged his Dominions, yet being the greatest Captain of his
age, and one who had raised himself to this height merely by his virtue, he
made all Italy sensible of the Power of Milan under such a Duke. Some, as the
Florentins, were glad at any rate to buy his friendship, others who could not
be threatened, as the King of Naples and the Venetians entered into a
Confederacy against him, and the lesser Powers according to their inclinations
sided with either, and so divided Italy, only Borsius having no prospect of
advantage by declaring, resolved to continue in peace well armed, and to give
or refuse passage to their Troops as he should judge most convenient. It is
plain Forza and the Venetians fought for no less prize than the Sovereignty of
Lombardy, the ruin of either party, as the case then stood, making it sure for
the other: And it was remarked to the great scandal of Christianity, how that
very day in which Mahomet seized upon the Imperial City of Constantinople,
their armies were hotly engaged, being both of one Religion, and of one Nation.
If instead of sheathing their Swords in one another sides, the common interest
of Christendom had happily united them under such a General as Forza, they
might have saved that City and Greece from bondage, and so far at least have
checked the insolence of this young Tyrant, that he durst never have landed
Forces in Italy to take Otranto as afterward he did.

Upon the news of the loss of Constantinople, the Pope dispatched Legates to
Naples, Venice and Milan, conjuring those Princes to take pity on the dangerous
state of Italy; that so composing all differences, they might make Head against
the Common Enemy, and join with Scanderbeg the King of Epirus, whom all allowed
to be the best General against the Turks that any age had produced. Borsius was
thought the most proper person to promote so good a work, and to him the King
of Naples immediately sent the terms he was willing to treat on: the Venetians
likewise being apprehensive of the Turks above all others, gave him
encouragement to go on in it. Borsius's Interest in the Duke of Milan made him
not fear any stop there, and so warmly did he follow the business, that the
peace was soon concluded: all expected in the next place a Confederacy against
the Turk, which the death of Nicolaus the fifth retarded. His successor
Callistus indeed appeared very earnest in it at first, but having got into his
hands what money he could, the design was let fall.

Pius the second, formerly Aeneas Silvius set the same design again a Naples,
invaded by the French, was a little over; and then going toward Mantoua, where
he had called a Council, he visited Borsius, and stayed with him twelve days,
consulting about so great an undertaking, for the Pope knew his Prudence and
Interest could much advance it: and so well was he satisfied in discoursing the
matter with Borsius, that he declared he would Create him Duke of Ferrara, as
the Emperor had done of Modena some years before. At Mantoua mighty projects
were laid, and afterward some Forces raised, but all vanished with the Popes
death, and the Dukes additional Title was reserved for Paul the second to
bestow.

The Dukes Brothers whom Leonel had sent to Naples were grown weary of that
Court. Ferdinand by joining a Spaniard in Commission with Hercules in the
Government of Apulia, and by not treating him upon other occasions suitably to
his birth and merits, had so highly disobliged him, that he and the Prince of
Taranto, with several discontented Barons, took part with the French; wherefore
Borsius seeing Hercules in danger, and Sigismund discountenanced, sent for them
home, and that it might appear he had not the least jealousy of either, the
one was made Governor of Modena, the other of Regio. The Emperor Frederick
coming again into Italy, could not pass that way without visiting Borsius, as
he likewise did in his return; and to say no more, was both times treated at a
rate peculiar to Borsius.

The French afterward sent to Borsius to make known their resolution of
invading Naples again, being encouraged in it by Paul the second; but the Duke,
though he had no kindness for Ferdinand, yet instead of giving any assurances
to France, sent to the Pope to represent to him the unreasonableness of the
thing, how little he could expect from the French, how much he would disturb
the quiet of Italy, by calling them in, and disoblige all the Princes, and that
it would much better become him to consult the common safety of Christendom,
and the quiet of Italy, by employing such restless Princes against the Turk.
The Pope being taken with the Dukes freedom, invited him after some time to
Rome, and made good what Pius had promised, by Creating Borsius Duke of
Ferrara: This new Title he did not long enjoy, for falling sick, in a few days
after his return he died.

Borsius was a just, a splendid, and a bountiful Prince: every day he used to
walk in the Outer Court of his Palace, there to hear whatsoever complaints were
brought him; if he observed any that had not the confidence to come, he called
to them, and by his affable carriage encouraged them to speak; oftentimes both
parties appearing, he presently came to a determination, and where the business
was difficult, he would be sure first to ask the Opinion of those about him;
and in this he took such a particular pleasure, that he often said it was the
chief work of Princes to be ready to examine and redress the grievances of the
meanest of their Subjects; the rest of his time he spent in hunting, in
hawking, and in Horsematches, his Stables being the best furnished of any in
Italy: His constant habit was rich Brocade, and the same he allowed to all his
Buffoons, of whom his Court, according to the humor of that age was full; one
of them called Gonella of Ferrara had so great a Name, that every witty saying,
and brisk repartee was fathered upon him, and he was talked of in all the
Courts of Italy. The hospitality, and bounty of Borsius was yet beyond all the
rest; whoever came within the Court might eat or drink what they pleased,
Officers still being in readiness to treat them according to their quality: the
names of all the poor in the City were written down, their wants plentifully
relieved, and portions given by the Duke with their Daughters in marriage: such
persons were likewise desired to give notice of their condition, and had
Physic, and other necessaries accordingly sent them. Every Christmas day, the
Treasury being opened, Borsius came thither in person, and called all to whom
he or his Officers owed any thing, to receive their money; which being done, as
seldom it was then to do, what remained he divided with his own hands among the
Gentlemen of his Court: In one word, such was the bounty of his Nature, that
there could scarce be given an instance of his ever having refused what any
asked him. These Princely Virtues made his Subjects heartily love him, and the
love of his Subjects was of all things most proper to recommend him to
strangers; the Duke of Milan and the Venetians, who differed in most things,
agreed in their good Opinion of Borsius. His Family after him bore the
honorable badge of the value the Emperor and Pope had for him; and as if all
this had been too little, or as somewhat of partiality had been in it, because
proceeding from those of his own Country, or of his own Religion, a great
Mahumetan Prince, the Sultan of Egypt, by an Embassy and rich Presents sent to
Borsius a little before his death, did demonstrate, that his reputation was too
large to be confined within Italy, or indeed within Europe.

CHAP. XI.
The Life of Hercules the first, the second Duke of Ferrara, etc.

THe Mother of Hercules upon her Husbands death, and Leonels advancement,
retired to the Marquess of Saluzzo's, with a vow, that she would never see
Ferrara till her Son were in possession of his Right. Many melancholy years had
she spent while her Son lived in an honorable sort of banishment at the Court
of Naples: his returning home safe, which she scarce expected, and his Brothers
treating him with much kindness, did a little raise her languishing spirits;
but now hearing that Borsius was dead, and the injury done Hercules in some
measure repaired by the accession of a higher Title, she with unexpressible joy
made have toward Ferrara, where being scarce well arrived, she had the comfort
to see her other Son Sigismund return from Naples with the Kings Daughter for a
Duchess to Hercules, and to Crown her with all worldly happiness, the next
year brought her a Grandchild Alphonsus, Heir to the Dutchies of Ferrara and
Modena.

After all the troubles Hercules met with, and his late establishment in what
was undoubtedly his at his Fathers death, Nicolaus, Leonels Son, who never
durst mutter while Borsius lived, had now the impudence to disturb his quiet:
He was a Grandchild of the House of Mantoua, and wanted not those at Ferrara,
who upon the least success were ready to declare for him: this encouraged him
with what Forces he could make to come by water from Mantoua, when the Duke
seemed most secure, and being brought safe by night with his men into the chief
street of Ferrara, he beat the Drums early in the morning for those of his
party to take Arms; but seeing none offering to join with him, the Guns playing
from the Castle upon his Soldiers, and men beginning to appear in arms about
the Palace Gate, he made have to get away, and was taken in his retreat: the
Duke inclined to save him, but those who knew his temper, being of another
mind, he was formally condemned and beheaded with the Chief of his Followers;
the rest of the Prisoners were to be set at liberty, only a true-hearted German
who had lived long with Nicolaus, and deserved a more fortunate Master, when he
saw his dead body, refusing the benefit of the Dukes pardon, died the most
gloriously of any in that quarrel. Two days after a Gentleman brought the Duke
the names of all in Ferrara that were privy to the late design; but Hercules
without ever opening the paper burnt it in the Gentleman's presence, telling him
he intended to punish no more upon that account; that he would gladly have
pardoned his Cousin Nicolaus, if it could any ways have consisted with his
safety; that he desired not to know who had been his Enemies, lest he were
thereby tempted to bear them a grudge; and that he would not have such think he
knew them, lest it might occasion a jealousy of his being less tender of them
than of the rest of his Subjects.

Sixtus the fourth who succeeded Paul, designing to exalt his Nephews at any
rate, and hoping if he could make sure of Julian, and Laurence of Medici,
Florence might easily be seized upon, procured the one to be murdered at Church
before the very Altar, and the other to be desperately wounded, and as they
thought killed: But the blackness of the action put the whole City into such a
fury, that none of the Conspirators, no not the Archbishop of Pisa escaped,
being hanged from the Palace windows, only the Popes Nephew, against whom the
Evidence was not so clear, they shut up in prison. The Pope grieved for the
disappointment, as likewise for the Archbishops ignominious death, and the
imprisonment of his Nephew, made ready the arms of the Church, and those of the
King of Naples against the Florentins; but they who were not to be threatened,
neither by his Excommunication, nor the Kings Troops, out of their Liberty and
the Justice of their Cause, had assistance from Venice and Milan with the Duke
of Ferrara for their General: The War was carried on but faintly in the Popes
behalf by the Duke of Calabria, and a Peace at length was concluded betwixt
Ferdinand King of Naples and Florence, the Pope having lost his honor without
reaping any advantage by this

Some disputes arising about the Confines of Rovigo, neither the Duke of
Ferrara's proffering to refer the matter in contest to any two Princes, nor
Ferdinand King of Naples, and John Galeazo Duke of Milan's endeavoring an
accommodation by their Ambassadors, could keep the Venetians from a War with
him, the Pope they were sure of, because he hated the Duke since the war of
Florence; but Galeazo and Ferdinand declared for him, and Frederick Duke of
Vrbin, esteemed the greatest Captain of Italy after the death of Francis of
Milan, undertook the Conduct of his Army: The Venetians at first went on
furiously, because their Forces were much more numerous than the Dukes, and the
Pope denied passage to the Troops of Naples; but Matthias King of Hungary, who
had married the Duchess of Ferrara's Sister, and Ferdinand of Spain her
Cousin, never gave over soliciting till the Pope broke with the Venetians, and
then the Duke of Calabria having leave with his Army to march toward Lombardy,
things went better with the Duke: and after several Campaignes, both parties
being almost tired, acts of hostility came insensibly to cease, a more
dangerous war for Italy then breaking out.

Galeazo's Son of the same name being now Duke of Milan, and married Calabria's
Daughter, his Uncle Lewis Forza kept all the Power in his hands, much to the
grief of the young Duchess, who was more impatient than her Husband, so that
she never rested till she engaged her Father to write to Lewis to resign the
Government to his Nephew that was then of age, threatening that in case he
refused he would see reason done to his Son-in-Law. Lewis, that he might find
employment elsewhere for Alphonsus, invited Charles the eighth to the Conquest
of Naples, to which he could make a specious Title, and the King being young,
stout and ambitious, to say no worse, was easily engaged. What Lewis did, all
thought to be by the advice of the Duke of Ferrara, whose Daughter Beatrix he
had married: for the Duke, though he appeared not much in it, yet went with
Lewis to meet the King of Alexandria. This Expedition is so exactly set down by
Guiccardin, one of the best of the Modern Writers, that it will save all who
come after him the pains of enlarging upon it; but in short, there are few
instances of a Kingdom Conquered in less time, or with less resistance:
wherever Charles came the Gates were opened, and the Magistrates ready to
salute him King; and at Naples he was welcomed as Emperor of the East: whether
this were to gratify a vanity they observed in the French, as Alexander the
sixth had done before at Rome; or if Charles and his Officers really gave out
that he designed to pass unto Greece against the Turk I shall not determine;
but too true it is, that this empty Title given him at Naples, cost many
thousand Christians in and about Constantinople their lives: for Bajazet the
Father of Selym seemed jealous of some such design, and of their being privy to
it. The Kings great success frighted the Princes of Italy into a Confederacy to
cut him and his Army off in his return, and no person was so forward in this as
Lewis Forza who had brought him in; but the Duke of Ferrara, though he had only
complemented the King, stood more upon his Honor, and could by no persuasions
be brought to the field against him: The Confederate Army trusting in its
number, which was four to one, stopped the King near the River Taro, where he
bravely fought his passage, and got safe into the Duke of Savoy's Territories.

The Duke of Orleans, afterward Lewis the twelfth, kept Novara, whither the
Confederate Army marched to be revenged on him for the Kings escape; but there
was no getting the place, till by the Duke of Ferrara's mediation honorable
Articles were granted the French: First, that in lieu of Novara, Forza should
pay the Duke of Orleans a considerable sum of money. Secondly, that neither he
nor the Venetians should assist the house of Arragon in Naples; and in case the
Venetians did, that then Forza should be obliged to make war upon them: and for
the performance of these Articles, the Castle of Genoua was consigned into the
Mediators hands, who sent Francis Raugoni one of the chief Gentlemen of Modena,
to take possession of it, and to continue his Government there.

After the death of Charles the 8th, Lewis the twelfth, being mindful of
Forza's treachery, and encouraged by the Venetians invaded Milan; and
notwithstanding the endeavors of Maximilian the Emperor, and the great
diversion given the Venetians by the Turks, whom Forza had stirred up against
them, Forza lost Milan, and was carried prisoner to France, there to end his
days in a melancholy dungeon. The Duke of Ferrara not knowing how to meddle
betwixt the King that was his Friend, and Forza to whom he was so nearly
related, had observed in this War a perfect neutrality; but when the French
Troops marched again to the Conquest of Naples, none was more forward than the
Duke to assist them. The Great Gonsalvo, Ferdinand of Castiles General, being
then in Sicily, they fatally advised Lewis to secure his friendship by allowing
him a share, which being agreed to, the division of the Kingdom betwixt them
cost more time than the Conquest: for what opposition could two such powerful
Princes meet with from Frederick, whom his Subjects hated and contemned. But
Naples was too narrow to satisfy both the French and the Spaniards: and
Gonsalvo was a man of such unlimited ambition, that a Controversy began about
a small parcel of Ground, to which both parties pretended, and which nothing
but Arms could decide. In this the French had so ill success, that they were
suddenly beat out of all, Gonsalvo with the Spaniards becoming then sole
Masters of the Kingdom of Naples, which they have kept ever since.

About this time died Hercules Duke of Ferrara, whose life does represent to us
Fortune in all her different aspects; he was born the undoubted Heir of one of
the richest Princes of Italy, was left young by his Father, which made him come
the later to his Estate after the death of two Brothers: Many storms did he
weather both in the Court and Wars of Naples, his own Courage and the Kings
Malice exposing him to every danger, till at length he changed parties. At his
return from thence he lived for some time a Subject in his own Principality,
being glad to be a Governor of one of his Cities under his Brother. But the
latter part of his life made a fair reparation for the former, no Prince of
Italy being more valued or courted than Hercules; that very King of Naples, who
hated him so much, sent to proffer him his Daughter in marriage, by whom he
left a hopeful Issue: the Kings of Castile and Hungary when he was in danger
by his War with Venice, gave testimony how much they were concerned to support
him: Henry the seventh of England complemented him with the Order of the
Garter; and three several Kings of France sought his Friendship as necessary
for the advancement of their interest upon the other side of the Alps.

CHAP. XII.
The Life of Alphonsus the first, the third Duke of Ferrara.

HErcules had four Sons, Alphonsus who succeeded him, Hippolytus the former of
the two famous Cardinals of Este of that name, Ferdinand and Sigismund;
Alphonsus was twice married in his Fathers time, first to the Daughter of John
Galeazo Duke of Milan when he was very young; and when she died, a Match by
Lewis the twelfth's means was made up betwixt him and Lucretia Borgia Pope
Alexander the sixth's Daughter, the King designing by this to unite the Duke
with Caesar Borgia, and both to himself. The first remarkable action we meet
with in Alphonsus after his Fathers death, Caesar Borgia being then ruined, was
his defending Bologna for Julius the second, and his defeating Bentivoglio,
from whom the Pope had lately taken that City, and recommended it to the Duke.
Not long after was the League of Cambray concluded, where Alphonsus joined with
the Emperor, the Pope, the Kings of France and Spain, to take the terra firma
from the Venetians.

The King of France began the War, and gave the Venetian Army, which was
commanded, or rather divided by two Generals of quite different tempers, so
great an overthrow, that the other Confederates did thereupon make the more
have. The Venetians seeing themselves in no condition to defend their Subjects,
wisely made a virtue of necessity, and allowed them the liberty to make the
best terms they could with the Enemy, and so prevent their ruin: for they
presumed, and upon good grounds, that this instance of their tenderness, would
invite them home to their ancient Masters as soon as the storm was over: being
attacqued then on all hands, nothing except Treviso was left them in a short
time, and the Duke of Ferrara for his share was once in possession of Rovigo,
la Badia, with Monfelice, Este, and other places which formerly belonged to his
Family. Besides the places he had taken, the Pope declared him the General of
the Church, which made the Venetians discharge their whole fury upon him both
by Sea and Land; but such was their ill success in every enterprise, that their
very Navy became a prey to him that had no ships: for having chained them up by
night within the mouth of the River where they thought themselves secure, he
burnt some, took others, and returned to Ferrara in a sort of Naval Triumph
upon one of their Chief Galleys.

The sole hope now left the Venetians was to break a League in which so many
Princes of different, or rather incompatible Interests were united; and this
they found no hard matter, Julius being willing not only to take off his
censures, but also to fall out with France, and to help to chase Lewis out of
Italy, if they would give him the places in Romagna, which by the League were
designed for him. It was not now time for the Venetians to stand at any thing,
and therefore they readily acquiesced to the Popes proposals, and he sent to
the Duke of Ferrara to acquaint him with what he had done, and to desire him to
forbear any further acts of hostility against the Republic; but the Duke
excused himself, saying that he could not in honor nor in conscience abandon
those with whom he was in Confederacy. Julius taking this excuse for a direct
upbraiding himself with what he had done, excommunicated the Duke immediately,
sent Orders to Romagna to seize upon what places he possessed there, and
exhorted the Venetians to fall upon him to revenge his and their quarrel: the
Duke in a short time lost Rovigo, all the Polecine, Monfelice and Este on the
one hand; and upon the other hand, all the places of Romagna, and which grieved
him most, Modena and Sassuolo, with several Castles near him: his only comfort
was, he knew, that if he had pleased to make honor and conscience truckle to
Interest, he might have been a saver. But never resolving to stear by this
compass, nor to follow the precedent given him by P. Julius, he waited for
better times, till he could fairly recover what he had unjustly lost.

Never was Pope freer of his thunders than Julius, who seeing his success
against Alphonsus, took his aim a little higher, at Lewis the twelfth, deprived
him of his Title of the most Christian King, and of his Crown, and exposed his
Territoris as a prey to those that could take them; but though his lightning
did shine, it was not felt in France, otherwise than in provoking the good King
to Vow, and to publish his Vow also in his coin, That he would destroy Babylon,
meaning Rome. The King of Castile sent an Army to assist the Pope and the
Venetians, which made Lewis likewise reinforce his Troops under a new General
Gaston de Foix, Duke of Nemours, to him he particularly recommended the
concerns of the Duke of Ferrara, whom of all the Italians he had found the most
trusty Confederate, and the French Army then lying in Romagna, the Duke
recovered his places from Julius. Gaston was impatient till he gave the Enemy
battle, which he did near Ravenna: the Duke commanded that part where the
Artillery was planted, and they observed he used it with such advantage, that
it helped greatly to obtain the victory. When the Enemies main body was routed,
and their Officers gone, in a little action fitter for some young Captain than
a General, Gaston was unhappily killed, and by his death he made that day
remarkable above all others, that a victory may be too dear bought with the
loss of a General: for from that hour the French Arms declined in Italy, and
did every day lose ground, leaving those at last, whom they had beaten, in
possession of what they fought for. There being now no French Army in the
field, the Duke inclined to an accommodation with the Pope, Fabricius Colonna
whom he had taken prisoner at Ravenna, and had used with great civility, and
dismissed without any ransom, promising to procure it upon equal terms; the Duke
had an invitation from Julius to Rome, with assurances, that he should find a
reception answerable to Colonna's promise, as indeed he did, being immediately
absolved from all his censures; but when they came to treat, such unreasonable
demands were made, that he chose rather to venture all than agree to them, and
the Pope seeing his resolution designed to keep him there: Colonna who was the
occasion of the Dukes coming, thought his honor now so much at stake, that not
valuing the Popes indignation, he brought the Duke from Rome by night in spite
of the Guards, and committed him to the care of his Cousin Prosper Colonna, who
with great Address in the midst of the noise of his escape brought him safe
through the Popes Territories.

The Pope being upon this more enraged than ever, did, contrary to his promise,
send to the Duke of Vrbin, and his other Officers to get what they could before
the Dukes return; most of the Dukes Subjects looked upon him now as
irrecoverably lost, not only the places in Romagna, but also Regio, Brescello
and Carpi yielded, so that little remained to him upon that hand, and all
concluded that it must have ended in his utter ruin, had not God happily put
an end to the life of Julius.

The person in the whole College next to his Brother Hippolytus whom the Duke
could have wished to succeed Julius, was John Cardinal of Medici, who in the
former reign had secretly favored him, and found ways when employed as Legate
in those parts to decline the executing the Popes violent resolutions against
him. Upon the joyful news of this Cardinals election, who is known by the name
of Leo the tenth, the Duke went immediately to Rome, and came in time to be
absolved anew, and to carry St Peter's Standard, as great Confalonier, or
General of the Church at the inauguration of Leo, who promised to restore
whatever Julius had taken from him; but in a little time he was so strangely
altered, that far from the least performance, he watched every opportunity to
take from the Duke what was left him. Upon a report of his being dead, Leo
ordered his Troops to march that way, and when it proved a mistake, he did
endeavor to excuse it, as if his design had been to secure the Duchy for
Prince Hercules, the Dukes eldest Son. His ill intentions were more plainly
discovered two years after, for he hired one Rodolphus a Captain Leo, who could
never be brought to make good his promise till Francis the first, who succeeded
Lewis the twelfth, being well satisfied that all the Duke of Ferrara's
sufferings, proceeded from his constant adhering to the French Interest, did
refuse to enter into any treaty with the Pope, unless the Duke were
comprehended in it.

After Leo's death no Prince complemented Adrian the sixth with so noble an
Embassy, as the Duke of Ferrara did, who upon the Popes arrival at Rome, sent
his Son Hercules thither attended by many of his chief Nobility: the young
Prince was then but fourteen years of age, yet having his audience of Adrian
before the Consistory, he harangued so finely, and with so good a Grace, that
the Pope embraced him with tears, and having asked him several questions in
Latin, found him so much a Master of that Language, his answers so pertinent
and lively, and in his whole behavior a modest assurance so fitted to his age
and quality; that Adrian declared before all the Cardinals, that he must grant
the Duke of Ferrara whatever he demanded by such an Extraordinary Ambassador.
Lueretia the Mother of Hercules being dead, there lived a young Gentlewoman at
Ferrara, called Laura Enstochia sufficiently qualified every way for a
Princess, except in her birth; her person, her air, but above all, her wit did
so charm the Duke, that after having sometime Courted her, she came to be his
third Duchess, and brought him two Sons, Alphonsus and Alphonsinus.

Much were the Duke and the Prince grieved for the death of so friendly a Pope
as Adrian, when they perceived that Clement the seventh began to renew the
practices of Leo, offering the Emperor great sums of money to have Modena and
Regio given to himself and his Family; but the Emperor being unwilling to
advance the House of Medici by an act of injustice to that of Este, would not
hearken to the proposal, though the Popes bounty to his Ministers who were to
further it, had drained the Apostolical Chamber: this disappointment which cost
Clement so dear, helped to hasten his unhappy breach with the Emperor, by
which Rome was exposed to the most barbarous usage it had met with since the
Goths and Vandals sacked it, and he himself imprisoned in the Castle St Angelo
by the Duke of Bourbon's Army: Duke Alphonsus instead of insulting over his
Enemies misery, was as forward as any to contribute toward his releasement,
and at Ferrara was a League of most of the Christian Princes concluded against
the Emperor to this very intent.

No man questioned but the Duke in this action had for ever secured to himself
an interest in Clement, who by his Legate offered to renounce all his
pretensions upon Modena and Regio, and to renew the investiture of Ferrara as
soon as she should be set at liberty; yet all was presently forgot; and the
only advantage the Duke had by this League was the match then made up betwixt
his Son Hercules and Renata, Lewis the twelfths younger Daughter, who proved
the most excellent Princess in all respects that ever Italy saw.

Amongst other things, Clement had promised upon the death of Cardinal Gonzaga,
the Bishopric of Modena to the Dukes second Son Hippolytus; but it was given
away to a Son of one of the Emperors Chief Favorites, purposely that the Duke
by disputing the business might draw upon himself the Emperors Indignation, if
not his Arms: Other subtle Arts were used by Clement to ruin the Dukes
Interest at that Court, yet to no effect, for when Charles the fifth came to
Bologna, the Duke did fully satisfy him of the Justice of his proceedings with
Clement; and the Popes pretensions upon Modena, with the Clement, who taxed the
Emperor with great partiality for one of the justest decisions that ever
Prince made.

Some time after the restitution of Modena, the Princess Renata was brought to
bed of Alphonsus the second, the fifth and last Duke of Ferrara; and Clement
the seventh died, who had made it the whole business of his reign to create
himself and others trouble in heaping up riches for the House of Medici.

Upon the Election of Paul the third, Prince Hercules designed to go in person
to complement him; but while things were preparing for his journey, the Duke
his Father fell ill and died. Alphonsus was a just and a valiant Prince. He had
been hardly dealt with by three several Popes, Julius the second, Leo the
tenth, and Clement the seventh: Yet neither threatenings nor promises could ever
make him break his word, or abandon the French, though this constancy was
several times like to have cost him his Duchy. In all his troubles he
countenanced men that were Eminent in any profession, and none more than his
Subject and Citizen the great Ariosto, who at the Dukes instance was by Charles
the fifth solemnly Crowned with Bays at Mantoua, as a second Virgil, for his
Orlando Furioso. Before his death he dis-intangled himself from all his
troubles, and left things in good order to Hercules the second, having likewise
provided the Sons of the last Duchess with large Revenues and independent
Jurisdictions.

CHAP. XIII.
The Life of Hercules the second, the fourth Duke of Ferrara.

HErcules considering how welcome an Ambassador he had been from his Father to
Adrian the sixth, resolved still to pay that respect in person to Paul the
third, which he was to have done in his Fathers name. When he came to Rome the
Pope received him with much kindness, absolved him and his Territories from all
manner of Censures, renounced what pretensions the late Popes made to Modena,
and granted him the Investiture of the Duchy of Ferrara; from thence he went
to Naples to see the Emperor, and to thank him for the Justice done in his
Fathers differences with Clement; at his return he found his Duchess safely
delivered of a young Princess, named Lucretia, who afterward married the brave
Francis Maria Duke of Vrbin; and the next year she brought him a second Son,
called Lewis after his Grandfather the King of France. Amidst all these
blessings he narrowly escaped being assasinated by a Gentleman of his Court,
who had of late born him a grudge; the design being discovered the Gentleman
fled to Venice, where by the Senates Order he was taken, put in chains, and
sent to Ferrara to be beheaded for his villainous intention; but the Duke in
remembrance of their ancient friendship, remitted the punishment, being
satisfied only to secure himself, by condemning the Criminal to a perpetual
imprisonment.

His Brother Hippolytus being already Archbishop of Milan, and one of the
richest Abbots of France, had a Cardinals Cap given him; his promotion was
welcome to those that remembered the late Cardinal his Uncle, so celebrated in
the Court of Rome for his profuse liberality: nor did the Nephew disappoint
their expectations, Leo the tenth, Adrian the sixth, and Clement the seventh's
reigns; so now his was the sanctuary of all distressed Gentlemen, and poor
Virtuoso's: And to complete the parallel, the same imputation lay upon both, of
having no deep impressions of Religion; for that cursed leaven of Atheism that
poisoned Leo the tenth's Court, had not a little infected these two Princes,
whose irreverent and light expressions in matters of the highest importance,
are not yet forgot. The Duke behaved himself much better, in making rigid Laws
against all such as were convicted of blasphemous words, or of scoffing at
things sacred, proposing rewards to the discoverers.

The Pope going to Parma to put his Son Peter in possession of that Duchy came
to visit the Duke at Ferrara, where nothing was left undone that could express
his respect toward a Pope, who had showed so much kindness to the Family. I
have seen a long description of the manner of his Reception, of his
Entertainment, of the Balls and Comedies acted by the young Princes, and the
Chief Ladies of the Court, with the mutual presents that past at their
departure, which though in themselves truly great, yet can have no place in so
compendious a relation: That which seems more remarkable, is, the honor the
Duke did to Alphonsus his younger Brother, by his Fathers last Duchess, who
being married to the Duke of Vrbin's Sister, the Duke with a great part of his
Court, accompanied him to Pesaro to bring home his Princess, and she was
received at Ferrara, as if she had been his own Duchess.

Paul being dead, and Julius the third chosen, in several places of Italy they
discovered some inclinations to the Reformed Religion, and no where more than
at the Court of Ferrara, especially among those who attended on the Duchess,
and there were shrewd suspicions that the Duchess did inwardly favor that
persuasion: for professing her self a great lover of Learned Men, and all such
being welcome to her, under this mask several Eminent Protestants, among the
rest Calvin had free access and opportunity to confirm her in her favorable
Opinion of them: the Duke being informed of these things, was advised to bring
in the Jesuits, who then began to have a vogue for their zeal and subtilty in
supporting the declining Religion; and no sooner were they settled, but great
alterations followed at Court; the former freedom in Conversation could no
longer be allowed, the French servants were on a sudden dismissed, strangers were
forbid coming thither, the poor Duchess was confined to a few rooms in the
Castle, and had new Servants put about her; and the young Princesses, as if in
great danger with their Mother, were sent to a Monastery, there to be
instructed anew by the Nuns, who were to receive directions from these good
Fathers.

After Julius the third, Paul the fourth, whom Hippolytus by his Interest
advanced, falling out with Philip the second of Spain, engaged France in his
quarrel: the Duke of Ferrara was declared General of the French Arms in Italy,
as likewise of the Church; but he declining the Employment, it was given to his
Son Alphonsus, who was well known at the Court of France, and high in the
esteem of Henry the second: The Dukes refusal while his Son accepted the
Command, signified nothing to Philip, who labored hard to make a breach
betwixt him and the Venetians; but they not being disposed then to enter into a
War in the Spanish Quarrel, excused themselves, pretending that the Dukes being
a Gentleman of Venice, and a member of their great Council, he must first
forfeit that privilege before they could so far disown him as to come to a
War. The great overthrow the French received at St Quintin, put the Duke and
all that party in Italy in some apprehensions; but the Victory not being
pursued, a Peace was some time after concluded betwixt the two Crowns, and then
died Hercules the fourth Duke of Ferrara in the fiftieth year of his age. In
his youth he had been the most hopeful Prince of Italy for all manner of
accomplishments: After his Fathers death he lived in peace, governed his
Subjects with great gentleness, no Prince ever was readier to pardon injuries,
or to oblige every person about him; the expense of his Court being great, and
his Subjects slow in granting new Subsidies, he did much anticipate his
Revenue, by borrowing money upon several branches of it, in which his Subjects
did not think fit to concern themselves, seeing it only emptied his Exchequer,
and made the Government uneasy for his Successor.

CHAP. XIV.
The Life of Alphonsus the second, the fifth and last Duke of Ferrara.

AN Express was immediately dispatched by the Duchess to her Son Alphonsus
then at the Court of France, who making what have he could to Marseilles, took
ship, and had a quick passage to Legorn, where Cosmus Duke of Florence with
many of the Toscan Nobility were ready to welcome him, and saw him safe in his
own Territories. Near Modena his Uncle Alphonsus, and the whole Gentry of that
Country received him; and at Ferrara he made a public entry, passing through
five triumphal Arches erected at the Cities charge. Next morning was the death
of Hercules the second published, Alphonsus by sound of Trumpet was proclaimed
Duke, the Scepter and Sword delivered to him by the Chief Magistrate upon his
knees; and an Oath of Allegiance taken by him to the new Duke, in the name of
all the people: the Duke also according to the usual form, swearing he would be
a Just Prince, and consult the Common Interest of his Subjects. Which solemnity
being over, Alphonsus made his Fathers Funeral Rites be performed with great
decency; and then he sent Francis one of the Princes of Este to Florence to
bring home his Duchess that Dukes Daughter. According Ferrara.

The Duchess Dowager having no comfort in her stay in Italy after her Husbands
death, returned to her Native Country, from which she had been so many years
absent; and left all Ferrara, except the Jesuits, in tears for the loss of so
incomparable a Princess. The Gentry when she first came thither, considering
her as Lewis the twelfth's Daughter, bred up in the most glorious Court of
Christendom, where Princes of the blood, especially the Kings Children could
not have too much respect paid them, expected to be kept at a greater distance
now than they had been under the former Dutchesses; but on the contrary, access
to her was so easy, her conversation so free, and her whole deportment so
modest, that had she been the Daughter of a little Duke of Saluzzo, or an
Eustochia Laura raised by her virtue, she could not have taken less state upon
her: All the Learned found the good efeffects of her Patronage, and were as
liberal in setting out her Virtues, as she could be toward their support: The
Poor and the Sick were sure of relief, and Orphans of care and protection. So
that in the whole City of Ferrara there was scarce a person, that could not
show some instance of that unlimited goodness which had so long time diffused
it self upon all her subjects without missing rich or poor.

Prince Lewis after his return from France, whither he went to accompany the
Duchess his Mother, was created Cardinal; and while the joy of his promotion
filled the Court with Balls and Banquets, the death of the Duchess Lucretia
changed the scene: she had lived but fourteen months with her Husband, and had
left him childless; yet this was in some measure repaired by the birth of
Caesar the Son of Alphonsus, and Julia of Vrbin in whom the Duke could not want
a Successor.

Cardinal Hippolytus had been Legate in France, and returning thence with the
Cardinal of Lorrain, and many French and Italian Noblemen, they were all
treated at his Nephews Court, where at the same time there happened to be
several other Princes; and then it was that Hippolytus playing at Cards, with a
vast sum at stake, and all the good Cards in his hand, made a hard shift to
lose, whispering to one of his Confidents, who seeing his hand seemed
surprised, that he was more a Gentleman than to win so much money of strangers
at the Court of Ferrara; but if he had such luck in France or at Rome, he knew
how to make the best of it.

The Duke was easily reconciled to a second marriage, when the Emperor
Maximilian proffered him the Princess Barbara his Daughter; the Cardinal Lewis
went to meet her at Trent, and brought her to Ferrara with all the state that
either the Princes of Este, or that City could show upon so solemn an occasion.
The War in Hungary growing hot with the Turk, Maximilian invited the Christian
Princes to his assistance, and thither went the Duke of Ferrara with fifteen
hundred Horse, having sent the Officers of his Household before with the
Baggage: soon after their arrival in the Imperial Army, Solymans death put an
end to the War. This Expedition was very chargeable to the Duke, for besides
the length of the march, he had three hundred Gentlemen clothed in Velvet
richly embroidered, with Servants all in the same Livery; the rest also were so
finely accoutered, that they seemed rather designed for a Cavalcade than an
Army; his zeal however and his magnificence in this great appearance was so
much taken notice of, that some years after they named him in Poland among the
Princes who were Candidates for that Crown; and it was thought, if Maximilian
had not in vain designed it for himself, he might have carried it for his Son
in Law the Duke of Ferrara.

The Duke having no concerns at Rome for three or four reigns, which therefore
I pass in silence, spent his time in entertaining all the Princes that came
that way, and in diverting himself. Great complaints were brought him of the
Country peoples in those fields, some with Partridges, some with Pheasants,
some with Hares about their legs, the Dukes Officers giving out that they were
put to death for killing such. This so frighted the people, that never was Game
in Italy so preserved, as in the Country about Ferrara; but withal it did
beget in them such an Opinion of the Dukes cruelty, that they could never
afterward be brought to have a hearty kindness for him: and though others who
were privy to the thing, labored to disabuse them, yet it was now sunk too
deep to be removed.

The Duchess Barbara being dead, the Duke was again married to a Daughter of
Mantoua; but there being no hopes of Children by any, he began to look upon
Caesar, the Son Alphonsus, as most likely now to succeed him: with this
prospect he procured a marriage for him with the Great Dukes Daughter, and made
him larger appointments than formerly. Sixtus Quintus being lately chosen Pope,
Caesar by the Dukes advice went to Rome, whence he returned very well
satisfied: soon after died Lewis the Cardinal to the great grief of the Duke
his Brother, and this grief was not digested when he had news from Blois of the
fatal deaths of the Duke and Cardinal of Guise, whose Mother was the Dukes
Eldest Sister.

Italy had been a considerable time without War, but the Bandito's were now
grown more terrible than any Enemy; especially in Romagna, where listing
themselves in three Companies, above six hundred in all, they put the whole
Country under Contribution, they had the impudence to erect Judicatures, try
men for their Lives, give Passports, and Commissions, impose Taxes, and to act
by a Sovereign Power they had assumed to themselves; they mocked all Princes,
especially the Pope, upon whom they lay heaviest; and when ever those of
Religious Orders were brought before them, they would have them fall down and
worship them: If any Town failed to send them what they required, within a few
days it was sure to smart for it; for they being all desperate Bandito's well
armed, there was no resisting them, till upon grievous complaints of their
cruelty, the Duke sent Count Montecuculi, with some other good Officers, and
several Companies well provided with ammunition, who in two months time killed
the Chief of them, and dissipated the rest, of whom few escaped, the whole
Country rising upon them.

The Duke being grieved at the loss of his Brother, and of his Nephews, as also
to see himself decay apace Modena and Regio to himself and his Cousin Caesar;
which was accordingly done without any difficulty: at Rome he was not so fairly
dealt with, but put off with empty excuses from time to time, and the Popes
dying before the business could be brought to an Issue, in the next reign he
was obliged to begin again. When he heard of the Election of Clement the
eighth, he did not question, but he was fallen into good hands, Clement's
Father, having raised himself by the bounty of the late Duke, and of his Uncle
Hippolytus, not only from a low but from a necessitous condition, as Clement
had always owned while a Cardinal; but now being Pope he grew more reserved in
his acknowledgements, yet upon every occasion expressed a most particular zeal
for the House of Este: The Duke trusting in his kindness, and foreseeing his
own death at hand, made his last Will, by which he declared his Cousin Prince
Caesar his Heir; three or four days after he was taken ill of a fever, in
which at first there appeared no danger, but the malignity of the distemper
discovering it self, and Nature being quite spent, he called to him Prince
Caesar, made his Will be opened, and read in the presence of many of the
Nobility, recommended his particular Friends and Servants to his Cousins care;
exhorted him to be a Just Prince, and the Nobility to continue dutiful and
obedient as he had ever found them; and then died with great composure of mind.
He was tall of stature and well proportioned, countenance; and besides the
ordinary traits of a good face, had according to the observation of one that
knew him, some thing of Majesty proper to the House of Este; which challenged
an awful Reverence as well as Love from all that beheld him: They were
disappointed who expected treasures at his death, and no wonder, for the
constant charge of his Court, with the extraordinary charities he did in time
of Famine, gave a full account of his Revenue. The Court of Ferrara, though
very ancient, yet may be said to have received its first Luster from the
Marquess Nicolaus, before Eugenius the fourth kept his Council there. Leonel
did endeavor to imitate his Father; but Borsius his second Son, and the first
Duke, raised things to a higher pitch, and became famous all Europe over for
the greatness in which he lived. Hercules the first, with his Duchess Leonora
of Arragon, added every thing that was Gentile at the Court of Naples, making
Ferrara not only a Court fit for Gentlemen, as it was in the time of Borsius
who lived single, but for Ladies also: under Alphonsus the first,
notwithstanding his constant War, nothing of the former state was lost. And
when Hercules the second brought his Duchess Renata from France, the
alterations she made were much for the better: But the late Duke did yet outdo
those that went before him, rendering his Court an Epitome of whatever was fine
or great in France, Germany or Italy. Princes came long journeys on purpose to
see it, and by all their confessions, though some Courts might be greater, yet
none in other respects did come near that of Ferrara.

Nor was it an empty show; for with that noble entertainment such as Italy has
not since seen for strangers of all qualities, some thousands of poor had their
daily maintenance thence: The young Gentlemen of Quality were at such an age
received into the number of the Dukes Pages, and bred up to all manner of
exercise beyond any Academy of the world; and owing their Education to their
Prince, for the most part they dedicated their lives to his service, either
being entertained as Officers of his Household, as Captains of his Guards, as
Governors of his Castles; or employed as Ministers in foreign Courts, where
the Ambassadors of Ferrara in their Equipage and behavior gave strangers some
notion of the place from whence they came. None of the Dukes Subjects that
excelled in any thing needed go to a foreign Court for want of encouragement at
home; and Cavalier Guarini the Author of Pastor Fido, who rashly engaged
himself to the Duke of Savoy, much repented him of his change, but could not
aagain be restored to his Country, or to the favor of his Prince, who thought
himself affronted by his departure. The loss of Guarini was sufficiently
repaired in the great Torquato Tasso a Neapolitan born, who in his distress, as
he himself owns, found shelter at Ferrara: There it was that he composed his
Gierusalemme Liberata, esteemed to be absolutely the best Heroic Poem of all
the Moderns.

The happy influence a Virtuous Court has upon all near it, was here apparent:
for the whole City resembled a great University: Academics being erected for
Painting, Music, Poetry, Mathematics, and the like in every corner; the very
Monasteries and Nunneries turned Seminaries of Virtue, and most Citizens
consulting the capacity and genius of their Children spared no charge in
breeding them to what one day they hoped might advance their fortunes in the
Court they little imagined this envied felicity was so near a period, that
Alphonsus the second was to be the last Duke of Ferrara, or that the Court: of
Este was to be removed to another City; while they having no Prince either to
reward their Virtue or redress their grievances, were to be left to the mercy
of Ministers, that bought their places at Rome, and came thither only to
reimburse themselves at Ferrara's cost.

CHAP. XV.
The pretended devolution of the Duchy of Ferrara, Clement the eighths manner
of proceeding with Duke Caesar, and his retirement to Modena.

WHen the death of Alphonsus was known at Rome, it was presently given out
there, that the Duchy of Ferrara came by devolution to the Pope, because the
present Dukes Father the Son of Alphonsus the first, was not as they falsely
pretended at Rome, begot in lawful wedlock, nor Laura Eustochia whom we upon
good grounds call Alphonsus's third Duchess, ever married to him: That which
gave the rise to this report was the familiarity observed betwixt the Duke and
this Lady before they owned a marriage, and their having been married privately
without any of the formalities observed by Princes upon such occasions. This
Alphonsus did to humor his Son Hercules by his former Duchess, who had no
kindness for the Lady Laura; and therefore he gave too much way afterward to
this false report, being angry likewise with her Sons, his younger Brothers,
because his greatness was impaired by the loss of the Lands, and independent
Jurisdictions bestowed upon them by Alphonsus. But to clear a matter of such
importance, and to do Justice to one of the most Illustrious Races in the
world, I have at the end of this History set down in Italian and English what
was offered in writing to Urban the eighth by the present Duke of Modena's
Grandfather Francis the first, who if he had lived was likely enough to have
made good his Title to Ferrara by his Sword, as well as his Pen; being the
stoutest Prince, and greatest Captain of Italy in our age. To the Dukes own
words then as of unquestionable Authority, I refer the Impartial Reader, not
doubting but they will satisfy others as much as they did my self.

The death of Alphonsus the second being published, and the whole Magistracy,
Nobility and Representatives of the People being assembled, the Judge of the
twelve Savii, after having condoled the loss of the late Duke, commanded his
Will to be read openly; and then according to the ancient custom of that City,
asked them if they were not willing to have Don Caesar of Este the Grandchild
of Alphonsus the first, and the Testators Cousin German, for their Prince, to
which all did answer in the affirmative, and with great acclamations of joy
declared Caesar Duke of Ferrara, etc. Next morning in a solemn manner they came
to the Palace to pay their homage to their New Duke, who sitting upon a Throne
in his Ducal habit, received them, and the Judge of the Savii kneeling before
the Throne, did in the name of all the rest deliver him the Sword and Scepter:
Then Caesar with his Ducal Crown upon his head coming out of his Palace, and
taking Horse in the great Piazza, having the Ambassador of Florence upon his
right hand, and the Judge of the Savii upon his left, the Marquess of
Bentivoglio, carrying the naked Sword before him, began his Cavalcade through
the City: all the streets as he past, ecchoing, with Long live Caesar Duke of
Ferrara; the Cavalcade ended at the great Church, where after High Mass, the
Judge did administer him his Coronation Oath, and then Te Deum being sung, he
returned to his Palace.

The solemnity being over, the Duke resolved in Council to dispatch Ambassadors
to the Pope, the Emperor, the Kings of France and Spain, to the Republics of
Venice and Genoua, and to the rest of the Princes of Italy, with an account of
what had past: For these Embassies the Chief of the Nobility were designed, but
afterward he found his mistake too late, when that to complement foreign
Princes, he deprived himself of those persons, who for their Loyalty and
Interest could have done him better service at home in so critical a
conjuncture.

Advice being brought to Rome of the Dukes Coronation, Clement the eighth,
without expecting the Ambassadors arrival, gave order for a Monitory to be
immediately issued out, requiring the Duke within fourteen days to render an
account at Rome of the reasons of his proceedings. The Duke by an express to
his Ambassador, endeavored to divert the Pope from this violent course, by
suspending his Monitory, or at least by granting him longer time in a matter of
that consequence; offering moreover to refer the whole difference betwixt him
and the Pope, either to the King of Spain, or any other Prince, whom Clement
should think fit to pitch upon: Most persons thought the Pope would readily
have complied with so reasonable a proposal, which yet he could by no means be
brought to hearken to, but dismissed the Ambassador without any hopes of an
accommodation.

After the Ambassadors departure, the Pope called a Consistory, that he might
have the advice of his Cardinals, before he proceeded further in what concerned
the Apostolical Sea so near; there the Cardinals did much differ in their
Opinions, some by a faint compliance with what they judged the Pope enelined
to, were for his going on immediately, both with his spiritual and temporal
arms against the Duke; others looked upon this as a method not so suitable to
the Apostolical See, where nothing of precipitancy ought to take place; and
therefore gave their judgment that his Holiness was never to have recourse to
such severe remedies, till such time as it appeared the Duke was not to be
wrought upon by gentler means. But those who understood what fair proffers were
made by the Ambassador of Ferrara, did disapprove of violent courses at any
rate; being of opinion, that the Pope had better wave his pretensions to
Ferrara, than by excommunicating the Duke, to enter into a War, and so kindle a
fire in Italy which would not easily be quenched: they urged that the City of
Ferrara was well fortified and peopled, and that no Princes were ever more
beloved of their Subjects than those of Este, whom undoubtedly they would not
easily be brought to part with. Besides they had reason to believe the Duke had
made sure of his Allies, and of all those who were already jealous of the Popes
greatness; whereas on the contrary, they could think of none among all the
Princes of Italy, that would declare in favor of the Pope.

The Pope seeing the Cardinals so much divided broke up the Consistory without
coming to any resolution; but while he was doubtful within himself, whether it
were better to proceed in his undertaking, or to give it quite over, one of the
Cardinals having obtained a private Audience, told him, that notwithstanding
all the difficulties proposed in the Consistory, yet if his Holiness would
vouchsafe to follow his advice, Ferrara should undoubtedly fall into his hands
without putting him to much expense, either of money or of blood. I confess,
says he, the City of Ferrara is strong and well peopled, and that the Prince
is there generally beloved more than any where else in Italy, which perhaps may
discourage your Holiness from making good your Title; yet I question not but by
the discreet management of some person of credit and interest at that Court, in
whom you may confide, many of the Dukes friends may be gained, his most secret
Councils revealed, and the City it self made glad to receive your Holiness. We
know, says the Cardinal, how Ferrara abounds with Nobility, whose Fortunes are
narrower than their minds, and who cannot all expect preferment at that Court;
besides there are questionless some there, as about all Courts, who are angry
with the Government, not thinking themselves considered according to their
merits. Upon such ambitious and discontented spirits large promises made in
your Holinesses name, will be sure to work, such must be made sensible of the
happy exchange from a private Prince to a Pope, in whose power it is to reward
the Virtuous, and those who deserve his favor, with the highest dignities,
subjects are capable of; and how those who are immediately under the Church,
have much the advantage of all others in their pretensions at Rome. And when
the person, says the Cardinal thus employed can show his Authority for what he
promises under your Holinesses hand and seal, they will strive to outdo one
another in their zeal to promote your service.

The Pope did heartily approve of this project, and as soon as the Cardinal was
gone, the French Ambassador came to assure the Pope in his Masters Name, That
he was resolved to declare for him, and to fall upon those who should appear in
the behalf of the Duke of Ferrara. Henry the fourth renouncing the Reformed
Religion, had reconciled himself to Rome some time before, and thought this a
fit occasion to express his unfeigned zeal for the Church, which many still
questioned: But truly his abandoning thus the House of Este, which had for many
ages adhered so steadfastly to the Interests of France, did little raise his
reputation any where, except at Rome; nor does this deserve to be recorded by
Posterity among those Heroic Actions, which have got him the Name of Henry the
Great. In short, the Cardinals subtle advice seconded by the hopes of
assistance from France confirmed Clement in his former resolution of setting
all expedients a foot to turn Duke Caesar out of Ferrara.

The Duke renewed his instances, either to have the matter in contest referred
to the King of Spain, or at least to have a competent time allowed him to sum
up his reasons, in which he was confident, not only to satisfy all indifferent
persons, but even the Pope himself; but at Rome it was resolved, that neither
reference nor reasons should now take place; and that the Duke, for not
complying with the Monitory, though it required of him things impossible, was
forthwith to be excommunicated. That the excommunication might give the smarter
blow, Colonels and Officers were named, and Forces raised to go against the
Duke: there was also a great deal of money coined with the Arms of Aldobrandin
upon the one side; and upon the other was a small ship tossed by the waves, and
St Peter sitting at the Helm, with this Motto in Latin, Non praevalebunt, They
shall not prevail.

The Duke being informed of all that past publicly, but ignorant of the secret
practices against him, dispatched immediately a famous Civilian to Rome, who
undertook to satisfy such as the Pope should appoint to hear him: First, that
the Princes of Este never held Ferrara of the Church as a feudal City, by
proving which he removed one of the chief pillars of its pretended devolution.
Secondly, that Alphonsus the first, Duke Caesar's Grandfather, was married to
the Lady Laura Eustochia, of which he brought most unquestionable testimonies;
and this removed the other objection against the Dukes person: but the
Excommunication being now drawn up, and the Forces already upon their march,
there was nothing more to be done by way of Treaty; so that the Duke was at
length forced to have recourse to his Arms for maintaining the Justice of his
Cause: having therefore called the Magistrates, and the Chief of the Nobility
together, he gave them an account what endeavors he had used, though
unsuccessfully to sweeten the Pope, and prevent a rupture, that now being
necessitated to take Arms in his own defense, he hoped all of them would
concur, and not suffer the Princes of Este, under whose auspicious Government,
they and their Ancestors had for many ages enjoyed so great privileges, to be
violently and unjustly thrust out of their Native Country; then the method of
carrying on the War being set down, every one seemed cheerfully to undertake
some part of the charge and danger, though in effect, the Popes Emissaries had
already laid the train according to the Cardinals project; and the Duke had now
no greater Enemies than some of those who were most in his confidence.

Upon the news of the Excommunications being published at Rome, and sent by the
Army toward Lombardy; the Duke sent once more to Clement, expostulating about
his ill usage, and entreating him to consider how hard it was to hasten so
severe a sentence, without first allowing time and appointing Judges (as he had
most earnestly decreed) to hear his reasons. And, last of all, he modestly laid
before him how little it would be for the honor of the Apostolical See for his
Holiness to proceed after this manner in an affair wholly temporal, wherein he
himself was both Judge and Party, which made the Duke still hope, that upon
cooler thoughts he would think fit to put a stop to the Sentence before it were
published in Lombardy.

The Excommunication notwithstanding all the Dukes endeavors, being published
at Bologna, and elsewhere, order was given to keep strict watch at all the
Gates of the City, where every person who entered was to be examined and
searched, lest it should be brought to Ferrara, and affixed by night upon the
great Church: and people being now in a general consternation, betwixt the news
of the Sentence which was expressed in the most dreadful terms, and of the Popes
Army, which was advancing toward them, Father Palma a Jesuit, with the wonted
assurance of those of his Order, demanded Audience of the Duke, and after
having made a grave discourse, like a Divine, of the great danger of being cut
off from the Communion of the Church, and of forfeiting all those privileges
that Christians enjoy, he put on the person of a Statesman, and showed the Duke
how unreasonable it was for him to think of resisting the Papal Power, with
which few Kings were able to graple; he put him in mind that he had not to do
with him who bore St Peter's Keys only, but also his Sword; that the Pope was
no inconsiderable Prince in what immediately belonged to the Church; and that
besides this, he had a party in all other Princes Dominions and Courts, and
could never be supposed to want assistance from abroad more than other Princes
could reasonably promise themselves, and therefore upon the whole matter, after
great protestations of kindness for his Highness, and his most serene Family,
he conjured him, not to stand out, concluding that the circumstances in which
the Duke then was, obliged him to follow his advice, because those whom he most
trusted were ready upon occasion to betray him: that there was a design also
upon his other Dominions, and that he was sure the Pope wanted not friends at
Ferrara, who, if the business were not soon accommodated, would at length
compass their ends in the Dukes ruin.

When Palma was gone, the Duke began to reflect upon what he had said,
especially upon the latter part of his discourse, which he thought was not to
be slighted, having reason to believe, that none knew more of the designs afoot
against him, than that good Father and the rest of his Order. Whereupon growing
jealous, lest Modena and Regio might be lost, while he labored in vain to
preserve Ferrara, a sudden resolution was taken to part with it, and the
Duchess of Vrbin was forthwith employed to go and treat with the Popes Nephew,
Cardinal Aldobrandin. The Articles were too soon agreed on, but might have been
much more for the Dukes advantage, had he pitched upon another Plenipotentiary
than the Duchess, who most palpably sacrificed his concerns to secure her own.
The Duke having according to the agreement resigned the Government into the
hands of the Magistrates, and sent the Prince his Son hostage to Bologna for
the performance of the other Articles, made what have he could to retire to
Modena, for he now began to hate Ferrara, and that upon good grounds: Don Mario
Farnese sent thither by the Cardinal, having plainly showed him, that all his
secrets had been revealed, and the manner of seizing on his Dominions concerted
by many of those about him, as Letters there produced under their hands and
seals did testify, and that the City was to have been delivered to the Popes
Army within a few days, had not the Duke prevented them by a voluntary
surrender.

Nothing can excuse Caesar's parting with his Duchy upon so easy terms, but
the evident danger he saw himself in of being betrayed by his own Subjects, who
expected great things under a New Government: Yet we must not brand all of them
with this black mark of perfidy, as is too common upon such occasions: A few
traitors may bring an undeserved blot upon the Nobility and Gentry of a whole
Nation, which in general abhors such hellish practices; of which we had too
signal an instance, in the never enough detested delivery of our late Sovereign
of blessed memory, where the crime of a few was charged on our whole Nation:
And the same harsh opinion might we have of those of Ferrara, that others have
rashly entertained of us, did not our unjust sufferings put me in mind to
vindicate them: the most considerable then among the Nobility, and indeed the
greatest part did behave themselves both dutifully and faithfully toward the
Duke; and foreseeing the misery which was like to ensue upon the loss of their
Prince, took their leave of him with unfeigned expressions of sorrow, and most
them out of love to the injured House of Este, would have forsaken with a good
heart their Native Country, and settled at Modena, could they have carried
their Estates along with them.

After this manner was the flourishing City of Ferrara lost, I may almost say,
ruined; that very night Duke Caesar departed, five thousand of the Inhabitants,
who depended upon the Court, wanted bread; in a few months many of the shops
were shut up, and the Tradesmen forced to go into other Cities, not being
longer able to maintain their Families there, the Nobility found their
condition very comfortless, and those who had betrayed the Duke in hopes of
preferment were justly disappointed of their expectations: the New Government
with new Customs and heavy Taxes, brought in strangers into most of the good
Offices which the Natives enjoyed under their Dukes; so that even those who
were most for a change, if they had foreseen what was to come, would all, as
one man, have sacrificed their lives in the Dukes defense. Modena upon the
other hand growing every day more populous and rich, became soon sensible of
the benefit of a Court, for what was raised by Taxes seemed rather lent, being
repaid oftentimes with interest by the Dukes expenses among them: besides the
Nobility who formerly gave their attendance at Ferrara spent all their Rents
now at home; so that in a few years the Inhabitants were double in number to
what they had been before the Courts coming thither: But it was observed, that
of sixty thousand persons whom the Duke left at Ferrara, after some years there
was scarce half the number to be found there, and at present (as I was credibly
informed upon the place) they cannot reckon twelve thousand, and of these no
inconsiderable parts are Jews; some Lanes of that melancholy City are utterly
forsaken, most of the Palaces are ruinous, and the chief street so little
frequented, that grass appears in many places. In a word, there are few
instances of Cities, which without suffering by any long siege, or
extraordinary casualty have decayed faster than Ferrara has done in little more
than fourscore years since its Union to the Church.

Ristretto delle Ragioni che la Serenissima Casa d'Este ha colla Camera
Apostolica fatto al tempo d'Urbano 8vo, dove si mostrera che fosse
insufficiente e Lontano della Ragione il pretesto di Clemente 8vo d'occupare li
stati del Duca Caesare.
IL pretesto del occupazione hebbe per fondamento la morte del Duca Alfonso
2do, pretendendosi che lo stato di Ferrara fosse devoluto alla sede Apostolica
per Linea finita, e che l'Duca Cesare Cugino ed Erede del defunto non potesse
esserne capace come nato di padre non legittimo, essendo Don Alfonso Figlio,
del Duca Alfonso 1mo e di D. Laura Eustochia fra li quali adducevasi non essere
seguita la necessaria validita del matrimonio.

Lusingato da quest' apparenza di ragione Clemente 8o allora pontefice,
s'indusse a procedere non solo con monitorii e censure contra la persona del
Duca Cesare, ma a muovere l'arme a condurre a danni di lui Eserciti numerosi ed
a procurargli con occulte negoziazioni ogni maggiore pregiudizio anche negl
altristati che dal sagro Romano Imperio unicamente riconnosceva: di modo che
l'Duca Cesare per non poter resistere a si potente auversario; mosso da giusta
temenza, rilascio il possesso di quel stato nella maniera che fece.

Che Don Alfonso, Padre del Duca Cesare fosse legitimo pe'l matrimonio seguito
poi fra il Duca Alfonso 1mo suo Padre, e D. Laura Eustochia sua Madre, le
pruove susseguenti assai chiaramente lo dimostrano.

La Testimonianza degl'Historici, della cui feed in casi simili suole e dee
farsi grande stima e capitale quando particularmente son molti, non ammette
dubitazione alcuna nel matrimonio; E vaglia il vero come puo credersi che le
pen di tanti e cosi celebri scrittori avessero co'l pregiudizio della loro
gloria cospirato alla publicazione di cosa notoriamente falsa, mentre potevano
contanta facilita essere convinti di Bugia. Ne dee supporrsi che per adulazione
overo per promuovere la propria fortunanel migliorare la condizione degl'altri
condescendessere a mentire, essendo in quel tempo lontanissimo il caso di
questa successione per essere allora vivi i quatro figli dell altra Moglie
Lucretia Borgia.

Fra Leandro Alberti nella sua descrizione d'Italia trattando della Romagnuola,
e parlando d'Alfonso 1mo, cosi precisamente ragiona, Vxores habuit tres, 1mam
Annam Galleatii Forzae Mediolani Ducis filiam, inde Lucretiam Alexand. 6ti
Pontificis Maximi, ex qua Liberos Mares 4. sustulit, Herculem 2dum, Hypolitum
qui postea Cardinalis, Franciscum and Alexandrum, deinde Lucretia mortua, duxit
Lauram Ferrariensem obscurae quidem originis, sed accerrimi ingenii, maximaeque
prudentiae faeminam, ex qua duos Alphonsos creavit. Parole chiarissime e che
pruovano non solo il matrimonio ma i figlioli che n'ebbe, uno de quale fu Don
Alfonso di cui presentamente si famenzione. Lo Scrittore era Frate, era suddito
della Chiesa, e contemporaneo del Duca Alfonso, poteva sapere la verita del
fatto, e quando pure la passione havesse havuta forza di muover le egli, e
credibile che non a favore, ma contra il matrimonio havesse scritto.

Il Giovio non solo persona Excellentissima, ma Vescovo, Coetaneo anco egli del
prefato Duca, e pienamente informato degl interessi de' prencipi, ragionando di
D. Laura dice, Verum eam probis pudicisque moribus, and statae formae dignitate
ad genium respondentem, and a foelici foecunditate commendatam, legitimae
uxoris loco habuit, and geminos ex ea filios de nomine suo Alphonsos
appellavit: dal che chiaramente si comprende che'l Duca Alfonso dopo lacquisto
de i due figlioli firato delle singulari virtu di D. Laura la prese per Moglie.

Marco Guazzo nella cronica de suoi tempi, chiama ancor egli Moglie d'Alfonso
Laura Ferrarese Donna d'umile sangue, ma per prudenza ed ingegno molto nobile.
Lo stesso testificano il Sansovino nella storia delle famiglie illustri
d'Italia, ed Andrea Teut Autore Francese nelle vite degli huomini illustri,
lib. 5. cap. 53. E finalmente Marc Antonio Guarini Ferrarese, e pero partiale
della chiesa, e che scrisse tant anni dopo loccupazione di Ferrara, onde con
molta ragione poteva dubitare dell indignazione del Papa; Forzato della verita,
conferma il medesimo nel suo compendio storico delle chiese e luogi pii di
Ferrara.

All suprad debt Autorita s'aggiunge anco quella di Federico Scotto Dottore
di chiarissimo nome, e che scrisse ancor egli assai vicino a detti tempi,
perch volendo pruovare, Cons. 4. number. 17, e 18. Tom. 2. lib. 3. che un
prencipe puo donare a sua Moglie, porta per essempio le donazioni fat a D.
Laura quando fu sposata dal Duca Alfonso, con queste parole, Exemplum ponerem
in donamentis missis ab Alphonso 1mo, Duce Ferrariae, D. Laurae tertiae ejus
uxori, and filiae Beretarii ab illo ductae causa voti adimplendi.

Ne della feed degli storici dissentono le deposizioni, che tutta via si
conservano a perpetua memoria di molti testimoni esaminati in forma autentica;
onde conchiudamente si prouova una publica voce e fama del matrimonio di cui si
parla, e tal'vn e ch'arriva a deporre d'avere con gl'occhi propri veduta D.
Laura ricevere dallo stesso Duca onori e trattamenti propri di Moglie.
Aggeungono ch ella godeva le prerogative che ad una prencipessa solamente
potevano convenirsi, vegnendo communemente onorata non solo da i sudditi, ma
anche da i prencipi forrestieri, ed essendo da tutti chiamata di casa d'Este,
cognome del quale s intitolava anch'ella sempre in tutte le scritture publiche
e private, come pure oggi appare per un infinita di'strumenti authentici,
privilegi, ordini, lettere, mandati, e simili.

Servivasi del sigillo coll'arma de' prencipi d'Este ne suoi ordini e lettere,
parlava in noi; era solita d'andare per la citta con Gentilhuomini avanti, e
dame in carrozza dietro: per espressione di quella fortuna favorevole, che dal
umile sua condizione l'aveva sublimata a quello stato di grandezza portava,
scolpito nella sua carrozza un sole con motto, Quia fecit mihi magna qui potens
est; e 'l Duca suo marito alludendo allo stesso fe battere moneta delle quali
moltissime si veggono pure oggidi con un salvatore a sedere ed una Donna a suoi
piedi colle parole, Fides tua salvam te fecit; segno manifestissimo ch'l aveva
essaltata al supremo grado dimoglie. Ella dopo la morte del marito vesti per
tutto 'l tempo che sopravisse abiti Vedouili, e che non auvrebbe fatto, se tale
non fosse stata. Dagl'Onori e dalle prerogative che'lla bebbe in vita, passono
i Testimoni suddetti all dimostrazioni che in morte le furono fat, e dicono,
ch'l Duca Alfonso secundo e'l Cardinale Luigi suo Fratello col segnito di tutta
la Corte l'accompagnarono publicamente alla sepoltura, Onorando il Duca quel
funerale col corrotto, e l'Cardinale col abito solito a portarsi per la morte
de' parenti. La Corte tutta vesti da duolo, e furono conform all uso, esposte
larme di detta signora in quartate con quelle de'prencipi d'Este, Vna delle
quale riconnosciuta da i Medesimi Testimoni tutta via si conserva. Onori tale
Dimostrazioni di questa sort a qual altro potevano competere ch'ad una moglie
del Duca? e come may Alfonso secundo e'l Cardinale Luigi prencipi chi nel
portamento loro tennero sempre style e maniere proporzionate alla condizione
loro, havrebbono tollerato non che cooperato colla propria assistenza che in
forma somigliante, ella fosse tratata quando per una Prencipessa della casa
loro non lavessero effettivamenti riconnosciuta.

Sonoci finalmente due strumenti Autentici e Legalizzati, che Sgombrano ogni
nube di difficulta essendo massimamente rogati in Ferrara, luno del 1550. e
l'altro del 1551. Le precise parole per quello che tocca il punto del
matrimonio sono linfrascritte concordi ed uniformi.

Illustrissima Dna D. Laura Eustochia, Vxor quondam Illustrissimi and
Excellentissimi Ducis Alphonsi Ferrariae, Mutinae and Regii Ducis, etc. Epur
viveva di que 'giorni Ercole secundo, chi mal affetto, come si sa, a D. Laura
ed a suoi figlioli, non aurebbe permesso ch' ella con titoli somiglianti fosse
in scrittura publica falsamente Onorata.

E con suddetti confrontasi un altro strumento antico che dice.

Illustrissima and Excellentissima D. Laura Estensis, Relicta quondam
Illustrissimi and Excellentissimi Principis Alphonsi felicis memoriae Ducis
Ferrariae, etc. Riflettasi per conchiusionedel present articolo che qui si
tratta di negozio antico, nel quale sammettono non solo le pruove conchiudenti,
ma le cogietturali e presuntive ancora, come sono queste, e tanto piu che non
si cerca adesso la verita del matrimonio per lo matrimonio stesso, ma solo per
legitimare la successione ne posteri, nel qual caso tanto piu facilmente si
ricevono le pruove le piu Leggieri. Ne di poca considerazione e, che'l
matrimonio suddetto fosse celebrato prima del Concilio di Trento, per che non
vi ricercavano tante solennita, e le provizioni fat in quella santissima
radunanza, furono per regolare i matrimoni futuri non i passati, come piu volte
da piu supremi Tribunali e stato di chiarato, ne mancherebbe lo strumento
Principale del Matrimonio del quale fu Rogato Gio. Battista Sarachi Notario
Ferrarese: Equesto ed altre scritture concernenti la stessa materia non fossero
state tolte dal Duca Ercole, per auversione che teneva (come s' e toccato di
sopra) a i Duoi Alfonsi suoi fratelli, cagionata dal essere questi figli d'un
altra Madre, e dal vedere che l'Duca Alfonso Commun Padre gl'amava con
parzialita d'affetto ed aveva loro assegnati per cio Feudi Liberi ed
independenti e rendite di non ordinaria conseguenza. Restanci non dimeno per
Giudizio divino tant altre pruove ancora che bastano per svelare la verita.

Anzi a queste ragioni indotta la Maesta di Ferdinando secundo Imperatore, ed
informato che Don Alfonso fu veramente legitimato per lo Matrimonio susseguito,
non solo dichiaro vana la fama publicata in contrario da person mal affette,
ma concesse anche l'Investitura a me, degli stati Imperiali non come a semplice
successore del Duca Alfonso secundo, ma come a Prencipe chiamato e compreso
nell'antiche investiture de miei progenitori.

E perch non paia che sua Maesta senza le dovute precedenti ponderazioni si
movesse a cio, accompagna la sua dichiarazione coll infrascritte formali
parole, animoque been deliberato and sano, and maturo accedente consilio.

Restando dunque provato il matrimonio per la feed di tanti storici, per la
Testimonianza d'un cosi accreditato Giurisconsulto, per la deposizione di
Testimoni per essere stata D. Laura trattata sempre come moglie del Duca in
vita, ed in morte per titoli, sottoscrizioni, sigilli, arm, vestiti, e
finalmente per dichiarazione dell Imperatore; vien di necessaria conseguenza
abbattuto il pretesto del caso di Ferrara, perch provato il matrimonio non puo
rivocarsi in dubbio che i figliuoli legitimati per mezzo d'esso non sieno
realmente legitimi, e per cio capaci della successione di qual si voglia stato.

An Abstract of the Rights of the most Serene House of Este, against the
Apostolical Chamber in the time of Urban the 8th, by which it will appear, that
Clement the Eighths pretense for seizing upon Duke Caesar's Territories was most
weak and unreasonable.
THe pretense for the seizure was grounded upon the death of Duke Alphonsus the
second, it being alleged that the Duchy of Ferrara was fallen into the
Apostolical See by the failing of the Line; and that Duke Caesar, Cousin and
Heir to the late Duke, could not succeed, as born of a Father not lawfully
begot, Don Alphonsus being the Son of Duke Alphonsus the first, and the Lady
Laura Eustochia, betwixt whom they pretended that there did not pass the
necessary tie of marriage.

Clement the eighth who was then Pope, being deceived by this shadow of reason,
took upon him to proceed against the person of Duke Caesar, not only by
monitories and censures, but also by making War, by bringing numerous Armies
against him; and by subtle practices, working him also what mischief he could
in his other Territories, which he held of none but the Sacred Roman Empire:
insomuch that Duke Caesar not being able to deal with so powerful an
Adversary, and being moved with a just fear, parted with the possession of that
Duchy as he did.

That Don Alphonsus the Father of Duke Caesar was legitimate by the marriage
which followed betwixt Duke Alphonsus the first his Father, and the Lady Laura
Eustochia his Mother, the following proofs make most evident.

The testimony of Historians (whose credit in such cases we use, and ought
highly to value and regard, particularly when they are many) leave no ground to
doubt of the Marriage: and to speak the truth, how can it be imagined that the
pens of so many, and of so famous Writers, should; to the prejudice of their
reputation, have conspired to publish a thing notoriously false, while they
could so easily have been convicted of a lie? Nor is it to be supposed that out
of flattery, or a design to promote their own fortunes, by bettering other men's
condition, they would have condescended to publish a falsehood, seeing there
was not at that time the least appearance of this succession, the four Sons of
the former Duchess Lucretia Borgia being then alive.

Leander Albertus in his description of Italy treating of Romagnola, and
speaking of Alphonsus the first, uses these very words, He had three Wives,
first, Anne Daughter to Galleazo Forza Duke of Milan; then Lucretia Pope
Alexander the sixth's Daughter, by whom he had four Sons, Hercules the second,
Hypolitus afterward a Cardinal, Francis and Alexander; in the third place,
Lucretia being dead, he married Laura of Ferrara, a woman of mean Parentage
indeed, but of most quick parts and extraordinary prudence, by whom he begot
two Alphonsus's. Words most plain, and which prove not only the Marriage, but
also the Sons he had, one of whom was Alphonsus that we now mention. This
Writer was a Friar, a Subject of the Church, and Contemporary with Duke
Alphonsus: he had occasion to be informed of the truth of the business; and if
passion could at all have by assed him, it is to be believed he would not have
written for the Marriage, but against it.

Jovius, who was not only a most rare. Person, but a Bishop, Contemporary
likewise to the above named Duke, and perfectly well versed in the concerns of
Princes, discoursing of the Lady Laura, says, But she being of a virtuous and
chaste behavior, and in her beauty answerable to her parts, and being happily
recommended by her fruitfulness, he had her for his lawful Wife, and had by
her two Sons, both of whom after his own Name he called Alphonsus. By which we
clearly understand, that Duke Alphonsus after he had got two Sons by her, being
charmed with the singular Virtue of the Lady Laura, took her for his Wife.

Marcus Guazzo in his Annals of those Times, calls the Lady Laura of Ferrara
Duke Alphonsus's Wife, a woman of low Extraction, but for her Prudence and
Parts truly Noble; both Sansovinus in his History of the Illustrious Families
of Italy, and Andrew Teut a French Author in his Lives of the Illustrious Men,
lib. 5. cap. 53. do testify the same: And finally Marcus Antonius Guarini of
Ferrara, though he was a great friend to the Church, and writ so long after the
seizure of Ferrara, that he had reason to doubt of his incurring the Popes
indignation; yet being constrained by truth, he confirms the same in his
Historical Compend of the Churches, and pious places of Ferrara.

To the abovementioned Authorities we must likewise add that of Frederick
Scot, a Doctor of great reputation, and that writ also near those Times, who
while he endeavors to prove, Cons. 4. numb. 17, and 18. Tom. 2. lib. 3. That a
Prince may make presents to his Wife, brings for an instance the presents made
to the Lady Laura when she was married to Duke Alphonsus in these very words, I
could give an example in the Presents sent by Alphonsus the first, Duke of
Ferrara to the Lady Laura his third Wife, and the Daughter of Beretarius whom
the Duke married in performance of his vow.

Nor do the depositions of many Witnesses that were examined in a legal manner
since the loss of Ferrara, and which are still kept on record, differ from the
Historians Testimony: From whence a public report and fame of the marriage we
speak of is evidently proved, and some there were ready to take oath that they
had seen the Lady Laura treated by the Duke himself with that honor and
respect which are only due to a Wife: to this they add that she enjoyed
Prerogatives which were suitable to none but a Princess: she was generally
respected as such, not only by her Subjects, but likewise by foreign Princes,
and was by all treated with the name of the House of Este; which surname she
always took in all public and private writings, as does still appear by an
infinite number of Authentic Instruments, Privileges, Orders, Letters,
Commissions, and the like.

She made use of a Seal with the Arms of the Princes of Este in her Orders and
Letters, she spoke in the plural number [We:] It was her custom when she went
abroad to have Gentlemen before, and Ladies in Coach behind her. And as an
expression of that favorable fortune, which from her low Condition had exalted
her to that pitch of greatness, she had engraved upon her Coach a Sun with this
Motto, For he who is great has magnified me: and the Duke her Husband alluding
to the same, had Money coined, of which very many pieces are still to be seen,
where our Savior is sitting, and a woman at his feet, with these words, Thy
faith has made thee whole; which was a most manifest sign that he had exalted
her to the eminent station of a Wife. All the time she survived her Husband she
went in the habit of a widow, which she had not done, had she not been one.
From the Honors and Prerogatives she enjoyed in her life, the said witnesses
pass to the respects which were paid her at her death; and they averr, that
Duke Alphonsus the second, and Cardinal Lewis his Brother, with a train of the
whole Court did solemnly accompany her to the place of burial, the Duke
honoring the Funeral with mourning, and the Cardinal with the Clothes which
such Princes use to wear upon the death of their Relations. The whole Court put
on mourning, and as the custom is, they did hang out the Arms of the said Lady
quartered with those of the Princes of Este, one of which, according to the
testimony of the same witnesses is still preserved: To whom else could honors
and respects of this kind agree, but to the Dukes Wife? and how could ever Duke
Alphonsus and Cardinal Lewis who were Princes, that in their carriage observed
always a state and carriage suitable to their quality, ever have suffered, much
less contributed by their presence toward her being treated after this manner,
if they had not really owned her for a Princess of their Family?

Finally, there are two Authentic Instruments verified by all the forms of
Law, which remove all manner of difficulty, and were with great earnestness
required and made by a Notary in Ferrara, the one in the year 1550, and the
other in 1551. The very words for what concerns the marriage do agree and are
the same, as they are here set down.

The most Illustrious Lady, the Lady Laura Eustochia, Wife of the most
Illustrious and Excellent Duke Alphonsus, late Duke of Ferrara, Modena and
Regio, etc. And yet Hercules the second was then alive, who having no kindness,
as every one knows, for the Lady Laura and her Sons, would never have suffered
that she should have been falsely honored in public writings with such like
Titles as these.

And with those abovementioned there is another ancient Instrument, which
agrees with it thus:

The most Illustrious and most Excellent Lady Laura of Este, relict of the late
most Illustrious and Excellent Prince Alphonsus of blessed memory Duke of
Ferrara, etc. being personally present. To conclude the matter now in hand, we
must consider that here we treat of a business of some antiquity, in which not
only evident proofs, but likewise presumptive and conjectural ones, such as
these are, must be allowed; and the rather, because we do not enquire now into
the truth of the marriage for the marriage it self, but only to make the
Succession Legitimate for posterity, in which case slighter proofs may be the
better admitted. Nor is it of small moment, that the said marriage was
solemnized before the Council of Trent, because then so many formalities were
not required, and the Orders that were made in that most holy assembly, were
for regulating future marriages, and not those that were past, as it has been
often declared in several Supreme Judicatures, nor would the Original
Instrument of the marriage be wanting, which was required and made by John
Baptista Sarachi a Notary in Ferrara, if this and other papers relating to the
same affair had not been withdrawn by Duke Hercules for the grudge he bore (as
we have already hinted) to the two Alphonsus's his Brothers, both upon the
account of their being the Sons of another Mother, and because he observed that
his and their Father Duke Alphonsus loved them so very tenderly, and thereupon
granted them free and independent Feuds, and considerable Revenues:
Nevertheless by Divine Providence, so many proofs still remain as are
sufficient to discover the truth.

Moreover his Imperial Majesty Ferdinand the second being wrought upon by these
motives, and informed that Don Alphonsus was really legitimate by the Marriage
that followed, not only declared the report which was given out to the contrary
by ill affected persons, to be vain, but did grant also the Investiture of the
Imperial Territories to me, not as the Successor simply of Duke Alphonsus the
second, but as to a Prince named and comprehended in the ancient Investitures
of my Progenitors.

And that it may not appear his Majesty was moved to do this without having
first weighed well the business, he accompanies his Declaration with the very
words that follow, that he declared this, having deliberated well upon it, and
having taken sound and mature advice about it.

The Marriage being then proved by the credit of so many Historians, by the
testimony of so famous a Lawyer, by the deposition of Witnesses, that the Lady
Laura was always treated as the Dukes Wife during her Life, and at her Death,
by Titles, Subscriptions, Seals, Arms, Habit; and lastly, by the Emperors
Declaration: It necessarily follows then, that the pretense of the devolution
of Ferrara is overthrown, because the Marriage being thus proved, it cannot be
questioned but the Children who are by this means Legitimate, are really
lawful, and therefore capable of succeeding to any estate whatsoever.

FINIS.

