Scotland's Sovereignty ASSERTED BEING A Dispute concerning HOMAGE, against
those who maintain that Scotland is a Feu, or Fee-Liege of England, and that
therefore the King of Scots owes Homage to the King of England.

Wherein there are many Judicious Reflections upon most of the English
Historians, who wrote before the Year 1600. and abundance of considerable
Passages, which illustrate the History of both Kingdoms.

By Sir THOMAS CRAIG, Author of the Book de Feudis.

Translated from the Latin Manuscript, and a Preface added, with a short
Account of the Learned Author, and a Confutation of that Homage said to be
performed by Malcolm III. King of Scotland, to Edward the Confessor, lately
found in the Archives of England, and published in a single Sheet, by Mr.
Rymer, the King's Historiographer.

By GEO. RIDPATH.

London, Printed for Andrew Bell, at the Cross-Keys in the Poultrey, and sold
by Thomas Brown, Alex. Henderson, George Mosman, John Valens, John Mackey, Mrs.
Ongstone, Rob. Allex, Booksellers in Edinburgh. 1695.

BOOKS lately printed and sold by Andrew Bell.
ADvice to the Young, or the Reasonableness and Advantages of an Early
Conversion to God, demonstrated in thr^e Sermons on Eccles. 12. 1. By Joseph
Stennett.

A Defense of the Archbishop's Sermon on the Death of her late Majesty of
blessed Memory, and of the Sermons of the late Archbishop, Bp of Litchfield and
Coventry, Bp of Ely, Bp of Salisbury, Dr. Sherlock, Dr. Wake, Mr. Fleetwood,
preached upon that and several occasions; being a Vindication of the late
Queen, his present Majesty and the Government, from the malicious Aspersious
cast upon them.

Christians Preparations for holy dying.

An Exposition with Practical Observations upon the Book of Ecclesiastes;
written by Alexander Nisbet, Minister of the Gospel at Irwin in Scotland.

The Churches Triumph over Death: A Sermon preached upon the Decease of blessed
Mr. Robert Fleming, with some Account of his Life.

Foolish Talking and Jesting described and condemned.

Holy Union, and holy Contention described and pressed.

All three by Daniel Burgess.

Where likewise is to be had all his other Practical Pieces.

The fulfilling of the Scriptures; or a Discovery of the Accomplishment of
God's holy Word in his Providential Works: The third Edition, collected and
enlarged with Doctrines and Histories. By the Author Mr. Robert Fleming^

A brief Refutation of the Errors of Toleration, Erastianism, Independency and
Separation, with other Sermons. By Mr. Ferguson.

A Sermon preached in the high Church of Edinburgh, at the Election of the
Magistrates of the City. By James Webster, Minister of the Gospel.

Novum Lumen Chirurgicum Extinctum: or Med. Colbatch's new Light of Surgery
put out, by W. W. Surgeon.

The Barren Fig Tree; or the Doom and Downfall of the fruitless Professor. By
John Bunyan.

Grapes in the Wilderness; a Discourse fitted to all Times. By Tho. Bell,
Professor in the College of Edinburgh.

Mr. Rutherford's Letters, the third Edition, with an Explanation of Scots
Words.

To the Right Honorable My LORD Secretary IOHNSTON, One of his MAJESTY'S
Principal Secretaries of State for the Kingdom of Scotland.
My LORD,
I Take the Liberty, though in your Absence, to present you with the ensuing
Treatise. It were sufficient to entitle it to your Patronage, that the Subject
of it does nearly concern the Honor of your Country; but it has a more
peculiar Claim to your Favor, since it is one of the posthumous Works of your
Great Grandfather Sir Thomas Craig. The Honorable Name his Book de Feudis has
acquired him all over Europe, and which he has in his own Country upon many
other Accounts, lays (not to mention the Duties of Nature) particular
Obligations to him upon those descended of him. Besides, the Subject of the
following Treatise requiring the Knowledge of the Laws and Customs of your
Country to judge of it, who can do it better than your Lordship, who has made
the Pursuit of Knowledge so much your Work, and to whom this Knowledge (could
Knowledge be transmitted with the Blood, as Vice is) should belong by
Inheritance? My Author Sir Thomas Craig, and Sir John Skeen, are the two known
Oracles of the Scottish Law; and the Latter was your Great Grandfather by the
Mother's side, as the Former is by your Father's, and both of them
extraordinary Men upon other accounts: Sir John was eminent by his Birth, he
being related to the Royal Family; as appears by King James the Sixth's Letters
to him yet extant, and by his Employments Abroad, he having been Ambassador for
K. James to most of the Courts of Europe, and advanced to that Honorable Post
of Which is the best Post in the Kingdom, if the Honor, Profit, and Interest
in the Government which it brings him that has it, be jointly considered.
Lord Register at Home. But to go on with your Lordship's Title to the Knowledge
of the Laws and Customs of your Country, o^ rather their Title to your
Protection; Sir John laid particular Obligations upon the Nation by his
digesting and compiling those Laws and Customs in h^ useful Treatise de
Verborum significatione, so much known and referred to everywhere. Your
Grand-Vncle too, Sir James Skeen his Son, was President of the Session That is
in effect, Lord-Chief-Justice of Scotland, for there is but one Sovereign Court
of Justice in private Civil Causes there.
; and your Grandfather the Lord Forresterseat, was with much Honor and
Integrity, both a Judge and a Privy-Counsellor above 30 Years. Your Father also,
the Lord Waristoun, having been, because of his Capacity and Knowledge in the
Laws, first King's Advocate, then Lord Register, lost indeed both his Life and
Fortune by the Iniquity of the late Reigns; but no Time can deprive him of the
Character which his Integrity and the Services he did his Country, have
acquired him in the Memory of all good Men.

My Lord,

I shall not enter upon the Subject of your own Praise. Things are stronger
than Words, and show that you are resolved to imitate such honorable
Ancestors. You struggled long under the Ruins of your Family, but without
yielding to the many Offers and Opportunities you had of getting out of them,
by doing any thing contrary to your own Mind, or otherwise unworthy of you; and
now of late that you have risen to a great Post by Ways worthy both of you and
it, you show the same Firmness of Mind in Prosperity that you did in Adversity;
and neither the daily tempting Opportunities that such a Post affords you of
recovering your Family, and becoming suddenly rich, nor the many Examples that
you have before you of those that do so in this corrupt Age, have been
sufficient to subdue you.

That your Lordship may go on steadily in the Ways of Virtue, and be an Honor
to you^ Ancestors, as they are an Honor to you, is the earnest Prayer t^ God
Almighty, of,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most obedient Servant, GEO. RIDPATH.

THE PREFACE.
NATURE teaches every Man to love his Country, insomuch that the civilized
Heathens did always allow Piety to that; the next Place to Piety toward their
Gods; and it was esteemed glorious by the old Romans to devote themselves to
death for the Safety of their Country: But we have yet a greater Pattern, viz.
the Apostle Paul, who wished himself accursed from Christ, so that his
Countrymen the Jews were ^ngrafted in him; and whatever be the meaning of that
Expression, we may safely infer, that it contains a higher Flight of Zeal for
the Welfare of his Countrymen than is to be met with in any Heathen Author, and
does much exceed the Roman Phrase of devoting themselves to the infernal Gods
for their Country's Sake. This is sufficient to justify the Author for writing
the following Treatise; so that it only remains that an Account should be given
why the same is now translated and published, after having lain dormant near
100 Years in Manuscript.

It Is a loss that the Learned Author did not publish the same both in Latin and
English; but why he did it not, we are not able to conjecture at this Distance.
However there is no Reason that Scotsmen should be perpetually silent, when they
find the Honor of their Country attaqu'd in this Point by English Historians
one after another, as particularly by Heylin in his scurrilous manner, and now
by Mr. Rymer Historiographer to his Majesty King William^ who has published a
Form of Homage said to be performed by Malcolm the third King of Scots, to
Edward the Confessor, for the Kingdom of Scotland and all the adjacent Isles.
It were indeed to be wished, that the Latin Manuscript de Hominio were printed
for the Honor of Scotland, and the Information of Foreigners who are
frequently misled as to our Affairs, and particularly on this Head, by English
Historians; but that must either be the undertaking of the Public, or of those
who are willing to be at the Charge of it.

In the mean time seeing our Neighbors have published their Plea for this
Homage in their own Language, they cannot well take it amiss if we make this
Learned Confutation answer them in that same Dialect.

Some may perhaps think this Publication unseasonable, as tending to revive old
Quarrels betwixt the Kingdoms; but why the Defense of out Independency by Sir
Tho. Craig against Mr. Holinshed, who are both dead long ago, should have more
influence upon the Friendship of the Nations, than that about our Antiquity
betwixt Sir George Mackenzie, Dr. Lloyd and Dr. Stillingfleet, when the
Controverting Authors were all alive together, cannot well be divined. But if
it should, the first Aggressors must bear the Blame: no Reason can be assigned
why Scotsmen should not now defend with their Pens, what their Ancestors
maintained so gallantly with their Swords; and as they did never more verify
that part of the Character given them by the Learned Cluverius, that they are (
Mart felices) Noble Warriors, than in the glorious Defense of their Nation
from this very Claim by their Arms, the other part of his Character, that they
are also (Ingenio F^lices) very Ingenious, was never demonstrated by a better
Instance than this Vindication of their Country from that Ignominious
Imputation by their Learning, which will more fully appear by the perusal of
this Treatise, wherein the Author has acquitted himself as became one of his
Birth, Estate, Learning and Probity.

It may be objected by some, that the Knowledge of this Controversy is now
become useless, because of the Union of the Crowns; but it is hoped that all Men
who love their Country, will be willing to know what can be said in defense of
its Honor, especially in a Point, which as appears by our Histories,
occasioned sixty Years War betwixt the two Kingdoms, and cost them at least
three hundred thousand Lives: An Argument sufficient of it self to when the
Appetites of the Curious, to hear what is to be said on both sides. But for
Scotsmen to be indifferent in this Affair, will argue a mighty Degeneracy form
the Zeal of their Ancestors, who according to the Testimony of Paris and
Westminster, both English Historians, did in the Reign of Henry the third,
bring one hundred thousand Men into the Field, who had all confessed themselves
to the Priests, according to the manner of the Times, and resolved every Man to
sacrifice his Life for the Honor of his Country, rather than submit to the
Homage here treated of, an Instance which is scarcely to be prallel'd in
History. We read indeed of Curtius and some other Noble Romans, who have
devoted themselves to death for their Country; but that is nothing in
Comparison to such a Multitude: and yet it is probable that the Kingdom of
Scotland would have furnished a far greater Number of such if there had been
occasion, when the Nobility of Scotland in their Letter to Pope Boniface VIII,
protested that they would never be subject to England, so long as there were an
hundred Scotsmen alive.

But that which renders the Knowledge of this Controversy more needful at this
time, is the Revival of it by the Form of Homage, said to be performed to
Edward the Confessor by our king Malcolm, for Scotland and the adjacent Isles,
lately found by Mr. Rymer in the Archives of England; and he has published it
as a Proemium to the public Treaties betwixt England and other Nations, which
he designs to print.

I no sooner saw that Paper, but it brought me in Mind of the Story of Annius
de Viterbo that famed Impostor, who being a great pretender to Antiquity, did
not only in his twenty seven Books on that Subject impose Counterfeit pieces
upon the World, under the Name of Berosus Manetho, etc. of which Joseph
Scaliger, and others advise young Students to beware; but to put a Complement
upon the City of Viterbo, the Place of his Nativity, he ordered some
Inscriptions to be engraven, and hiding them amongst the Vines caused them
afterward to be dug up, and carrying them in triumph to the Magistrates,
pretended that he had found Inscriptions, which made it appear, that their City
was much elder than Rome, and that it was built by Isis and Osiris, who lived
about two thousand Years before Romulus. I would not be understood to reflect
upon Mr. Ryme^, as if this Counterfeit Homage were of his Contrivance, for I
doubt not but he found it, where he says he did; but that it is a Counterfeit,
and that none of the oldest standing, I conceive will appear by what follows.

1. That there is no mention made thereof by Edward the first, in his defense to
Pope Boniface the eighth, who charged him with making an unjust War upon the
Scots, and ordered him to desist on Pain of Excommunication: Now can any
reasonable Man believe, that if there had been such an Authentic Record of
Homage performed for the Kingdom of Scotland not much above two hundred Years
before his own Time, that this Prince who traced the fabulous History of his
Country as far as Brute with his Trojans, and searched all the Records both of
England and Scotland for Arguments to support this pretended Homage, could have
missed of such an Authentic Piece as this if it had been then in the Archives
of the Nation?

2. When Richard King of England, as appears by his Charter mentioned in
Hoveden, restored to William King of Scotland all the Monuments of Homage
either performed, or which had been said to be performed for Scotland upon the
Public Faith of the Kingdom; Is it reasonable to suppose, that either the
Government of Scotland would have been so silly as to have neglected the
demanding of such an Authentic Record, had there been any such, or that the
Government of England would have broken the Public Faith to have retained it?
It Is true, that there is a Caveat in that Charter, that if any such Monuments
were retained through forgetfulness, they were ipso facto to be held Null and
Void; but that will nothing help our Adversaries, for it is not to be supposed,
that an Homage performed in full Parliament, as this is said to have been,
could be forgotten by either of the Nations.

3. It is not to be thought that Henry the eighth would have omitted this
Evidence of our Homage in ^his Declaration of War against James the 5th of
Scotland, wherein he amassed all that could be said for the same, had there
been any such thing in the Archives of his Kingdom. By all which it will
appear, that either there was no such Record then in the Archives, or that it
was not known, or at least not looked upon as Authentic: but that it was
unknown is next to impossible, seeing it is pretended to have been performed in
full Parliament; that it should not have been esteemed Authentic if it had
been known, is very improbable, seeing it carries a fairer Countenance than the
Arguments they made use of from Brutus, etc. Therefore there is Reason to
presume it was forged since that time, and probably in Q. Mary's Reign, because
when fresh enquiries were made into the Pretensions of England to this Homage,
in the time of Edward VI. there is no mention of this Record, as appears by Dr.
Burnet's History of the Reformation.

But now I shall exhibit the Charter it self, first in Latin, exactly
according to the Copy printed by Mr. Rymer, then in as good English as the
barbarous and incongruous Latin will bear, and make such Observations upon it,
as will clearly evince its being a Counterfeit.

MAlcolmus Dei gratia Rex Scotoru^ and Insularu^ adjacentium, o^nibus
Christianis ad quos Presents Lre^ pervenerint Salutem, tam Danis et Anglis
qua^ Scotis; sciatis nos et Edwardu^ primogenitu^ filtu^ nru^^ et beredem,
Comite^ de Carrick et de Rotsaye, recognovisse nos tenere totu^ Regnu^ nru^^
Sco^iae et Infulas adjacentes de Excellentissimo dno nro Edwardo, filio
Ethe^redi nuper Regis Angliae, Superiore Dno Regni Scotiae et insularu^
adjacentiu^ per Homagiu^, Ligiu^ et Fidelitate^, prout Antecessores and
Progenitores nri pro antea temporibus retroactis satis notabiliter
recognoverunt et feceru^t, prout par antiquior Recorda Coronae satis nobis
constat. Quare ex jure directo nos devenimus ho^nes u^tros, O Domine noster
S^renis^^^me Edward, fili Ethelredi, Rex Angliae, et Superior Dominus Scotiae
et insularu^ adjacentiu^, durante vita nra, contra oe^s homines vobiscu^ vivere
et mori, tanquam Ligii subditi vestri fidelis, et Lig^a^ fidelitate^ vobis et
haeredibus vestru^ portabimus. Stc Deus nos adjuvet et scu^ Dei Iudicium. In
cujus Rei Testimonium Presentibus sigillum nru^^ apponi fecunus pro nobis and
filio nro predco^ apud Eboracu^, quinto die Iunii, ann. Regni nri nono. In
Parliamento predicti Dni superioris nri ibide^ tento ex consensu and consilio
Margaretae Consortis nrae, filiae Edwardi filii Edmundi Ferrei Lateris, Edgari
Atheling fri^s, ejusde^ Consortis nostrae, and qua^ pluriu^ Magnatu^ alioru^
Regni nri praedicti.

(Locus Sigilli.)
In English thus.
MALCOLM King of Scots, and of the Adjacent Isles, to all Chri^tians to whom
these present Letters shall come, Greeting, as well to Danes and English as to
Scots. Be it known to you, that we and Edward our eldest Son and Heir, Earl of
Carrick and Rothsay, have recognized that we hold our whole Kingdom of
Scotland, and the adjacent Isles, of our most Excellent Lord Edward Son to
Ethelred late King of England, Liege Lord of Scotland, and the adjacent Isles
by Liege Homage and Fealty, as our Predecessors and Progenitors are very well
known to have recognized and done, as manifestly appears to us by the ancient
Records of the Crown; and therefore by direct Law we become your liegemen, O
our most Serene Lord Edward Son of Ethelred King of England, and Liege Lord of
Scotland, and the adjacent Isles; and we shall bear liege Fealty to you and
your Heirs during our Lives, to live and die with you against all Men as your
faithful Liege Subjects. So Help us God, and the Holy Judgment of God. In
witness whereof we have caused our Seal to be put to these Presents for us and
our Son aforesaid, at York the fifth day of June, and the ninth Year of our
Reign, in the Parliament of our liege Lord aforesaid held there, by the Consent
and with the Advice of Margaret our Consort, Daughter of Edward, Son to Edmund
Ironside, Edgar Atheling Brother to our said Consort, and many others of the
Nobility of our Kingdom aforesaid.

There are many Exceptions to be brought against this Homage, as that it is
contrary to all the Forms of Homage recorded even in the English Histories,
having an impertinent Address to the King of England in the Nature of a Prayer,
O Domine Noster, etc. an affected Genealogy of Margaret Queen of Scots which is
nothing at all to the purpose; a Title by which never any of the Kings of
Scotland designed themselves, viz. Scotorum and Insularum adjacentium: Not was
there then any Earl of Carrick or Rothsay, and the eldest Son of Scotland was
long before that time entitled Prince of Cumberland. Nor is it to be forgot
that there is no mention in this Homage of the Northern Counties though then
possessed by the Scots, which is another Argument of its being a Forgery. It is
also to be observed, that Rothsay was no Title belonging to the Royal Family,
till the Stuarts came to the Crown which was in 1377, being 311 Years after the
Date of this Homage; for Rothsay is a Town and Castle in the Isle of Boot, the
paternal Inheritance of the Stuarts; and the first mentioned in our History to
have born the Title of Earl of Rothsay, is David Son to King Robert the third,
about 1390, which is 324 Years after this Homage.

We might also object against the Word Parliament as being French, and not
probably used in England till after the Conquest; their public Assemblies at
that time being called Wittena a Gemots, which if rendered in Latin then, ought
either to have been Conventus Saprentum according to the import of the Words,
or Conventus Ordinum, of Comitia Regni, according to the Latin Idiom, and not
Parliamentum, which Cambden in his Britannia owns to be a French Word, and of
no great Antiquity. But that which proves this Homage to be a Forgery beyond
all Controversy, is the alleged Consent of Margaret Queen of Scotland, and
Prince Edward her Son, June the fifth, in the ninth Year of Malcolm's Reign,
which must be 1066, for he began his Reign April 25. 1057. Now Margaret and her
Brother Edgar Atheling, did not leave England till after the Conquest, which
was in October 1066. and disigning then for Hungary, they were driven ashore in
Scotland by stress of Weather, and there King Malcolm being taken with her
Beauty and Probity, married her, as near as we can guess, in 1067: but that she
was not married till she fled out of England after the Conquest, all the
English Historioans that I have met with agree, and particularly Sir William
Temple, in his late Introduction to the History of England; so that here she is
supposed to give Consent to her Husband's doing Homage to Edward the Confessor
before she was married, and when Edward the Confessor was dead: and seeing they
will have her Son Prince Edward also to sign it, they must at least allow him
to be fourteen Years of Age before he was capable of signing a Deed of this
Importance, whereas he was not then born. These things appear plain to any Man
that will be at the Pains to look into the Histories of both Kingdoms, tho I
must own that that Learned Gentleman James Tyrrel Esquire told me of this false
Date before I had seen an authentic Copy of the pretended Homage; and as that
Gentleman has put a great Obligation upon his Country, by asserting their
ancient Liberties in his elaborate Book, called Bibliotheca Politica, it is not
to be doubted but he will in like manner advance its Honor, by refining and
improving their History, without copying the Reproaches cast upon Neighboring
Nations by the common Herd of preceding Historians, or robbing Other Kingdoms
of their due Honor, England having so many real Glories of her own, that she
needs not bereave her Neighbors of any of theirs; and it is hoped that Mr.
Rymer will not disgrace his Treatise of the public Leagues and Transactions of
England, with such a notorious Counterseit as this appears to be.

It Is but just that we should conclude with some account of Sir Thomas Craig,
the Author of the following Treatise.

He was lineally descended from the Family of Craigston in Buc^an, one of the
most Ancient in the Kingdom: he was born about 1548, and having been virtuously
educated by the Care of Mr. John Craig a great Divine, and his near Relation,
and made more than an ordinary Progress in the learned Languages and
Philosophy, he went to France, and studied the Civil Law: in the Knowledge of
which, he exceeded most of his Contemporaries; for he had very great natural
Endowments, as well as acquired Parts. On his return from France, he applied
himself to the Bar; where he purchased so much Reputation by his Learning and
Integrity, that in 1604, when K. James set the Design of an Union betwixt the
two Kingdoms on foot, he was chosen by the Parliament of Scotland as one of the
principal Commissioners to negotiate that important Affairs.

He was universally esteemed by all the Great and Learned Men of his Time; kept
Correspondence with many of them, and particularly with Cambden, that famous
Antiquary.

He gave a convincing Demonstration of his extraordinary Knowledge in the Law,
by his Book de Feudis, so well known to all the Learned in that Faculty:
Wherein, like another Justinian, he reduced into a clear and intelligible
Method the whole Laws of his Country, which were formerly like an undigested
Chaos, and illustrated them by the Civil and Canon Law, and the Customs and
Statutes of various Nations.

Having thus devoted the first Fruits of his Pen to the Service of his Country,
and the students of the Scots Law, he persisted in that generous Course; and
undertook the Defense of his Sovereign's just Right of Succession to the Crown
of England, against the ^avils and Objections of Dolman, or rather the Jesuit
Parsons; wherein he defeated the bold Adversary to the full Conviction of all
Rational Men. This valuable Manuscript is still preserved in the Library of the
College of Edinburgh; nor would it have remained unprinted, had not K. James
the Sixth's pea^eable Access to the Crown of England rendered the Publication of
it needless in that Juncture.

Sir Thomas's Zeal for his Prince and Country, did not stop here; for the
desirable Project of Union having warmed the Breast of that Learned Monarch,
and inspired his Chief Ministers with an earnest Desire of bringing it about,
this Great Author wrote an excellent Piece on that subject, entitled, De
Unione Regnorum; wherein he has with all the Strength of Reason, Wit, and
Eloquence, demonstrated the Necessity and Expediency thereof, though the bad
Genius of the Island has hitherto obstructed it. As the first Effort of his
Pen was for the Honor and Advantage of his Country, to which he approved
himself a faithful Patriot throughout the whole Course of his Life; his last
Effort of that Nature was directed to the same End, which put him upon writing
this learned and Elaborate Treatise, De Hominio, in defense of the Independency
and Sovereignty of our Kings.

It is not to be imagined but that this laudable Zeal for his Prince and
Country, was well resented; and as an Evidence thereof, the King conferred the
Honor of Knighthood upon him, which was reckoned a considerable Honor in
those times: But this worthy Man being a Person of substantial Merit, and one
who slighted the gaudy Accoutrements of Honor, he could never be brought to
accept of it formally; upon which the king commanded that every one should give
him the Title.

These Instances are sufficient to demonstrate his Piety toward his Country;
what follows are Evidences of no less Piety toward his Parents and Children,
and Hospitality toward his Neighbors. His Father being of the Romish
Communion, Sir Thomas never desisted from his pious Endeavors till he brought
him over to the Protestant Religion, which yielded him no small Joy. His Zeal
for the said Religion, and Fatherlycare for his Children, appears by his Will,
dated in 1591. about 17 Years before his Death: Wherein he protested, that as
he lived, so he intended to die in that Religion which was at that time
professed in the Kingdom, in all Points and Heads of Doctrine, which he
believed to be the only true and uncorrupted Religion taught and left to us by
Jesus Christ; and after a very serious Strain of Practical Devotion, and
Provision made for his lady Helen Herriot, a Daughter of Trebourn in East
Lotbian, he gave strict Injuctions to his eldest Son Lewis, that as he would
inherit the Blessing of God and his Father, he would take a Fatherly-care of
the rest of his Brethren.

And as he was a dutiful Child himself, and eminent for filial Piety, God
rewarded him in that same kind: For his eldest Son, Sir Lewis Craig of
Wrights-houses, who attained the Dignity both of a Counselor and Judge before
he was 34 Years old, which was a thing very rare in those days, when few were
ever admitted to the Bench, unless to their other good Qualifications, they had
a long Tract of Experience adjoin'd; yet this du^iful Son, notwithstanding his
high Station, would always be uncovered to his excellent Father when he came to
plead before him at the Bar. His second Son was Sir James Craig of Castle Craig
and Craigston, in the County of Cavan and Letrum, and Province of Ulfter in
Ireland, who behaved himself gallantly against the Irish Rebels in 1641, and
dying in defense of his Country without Issue, left his Estate to his younger
Brother Dr. John Craig, Physician in Ordinary to K. James the Sixth, and
afterward Chief Physician to K. Charles I. His fourth Son, Mr. Thomas, became
an Advocate. And he had moreover, three Daughters, all of them honorably
married; the eldest Margaret, to Sir Alexander Gibson of Dury; the second
Elizabeth, to Mr. Iohnston Father to Sir Archibald the late Lord Wariston, and
Grandfather to Mr. Iohnston, one of his Majesty's Secretaries of State for the
Kingdom of Scotland; the youngest Ianet, was married to... Belchis of Tofts.

Then as for his Hospitality toward his Neighbors; it was evidenced by his
keeping an open Table to Persons remarkable for their Birth or Learning. And
thus having moved in an high Sphere of Reputation till the 60th Year of his
Age, he died at Edinburgh, Ann. Dom. 1608. The present Representative of his
Family, is Robert Craig of Riccarton; who though he has an opulent Estate if 1200
l. per annum, yet follows the law after the Example of his Predecessors.

As for the Translation, all that can be said for it is this, that part of it
was shown to some of good Judgment before it went to the Press, who were
pleased to approve of it. It Is but seldom that Originals gain any thing by
Translations; and it is not to be supposed that the Publisher's English should
come any thing near the Author's Latin, of which he was known to be so great a
Master; but Care has been taken to express his Sense as far as the translator's
Capacity could reach it; and he hopes that some Allowances may be granted him
though the Style be not found very smooth and equal, seeing the Nature of the
Debate would scarcely admit of it.

ADVERTISEMENT to the Reader.
THere are some few Dates and Quotations on the Margin left out, because
wanting in the Latin Manuscript, as Page 83, and 144. The Transcriber, though a
good Penman, yet has neither understood Latin nor History well, nor was his
Copy ever perused by the Author. However, it is hoped that no important Mistake
has escaped; but if any Gentleman be so kind as to impart what he discovers to
the Bookseller, they shall be fairly considered if ever we come to a Second
Edition; and the Manuscript in the Lawyers Library at Edinburgh shall be
consulted, which the Publisher knew nothing of till this was translated. There
are also some Latin Verses and Terms of Art, which it was thought advisable to
exhibit without Translation, as tending more to the Embellishment of the
Discourse than any way needful; and the Verses especially would have sounded
harsh in English, except they had been turned into English Meter with a Flame
equal to that of the Original: But the Learned know them, and for others they
will understand the Controversy as well without them. The Translator begs a
favorable Censure, as having undertaken it for the Honor of his Country, and
committed no wilful Mistake. The Latin Manuscript may he seen by those who have
a mind to it, at the Book seller's.

Vale

ERRATA.
Page Line 18 19 read, (...) 24 4 r. prove that. 27 9 put, after those. 63 9,
after Client. 70 16 r. Logician. 89 28 r. several. 91 9 r. that question. 95 1
dele him. 133 ult. r. them for then. 166 24 for British r. Pictish. 191 11 r.
then for than. 229 20 r. History. 280 8 r. Vassals. 317 10 r. their Founders
for their Authors. 365 26 r. Alvarottus. 27, after Hottomann^s. 366 13 r.
Plantagenet. 420 11 dele, after David.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. OF the Occasion of ^riting this Book, and the Asserters of this
Homage. Page 1 II. The Definition and Form of Homage. 11 III. At what time
Homage began to be known in the World. 17 IV. At what time Kings began to reign
over that Part of Britain which was a Roman Province. 21 V. That the English
have no certain History before the Conquest, except those things which are
related by the Roman Writers, and Gildas or Bid. 34 VI. That all the Witnesses
brought for the Proof of this Homage are suspected. 45 VII. This Homage is not
consistent with the Feudal Law. 59 VIII. That neither Brutus, Ebrancus,
Clotenus, Mulmutius or Dunwallo, knew any thing of this Superiority, or exacted
it. 66 IX. Of Fergus 1. King of Scots, Coilus King of the Brittons, and other
British Kings till Cesar's Time. Page 78 X. What Condition the Scot^ were in,
and what Society they had with the Brittons after the Arrival of Julius Caesar,
and the Romans in Britain. 85 XI. Of the Departure of the Romans out of
Britain, and how the Whole was subjected to the Scots and Picts. 97 XII.
Concerning Arthur; whether he subdued Scotland, or required Homage from the
King of Scots. 109 XIII. Of Malgo, and other Kings of the British Line; and
whether they could pretend to any Homage. 122 XIV. Of the Saxon Monarchy, and
its Duration; and whether ever Scotland belonged to the King of England. 131
XV. A true Delineation and Description of the English Saxon Monarchy. 149 XVI.
Whether Cadvan, Ethelfred, Oswald, Oswin or Osbright, did demand this Homage.
159 XVII. Concerning Ethelwolph, Alured and Edward, Kings of England. 171
XVIII. Concerning Athelstan, who was the first that received Homage from the
King of Scots for Cumberland and Westmoreland. 178 XIX. Concerning Edmund,
Eldred and Edgar, English Saxon Kings, and whether they pretended any right to
the Superiority of Scotland. Page 212 XX. Concerning Ethelred, Edmund Ironside,
Canutus and Edward, Kings of England; and whether ever they pretended any Right
to Scotland. 226 XXI. That there is no probable nor likely Reason to be adduced,
that Homage was performed for Scotland during the Time of the English Saxon
Monarchy. 242 XXII. Of William the Conq^eror, and whether be pretended any
other Right to the Kingdom of England, than that of Conquest. 259 XXIII. Of the
Conqueror, and his Sons Rufus and Henry Kings of England; and whether Homage
was performed to them for Scotland. 268 XXIV. Of Henry II. and by what Methods
^e would have settled that Homage upon himself and his Heirs; and of the true
Form of this Homage. 284 XXV. That the Scottish Clergy are subject to no English
Archbishop in Spirituals. 309 XXVI. Of Richard and John, Kings of England; and
what was the Form of the Homage done to them. 326 XXVII. Of Henry III. and if
any Homage were performed to him. 337 XXVIII. By what Tricks Edward the First
sought after the Superiority of Scotland. Page 348 XXIX. Whether or not that
Senten^e was just, which Edward gave for Bruce against Baliol. 363 XXX. Whether
Sovereign Princes can render Themselves, and their Subjects, Vassals to another
Prince: And how by the Act of this very Edward, the S^periority was destroyed.
369 XXXI. A sharp Epistle from Pope Boniface the 8th to K. Edward, about the
Injustice of his War against the Scots; and Edward's Apology. 380 XXXII. Of the
various Success in this War against the Scots, and how all the English were at
last throw^ out of Scotland. 398 XXXIII. Of Edward II. and III. and Henry IV.
and whether they received Homage from the Scots. 405 XXXIV. A Brief and Summary
Conclusion of the whole controversy; with some new and strong Arguments against
this Fictitions Homage. 415
A Dispute concerning HOMAGE, against those who maintain that Scotland is (...)
or Feu-Liege of England; and that therefore the King of Scots owes Homage to
the King of England.
CHAP. 1.
Of the Occasion of writing this Book, and the Asserters of this Homage.
ABOVE two Years ago, I undertook a Treatise of the Manner of Fees; not that I
conceived my self capable of giving any new Light, or adding any fresh Luster
to the Feudal Law, after the Endeavors of so many Learned Men on that Subject;
but because, as is manifest to all Men, the Laws of our Country do flow from
thence, as from their Fountain, and have a Dependence on the Rules and Maxims
thereof. But the Mind of Man being naturally desirous of farther Knowledge, I
began likewise to enquire into the Laws of our Neighbors, to see if there
might not be also some Assinity betwixt theirs and the Feudal Law: for I
perceived that our Law agreed with that of England, and that the Customs of
both Nations di^ in most things agree with the Feudal Law; tho the English will
not own so much, (...) that they use no other Laws than their own, viz. their
Municipal Law. Yet I was discouraged from pursuing my Design, because I had but
little Knowledge in that sort of Law my self, and knew not of any Man who could
assist me. However, I did not abandon the Enterprise, as hoping to meet with
that in Books, which was not to be met with elsewhere.

Having therefore taken care to provide my self with some Books, and enquired
diligently of my Friends if they had any such by them; I was advised, by a
certain Person, that Rap^ael Holinshed, a late English (...), had writ much
concerning the Laws and Customs of the English; which I was a little surpised
at, because I had frequently made use of that Author, and never took notice of
any such thing in him* but upon his ^hewing me the Place in his second Book of
the Description of Brit^in, Chap. 8, and 9. I resolved on reading of the same,
to peruse all that he had writ upon the Subject, to try if I could learn any
thing further; and unexpectedly I met with (...), Lib. 1. Cap. 22* where he
pretends to show, how the Superiority of the whole Isand is (...) in the Kings
of England* And having (...) it over ca^efully, I found my Chole^ begin to
rise, and that it heppe^^d to me exactly as Hol^shed had fo^etold for there is
nothing, says he, which will vex a Scotsman more, or that he takes worse, than
to tell him, that Scotland is a Fee-Liege of England, and that the King of
Scots owes Homage to the King of England as his Liege Lord on that account: and
in truth, Holi^shed was so fan in the Right; for what can be more odious to
generous Spirits, or which way can you enrage them more, than to brand them
unjustifly with a Badg of Servitud^ (...)

But I was yet more in^ens'd, (...) worse, that none of our Count^y-(...) had
answered that Calumny, as if they seemed to own the Truth of it by their
Silence. But measuring others by my self, I am apt to impute it to the
Negligence of our Countrymen, who though Holinshed has been published this
sixteen Years, yet satisfying themselves with the Texture of the History, and
the Continuation thereof unto our own Time; they looked over those things which
he premises, as being only ornamental, and no way belonging to them. And
although we find it very often in the Body of Holins^ed's History, that the
King of Scotland had paid Homage to the King of England; I should for my own
part have slighted it, as a thing that could have no weight amongst the
Learned, because it was the Testimony of an Enemy in praise of his own Country,
according to the Distich against Poggius; Dum patriam laudat, damnat dum
Poggius (hosten;
Nec bonus est Civis nec bonus Historicus.
But it happened far otherwise, for Joannes Bodinus, Lib. 1. Cap. 1. de
Republica, falls into that same Error by reading the English Histories, and
writes, that the Kings of Scots did (...) acknowledge the Kings of England (...)
Liege-Lord; but they have now forborne doing so for about three hundred Years.
And Bernard Gerard a Modern French Historian, in Philippo 1. Lib. 7. asserts,
that Scotland is a Fee-Liege of England, although the Scots do at this time
deny it; and both those Authors are very Learned Men, though unacquainted with
our Affairs. And therefore lest by this Silence of ours, the Error should
spread further, I resolved to obviate the growing Distemper, by some healthful
Antidote, and to examine all the particulars of this Controversy with the
utmost Diligence. Holinshed might indeed be born with, if contenting himself
with his Argument, he had abstained from ill Language; but in his Satirical
Invective, besides what he says of our Poverty and Want, he upbraids us
continually with Sluggishness and Persidy, which by his leave, are Crimes that
may as justly be charged upon others. But seeing he has perhaps some reason to
charge us with Poverty, Leniter ex merito quicquid patiare ferendum est; we can
patiently bear what we deservedly suffer; for we may want Riches without being
criminal or justly reproached for our Poverty, and others may enjoy them
without any great Credit: So that I may say with Tacitus, I know not whether
the Gods have withheld Riches from us out of Love or Anger; seeing it is
possible as Horace says, -- Sub paupere tecto
Reges and Regum vita praecurrere amicos;
That Men of greater worth than Kings or Courtiers may live in mean Cottages.
But no Man can own himself Vicious, without being content at the same Time to
be reckoned Infamous; and notwithstanding all this, our Condition is such, that
our Poverty is no way burdensome to us, nor have we any occasion to beg greater
Riches from our Neighbors. And as for our Cowardice and Persidy, we shall
treat of them afterward.

The (...) which induce me to a (...) of this kind, are, First, the Duty which
I owe to my most gracious Sovereign, from whose Majesty and Authority Holinshed
would not ^ little detract by this Invective: for (...) be no Majesty where
there is not a Sovereign Command; neither does he retain the Rights of
Sovereignty, who acknowledges another to be superior to himself, or is obliged
when called on, to answer at his Court. The next Motive is Love to my Country,
which by the Homage, as thus (...), seems to be rendered (...) the Name of a
Kingdom, and is in a (...) deprived of its Sovereignty* and therefore it is my
design to vindicate the same from all imputation of Vasialage, lest that (...)
Calumny should obtain Credi^^, and lead Posterity into a Mistake, but chiefly,
lest others by a foolish Credulity should swallow down the Assertions of every
Author as undoubted Truths. For why is it not as lawful for me to clear my
Country from this odious Calumny, as for H^linshed by his insolent way of
Writing, to load it with Infamy? and I hope that our Neighbors will pardon me,
and not take this Work amiss, at least such of them who are of an equal Temper,
because I have not entered the Lists without Provocation; nor can they be justly
offended, if by solid and true Reasons, I deprive them of this little point of
Honor: for according to the common Saying, Turpi^s ejicitur quam non
admittitur Hospes* It Is more disgrace for a Landlord to be thrown out, than not
admitted; so it will be more for their Credit, if I make it appear, that they
never enjoyed this fictitious Superiority, than that they were beat out of it
300 Years ago. For as to the real Glory of the English Nation, who have filled
E^rope with the Fame of their Great Actions, I am neither desirous nor capable
of drawing a Vail over it. by this small Treatise.

To prove this Homage, the common sort of English Historians put all their Wit
and Art on the Tenterhooks, especially Geffrey of Monmouth, William of
Maimsbury, Henry of Huntington, Matthew Paris, Matthew of Westminster, Roger
Hovedon, Florence of Worcester, and Thomas Walsingham, all Monks: But they
content themselves with the bare Assertion of this Homage's having been paid,
and touch it but briefly in the Course of their History. But others carry it
further, and laying aside all Modesty, affirm, that this Homage was paid for
Scotland; though those are indeed but few, nor do they assert that it was ever
done above once or twice. But they who professedly handled this Question, were
two Kings, both of them of great Fame and Repute, Edward ^. and Henry VIII. the
former when sharply reproved by Pope Boniface VIII. for harassing the Scots
with an unjust War, on Account of that Superiority over them which he had
feigned to himself by an Erroneous Opinion, did for his own Vindication alledg
many Reasons, some of which were feigned, and others of them made nothing to
his purpose of proving that Superiority which he claimed over Scotland. But
Henry VIII. seeking for an occasion of War against King James V. of Scotland,
did at last pretend this for one, that he would recover by Force of Arms, the
Right of Superiority that the Kings of England had over Scotland, but which his
Ancestors had neglected; though we all know that there was another cause of
that War, which is also owned in the beginning of his Declaration: For James V.
having promised to meet his Uncle at York, that they might consult together
about the Conjunction of the Kingdoms, and what might be for their mutual
Advantage; he was at last compelled to break the Appointment, by the Authority
of the Pope and Papists, who then made no small Figure in the Kingdom, and were
afraid lest that Conference should have issued in a Reformation. Henry VIII.
being a Magnanimous Prince, provoked by this Aff^ont, and unwilling to bear it,
thought the Breach of the Appointment not to be a sufficient ^ause of War, and
therefore founded it upon the Pretext of regaining the former Superiority,
which gave rise to that called the nine Years War, famous for Mutual
Overthrows, but wherein the Scots did indeed suffer most. Both those two Potent
Kings abovementioned, the one in his Apology to the Pope, and the other in his
Declaration of War, do most tenaciously assert this Homage to be due from the
King of Scots, to the Kings of England, but with more Confidence than Reason;
and after them it is asserted by John Leland, who was supposed to have been the
Author of that Declaration. And Holinshed musters all their Arguments together,
but thinking them either insufficient of themselves, or at least having a Mind
to show the Goodness of his own Parts, and the Force of his Pen; he adds many
things of his own Head, wrests many things which he finds in other Authors,
feigns abundance as if they were made beforehand, and ascribes many things to
other Authors which they never so much as once thought of. But, Improvisum
aspris veluti qui sentibus anguem
Pressit humi, nitens trepidusque reprente resurgit
Attollentem iras and caerula c^lla tumentem.
So Holinshed being afraid to venture himself in the Lists, substitutes one
Nicholus Ad^ms a Petti^ogger in his Place, whose Arguments he pretends only to
repeat, without adding any thing of his own. But Holinshed ought to have
remembered that he is no less a Cheat who makes use of Counterfeit Writings,
than he who writes them himself; nor is he an honester Man who puts off false
Money, than he that coins it. For my own part, in refuting of Holinshed, whom I
choose to answer instead of all the rest, because he has collected all their
Arguments together, I shall only say by way of Preface, that I will bring
nothing to strengthen our Plea from any Scots Author, but what I design to
prove, I take from English Monuments and Histories, except when the plain Truth
of the History is industriously perverted by this Man; and in that Case I am
sometimes forced to bring things from our own Writers, to give Light to the
Point of History: And as I doubt not to make this Author's Malice and Ignorance
appear to the View of the World, neither do I refuse any Man for a Judge* who is
not altogether void of Judgment himself.

CHAP. II.
The Definition and Form of Homage.
THE State of the Question is this, Whether the Kingdom of Scotland be a
Fee-Liege of the Kingdom of England, and whether the King of Scotland owes, or
ever did pay Homage to the King of England upon that Account. The Affirmative
is stiffly maintained by all the English. The Scots not contenting themselves
with the bare Negative, though that be sufficient in Law, without any thing
else, so long as the Plaintiffs don't prove their Point, have both their own
Arguments, the likelihood of things past, and also the Presumption of Law on
their side, seeing they have been in Possession of their Liberty now for three
Ages, even by the Confession of the English themselves; and therefore except
the Plaintiffs do clearly make good their Plea, they must of necessity yield
the Cause. But that we may not proceed in unknown Paths, we must enquire what
this Homage is, whence it had its Rise, what is its Form, and when it came
first in Use.

This Homage then is a Profession of Fealty, which the Vassal is obliged to
make unto his Lord by Oath, upon the Account of some Benefit received. If we
examine the Terms of this Definition, it will appear that Homage and Fealty are
not the same: For Fealty is owing during Life, but Homage is only performed
once; Neither is there any Author, who mentions the Swearing of Fealty oftener
than once, during the Life of the Lord or Vassal. It is said also in the
Definition [ which the Vassal is obliged to make unto his Lord] because there
is a certain Neighbourly Fealty, when Men are bound to one another by Mutual
Oath and Covenant; but this is not the Fealty here mentioned, that being only
such whereby the Vassal is obliged to defend the Person, Fame, Dignity, and
Fortune of his Lord, and to procure and promote his Advantage as much as he
can. Nor is this a simple Obligation, but there is a Cause annexed, viz. on the
Account of a Benefit received; so that tho there should happen an Obligation to
Fealty by an Oath, except the Vassal receive a Benefit from the Lord upon that
Account, it is not called Homage, For those things, as I said, are Relatives,
and the one cannot be understood without the other, I mean a Fee, or Benefit
and Homage: for neither can there be a Fee without Fealty and the Profession of
it, nor Homage without an Antecedent Benefit. I said a Profession of Fealty by
Oath, because a simple Promise was not sufficient, and therefore the
Interposition of an Oath was necessary, for without that, it is not called
Homage, although the ^Obligation of Fealty be permanent. There was a double
Form of Oath used formerly in Fees, and I shall by and by exhibit that which is
in Practice now.

The Etymology of this Word is easy; for Hominium or Homagium, is the Action or
Profession of a Man: and the Doing of Homage is no other than a Man's
Professing himself to be his Lord's Man, and Promising to perfor^ his Military
Service faithfully when required, and sometimes also when he is not required;
for it is Fidelity alone which is performed and required in those Feudal
Actions.

I know that most Learned Men are of a different Opinion, and distinguish
Homage from Fealty thus; that the former is transacted with more Veneration
than the latter, that so they may make the Oath of Homage distinct from that of
Fealty; and thus they require two Oaths, whereas there is only one needful in
Law. But by their leave I make bold to say, it is not so; for there was only
one Oath, the Form of which was twofold in Law, and we don't read that any Man
did ever in that Case take two Oaths. I confess indeed, that among different
Nations this Oath was differently administered, in some with more, and in others
with less Veneration, but so as it was always performed with Reverence. For
Rollo D. of Normandy, when he received Neustria from Charles the Gross in Fee,
being (...) never required by any Christian Prince but the Pope, except that
the King of Bohemia, when he was first created by the Emperor, did him Homage
by prostrating himself at his Feet Albert. Crants. Lib. 7. Vandaliae, Cap. 31.
. In others, Bodinus says, that this is observed in performing Homage, that if
any Prince who is not a Subject be obliged to do Homage* and performs it with
his Hands stretched out in the Posture of a Supplicant, and put betwixt those
of his Lord, he swears Fealty to him in these Words, IN being present become
Liege-man to Prince R. on Account of such a Fee which I hold of him, and for
that Cause I promise Fealty, to him against All Men. But if he be a Vassal and
Subject, then he is obliged to lay aside his ^rms, his Hat, his Cloak, Spurs
and Gloves, and upon his bended Knees put his Hands in ^orm of a Supplicant,
betwixt those of the Prince o^ his Proxy, and swear Fealty in the ^ame Words:
So far (...) But in paying Homage to Lords, who are below ^he Dignity of
Princes, there is less Veneration ^s'd, so that it is sufficient if one stand
in^ ^everend Posture however, and desire In^vestitute, or the Renovation of it
with all Humility, a^ we express it. Amongst ^he Spaniards, the Kissing of the
Hand alone was reckoned enough for Homage, according to Roderick of Toled^ Lib.
5. Cap. 25. de Rebus Hispaniae.
. So that the ^orm thereof depends on the different Way and Customs of each
Nation. Fealty then is that Obligation by which the V^ssal is bound to his
Lord, and Homage is the Swearing of that Obligation. Nor is this overthrown by
what is writ concerning the Controversy betwixt the Emperor Frederick ^. and
Pope Adrian IV. For when the Emperor required that the Bishops should swear
Fealty to him as was meet, which was nothing else but doing him Homage, the
Pope opposed it, as appears by his Letter to Frederick ^^devicus, Lib. 2.
, in which that wretched Pope pleads, that his Ecclesiastics should be
exempted from doing Homage to the Emperor: What becomes, says he to the
Emperor, of the Fealty which you have promised and sworn to St. Peter and Us?
how can you observe it when you require Homage from those who are Gods, and are
called the Sons of the most High, (meaning his Bishops) when you demand Fealty
of them, and enclose their Sacred Hands betwixt yours? These things, I say,
make nothing against my Opinion of Homage, seeing it is apparent from thence,
that Fealty may be performed without Homage; and in that very Controversy which
was finished by a Treaty, it was agreed, that the Order of Bishops should be
exempted from Homage, but not from Fealty* which was no otherwise than to
promise Fealty in apt words without swearing it; and from that Time to this
very Day, Bishops were accustomed both to promise and perform Fealty to their
Princes, but not obliged to swear it, as in our Time they swear only to the
Pope as their Lord: but at what time Fee or Homage began to come in use, I
shall explain in the first Proposition following.

CHAP. III.
At what time Homage began to be known in the World.
TO return to my purpose, and that the whole Matter may be set in a due Light,
I shall premise four or five general Propositions, that by considering them and
the Arguments brought in this Answer, the Truth of the whole Question may
appear even to the most unlearned, and afterward I shall take Holinshed's
Arguments and Proofs to task.

Then let this be laid down as the first General Proposition and Rule, That
before Charlemain's Time, or the Year of Christ 800, the Name of Fee-Liege,
Homage or Superiority were unknown to the World; and Peter Rebuff a most acute
Lawyer, in his Declaration of Fees, says, that the very Name of Fee or Feu was
unknown, until the Books concerning the use of Fees were published, which
happened in 1170. But his Opinion does not at all please me, for although the
Name did not come to us before the publishing of those Books, I am of the Mind,
that it was of an older Date, first, amongst the Lombards, and then in France:
for Charles the Great after he had put an end to his many great and important
Wars, growing Old, began to distribute the Countries which he had conquered
amongst his deserving Soldiers; to one a Country, to another a Town, to a
Third a Farm, reserving to himself a Claim of Fealty; and they were to maintain
the Charge of the War by their Product, and to take care that the Product might
be sufficient for that end, and thus it came on by Degrees: but the Names of
Clients, Vassals, and those of an inferior Order as Vavasors and Vavasins, were
scarcely heard of in this Age; nor before those Times, that is to say, about
the Year 900, is there any Writer who mentions the Names either of Fee, Vassal
or Homage Bern. Gerard. in Charlemain.
. Neither was Charles the Great the first who founded Hereditary Fees, nor were
they ^steem'd or looked upon as an inheritance before Hugh Capet's Time, who
that he might oblige the Nobility of the Kingdom which he had usurped, and
assure himself of them for Time to come, made those Temporary Benefits which
Charles and his Successors had granted only for a Time, or at most for Life,
hereditary to his own Followers, and then Homage began to come in use, and at
that time the Names and Foundations of Lords, Vassals, and of Fee it self,
which Charlemain had laid, were confirmed; and this Charlemain died A. C. 813.
and Hugh Capet began his Reign Anno 944.

In Spain the Name of Homage and Superiority, began to take place about this
very Time; for Sancius, Son to Ranimirus, received both Homage and Tribute from
Gondisalvus, who reigned beyond the River Dorium. Nor is there any Spanish
Writer who makes mention of Homage before this Time.

As to what concerns Britain, it was late^ before this Feudal Law and those
Names came hither, and that only from France and along with the Conqueror, as I
am apt to conjecture; yet our Authors alledg that Homage was first mentioned in
Athelstan's Reign: But the Ancient English Laws before his Time, which were
printed at London by John Day, in 1568. under the Title of (...) make no
mention of Superiority; and if the English have any thing which they can
produce for themselves, or in Confirmation of their Opinion, I desire them to
name me any one Writer, who before that time makes the least mention of Fee or
Homage. I take no notice, as I told them, of the mention of Fealty, since that
may be neighbourly, and used amongst Friends and Confederates, neither indeed
will they find it mentioned in that sense; and if the Names of Fee and Homage
were not known to the World till that Time, with what Countenance can the
English Writers, and chiefly Holinshed, affirm, that Brutus divided the Island
of Britain, which was so called from himself, amongst his three Sons, Locrinus,
Camber and Albanactus, but reserved the Superiority of the whole to his first
born Locrinus, seeing the Names of Superiority, Fee, or Homage, were not
publicly used for 900 Years or more after Christ, nor for any thing I know
read in any Author before that Time? Brutus was before Charlemain almost 2000
Years, and therefore to ascribe that to Brutus, which had not a Being in Nature
till almost 2000 Years after him, is perfectly to impose upon Mankind. If in
Iustinian's Time, which was about the Year 500, there had been any mention of
Homage, Superiority or Fee, it would never have been omitted by the famous
Lawyers of that Age. As for that fictitious History of Brutus, it is exposed to
ridicule and hissing by our Buchanan; and that I may speak softly for fear of
offending those that hear me, it is esteemed a Milesian Fable by Polydore
Virgil, a most Learned English Historian, and therefore he calls it a new
History lately dropped down from the Clouds, and unknown to all the Ancients till
Geffrey of Monmouth's Time, of whom afterward.

CHAP. IV.
At what Time Kings began to reign over that part of Britain which was a Roman
Province.
THE second Proposition is this, That before the departure of Aetius the Roman
Legate from the Province of Britain, which happened in the Time of Arcadius and
Honorius, there was no King over all that part of Britain which was a Roman
Province; nay, I affirm, that even after his departure there was no certain nor
stable Form of a Kingdom in the same, until the Conjunction of the Saxon
Heptarchy, which fell out about 835, in the Time of King Egbert; and what
Reasons I have for this Assertion, I shall by and by declare.

Julius Caesar (whom Tacitus deservedly calls a very great Author) was the
first who entered Britain; and as a Person who loved Glory, and that he might
not be any way wanting to himself on that Head, he testifies that he had
searched diligently into the Antiquity of the Nation which he had conquered,
but could never find by what or how great People it was inhabited, nor learn
their manner of War, or by what Customs they lived Lib. 4. of his Commentaries.
: and afterward he asserts, that the innermost Parts of the Island were
inhabited by those who call themselves Natives by Tradition, but the Maritime
Places were Possessed by those who had come over from Belgium, either to make
War or get Booty Lib. 5. of his (...).
. So that if either Cassibelan or Cassiv^lan, or any other had at that Time
governed all Britain, as is feigned by those Trifle^s, Caesar would never have
omitted it, because it had been more for his Fame and Glory to have fought with
the Monarch of all Britain, than with the petty Princes of one Town or
Province, or at least he would have some where made mention of this Monarch of
all Britain. But Caesar speaks of four Kings in Kent it self, which is but a
Corner of England; and besides those he mentions King Imanuentius, and
Mandubratius, and that almost every City had its own King, of whom most part
sent Ambassadors to him for Peace before he came over, than which there can be
nothing more contradictory to Britain's being then one entire Kingdom. And
Caesar himself makes no mention of Cass^belan, except in his second Expedition,
neither does he then dignify him with the Title of King: He does also take
notice of his having made continual War with other Cities before his Arrival,
and describes his Boundaries. Nay, ^ede an Englishman (and the only ancient
Writer that they have) does not call Cassibelan a King, but General of the
Army, and says, that he only commanded over one City which was taken by Caesar.
However it appears from both Histories, that he was a prudent Person, and
entrusted with the Management of the War against the Romans by the other Cities
and petty Princes. Tacitus in the Life of Julius Agricola, who also was his
Father-in-Law, and went to and again through the Heart of Britain for eight
Years Time together with his Forces, and could not possibly be ignorant of the
Truth, does yet more plainly make for us. Of old, says he, before the Arrival
of the Dictator, the Britains were governed by Kings, but now they are broken
into Factions and Parties by their Princes; nor is there any thing of more
advantage to us against those most valiant Nations, than that they don't
consult together: for the Union of two or three Cities to withstand the common
Danger is very Rare, so that while they fight singly, all of them are
conquered. But if any one King had been set over them all, he might both have
obliged them to hold public Meetings to withstand the common Danger, and have
prevented the fighting of single Cities by themselves. And a little after he
adds, When the Britains bewail their Servit^de, they complain that formerly
they had each of them their particular Kings, but that now they have two
imposed over them, viz. the LEGATE who preys on their Lives, and the PROCTOR or
Questor who seizes their Estates. These things sufficiently prove, there was
not any one Man who at that time commanded over all Britain, but that their
condition was the same with their neighboring Country of Ireland, which
Tacitus affirms to have been then also governed by many little Princes, as it
was by five Kings when it submitted to the English. If in Kent alone there were
four Kings, how many must we allow to all Britain? for both the Silures and the
Brigantes had their own Kings, as appears from Tacitus; and Claudius Caesar
triumphed over Gethus King of Orkney. In France there were as many Kings as
Provinces, as is manifest from Caesar; and that it was the like in Spain
appears from Livy. V^piscus gives an account of nine Kings in Germany, who
convened to meet Probus Caesar Fl. Vopisc. in vita Probi.
. In Illyrium there were five, and in Greece there were seventy Kings who
combined in the War against Troy Dictys Cretensis.
Whence it is so much the more to be wondered at, what this Man means to assert
so rashly, that the Britains had a form of Government different from other
Nations, and that one Man reigned over the whole. What is writ concerning
Lucius King of the Brittons or Britains, that he was the first who embraced the
Christian Religion, I am of Opinion, that he was not a Britain, or at least not
King of all Britain, and that that Epistle of Pope (...) to Lucius is a
Counterfeit; for none of the Roman Pontiss, either at that Time or for some
Ages after, before the Emperor Phocas who reigned in 602, did ever arrogate the
Name of Pope to themselves; and the very Name Lucius is a Roman, not a British
Name. It Is certain that none of the Ancients except Bid, make any mention of
this Lucius, and neither does his Computation agree with the true Chronology;
for that Epistle of Eleutherius, printed at London, bears date in the Year of
Christ 169, at which Time Eleutherius was not Bishop or Pontif of Rome: but
according to Bid, those things were transacted betwixt Lucius and Eleutherius
in the Year 156, and so there is the Difference of thirteen Years betwixt the
Calculations. To which may be added, that Eleutherius in his Epistle takes
notice, that Lucius and the Nobles of Britain desired that he would transmit
the Roman Laws to them, that they might make use of them; but this is not very
probable that any Nation would have born with the change of their Ancient Laws:
and moreover, when that Letter was writ, Britain was a Roman Province, and from
the Time that it became such, which was 140 Years before, had already received
the Roman Laws: for the Romans imposed their own Laws upon their Provinces, and
abolished their former Institutions. I shall only bring one Example from
Caesar. Lib. 7.
where Critognatus aggravating the severity of the Roman Government, says, if
those things which are done in remote Nations be not known, look but into the
neighboring Country of Gallia, which being reduced to a Province, their Laws
and Customs are changed, they are subjected to Roman Officers, and oppressed
with perpetual Servitude. But let us consider what Eleutherius answers, he
says, that it was always in his Power to reject the Roman and Imperial Laws:
Now if this could be born with in him who was a Roman Subject, and also a
Christian Bishop, let others judge; certainly his calling Lucius God's
Vicegerent in his own Kingdom, does not agree well with the Roman Authority, of
which be ought to have been very tenacious. There are some places of Scripture
mentioned in that Epistle, which are not very well accommodated to the Matter
in Hand; and in fine, the whole Letter savours nothing of the Learning of that
Age. These are the Things which occasion my doubts of the Truth of that
Epistle; neither is Bid a sufficient Witness for things done 600 Years before
his Time. Yet it may be that the Romans then suffered some petty Princes to
enjoy the Royal Name, as Tacitus writes concerning King Cogidunus, who he
affirms was left King by the Romans, not to govern, but that according to the
ancient and long received Custom of the Romans, they might have Instruments of
Servitude, and amongst those Kings as well as others. Moreover, in what part of
Britain this Lucius did reign, or how far his Command extended, Writers don't
say, nor does it appear more that he was King of Britain, than that he was King
of Scotland, which was then part of Britain: and therefore it is plain that the
Romans had petty Princes in this Island, who might serve them as Instruments of
Servitude; but there was no Man entrusted with the Government of the whole
Island, or that had Authority to assemble the People.

Tacitus says, that Caratacus and Galganus were Generals who excelled in
Nobility and Power, yet does not give them the Name of Kings, except that in
one place he calls Caratacus King of the Silures, but not King of Britain, as
Cartismandua reigned over the Brigantes; but from both of them it is apparent
enough that the Brigantes, Silures and Iugani had each of them their own Kings.

But that this whole Matter may be the more easily understood; let us examine
what was the Roman way of governing a Province, and at what time Britain became
a Roman Province. As to their way of Government, it is certain, that when the
Romans had subdued a Country, they used to exauctorate the former Magistrates,
reduce the Country into the Form of a Province, and substitute new Roman
Magigistrates, viz. a Pr^etor and Questor, the one to administer Justice to
those of the Province, and command the Army, and the other to gather in the
Tribute; so that there was no Province which did not pay Tribute to the Romans,
and obey their Magistrates, except that some Cities, for their former Services
to them, were exempted from Taxes and Tributes, and left in the Enjoyment of
their Ancient Laws: And so it was as to Kings, whose Realms they used to leave
free on that same Account, and then they were called the Roman Associates: for
as Caesar testifies elsewhere, Fabius overcame the Arverni and Rhuteni; but the
Romans pardoned them, and did not reduce them into the Form of a Province. But
when either a Country or Kingdom was reduced into a Province, first they took
away their Kings, that they might have no General to head a Rebellion, then
they appointed a Praetor or Praeses, who had the sole Command; his Badges were
six Fasces, or Bundles of Rods, with Axes; and Lictors, or Sergeants went
before him: The Praetor summoned Courts and Conventions, decided private
Causes, or delegated others to do it; he commanded the Army which was assigned
him for Defense of the Province, raised new Troops, casheer'd others, and had
the Administration of all things relating to Peace and War. The Questor was
over the Tribute, Imposts and Customs, whether of Money or Provisions, and kept
the Public Accounts, as I formerly observed from Tacitus: Neither was there
any thing more unusual in a Province than a King, nor a greater sign of
Rebellion, than for those of a Province to set a King over themselves, as we
shall afterward show in Carantius. Nor could those of a Province obey a Roman
Legate and a King at the same time, for the Power of the one did wholly abolish
the Power of the other; for of what use could a King be without Power or
Command, Army, Jurisdiction, Tribute, Customs, or Authority over the
Provincials? Nor is it likely that the King would obey the Legate, who was at
that time his Superior, or that the Legate would obey the King. Those who would
inform themselves further concerning the Ancient Law of Provinces, may read
Charles Sigoni^s, who has published a particular Treatise on that Subject, and
they will find that I have advanced nothing but Truth.

It remains that I show at what time Britain was reduced into a Roman Province.
Some ascribe it to Caesar the Dictator, as the first who subdued Britain by
Arms, made it Tributary to the Romans, and demanded Hostages: Yet seeing he did
not enter into the furthermost Parts of the Island, but returned again to
France, he seems rather to have pointed out than subdued Britain for his
Successors. Tacitus says, That Legions and Auxiliaries were brought over by
Cla^dius, and that then the People were subdued, their Kings made Captives; and
the first Consulat established in the Person of A. Pla^tius, 140 Years before
the Reign of this Lucius. So that it seems altogether monstrous to imagine,
that the Britains enjoyed their own Laws and Kings in the Time of Eleutherius;
and Tacitus sets down the Number of the other Governors of Britain to his own
Time, that is to say, till Domitian's Reign. Certainly Claudius did so please
himself with this Conquest, that he led the British Kings in Triumph, and took
care to have his Son saluted by the Name of Britanni^ns. I have perhaps been
too prolix upon those Things, but I was willing to undeceive our Neighbors as
to their Opinion, that Britain, though reduced to the Form of a Province,
enjoyed its own Laws and Kings, who were, according to this vain Conceit,
endowed with Sovereign Authority; and therefore I conclude it to be highly
improbable, that during the Time of the Romans in this Island, any one King had
the Government of the Provincial Britains. Gildas, whose Credit is most
esteemed by Polydore Virgil, and Bid, the one a Britain, and the other an
Englishman, are very full in their Evidence for this Matter; for Gildas
affirms, that the British Government was administered by their own Countrymen
before the coming of the Romans, but makes no mention of any Kings. Next, he
says, that the Island was governed by the Romans, whom he calls Transmarine
Kings; and blaming the Cowardice of the Britains, he says, that the Romans
brought Laws into the Island, and subdued the unwarlike and perfidious Nation,
not so much by Arms and Engines, as they did others, but by mere Threatenings
and Menaces of Punishment; and he describes their Cowardliness so graphically,
that he says, the Romans at their going away, set some of the Natives over
them, who to use his own Words, were to make the Whip cleave to their Backs,
and the Yoke to their Necks, that so they might chastise the deceitful Nation;
not so much by Military Force, as by Rods. Bid acknowledges that Britain was
unknown and inaccessible to the Romans before Caius Caesar's Time: so that
neither while the Roman Empire stood, nor before Caesar, was there any King
over all Britain, or any who governed that part of it, which was not subject to
the Scots and Picts. Bid writes, that the Romans reigned in Britain 470 Years,
from the Time that Julius Caesar entered the Island; but that any other reigned
in their Province during that Time, there is no probable Reason to be alleged
for it. But when the Roman Power declined, and that the Britains were not able
of themselves to withstand the Invasions of the Scots and Picts, they begged
Assistance from the Romans, with lamentable Complaints, but in vain. So that
being rejected, they chose, in a tumultuary manner, one of the Ancient British
Blood named Vortigern, whom they called Captain, or King, for I find him under
both those Titles; and after him Aurelius Ambrosius, who was the only One of
the Roman Stock left in Britain. Vortigern perceiving that he had not Strength
enough of his own to oppose his Enemies, persuaded the Britains, who were then
at a Consult about their Common Safety, to hire Saxon Auxiliaries, which issued
in their Destruction; for when the Saxons, who came at first only with three
Ships, observed the Fruitfulness of the Island, and the cowardly Temper of the
Inhabitants, a greater Number followed in 35 Ships, turned their Arms against
the Britains, and divided all Britain into seven, some say nine Kingdoms,
amongst themselves; From that Time, which was in the Year of Christ 456, or
according to others, 459, that Hengist arrived in Britain, until King Egbert's
Reign, under whom the seven Kingdoms were United, It Is certain, that there was
no King who reigned over all Britain; for what is writ of King Constantine, and
the Auxiliaries which came from Britany in France, are mere Fables: Nor does
Bid and Gildas, the Historians of those Times, make any mention of them. But
to what End is all this Discourse, may some say? Or what relation have those
things to the Homage which was owing, and performed by the Kings of Scots? I
answer, very much; for if there was not at that Time one King over that Part of
Britain, which was a Roman Province, but either none at all, or more than one,
it must necessarily make out what we affirm, viz. that there was no Homage due,
during that tract of Time, from the King of Scots, seeing there was no other to
whom it could be due, nor no Fealty sworn, when there was none to whom it could
be sworn; for to suppose that it was performed to all of them together, is
absurd. But if any Body object, that by this Proposition I derogate from the
Credit of the whole English History, I would pray him to suspend his Judgment,
until he has also perused the following Proposition, and compared it with that
which went before.

CHAP. V.
That the English have no certain History before the Conquest, except those
things which are related by the Roman Writers, and Gildas or Bid.
THIS is the third Proposition; That most of what we find in the English
History before the Conquest is vain and trifling, and almost all of it
uncertain, except what is writ by the Roman Historians, and Gildas or Bid; and
especially what is said concerning Brutus, C^ssibelan and Arthur, is wholly
vain and deserves no Credit. For the Original of Britain, and the first
Transactions of the Inhabitants, lies buried in a greater obscurity than that
of the Cimmerian Darkness. Caesar testifies, that there were no Monuments, nor
Memorials of Antiquity in that part of Britain which he saw, though it was the
chief Part then, as it is still, both for the Number and Wealth of the
Inhabitants. But amongst those who inhabited the Inland Parts, and were nothing
so cultivate, it was far less to be expected: so that when he enquired at them,
concerning the Original of their Nation, and the first Inhabitants of the
Island; he tells us, that he could learn nothing of certainty Lib. 4. and 5.
. But Tacitus In vit^^ Agricol^^^
(whose Father-in-Law Agricola entered into the innermost Parts of Britain,
searched it thoroughly for eight Years Time, and from whom nothing could be hid,
because of his Authority) is more express for us; and says, that as to what
sort of People did first possess Britain, the Inhabitants, like other
Barbarians, could give but very little Account. Who then can bear with Geffrey
of Monmouth, a most impertinent Trifler, as the English themselves call him;
who forms such a distinct Story concerning Brutus his Grandfather,
Great-grand-fathers, Son's Mother and Offspring, and in a word, his whole
Pedigree, and describes their Names, Affairs, Life and Death, though above
twenty Ages before himself, as accurately as if he had been their
Fellow-Citizen, or writ his History in their own Time; though he did not begin
the same until the Year 1150, or thereabouts? And whereas Caesar testifies,
that there were no Memorials of things past kept in Britain; and that the
Antiquity of that Nation was altogether unknown: Yet Geffrey Lib. 4. c. 1.
relates, that when Caesar came to the opposite Shore of the Morini, saw the
Island, asked who the Inhabitants were, and understood the Name of the Kingdom
and People, by Hercules, says he, they the Britains, and we Romans, are of the
same Original. For Aeneas after the Destruction of Troy, was our Founder; and
Brutus begotten by Silvius, Son to Ascanius, and Grandson to Aeneas, was
theirs; but certainly they know nothing of Warfare: and abundance more which
deserves rather to be entertained with Laughter and Scorn than confuted, seeing
they do so plainly contradict Caesar's own words. I submit it then to the
Judgment of the Candid Reader, what Evidence either the Britains or English can
produce for those things. It is certain that there can be no preservation of
the Memory of things past, nor continuation of the remembrance of things
present, without the help of Letters, seeing the Memory of Man is terminated by
the space of one Age. But it is evident from T^^itus, that there was no use of
Letters in Britain before Caesar; for he relates that in the Time of his
Father-in-Law Julius Agricola, who was Domit^an's Legate in Britain, the British
Youth began to be instructed in Roman Letters, (as the Americans are now by the
Assistance of the Spaniards) that they excelled in the same, and that Agricola
used to prefer their Wits to those of the Gauls, because they studied
Eloquence: and therefore before that time, viz. the Year of Christ 83, when
Domitian began to reign, it is apparent enough, that there were no Letters nor
Memorials of things past in Britain. But some may object, that although the
Romans wrote nothing concerning British Affairs, yet there were many British
Writers, who it is probable would not have left themselves destitute of some
Monuments or Memorials of their own Affairs: I answer, how could they continue
their History, or by what Characters did they write it; for the Latin Letters
had not then reached them, and they were ignorant of the Greek for many Ages
after. But Gildas shall answer this Question for me, who is the eldest of all
the British Writers, was born in 498, three Years before Arthur if there was
any such Person; and wrote about 540, after the Ruin and Dissolution of the
British Kingdom: and when he bewails the Subversion of his Country by the
Saxons, he testifies, that there were no Monuments of the British Writers left,
or if there were any, that they were either burnt by the Enemy, or dispersed
and lost by the Exile of his Countrymen, so that there were none of them to be
seen in his Time: Here he plainly distinguishes betwixt these two, either that
the British Historians left no Monuments behind them, which is most likely, or
that they were destroyed by the Fury of the Enemy. Whence then can those
numerous Victories, and illustrious Actions of the Britains be instructed, when
all Authors do unanimously call them a cowardly and perfidious Nation? I
believe that it happened to them as it did to the Holy Relics, for about 1000
Years after Christ's Passion, all the Parts of the Cross on which he suffered,
as also the Column, and other Relics now in Esteem, were found in places far
distant from one another; and if any Body ask how they could come thither, they
forthwith have recourse to Miracles, by which they confirm the Matter. Polydore
Virgil, a Modern Writer, testifies the same Thing, as having with extraordinary
Care, searched into all the Writings of the Ancient Britains, and for that end
unlocked all the Cabinets and Records of Monasteries, and that by Henry the
8th's Command, which no Man did ever neglect with Impunity. This Author then
speaking of the History of the Britains, affirms, that the whole is full of
Obscurity, and that he had no leader whom he could follow. But Geffrey of
Monmouth, and our Holinshed reckon up Fathers and Grandfathers, and not only
deduce the whole Series from the Egg with the double Yolk, the celebrated
Trojan War, but from a much older Period, viz. from Gog and Magog, and old
Father Dis, lest they should come short of the Gauls; and in fine bring it down
from the Time of the Gigantick Duels which they would fix as the Poll-Star of
the British History. So much concerning Gildas. We shall touch on Geffrey of
Monmouth afterward, when we come to his Arthur. After Gildas comes Bid, who
brings down his History as far as 734, almost to the Reign of Ceol Wulphus King
of the West Saxons: His Credit I shall every where preserve entire, to let it
be seen that I deal fairly with Holinshed; From his Death, or rather from the
End of his History, which falls about 734, to the Time of Henry I, who began
his Reign in 1110, I maintain that the English have no certain History nor
Writer, except the Fragment of Ethelverd who flourished about 1090, be reckoned
an History; for I don't acknowledge the Fragment of Ingulphus, who preceded
Ethelverd twenty Years, as an History; and Asserius Menevensis wrote only
concerning the Transactions of his own King Alfred. But lest I should seem to
have affirmed any thing rashly, I shall bring English Historians to witness
this Matter. William of Malmsbury Lib. 1. Fol. 23.
says, that all the Memorials of Transactions from the Death of Bid, to his
own Time, which was in the Reign of Henry I^ about 1142, were utterly lost; nor
was there any who followed that study, or endeavored to pursue the Thread of
the History; and one slothful Man being always succeeded by another more
slothful, the desire of Learning was for a long Time abated in this Island, so
that he had no other way to inform himself concerning the Transactions of those
Times, but by the discourses of ancient Men. And the Author of the Prologue to
Malmsbury's first Book, does ingenuously confess, that the History of 225 Years
after Bede's Death is entirely wanting: so that even by his Evidence, there is
nothing of certainty to be found in the British History from 734, which was the
Year of Bede's Death, to the Year 957, but all things were founded upon the
Rumors of ancient Men, and it may be old Wives Fables, which being collected
together into one Book, and put in a Latin Dress, made up as it were the shadow
of a History, from whence Holinshed does nevertheless bring most certain
Arguments to establish his fictitious Homage. Florence of Worcester agrees in
most things with Malmsbury, for they were Contemporary. He says, That after
Bede's Death the English History ceased, but that for his own part he had left
things to Posterity, either as he found them in the Text of the English
Chronicles, or as he had them from the Relations of Men worthy of Credit, or
heard and saw them himself. As to what concerns the Text of the English
Chronicles, he mentions them that he may deceive his Reader with the greater
Facility; for if there was any Chronicle of those Times, seeing Florence lived
about the Year 1148, they must still remain in the Archives, which hitherto no
English Author did ever alledg, or has been able to demonstrate; for that
Chronicle, as is observed by the Prologue, did only set down the Number of
Years: And as to those things which he wrote either from the Relations of
Persons worthy of Credit, or what he heard himself as certain Truths, neither
those things which are related by credible Persons, nor such as one may think
of undoubted Verity, are sufficient to biass any Man to the Prejudice or Injury
of those against whom they are related, except he produce his Authors, that so
there may be room for our Objections against them, as is usual against the most
legal Witnesses; and that we have enough of rational Grounds for Objections, no
Man of Candor who reads these things can so much as doubt. The Scope of the
whole is this, that it may be manifest to all Men, that there is no perfect nor
Authentic English History, and that there is no Authority nor certain Proof to
be had from thence, as to matters of Moment, before Henry the second's Time,
when Authors began to commit public Transactions to Writing, except what is to
be found in Gildas, Bid, and Ethelverd above mentioned. But to come to the
matter in Hand, if the English can produce me one approved Writer, even of
their own Countrymen, who composed a History from the Time of Bid to that of
Henry the second, I shall willingly give Ground, and yield this Proposition.
They who would be further informed, as to the uncertainty of the English
History, may read the Prologue to Malmsbury's first Book, concerning the Lives
of the English Bishops, with the Prologue to Walsingham's History, and they
will be obliged to confess, that I have neither asserted any thing of my own,
nor relied upon the Authority of any Scotsman: and therefore if there is
nothing of this fictitious Homage to be found in Caesar or Tacitus, nor in
Gildas and Bid who came after them, and that the rest of the History is
wanting, and that there is no other Author but Bid, who writes of the English
Saxons and their Affairs, it must necessarily follow, that whatever things were
writ concerning this Homage before the Conquest, may safely be denied without
hazarding our Eternal Salvation; for we must not be rash in believing Authors,
who neither saw what they write themselves, nor can bring any approved
Historians to vouch what they say; as for Example, Matthew of Westminster, and
Florence of Worcester, do both write of things before our Savior's Birth: but
if they neither produce Witness, Author nor Surety for their Fidelity, I don't
see why we ought to believe them: Nor is the bare Credit of an Historian
sufficient for those things which were before his own Time, if he did not read
them in other Historians, but had them only from the Relations of credible
Persons; for in that Case the Reader must judge what is to be believed, and what
not.

It Is a general and grievous Complaint amongst the English, that hitherto they
have no Historian of Worth, of which they alledg this to be the Cause, that
there is no Reward proposed, answerable to the Toil and Fatigue The Prologue to
Thomas Walsingham.
: But in my Opinion they are much mistaken, and assign that as the Cause, which
is none at all; for there is no Place where Virtue and Learning is more
bountifully rewarded than in England, and consequently no Nation which abounds
more with Learned Men. But they have such Historians as they covet and desire,
viz. such as pursue Fables instead of Truth; for they cannot endure to have
their Histories purged of such: Hence it comes to pass, that no Learned Man
attempts it, because he sees that he must either offend the People, or lose his
Preferment and Dignity, if he omit any of Geffrey's Fables, but those are not
the Laws of History: For he who is engaged in such a Work, ought to observe two
things; first, That he write nothing that is false, and next that he omit no
part of the Truth. Polydore Virgil endeavored to rid his History of those
Milesian Tales, and old Wives Fables, but he durst not openly detract from
them, though he does manifestly distinguish his History from that new one of
the Babbler Geffrey of Monmouth; yet we see he is in no Esteem amongst the
English, though he be their only Historian, who has writ with any Judgment: yet
in many places he deals unfairly with us, which he does tacitly acknowledge
himself, when he says, that he only repeats what others have writ, but abstains
prudently from making any Judgment of his own.

CHAP. VI.
That all the Witnesses brought for the Proof of this Homage are suspected.
THE fourth Proposition is concerning the Nature of the Evidence, which
Holinshed makes use of in his virulent Invective, and of those which are also
brought by other English Historians. That sort of Evidence is chargeable with
three Faults; First, That it is Monkish; Secondly, That it is Domestic; And in
the third Place, that it is the Testimony of one Enemy against another, as the
Times then were. As for the Testimony of Monks it is justly rejected; for Monks
being as it were dead to the World, and consecrated to Christ alone, they have
no legal Right of giving Evidence: for the business of Monks is not to teach,
but to mourn, and they are commanded to abstain from all secular Affairs;
neither can they exercise the Office of a Clergyman or Scrivener, confirm the
public Faith, or draw up any public Act to which Credit may be given; but on
the contrary, the Title in the Canon Law does expressly enjoin them not to
concern themselves with secular Affairs: They cannot be Judges in Temporal
Concerns, nor so much as Witnesses seeing they are accounted as dead, and the
Voice of Monks is reckoned ghastly. And therefore I say, that if they ought to
lead a mournful and folitary Life in their Monasteries, and to abstain
altogether from secular Affairs, certainly it is very seldom, if ever, that we
ought to trust them in public Affairs, seeing they are not competent Judges
concerning them. For it is not very probable that either the Secrets of
Princes, or things belonging to the State, were ever communicated or imparted
to them any otherwise than by common Report, seeing they keep at the greatest
distance imaginable from all manner of Action, and do oftentimes embrace things
doubtful as certain, and Fictions for matter of Fact: and therefore this
feigned Homage must of necessity fall to the Ground, for which there is no
better Evidence than that of a Monk; for it will not be admitted as a good
Conclusion, that because a Monk says so, therefore it is true. This is
certainly the common Opinion of all the Learned, that Monks are not to be
received as Evidence, especially in great Matters, and such as have no relation
to the Monastical State and way of Living, which they themselves did not see,
but only had them by the Relations of such as they thought credible Persons. It
may be they took notice of Victories and the times of War, but they were
altogether uncertain as to the Conditions of Peace, Circumstances and Causes of
Things, Agreements betwixt Princes, and what was done in Public and Private
amongst Foreign Nations.

But Holinshed will object, that this is not the Testimony of one Monk, but of
all of them that ever conveyed to us the History of things past. I answer, that
this I can deny if an equal Interpretation be allowed me, but however I will
grant it; Yet this must be confessed, that almost all of those who wrote the
English History till within this hundred Years were Monks, and followed
whatever they found in former Histories or Manuscripts, lest they should
derogate from the Honor of their Country; so that they made it a matter of
Religion to vary, in the least from them. As for Example, let Florence of
Worcester be supposed the first who wrote of this Homage and Fealty; for I
believe he is the very first whom our Neighbors can produce: William of
Malmsbury and Henry of Huntington, who were almost Contemporaries, followed
him, as did also Roger Hoveden, Matthew of Paris, Thomas Walsingham and Matthew
of Westminster, the first leading his followers into an Error, as we see among
Cattle, that if one break over the Ditch the rest follow; and conceive that
they may lawfully do so when they have the Credit of their Predecessors to
support them. To this may be added, that they discourse of things which not
only happened before they were born themselves, but at a much greater distance
of Time, when mean while they have nothing to make good their Point. For what
is it which others then, and they now, may not forge concerning things which
were done many Ages before; if, as we say in Court, they produce no other cause
of Knowledge but Hearsay and deceitful Fame, which grows as it runs, and of a
Fly becomes an Elephant? Moreover, in those Writings of the Monks, there
appears a mighty Ignorance of our Affairs: and seeing they don't so much as
know the Names of our Kings, they can far less be acquainted with their
Actions. In the Catalogue of the Kings of Scotland, there is neither Iresius nor
Rinaldus to be found: but those Monks write that both of them performed Homage
to the King of England. That there were then any Kings of Cumberland, Gallowdy,
Man, and the Western Islands, was not so much as heard of; yet these good
Monks, that they might advance the Glory of their own Nation, were not afraid
to leave it to Posterity, that all those Kings or Roytolets, together with
Edgar the petty King of Scotland submitted their Necks to the Collar of (...)
K* of England, and were tied to his (...) to want him over the River; but the
^^^orance of Monks is become a Proverb: and (...) for my own part, I don't
think that they understood the name of a Liege-Fee, or what was meant by the
Homage which they talk of, seeing that is understood by few but those who have
some knowledge of the Law, or Judicial Proceedings. Nor were the Monks free from
Perturbations of Mind, and their Passions of Love toward their own Country, and
Hatred against their Enemies; and being shut up in Cloisters; they are so much
the more obnoxious to their Passions and Affections, from which Historians
ought to be freer than others. Nor was there any Order of Men who did more hunt
after Court-Applause by Flattery and Assentation, than they; as knowing that it
was a sure Way of obtaining the Favor of their Princes. Neither must this be
past over, that it is no new thing among English Historians to have Fictions
for Matters of Fact, supposititious Stories instead of Realities; and sometimes
true Histories corrupted either by adding or diminishing, as they thought it
conducible to the Honor of their Nation. Polidore Virgil is a famous Witness
of the former, as to the Counterfeit History of Gildas and others, and the
Author of the Prologue to Matthew of Westminster, is Evidence for the latter,
in those Words; You must not wonder, says he, though you perceive most Authors
to be so much injured as to have their Writings adulterated by the Fraud of
Posterity, seeing some Men are come to that height of Impudence, that by adding
and diminishing, they make any Author, how pious soever, to patronize the most
execrable Villainies, according as they have a mind to it. How easy then was it
to insert in those Monkish Writings, when they take notice that the K. of Scots
did sometimes pay Homage to the K. of England, as the latter did to the K. of
France; that the said Homage was paid for the Kingdom of Scotland, as we shall
afterward explain more at large? Nay, the Truth of the Monastic Writings is
in many places questioned by Holinshed himself in his History. We must also
consider the Time when those Historians wrote, which was in the Heat of the
War, when the Nations were eagerly fighting about this very Homage, viz. in the
Reign of Henry the Second. About whose Time lived Florence of Worcester,
Malmsbury, Huntington and Hovedon; and Thomas Walsingham, and Matthew of
Westminster, wrote in the very Heat of that bloody War betwixt Edward I, II,
and III. and our Kings about this Homage. In which Quarrel, there fell 300000
Men: And who was it that did not at that Time endeavor to maintain the Cause
of his P^i^ce and Country with his utmost Zeal, and labor to make the Equity
of the same appear unto all Men; and patronized it not only by Word and
Writing, but by Arms? What strange things did the Monks feign against Henry II.
on account of their St. Thomas of Canterbury, who was in my Opinion the most
villainous of Men? And that they might advance the Reputation of him, and his
Ecclesiastical Order, they speak diminutively both of the Cause and Power of
their own Kings. These things prevail with me, as perhaps they may do with the
Learned World, not to be over-credulous in believing whatever the Monks assert;
but that their Testimonies, which are suspicious enough of themselves, ought to
be exactly weighed with the Credit of History, and the Probability of the
Matters of Fact; as I shall take care to compare them together when they occur,
that the impartial Reader may according to his own Candor, judge what is most
like to be true. For it is in every Body's Mouth, Non audet Stygius Pluto
tentare, quod audet
Infamis Monachus, plenaque fraudis anus:


Which may be Englished, Old Nick himself durst ne (...) attempt for Shame
What Is (...) by ^loystered Monk, and doing D^^e.


We have more to say why we suspect the Evidence of the Monks, when we come to
their particular Testimonies.

We object against their Probation in the second place, that it is domestic;
and how little Cre^^^ is to be given to that sort of Evidence, the Customs of
every Nations, the Law it self, and daily Experience, does sufficiently
demonstrate. This one thing I affirm, that there is no Nation in Europe which
admits of domestic Evidence where either the Wealth or Dignity of the Lord is
concerned; it being certain that such kind of Witnesses are every where
rejected, except the Matter be done within the Walls of his own House, and so
as it cannot be proved otherwise, or that they are produced against the Lord
himself: and therefore though the Testimony of those Monks might perhaps be
taken against their own Prior or Fellow-Monks, as to things done within the
Walls of their own Monastry; yet they are not to be admitted as to the Secrets
of State, Peace, War, Judgment of Courts, or Conditions of Peace, and things of
greatest moment. What the Civil Law says concerning domestic Evidence, or the
Authority thereof* appears plainly by the R^script of Valerian and Galien;
Whose Words are these, The Credit of Domestic Evidence is also rejected by the
Civil Law. And in saying so, those Emperors seem to follow that Answer of Paul,
the Tenor whereof is this: Those Witnesses which the Plaintiff brought from
home, I would not so much as examine. But the Emperors Dioclesian and Maximiam
are yet more plain: We ought to make use of those Witnesses, say they, for
maintaining the Truth, who choose to give Evidence for Truth without either Fear
or Favor. And therefore those who give Evidence ought not to depend neither on
the Power nor Favor of those for whom they give it: For who will affirm, that
the Monks had not the Favor of their Princes in view, or were afraid of their
Power, when they writ those things? Lawyers say, that such Men are not reckoned
proper Evidence, who can be commanded to be Witnesses; and therefore Subjects
in the Cause of their King and Country, an enfranchised Servant in the Cause of
his Patron, and a Servant in the Cause of his Master, are not to be admitted as
Evidence. The Reason given by the Doctors is, because they swear whatever they
are commanded, and suppress the Truth for fear of their Masters. But in our
Controversy there are none who give Evidence against us but Englishmen,
subject to the K. of England's Power; whom he could compel to give their
Testimony, and dictate how they should depone: Moreover, they are such as give
Evidence for their Country and its Dignity, and are consequently Witnesses in
their own Cause; for that such things as are writ for the Safety and Honor of
a Nation, pertain to every one of the Country, no wise Man will deny. And so I
absolve this Proposition, having confirmed it by the Custom of all Nations, the
Precepts of all Laws, and Reason it self. And therefore the Domestic Testimony
of the English for the Proof of this feigned Homage, is not sufficient to
prejudg a third Person, but ought to be exploded whenever it occurs, as being
justly suspected in all its parts. All the Doctors of the Law maintain, that a
Domestic Testimony ought to be rejected. But I shall demonstrate afterward
that we have no great reason to be afraid of the Testimony of those Monks; but
on the contrary, that they will make very much for our Cause, if we be but
allowed to put a favorable Interpretation upon their words.

The third Fault is yet far more grievous; for we are not only pressed with the
Domestic Testimony of the English, but because the Evidence of an Enemy
against an Enemy, as Times then were, is received as authentic, and believed
more firmly than the Oracles of Sibylla or Delphos. Law, and daily Practice, do
both admonish that Hatred and Enmity ought to be far from a Witness; for
there is none of the Affections more violent, or which do sooner incline to
Wickedness, than Hatred, when it seizes upon the Mind of an impotent Man; and
therefore capital Enmity does exclude a Witness from giving his Evidence in
Law. And moreover; We not only forbid the Testimony of one Enemy to be received
against another in Law, but do the like if they be but newly reconciled; and
refuse also the Testimony of such as dwell with an Enemy. But when those things
were writby the English, there were not only Capital Enmities in the Case, (I
call them Capital, when two Nations fight with incensed Minds to decide which
shall be Sovereign, and have the Command of the other) but Mortal Enmity, and a
Hatred exceeding that of Thyestes, when the one Nation conspired to the
Destruction of the other, and bent their whole Strength, Actions and Purposes,
to that End; that the Enemies being utterly exterminated and rooted out, the
Survivors might enjoy their Place; and how often the English have attempted
that against us, will appear from what follows: Then whether or not any
Testimony can be admitted from those who not only raged against us by Word and
Writ, but committed the most atrocious Cruelties upon us by Violence and Arms,
without standing upon what was lawful or unlawful, let those judge who are any
way conversant in Affairs: For my own part, I am not afraid of the Censure of
any Man who is able to make a just Judgment of things.

There are three things by which all Inferior Matters are governed amongst us,
viz, Law, Custom, and Reason; and certainly neither the Laws nor Customs of
Nations, nor Reason it self, will allow such sort of Testimonies: For the Law
restrains Capital Enemies from giving Evidence against one another. Neither is
there any more Credit to be given to an Englishman against a Scots-man, than
to a Scots-man against an Englishman, or to a Frenchman against an
Englishman, than to an Englishman against a Frenchman: For what is there
which the English and French don't forge against one another? The Carthaginians
and Romans do mutually (...) of England and Scotland, manage their Affairs? For
no Englishman is condemned either for Theft, Robbery, or Fire, except the
Matter of Fact be proven by English Witnesses: Neither can a Scots-man be
adjudg'd to make restitution, except the English produce Scots Witnesses
against him. And how much more equally did Hannibal the Carthaginian proceed,
when Dasius and Blas^us did mutually accuse one another of betraying Salapia to
the Romans? for he rejected both their Testimonies, because, says he, they were
mutually influenced thereunto by Hatred and Emulation. And Edward I. when Cumin
accused Bruce of aspiring to the Crown of Scotland, rejected the Accusation as
proceeding from one Rival against another. Shall such then be admitted to give
Evidence against one another? Or will any honest Man give Credit to their
Testimony? But the equal Judge will suspend his Opinion as to both Parties,
until he weigh^ the Beginning, Progress and Event of things. Those three
Faults, or Objections, ^r^ every one of them sufficient of themselves to
invalidate an Evidence; but if they concur in one Man, there is no Body so
unjust as to suffer him to give in his Evidence, or that will give any Credit
to him in Judgment, especially when he is not upon Oath.

CHAP. VII.
This Homage is not consistent with the Feudal Law.
OUR fifth Proposition to prove the Negative as to this Homage, is taken from
the Nature of a Feu or Fee; for by the Feudal Law, it is not possible that
Scotland can be a Feu of England, or that ever the King of Scotland could be a
Vassal thereof, or the King of England his Superior: For a Fee comes from the
Lord, and is wholly owing to his Liberality and Bounty, who settles some part
of his Patrimony upon his Vassal or Faithful Servant, (for so are Vassals
called in the Feudal Law) that he may be Faithful, pursue the same Interest,
have the same Friends and Enemies with his Lord, and serve him honestly in War,
as becomes a Soldier. Therefore a Fee is the most strict and obligatory Bond
of Humane Society, by which the Lord is obliged for ever to the Vassal, as well
as the Vassal to the Lord, that the one shall defend the other's Life, good
Name and Estate, to the utmost of his Power, against all Men, by whatever
Kindred, Alliance, or Obligation conjoined, (Parents only excepted) yea, even
against their own Children, which they are either to put out of their Family,
or reconcile them to their Lord. And the like is to be performed by the Lord,
in respect of his Vassal, if injured by any of his Lord's Children; for either
the Lord must reconcile them to his Vassal, or exclude them from himself and
his Family. If e^her of them wage War, the other is obli^^d to assist him with
his Forces, Arms, Horses and in a Word, to the utmost of his Power, even though
he be not called; he is also to withstand his Enemies, never to enter into a
League with them, and the one is to have the same Friends and Enemies with the
other. If any Difference happen betwixt the Lord and Vassal, it is not to be
decided by Arms, but referred to Judgment; yet the Feudal Law will more readily
allow Arms to the Vassal, if his Lord deny him Justice, seeing the Fault is
rather presumed to be in the Lord. Neither has the Vassal any other way to
force his Lord to make Compensation for his Damage. So the Vassal must not
discover his Lord's Secrets; he is obliged to defend the Castles committed to
his Care in his Lord's Name, and for his Use; to hazard his own Life for his
Lord's in Battle* and if the Vassal for (...) his Lord in the Time of Fight, he
is deprived of his Fee. The Vassal is obliged to attend at his Lord's Court,
when ever a public One is summoned, whether he be called or not, and there to
assist with his Counsel, and the like out of Court, as often as he shall be
called upon, when his Lord is to con^ult about things of Moment. He is also to
receive the Invest^ture of his (...) from his Lord, nor ought he to enter upon
his ^ee without it; and in fine, he is obliged to maintain a sincere and
inviolable Fidelity toward his Lord; and when he swears the same, he performs
Homage.

The Lord, though he be no less obliged to be faithful to his Vassal, than the
Vassal is to him, yet he is not bound to swear, this Respect being due to the
Lord, that he is to be believed without giving his Oath: but in other things,
this Trust is managed with equal Faith and Benevolence on both Sides; so that
the Lord is no less bound to the Vassal in all the things abovementioned, than
the Vassal is to the Lord, and the Obligation is reciprocal. But if any of
those things be found, as to the Case of Scotland; If the like Offices were
performed, either by the English to the King of Scots, or by the Scots to the
King of England; if the Kingdom of Scotland was ever part of the Patrimony, or
under the Protection of that which is now called the Kingdom of England, except
it were a long Time before the English Monarchy had a Being, as Englishmen
themselves confess, so that the King of Scots could neither hold his Kingdom as
part of the King of England's Patrimony, nor by his Bounty: If there were not
always more than Capital Enmities betwixt the two Nations; and if there were
not the most cruel Actions that could be, War, Slaughters, Devastations,
Burnings, bloody Battles, and more than Vatinian Hatred betwixt the two
Kingdoms: If the King of England did not always stir up Enemies against the
Scots, as we shall make it evident afterward, when we come to speak of the
Picts, and Edward Baliol; and on the other Hand, if the King of Scots did not
assist the King of France with all his Might against the King of England, both
by sending Auxiliaries into France, infesting them at Home, and provoking them
to fight, and always preferred the French King's Interest to the King of
England's, even in the greatest of his own Difficulties and Dangers, (which was
neither the part of a Vassal to his Lord, nor of a Lord to his Vassal:) If ever
the King of Scots appeared at the King of England's Court or Parliament, either
to give Advice, or receive Judgment: If ever any King of Scots was invested by
the King of England, or desired the Renovation of the Investiture; or if the
Consent of the King of England was ever expected, or desired at the
Inauguration of our Kings: we shall not deny, but that the Kingdom of Scotland
owes the Fealty of a Client and Homage to the King of England, and that the
King of Scots shall be accounted his Liege Vassal and Client, and bound to all
Services as such. But seeing there were always those Grudges and Hatreds
betwixt the Nations that we read of, and that almost without any intermission,
for above 1000 Years; What Man who is capable of making an equal Judgment, will
give it as his Opinion, that the King of Scots owes the Fealty of a Client to
the King of England, or that he is his Liege Subject?

Those who describe Britain, and the Customs of both Nations, do unanimously
affirm, That there was seldom any Peace betwixt them, the one attempting to
enlarge their Dominions, and the other to keep their own; and I have often
heard it said proverbially in France, That such things will come to pass when
there is Peace betwixt the English and Scots: Which was as much as to say, that
such a thing will never happen, or not till the Greek (...). Though by the
Blessing of God, since we are all agreed in the Light of the Gospel, there has
been a (...) and entire Peace for this forty year^ and upwards, which never
happened before, since the first Original of the two Nations; and that it may
be continued for all Time coming, every one of us ought earnestly (...) him who
is the Author of Peace, and alone able to effect it.

These t^^ngs being premised, it will be manif^st from the Nature of a Fee, to
any Man who is not already prejudged, or sworn to the Sentiments of another in
either of the Nations, that the King of Scots owes no Homage to the King of
England: For except they prove the Affirmative, the Negative is ^vident of it
self, as having the Presumption of the Law on its Side; for by the Testimony of
the English themselves, we have been in possession of our Liberty for these
three Ages last past, and acknowledged no Superior.

Now I come to the Confutation of the particular Proofs, brought by Holinshed,
or as he says, by Nicholas Adams, a Pettifogger, who, in my Opinion, has but
very little Skill in the Law; and seeing all those Proof^ which are brought
against us, consist in Examples, which rather demonstrate what was done, than
what ought to be done, I shall divide them into three Classes or Ranks: The
first shall be of those which are believed to have been done in the Time of the
Kings of the Britains, or Brittons; the second of those, which happened in the
Time of the English Saxons; and the third of those, which Holinshed, who is
very prodigal of his Faith and Credit, writes to have happened since the
Conquest. Yet so as we must always take the five general Propositions before
mentioned along with us, that we may not seem to recede from them in the least;
but I shall endeavor to wipe off those things which he has, by the height of
Fraud and Calumny, writ against us, and endeavored to fix on us by his vain
and petulant Pen, after having examined the Particulars duly and exactly.

CHAP. VIII.
That neither Brutus, Ebrancus, Clotenus, Mulmutius or Dunwallo, knew any thing
of this Superiority, or exacted it.
HOlinshed's first Argument is deduced from that Commentitious Division of
Britain amongst Brutus his three Sons, Locrinus the eldest, Camber the second,
and Albanactus the youngest: for the English do stiffly assert, that to
Locrinus he gave Loegria or Britain, viz. that part of it which was a Roman
Province, or possessed by the Angles, with the Superiority of the whole Island;
to Camber, Cambria or Wales; and to Albanactus as the youngest, the least
valuable share, viz. Albania, that is, the whole Country benorth Humber. And
all this we shall grant, that we may not be troublesome, and so we shall
suppose that to have been, which never was, although there cannot be any thing
said or imagined, that is more vain than this Brutus and his Fable, as Buchanan
bath evinced. But Albanactus being killed, which happened very speedily after,
as they say, Albania, which was his Portion, accrued to Locrinus, and not to
Camber, by the Right of Primogeniture; and this we shall not deny, though it
helps but very little to prove the Conclusion which Holinshed undertook. But
this Right of Primogeniture is still observed amongst the Scots, says he, so
that when the youngest of three Brethren dies, the eldest succeeds as Heir of
his whole Estate, and the Second is past by. And therefore seeing the Scots
observed the same Laws and Customs with the Britains, it necessarily follows,
that they were their Subjects; and this is the Form of his first Argument.
Homer's Nestor is commended by all Men, because that in marshalling his Army,
he posted his stoutest Soldiers in the Front and Rear, and placed the most
faint-hearted in the Middle, that they might be compelled to fight, by the
Magnanimity of the former, and the Valor of the latter. I thought that
Holinshed would have taken the same Method, and placed his strongest Reasons in
the Front, which it would not have been easy for our Countrymen to rencounter.
But let us see what this first Argument is: It is true, that in England, when
the Youngest of three Brethren dies, the Eldest succeeds to his Estate by right
of Promogeniture, and the Second is passed by: but there is nothing more false
than to say, that the same Custom is observed amongst the Scots; for if the
Question about Albanactus his Successor, had been decided according to our
Customs, or in our Courts, Camber would have succeeded to his whole Estate, and
not the least Share of it would have come to Locrinus: Then what are we to
expect from this Man in the Conclusion, when he does so manifestly stumble at
the Threshold? And what if we should grant him this, that Locrinus should have
succeeded to Albanactus, that is, to the Government of all Britain according to
our Law? How will he thence prove, that the Scots are subject to the English?
Will it necessarily follow, that because they observe the same Laws, Rites and
Customs, that they are their Subjects? It had been better argued according to
the Laws of Disputation, that they were the same People, or that the one drew
their Original from the other; and yet if he had done so, it had not been
according to the Rules of Logic neither; for those who worship the same God,
and observe the same Laws, Customs and sacred Rites, are not always to be
looked on as the same People, and much less that one of them must needs
therefore be subject to another. For the second Table of the Mosaic Law, the
Law of Nations, the Civil Law, this our Feudal Law, and also the Right of
Primogeniture, are common amongst many Nations, which yet are distinct from one
another in their Empire. Kingdoms and Jurisdictions, and are not united by any
common Ti^^

Tacitus, speaking of the Laws of Succession amongst the Germans, says, that
they lest their Horses to such of their Children as were most fierce and expert
in War: but who will thence infer, that the Germans were subject to the
Britains, because they observed the same Right of Primogeniture? How much more
judiciously does Tacitus leave it at an uncertainty, whether the Aravis^i in
Pannonia, descended from the German Osi, or whether the Osi were a Colony of
the Aravisci that came into Germany; when yet, says he, they use the same
Language, Customs and Institutions? Or because the Grecian Laws, afterward
known by the Name of the twelve Tables, were brought from Athens and the other
Towns of Greece, and embraced by the Romans; will it thence follow, that the
Romans paid Homage to the Greeks, or acknowledged them as their Liege Lords? It
often happens in Kingdoms, that whenever the Profit of King and People
persuades them to it, or that there are any Hopes of Advantage from it, that
the Customs observed in one Nation, are transferred to another, although they
be distinct in Empire and Jurisdiction: and thus many of the Laws of the Danes
and Brittons, are still in force in England, and yet that Kingdom is subject to
neither of them; and there came as it were a great Inundation of French or
Norman Laws with the Conqueror from France into England, insomuch, that the
English at present are governed by no other Law: but they will not allow that
it follows thence, that England is either a Liege Fee of France or Normandy.
Whence it appears, that what this bad Historian, worse Lawyer, and yet worse
Logicician infers, that one Nation is subject to another, because of their
agreement in Laws, or rather in one particular Law, is altogether void of
Reason; and by that same Argument, he may as well prove the English to be
subject to the Scots, as the Scots to the English: for a communion of Laws, and
much less an agreement in one Law, does not subject one Nation to another, nor
indeed unite them. Otherwise by as many Laws and Customs as we disagree from
the English, we are as many ways disjoined; for no Body is ignorant, that in
some things our Law differs from that of England: and therefore Adams or
Holinshed infers very weakly, that one Nation is subject to another, because of
the Identity or Communion of one Law or Custom. Moreover, Holinshed and others
make Albanactus the Youngest of Locrinus his Sons; whereas Edward the First, in
his Letter to Pope Boniface VIII. calls him his Second; so that to reconcile
those when neither of them is to be credited, were the part of a Man who has a
Mind to mispend his spare Time. This is also of the same Nature that Holinshed
derives the Prerogative of this Primogeniture from Brutus, but Edward I. from
the Customs of the Trojans, whom if Holinshed had followed, he had consulted
the Common Tranquillity much better, seeing by the common Institutions of both
Nations, be might have argued, that they had One and the same Original, and
were the same People.

The only thing I wonder at is, how this Superiority came to be continued to
these Times: for if Locrinus had the Superiority of Albany, and succeeded to
Albanactus deceased, it necessarily follows, that the Liege Fee was
extinguished with Albanactus, and that Albany returned to the Superior Lord,
per consolidationem utilis Dominii cum directo, as is usual in Vassalages,
where the Lord of the dominant Estate succeeds to the Lord of the Subordinate,
or as the Creditor succeeds to the Debtor, and per contra; and so this
Superiority evanish'd in its Infancy, being stifled with Albanactus, who did
not long outlive his Father: Nor was it ever for any thing that I know,
revived again. And if we would examine this Fable of Brutus in every
particular, which is the very Foundation of this Plea, it would vanish into
Smoke; and so all this Proof, with the Author of it, must be buried in
darkness. He who would be further informed as to this Fable, may read our
Buc^anan, who exposes it as a Subject of Laughter to all Mankind. Perhaps I
have been more prolix than was needful in refuting this Argument; but because
those kind of Arguments are so often repeated by Holinshed, I resolved to
answer them to the full if there were more of them.

His second Argument is brought from Ebrancus, who was King of the Brittons, as
he dreams, and fortified the Castles of Du^^barton and Edinburgh, the two
strongest in Scotland. Therefore, argues he, those Countries were then under
the Command of the Brittons; and to use Holinshed's Words, Ebrancus was then
seized of them, so that the Scots held them by the Bounty of the King of the
Brittons. We will grant that those Castles were built by Ebrancus, though they
^e rather fortified by Nature than Art: And (...), or Alcluith, is a Town in
South-Britain on the River Don, both according to Matthew of Westminster and
Bid Lib.^ 1. Angl. Hist. cap. 12.
himself, in the Slaughter of Hengist. But if we insist on the Confutation of
all the Follies of Holinshed, and this petty Lawyer, it would require a
Twelvemonth to peruse it. If any Body argue, that the King of Scots, who is
now possessed of those Castles, owes Homage to the King of the Brittons because
he built them; by that same way of Arguing, the English Saxons owe Homage to
the Brittons; and the Normans, who are now in possession, owe Homage to the
English Saxons, because the English did by force of Arms seize the Lands,
Towns, Castles, and in fine the Countries of the Brittons, as the Normans threw
the English out of their Possessions; and yet the English Saxon never
acknowledged the King of the Brittons, nor did the Norman ever acknowledge the
King of the English as his Superior or Liege-Lord: Or, because the Israelites
built Towns and Castles for Pharaoh, did he serve them and owe them Homage, or
were the Israelites then seized of Egypt. But in those Cases he who is
strongest by Arms, has the best Title in Law, though neither that nor the other
Argument touch the Scots, there being none of them at that Time in Britain. Nor
is there any mention of the Word ( Sasinaru^) Seizings, for almost 2000 Years
after in any Writer; and therefore that Objection is rejected as trifling, and
unworthy of an Answer.

The third Argument speaks of Clotenius; who is affirmed to be mentioned by the
Writers of both Kingdoms, as having reigned over all Britain; and what is meant
by that, we shall see by and by. But no Scots-man did ever mention this
Clotenius: Nay, Holinshed himself does not say that he reigned over all
Britain, but only over the Mountainous Country of Cornwall, from whence he had a
very long Way to go and command in Scotland, either by Land or Sea. Nay, in
this Clotenius Holinshed does not obscurely call the whole Fable of Brutus in
question, and says that his Offspring failed in Clotenius, but that too much
Self^love drew him aside, that he might have occasion of insulting over us more
freely. But if Clotenius did reign over all Britain, as our Author will have
it, then there was no Part of it which held of him in Service or Fee, whether
he consider the Parts as Homogeneous or Heterogeneous: for as Lawyers speak, A
Man's own Estate cannot hold of him in Fee or Service; for Service or Vassalage
is required from another's, and not his own. But what does this concern the
Scots, who were not then in Britain? Or what relation has it to the Homage of
the Scots, which he undertook to prove? So that this Instance of Clotenius is
so foreign to the Purpose, that it neither maintains Holinshed's Opinion, nor
refutes ours; for though we should grant all that he says concerning it to be
true, it will not be of the least Advantage to his Conclusion.

But the Scots, says Holinshed, received the Law concerning Duels from
Mulmutius Dunwallo the King of the Brittons, who was the first that made it,
and they do still retain it: Therefore, says he, the Scots were then his
Subjects, because they received that same Law. That the Law concerning Duels
was first instituted by Mulmutius, none of the Ancients did ever affirm; nor do
I know from whom he has it. If he has it from none of the Ancients, what does
he bring to enforce our Belief? To play the fool on the Credit of a Great
Author, is almost the part of a wise Man, says the Comical Poet; but to rave
without any Authority, is plainty the part of a mad Man. This Argument also
coincides, and has altogether an Affinity with the first: But to say, because
the Scots embraced the same Law, that therefore they were Subjects, is a
perfect Paralogism, as I said before. He might with better Reason argue, that
we are now subject* to the English, because we make use of the same Language,
the same Translation of the Bible, and delight in the Bow as they do; and
therefore I shall not insist upon the Confutation of him, having said more than
enough to this Way of Arguing: For if all Nations, as this Man infers, who
embraced the Custom of Duels, obeyed the King of the Britains, or did him
Homage, then Palestine must have belonged to the Britains; in which Goliath and
David fought a Duel long before Dunwallo's Time. And in like manner, Asia
Minor, and the whole Kingdom of Troy, for their Diomedes fought a Co^^bate with
Aeneas, as did Paris with Menelaus, and Hector with Ajax and Achilles. Italy
must also have belonged to the Britains, because of the Duel betwixt Pallas and
Turn^s, and a little after betwixt Turn^s and Aeneas; all of which happened
long before Brut^^ was born. And in the Time of the Romans, Titus Manlius
fought a Duel with Geminius Metius, Papyrius Cursor with Gallus, and Torq^atus
with another of that Name: And hence it will follow, that Greece was under the
British Empire, because of the Duel betwixt Neoptolemus and Eumenes; and the
same must be said as to Spain, in which G^rbi^ and Orsoua fought a a Duel for
the Principality of the Town called Ibes, Africanus being Judge. I may alledg
the same as to Den^ark, France, and Germany, in which there are still many Laws
concerning Duels; and especially in the Laws of the Lombards, amongst whom all
Probations were made by Duels.

Britain would indeed have been mightily obliged to her Holinshed, if he could
ha^^ brought all the Countries where Duels were used under her Subjection; for
there was never any who extended the Confines of the British Empire so far. But
no wise Man would have ascribed the first Institution of Duels to the Britains,
seeing it was common to all the Northern Nations: For Saxo Grammaticus writes
that Frotho K. of Denmark made a Law that all Controversies should be decided
by the Sword. But I pass over Holinshed's Trifles, who ascribes the Original of
Primogeniture and Duelling to his Brittons, tho they be both mentioned in the
Holy Scriptures long before Brutus his Time. Now what I pray do these three
Arguments signify for Proof of the Homage?

CHAP. IX.
Of Fergus I. King of Scots, Coilus King of the Brittons, and other British
Kings till Cesar's Time.
HE has composed such an History of Coilus and Fergus, as he never received
from any English or Britton Author. Nor can he name me one of his own
Countrymen, who has mentioned this Fergus or Coilus. If he confess that he had
it from our Historians, as he must needs do, why does he not relate it
faithfully as he had it? Or how comes he to pervert the Relation of his Author?
But it is easy to conjecture why he did so, or at least he may be pardoned to
derive the Original of our Nation from a Night-robber, as he feigns him to be,
seeing he is not ashamed to draw the Pedigree of his own from Brutus a
Parricide. And suppose that Fergus had done such a thing, I don't see why he
should be upbraided with it; for the very Attempting of such an Enterprise,
has consecrated the Name of Quintus Mutius to Eternity, although it had no
effect. The History does also take notice, that the Scots forced the Camp of
the Brittons, and put their Army to flight: But Holinshed, such is his Modesty,
suppresses that. Our Countrymen did not come from S^ythia, as this unlearned
Author conceives, but from Ireland, as is manifest from Claudian and Bid; nay,
and it may be inferred from this following Verse of Glaudian's, that all
Ireland was called Scotland: -- Totam cum Scotus Iernam
Movit, and infesto spumavit remige The^ is.


And again; Scotorum Cumulos flevit Glacialis Ierne. For why should Ireland
lament, except it were for the Slaughter of its own Inhabitants? But Claudian
hints, and that not obscurely, that the Scots had assembled all the Strength of
Ireland to invade Britain, which was then governed by Stilico. I have Scots
Authors, who wrote about 812, and mention that when the Danes invaded Ireland,
and determined to settle there, that they were overcome in Battle by the Scots.
And in the Life of Charles the Great, writ by an uncertain Author, but one who
lived at that Time, Ex fragmentis antiquissimis Historiarum quae circa Annum
Domini 850. conscriptae sunt, and typis excusae apud Claudiu^ Chappelet
Lutetiae I 588.
this following Passage is found: At that Time a Norman Fleet having entered
Ireland, an Island of Scots, an inn^merable Multitude of Normans fell in Battle
against them, and the rest made a shameful Retreat, Whence it is manifest, that
that Island was not only inhabited by our Countrymen, but that the Government
was also in the hand of the Scots. Or if we should be descended from the
Scythians, whose name Reiner^s Reinecci^s, a Person well versed in all
Antiquity, says we do still retain, I don't see why we should be reproached
with it, seeing the noblest Nations in Europe derive their Orignal from them;
and Charles the Fifth reckoned it one of the things wherein he had reason to
glory, that he was descended from the Goths and S^ythians. But at present the
Question is not concerning the Original of our Nation, but about the Homage.

Nor is what he subjoins, any more to the Question in hand, viz. that Coilus
the Second expelled the Scots out of Britain; whereas our Historians attribute
this to Sic^lius; and hereby the Homage is plainly subverted: for Lords don't
use to drive out their Vassals; and the Scots chose rather to be Exi^es, than
serve such malicious Masters, or acknowledge the King of the Brittons as their
Lord. The Story is thus, though Bid runs it over very briefly; Our Countrymen
being divided into Factions, and ha^ing fought it so eagerly with two mod^ll'd
A^mies, that there were scarcely 800 le^t alive on both sides: the King of the
Bri^tons; who watched for an Opportu^^^y, and was desirous to exterminate that
Nation, which he had formerly attempted ^o subdue by force of Arms, but in
vain, p^r^eiving their Strength now to be brok^^, expelled them the Island. But
(...) as to the Manner of their Return* though it had been the part of a good
Historian either to have mentioned both, or said nothing of either.

What he writes of Sicilins, that he never de^i^ted from infesting the Scots;
and that (...) Re^da, Thereus, Fin^a^^^, Iosina and Durstus, Kings of Scotland
who ^^cceeded immediately one after another, with a continual Wa^, until they
sub^^^ed themselves to him as his Subjects, and acknowledged him for their
Superior: We must enquire whither it be true or not. The History or Names of
those Kings he finds (...) no British Author* so that he has them only f^o^ us:
and if either he, or any other Englishman can produce an Author for this
notorious Falsehood, we will either give him an Answer, or yield the Cause: For
the Babbler Geffrey of Monmouth, of whom we shall speak anon, leaves him here
without defense; nor is there any mention of those Kings to be found in him.
Nay, Holinshed in his whole History, is perpetually silent as to this Sicil^us
his Victories over the Scots, or their Surrender of themselves unto him. But
perhaps he thought that he was obliged to use more Modesty in an History, than
in a Declamation; where he could blab out whatever came in his Head. However,
it is a Sign of a dishonest Mind either to speak things that we don't know, or
to suppress those which we do, if either Danger or Dishonor may thereby accrue
to another. Therefore whatever Holinshed has in this Matter, he excerpted it
from our Historians; but how little Candor he has used toward us, was never
plainer than here. Our Historians relate, that after the Return of Re^therus
from the Isles, Affairs not being thoroughly settled, that the King of the
Brittons fatigued them with War as he had always done: but this honest Author
adds of his own, until they made a Surrender of themselves; which was not to be
found in any Historian of what note soever. The Reigns of those six Kings
beforementioned makes up 118 Years; and therefore I would desire Holinshed to
resolve me this one Question, How this Sicilius could vex all those six Kings
with War, seeing he only reigned (...)* Years, as he himself confesses? But he
had laid aside all Shame in this his Invective. It is not to be passed over,
that he owns those Kings to have been chosen by our Countrymen: Whence it is
evident, that we had Kings many Ages before the Arrival of the English Saxons
in Britain; and that the Inauguration of our Kings did never depend upon the
Pleasure of the Brittons or English: Nor was ever their Con^ent expected at the
Election; which is a certain Argument that they were never subject to the
Brittons, as we shall see afterward. Here Holinshed pleases himself with a
facetious Rhetorical Flourish, when he writes that Sicilius gave his Daughter
Agasia to Durstus King of Scots; hoping, says he, that the connate Rudeness
(not to say Deceit and Perfidy) of the Nation might be corrected and mollified
by the Disposition of the Maternal Line: But let Foreigners be inquired at
concerning the Rudeness, Deceit and Perfidy of either Nation; for no great heed
is to be taken to what an Englishman says of a Scots-man, or what a Scotsman
says of an Englishman, seeing there have been Actions betwixt them much
fiercer than Words. The Faithfulness of the Scots is proven by the French
Annals. But Holinshed ought to remember what the British and English Writers
have left upon Record concerning the Faithfulness of the Brittons; for all of
them agree, that it was used as a Proverb, Nec Britones Bello fortes nec Pace
fideles: i. e. That the Brittons were neither courageous in War, nor faithful
in time of Peace. This Proverb is found in Polydore, Bid, Newbridg, Malmsbury,
and other English Historians; who all of 'em say, that it was common amongst
the Vulgar: and in many places both in Gildas and Bid, they are called the
perfidious Nation of the Brittons; as if Perfidy were their proper Epithet. So
that a Depravation of their Native Simplicity and Manners, was rather to be
expected from this Match, than a Reformation. I have already touched the
Cowardly Temper of that Nation from Gildas, and shall treat of it further when
I come to speak of the Saxons. Then let Holinshed go and extol the
Faithfulness, Virtue, and Fortitude of his Brittons to the Skies, or above them
if he pleases; and let him talk of their subduing France, Italy, and a great
Part of Germany, and that Rome it self was conquered and burnt by Brennus, if
you please to believe him; while all the ancient Writers do not only dissent
from him, but gain-stand and contradict him. Those things I say of the ancient
Brittons; for as to what concerns the Remainders of that Nation, there is no
People, now that they have changed their Soil, who are more courageous and
hardy than the Welsh, since they were born and bred in a barren and mountainous
Country.

CHAP. X.
What Condition the Scots were in, and what Society they had with the Brittons
after the Arrival of Julius Caesar, and the Romans in Britain.
HOlinshed, or the Pettifogger Adams, writes that our K. Ederus sent Auxiliary
Forces to Cassibelanus, and that he served him in his War against Julius
Caesar: And herein he is not altogether destitute of Authority; for Geffrey of
Monmouth, of whose Credibility we shall afterward discourse, writes that
Cradious King of Albany served as a Subject under ^assibelanus in his Wars
against Julius Caesar. But whether this Cradious was our Ederus or not, let
others see to it; he is not to be found in the Catalogue of our Kings. But to
return to Cassibelanus; Certainly we are but sorrily rewarded if we must be
accounted to have been subject to him, because we sent him Auxiliary Forces:
For on the other hand, if the English had sent Auxiliaries to us, they would
have alleged that they had done so as Masters; but there is nothing here of
Homage, or Liege-Dominion over us. Must Germany be said to have been subject to
England, because the Emperor Maximilian served in the English Camp for Pay
against the French? Or, because the Queen of England sent Assistance to the
Spaniard at the Siege of St. Quintin in Picardy, must She therefore be
accounted to have been subject to the Spaniard? No Englishman would endure
Holinshed to reason thus; neither does he act with Judgment or Justice, who by
a reproachful Interpretation would convert the Good Will of his Friend into a
Necessity of Obedience, or an Obligation of spontaneous Submission: for by that
way of Arguing, we shall conclude the Lord to be inferior to the Servant, if
he assist him in Adversity, or extend his Munificence and Liberality toward
him. We will grant that our Forces served in that War, but what Consequence
will that be to infer thence, that Ederus was Servant or Subject to
Cassibelanus or paid him Homage? It was necessary that one should command the
rest in the War, and that they should obey and serve him; for the word serve is
used by good Authors, to denote only Obedience; and thus Iugurtha served
Africanus the Younger in the Numatin War, in the Name of the King of Numidia,
yet the Kingdom of Numidia was free and independent, and their King not called
a Servant, but an Associate of the Romans. But this whole story of Cassibelan,
that part of it excepted which is found in Caesar's Commentaries, contains
nothing but Fables and Trifles, and was either forged by Geffrey of Monmouth,
or illustrated by his Comments.

Holinshed says, that Caesar writes in his own Commentaries, and that it is
attested by the Scottish Historians, that he subdued the whole Island, and
entered into Caledonia; both of which are false, as will appear to any who read
those Histories: for Caesar went no further than he himself writes, and it is
not likely that he would detract from his own Fame; and that Edifice at Carron
was not built by Julius Caesar, but by Julius Agricola some Years after him:
Neither does Boethius say, that Caesar entered Caledonia, but asserts only, that
it was reported so by some of the Vulgar. But Holinshed plays with the History
in this Point, which I neither admire, nor regard; nor will he ever be able to
prove from this Commentitious History of Cassibelan, that Scotland was a Liege
Fee of Britain, or that the King of Scots owed Homage to the King of the
Brittons.

I pass over Mor^i^s, Coilus and Lucius, seeing there is no mention of any War
which they had against the Scots, nor yet of this Homage in their Reigns, at
which I wonder that he should not at least have forged something in their
Reigns, as well as others* But lest he should seem to have done nothing here,
he savs, that King Lucius changed the three Archflamins, which were instituted
by King Belinus into three Archbishops, whereof he places one at London,
another at York, to whom he subjects the Scots, and the third at Caerleon; and
all those things he alleges, that he may clear the Way for rendering the Scots
Bishops subject to the Archbishop of York: and as he will have the Scots to be
subject to the English in Temporals; so he would infer, that the Scottish Clergy
acknowledged the English Archbishops as their Lords in Spirituals. But if we
may believe Malmsbury an English Chronologer, there was no Archbishopric in
the Kingdom of the Brittons. His words, lest I should be thought to injure him,
are, But whether there was any Archiepiscopal See in the Time of the Brittons,
I do very much doubt; for my Knowledge faulters, because Antiquity has
swallowed up the Memorials of those Times: and here he spoke ingenuously, if he
had done so in other things In prol. Lib. I. de Geftis Anglorum Pontisicum.
. Neither does Gildas make any mention of the Bishops, or Archflamins of the
Brittons, but only of the Priests. As to what concerns the Archflamins, there
is no mention of them to be found in approved Authors, except we should reckon
Geffrey of Monmouth, who is the greatest Liar of all Men, one of that number,
for which they shall have my free leave. For according to the Institutions of
Numa, and the Ancient Romans, there could be no Archflamins; and if there had
been any such, they must of necessity have been set over other Flamins, which
is manifestly as repugnant to Truth, as that the Scots Bishops are subject to
the Archbishop of York. The severals Gods of the Gentiles had their own
Flamins, and thus we read of Flamen Dialis and Flamen Quirinalis in Cicero,
Lib. 2. de Legibus.
over whom the great Pontif had the supreme Authority, and not the Arch-flamin;
but the Illiterate Geffrey of Monmouth and those who followed him, did never
understand what a Flamin was: neither has it any appearance of likelihood, that
the Brittons would have composed a Name of Greek and Latin words, as being
ignorant of both the Tongues.

As to what concerns the Subjection of the Scots Bishops to the Archbishop of
York, Holinshed can never evince from any approved Author, Englishman or
others, that there was any Archbishop of York at that Time, or for some Ages
after; and if it were not that I hate to engage in an useless Controversy, I
will undertake to prove from English Authors, that we had Bishops in Scotland,
before they had any in Britain, and that Palladius the first Scots Bishop,
preached the Gospel to us, before Austin preached to the English. What credit
those things deserve which were writ before Gildas or Bid, they themselves
shall bear Witness; forbid does plainly own, that the English received the
first Rudiments of Piety from the Scots; and Malmsbury, who has writ three
Books of the Actions of the English Prelates, says, That he was almost
destitute of all kind of help, that he grop'd his Way through the dark Paths of
Ignorance, nor had he any previous Light of History to direct his Path; and yet
this Author of ours according to his usual Folly, relates them all in order and
exactly: In prohem. Lib. 1. de Gestis Pon^i^. Angl.
But whether or not the Scots Bishops were subject to the Archbishop of York,
we shall see afterward, though their Question makes but little to our present
purpose, which is to treat of Fee and Homage, and temporal Things, and not of
Ecclesiastical Affairs, which depended on the Will and Pleasure of the Pope.

As to what Severus, Augustus, Maximianus and other Roman Generals did, or
attempted against us, it does not at all belong to the Brittons, who must
certainly have very little Merit or Glory of their own, when they rake together
the Praises due to other Men on all sides, and apply them to themselves. But
Ethelverd, than whom the English have scarcely a more ancient Historian, says,
That when Claudius and the Romans invaded Britain, and subjected their Kings,
the Scots and Picts did stoutly gainstand them; though Holinshed will have them
to be subdued, and expelled at that Time. But if they were ejected or drove
into Exile, who is there that will not ascribe it to the height of their
Courage, and that deservedly? For they would rather be Exiles, than submit
dishonourably to the Roman Yo^k, as the rest of the Britains did, who if they
had been inspired with the same Courage, they had never been subject to the
Roman Servitude.

But that Severus designed to drive the Scots out of the Island, for their
Perfidiousness and Rebellion, as Holinshed pretends to write from Boathius, we
will not acknowledge; for they cannot be accused of Perfidiousness, who did never
owe nor promise Fidelity; and let Holinshed say, if he can, in what Author or
Book he ever read, that the Scots swore Fealty, either to the Roman Legate or
Emperor, that so he may make good his charge of Perfidiousness: for this is
truly asserted by all Writers, that the Scots held that part of Britain which
now they enjoy, not by any Paction or Covenant with the Romans, but by Force of
Arms.

But Holinshed will have it that they rebelled. Now those are called Rebels who
being subdued, or having surrendered themselves, don't continue firm in that
Allegiance which they have sworn to the Prince or Republic that overcame them;
but take up Arms against those to whose Dominion they submitted, which cannot
in any manner be said of the Scots; nor is that true which Holinshed alleges
from Bo^thius, that he confesses this to have been done because of the
Rebellion of the Scots against the Romans; and if they were Rebels, then he
in^ers, that they were Subjects. But there is no such thing to be found in
Boethius, neither would it thence follow that they were Subjects to the
Britains, but to the Ro^ans. I will not retort upon him what he ascribes
undeservedly to our Boethius, That a (...) o^ght to have a good Memory: for
whatever Holinshed writes as to the Scots, b^ing almost conquered and expelled
the I^land and that 30000 of their Men were Slain, in the following Chapter, he
says, That the Emperor Severus Lib. 1. Descript. Britan. Cap. 23.
lost 50000 Men in that same Expedition; and when he could not defend himself
and his Bri^^^ns from the most out^agious Enemy, he built that Stone Wall from
the East to the West side of the Island, that the Britains who obeyed him and
the Roman Gari^ons might be the more ^afe within their own Barrier^. How those
things agree together, when the one Chapter follows the other immediately,
(...) any capable Man judge.

What he w^ites as to the granting of (...) to the (...) and Pic^'^ by the
Kings of the Brittons, it is altogether frivolous; for we know how small a part
of Scotland Caithness is, and so barren that it could not be sufficient for
three Nations to inhabit: for besides that he writes those things without any
Authority, there is nothing so ridiculous which this Man does not look upon as
an Oracle, so that it does but afford him an occasion of venting his Spite
against the Scots. But I cannot perceive how from all those famous Actions of
the Romans against us, Holinshed can make it appear, that the Scots were
subject to the Britains, or paid them Homage.

From Carausius, Holinshed concludes nothing which makes for the question in
Hand; but I wonder he did not also feign that he subjected the Scots, for
without doubt if either his Memory could have suggested it, or that his froward
and arrogant Mind could have feigned or adulterated any thing, he would never
have omitted it. But what I said before, appears evidently in Carausius or
C^rantius, that the Romans could never endure a King in their Province in
Britain.

For an eighth Argument, we are pressed with Actions of Maximinus or
Maximianus, whom Holinshed (contrary to the Current of all Writers, who say, he
was born at Smyrnium in Pannonia) will have him to be a Britton, and that he
drove the Scots out of the Island for their Rebellion, having slain their King
E^geni^s. We may perhaps yield that they were driven out of the Island, because
they were not accustomed to Servitude; but that it was for Rebellion, we
constantly deny, there being no other Authority for it but Holinshed's, for
they never swore Fealty to the Romans, nor were they overcome and drove out of
the Island by the Romans alone, but by the Conspiracy of four most powerful
Nations, the Romans, Brittons, Picts and German Auxiliaries, who combined
together for the destruction of one Nation, and that no very great One: but
this happened by the cunning of the Romans, I confess, under a Pretext of
dividing the Kingdom of Scotland among their Neighbors; but when they were
ejected, and that the Romans designed the same Thing against the Picts, the
latter perceiving the Craft of this Leonine Confederacy, condemned themselves
for their impious War against their ancient Neighbors the Scots, and renewing
the former League with them, afforded them an opportunity of returning to their
Country, under the Conduct of Ferg^s the second. But what says all this to the
Sovereignty of the Brittons over the Scots, or the supposititious Homage?

Holinshed says, That when Fergus returned to Britain, he durst not enter upon
the Continent, but took the Regalia upon him in Argile; the foolish Man being
ignorant of our Affairs, takes Argile to be an Island, and not part of the
Continent. But after his r^turn, says he, he was killed, and his Army defeated
by Maximian the Roman Legate; nor do we deny that, for we don't take upon (...)
to maintain, that the Scots were never overcome nor defeated, but that they
never obeyed any Prince but their own, nor yet performed Homage to any other;
and in fine, that they did never own a Foreigner as their Lord or Superior, but
that those Scots who were so often beat, so frequently overcome, and at last
expelled the Island by the Romans, have hitherto maintained and do still
maintain their Royal Dignity without Diminution; whereas the Brittons who were
both richer, more numerous, and as Holinshed will have it, better Warriors than
we, were put under an ignominious Servitude by the Romans.

CHAP. XI.
Of the departure of the Romans out of Britain, and how the whole was subjected
to the Scots and Picts.
BUT when the Romans left the Island, then it quickly appeared which of the
Nations were the best Warriors; for the Britains being almost totally cut off
by the Scots and Picts, submitted to their Yoke, and left them all the Country
beyond Humber, which we call on this side Humber, to inhabit, because the Scots
and Picts were not numerous enough to people their farther Provinces, which the
Brittons did then hold, and gratefully accept from the Bounty of the Scots and
Picts, paying Tribute to the Conquerors, giving Hostages, submitting to them in
every thing Divine and Humane, and abjuring the Protection of the Romans. Here
are all the true Marks of a Surrender, and so the Britains yielded themselves
to the Scots and Picts, nor is there any room left for a Subterfuge. Holinshed
and the common Herd of English Historians, give this as the Cause of that
Calamity, that above 100000 Brittons were carried away by Maximianus, as he
returned into Gallia Armorica; and most of them augment the Number, but none
that I know of does ascertain them, and this number is also made up by Women,
Children and Servants. But it appears, that a greater number of Scots fell in
the Field almost at the same Time, under their Kings Eugenius and Fergus, while
they endeavored in vain to recover their Country; then were carried over by
Maximianus into Britannia Armorica, of which a great part did also return Home
after he was slain. Holinshed passes over this History very cursorily, when he
asserts, That all Britain was not subdued by the Scots and Picts, but only some
Provinces, and that the principal part of the Island was never touched by them;
and here he accuses our Boethius of a Lie, because he says, that all Britain
was surrendered, whereas the Scots did only seize the Country benorth Humber.
Nor is it probable, says he, That the Scots being but a poor and broken Nation,
and having lost their King with the stoutest of their Soldiery, could in the
fourth Year after their return from Exile, subject all Britain to their own
Command; for if that had been true, the Scots would rather have chosen it for
their Habitation, than to have lived amidst Frost and Snow at Home. All this he
alleges, to lessen the Credit of Boethius's History, which detracts from the
Fame and Dignity of the Britains, tho the same thing be contained in all the
Writers of that Age, Paulus Diaconus, Gildas, Bid, Marianus Scotus, and all
the Writers of British Affairs, Geffrey of Monmouth, Malmsbury, Westminster,
and all who ever wrote of those Times, write clearly concerning this Affair,
and assert, that all Britain was subjected to the Scots and Picts; and as to
what he says, of the improbability that the Scots who were so lately defeated
and scattered, should in so little a Time recover so much Strength and Courage,
let him recall to mind how many Armies of Scots were defeated by Edward I. and
yet they never laid down their Arms, until in two pitched Battles by the
Humber, or at York, which is situated on the Banks of that River, they put
Edward II. to flight at that Time, the most potent King of Britain, Ireland,
Wales, and a great part of France. Nor is it without Ground, that Lucan says,
Poverty is fruitful in Men: So that if Holinshed had considered these things,
he would have ceased from Wondering. Therefore Britain was truly surrendered to
the Scots and Picts, and the Surrender accepted; and the Britains after they
had in vain sought for the Assistance of Aetius the Roman Legate by Tears and
lamentable Complaints, submitted to the Yoke, not willingly I confess, but
being thereunto compelled by Force of Arms. And thus they continued for thirty
Years, and since that Time our Countrymen have always pretended a Right to
Northumberland, Westmoreland and Cumberland, which was the occasion of many
Wars, as we shall hear afterward; but the Britains growing weary of the
continued and grievous Servitude, they sent for Assistance from Britannia
Armorica, whence Holinshed writes, that Constantine came with an Army, who
killed Dongardus King of Scotland in Battle, and recovered Scotland. This is
the third King of Scotland, who in a small interval of Time fell as fighting
gallantly in the Field, that being looked upon as honorable and familiar to
our Kings: for it is brave and honorable, says the Lyric Poet, to die for ones
Country; and others of our Kings have followed their Examples, which Holinshed
objects as a Disgrace to them: But he will find nothing amongst his Britains
which relishes so much of true Nobility; nay nor amongst the English are there
many Kings to be found who died in Battle, unless it was during the Heptarchy,
while they raged mutually against one another.

But that we may return to the Armori^i, or People of Little Britany; Holinshed
says, that Constantine of that Country recovered Scotland, and was made King of
all Britain: But how could he recover that which he never lost, especially
seeing Dongardus fell a Conqueror, which the Britains had felt to their no
small damage, except he had been followed by a cowardly Successor? Holinshed
will have this Constantine to be descended from Brutus in a direct Line, and to
have been Son to the King of the Lesser Britany. But Matthew of Westminster
writes, that he died without having done any thing of note, and left Children
behind him, Aurelius, Ambrosius and Vter; under whose Conduct he says that the
Britains fought with the Scots, and obtained a Victory: What Manner of Victory
it was, in what Place obtained, or who were the Generals, there is not one word;
but it must needs have been a very small Victory which did neither advance the
Britains, nor depress their Enemies. Would any Body offer such Fooleries as
real Matters of Fact? But the Truth is, that the Scots were neither expelled by
those of Little Britany, Constantine, Aurelius nor Vter; but held the
Sovereignty of the Island until the Saxons, being hired by the Britains,
dispossessed them of that Part of Britain which was a Roman Province: And that
Aurelius Ambrosius did not come into Britain before Hengist, appears by
Hengist's Oration to Vortigern; which is exhibited by Matthew of Westminster.
But to set this whole Matter concerning the Auxiliaries from Little Britany, in
its true Light; whatever Holinshed and Geffrey of Monmouth may fabulously
assert, when the Britains were repulsed by the Romans, and did unwillingly fall
off from them, they consulted about choosing a General against the Scots and
Picts, and pitched upon Vortigern; who finding himself unable to sustain so
great a Burden, whatever Holinshed may say, persuaded them to hire the Saxons
to undertake the War for them: which had been altogether needless if Scotland
had been subjected and recovered before; for none use to desire Assistance, who
are able of themselves to maintain War.

Whereas Holinshed alleges, that Vortigern gave Galloway, Annandale, and the
Mers, which were Scottish Provinces, to be inhabited by the Saxons; it is
according to his usual Manner, and against the Credit of all Historians, who
have left it on Record that Ke^t, the most fertile Province of England, was
granted to them. And as the English Writers themselves testify, when the Saxons
understood the Fruitfulness of the Island, and the cowardly Temper of the
Inhabitants, and that Kent was not sufficient for the Soldiers that arrived
daily, that Hengist obtained the Countries which lay upon the Humber from
Vortigern, that his People might fix there and prevent the Entrance of the
Enemies into Britain. Neither were the Saxons so very dull as to choose such
Countries as were not fertile for their own Habitation, and to leave the most
large and fruitful Countries of Britain; but they did gradually aim at the
Sovereignty of the whole Island, as the Event did quickly verify.

But this is not to be passed over, that though all Historians agree that those
Countries were given to the Saxons, yet they make no mention of any Homage or
Superiority, or that the Britains reserved any Claim of Fealty over those
Countries to themselves: A most certain Argument that there was not any Name or
Memory of Homage then, or for some Ages after in Britain; and therefore
whatever mention there is of Homage or Fealty performed by the Scots during the
Time of the British Monarchy, if there were ever any such, it is vain and
frivolous, and to be reckoned amongst the Milesian Fables, or as we may say,
old Wives Tales. The English possessed Kent, the Is^e of Wight, and the Eastern
Parts of Britain, by the Bounty of the Britains; but neither did they own them
as their Lords upon that account, nor pay them any Homage, there being no such
thing then in being. And Polidore Virgil does not only suppress all that is
said concerning those Auxiliaries from Little Britany; but also says, that
Vortigern being chosen King by the Britains, who were then consulting how to
^esist the Scots, gave them this Advice to bring in the Saxons. Marianus Scotus
has nothing of those Auxiliaries from Britany; which this Man advances as the
most certain Truth: Neither is there any mention of them found in Mal^sbury,
Huntington, Ethelverd, Florence of Worcester, nor Gild^s, whom I prefer to all
Men on this head; and yet he neither takes any notice of them nor of Vortigern,
though he was born at that Time, so that nothing could be hid from him. Nor
does Bid, who lived after him, and wrote a true and brief History of those
Times, though he takes notice of Vortigern, say any thing of those Auxiliary
Britains; nor of that Constantine whom this Jugler avers to have slain the King
of Scots in Battle. Ethelverd does not call Vortigern King, but says that he
was esteemed as such by all Men: And none of those Authors take any notice that
the Scots were either beat, or divested of the Empire of Britain by any other
than the Saxons: But that by the Advice of Vortigern, whom they chose King in a
tumultuary Manner, upon the Departure of the Romans from the Island, they
agreed to hire the Saxon Auxiliaries that they might bear the Burden of the
War: And all of them testify that the Saxons after their Arrival in the Island,
under the Conduct of their Captains Hengist and Horsa, were never defeated nor
dispossessed; but having sent for their Fellow Soldiers from Germany, they
quickly drove the Britains into Wales; and first founded one Kingdom, then a
Second, and at last a Heptarchy, or Seven Kingdoms. And therefore what this
Babbler dreams of Vortigern's having subdued Scotland by the Help of the Saxons,
and deprived them of the Islands, which were the common Refuge of the Nation,
are so vain, that they are not worthy of a Confutation; for he has feigned all
those things himself, without the least Authority or Evidence: and if it be not
so, let any Body who espouses his Quarrel name but one Author, and we shall
yield. Bid, the only Writer of those Times, has not one word of those things:
but this Author thought that he might lawfully forge, feign, and invent what he
pleased, so he did but tear the Scots with his Invectives. But how could
Vortigern, who was inferior to the Scots in War, and obtained the Kingdom by
gross Wickedness, as Historians write, for which he was hateful to his own
Subjects, bring the Scots under his Yoke? For Vortigern after he had called in
the Saxons, was first deserted by all his own Subjects, and then dethroned, his
Son Vortimer being set up in his Stead, according to their own Historians.
Gildas and Bid do both mention Aurelius Ambrosius, who succeeded Vortigern,
and fatigued the Saxons by War; but they call him a Roman, and the only
surviving Person of the Roman Blood, and own that he obtained the Monarchy of
Britain, that Part of it I mean that was a Roman Province: which is an Evidence
how unwillingly the Britains fell off from the Romans. Malmsbury and Henry of
Huntington say the same; and Paulus Diaconus writes, that this Aurelius
Ambrosius assumed the Purple; that is, took upon him the Imperial Dignity in
Britain. But this Man being resolved to make War with the Truth, would rather
follow Geffrey of Monmouth in his History, than those Authors of approved
Credit and Reputation. What he has writ concerning Vter's having subdued and
recovered the Kingdom of Scotland, is of the like nature; for if his History be
true, the Saxons never gave him so much time to breathe as to think of invading
Scotland; and being, in fine, deluded by them, and harassed with War during his
whole Reign, if he had any, he was neither honored by his own Subjects, nor
taken notice of by the Saxons. Whereas he says, that the Scots entered into a
Bond of Friendship, and joined in War with the Saxons, he is foully mistaken,
to say no worse; for Palladius, according to Bid, obtained from the Scots, who
had received many Injuries from the Britains, and were therefore thinking upon
Revenge, that they should nevertheless join in Arms with them, because the
Saxons were at that Time bitter Enemies to the Christian Religion; and Polidore
follows B^de in this. Here we may observe the Virulence of this Man against the
Scots: For whereas Bid has left it behind him in Writing, that the Saxons
entered into a League with the Picts, and joined their Arms to subdue the
Britains; this Juggler turned it upon the Scots, as if they by joining with the
Saxons, had made War upon the Britains; when on the contrary, as Polidore
ingenuously confesses, Constantine the King of Scots being invited by the
Saxons, refused to join them, and sent Assistance to the Britains; which was
the only thing, as he says, that supported the British State for some time at
least, and kept it from immediate Ruin. So that there is nothing farther from
Truth, than to say that V^r^igern or Vter did reduce the Scots by War: For
besides that those things are spoken without any Authority, Evidence or
Probability, Vortigern being worsted in the War, called in the Saxons: and it
is very unlikely that the Britains should invade the Scots after the Arrival of
the Saxons, when they were not able to defend themselves from that Cruel Enemy,
but by the Assistance of the S^ots Auxiliaries. But this is the Thanks we have
for our Kindness to the most ungrateful of Men, that we must be accused as
having made War upon them, when we sustained them by our Arms for some time,
and kept them from present Ruin.

CHAP. XII.
Concerning Arthur; whether he subdued Scotland, or required Homage from the
King of Scots.
LET us now come to Arthur; who, as he says, did not only subdue the Scots, but
according to our own Historians reduced all Scotland, and the Isles as far as
Caithness; but he names no Body, as fearing to be cat^^'d in a manifest
Untruth. There are not so many Scots Historians, that we need to be ignorant
what any of them says; but none of them did ever convey such monstrous Lies to
Posterity. There are some, who being led into an Error by the English, do write
many great and magnificent things concerning Arthur: But that he subdued
Scotland, demanded Homage or Fealty from the Scots, or set his Kinsman
Angusianus, who was his own Sword Bearer, over them, there is neither any
Englishman nor Scotsman, except Geffrey of Monmouth alone, who has committed
it to writing. But that Man must needs be more than ordinarily impudent, who
has once leaped over the Bounds of Modesty. But there are many things which
move me either to think that there was no Arthur, or that at least he was not
King of Britain: For, as the English and Scottish Historians assert, Hengist
came into England with his Saxons in 449. They and the Britains fought at
Bansdown in 498, about 49 Years after Hengist's Arrival. And Gildas says, that
he was born in that Year. Monmouth, Westminster, and those who follow them, say
that Arthur began to reign in 516, being then but fifteen Years of Age; and
that he was advanced to the Throne, though unlawfully begot, because of the
great Opinion which Men had conceived of his Virtue: therefore we easily
collect that Arthur was born in 501, three Years after Gildas. And Polidore
does plainly say, that this Arthur died in the very flower of his Youth; being
afraid of the Indignation of the Vulgar, if he had writ nothing of him. From
those things it is evident, that Gildas was three Years older than Arthur, and
his Contemporary: But this Gildas, a very great Lover of Truth, when he
deplores the Arrival of the Saxons, and the Destruction and Cowardice of his
own Countrymen the Britains, he has not one word of his Contemporary Arthur,
whose subject he was, viz. a Britain born under a Britain; and speaks not so
much as one word of him in Jest or Earnest. Which so great a Man would never
have been guilty of, if any such Personage as Arthur, famous for so many Great
Actions, had lived in his Time; who did so often put the Saxons to Hight, and
drive them out of Britain. Neither does he ever write, that the Saxons yielded
to the Britains after their Arrival; but that having enjoyed the Government in
Britain with Hengist, they divided the Kingdom amongst themselves in his
Lifetime, and made it their Country. Polidore has so great an Esteem of this
Gildas, that he says there was nothing which he abhorred more than Lies, and
that there was nothing more familiar to him than Truth. Bid, than whom there
is not a more true and uncorrupted Writer, and who at that Time was not only
the greatest Ornament of Learning in Britain, but in all Europe, has nothing of
this Arthur, though he lived but 160 Years after him, (for he flourished Ann.
Dom. 700.) and comprizes in an accurate History, all the Fights, Battles and
Skirmishes betwixt the Brittons and Saxons. Neither is he mentioned by Florence
of Worcester, nor Ethelverd, the most ancient Historian of those Times next to
Bid. Newbriggs, in the Preface to his History, says in express Terms, that
`whereas they do not make the least mention of Arthur and Merlin, and though
all those things concerning them are feigned by Counterfeits, yet that Man
(meaning Geffrey of Monmouth) has published them to entertain Men's Curiosity.
Malmsbury does indeed make mention of him, yet not as a King, but as one of
A^relius Ambrosius's Captains; as does also Henry of Huntington: But as for the
Roman Historians, they never so much as take notice of him; nor is he to be
heard of in Paulus Diaconus, Procopius, Agathias or Iornandes, who wrote the
History of those Times, nor in any French Historian. Nay Cooper, an English
Writer, does ingenuously confess, that the Actions said to be done by Arthur,
agree with none of the Historians of those Times, although by them he is
rendered famous for his Exploits, as having subdued all France and Italy; so
that those Historians could not have pass^d him.

Arthur is also feigned to have routed the Emperor Tiberius, and the Auxiliary
Forces brought him by Epistrophius King of Greece, Mustensare King of Aphrica,
Alifantina King of Spain, Hirtacius King of the Parthians, Bocchus King of the
Medes, Sertorius King of Lybia, Teucer King of Phrygia, Ser^es King of Iturea,
Pandrosus King of Egypt, Micypsa King of Babylon, and the Dukes (as if there
had been any then of that Title) of Bithynia, Phrygia, Syria, Beoti^ and Cret^.
Whereas indeed Tiberius did not undertake the Empire, and that only of the
East, until 40 Years after Arthur's Death; for Tiberius began to reign Ann.
576, and A^g^sianus King of Scotland, whom Holinshed will have to be Arthur's
Sword Bearer, died before Arthur was born. As to those fifteen Kings and Dukes,
this I affirm, that those Provinces had then no Kings nor Dukes, of which there
were at that Time none in the World, but were subject to the Roman Empire. And
at that Time, when Arthur is said to have reigned, Justinian was Emperor, the
Goths possessed Italy, Chilperic governed in France, and other magnanimous
Kings, who would never have suffered Arthur to enter their Kingdoms with an
Army: Therefore whatever is writ concerning Arthur, is both fabulous, and
justly so reputed. And Holinshed himself confesses them to be fabulous, though
he be otherwise a wonderful Artist at scraping together whatever may advance
the Praise of his Britains. But let him if he can produce any Historian of that
Time, English or other, who wrote any thing concerning Arthur. The sole Author
of all this Fable of Arthur, is Geffrey of Monmouth; concerning whom, I shall
in a few words exhibit the Judgment of the Learned, yea, even of Englishmen
themselves, without adding any thing of my own. P^lidone, although he was a
Native of Vrbin, yet I name him amongst the English Writers, both because he
lived in England, and wrote an History thereof to please K. Henry the Eighth.
His own Words, lest I should seem to impose upon any Body, are these: Lib. I.
of his History.
B^t on the contrary, says he, there sta^ted up ^ certain Writer of our Age;
who that he might a^ o^e for those Crimes of the `Brittons, I mean their
Cowardice and Per^idionsness, scrapes t^gether ab^ndance of ridiculous*
Fictions concerning them; and with an impudent Vanity, extols their Valou^
abov^ that of the Romans on Macedonians. This is Geffrey of Monmouth; who is
also surnamed Arthur, because h^ spread a Latin Vail over the Fictions of the
Brittons concerning Arthur, which he has augmented himself, and given them the
name of True History. And the anonymous Continuator of Bede's History, who
begins his British Affairs with the Scottish War, has these Words: -- All before
this, says he, which that Man (meaning Geffrey of Monmouth) ^ath taken ^ar^ to
write concerning Arthur, and his An^estors before Vo^tigern, were partly
feigned by himself, and partly by others: Whereupon h^ calls him the fabulous
Geffrey; and says he arrived to such a height of Lying, that to use his own
Words, he has made the Finger of his Arthur thicker than Alexander the Great's
Back. William of Ne^bridge does not content himself merely to reproach Geffrey,
but spends two entire Pages in confuting him and his Writings. Geffrey is
indeed a wonderful Artist at History; who out of his own Head continued the
Story of 1700 Years, so as to lead our Writers and all Posterity into a very
great Error: and although they know themselves to be imposed upon, yet they
will not be reclaimed from their Mistake; they are so very ambitious of Glory,
were it even but from Fables. For who is not pleased with the ^able of Brutus,
the supposititious Author of the British Nation, and his Arrival in Britain,
whose Father, Grandfather, and Great Grandfather, together with his Wife and
Offspring, he names as if he had lived with them? And with ^he same Assurance
he utters what he says of Brennus; whom he will have to be a Britton, if the
Gods be so pleased, (as Lloyd will have his Cambri to be called Ci^bri) and to
have overcome the Gauls, Germans and Romans; and at last, to have set Rome it
self on fire. His third Fable concerning C^ssibelan^s is plainly against
Caesar's Authority, who, as I said, is reckoned the Chief of Writers. His
fourth are the Duels betwixt his Arthur and the Giants, for which Geffrey, as
has been said already, did merit the Surname of Arthur* His fifth are the
Prophecies of Merlin, which are so full of Ambiguities, Turnings and Windings,
that the Oracles of Delphos are not to be compared to them: and besides those
five pleasant Fables, Geffrey has nothing in him worth reading. But some will
say, that he professes himself to be only a Translator: it is true indeed, but
it is only that he may cheat us with more safety and secresy, for he has not
been able to name any of those Authors whom he pretends to have translated: And
Gildas does expressly testify, that all the Monuments of the Britton^, were
lost, and none of them to be found in his Time. Shall this Man then, who could
forge the History of so many Years out of his own Brain, be brought in Evidence
against us, or must we believe it because he writes so, for Holinshed has it no
where else, that the Scots following the Treachery of their Ancestors, did
besiege Houell King of little Britany? Let Arthur then, with his Historian
Geff^ey, go and keep Company with the Night-Owls. It Is certain, that there was
never any settled Form of Government in the British Republic, neither in
Vortigern's Time, who first brought in the Saxons; nor after him was there any
established Kingdom, until the Time of Aureli^s Ambrosius, who was of Roman
extract, and at length chosen King or General (for I find him named both ways)
in a tumultuary manner by the Britains, who began, though too late, to repent
the bringing in of the Saxons, and deprived Vortigern of the Government.
Aurelius made War upon the Saxons for some time with various success; and that
he might strengthen himself on all sides, he gave his two Sisters in Marriage,
Anna to Lothus King of the Picts, and Ada to Conranus General of the Scots
Army, who was to succeed his Brother in the Kingdom, and by their Assistance he
did for some time bear up the ruinous State of the Britains. After his Death,
when the Kingdom fell by Law upon Lothus his Posterity, and that the Britains
set up one Constantine in his place, Modredus, Lothus his Son, pursuing his
right by Arms, had a terrible and fatal Battle with the Britains, wherein he
died, though Conqueror: Hence followed irreconcilable Feuds betwixt the Picts
and Britains, and that League betwixt the Saxons and Picts for the Destruction
of the Britains, who though they were for some time assisted by the Scots, (for
Palladius obtained from Constantine King of the Scots, that he should not
desert the Britains, though he had received many Injuries from them, nor join
with the Saxons, tho they promised great things, because they were Enemies to
the Christian Religion) yet they were at last subdued and forced into Wales;
and not only lost the Royal Dignity, (if ever they had any) but were
constrained to abandon the most fruitful Provinces of their Country to the
Enemy, which they might perhaps have enjoyed to this Day if they had sincerely
cultivated their Friendship with the Scots and Picts. Let this suffice as the
first Example to our Neighbors, that they don't, from an Excess of Ambition,
endeavor to invert the true Succession of the Crown, and prefer some of their
own Countrymen right or wrong. For Modredus was Heir of the British Monarchy,
if they had any such, and his Posterity as far as Hungus King of Picts carried
the same Right; and Hungus dying without Issue, the Succession of the British
and Pictish Crowns devolved upon Alpin King of Scots, who was his Nephew by
F^rgus his Sister; and so it descended by a continued Series, to the most
Serene Prince James VI. King of Scots: and although he should not succeed to
that Right by Hungus, yet as being descended from Ada the youngest of Aurelius
his Sisters, who was married to Conranus, he has the sole and undoubted Right
to the British Empire.

Some may wonder perhaps that I should reject A^thu^, and all that is said
concerning him so rashly, when there are so many probable Monuments of him both
in England and Scotland, so many places denominated from him, as Arthur's Seat
near Edinburgh, Arthur's round Table, Arthur's Vault not far from Sterlin, and
the Inscription on his Sepulcher at Glastenbury in England, Hi^ jacet Arth^rus,
Rex quo^dam, Rexque futur^s.

Which may be Englished thus; Here lies Arthur, who did sometimes reign,
And had he lived, should have been King again.
Which form a very strong Argument, that there has been some one called
Arthur. What answer to return I know not, but this I am sure of, that what I
have inserted is not mine, but taken from the most polite of the English
Historians themselves. Nor can I guess at any other Cause, why we are imposed
upon with this commentitious Arthur, than the depravation of Man's Nature since
the Fall, which chooses Vanity rather than Truth. For we perceive what sort of
things are writ by Homer, concerning Polyphemus, Antiph^s, and the rest of his
Cyclops, or Lestrigones, and the like, and yet they are in Honor and Esteem by
all Men: But as Ovid says of Ulysses, Add quod illius pars maxima ficta
laborum est. And there is nothing more frequently read, than the Ethiopian
History of Heliodorus, Leucian's Ass, or Apuleius's Golden Ass: so the French
have their Hugh of Burdea^x; and the Britains being acted by the like Folly,
did feign themselves this Arthur, that they might not come short of their
Neighbors, and him they give out to be a Demi-God, and Prince of Ghosts, that
he might appear the more august unto Men; whence it came to pass, that if there
were any Country or Place which struck Men with Horror, that they imagined to
be inhabited by Arthur. If any Man bring another Reason, I shall acquiesce; but
this is certain, that if there had been any Arthur, either in the Time of
Justin or Justinian, something of his Memory would have been transmitted to us.
But to return to our purpose.

In the Book entitled (...) printed at London by John Day in 1568, Arthur's
Victories are related, and the Provinces which he subjected to Britain are
enumerated, viz. all Scantia, which is now called Norway, Snechorda, Hibernia,
Gutlandia, Dacia, Semelandia, Winlandia, Curlandia, Roe, Femelandia,
Wirelandia, Flandria, Cherrela, Lappa, Islandia, Greenlandia, and the Islands
of the Eastern Ocean, as far as Russia, and many other Islands beyond Scandia.
There are some of those Countries, viz. Island and Greenland, which are known
to Sailers, the Sovereignty of which no Body envies Arthur, they are so very
disagreeable to Mankind. Nor did we ever see any Men from those parts, either
eminent for their Actions, instructed in Learning, or indeed scarce Christians,
the Country being full of Apparitions, Ghosts, Hobgoblins and Fairies: and
therefore it is not without reason, that I am brought to think him the Prince of
the Ghosts, and feigned on purpose to frighten Children into their good
Behavior, or to terrify the Minds of weak Men. As for the other Countries,
Snechorda, Gutlandia, Semelandia, Winlandia, Wirelandia, and Cherrela, which
are no where to be met with, and whose Names were never heard of, they are
fittest for Arthur; that this new and fictitious King should reign and govern
in these new and fictitious-Territories, according to his own Will and
Pleasure; so that he be but kept out of Britain, and not made use of as a
Bugbear to frighten timorous Men.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Malgo and other Kings of the British Line, and whether they could pretend
to any Homage.
HOlinshed subjoins that Malgo or (...) succeeded Arthur, and passes over (...),
Connan^s and Vortiporius, because he ^ound nothing in them which could whet his
Teeth against the Scots. As to Malgo, he says, That he gave Lothian, a part of
Scotland, to Ethelfred the English Saxon. How to answer this Man according to
his Merit, I know not, except by applying to him what Leland says undeservedly
of our Boethi^s; for Lothian at that time was not a Scottish Province, but
belonged to the Picts. Nor would what he designs follow thence if it had; for
granting that Malgo had given some part of Scotland to Ethelfred for a place of
Habitation, it cannot be concluded from thence, that the King of Scots paid
Homage to Malgo, nay, the contrary is to be inferred from the Feudal Law, viz.
that if Malgo had had any Superiority over Scotland, he lost it by this very
Act, in making the Condition of his Vassal worse than it was, without his
Consent, and taking away part of his Fee; for according to the Feudal Law, as
the Vassal cannot encroach upon his Lord's Patrimony, so neither can the Lord
hurt his Vassal, or diminish any thing of his Fee without his Consent. But what
do I argue thus with this Holinshed, who according to his own Confession is
altogether ignorant of the Law? But the impartial Reader may thence judge
whether those things be probable.

Malgo reigned only five Years, in which time being defeated by Ethelfred with
a great Discomsiture, he was scarcely able to defend his own Wales. He was
moreover a Person so hateful to God and Man, for the unheard of sorts of Lusts
which he brought into Britain, that there is not the least Shadow of
Probability, that ever he thought of seizing or distributing other Men's
Provinces. And at last I set Holinshed here against himself, in whose History
there is no such thing to be found, especially when none of the Saxon Kings did
more grievously afflict the Britains than Ethelfred. He writes, that Cadvan^s
succeeded Malgo, and passes over an Interregnum of twenty four Years, and
Careticus, who defended the Scots his Subjects from the Violence and Injuries
of Ethelfred, but repenting him straightway of what he had done, because of
the Rebellion of the Scots, he says, that he granted all Scotland to Ethelfred;
which nevertheless Cadwallo King of the Britains recovered, and killed
Ethelfred, and in this Expedition, he says, that all the Saxon Kings served
Cadwallo. But all who have ever writ of British Affairs, do testify, that never
any one Man did so much afflict the Brittons as this Ethelfred, who drove them
into their own Wales, and cut off from them all hopes of return: That all the
Saxon Kings served the British Kings in the War, is ridiculous, for the Saxons
never ceased, until the Britains were expelled, and they themselves possessed
of their Country; nor was there any Cessation from War, for Cadwanus and
Cadwallo esteemed it enough, says Polydore, to bear up against the imminent
Ruin of their Country; and if it had been either in Cadwanus or Cadwallo's
Power to fix their Residence in Scotland, how bad soever it may be, they would
never have preferred Wales before it. But as to the matter of Homage, here is a
perpetual Silence.

When Cadwallader the last King of the Britains, who went over into little
Britany, because of a raging Famine and Pestilence at Home, had gathered
together an Army to recover his Country, he was said to be admonished by an
Apparition of a more venerable Shape than any thing Humane, that he should not
attempt in vain what Fate had forbid him, for his Country should fall into the
Enemies Hands, and be recovered a long Time after by his Posterity, as
Polydore, Holinshed, and the rest of the Common Historians have it, which may
be much better accommodated to King James VI. than to Henry VII. for neither
does it appear, that Owen Teudor was descended from the Race of the Welsh
Kings, nor is there any one who can deduce his Pedigree from them: But Walter
the first of the Family of the Stewards, which now reigns, is descended from
them. But whether that Oracle did regard the said Walter, or Henry the seventh,
it is certain that it hits in the most Serene Prince James the sixth, who is the
undoubted Heir of both, by both Lines.

So much concerning the British Kings and their seigned Homage, which
nevertheless, as I observed before, was not known in Britain before the
Conquest, or at least before the Year 900; therefore whatever is said or writ
concerning the Homage before that Time, is so inconsiderable, that it does not
deserve a Confutation, or if they have any Author of this Homage, by whom they
can defend themselves, let them name one before the Conquest, who made any
mention of Vassal, direct or profitable Lordship, Homage, Fealty, Fee Liege, or
Fee it self, and we shall yield the Cause. As to what concerns the Brittons
after the arrival of Julius Caesar, (for before his Time we have nothing to
say) it is certain that they were always under the Roman Yoke; and when they
went away, all the Histories of that Time do testify that they became
tributary, and gave Hostages to the Scots and Picts for thirty Years together:
Nor is there any English Author who has not expressed that very thing. And
that they might shake off their Yoke, they invited the Saxons into the Island,
by whom they were far more grievously oppressed, expelled their Country, and
driven into Wales, which at last they could not retain neither; but falling
under the Power of the English, the Brittons lost all Royal Name and Dignity in
the Island for ever.

We must also consider in this Cause, as a Thing which gives very great Light
to the Question, what it is that an^ient Authors understand by the Name of
Britain; for whenever Holinshed reads, that any of his fictitious Kings did
reign over all Britain, forthwith he supposes, that they did at the same time
command over Scotland, seeing that is a part of Britain: but as George Bucha^^^
has observed, it is certain that the ancient Writers did by the Name of
Britain, understand only that part which was inhabited by the Britains, and
enclosed within Severns's Wall as a Roman Province. I shall add some single
Instances, instead of many, out of Gildas, Bid, an anonymous Author, and
Geffrey himself, besides those which are cited by Buchanan.

Gildas when he writes of the Destruction and Conquest of Britain, understands
it only of the Conquest and Destruction of his own Country; for Scotland was
neither conquered nor destroyed, there having never been any Man yet, who could
truly boast that he had conquered Scotland. Geffrey writes, That Cadwallo King
of Britain, chased the Saxons beyond the Wall, which was built betwixt Britain
and Scotland. Bede's words are, Neither was there any of the Kings of Scots who
durst enter Britain to infest the Saxons, after that fatal Battle of Aidan the
King of Scots with Ethelfred: but it is certain that King Aidan and his Scots,
did securely inhabit that part of the Island which is called Scotland, both
then and afterward. And a little after, the same Bid says, There Is a Place
near the Wall Northward, by which Wall the Romans encompassed Britain from Sea
to Sea: Therefore Britain was then called an Island as enclosed with a Wall. I
pass by many other Instances, lest I should be tedious to the Reader; but it
appears from what has been said, that when we find it mentioned concerning any
one, that they reigned over Britain, there is nothing understood of Scotland,
whatever Holinshed may aver, who deals unfairly in many things: for when in his
History he affirms, That the Scots did not arrive in the Island before the
Reigns of Honori^s and Arcadi^s; and that he has the History of all the
preceding Scots Kings from us, there being no Englishman, for what I know, that
writes concerning our Affairs, ( Bid it is true, makes mention of Reutherus,
but he confesses that it was not his design to write the Scots History) yet
nevertheless Holinshed perverts the whole. If it be writ that the Brittons made
War upon any of our Kings, then straightway Holinshed asserts that they were
beaten, conquered, implored Mercy, and performed Fealty and Homage: If they
would not submit, then they were expelled by the Brittons; and that because of
the innate Treachery of the Nation, and their continual Rebellion: But if they
did any thing that was gallant, he either adulterates the same, or passes it
over in silence; such is Holinshed's Candor toward us in his History, and such
his Fidelity in relating Matters of Fact.

Neither is this to be omitted, that if the Kings of the Brittons had any
direct Lordship or Superiority over Scotland, it certainly fell with their
Monarchy, according to the Maxims of the Feudal Law: For it is a most certain
Rule in that Law, that by the Destruction of the thing from which a Fee is
held, if so be it happen without the Vassal's Concurrence, as by Fire,
Earthquake, Opening of the Earth, Inundation, or be seized by an Enemy, or
otherways, the Fee and Lordship ceases, and becomes extinct. But that the
Monarchy of the Brittons, to which this Homage was due (according to Holinshed)
is destroyed, and their Country overrun by an Inundation of Enemies, is
certain; and therefore this supposititious Right of Superiority is also by the
Rules of the Feud^l Law extinguished with the Monarchy of the Brittons, to
which it was due and appertained. But let us suppose that it is not ceased,
then it must needs devolve upon the Posterity of Brut^s, and not upon their
most bitter Enemies, who deprived them of their Country, Life and Liberty: And
if it be so, the King of Scots is the only Survivor of Brutus's Line I think
fit to admonish the Reader of this one thing; That all those Matters if they do
any way refer to the Question in hand, are alleged by Holinshed, without any
Author, probable Reason, or Likelihood: And indeed this is a very strange
thing, that he should be so ungrateful to his Authors as not to think them
worthy to be named: And it is also wonderful that any Men, eminent for
Experience and Learning, of which there is no small Number in England, should
listen or give Credit to any of those Impostures; for that which is not founded
upon any certain Authority, deserves no Credit amongst honest Men. But I
suppose he was afraid to name his Author, lest the Matter should not have
succeeded according to his Desire; and in that case, if the quoted Author
should have denied him his Patronage, he would have been caught at a
Disadvantage, and le^t to enter the Lists alone without Arms.

(...) ad extremum ridendus and Ilia ducat. CHAP. XIV.
Of the Saxon Monarchy and its Duration, and whether ever Scotland belonged to
the King of England.
HAving gone through the Time of the British Monarchy to see if there were any
Footsteps or Token of this Homage to be found, the first Army of Instances
which were rashly led up by Holinshed, consulting their own Safety, betook
themselves to their Heels, and run over to the Enemy. Now it remains for us to
attack the second Army of Instances, which he brings from the Time of the Saxon
Monarchy, to try whether any thing can be found in them to confirm this
Com^entitious Homage. This Saxon Monarchy began about the Year 450, and lasted
about 600 Years, till the Time of the Conquest. In all which time, that there
was no Homage, no Benefit for which it was due, no Superiority, or direct or
profitable Dominion, Dominium directum vel utile, I have made manifest in the
first Proposition. In Confirmation whereof I add this, that if the ancient
English Laws before the Conquest, printed at London under the Title of (...),
be seriously perused, it will appear that there is no mention of Fee, without
which there can be no Homage: For as to Athelstan, who by our Writers is said
to be the first that received Homage from Malcolm, or as they say Constantine
King of Scots, for the Principality of Cumberland and Westmoreland, he lived
only one Age before the Conqueror; and I suppose that our Authors did rather
follow the Custom of the Age when they wrote, than of that wherein those things
were transacted. But of Athelstan we shall say more afterward. The Writer of
that Time, and the Transactions which happened therein, is Bid, who died Ann.
Dom. 733. and that by his Death, the History of that Time was lost, is
testified by Malmsbury, Florence of Worcester, and him who wrote the Prologue
to the first Book of Malmsbury's History. But whether it was Malmsbury himself
or another, he confesses ingenuously that the History of 223 Years was lost;
which if they be added to the Years of Bede's Death, reach to 956. Betwixt
which, and the Time of Bede's Death, it is certain from the Testimony of the
English Writers themselves, that all their History was lost: and that therefore
no Credit is to be given to those who assert whatever comes uppermost, or
alledg any other things than what Bid transmitted to Posterity. But those who
would have themselves to be believed as to the Transactions of those two Ages
and a half did not live till Henry the Second's Time, which was about 1170;
that is almost 400 Years after those things were transacted concerning which
they write. The oldest is Ethelverd, who lived in 1090; and whether it be fit
to believe those Men concerning things which happened so long before they
themselves were born, especially when they have no Authority but the Relation
of Men whom they esteemed worthy of Credit, I submit to the Judgment of those
who are any way versed in History.

But here some may object, that they had Chronicles whence they might excerpt
those things. It Is true, that the Chronicles did use indeed to take notice of
the Year and Reign when such a thing happened; but omit Causes, Reasons,
Circumstances, and other things which are of most note in History: Or if they
have any unsuspected Chronologer who attests this Homage, let them produce him,
and we shall grant then the Victory But whence they had those things which they
wrote, and what they understand by Chronicles, I shall dispatch in a few words;
and from one History, which was much esteemed by them, according to the Custom
of those Times, we may make a Conjecture of the rest, that all Men may perceive
how f^ivolous their Reasons, and how vain those Monuments are which they use,
or rather abuse in a Matter of so great Weight, to weigh down the Truth which
we have on our side. I have in my Custody a History of those Times in
Manuscript, so stuffed with Fables, Miracles and Monsters, that it must needs
raise the Contempt of any Reader. The Author is uncertain, but it is certainly
a Relict and Monument of some English Monastry. It Is wonderful to read what
great and strange things he writes concerning Edward and A^helstan; all which
are ascribed to the Prayers and Merits of St. John of B^verly, and the
Invocation of St. Guthbert. He says, that being invoked by Athelstan, they put
the Scots to flight; and that Athelstan at his return, endowed both their
Churches with innumerable Gifts and rich Farms. Nor have they any other
C^ronicle or Author, (as shall be afterward made appear in Edward ^) but one
of those who wrote the Lives of the Saints; and why I should believe them
rather than those things which are writ in the Golden Legend, Lives of the
Fathers, or such kind of Writings, I know not For what could the well-fed and
idle Monks do better, when they had a mind to shake off their Sloth^ and
Drousiness, than to seign something which they thought worthy to be remembered?
Therefore one set himself about the History, or rather Romance, of St.
Cuthbert: Another about that of St. John of Beverly: A third about that of St.
Bridget, or some other tutelary Saint to whom their Church was dedicated; which
they set off with all manner of Counterfeit Fables and Ornaments that could be
invented. To this was added a Cart-load of Miracles; without which the
Saintship of him, in whose Name their Church was consecrated, was in hazard to
be called in question: and therefore it behoved them to feign, that by their
Influence either the Danes were drove back to their Ships, or that the Scots
were routed and broken, or had made a Surrender of themselves. Nor did they
think that they sinned in so doing, for they called it only an Officious Lie;
and the more notable the Fiction was, they were held worthy of the higher
Dignity, and looked upon as Persons of more than an ordinary size of Piety.
Then they were admired by the ignorant Friars, and reverenced by following
Writers. At last, when the Government of a Monastry became vacant, such an
Author alone was reckoned worthy to succeed; which he ascribed to the
propitious Name of his tutelary Saint. When I was at Paris, I saw in St.
Genevieve's Church at the High-Altar, her Achievements finely painted; and
amongst other things, it was feigned that by her Prayers she had beat off the
English from the Siege of Paris, routed them, chased 'em, and chastis'd them
with innumerable Calamities: though no Englishman did ever either hear or see
that Paris was besieged by the English; and Genevieve her self was dead many
Years before the Reign of the English, for she died at Paris about 80 Years
old, ann. 513. as is witnessed by Matthew of Westminster. But those Writings
having once pleased the Ears and Minds of the common People, were esteemed as
true; so that if any Man durst but mutter against them, he was forthwith looked
upon as an Heretic and Enemy to Piety. Nor is Bid himself, though a most
Learned Man, free from this Crime of believing Lying Miracles; for there are so
many of them inserted in his History, that they derogate from the Credit of
what is true. If no Fable of a Saint occurred, then they described Arthur's
Achievements; as Geffrey of Monmouth, who wrote five Books of things that were
never transacted; or they forged some new Gildas, that the New History of
England might have something of Probability: and so those Writings of the Monks
coming to be admired, were desired by others that they might be copied; by
which Means they were filled with Mistakes, partly by Negligence of
Transcribers, and partly out of a Design to advance their own Religion, and
honor their Country, or out of favor to this or the other Man, who had done
them a Kindness, or enriched their Churches. From the Text of those Legends, or
Chronicles* as the Vulgar used to call them, Malmsbury and Florence collected
their Histories; and omitted nothing that was fabulous or conducive to promote
either the Dignity of their own Country, or the Ecclesiastical State; and if
they say otherwise, let them produce any one Author or Chronicle which is not
made up of things transacted at least 200 Years before he was born who writes
it: And how is it possible that he who did not live till so many Years after,
should be able to give an Account of Transactions, with the Causes, Occasions,
Events and Circumstances at such an Interval of Time?

But there are two Evidences, chiefly by whose Testimony more than all the
rest, the Equity of our Cause is mightily prejudged, viz^ Matthew of Paris, and
Matthew of Westminster, both Monks: but how much Credit is to be given to their
History, shall be made appear, not from any Scots Author, for I would not have
a Scotsman credited in this Case; but from a Learned English Author, whose Name
I know not, viz. he who wrote the Preface to the Life of Alfred and
W^lsingham's History. For first, he says, that they abound with Monkish
Fictions, and old Wives Fables* and then he adds, that Matthew of ^estminster
and Matthew of Paris, are so full of Fables and monstrous Stories, that no Body
does now believe them; yet he thinks fit that they should be published, that we
may see with what Clouds of Darkness we were encompassed in the Time of Popery:
for what danger can there be, says he, in repeating those Fables and Dreams?
Certainly if any Man be drunk and bewitched with Monkish Dotages and Fables,
they will both believe them and the Author: And a little after he says, But for
my part, as often as I fall upon those Monkish Fables and old Wives Tattle, I
am mightily pleased with them; and yet these are the Writers by whose Authority
we are run down: So much says he in his Preface. For as it appears by the
Reseript of Valentinian and Valens, all Monks were accounted irreconcilable
Enemies to Truth, and such as were accustomed to embrace the Shadow for the
Substance. Quidam Ignaviae Sectatores. C. de Curionibus.
And those Writers lived in a Time when nothing was more hateful to the English
than the Name of a Scotsman; and therefore they thought it their Glory to forge
whatever they could against the Scots, seeing they might not only do it without
fear of Punishment, but did also either reap actually or at least conceive
Hopes of having great Profit by it: And they did afterward arrive at that
height of Impudence, that either by adding to, or diminishing from Authors,
they did most wickedly make them patro^^ze the most absurd things, as is noted
by Henry Savil (in his Preface to Westminster) a Man truly Learned, and who
has l^^ely published the ancient English Historians. And seeing from a
Principle of Po^^^ Superstition, there was nothing which the Monks would not
forge, which could either enrich the Ecclesiastical Order, or advance the Pope
above all Kings, and make him Sovereign of the Universe; and seeing also, as is
said by the Learned in the Law, de sim^li in simile facilis est Transitus, Why
should we not think that they would turn every thing that occurred into a
Panegyric of their own Prince, so they could but render him Sovereign of the
whole Island?

Iuvenal is certainly in the right, when he says in his third Satyr, Graeculus
esuriens in coelum jusseris ibit,
A hungry Fellow will do any thing to have his Belly full.
And in that same manner, those Court-Dogs do continually fawn upon their
Masters, that they may procure some Morsels to stay their ravenous Stomachs.
But here the English will object, that if we refuse this sort of Evidence, what
is it that will satisfy us, or what Proofs do we require in a matter of this
Importance, to make the Truth of that Homage manifest? I answer, that as I have
no regard to the Testimony of impudent Monks, so I maintain, that the
Affirmative is only to be proved by authentic Charters and Monuments (kept in
the Archives) under the Handwriting of both Kings, and no otherwise: Nor is
the Assertion of one sufficient without the exchanging of Indentures, or
attested Breviates, as we call them in the Feudal Law; for that is not
sufficient for one of them to salute another, by the Name of his Lord or Coheir
in a Missive Letter, this not being enough to make either the one Lord, nor the
other Heir; nor if there be some such assertory Letters, as Paulus de Castro
speaks In summario.
is that sufficient: for says the Emperor Philip, Domestic Instruments,
private Testimonies or Annotations, are not good enough Proof, if they be not
supported with other Circumstances Instrumenta, ibidem.
. Now what can be writ or said more weighty against the Testimonies of those
Monks, or their Notations of Times which they call Chronicles? Bodinus Lib. 1.
de Repub.
testifies, that all those Homages which were performed either by the King of
England, Dukes of Britany, Burgundy, etc. to the Kings of France, are still
extant in the Archives. Then let Holinshed Show me any one such if he can; or
if we must believe Witnesses, I wish he could tell me of any Pandulphus, who
was sent as his Master's Ambassador or Proctor, in whose Presence the King
pulled the Crown from off his own Head, and delivered it into the Hands of the
Ambassador, who after he had kept it in his Custody for fix Days together The
Form of Homage which John King of England performed to the Pope.
, did in his Master's Name set it upon the King's Head again, as his fiduciary
Client, imposing a Tribute of 1000 Marks Sterling upon him at the same Time,
and taking his O^th, not only to perform faithful Vassalage and perpetual
Service, but also that neither the King nor any of his Posterity, should ever
pretend to that Crown any otherwise, than by the Bounty and Good Will of his
Liege Lord, and this under his own Hand, the Great Seal of the Kingdom, and
those of sixteen Earls, besides others that were present.

If they can show us that ever any such thing was performed by the King of
Soots, or received by the King of England, they shall readily obtain our
Affirmative to this Question. But they are also to take notice, that Charters
alone are not sufficient to confirm this; for though they should agree, that
the one shall be Lord, and the other Vassal, yet except there be an intervening
Benefit, there cannot be any Homage; for Homage is always accompanied with
Benefit, as the Sun is with a Shadow; or as we say in Relatives, the one
without the other is inconsistent, as I have observed before. They who have the
least knowledge of the Feudal Law, must confess those things to be true; for if
there be no Benefit granted me, how can I owe Service, or with what Confidence
can the Lord demand Military Service or Homage, from him who is not obliged to
him by any manner of Bounty? for when the Bounty ^eases, the Homage does also
cease. But that Scotland was the Benefit or Gift of England, or the English
Kings, there is no Man as I conceive will be so Impudent as to assert; for if
so, who gave it? Who received the Investiture? Where are the Monuments or
Indentures? When did we receive this Benefit? In what Century or Olympiad? Long
before the Name of Bugland was known, we had many Kings in Scotland; nay some
of them possessed Britain it self. As to what concerns the Kingdom of the
Picts, it cannot be called their Benefit, for that we acquired by our own
proper Valor against their Will, they having taken Arms in defense of the
Picts; so that Scotland cannot be called a Benefit of England, by any Man who
has not bid defiance to Truth. But they will say that there is another way of
acquiring Fealty and Homage, viz. by Force of Arms; for it may so happen, that
a King who is routed and conquered, may surrender himself up as a Vassal to the
Conqueror, and hold the Kingdom in Fee of him which was Free before, and
perform Homage to him upon that account. To which I answer, that this is
contrary to the Nature of a Fee, for a Benefit ought not to be acquired by
Force and Violence, but by Liberality and Munificence, and a Benefit (
Beneficium) is the Genus of the Thing defined in a Fee ( Genus de^initi est in
Feudo). But of this Instance there is no Example: For in all Europe there is no
Homage (at least in Clientelary Kingdoms) which was acquired by Arms. Indeed
the Emperor Henry V. or as some will have it Frederick I. The Kingdom of
Bohemia was at first instituted, that it might be a Fee of the Empire.
created a King of Bohemia out of his own Patrimony, who did thereupon perform
Homage to him about the Year of God,... but this did proceed merely from wicked
Ambition; for the Emperor perceiving that there were diverse Kings in Europe,
who would scarcely yield to him in Point of Dignity, that he might be revenged
upon them in some measure, and show, that he could do that which others could
not; he would create a King, but one that should be his Vassal, for which he
had no Precedent, neither can any Man, in so far as he is King, have another
King under him; that of Martial is known, Esse sat est Servum, jam nolo
Vicarius esse
Qui Rex est Regem maxim non habeat.
And it is a Maxim in Law, Par in parem non habet Imperium, i.e. Equals have no
Command over one another; but the King of Bohemia had his whole Kingdom out of
the Patrimony of the Empire, and upon that account performed Homage.

The Antipope Anaclet the second, in Imitation of the Emperor's Ambition, and
that he might also have Kings for his Vassals, created the Duke of Apulia King
of Naples, and empowered him to make use of the Regalia, as a Fiduciary Client
of the Patrimony of St. Peter, as they call it, to which as they alledg all
Italy belonged by the Donation of Constantine. The Kingdoms of Naples and
Sicily founded at first, that they might hold in Vassalage of the Sea of Rome.
Therefore the Kingdom of Naples holds in Fee of the Sea of Rome, and pays
50000 Ducats yearly by way of Covenant. And in like manner Manfred was invested
King of Sicily, because he had taken it by Force of Arms from the Saracens; and
because this noble Island being taken from the Saracens had no Sovereignty, the
Pope adjudg'd it to the Patrimony of St. Peter, but so as Manfred should be
King under the Vassalage of the Roman Pontif, out of whose Patrimony he would
have it to be thought, that the said Benefit was granted. Now those Kings
received their Kingdoms, from the Bounty of the Emperors and Popes; and so
those Kingdoms were originally founded, that they should hold in Vassalage, and
perform Homage upon that Account: But here was nothing effected by Force nor
Arms, and they are the only Kings who hold in Vassalage in Europe; except some
have a Mind to say, that the Kings of England and their Successors were made
Vassals to the Sea of Rome, not by Benefit, but by the Papal Arms, that is to
say, by Curses and Excommunications, the Ordinance of the Vatican. The King of
Denmark indeed acknowledges the Emperor as his Lord for Ditmarsh, and upon that
account pays him Homage and receives his Investiture, but for Denmark he owes
neither Fealty nor Homage to any Man. And the Kings of England swore Fealty and
Homage to the French King, so long as they enjoyed Anjou, Poictou, Aquitain,
and the rest of the Provinces beyond Sea; but those being taken away, the
Homage ceased, for the Benefit ceasing as the Cause of the Homage, the Homage
it self must of necessity cease also. Neither is it usual for Conquerors to
leave the Royal Title to the Conquered Kingdom: Britany was called a Kingdom
formerly, but after it was subdued by the French, they laid the Name of Kingdom
aside. When the Welsh were brought under by the English Power, they were forbid
to choose any more Kings; and it was the like as to Ireland, which was governed
by five Kings when conquered by the English; who were all of them constrained
to quit that Royal Title, and for the most part assumed that of Earls; so that
fourfold Division of the Kingdom of France amongst the Sons of Charlemaign,
whenever any of them returned to the ancient Patrimony, their Title of Kingdom
became antiquated: and indeed in my Judgment, there is no such thing to be found
in all Europe, that one King should have another for his Vassal, although the
same be not unusual to Emperors and Popes, who arrogate to themselves a
Superior Power.

I know that the Kingdom of Castile did sometimes pay Homage to the King of
Leon, and Portugal did the same to Castile; but Castile was originally no more
than a Province, or County of the Kingdom of Leon, and Portugal a part of
Castile. Nor did their Princes at first assume Royal Dignity to themselves,
lest they should be forsaken by their first Patrons; but when they began to
reign in good earnest, and that their Royal Title was confirmed, the Homage did
also cease as is witnessed by Roderick Sancius.

But lest we should seem to be altogether contentious, we will grant, though
they can never force us to it neither by Argument nor Example, that a King may
be compelled by Arms to acknowledge another as his Lord, and receive the
Investiture of his Kingdom from him, as a Beneficiary. Let us go through the
whole Time of the Saxon Monarchy, which stood for about 600 Years, as I have
already said, and see if any thing occurs which bears a Shadow of Probability,
that ever the King of Scots was so brought under by the King of England, as
either to make a Surrender of himself unto him, or receive a new Investiture of
his Kingdom from him: and in order hereunto, we shall begin with Hengist.

CHAP. XV.
A true Delineation and Description of the English Saxon Monarchy.
THE first Monarchy of the English Saxons in Britain, was founded by Hengist
himself, and preserved with a great deal of Difficulty; so that from him we
were in no Danger; he being engaged in War with the Britains during his whole
Life, and falling in the same at last. He was succeeded by his Son Esca or
Osca; and Auxiliary Forces arriving daily from Germany, when once they were
informed of the Nobleness of the Island, they continued the War with the
Britains; and having driven them into Wales, divided the Province amongst
themselves into seven Kingdoms, the Countries being shared according to every
one's Merits; so that all the Time of this Heptarchy, they had a Domestic
Enemy to contend with, and the Point in controversy was not, which of them
should Govern, but which of them should Live: For the Britains, though they had
the justest Cause of War that could be, yet being inferior to the Saxons in
Valor and Strength, and forced to retire into the Mountains and (...) Places;
they did con^^^ually infest the Territories of the English Saxons with their
Inroads, whereas they were secure themselves by the natural Strength of their
Country, and did also possess the Counties which lay next to them, and whenever
a fair Opportunity offered, they did not decline Fighting, Anger and Grief for
the loss of their Country inspiring them with Courage, while Fortune and their
own Valor favored the Saxons: So that during this whole six hundred Years,
one War begat another, without any mention of Peace, both Nations fighting
eagerly; nor in all this time could the Bri^ains be subdued, no, not in the
Conqueror's Reign Rufus his Son having killed their King Rhe^us, who was the
last they had, did in some measure oblige them to surrender; and since that
time there have been no Kings in Wales, or the Ancient Gambriu, yet they were
not entirely subdued till the Time of Edward the first: It may be indeed that a
Truce happened sometimes by mutual Consent, but they never laid down their
Arms, the one striving to regain their ancient Country, and the others to
retain it.

The Britains being thus repulsed, though not conquered, a far more
insupportable Mischief fell out amongst the Saxons themselves, viz. Civil Wars
which were bloody to that degree, that the Conqueror seldom gave any Quarter to
the Conquered, but did rage against one another with mutual Butcheries: And
thus these following Princes and their Armies were slaughtered, viz. Ethelfred
by Redval, Oswald by Penda, and Penda by Oswy, Brother to Oswald, in revenge of
his Brother's Death. I could name many others, but it not being my design to
write the Story of the Heptarchy, I shall only add, that thus they exercised
their Fury upon one another by mutual Discomfitures, until the rest of the
Heptarchy's being suppressed, the whole Province submitted to the Government of
Egbert, about the Year 800: He was the first who would have Britain called
England, by the Name of his own People; and the Britains in the mean time
keeping up their Arms, was the principal Cause of this uniting among the
Saxons, for being too weak for the Britains apart, the Saxon Commonalty did the
more readily agree to submit themselves to the Government of One; that so with
their united Forces, they might the more easily repel the Britains: then seeing
for that whole space of four hundred Years, they had an irreconcilable Enemy
at Home, and destroyed one another with mutual Slaughters, who can believe that
they did ever so much as dream of invading or subduing Scotland; they had Wars
and Trouble enough at Home, but no Cause of Hatred against the Scots.
Ethelfred's Victory over Aidan, which is related by Bid, makes nothing against
this Proposition, for it was Aidan who provoked the Saxons, and had already
settled himself in Northumberland, that he might assist the Britains against
them as became a true Christian, though he had very just Causes of being
offended with the Britains; yet by the Influence of the Bishops, he was not
only withheld from taking Arms against them, but chose rather seeing they
professed the Christian Religion to join with them against the Saxons, the
Common Enemies of Christianity; and therefore it could never so much as once
enter into Ethelfred's Mind to subdue Scotland. But we shall give an answer in
a little Time to those things which are objected by Holinshed. It is therefore
manifest, that during those four hundred Years, the Saxons made no Hostile
Attempt on the Scots, nor never entered Scotland, or if they did, were not
permitted to make any long stay there. But besides the Incursions of the
Britains, and their own Domestic Broils, and mutual Slaughters which ended in
Egbert, the English were attaqu'd with a new and more grievous Judgment than
all the former; for the Danes upon the same Motives that the Saxons entered
Britain under Hengist, did first infest the Coasts with Piracy, and conceiving
hopes of enjoying the whole Province, by observing the feeble Resistance of the
Saxons, who having gradually laid aside their ancient Fierceness, were grown
more Humane, they were encouraged to land upon the Continent of Britain with
great Forces, and coming off Conquerors in some Battles, were lifted up with
the Hopes of enjoying the whole Kingdom. Alfred opposed them stoutly, and being
oft-times beaten and oft-times victorious, he did happily however preserve the
Government; and if we may believe our Writers, being assisted with the Scots
Auxiliaries, he overcame the Danes in a great Battle. But however that is, he
entertained a fair and sincere Friendship with the Scots; for England had
embraced the Christian Religion about an Age or two before, and therefore the
Scots were easily persuaded to join with them against the Danes, who were
bitter Enemies to Christianity. All the time of this Alfred, the Scots enjoyed
Northumberland, Cumberland and Westmoreland peaceably, as they had done from
the Reign of Gregory, who had taken them from the Britains and English;
although the English Annals affirm, that they were freely granted to us by
their King, as a Reward of our joining in Arms with them against the Danes.

Athelsta^ succeeding his excellent Father, and being free from the trouble of
the Danish Arms, he could not bear with his Father's great Bounty toward the
Scots, but demanded the Restitution of those Countries from Constantine,
threatening to take them by force of Arms, except the King of Scotland restored
them willingly. Constantine's nearest Kinsman, Malcolm, being already declared
Prince of Cumberland, as a certain Sign of his Succession to the Crown,
according to the then Custom of the Scots, gave a resolute Answer to
Athelstan's Letters; so that they betook themselves to Arms on both sides. In
the mean time a new Army of Danes landed in Northumberland; and having notice
of this Discord, they poured Oil into the Flames, allured the Scots to abandon
the English, and join Arms with them: The unwary Youth did easily agree to it,
as taking it heinously that those who had been so often relieved by his
Father's Arms, in their greatest straits, should now take away the Reward of
his Labor, and therefore he flies into England with Forces, and joins Camps
with the Danes: as soon as ever an Opportunity offered, he att^qu'd the English
with great Fierceness, but his Valor was overcome by their Policy; for
Athelstan had ordered his Men to retire gradually, and counterfeit a Flight,
which the Scots taking to be real, broke their Ranks, and pursued them until
such (...) as new Troops came out from the Prince where they had lain in
Ambush, and the rest returning to order of Battle, did first put the Scots, who
were eagerly fighting, to the Rout, and then the Danes; by which Stratag^m the
Conqueror did afterward overcome Harold. Malcolm, the most of his chief
Nobility, and the stoutest of the Youth being stain, returned wounded into
Scotland, no Man pursuing him; nor is there any thing more false, than what is
asserted by the Common sort of the English Historians, that Constantine was at
this Battle in Person. But when the Danes upon News of this Fight came in with
Auxiliary Troops from all parts, their Army increased so mightily, that
Athelstan perceived he was in hazard of losing all, if the Scots should but
join them with never so small a Force, and therefore conceiving it to be easier
to please the Scots, because they were Christians, he first sent Ambassadors to
renew the Friendship with them. The King of Scots perceiving the multitudes of
Danes which arrived daily; and fearing that after they had destroyed the
English, his turn should be next, he gave consent without much Reluctance: The
conditions were, that Westmoreland and Cumberland should be granted to Malcolm,
as a perpetual and Hereditary Fee; Upon which account he was to receive the
Investiture of those Countries from Achelstan, and to do him Homage as his
Lord; and this is the first Homage that we read of to have been performed in
Britain: which yet those ignorant Monks call a Surrender and not a Homage,
because they did never understand neither the One, nor the Other: For the Names
of Homage and Fee, which had their first Rise amongst the Lumbards and French,
might have crep't into England before that time, though the Feudal Law had not
as yet taken Root there. As to Northumberland, because the Danes did then
possess it by Force, there was no mention of it in the Agreement; though the
Scots did remonstrate, that unless it were also restored, there could be no
firm nor lasting Friendship; but Athelstan excused himself by the Pretext
abovementioned. From his time, to the Conquest, there past 130 Years, during
which the Scots maintained an Inviolable Friendship with Edward, Athelstan and
the English; so as they drew the Arms of the Danes upon themselves, and
hazarded their own Safety for that of England. The Danes having labored a long
time in vain to break this League, promising to give Northumberland also to the
Scots, did at last attaque them with many Armies, and were often Victorious;
but being at length overcome by Malcolm the second in three most desperate and
bloody Battles, they were forced to return into Denmark, and to oblige
themselves by Oath, never to return to Scotland in an Hostile manner. Nor was
England ever delivered from intolerable Misery and Slavery, until the Strength
of the Danes was first broke by the Scots; whose Victories procured some Rest,
and a breathing Time to the English. Let all the Monastical Writers be turned
over and over again, to see whether they fix the least Infraction of this
League with Athelstan upon the Scots; nor did the English indeed break it, so
long as they were under any fear of the Danes, so that with united Force they
did gallantly bear up against the Power and Violence of the Danes and Normans,
which did then strike a Terror into all the Kingdoms of Europe, as we shall by
and by make it appear from the Antientest Monuments of England: This is the
truth of the matter of Fact, and disagrees very little in any thing from the
Monastical Writers, if they be rightly understood, but only that they are very
faulty in their representations of the Form and Causes of Transactions, as
shall be made manifest anon. We shall now come to those particulars, which are
objected against us by Holinshed, from the English Saxon Kings, but so as to
discuss those things which are matter of Fact, before we come to the Question
of Right, as Lawyers speak.

CHAP. XVI.
Whether Cadvan, Ethelfred, Oswald, Oswin or Osbright, did demand this Homage.
THE first that occurs, is Ethelfred King of Northumberland, who according to
Holinshed's Tittle-tattle, received Lothian and many other Countries in
Scotland from Cadwallo, who invested him with the same by force of Arms; and
that Cadwallo repenting of it afterward, because of Ethelfred's Rebellion,
took Scotland again, and became (resais^tus) reseiz'd of it. Here I don't know
whether to admire the Man's Ignorance or Vanity most; for at that time there
was no such thing as Seisin (saisina) in use; and if Cadwallo was the Lord
Paramount, where was the need of a Reseisin? For a Fee Liege is always in the
Possession of the Lord: Nor is there any necessity of a new S^isin, if it be
laid open to the Lord in the Recovery. And Lothian was not then a Scottish
Province, but belonged to the Picts, whose Kingdom was then entire: with how
much more Truth does Bid (who f^ourish'd not long after) relate Ethelfred's
History, whose very words I shall exhibit, that all Men may see how unfaithful
Holinshed has been, in writing his History. This Ethelfred, says he, King of
Northumberland, afflicted the Britains more, made greater Devastations in their
Country, and took more Land from them than all the other Saxon Kings. He fought
with Aidan (whom he calls Eden) King of Scots, such a terrible Battle, that
though Aidan was defeated, and fled beyond the Wall; yet Ethelfred lost his
Brother Theobald, and the Army which he commanded: But the King of Scots durst
never after that hazard another Battle against the English, while Ethelfred
lived. And he adds afterward, that Ethelfred made a terrible Slaughter of the
faithless Britains; and yet Holinshed has the Impudence to charge us with
Per^idiousness, and to assert, that Ethelfred subdued all Scotland, (such is
the Veracity and Nature of the Man) whereas Bid takes notice, that he never
entered Scotland, but contented himself to exercise his Arms against the
Britains; nor does Gildas make mention of any such thing: So that I wonder at
this Man's boldness, who without any Author, nay, against the Authority of the
greatest Writer in those times, dare so rashly advance such a manifest Untruth,
as that the Scots were subdued by Ethelfred: Or let him cite me any other
Historian, if he can, who is to be compared with Bid for Faithfulness or the
Pre-eminence of that Time: Holinshed in his History indeed, where he does
somewhat consult his Credit, passes by all those things. It is not so much as
true, that Ethelfred was slain by Cadvanus, but by Redval the King of the East
Saxons. But that all the Saxon Kings were subject unto, or did serve Cadvanus
or Cadwallo, is monstrous to assert: And I wonder Holinshed, (for to you
henceforth shall my Speech be directed) that your Countrymen the English
Saxons don't break your Face, for such a notorious Fiction. For it is certain
that the Britains were at that time deprived both of their Country and
Sovereignty by the Saxons, with whom they did never entertain any Friendship.

Oswald and Oswin you jumble together; the one you say, overcame and subdued
the Scots at Cadwallo's Command, and the other according to you, did not only
subdue them afresh, but kept them under subjection for twenty eight Years, both
of which are false; and though it were otherwise, neither of them is sufficient
to prove the Homage: For that Oswald and Oswin, after their Father Ethelfred
was slain, and his Kingdom of Northumberland seized, did fly into Scotland, you
your self bear Witness, as do also our Annals, and all those that write of
Oswald and Oswin. Nor is it credible that they would have chosen Scotland for a
Place of Retreat, if so many Offenses had past, and such an inveterate ^nmity
had continued betwixt Aidan King of Scots, and Ethelfred their Father. Or
Aidan's Goodness must needs be commended by all Men, who not only entertained
the Sons of his most Capital Enemy, and vouchsafed them his Protection, against
the Murderer of their Father; but did also instruct them in true Piety, and the
Christian Religion, which the Saxons had not at that time received, and gave
them likewise the best of other Breeding; and being restored to the Kingdom of
Northumberland by his means, they converted their Subjects to the Christian
Religion, by the help of the Scots Bishops. Nor were there ever any Princes who
had a greater Veneration for the Scottish Name, or observed a more inviolable
Friendship with them; as being mindful of the Kindnesses which they had
received in Scotland: Neither do you your self in your History, nor Bid before
you, make any mention, that ever Oswald made War upon the Scots. That which led
you into the Error of asserting that Oswin subdued Scotland, I suppose to be
this of Bid, who says, that Osuin did for the most part subdue the Nations of
the Scots and Picts, (who inhabit the North of Britain) and render them
Tributary; but of this afterward (says he) Cap. 5* Lib. 2.
. But having spoke then occasionally of Oswin, as he was writing the History of
Edilbert King of Kent, he refers the true Account of the Matter to that Place,
where he was to treat of Oswin's History, and his words there are, That the
same Oswin after Penda was slain, governed the Kingdom of the Mercians, and the
rest of the Southern Provinces; and did also subject most of the Pictish Nation
to the King of England Lib. 3. Cap. 24.
Let those two places be compared together, the one wherein Bid treating on
another Subject, says, That the Scots and Picts were for the most part subdued;
and the other wherein he only mentions the Picts; and any Body may easily
perceive, that the latter is the Explication of the former. But that he subdued
the Scots, or made them submit to his Government, Polydore makes no mention,
nor do you your self, Holinshed, in your History. It Is certain that Oswin lived
in a very good understanding with the Scots. But the Picts having broke their
League with the Scots, and being left to themselves, were grievously harassed
by the Northumberland Saxons: yet nevertheless, they held the Kingdom still,
and did afterward cut off Egfrid King of Northumberland and his Army.
Polidore, Lib. 4.
But he has nothing concerning the Tribute of the Scots, nor the Homage, nor
any thing whence that Homage can be inferred. Although our Historians do disagree
from Holinshed, as to the Truth of the History: As to the League betwixt
Charles the King of France and Achaius, which has cost us so much Blood, we
shall speak anon.

We acknowledge that K. Alpin was defeated, taken, and beheaded by Brudaeus King
of the Picts; and that his Head was fastened to a Pole over the Gates of
Camelodunum: But though you should declare it upon Oath, that that inhumane and
unworthy Act was done by the Command of the King of Northumberland, I will not
believe you; although I own that the Picts received Assistance in that War from
his Auxiliary Troops. Indeed to betray his Vassal to his Enemy, to desert him
in a just War, and to assist his Enemy with Auxiliary Forces to oppress his
Vassal; and last of all, to take Order that his Head should be publicly
fastened to a Pole, was not the part of a LiegeLord. Those things do plainly
argue that there was no such Band of Society or Friendship at that time,
betwixt the Scots and the English, as is required betwixt Lord and Vassal; but
if there were, the King of England deserved to be deprived of his Superiority
for ever, because of his Cruelty against his Vassal. Nor can you bewray the
inveterate Rancour of your Heart against the Scots, more than you have done in
writing this; which yet makes nothing toward proving the Homage. But the Story
is known: For whereas the Right of Succession to the Kingdom of the Picts,
after the Decease of their K. Hungus without Children, did by Law fall upon his
Uncle Alpin King of Scots, there did flow hence more than capital Enmities
betwixt the two Kingdoms; who fought against one another with such virulent and
embittered Minds, that there was almost no Quarter given on either side. Alpin
came off Conqueror in the first Battle; but being afterward defeated and
taken, they cut off his Head: but, according to your wonted Candor toward us,
you wilfully pass over what was the Issue of this Affair to the Picts, (for
such a prodigious Piece of Wickedness, and their Violation of the Laws of War);
who being overcome in two or three Battles by Kennethus, Alpin's Son, and the
Revenger of his Father's Death, not withstanding the Assistance which they
received from the English, they were totally destroyed; and their City of
Camelodunum, where the Head of that noble Prince was publicly affixed to a
Pole, (the most prodigious and heinous Breach of the Law of Nations from the
Beginning of the World to that Day) was razed from the very Foundations; so
that there is not the least Vestige thereof now to be seen: And thus that most
wo^ul Disgrace was expiated and revenged, by one which was yet more woeful. Nor
were the Remainders of the Pictish Nation, which was once so famous among the
Brittons and Romans, and who cut off Egfred King of Northumberland with all his
Forces, so much as ever taken notice of afterward in any place of the Earth;
and their Kingdom devolved upon the true Heir. Let this be the second Warning
to you, O People of England, to preserve the Laws of Succession, instituted by
God himself, inviolable; and set always before your Eyes, the Destruction of
the British Nation, and the Cause thereof.

You write that Osbright and Ella, with an Army of Britains and Saxons, did
invade Scotland, put the Scots to flight, and despoiled them of the Countries
by South Forth, because they chose a King of themselves. We confess all but the
Cause of the War, for which you have no Author. But the Case was thus: The
Remainders of the Picts, that they might raise up Enemies against the Scots on
all hands, transferred all their Right to the Kingdom of the Picts upon the
Britains and Northumbrians, whose Kings being joined with the Remains of the
Picts, defeated the Scots, who were much weakened by their many former Battles
with the Picts. But if our Historians may be believed, Mr. Holinshed, from whom
alone you have this History, there being no English Author who mentions it,
although this Victory was so great that perhaps there was never a greater; it
was not so much owing to our Enemies Valor, as to our own Negligence: For the
Scots having come off victorious, and believing that they had nothing more to
do, lay down upon the Grass, made merry in the Enemies Camp, and betook
themselves to rest; and the English, etc. who were watching for an Opportunity,
having notice of their Security by some Traitors, surprised them asleep and
without Arms, and cut them almost totally off: However, though they became
victorious in this Manner, yet they never demanded Homage; but satisfying
themselves with the Countries on the South of Forth, abstained from doing us
any farther Injury. But you have nothing neither here nor in your History,
concerning Homage, Tribute or Subjection Mr. Holinshed. We will grant you that
the Scots were routed, and left many of their Countries to be inhabited by the
Saxons and Britains; but deny that they retired into the Islands, as you will
have it, seeing they had many Countries, and the far better part of Scotland
still remaining. It Is not our Purpose to maintain that the Scots were never
subject to an averse Fortune in War; and therefore confess, that both then and
before, they were often overcome, put to flight, and driven out of some Part of
the Kingdom, viz. the Countries by South Forth: But the same routed and
dispersed Scots, having re-assum'd their Courage upon the Increase of the
Youth, did again make head against the Conquerors; and the Fortune of War
changing, did not only rout and chase, but drive them beyond Humber; as shall
be made appear anon, when we come to speak of Gregory. But this good Historian
does so often take notice of the Scots being beat, routed, subdued, reduced,
and expelled the Island, and that with so much Precipitancy, that he ascribes
one and the same Act to two Kings, that so we may seem to have been twice
defeated; but never says one word how we recovered our Country, and forced the
English to quit it. Whereas, according to the Laws of History, he ought to have
recorded the one as well as the other, or have passed them both over in
silence: It being altogether intolerable in an Historian to commemorate the
famous Achievements of his Countrymen, and never to take notice of their
Overthrows and Defeats. But Holinshed makes no mention of the total Extirpation
of the Picts, though assisted by the English; such is his Candor toward
Scots-men. Nor can I but take notice of what he assigns as the Cause of this
War, that the Scots had chosen themselves a King without the Consent of the
Britains and Saxons. Where, I pray, and in what Author did you read this? Or
who ever writ that the Right of Choosing our Kings belonged to the Saxons and
Britains? When did this begin, and who was the first that was chosen? For our
Kings are not so much as elected by our selves, and far less by our Enemies,
but come to the Crown by Succession. Or if the Consent of the Britains and
Saxons were to be required in this Affair, you might have been pleased to
acquaint us whether this Respect was due to them both conjunctly or separately;
or if separately, to which. But it is not worth the while to confute this Man's
Folly. This whole Story of Osbright and Ella he has from our Historians, there
being no English Author who makes mention of Osbright's Victory; but he
perverts the whole Matter, according to his usual Method.

As to Hungar and Hubba, I do not regard them: It Is true, they overcame the
Scots, though you have nothing of their Victory, nothing of that Superiority
nor Homage, in your History. Neither do I see, though it had been performed to
them, why it should be due to you: But the Danes perceiving it dangerous to try
the Fortune of War with a fierce and hardy Nation, and liking England better,
because there they hoped to find less Resistance, and a larger Reward of their
Trouble, they left Scotland, and turned their Arms against the English. To
enquire into the Issue of that War, makes nothing to the Question in hand; but
only that you advance that Constantine King of Scots, who was chosen to that
Dignity by Osbright, being slain by Hungar and Hubba, that Ethelwolph to
revenge his Death, took Arms against them, and slew them both: But here are as
many Mistakes as Words; for it was never so much as once heard of, that any of
our Kings did reign by the Authority of the Kings of England. And as for
Constantine, he succeeded as lawful Son to his Father Cann^thus. Nor were
Hungar and Hubba slain by Ethelwolph, but by Alured; and why Ethelwolph should
revenge the Injury done to Osbright I don't see, he being nothing akin to him;
especially seeing Ethelwolph was King of the West Saxons, and Osbright King of
the Northumbrians.

CHAP. XVII.
Concerning Ethelwolph, Alured and Edward, Kings of England.
THat Ethelwolph, or Edulph, was the first of the English Kings who subjected
the Kingdom to the Church of Rome, and rendered the same tributary thereunto by
the Impost of Peter Pence, is asserted by you Mr. Holinshed; and according to
your wonted Veracity, you will have the Scots also to pay the same: Whence you
infer, and that also in a reproachful Manner, (which is so familiar to you)
that the Scots were subject to England. But there is not so much even as one
English Historian who takes notice of this Peter Pence's being paid by the
Scots; or if you have any, pray produce them: Nec pigeat Dominum monstrare
tabernae, as Iuvenal says: Don't think much to name your Man. You might as well
have ^eigned that we paid Tribute to Caesar, for it was never neither written,
painted, feigned nor heard, that the Scots paid Peter Pence: sed solatio est
miserorum habere pares, It Is some Comfort to have Fellows in Adversity; the
English not being able to deny, that they hold their Kingdom in Vassalage of
the Sea of Rome, they would have us to be Partners with them in the same
Servitude. Nor is it true that Ethelwolph was the first, who made the Kingdom
of England tributary to the Pope; for Offas King of the Mercians, and also Inas
did it before him: but no Body can thence infer, that we paid Homage, either to
the English, or the Roman Chair.

Of the same Nature is that which you subjoin as to Alured, who ordained, that
no Excommunicated Person should be admitted to the Property of any Fee in
England: and seeing the same Custom is still observed in Scotland, thence you
infer that the Scots were Subjects of England, but by the same sort of Argument
that you made use of formerly. But pray Mr. Holinshed, was this the Statute of
your Alured, or of the Church of Rome, which obtained in all that part of the
Christian World, that submitted to the Church of Rome, as all Britain did at
that Time? And therefore to infer from the Communion of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, that we were your Subjects, is an ill way of arguing; for by that
same Argument, you may conclude, that the whole Western part of the World were
your Subjects: but to this way of arguing, I have answered twice or thrice
already. You write that the same Alured did install Gregory King of Scots, and
compel him to break the League with France, which are both your own Fictions,
having neither Author nor Evidence for it, no, not so much as an Englishman; or
if you have any who has recorded it, that Gregory was installed King by
Alured, and forced by him to dissolve the League with France, name them. But
which way could he compel him, who never attaqu'd him by Force of Arms? For
Gregory as the true Heir of the Crown, and Son to Dongal, succeeded his Kinsman
Ethus, and was most fortunate in War; for having conquered the Danes, and
ejected them totally out of the Kingdom of Scotland, he applied himself to
recover the Countries besouth Forth, which were then possessed by the Danes,
who had dispossessed the English that took them formerly from the Scots, and
cut off Constantine King of the Britains with his whole Army, because he would
not part with Annandale, Galloway, and the rest of the Scottish Countries which
he had acquired in Conjunction with Osbright: And Gregory afterward seizing
Cumberland and Westmoreland, did also drive both the English and Danes out of
Northumberland; and as he was about to besiege York* Alured finding himself not
able to bear up both against the Scots and Danes, reconciled himself to Gregory
King of Scots* and gifted him with all Northumberland, that he might join with
him in his War against the Danes, at that time Enemies to the Christian
Religion, and all the Inhabitants of Britain: this Covenant intervening* that
Northumberland, Cumberland and Westmoreland, should be for ever subject to the
Scots; and therefore both Gregory and his Brother Donald, after his Death, did
assist Alured with their Arms. But this is a new way of arguing, Gregory and
Donald did assist the English with Auxiliary Forces against the Danes;
therefore the Scots were at that time subject to the English: This is a very
sorry Requital for so great a Favor. From that time forward the Scots could
never be withheld from laying Claim to those three Countries, either by Law or
Arms; and the English also reclaiming them, this did continually administer
Cause of Quarrel and Discord betwixt the two Nations, as we shall hear by and
by. This Gregory did also subdue Ireland, which makes it so much the less
probable, that he who conquered so many Nations and People, should be compelled
by Alured to dissolve his League with France: But what is all this to the Homage
in Controversy?

You do also assert, that Edward Son to Alured, did overthrow Constantine King
of Scots, and force him to pay Homage, because he conspired against him with
the Danes. Edward indeed being grieved that so many large Countries were cut
off from England, and given to the Scots by his Father, would needs redemand
them contrary to the Public Faith and Covenant; and it may be that the King of
Scots was forced to join with the Danes. But to prove that he received his
Kingdom from Edward, and acknowledged him for his Lord, you bring ^ Witnesses,
viz. Marianus our Countryman, Ho^eden and Malmsbury; and Henry the eighth in
his Declaration of War before mentioned, does the same: As for you Mr.
Holinshed, I confess I do not wonder, for you have so accustomed your self to
Falsehood, that it is very probable Truth may run away from you, as afraid of
you: but I wonder who could suggest such things concerning Marianus, to that
Noble Prince, who was so famous for his Valor and Achievements, except it be
John Leland, who dedicated his Book on this Subject to that King. But as to
Marianus Scotus, there is not the least mention of those two Kings, Constantine
and Edward, nor yet of Homage to be found in him, though he carried his History
down to the Year 1083. As to Hoveden and Malmsbury, whatever they say, alter
mihi Phryx alter Thrax erit, a^t olitor agens Mercede Caballum; they are both
Enemies, and wrote for Hire: but to be more plain with you, there is no such
thing to be found in Hoveden, no more than there was in Marian: So that here
you are forsaken by two of your Evidence, and the third is in hazard of
betaking himself to his Heels; for though Malmsbury writes, that he defeated
and brought under Subjection all the English, Northumbrians, Scots and
Britains, whom we now call Welsh, yet it is so plainly contradictory to the
Truth of History, that Polydore has tempered it thus, by saying, That he
obtained the Sovereignty of all the People in the Island except the Scots.
Florence of Worcester, who is more ancient than either Hoveden or Malmsbury,
says, That the King of Scots, and Reginald King of the Danes, did choose this
Edward the Elder for their Father and Lord, and entered into a League with him:
But what is all this to Homage, Fealty, or Subjection, if such things were
either written or spoken to him upon the account of Duty or Merit? If any one
salute another by the Name of Patron, Father or Lord, shall we therefore say,
that he pays him Homage? Polydore writes, that Edward made War upon
Constantine, because he did continually make Inroads upon the English Borders;
that this War was carried on with great slaughter on both sides: but the Scots
having the greatest Loss, laid down their Arms willingly; and having obtained a
Peace with the English, proceeded no further. But neither Malmsbury nor
Huntington say any thing of the Homage done to Edward, but are wholly silent as
to that Point.

CHAP. XVIII.
Concerning Athelstan, who was the first that received Homage from the King of
Scots for Cumberland and Westmoreland.
IN Athelstan you seem not only to conquer, but triumph, and assert that what
the Scots do so stiffly deny as to Homage performed to him, after Constantine
was defeated, is owned by our own Writers; and to this you add a base and
contumelious Reproach, that the Scots being corrupted by Danish Money, did
violate their Faith to the English. And that your Honesty may the better appear
to all Men, you affix that upon Constantine as a Blemish, which Malmsbury
attributes to Athelstan himself, viz. that under the Notion of a Stage Player,
or Jester, he entered and viewed the Camp of Avalassus the Dane, and then
returned to his own Army; though the Spanish Writers mention this as a very
great Commendation in Alphonsus the Catholic, who did the like in the Moors
Camp: And what you affirm of the Scots having been bribed by the Danes to break
their League with the English, is all of a piece. Histories do indeed make
mention, that the Danes did at that Time subdue a great part of Europe by Force
of Arms: But no Man, except he who has a Forehead of Brass, and is arrived at
the height of Impudence, will assert that they abounded so much in Money as to
bribe Kings and Nations with it. But to return to the Matter it self: You say,
Mr. Holinshed* that we occasioned the breaking of the League; and our Writers
impute it to Athelstan, who being unmindful of former Kindnesses, and troubled
that his Father and Forefathers had granted the Provinces of Northumberland,
Cumberland and Westmoreland to the Scots, demanded them back again, threatening
War unless they were willingly restored. Malcolm, who was Prince of Cumberland,
and declared Heir to the King of Scotland, took this fierce Declaration yet
more fiercely; but being overcome by a Stratagem of Athelstan, he quitted those
Countries. But Peace being afterward renewed, Westmoreland and Cumberland were
restored a^ Liege-^ees; for which the Prince of Scotland was always to do
Homage. But Northumberland was exempted, as being then in the hands of the
Danes. Let us see then how far our Writers and the English agree in their
Relations of this Affair. We own that the League was broke (but by your Fault);
and that Malcolm was routed, and the greatest part of his Army slain: But in
what follows we disagree. Our Historians say, that Malcolm, a young rash
Prince, was General of our Army; and that Constantine, upon the bad News of its
Defeat, forsook the Throne, and turned Monk. But all the English Authors that I
have read, say that Constantine was present in Person, and routed. Neither do
they agree as to this neither; some say that he was only put to flight, others
say he was slain, and a third sort will have it that he surrendered his Crown to
the English: so natural it is for those who do once step aside from the Truth,
the further they go on, the further to go astray: Nay, they do not so much as
agree in the Place of Battle. Malmsbury says they fought at Brunefurd in
England; some will have it that they fought in Scotland, whereas Athelstan
never saw that Country: And others give out that they fought at the Mouth of
Humber; whither they pretend that Avalassus, and Constantine his Father-in-Law,
arrived with a Navy. Which how like to be true that is, every Body knows; for
the Scots were never Masters of such a Fleet as they could entrust an Army
with, nor had they any need of it, seeing they could invade England by Land at
what part they pleased: But as to any Homage performed at that Time, there is
not so much as one word in any Historian. Polidore, who is the only Man that
has writ the History of England with Judgment, (but following the English
Annals) says, that Constantine swore Feal^y to Athelstan; but whether it were
for Scotland, or those beneficiary Provinces, he says not. And Henry the 8th,
in that Declaration of his beforementioned, says that Homage was done, but
never asserts it for the Kingdom of Scotland until he come to Edward I.
Malmsbury writes that Constantine was forced to quit his Kingdom; but was
afterward restored, that he might reig^ under Athelstan. Henry of Huntington
Lib. 5.
brings the Latin of a certain English Song made for the Joy of that successful
War, which may probably deserve Credit: Therein it is said, that there was
never such a Multitude of Enemies, viz. Scots and Danes, routed; but has not
one word neither of the Homage, nor of Constantine's surrendering himself to the
English. Hoveden writes, that Constantine was defeated; and that afterward
having given his Oath, he entered into a firm League with Athelstan, and gave
his Son for an Hostage; whereas Constantine had no Son, for Malcolm his next
Kinsman succeeded him in the Kingdom: And then he says that he was slain, which
Polydore calls a manifest Untruth. But of Homage he makes no mention. He
asserts that Ethelfred subdued the Scots and the Picts; having forgot that the
Scots had totally destroyed the Picts above an hundred Years before. M^tthem of
Westminster asserts that Constantine was overcome, and drove back to his Navy;
but that Peace being renewed, he only gave his Son for an Hostage, and returned
home: Which is repeated by Florence of Worcester in the same Words. The
Continuator of Bid passes by all those things, as being involved in Darkness;
but never one of them says that Homage was performed, much less for the Kingdom
of Scotland: Nor do any of them so much as make use of the word Homage.
Polydore indeed affecting the Latin too much, affirms that Constantine swore
Fealty, or Subjection, to Athelstan; (Iurasse in Verba Athelstani) but this is
an homonymous Phrase that may be diversely taken. For ^. S^ipio, called
afterward Africanus, compelled Q. Cecilius Metellus, and others of the Roman
Nobility, who consulted together to desert Italy after the Battle of Cannae
(Iurare in sua Verba) to swear Subjection to him; but it is not likely that he
received Homage from them. Iurare in Verba, is by good Authors taken for a firm
Assent; as Iurare in Leges, signifies one's obliging of himself by Oath to
observe the Laws: And so Horace, by Nullius addict us jurare in verba Magistri,
means to give Assent to no Man's Opinion: and whereas they may say, Polydore
did probably use the Words jurasse in Verba to signify Homage, it is certain he
affirms that this Homage was constantly denied, and sharply controverted by our
Writers; but that it did not belong to him to act the Part of a Judge in this
Affair, but only to write what the most ancient Annals say, without giving
Offense to either of the People. Nor have you one English Historian, Mr.
Holinshed, whom you can produce for the Truth of this Proposition, viz. that
Homage was demanded from Constantine: and tho some may have left it in writing,
that Homage was performed; and tho we should yield this freely, and grant that
to have been which never was, yet there is none so void of Modesty as to
assert, that Homage was performed for Scotland; for neither does the Nature of
the Benefit it self, nor the Circumstances thereof, allow that it could ever
have been done for Scotland, which was never part of the English Patrimony; and
Homage can never be performed without a Benefit: And therefore I know not what
to say as to those English Writers, seeing they don't agree amongst themselves
neither, as to the Place, Generals, Event, nor Effects of that Battle: So that
it is manifest, as I took notice before, that they have no English Writer of
that Time whose Authority they can produce for the third Proposition; but that
the whole History of 223 Years is perished, and that therefore they have
nothing of Certainty concerning Athelstan's Reign, which fell within that
Period, but what is collected from Oldwives Fables, or at best, from the
Relation of credible Persons, as they own themselves. As to what concerns the
Surrender, ( Deditionem) or entire subjecting of our selves, which they upbraid
us with here and elsewhere so often, I do believe that those Monks did never
understand what a Surrender, or Giving themselves up to an Enemy ( dedere se
hostibus) meant; and that they never read ^ivy on the Surrender of the Collatin
People ( de deditione populi Collatini). But they might however, have learned
from their own Polydore Lib. 5. Hist.
, concerning the Surrender of the Kingdom of Northumberland to K. Egbert: for
in the first the Collatin People lost their Liberty; and in the latter, the
Northumbrians lost the Honor of the Kingly Title. Except some have a mind to
excuse Holinshed, and those Monks, that they took the word ( Deditionis) in a
more favorable Sense, viz. as it signifies ( devincire and addicere) to oblige
and addict one's self; as dedere aures, to listen attentively in Cicero; and
dedere se Laboribus, to give one's self up to Labor; and as a Son is said (
dedere se Patri) to give himself wholly up to his Father's Conduct, in Terence.
Yea, in that noble Fight betwixt Edmund and Canutus, Canutus yielded himself
and his Kingdom of Denmark to be at Edmund's Disposal, that he might use it as
he thought fit. How often did Henry II. and Richard, put themselves and their
Kingdoms in the Will or Courtesy ( Voluntate) to use their own Words, of their
Lord the French King, tho^ he was not so? If this Word be made use of by them
now and then in that Signification, it may be tolerated; but if they do thence
infer any Servitude or Homage, they do manifestly accuse themselves of
Ignorance and Falsehood, who adventure to assert a thing of such moment without
Authority or Evidence. The Romans, at least those who were in the greater Camp,
did also surrender or yield themselves up after the Battle of Cannae; and both
the Consuls, T. Veturius Calvi^us, and Sp. Posthumous Albinus, surrendered
themselves at the Furcae Ca^dinae, when the whole Army passed under the Yoke:
But the People of Rome did neither acknowledge the Carthaginians their Lords in
the one, nor the Samnits in the other: Though after all, the English have no
Author who make any mention of the Surrender of the King or Kingdom of
Scotland. But to return to our Purpose: The Truth of this Story of Athelstan is
to be sought for from our Historians; who make no mention of Constantine's
having been in Person at the Battle, or of his having been killed or taken; but
that upon receiving the ill News of the unsuccessful Battle, he put on the
Monks Habit. The hotheaded Youth Malcolm, who was declared Prince of Scotland,
being improvident, did totally lose his Army, and missed narrowly himself at
that Time, as I said before. And here Mr. Holinshed, you insult over us in a
wonderful manner; and assert that the Scots sold their Faith, and treacherous
Souls to the Danes; and that they did never observe a Peace with the English
religiously nor faithfully: when at the same time, the Rise and Occasion of
this Persidiousness, was in Athelstan himself. But if you had as large a Field
of Declaiming against us, as the Britains have indeed of Declaiming against
your English Saxons, Mr. Holinshed, with what big swelling Words would you dart
Thunder and Lightning, and make the World ring ( permisceres Gr^ciam
Vniversam), as Cicero says of Pericles, with the reproachful Names of Perjured
Wretches, Covenant-breakers, who had violated their Pledged Faith, the Laws of
War, and overturned all Laws Divine and Humane, polluted their Hands with the
Murder of their Hosts, and defrauded their Clients? Would you abate us one word
of this? I am sure not. But, Stultus and improbus ^ic am^r est, dignusque
notari,
Cum tu^ pervideas oculis male Lippus inunctis
Cu^ in (...) vitiis, tam cernis acutum
Quam ant Aquila a^t serpens Epida^rius at illi contra
Evenit, inquirant Vitia ut tua rursus and illi.
He does not do well in my Judgment, who takes no notice of the Beam in his own
Eye, and finds fault with the Mote in his Neighbor's. Nam vitiis nemo sine
nascitur, optimus ille est
Qui minimis urgetur:
No Man is born without a Fault, but he
Is the best Man, who is from Faults most free.


But because the principal Hinge of this Controversy turns upon Athelstan, and
that our Neighboring Nation have nothing further to object against us during
the Saxon Monarchy; these things are to be more fully discussed, that all Men
may understand whether the King of Scots paid Homage for the Kingdom of
Scotland, or those Beneficiary Countries.

We will freely grant then, which they shall never be able to evince by any
necessary or concluding Argument (as we use to speak) from their own
Historians, that the King of Scots did then pay Homage to Athelstan. So that
the Point in controversy must now be, Whether the same was performed for the
Kingdom of Scotland, which until that Time was free, or for those Provinces
which he received from Athelstan, or had enjoyed in England before?

If they say for the Kingdom of Scotland; it is not any way probable that the
Scots, who were always most tenacious of their Liberty, as appears by what has
already past and is to follow, and who did constantly prefer the same to their
Lives, should so easily renounce, or abdicate that Liberty, and enslave
themselves of their own accord under the Servitude of the English, a new
Kingdom and Nation: for Egbert, who was no more than Athelstan's Grandfather,
was the first who gave it the Name of England. The King of Scots was not
reduced to such Straits as to be obliged to part with his Kingdom, if he did
not pay Homage for it: Neither is it likely that Athelstan, who was pressed
upon by the Danes, and thought nothing more advantageous to him than the
Friendship of the Scots during those Dangers, would redeem it by Conditions so
unequal, and which tended to the everlasting Reproach of the Nation; for he
knew that if such hard Terms were imposed, the Scots would not be easily kept
within the Bounds of Duty: Whereas in truth, they continued very constant in
the League made with Athelstan. Nor did they ever withdraw their Friendship
from the English, or disturb them, during the Danish War; which in those
truoblesome Times, it had been easy for them to do, and to have put in for a
Share of the Booty with the Danes. For seeing the Danes alone, without the
Assistance of the Scots, did at that Time conquer England, they cannot deny but
the Accession of the Scots would have been of some moment. And Holinshed
confesses, that the King of Scots did serve in this War against the Danes with
ten thousand Men, which it is not like he would have done without some Benefit;
so that of necessity that Homage must have been performed for those Countries
in England, which he did then hold in Fee of the English King, viz. for
Westmoreland, Cumberland, and Northumberland, which were added to the Scottish
Kingdom, by the Bounty of King Edward, for their faithful Service in the Danish
War.

If you deny this Mr. Holinshed, I will produce Holinshed as a Witness against
you, whose words are these: In the time of Edward and his Son Athelstan, the
Scots enjoyed part of Cumberland, and the North of England; and by and by, that
Edmund Brother to Athelstan, did assign all Cumberland to the Scots, for their
Assistance against the Danes. And Mal^sbury says, That the Province called
Cumberland, was given to Malcolm King of Scots, under an Oath of Fealty. And
Henry of Huntington writes, That King Edmund committed all Cumberland to
Malcolm King of Scotland, because he could not subdus the People of the
Country, on this Condition, that he should defend the Northern Countries of
England by Sea and Land, from the Incu^sions of Foreigner^* And (in like
manner) Edred his Brother and Successor, by granting Northumberland to the
Scots, which was reduced under his own Dominion, received Homage from the
Scots, though the Word Granting (conce^endo) be left out by the Printer's
Neglect, and the Sense is not perfect without it. Don't you see here Mr.
Holinshed, and Cumberland was assigned to the Scots, and an Oath of Fealty
thereupon demanded? But that Cumberland, Northumberland, Westmoreland, were at
that time in the Power of the Scots, is not obscurely hinted by Ca^^den a
Learned and modest Man, and the most Judicious of all the English Antiquaries:
He says, That York revived again and flourished with Riches, though it had been
often destined to destruction by the Scots. But how could the Scots design that
City to destruciton, or enter so far into the Country, if they had not been
possessed of the adjacent Countries? And he does also take notice of the
Stone-Cross, commonly called Re-cross or King's-Cross in Richmond-shire, in the
Confines of England and Scotland, and which was set up as a Boundary to both
Kingdoms. Though he does indeed confess, that this was the Boundary, yet he
will have it, that it was fixed in order to separate the Lands given by the
several Kings to St. Cuthbert, as Tutelary Saint, from the Incursions of the
Scots, which has no shadow of Truth. But the most express and clear Testimony
is, what he says in the Original of the Scots: But says he, When the Scots came
to join the Picts in Britain, although they did continually infest our
Countrymen (meaning the Britains) with War, yet the Scottish Monarchy did not
grow up of a sudden, but they lurked a long time in that Place where they
arrived, until they did totally exterminate the Picts; and that the Kingdom of
Northumberland fell by its intestine Broils, and the Incursions of the Danes.
Then, says he, all the Northern part of Britain went under the Name of the
Scots, as did also that hithermost part of the Country betwixt the River Tweed
and Edinburgh Firth. But Cambden does not hit the Truth in all this, for before
the Picts were routed out, the Scots and they together did inhabit all that
part of Britain benorth Humber, and had also the Sovereignty over the Rest,
having imposed a Tribute upon it, and received Hostages for it. There are also
many other places in Cambden, which testify, that Cumberland and Westmoreland
were then in the Hands of the Scots: So that this second thing is confessed by
both Parties, that those (...) were then possessed by the Scots; and the
Histories of both Kingdoms testify the ^ame; and that the Scots held them from
the Time of the said Malcolm, (...) Robert Bruce, which was four hundred Years,
is certain from the Histories, as we shall make it appear more a^ large in the
following Chapter* whence I infer, that the Scots did at that (...) possess
some English Provinces; and therefore it does necessarily follow, that they
held them either with or without the King of England's good Will o^ as the
Effect of his Liberality. That the Scots held them against the King of
England's good Will is not very likely, nor is there any Englishman who would
confess (...) though true; for seeing the Inhabitants of those Countries were
originally English, they were not kept in subjection by the Scots without
difficulty, their inclinations being always toward the English* which rendered
our Possession of those Countries very uneasy; and the like happened in (...),
as is witnessed by (...) for though either the whole, or at least the greatest
part of it were due to the King of England by Hereditary Right; yet the French
having a greater Propension toward their own Native Prince, did always
administer both Opportunity and Assistance to deprive the English of those
Provinces; and therefore to say that the King of Scots possessed those
Provinces, which were inhabited by the English, against the King of England's
Mind, is both very improbable, and against the Truth of History. And if we
possessed them with his good Will, it must of necessity have been the Effect of
his Benevolence, and by Consequence that we held them in Fee, seeing a Fee is
nothing else but the gratuitous Bounty of the Lord in favor of the Vassal, for
which he is to perform Fealty or Homage; for as I said before, where there is a
Benefit, there is Homage, but where there is no Benefit, neither can there be
any Homage: and therefore it necessarily follows from those things, that the
King of Scots did owe that Homage for Cumberland, Westmoreland, and
Northumberland, the Beneficiary Countries, and if he performed it, what Wonder!

And seeing there were not two Homages performed, (for none of the Monastical
Writers do mention two) and that it appears there was only One, let us enquire
further, (though it be plain enough from what is already past) whether it was
for Scotland, or for Cumberland, and the other Provinces. In all Paiments,
Lawyers will have the Payment to be interpreted according to the meaning of the
Debtor, and that the Payment was made for that which the Debtor said it was:
But our Countrymen when that Debt was paid, did plainly express, that they
paid the said Homage for those Countries. The English confess the Payment, but
suppress the Cause for which it was made, that they may be at Liberty to wrest
it as they please. Yea, Henry VIII. though he makes mention of this Homage very
often, yet he never affirms, that it was for Scotland, except in the time of
John Baliol and James the first, of whom in the following Chapter: and
therefore the Expression and Interpretation of the Debtor, and not of the
Creditor, is to be received in this Homage. Again, according to Law, if Payment
be made without Addition of what Debt it is for, the Payment is understood
rather for that which is uncontroverted, than for that which is; and if there
be two Debts, the one Certain, and the other Dubious, the Payment is presumed
to be for that which is certain, and not for that which is doubtful. But no
Body is ignorant that it is controverted, whether this Homage be due for
Scotland, for though the English do pertinaciously assert it, we do as
constantly deny it: that it was due for Cumberland, Northumberland and
Westmoreland, is confessed by both Parties, so that this Debt is out of all
Controversy* and therefore Reason persuades, and Law pre^umes, that the Pa^ment
was made for those Countries, when evey thing is to have its due, as Lawyers
speak: for matters of Fact that are dubious, are always to be interpreted in
the best and kindest Sen^e for the Agent, and according to the Reason of the
subject Matter; so that that is to be presumed to be the Sense of the thing
done, or ^o be done, which is the most apt; for that is the greatest of all
Fallacies, ^o transfer what is said concerning one thing to another, whether it
be Person or Thing* but the incurable Itch of Scribbling corrupts all things.

However we labor in a plain Ca^e, for both Matthew of Westminster, William of
M^lmsb^^y and Roger Hoveden, do plainly confess, that Cumberland was given to
the King of Scots, to be held of the King of England, that he might assist him;
so that this Homage cannot be accommodated to Scotland, but only to Cumberland
and the Neighboring Provinces: Nor is it true that King Constantine performed
Homage, but only Malcolm, who was made Prince of Cumberland on that Condition.
But Malcolm could not perform Homage for the Kingdom of Scotland, which was
then free, and of which Constantine was Sovereign: For he only ought to perform
it, who is Po^^essor of the Kingdom, and not the Heir Apparent as we call him.
For Cumberland, Malcolm both could, and ought to have done it, seeing he held
it in Fee of At^elstan. Then what Perverseness is this, to attribute to one
thing, what is only proper to another, with the greatest Disadvantage and
Absurdity in History that can be, where there is not the least Shadow of
Probability?

Whilst Holinshed seeks for Arguments, on every Hand, as to Athelstan, that he
may ^onfirm this his imaginary Superiority, he b^ings for Proof a Miracle taken
out of the Life of St. John of Beverly; whence it may be readily conjectured,
that whatever we have mentioned above, as recorded by the Monks, came from the
Workhouses of St. C^^^bert, St. James, or some other Tutelary Saint. But this
ridiculous Miracle is as follows: Athelstan being at Dumbar, and doubting, as
well he might, whether or not the Superiority over Scotland was rightfully due
to him; he prayed to God, not though the Merits of Jesus Christ, but those of
St. Joh^ of Beverly, that he would discover the Truth to him by some Miracle;
and having forthwith drawn his Sword, He struck a huge ill shapen Stone, of
which there are abundance, in that Place, and made a great Cleft in it; and,
says the Manuscript which I have in my Custody, the Stone cut as easily as if
it had been Butter or Beeswax.

Now let the stubborn Scots go and elude this Superiority, confirmed by so
great a Miracle, if they can, the Memory whereof, says Holinshed, is still to
be found in the Stone at Dumbar; though some of the profane Scots cannot hear
of this Miracle without Laughter, and say, That the Author designed only to
express the Fable of Actius Navius the Augur: Yet this is writ and received as
a Truth by most of the English, and has occasioned many, and particularly my
self, to wander among those Rocks, to see if there were any Stone with such a
Cut in it to be found. There are things added no less ridiculous, concerning
Athelstan's Knife, which was deposited on the Altar of St. John of Beverly, at
the Time of that Expedition into Scotland, which he redeemed again with great
Largesses and Endowments, when he returned victorious.

But the History is plain in it self, that Athelstan having overcome the Prince
of Scots, took from him the Provinces of Cumberland, Nort^umberland and
Westmoreland; but not being able to maintain a War against the Danes and Scots
both, and conceiving that the Scots would be more easily reconciled than the
Danes, who aimed at the Sovereignty of the whole Island, he renewed his
Friendship with the Scots, and gave them Cumberland and Westmoreland to hold of
him, and so he who was designed Successor to the Crown of Scotland, was called
Prince of Cumberland, whom the unlearned English Writers call King of
Cumberland: but Athelstan could not restore Northumberland at that time,
because it was possessed by the Danes. And thus our Historians agree on the
Matter with the English Writers, but only that the English enlarge too much on
this Victory, and vary from us in Circumstances: but however, this is apparent
from the History of both Nations, that the Scots did faithful and gallant
Service to the English in the Danish War, and that their Society and Friendship
continued without interruption, till the time of the Conquest, as we shall make
it appear by and by, from the very Laws of England.

Albert Kran^zius says, in his History of Norway, but falsely, that this
A^^helstan was a Cowardly Prince, and transacted with the King of Norway to
deliver him his Kingdom after Death, on Condition that he would divert the Arms
of the Danes from him, adding that he did only reign in a pre^arious manner,
and had nothing but the Vsus^^^^ (usu Fructum) of the Kingdom left him, and
that also on this Condition, that he should ^end Auxiliary Troops whithersoever
the King of Norway should command him. But here our Neighbors will object that
we must not credit Foreign Writers in every thing, because they allow
thems^lve^ a great Latitude in things that concern the Dignity and Glory of
their own Country: For what Man is there, say they who will not laugh at those
Stories of ^ward^ who says, that Frotho King of Denmark subdu^d Br^tain, killed
their King, and defeated the S^ots, long before Caesar's Time? Then if our
Neighbors look upon themselves as injured, if without Judgment we resign our
Faith to Saxo Gramma^icu^, Kran^zi^^ and other Historians of De^mark and
Norway, in what they write ^on^erning Su^n^, C^nute, etc. in their Conquest of
England, because both of them are too much addi^^ed to the Honor of their
Country: Is it not the same Case, when the English would have us religiously to
believe, what their Historians have writ against us with so much* B^ncour? for
we are tau^ht by nat^ral Reason, to give the (...) to others that we have from
them, and tha^ we should do the same our selves that we think equal in others.
But however that is, we shall find more heinous thin^^ alleged against
E^hel^re^ in the most approved English Histories, than what Constantin^ is
charged with by those Monks: For they devoted their Hea^ts, Tongues, and P^ns
to amplify their own Liberty, and (...) their Coun^r^. For Ethel^red King of
(...) obtained the Kingdom precariously from Sueno King of Denmark, as Sa^o
(...) testifies; and Pol^d^re from him, who thinks that more likely than that
Ethel^^^d was thrown out of the Kingdom, seeing he died in England. And to
reign preca^iously, is much meaner than to swear Fealty to any one; seeing to
reign precariously is no other than to enjoy another's Kingdom on such Terms,
and so long as the Sovereign thereof shall think meet, and to remove from the
same at his Pleasure.

But some may perhaps say, that if we reject this kind of Probation brought
from M^nastical Writers, what sort of Proof will w^ admit of as valid in a
M^tter of this Imp^r^ance? I answer; That certainly any ^^ual Judge when he
perceives that the English affir^* and the Scots deny this Homage, will
according to Law and Equity, determine in favor of the Scots, because they are
in possession of their Liberty: for we are not to believe English Monks, who
were at a great distance from the Place of Action, ignorant of the Causes and
Circumstances of things, and built upon mere Rumors, in a Matter of so great
moment. But if any Man can produce Deeds for this, writ by either Party, or
Charters, and ancient Monuments, corroborated by their Seals, as in the Case of
K. John formerly mentioned, then they have something to which they may give
Credit: But though they should produce the Testimonies, or Depositions of an
hundred English Monks for the Dignity of their Prince, their Country, or
Themselves, especially so many Years after the things were transacted, the
English themselves would not, as I suppo^e, require my Belief in a Matter so
absurd. But there are many other Reasons why I can neither believe the Monks my
self, nor think that they deserve Credit from others. First, because our Laws
do expressly forbid Credit to be given to such Testimonies as may be begged; but
only to Witnesses who are upon Oath, as to the Truth of what they say: For
Monks, as I have often said, being Strangers to the Affairs, and Public
Counsels of the Kingdom, and who never were present at those Transactions
themselves, a^e by no means to be admitted as Evidence in a Public
Controversy, especially Matter of Fact which happened some Ages before they were
born: for if they were brought to swear in Court, and the Judge should enquire
at them if they knew the Parties against whom they are led as Evidence, they
will say no. If they be asked, as to the Matter it self, how they came to the
knowledge of those things which they swear, what Cause, or, if not the true
Cause, what probable Cause at least can they bring, viz. whether they saw those
things, and were present at the Transactions, they will answer, no. If they be
asked, how they come to know it then, they will answer with Malmsbury and
Florence, that they had it from credible Men. If the Judge urge them further,
and ask whether those credible Men saw those things themselves, they will also
say, no; as they must of necessity do concerning things transacted so many
Years ago. And if the Judge enquire further, how they know that those Men
deserved so much Credit; they will answer, that they know it only by Hearsay.
But Witnesses who swear only by Hearsay, and can give no probable Reason, as we
use to speak, for their Deposition, don't deserve Credit in any Court. If they
be interrogated concerning things done in their own Time, whether or not they
know that the Scots surrendered o^ yielded themselves up? They will answer, we
know they d^d. If they be asked, what a Surrend^r ( deditio) is, and whether
they saw the Scots surrender, and the English receive their Towns, Lands,
Waters, Images and all Utensils, Humane and Divine, (all which are required in
a Surrender, nor can it be done without an express Stipulation, as is witnessed
by Livy in the Surrender of Collatia, and the Collatin People) They will
hesitate immediately, and tell you, that they don't mean any other Surrender,
but that the King of Scots did put himself in the Power of the King of England,
as they call it. If it be enquired, whether they know that Hostages were gi^en,
that Tribute was imposed, and that their Arms were taken away? They will
answer, that they know not that neither; and yet those are the Tokens of
Subjection: But so is not any one's saying off^ciously, that he would put
himself in another's Reverence, and do whatever he commanded? as was lately
mentioned in the Case of Canute.

Again; If that Monk (whoever he be that wrote of this commentitious Homage)
were interrogated, whether he saw that Homage performed and received? He will
answer, no; for he was not at that Time without the Pr^cincts of his C^oyster.
If he (...) asked, whence he had it then? he will tell you, from credible Men
who were present at the Transactions: But if he asked again, whether those who
pretended to be pre^ent (...) the Homage performed? He will answer, they saw
it. If he be interrogated, whether that Homage was performed for Scotland, or
the Beneficiary Provinces? He will tell you, he knows not that; but only that
he who related it, saw the King of Scots ^wear Fea^^y with his Hands put
betwixt those of the King of England; but whether it were for Sc^tland or
Cumberland, etc. he is altogether ^^certain. If Malmsbury, Ho^^den, and the
(...) of the English Historians, who have so inconsiderately committed it to
writing, were examined concerning the Homage performed to Athelstan; they will
answer, that the King of Scots did make a Surrender of himself: For that he
surrendered to Edward 1. they have read in that Legend of St. John of Beverly,
which is repea^ed once a Month in the Church; or in that of St. Cutbert, or
some other tutelary Saint. Or they will an^wer with Polydore, that they
remember it is so writ, but are not Judges whether it be true or false.

Whereas if they would speak the Truth, they should say that they have nothing
for it but idle Reports; and they would not have committed things of that
Importance to Writing upon such slender Proofs, if they had not been resolved
to purchase the Favor of the Court, or the Applause of the Vulgar, and to
write for the Honor of their Country at any rate: And shall those Testimonies,
or such as those, prejudg the Equity of our Cause? How ill the Scots take it to
be branded with a Note of Servitude, you your self bear them witness Mr.
Holinshed; and their being twice driven out of Britain, because they would
neither subject themselves to the Britains nor the Romans, does sufficiently
instruct it; and the most terrible Wars which they maintained against Edward I,
II, and III. upon this very account, are sufficient to persuade any Man that
reads them of the Truth of it. For though the Scots were overcome by Edward I.
in three or four fatal Battles, yet they could never be brought to acknowledge
this commentitious Homage, neither by Flattery nor Threats, nay nor even by the
Destruction of their People and Country: but having recovered their Strength,
they never desisted from fighting until they compelled Edward III. who was
called the English Ac^illes, and above twice as powerful as Athelstan, to
contain himself within his own Bounds, and abjure that Homage which his
Grandfather had extorted from Baliol. The Scots were also overcome by Osbright
and Ella, and by the Danes, in two very great Battles, wherein they lost two
Kings; yet they never abandoned the Cause, yielded up themselves, nor performed
Homage: Nay in this present Age, we have been defeated in two bloody Battles;
in one of which we lost a most valiant King, whose Heir was scarcely one year
old; and in the other, the Flower of our Nobility: yet neither did we make a
Surrender of our selves, nor was Homage demanded of us. Is it so then Mr.
Holinshed, that we cannot be beat, but you will have us to surrender upon it
immediately? For as often as the Rabble of English Historians find it mentioned
that the Scots were defeated, then straight they will have them to be subdued,
reduced, ask Mercy, and yield up the Kingdom; but as to the Victories of the
Scots, or how they delivered or recovered their Country, there is always a
profound Silence. Or is it credible, that if the Scots had been so defeated as
to be out of all hopes of restoring their Monarchy, that Athelstan having that
Kingdom in his power, which he and his Ancestors had so greed^y coveted, would
have left them the Name of a King? if it be so, it is without a Precede^t. For
when Ireland was conquered, their Kings were commanded to lay aside the Royal
Title, as I have mentioned before, and so became ^iduciary Earls: And the like
did happen before that in Wales; which being once conquered, was deprived of
the Royal Title: and when Northumberland was surrendered, it lost the Name of
Kingdom. Then let Malmsbury say whatever comes uppermost, and alledg that
Constantine was forced to resign his Crown, to which he was afterward restored
by Athelstan; who, according to him, said that it was more glorious to make
Kings than to be one; he will never be able to persuade any Man that the King
of England would have left a King in Scotland, if it had been in his Power to
hinder it, or suppress the Royal Title. But Mal^sbury, H^veden, and others,
have left it so in Writing, say the English, nor can any probable Cause be
assigned why they should lie. If any Body will compare the Time when those
Writers lived, with the Matters then transacted, it will appear that all of
them wrote their Histories at that Time when this Homage was most fiercely
disputed be^wixt the two Kings: And seeing those Monks could not defend the
Cause of their ^ountry by the Sword, it needs not seem ^trange to any Man that
they should favor ^t what they could with their Tongue and ^en: And this
Victory was also obtained in England, when Scotland at the same time was ^ot so
much as touched. that the Legend of St. John of Beverly asserts, that Athelstan
^ntred Scotland as far as Dunbar to fight ^^^stantine, is utterly false; for
this Battle was upon the Humber in England, and Athelstan wa^ then endeavoring
to drive the War from home, but not making it upon others: and therefore it is
not credible, that when the Kingdom of Scotland was not so much as touched,
that the Scots should despond so far as to subject themselves to a needless
Surrender. Hoveden says, that Athelstan wasted (...) as far as Feodor and
^altermor; whereas there are no such Places to be found in Sco^land, it being
probable that they were swallowed up by some Earthquake with those two Farms of
Oddam and Roddam, which you, Mr. Holins^ed, will have to be in Annandale,
though we Scots-men never heard of them. But the greatest Hindrance we meet
with in this Confutation is, that the Years wherein those things were said to
have been done, are not set down* which if they had, it would have been easy to
refute those Vanities by comparing Times together; but our Neighbors, a^ they
take no notice neither of Time no^ Place, so without Authority or Evidence,
they do constantly reproach us with this Commentitio^s Homage. And that they
may be sure to brand us on every sid^, they will have it that the Scots were
conquered twice; first by Athelstan, and afterward by his Brother Edmund.
Which Polydore does however assert to be false, and that it is only the Victory
of Athelstan repeated, and ascribed to Edmund. So that the English Historians
set no Bounds to their Ra^cor and Malice against the Scots; and therefore they
must pardon me if I tell them plainly, that I do not believe them; for they
deserve no more Credit than they would give to the Writings of our Monks
concerning a Question which might prejudg the Kingdom of England. I have been
larger than was meet upon this Affair, because our Neighbors have no other
English Saxon King whom they can object to us, nor no other Victory over us but
that which he obtained. But what they can infer thence, I see not; for
Athelstan could not be the true King of England. So much as to the Question of
Fact, Whether Homage was performed for Scotland or ^ot? The Question of Right
remains, Whether Constantine or Malcolm could enslave the Kingdom, which they
received free from their Ancestors, to another King; or render it up to hold in
Vassalage, and oblige their People to serve another Prince? But we will remit
this Question to another Pla^^, because it is sufficient to overthrow ^ll that
our Enemies have hitherto advanced. And now I return to those things which they
object against us in particular.

CHAP. XIX.
Concerning Edmund, Eldred and Edgar, English Saxon Kings, and whether they
pretended any right to the Superiority of Scotland.
You subjoin, Mr. Holinshed, that Indulphus King of Scots, with ten thousand
Men served under Edmund Brother and Successor to Athelstan, and did Homage to
him; and here you do manifestly play the Sophister, as you have done all along.
Indulphus being only Heir apparent to the Kingdom, and designed Prince of
Cumberland, did assist the King of England wuth Forces, as he ought. But being
declared King of Scotland, he never saw Edmund: Nor is there any mention of
this Homage in Malmsbury, Huntington, Hovedon, Westminster, Florence, Polydore,
Stow, nor in your own History, Mr. Holinshed, nor any other English Writer that
I know of. We will grant you, that he brought ten thousand Scots Auxiliaries to
Edmund, who would never have hazarded himself against the Danes without them,
but by their Assistance he did happily overcome them: Nay, which is more, when
Indulphus was importuned by the Danes, not to disturb them in their Wars
against the English, he refused, and drew the Arms of the Danes from the
English upon himself; and having fought and conquered them in a terrible bloody
Battle, he pursued a flying Brigade unwarily, and (as our Countrymen have
often smarted for their too great Forwardness and Heat) he was killed by a Body
of the Danes, which had never been broke. And for these good Services we must
be reckoned to have served you as Vassals: whereas indeed the English Kings who
were sensible of our Assistance, that they might repay the Kindness, did permit
the Scots to enjoy those Northern Countries of Cumberland, Westmoreland and
Northumberland, in Memory of the Kindness received: but that they did Homage
for Scotland, there is not so much as one of your own Monks who has left it in
Writing.

You and the Author of Henry VIII's Declaration of War, Mr. Holinshed, do both
assert, that Edred or Edred received Homage from Irisius King of Scots; but
that I may answer both of you, there is no such Person as Irisius to be found in
the Catalogue of the Scottish Kings: so that any Man may deservedly reject this
fictitious Homage with the fictitious King; nor does any Man besides your self
and this Forger, make mention of this Homage: but that I may also deprive you
of your own Evidence, there is not only no mention of this Homage in Malmsbury,
and the rest of the English Writers, nay, nor even in your own History, Mr.
Holinshed, which certainly you would never have passed over, if you could have
found any Author for it, such is your Candor toward us. This is wonderful
Ignorance in those Monks, that when they give Evidence against our Kings, they
don't so much as know their Names; for most of them, especially Edward I. and
Henry VIII. as we shall see afterward, write, that Irisius and Reinaldus were
Kings of Scotland, and performed Homage to the Kings of England: but if all the
Catalogues of our Kings, and all the public Monuments be examined, there are
none to be found either by the Name of Irisius or Reinaldus. Indeed they shall
be at liberty for us to feign what they please concerning Irisius and
Reinaldus, so as they don't call them Kings of Scots, or if they will have them
to be such, that they would say at what time, and how many Years they reigned;
where and to whom this Homage was performed, and what Author they can produce
for it. And as to what you say, that the Homage was performed by the Barons of
Scotland, it proclaims your ignorance of the Feudal Law; for the Barons, as the
greater Vassals, do (...) only to their own immediate Lord, and he swears for
them to the Liege Lord.

But you say, that Edgar Brother to Athelstan, did reign over all Britain. What
the Latins and your Writers understand by the Name of Britain, has been said
elsewhere: But you assert, that he received Homage from Kennethus, for the
Kingdom of Scotland, and appointed Malcolm to be Prince thereof. You have
indeed lost all sense of Difference betwixt Truth and Falsehood, but do still
retain that betwixt Love and Hatred: For Malcolm was born Heir of Scotland, and
declared Prince of Cumberland. You add, that Edgar did restore Lothian to
Kennethus, which Osbright had taken away from him. But it appears both by your
own Writings, and ours, as I have said before, that the Kings of Scotland had
not only recovered those Provinces by force of Arms Iong before this Kennethus,
but were also gifted with many Countries by the English, for their faithful and
gallant Service against the common Enemy the Danes.

It remains that we speak something of the Homage. It is very probable, nor do
we deny it, that Malcolm Prince of Cumberland did perform Homage for his
Principality: but Kennethus who was then King of Scotland, never saw the King
of England; or tell us we pray you, Mr. Holinshed, in what Year, and at what
Place had those Kings their Interview, or what Author have you for it. Polidore
writes, that Edgar did keep the Scots within Bounds; and that uncertain Author,
who continued Bede's History, says only, that Kennadus K. of Scots, and Malcolm
King of Cumberland, did bind themselves to Edgar by a perpetual Oath (perpetuo
Sacramento.) Many times those who are not Subjects are thus obliged; for
Princes do usually ratify the Leagues and Covenants betwixt themselves, with an
Oath, (Sacramento:) but as to the Homage, there is no mention thereof in him,
nor any other English Writer, although he calls Edgar the Honor and Delight of
England. As to the Lodgings or House at Westminster, in which the Kings of
Scotland used to perform this Homage: It is credible that the King of England
did not only furnish him Lodgings there, but also bear the Expenses of his
Journey, and that according to Agreement. For seeing the King of Scots did not
think himself obliged in Law, to perform Homage any where, without the Bounds
of his own Fee, or if without his Fee, that his Lord ought at least to bear his
Charges: It was agreed upon betwixt both Kings, who did then live in the
strictest Bonds of Amity, that as soon as the King of Scots should come over his
own Borders, he should be received by the Peers of England, with one Bishop,
and one Count, and conducted to the King, at the public Charge: which we
confess was first agreed on by Edgar, as we shall afterward explain it in
Richard I; and as it is prescribed by the Feudal Law. And thus the King of
England being summoned by the French King, was obliged to go. As for the Ius
Custodiarum, which we call Wards, and that you attribute to the Institution of
Edgar, and in^er thence, that we were then his Subjects, because we did
afterward embrace that Law; the form of your Argument is both disagreeable to
the Rules of Disputation, and it consists of a false Proposition. For the Law
concerning Wards, which you ascribe to Edgar, is by our Writers ascribed to
Malcolm the second, who reigned at the same time: to which of them then do you
say, shall we give Credit? To ours certainly. there being none of your Writers
that I know of, who mention this, or any other of Edgar's Laws, but our
Malcolm's Law^ are still extant. But to omit the Testimonies of English and
Scots, William Terrem a Norman, who it is supposed would not detract any thing
from the Offspring of his own Country, does attribute the same to us. Neither
is this true, that the said Law is only observed amongst the English, for you
had it from the French, and especially the Normans, who retain it to this very
Day. And if we take a true Estimate of the whole Affair, neither the French nor
English, ye^ nor the S^ots, were the first who did institute this Custom; for
all Wards, (Custodi^) and Weirds of Marriage, (Heredum Maritationes) came from
the Feudal Law: for it is equal and just, that when the Vassal is incapable by
reason of Nonage, of giving that Service and Advice which he owes to his Lord,
that until such time as he is capable, the Lord receive the Fruits of his Fee,
that he may be able to provide for his own Service, and in the mean time take
care that his Vassal's Heir, who is also to be his own Vassal in time, don't
marry into a Family which is at Enmity with his Own, and be by that Means
withdrawn from his Love to his Lord: Nor does it any more follow, that the
Scots were subject to the Englis^ upon this account, because they followed
their Example for their own conven^^^cy, as all Governments use to do, than
that they are subject to them now, beca^^e they have lately followed their
example in laying an Impost upon Goods impo^ted, especially Wine. But the truth
is, Mr. Holinshed, you indulge your self too much in a Liberty of forging what
you plea^e.

What you assert as to the Homage performed to your Edgar at Chester, by
Kennudus King of Scotland, Malcolm King of Cumberland, Murco King of Man and
the Isles, Duniwallus King of South Wales, Sifort and Howel Kings of the rest
of Wales, James King of Galloway and Iucullus King of Westmoreland, who were
all of them as it were condemned to row Edgar's Galley, while he sat on the
Stern, is wholly ridiculous. Believe ye as the Lyrick Poet says, Isti fubulae
fore Librum persimilem cujus velut aegri somnia vanae finguntur species. For
though those things be excerpted from that Anonymous Author of the Continuation
of the English History and others; yet how little Credit either you or they
deserve will easily appear: Where did you find those called Kings of
Cumberland, Galloway, Man, or of our Isles? Who dignified them with those
Titles? When and from whom did they receive the Royal Name? Cumberland was at
that time a Province, not very large, and appointed for the Eldest Son of
Scotland, under the Name of a Principality; but no Man did ever hear or write
that it was called a Kingdom, except some silly Monks, who receive every little
Whisper and Rumor as Oracles. Nor is this Kingdom numbered amongst those seven
or eight which were founded by the Saxons; and besides these and the Scottish
Kingdom, there were no other than in Britain. I know that Malmsbury calls them
Reguli, Petty Kings, whereas indeed they were only the Princes of Scotland, but
always designed by a Royal Title, in the Writings of those ignorant and
unexperienced Monks; and as during Edgar's Reign, there was no other King of
Cumberland than he who was designed Successor to the Crown of Scotland, so
Galloway is but a small part of the Kingdom of Scotland, and that not very
fruitful: so that to imagine any King to have reigned there at that time is
wholly ridiculous, there not being at this Day above four or five in it, who
are honored with so much as the Title of Barons. As to what number of Kings
did inhabit Westmoreland, South Wales and North Wales, I don't concern my self;
but this I know, that not one of them was ever saluted by the Name of King, or
left on Record to Posterity under that Title. I take no notice of your
reckoning the King of Scots amongst so many other Petty Kings, whereas that
tends as much to your own disgrace as ours, seeing you were never able to
subdue that Prince, how inconsiderable soever he was, by force of Arms. But we
will grant you that those little Petty Sub-Kings were in a manner tied to
Chains, and exposed to contempt, or rather, as you will have it, led in triumph
by Edgar. Must those things which are done by Princes, either for their
Pleasure, or to try their Strength or Skill in Rowing, be drawn into
Consequence? All the Kings of England, as well before as since the Conquest,
and as they do at this very Day, were accustomed to celebrate the Feast of our
Lord's Nativity with great Banquets, and splendid Entertainment, and to invite
their Neighboring Princes out of kindness, and amongst the rest, all the
Princes of Wales, how many soever; and the King of Scots who was also a Vassal
to the King of England, could not honestly refuse, but upon what Conditions we
have said already, and shall explain anon in Richard. This Solemnity used to be
continued to Epiphany, till after which they did not use to dismiss their
Guests, and on the Eve before they chose a King according to Custom whose
Commands all the rest were to obey during the Solemnity. The Lot fell upon
Edgar, so that he commanded the rest, and they must of necessity obey; but
shall we draw an Argumen^ from this ludicrous Festival? Certainly both the
Assertion and Proof of this Homage was very much affected, which was built upon
no other Foundation. What if this most Potent Prince of yours had submitted
himself to some such pitiful Fellow as you use, for Diversion's sake, to create
King upon such an Occasion, and had given him the right Hand, allowed him the
Regalia, and waited on him by Land or Water for a day or two; would you
therefore infer, that he was subject to this pitiful Fellow? Neither do you set
down the Year that this Homage was performed in: But how much more wisely did
Canute King of Denmark and England behave himself, that when he was saluted the
most Potent Monarch on Earth by his Flatterers, as he walked upon the Shore of
the Sea, he put off his Robe, and sitting down on a Chair within the Sea-mark,
forbad the approaching Wave to touch his Feet, but being wet by the same, he is
said to have turned him to his Parasites, and spoke thus, Lo, he whom you
salute as (...) most Mighty, cannot so much as command one single Wave;
therefore let all Power be as^rib'd to the great God, as it ought to be. But to
return to your Edgar, that Saying of his concerning so many Kings his Subjects,
was wholly barbarous, and an Evidence of a Mind too much elevated, even above a
humane Lot, for which the English were deservedly punished not long after,
being forced to redeem themselves, their Wives and Children, and Liberties
twice or thrice from the Danes, and were at last despoiled of the Kingdom, and
all their Military Glory, first by the Danes, and then by the Normans.

You will also have it, that Edgar provoked Kennadus King of Scots to a Duel,
viz. in England, whither he had invited him to a Feast: and if he declined this
Duel in England, what wonder, especially with his Host, lest he should violate
the Laws of Hospitality, which we read in the second P^nick War to have been
refused by T. Quintius Crispin^s to Campa^^s his Host. Though it is evident
that Kennadus, whom we call Kenneth^s or rather Canutus, was very valiant in
War, and none of our Historians do so much as make mention of his having ever
been in England.

You say that Edward Son to this Edgar, made War upon Cannethus King of Scots,
for poisoning Prince Malcolm, whom you call King. That Kennethus poisoned
Malcolm his Nephew, and him who should have been his Successor in the Kingdom,
you have from our Historians: but that Edward made War upon him on that
account, is your own Forgery; for neither does any English Historian, nor any
of ours whom it did most concern, say any thing of it. Your own Polidore, that
uncertain Author, William Newbriggs, Westminster, Malmsbury, Hoveden, nor no
other of your Writers have any thing concerning it; nor do you your self
mention it in your History, where you are a little more modest: so that you
have nothing of Kennethus's being subdued by War, nor having performed Homage;
but here according to your depth of Judgment, you think it as easy to subdue
the Scots as to write it. I don't marvel that you who write so many Wonders,
should relate that Kennethus King of Scots poisoned Malcolm King of Scotland: I
pray you, Mr. Holinshed, were there two Kings, one of Scots and another of
Scotland? but I plainly perceive that you have declared War against Truth; all
what you say of Kennethus's having promised to receive any one that Ed^ard
should offer as his Successor to the Crown of Scotland, is of the same Piece,
and that he ^et one Malcolm (for so you ^ame him by way of Contempt) over them.
Whereas this Malcolm was the true Succes^or of the Crown, and Kennethus his own
first born, to whom the Monarchy fell of Right: for as I have said, our Kings
are born and not imposed, nor subjected to a^other's Pleasure; nay, the Father
himself cannot invert the Law of Succession, so that Kennethus promised what he
could not perform, if what you say be true. We don't deny that Malcolm
performed Homage for Cumberland, (for it was held in Fee of England) but for
Scotland he neither ought nor could perform it, seeing there was another ^hen
in Possession of the Crown, viz. Ken^ethus his Father, who was obliged to
perform this Homage if any such had been due.

CHAP. XX.
Concerning Ethelred, Edmund ^ronside, Canutus and Edward Kings of England, and
whether ever they pretended any Right to Scotland.
YOU will have it that Ethelred Brother to Edward, designed to make War upon
this Malcolm, because of his conspiring against him with Sueno King of Denmark:
but Malcolm having submitted himself, and begged Pardon in a very humble
manner, Ethelred had compassion on him, and received him into his Protection,
and that afterward he recovered his Kingdom by the gallant and faithful
Service of Malcolm and his Forces, out of the Hands of Sueno, and reigned over
all Britain thirty eight Years: But you had done better, and perhaps more
faithfully, if you had always excepted Scotland. One token of Cando^ however
you have throughout your History, that you confess the Danes were expelled out
of England by the Assistance of Malcolm, who owed the same for Cumberland and
Westmoreland; but as to his Submission, there are none of your Writers who make
any mention, nor do you your self in your History wherein you are something
more modest. It may be when he cleared himself from the Conspiracy with the
Danes, which yet is not mentioned by any Author, you wrest it to a Submission
and Subjection as you do every thing else; neither is your Inference of his
having paid Homage, because of this Subjection, just: but according to our
Historians, this Malcolm was very Fortunate and most Victorious, none of our
Kings having given the Danes more Defeats, and turned the Arms of the Danes and
Norwegians from the English upon himself; and having broke their Strength in
four or five great Battles, did at last drive them wholly out of Scotland, and
obliged them to an Agreement upon Oath never to return to Scotland in an
Hostile manner; a Condescension which they did never grant to any of the Kings
of England, who for the most part purchased Peace for themselves and their
Subjects with Money, as being unequal to the Danes in Arms, which is owned by
Polidore and all others that ever wrote the History of England. But say they,
there is in that Place where the last Battle was fought betwixt the Scots and
the Danes, a Chapel erected in Honor of St. Olaus the Patron of the
Norwegians. What that Chapel is may yet be seen, (for it is still extant);
certainly no Man can look upon it as a Monument either of Victory or
Submission, it being only erected for the Interment of some of the Norwegian
Noble^ who were Christians: And we may just^y glory in this, that for 200 Years
together we sustained the most violent Impressions of the Danes and Norwegians,
and forced them to abandon their Design, though we were attacked by many of
their Generals and Armies, there being but a narrow Sea betwixt us. Whereas
you, though attacked by a smaller number of their Forces, did at last yield,
and submitted to their Yoke for 27 or 28 Years: Nor were you able to deliver
your selves from this intolerable Servitude by any other Method, than that of a
barbarous Conspiracy to murder them all in one night.

You say next, that Edmund, Son to Et^elred, being compelled thereunto by his
Mother Emma, divided the Kingdom with Canute; and yielded him the Countries
benorth Humber, with the Superiority of Scotland; which Malcolm resisted
according to the usual Form, but at last performed Homage for the Kingdom of
Scotland, which Canute held of K. Edmund as long as he lived; and compelled
Malcolm to dedicate the Church, lately mentioned, to Olaus the Patron of the
Norwegians: and so you make two superior Lords of Scotland, and create a
double Superiority. For according to you the King of Scots held Scotland of
Canutus, and he of Edmund; so that there is no end of Lying when once a Man
breaks over the Boundaries of Modesty. It is no Marvel Mr. Holinshed, that you
are so ill seen in our History, you are so very ignorant of your own. For what
Author did ever write, that Canutus and Edmund were reconciled by Emma? Nay, is
it not the height of Folly to commit those things to Writing, that can be
proven to be false from other Writers? For Canutus and Edmund, when they had
fought together in a Duel till they were both weary, did reconcile themselves
without Emma's Privity. Nor did Emma marry Canutus until Edmund was dead:
Neither was she Mother, but only Stepmother to Edmund; so very ignorant are
you in your own Mistory. But that Canutus was invested with the Superiority of
Scotland, no Man besides your self did ever write; nor do I believe that it was
ever read before, that Malcolm did then swear Fealty to him: No truly; and I am
afraid that you do rather want Honesty than Knowledge; and that you did not
write those things by Mistake, but because you had a Mind to deceive others, or
did at least believe that none of our Countrymen would ever read those things;
and therefore you thought your self at liberty to blab and prate what you
pleased. That little Church dedicated to Olaus, might perhaps have been some
Argument if the Norwegians should require Homage, though that would not be
sufficient neither; but how it can be an Argument of the English Homage, I
don't see, If it had been a Trophy of any English Victory erected at the
Appointment of Ethelfred or Edmund, it had never been consecrated to St. Olaus,
the tutelary Saint of the Norwegians; but to St. George, the Guardian of
England, seeing there were at that time most cruel and bloody Wars betwixt the
English and the Norwegians. But all this, Mr. Holinshed, you have from our
History, which you do miserably pervert. And if it were as you say, with what
Confidence can the English redemand this Superiority of Scotland from Canute's
Successors, the Kings of Denmark? for neither can the King of England own
himself to be Canutus his Heir, nor seek that again which he has gifted to
another.

And because we are fallen upon Canutus, whom Holinshed, both in this little
Treatise, and in his History, entitles King of England, Denmark, Norway,
Scotland, and Sweden; and says that he demanded Homage from Malcolm, who only
resisted him for fashion's sake: It remains to be enquired, whether those
things agree with the Truth of the History. And first, Mr. Holinshed, you
alledg in your History that Canute went into Scotland, and did not only
overcome King Malcolm in that one Expedition, but also two other Scottish Kings,
Macbeth and Ieohmar, without much Trouble, and forced them to profess
themselves his Subjects.

That there were three Kings of Scotland at that time when Canute undertook the
Expedition, is not very probable; their Names not being in the Catalogue of our
Kings, nor never so much as heard of by us. Matthew of Westminster does
advisedly forbear Names; and I should have looked upon it as a Typographical
Error, had I not found the very same Names in Huntington, and also in
Caradocus, a Welsh Historian, who was certainly led into that Mistake by the
English Monks. And they do all of them take notice, that this was done after
the Return of Canute from Rome, but say nothing of the Causes of this War,
which they call only Rebellion; neither do they make any mention of the Year,
with what Forces, under what Generals, or in what Place the Battles were
fought. Must we then believe such unlearned and ignorant Monks, who did not
know the Names of the Kings that performed the Homage, and against whom they
gave their Evidence, and who confess they knew not the Cause of the
Transaction? But that Figment will not be able to stand before the more weighty
Evidence of greater Men, nay even of Canute himself: For Polydore says that he
went to Rome in the Year 1030. that on his Return, he took Arms against Richard
Duke of Normandy for having divorced his Sis^er Histritha, and died in Normandy
soon after his Landing. This Author does not only pass over all his Expedition
into Scotland, as a thing that never had a being, but also asserts that
immediately after his Return from Rome, he made War upon Richard D. of
Normandy, and died in the Expedition, But those good Historians ascribe that
Time after his Return, to his subduing of Scotland; which they give out he did
without much trouble. Florence of Worcester, Hoveden, the Continuator of Bid,
Ethelverd nor Ingulpb, have nothing of this Expedition of Canute against the
Scots; and would never certainly have omitted a thing so considerable, if it
had been true. ^ut what farther Inference can be drawn from those things,
supposing them to be true, as they are notoriously false, but only that Homage
was performed; which perhaps we may grant them, as being equal that he who was
Vassal for Cumberland and Westmoreland, should perform the same to his Lord and
King.

But they say that Canute was a King of four Kingdoms, viz. Denmark, England,
Scotland and Norway: I oppose Canute himself to those empty Triflers, most of
his Letters are still extant in Mal^sbury and Florence as well as in Ingulph
and others, wherein he styles himself only King of Denmark, England, Norway,
and a great part of Sweden; and certainly if he had been King of Scotland, he
would never have passed that over in silence, when he takes notice of his being
King of Norway and a great part of Sweden: Were we unworthy to be named amongst
his Conquests? don't we read that Gethus King of Orkney afforded Subject of
Triumph to Claudius? I cannot then imagine any other reason why he should not
have taken notice of us amongst his Titles; and therefore it must of necessity
follow, that either Canute or Holinshed, with his Malmsbury and Huntington,
have forgot themselves; it is not usual with Kings to omit any of their Titles,
nor would he have passed over Scotland, who set down a great part of Sweden.
Canute on his return from Rome, which was not long before his Death, writ to
the Archbishops of England, and others of both Orders, Ecclesiastics as well
as Laics. And it is to be seen in Florence abovementioned, when he divided his
Kingdoms amongst his Children a little before his Death, that he calls himself
King of England, Denmark, Norway and a great part of Sweden, but there is no
mention of Scotland, neither in Florence nor Krantzius: and this Letter is to
be found both in Florence and Ingulph. So in the Preface to his Laws which he
gave to the English, he writes himself King of England, Denmark and Norway, but
is still silent as to Scotland: And in many of his Donatives to Churches, he
caused the Inscription only to be, King of Denmark, England, Norway; but if
Holinshed have a Mind to excuse himself, as having set down Scotia for Suecia,
by the Mistake of the Clerk, it is both a probable and pardonable Error.
Krantzi^s the Danish Historian, takes notice indeed, that Canute governed five
Kingdoms, but has not one word of Scotland: and whereas Holinshed writes, that
Scotland was subdued without much to do, he acts therein like himself, though
it is not so easy to subdue Scotland, as to write so. But if I should rehearse
all his Calumnies and Comments, my Book would swell to a greater Bulk than his
History: But that I may stop the Mouths of those ignorant Monks, (to say no
worse of them) who do write so often that the Scots rebelled, were routed,
conquered and subdued, I shall exhibit here one Testimony of King Edward, who
succeeded Canute, which will overturn all those Calumnies. For when it was
debated in the public Meeting of the States or Parliament, Who ought to be
accounted as Denizons of England, and enjoy the same Privileges with them:
Those of Britany in France were named, first, because they were originally from
England, Edward added the Welsh next, because King Inas married a Wife out of
Wales, and at that time there was a general Intermarriage betwixt the Welsh and
the English. The Scots were mentioned in the third Place, who almost all of
them, especially the Nobility, had married with the English, and so at that
time two became one Flesh throughout all Britain, by which they became one
Nation, and one People through the whole Island. All those abovementioned (says
he) did ever stand stoutly as one Man, for the common Vtility of the Crown and
Kingdom against the Danes and Norwegians, fought it most valiantly and
unanimously against the Common Enemy, and bore the Burden of most fierce Wars
in the Kingdom. This I have transcribed verbatim, lest any one should accuse me
of adding somewhat of my own. This Law of Edward, William the Conqueror
con^irm'd in the public Meeting of the States In Archaionomia.
, as they are translated from the Saxon Tongue by William Lambard, in the
Edition printed at London by John Day in 1568, and indeed there are many things
in this Law worth the taking notice of. The first thing to be weighed, is the
Title which is concerning those who may and ought of Right to cohabit and
remain in the Kingdom of Britain. Secondly, It is expressly provided, that the
Scots may and ought of Right to cohabit and remain in the Kingdom of Britain or
England, that is, be accounted Denizons, and enjoy the Privileges of the
Kingdom. There Is a twofold Reason given in the Text, why they ought to be
reckoned amongst the Denizons of England; First, Because the Nobility of
Scotland, and almost all the People in general had married with the English, as
many of the English had married with the Scots; and therefore the Scots being
descended of English Blood, they were of Right to be accounted as English. The
second Reason is, because all the People beforementioned did ever stand stoutly
as one Man, for the common Vtility of the Crown and Kingdom against the Danes
and Norwegians, and fought it most valiantly and unanimously against the common
Enemy, and bore the Burden of most fierce Wars in the Kingdom. The doubling of
the Adverb Semper deserves to be taken notice of, and that they ^ag'd most
fierce Wars together, for the profit of the Kingdom of England. Moreover, the
Time when they became one People, and did unanimously sustain the Impression of
the Common Enemies, is dated from the Reign of Inas King of the English or West
Saxons, who came to the Crown in 689, and continued till his time. This one
Testimony of King Edward I oppose to those of all the English Historians, who
write, that the King of Scots did so often rebel, and conspire against the
English, with the Danes and Norvegians, was so often conquered, surrendered, and
forced to become a Supplicant: for this Edward was elder than any Historian now
extant in England, nor have they any Historian from the Death of Bid to this
Edward before the Conquest; who was a prudent Man, and a very substantial
Evidence of the things that were done before. Moreover, this Law was approved
by all the States of England, who it is reasonable to suppose understood more of
the Transactions which happened before their time, than any Monk of the next
two following Ages; and therefore by the Testimonies of King Edward, that of
all the States of England, and the Conqueror himself: the Scots during the time
of the Saxon Monarchy, were their fellow Soldiers and faithful Companions, had
the same Friends and Enemies in common, and fought manfully for their Safety
against the Danes and Norwegians, and did thereby deserve to enjoy the same
Privileges with the English. These things I have insisted upon to refute their
Calumnies, who alledg, that the King of Scots ought to be excluded from the
Succession to the Crown of England, as a Foreigner.

You say that Edward, younger Brother to this Edmund, did deprive Malcolm King
of Scots of his Life and Kingdom, and made his Son Malcolm King of Cumberland
and Northumberland. That any of the Malcolms were ever slain by the English,
was never so much as heard of among us; and I should suppose that this Trifler
means Mackbeth, but that he himself takes notice that Mackbeth was slain
afterward, being afraid belike that he should omit any thing, and therefore
would be sure to write the same thing twice. This Mackbeth was slain in Battle
by Malcolm Prince of Cumberland, and true Heir to the Crown of Scotland, but
driven thence by the Tyranny of Mackbeth. We confess that in his Army, there
was not only a great part of the Scottish Nobility but most of the Northumbrians
under their Earl Sivard, Malcolm's Uncle, who joined his Nephew with his
Forces, as the Obligation of Kindred required he should, and afterward that
same Sivard did appear in Battle against the Conqueror upon Malcolm's account,
as we shall see anon. But otherwise there is no mention of Edward in our
Historians, except that those Auxiliaries are supposed to have been sent to
Malcolm, rather by his Connivance than Consent.

The Law concerning the Marriage of an Heir, or Ward of Marriage, ( Maritatione
haeredis) comes from the Feudal Law, and was in use both amongst the Normans
and us, before the English had any thing of it. But this is to be observed,
that Cumberland and Northumberland were possessed by the Scots, not under the
Title of a Kingdom but of a Principality. But our Author is so much mistaken,
and so very ignorant in History, that he makes three Contemporary Malcolm's,
one slain by Edward, another who was Prince of Cumberland and substituted in
his room by Edward, and the third Malcolm Son to Duncan, who being driven from
the Throne by Malcolm fled into England for his Life. Nor is that Malcolm Son
to Duncan any other than that same Malcolm Son to the King of Cumberland, who
if he did Homage to the King of England, for his Possessions which he held in
England, what wonder, or where is there any thing strange in it? but that he
did Homage for the Kingdom of Scotland, or was delivered to Edward by the
Nobility of Scotland upon the Account of Wardship, is foolish to assert: For
having fled from Scotland because of Mackbeth's Tyranny, he lurked for some
time in England, as Henry the 2d did afterward with David King of Scotland:
but that Edward gave him `Margaret to Wife is still more absurd, for this
Marriage was not consummated till after Edward's Death, which was some Years
after, and during the Conqueror's Reign; for Malcolm having entertained Edgar
Atheling the true Heir to the Crown of England with Margaret his Sister who had
fled from thence, being taken with Margaret's Beauty and Disposition, he
married her, whence there did arise an occasion of War betwixt him and the
Conqueror. Don't you see, Mr. Holinshed, how you are caught every way in this
Fiction, and encumbred on all Hands, and that you don't distinguish those Times
aright? This Malcolm whom you call Son to the King of Cumberland and
Nor^humberland, was true Heir to the Crown of Scotland, and Son to Duncan,
declared Prince of Cumberland, while his Father was alive and owed Homage upon
that account, and therefore it is no wonder that he performed the same.

Writers say, that Sivard marched into Scotland to assist Malcolm, and it may
be that it was by Edward's Command, which was no more than what became a lover
of Equity, to join his Forces with those of Malcolm, who was his Vassal for
Cumberland and Northumberland, and was then pursuing his Right to the Crown of
Scotland by Force of Arms; and in that Battle Mackbeth who seized upon the
Crown by Violence, was killed by Macduff Earl of Fife.

There was a bloody Battle betwixt Per^y Earl of Northumberland, and Henry the
4th; the Earl was assisted by a great number of Scots, under the Command of
Dougl^s. And if Henry had fallen in that Battle, as he was likely to have done,
we could not have said that he was killed by Douglas or the Scots: Nor for the
same reason can we say, that Mackbeth was slain by Sivard, but by Malcolm the
General of the whole Army, at that time Prince of Cumberland, and in a little
while after King of Scotland.

CHAP. XXI.
That there is no probable nor likely Reason to be adduced, that Homage was
performed for Scotland during the Time of the English Saxon Monarchy.
HAving thus run through the Reigns of all the Saxon Kings, some Generals are
to be added for the satisfaction of the Learned, by which it will appear to any
Man, though never so short-sighted, that the English Saxons never had nor could
so much as pretend to any Right of Superiority over Scotland.

In the first Place we must enquire concerning the Right to this Homage,
whether the Saxons obtained it before their Arrival in Britain, or acquired it
after: That they had it before, no wise Man will alledg, there having been no
Communion neither in Vassalage nor Superiority betwixt those Nations. If they
say that they acquired it afterward, either they had it from the Britains, or
purchased it by their own Valor. That they had it from the Britains is very
improbable; for according to the Feudal Law, this Superiority cannot be
transferred from (...) Lord to another, except the Lord quit (...) Right with
Consent of the Vassal. But ^^ere's no mention of the Britains having ^uitted
their Right in any Author: nor is (...) probable that they who were oppressed
(...) so many, and such remarkable Injuries (...) the Saxons, would give up
their Right (...) them, or gratify them in any thing. But ^ome Englishman may
perhaps answer, that ^e succeeded the Britains to whom this ^omage was due, and
do now possess their ^ingdom, and therefore the Homage which ^as due to them
before, is now of Right due ^o us. The barbarous Emperor of the Turks, (...)
use of the same sort of Argument; ^or whereas he now possesses Constantinople,
which was once the Seat of the Roman Empire, he thinks the Christian Princes
highly unjust, in not acknowledging him as their Liege Lord, receiving the
Investitu^e of their Kingdoms from him, and paying him Homage, being deceived
by a corrupt Opinion, that the rest of the Princes of the World ought to
acknowledge the Roman Emperor for their Sovereign. The English pretend the same,
and make use of the like deceitful Argument, that the Britains being driven
out, their Kingdom is transferred to them; and upon that Account they claim the
Right of Homage from the Scots: Tho with the Englishmens leave, I make bold to
say, that the great Turk's Argument is much the Stronger and more Honest: for
he seized the Capital of the Christian Empire; and sometimes there is, as there
is said to be, a Right in Arms: But in the Seizure of the Kingdom of the
Britains, there were many other things that did concur, which I should rather
were objected by the Britains, than our Countrymen. Therefore if they neither
acquired this Right by the Concession of the Britains, nor by a lawful
Succession in their Room; it follows of Course, that they must have acquired it
since their Arrival in Britain: and though it be manifestly repugnant to the
Nature of a Kingdom and Royal Majesty to acknowledge a Liege Lord, yet if there
be any such thing amongst Kings, as an acknowledgment of a Superior, as wicked
Ambition introduces new forms every Day; it has only Place in such Kingdoms as
are lately constituted and erected into the Form of Kingdoms on the Condition,
that they should acknowledge a Superior, such as are the Kingdoms of Bohemia,
Naples and Sicily. The first of which was honored with the Title of Kingdom by
Henry the 5th, though others say, that it was by Frederick Barbarossa or
Aenobarba, merely from a Caesar-like Ambition, as I said before; and the two
latter, viz. Naples and Sicily were adorned with the Titles of Royalty by Pope
Anaclet the second, who was equally Ambitious, and unwilling to yield in any
thing to the Imperial Dignity, but would rival them in Power. But those
Kingdoms were erected at first on this Condition, that they should be
Feudatory, and were honored with that Title on purpose, that they should
acknowledge a Superior; but this could not have Place in Ancient Kingdoms which
were originally Independent: for no Man in his right Wits, who was originally
Free, will easily condescend to be rendered subject to the Power of another,
seeing upon any Offense against his Liege Lord, he is immediately deprived of
his Fee; but that the Scottish Monarchy is older than that of the English
Saxons, is not denied by Holinshed himself, who writes, that so many Scottish
Kings were subdued by Sicilius King of the Britains, and the Saxons did also
wrest the Sovereignty of all Britain from the Kings of Scotland, so that they
must of necessity have been before the Saxons, or as we have already
demonstrated, elder also than the British Monarchy; for we have plainly proved,
that the Britains had no Kings before the Irruptions of the Scots, but were
subject to a Roman Legate. If then the Scots were independent from the very
first Constitution of their Kingdom, How could it be that they should enslave
themselves to the Will of another, and acknowledge Foreign Lords? They must
either have done this of their own Accord or by Force; as to their having done
it spontaneously, Holinshed himself will bear them witness how ill they take
it, and that they cannot bear it with Patience to have this Homage mentioned to
them at this very Day; and we shall make it appear further anon, when we come
to speak of Henry the third, and Edward the first, Kings of England. But when
we were invited thereunto by their Bounty ( Beneficio), we did willingly
acknowledge the King of England as our Superior; and in truth according to the
Feudal Law, there is no better way of constituting or confirming a Fee than
Bounty ( Beneficium): Neither were ever the Kings of Scotland Beneficiaries to
those of England for the Kingdom of Scotland, nor does any Body write that they
were; for seeing we do far exceed the English in Antiquity, it cannot be
supposed that we obtained that as their Bounty, which we enjoyed long before
their Monarchy, and are still in Possession of to this very Day. If they say
that we swore Fealty for Cumberland, Westmoreland and Northumberland, which are
great Countries, then they say something that has a Semblance of Truth: for as
long as we were permitted to enjoy that Bounty, we acknowledged the King of
England as our Liege-Lord, and did him faithful and gallant Service in all his
Expeditions against the Danes, as Holinshed and Edward himself, the last of the
Saxon Kings, have left in writing; and I do very much doubt that they would
ever have been able to shake off the Danish Yoke, without the Assistance of the
Scottish Arms: But when they redemanded the Bounty, which they had granted us
freely before, and do now retain it by Violence, by what Law can they require
Homage and Fealty upon that account, seeing they have recalled the Benefit for
which it was performed?

The second Part remains still, which is, that being conquered by their Arms,
we were forced to acknowledge the King of England as our Superior. It is true
indeed, that Nations overcome by War, do sometimes acknowledge the conqueror for
their Liege-Lord: but this I do constantly maintain, that no Nation subdued by
War, having yet their own King left, do so much fall under the Power of the
Conqueror, as to acknowledge him and their own King for Liege-Lord at the same
time. If otherwise, I wish they would produce an Example that ever a King
overcome by War, and left in his own Country with all his Rights and
Privileges, swore F^al^y and Homage to the Conqueror: For the Kings of
Countries conquered by War, u^'d to be suppressed together with the Royal
Title, and not left to renew the War upon every occasion. Did the English when
they subdued Ireland, leave the Irish their Kings, of whom they had at that
time five or six? No surely, but that all occasion of Rebellion might be cut
off, they abolished the Name of Kings, and established Fiduciary Earls. But of
a King overcome in War, and left in his own Country as a Fiduciary, no Man has
ever hith^rto read or heard.

It remains now that we enquire into the Matter of Fact, whether or not it be
likely that the King of Scots, being overcome by the Saxon Arms, was compelld
to swear Fealty to the King of England, and acknowledge him as his Liege-Lord.
Certainly from their Arrival with Hengist, to the time of the Conquest, they
had war with the Britains for 400 Years; and the Britains being wasted with
many Overthrows, did very much consume the Strength of the Saxons. Nor did the
Britains lay aside the Royal Dignity until William Rufus, the Conqueror's Son,
overcame them in 1193, and killed their King Rhaesus: Therefore it is probable,
that they neither thought of subduing Scotland, nor were in a Capacity to do it
during that Time.

While the British Monarchy was still in being, the Saxons raged against one
another with mutual Slaughters, until the rest of the Saxon Kings being
conquered, the King of the West Saxons obtained the Sovereignty of all England
except Wales, which happened about the Year 833; and therefore it is not likely
that they were intent upon the swallowing up of other Kingdoms during that
time. And before that, the Danes did exercise Piracy upon the Maritime
Counties; and being invited by the Fruitfulness of the Island, and other
things, and following the same Methods that the Saxons had done before them,
they conceived hopes of seizing the Kingdom: and therefore the English, though
they did willingly unite in one Kingdom, they did also desire the Conjunction
of the Scots, that they might be the more able to resist the Common Enemy. The
Scots did readily consent, and especially for these two Reasons: First, because
the English had a little before that embraced the Christian Religion, to which
the Danes were capital Enemies, as I said before: And, Secondly, because they
had experienced the Valor of the Danes when they slew Constantine the King of
Scots and his Army; and perceiving that they should be liable to the same
danger if the Danes should rout the English, and seize the Kingdom, they did
willingly associate their Arms with the English: And ^lured himself being
assisted by the Scots Auxiliaries, did break the Strength of the Danes, (Who
had already seized a great part of England) and entertained a sacred and
inviolable Friendship with the Scots, having left them those Northern Provinces
of Cumberland, Westmoreland, and Northumberland, as a Reward of their Social
Arms against the Danes: And his Successor Edward did the same. As for those
Victories which they boast of having obtained; that was indeed a great one
which Osbright and Ella, being conjoined with the Britains, did gain over the
Scots, and I know not if ever they had a greater afterward: and though by that
Victory the Scots lost all the countries be-South the Forth, yet the English
themselves did never pretend that they demanded Homage or Fealty from them.
Nay, that Holinshed's Temper may be known to all Men, he has not this Story of
Osbright and Ella from any English Writer; but has excerpted it from ours,
that he might scrape together on every side whatever could be injurious to our
Fame; so as having thrown off all Modesty, he may affirm that the Scots made a
Surrender of themselves, and performed Homage, though the same was never
mentioned neither by any of ours, nor the English Historians.

And therefore Holinshed himself is Author of this Forgery, amongst many
others. From his time till that of Edward the Martyr, or Athelstan, there was
no War betwixt the English and Scots; and it is certain, that during that Time
they obtained no Victory over us: for the English Historians would never have
passed it over, seeing they take notice of things far less considerable and
stuff their Writings with mere Trifles and Oldwives Fables: And the English
Saxons raging against one another with mutual Butcheries all that time, and
being quickly after attacked by the Danes, it is very improbable that they did
ever so much as think of invading Scotland, or demanding Homage from the Scots;
and after that the Heptarchy was united into one Kingdom, and that the Saxons
were overwhelmed with the Danish War, they associated with the Scots, and
delivered them the Northern Counties of Cumberland, Westmoreland and
Northumberland, as aforesaid. But Athelstan having obtained some Respite from
the Danish War, and not being able to bear so great a Diminution of his
Kingdom, repenting him of his Gift, he sought back those Countries, forced the
offended Scots to associate with the Danes for maintaining their own Right, and
revenge themselves for Edward's Violation of his Faith. However, the Scots were
defeated, Malcolm being their General, though the English do falsely assert that
it was Constantine. But after that Peace was renewed, and Cumberland and
Westmoreland delivered as a Benefit to the Prince of Scots; it is plain from
the Histories, that the English did never obtain any great Victory over the
Scots till Edward the Firsts time.

As to what concerns the English Historians of those Times, except it be Bid
and Gildas, whose Testimonies I have faithfully cited already, we have none who
take any notice of this Homage; all the rest being later by many Ages, as I
noted before; and confess themselves, that they have no Historian whom they can
follow. But this is the common Fault of all Historians to be lavish in the
Praises of their own Country, and allow themselves a Liberty of ^eigning any
thing to cry down their Enemies: For who is there that reads the Polish
Histories, and does not meet with Stories of their having conquered and subdued
Denmark, Germany and Bohemia, a great many times; and extolling the Valor of
the Poles to the Skies, nay above them? And in like manner (...) Grammaticus
and Krantzius write in their Histories of Denmark, Germany and Sweden. Though
they have that indeed whereof they may deservedly glory; but however, they mix
true things with false, so that the Truth it self comes often to be called in
question. And so the English relate their Victories over the Scots, as Cowards,
Rebel^, Covenant-breakers, and not so much as worthy to be conquered: But of
the Victories gained over them by the Scots, which must of necessity have been
some, otherwise they had never been able to have held their Kingdom, how
inconsiderable soever it is, there is a profound Silence. Upon which account, I
am the more favorable to Ieffrey of Monmouth; for I perceive his Fault to be
common to all Historians; and therefore honest Men do seldom give Credit to the
Historians of one Nation who write against another, especially with which they
are at Enmity. But Holinshed, with his Leland and Adams, filled us with
Expectations of valid Proofs from the authentic and unsuspected Annals of both
Kingdoms; at least Holinshed did promise it in their Name, but Quid dignum
tanto tulit ^ic promissor (...)* Has his Performance been answerable to his
Promise? Did he ever bring one Scots-man as a Witness except Marian^^, and not
him neither without a Falsification? for he ascribes that to Marianus, which is
no where to be found in him: But what Credit the Testimonies of Monks deserve,
who were not present at the Transactions themselves, but used to entertain
vulgar Fame and common Reports for Truth, especially seeing the English are
generally more addicted to their own Praise than is just, I leave to the
Judgment of the Reader; Holinshed himself being also suspicious of the Veracity
of the Monks in more places than one.

The Question of Right, which I referred to the End of this Chapter, does still
remain: Whether or not this Constantine or Malcolm could render the Kingdom
subject, or oblige it to pay Homage to another, seeing they had received it
free from their Ancestors? For it is certain that no Man can alienate the
Rights of Majesty derived from his Forefathers, or make himself feudatory to
another Prince; and that neither Constantine nor Malcol^, nor any of those who
succeeded them, could invest another with the Rights of the Kingdom, which came
free to their hands, or subject the same to hold in Fee of another. For Kings
being appointed by God to represent his Image upon the Earth, they can have no
other Superior besides himself; and that the Kingdom of Scotland was free and
independent before the Reigns of Constantine and Malcolm our Adversaries
themselves cannot deny. And in this Question all true hearted Englishmen will
agree with me, they being no less concerned in this Case than we; for their
Kings have often yielded themselves up to the power of others. Offa, King of
the Mercians, or South Saxons, having made a Journey to Ro^e, did render his
People tributary to St. Peter's Chair; which was renewed by Ethelwolph, who did
reign almost over all England: And so under King Ethelfred, the English were
made tributary to the Danes, and forced to redeem their Liberty with Money. But
John King of England did so ^ar subject his Kingdom to the Pope, that his
Successors were not to receive the Investiture thereof from any other but the
Pope; and therefore seeing this sort of Subjection does also militate against
their own Liberty, they will not take it ill if I expatiate a little in this
field. What Philip King of France thought as to this Question, I shall subjoin
in Holinshed's own words: John could not subject the Kingdom to the Pope
without the Consent of the Peers; and therefore he forfeited the Crown by his
own Fault, because the Kingdom of England never did nor never shall appertain
to the Patrimony of St. Peter: For though King John was a lawful King, neither he
nor any other King could alienate the Kingdom without consent of the `Peers,
who are obliged to the defense of him and his Royal Prerogative as much as in
them lies. And if the Pope (continues he) intends to defend this Error, it will
be a dangerous Example to all the Kingdoms of the World. Those things being
said, the Peers of France who were present, did unanimously protest that they
would persist in the defense of this until death; that no Prince nor King could
a^ his own Pleasure alienate the Kingdom, or render it tributary to any other
King or Prince, so as the Peers may be compelled to do Homage to any foreign
Prince. For he loses the Rights of Majesty, and cannot be any more called a
King, who is subject to the Power and Command of another, seeing he was
formerly inferior to God only; and he does manifestly abdicate, and deserves
no more the Title of a King, who ought to preserve the People committed to his
Charge, and all their Privileges ^^^^olable, ^f he subject them to the Power ^f
^^other: And of Right a King can neither (...) nor e^ancipate his Kingdom to
another; when besides the Lands, there are also ^ free People in it of whom
there can be no Commerce, and whom he cannot enslave without their own Consent.
Such as desire to ^e further informed as to this Question, may ^ead Hottoman's
Treatise of famous Questions, where this is professedly treated of, Q^est. 1.
and we shall add more afterward. Nay Ho^^^s^ed himself following Polydore,
denies that this Liege Homage performed by K. John to the Pope, did any way
prejudg his Succes^o^s the Kings of England; but only himself; who swore it,
and committed the Offense; although there was a public Indenture signed
obliging to this Homage, and confirmed not only by the Hand and Seal of K.
John, but those of 16 Earls. I wonder that those who are so sharp-sighted as to
discern an Ho^age in every public Transaction of ours, by which they will have
Posterity to be bound and obliged, should deny the Kingdom of England to be a
Fee, though the Name of Liege-Homage be expressly mentioned, a Tribute of 1000
Marks positively agreed on, and an express Proviso made that none should
succeed to the Crown of England without Investiture obtained from the Pope; and
yet they will not have it that this Act of K. John's did any ways affect his
Heirs and Successors: And therefore I think that the Negative of this
Proposition is very clear, viz. that during the Time of the Saxon Monarchy,
there was no Homage performed by Constantine nor no other King, for Scoland.
For Cumberland, Northumberland and Westmoreland, it might be that he who held
them in Fee, did Homage to his Lord; and that the King of Scots might profess
himself to be Liege-man to the King of England upon that account, as many of
the Kings of England since the Conquest were not ashamed to profess themselves
to the French King; which we shall hear anon.

So much as to the Time that preceded the Conquest; during which it is most
certain that neither Britains nor Saxons had, or could pretend to have, any
Right over this Kingdom, how inconsiderable soever: And therefore this second
Army of Instances have abandoned their Camp, deserted their General, and run
over to the Enemy.

CHAP. XXII.
Of William the Conqueror, and whether he pretended any other Right to the
Kingdom of England, than that of Conquest?
THat we may now leave those more remote Transactions, which are rendered
doubtful because of their Antiquity, and come to those which bear the Character
of being truer and more certain, we shall descend to the Kings of the Norman
Race. As to this third Classis of the British Kings, and whether they could
pretend to any Superiority over Scotland, the Field of Controversy is more
difficult and narrow; and that which has made it so, was the in^umane Cruelty
of Edward I. against us: Who being inflamed with an eager Desire of ^xtirpating
the whole Nation, and having ^avaged all the open Countries of the Kingdom with
his Army, he carried away the Royal Crown, the Honors of the Kingdom, all the
public Monuments, Charters, and Privileges, that he might abolish as much ^s
in him lay all Memory of Antiquity; insomuch that he plundered the Registers,
and destroyed the Monastries, and other public Places where they were kept;
and took them with him into England, upon the vain hopes which he had conceived
first of possessing the Superiority which he had falsely ^^igned to himself, and
then of seizing the Property of the whole Kingdom by an Exclusion of all the
Heirs of the Crown: and therefore our Task here is so much the more difficult;
whereas we have nothing to say on the Question, but what we must be obliged to
bring from English Monuments (...) Records, and the Evidence of the Witnesses
produced against us: And yet from those we shall make it plainly appear, if I
be not mightily mistaken, that the Kingdom of Scotland was always free, and did
never acknowledge any Superior Lord, (which is more than the English can say
for themselves*) But if our Kings received any thing from theirs under the
Notion of a Benefit, or Bounty, (Beneficii) it is not to be recokon'd strange
that they should have performed Homage for that, seeing the Benefit cannot be
retained without the Homage, the one going always along with the other. But if
the Lord either by Injustice, or due Course of Law, recall his Bounty, it were
very uncivil in him when he takes that away, still to require Service or Homage.

But before we come to those things which are objected against us by Holinshed
in particular, we must enquire in general, that if there was any Homage due
from Scotland to the King of England, to whom it ought to accrue after the
Conquest, whether to the true Heirs of their former Lord, or to those who
succeeded him by Force and Arms; for the English themselves will not say, that
Force and Arms do either give or take away another Man's Right, in as much as
they do still entitle themselves Kings of France, though they were thrown out
thence by Force of Arms. The same is to be said as to the King of France, who
does to this day call himself King of Navarre, as believing the same to pertain
to him by Hereditary Right. Then seeing Right cannot be purchased by Force and
Arms, nor Prescription be pleaded against him who cannot act, but that by Laws
both Humane and Divine, every one's Right ought to remain entire to him; we
must find out who it is that succeeded to that Right by Law.

There are some who feign, that William the Conqueror was named by Edward the
Confessor for his Successor, and that he left the Kingdom to him by his Will;
and Holinshed who is ashamed of nothing, how unreasonable soever, will have it,
that he succeeded as next of Kin: but how or by what means that can be, and how
agreeable it is to the Laws of God and Man, I shall show in a few words. And
first, that it may be known who this Edward was, and by what Right he succeeded
to the Kingdom, the Line of Succession must be repeated from Egilfred or
Ethelfred the undoubted King of England. Ethelfred then had two Sons, Edmund
the Eldest called Ironside, (because of his great Strength) by Ethelgin his
Wife, and Edward the Confessor by Emma Sister to Richard the second, Duke of
Normandy. Edmund succeeded his Father, and had a Son, who because of his
Banishment was named Edward the Exile; for Canute succeeding Edmund (justly or
unjustly I shall not say) lest he should incur any Damage from the Children of
an excellent Father, whose Memory was precious to the English, he proscribed
Edward who was therefore surnamed the Exile. This Edward retiring to the Court
of Henry the Emperor, found so much Favor there, that he obtained for Wife
Agatha Sister to the King of Hungary, and Niece to the said Emperor, by whom he
had Edgar commonly called Etheling, and Margaret afterward Queen of Scots.
Canute and his Son Hardicanute Kings of England, being dead, Edward, who was
Brother to Edmund, only by the Father's Side, whether it was by the Craft of
his Mother Emma, or by Election, as the English will have it, usurped the
Crown, by the Assistance of the Normans; against the Laws of England, seeing he
was not of the full Blood; but living a long time without Children, and having
no hopes of Issue, he sent into Germany to recall Edward, Son to his Brother
Edmund, from his Exile, that he might appoint him to be Heir of the Crown, in a
Convention of the Nobility. Edward obeyed, and returned into England, but died
that same Year. King Edward grieved at it, as it was but just, and recommended
his Son Edgar to the Nobles, as Heir of the Crown; and for that Cause would
have him called Etheling, which is as much as Infant of the Kingdom, according
to the Custom of Spain. But let the English say and write what they please
concerning this Edward, and rank him amongst the Gods if they will admit him,
to me he seems not to have been a good Man, who took the Kingdom that was his
Nephew's to himself, neither could he be called the true King of England; and
therefore it is very unlike that he would appoint the Norman Heir to the Crown
by his Will: for besides that it is most certain, and according to the Opinion
of all Lawyers, That Kingdoms cannot be disposed of by Will; it is as certain,
that the Father cannot prefer the Second to the Firstborn, or invert the Law
of Succession in his Kingdom. Neither is this agreeable to Equity, of which
this King is given out by his Countrymen to have been a strict Observer: For it
is not probable that either living or dying he would be of the Mind to transfer
the Crown into another Family when he had a just Heir, and the Dreams which he
is said by Holinshed himself to have had before his Death, declare, that he had
never conceived any such Design. His last words are to be found in Cambde^, by
which it plainly appears, that he appointed no Man Heir to the Crown of England
by his Will: So that the true Successor to that Kingdom, after the Death of
this Edward the Confessor, was Edgar Etheling; and this Homage was due to him
and his Heirs, and he dying without Children, the Right of Succession devolved
on the Heirs of Margaret, that is, the Kings of Scotland: And the Superiority,
if there was any such, is consolidate and confounded with the Property, as
Lawyers speak. For Malmsbury and Matthew of Paris, do ingenuously confess, That
the whole Nobility of the Kingdom of England went to the Scots, and the
Succession of the Crown devolved upon the Sons of Margaret after the Conquest;
but the English Nobles, because this Edgar was not fit to govern, suffered
Edward to enjoy the Crown of his Forefathers: But while they reject the true
Heir, they are forced to acknowledge a Foreigner for their Sovereign, by whom
being dispoil'd of their Riches and Estates, they were forced to undergo a
miserable Servitude. But what Holinshed asserts, that the Right of Succession
to the Crown of England, f^ll to the Norman by Kindred, is so silly, that it
needs no Refutation: He says, that the Conqueror was of the third, and Edward
of the second Degree of Consanguinity by Emma Mother to Edward, and great Aunt
to the Conqueror. But pray, Mr. Holinshed, is it customary with you in
Hereditary Kingdoms, for the next of the Mother's Line to succeed? Certainly in
the Feudal Law, the Mother's Line is not regarded, except in Fees which descend
from the Mother and the Mother's Kindred, which obtains to this Day in all the
Kingdoms of Europe, that are governed by Customs and Laws: But let us grant
that an Heritage may descend to the next of the Mother's Line, William was a
Bastard, and acknowledges himself to be such in that Charter which he grants to
Alan Count of Britany, which is to be seen in Cambden's Richmond. But in Law a
Bastard can neither succeed nor have any Successor.

Let this be the third Warning to our Neighbors, not to violate the Right of
Succession; First in Modred, the second in Brude^s King of the Picts, who being
assisted by your Forces, turned Alpin out of the Succession to the Pictish
Crown; but the Destruction of the British Nation followed the one, and that of
the Picts followed the other: the first being drove out of their Country,
retired into Wales, and the latter being totally rooted out, have left none to
keep up their Name; both of them paying dearly for rejecting the true Heir and
Successor, but all that they suffered under the Romans, by the Invasions of the
Scots and Picts, or at last by the Saxons, was but Childrens play to what they
suffered under the Conqueror; for neither God nor Man (to make use of the
Phrase) were secure from his Injuries, for he drove the English out of all
Benefices, and gave them to his Normans; he melted down the Plate of the
Churches, he sold the Noblemens Estates to those that bid most, he forced all
the English to swear Fealty and Homage, and laid grievous Imposts upon private
Men's Estates, and claimed every thing as his own by the Right of Conquest; he
did moreover, abolish the Laws and Institutions of the Country, changed the
ancient Arms and Bearing, and put the Norman Arms in their Stead; and insulted
over the English as unworthy to enjoy any Estates: so that it was accounted the
height of Reproach to be called an Englishman, says Cradock and Matthew Paris;
nay, he would have had the very Name of England obliterated, says Polidore, and
the Country to be called Great Normandy. And therefore I advise you again and
again, not to be guilty any more of rejecting the true Heir of the Crown. And,
Si Gen^^ humanun^ and Mortalia temnitis Arma,
At sperate Deos memores fandi atque nefandi.


CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Conqueror and his Sons Ru^us and Henry Kings of England, and whether
Homage was performed to them for Scotland.
NOW I return to the Conqueror, and whether he acquired any new Right to the
Kingdom of Scotland; for that he succeeded to the old Right, or that the same
was devolved upon him, can neither be maintained by any probable Argument, no^
is it agreeable to Law or Equity, that he should derive any Right from those
whom he subverted, and did so grievously vex. One thing however I think fit to
advise the Reader, that there is no public Writing, Charter or Monument
produced against us for the Conqueror's Right, but only Domestic Testimony,
and that also of an Enemy; and how much Credit that deserves has been
explained already, and is referred to the Judgment of the Impartial Reader: nor
if all the Monkish Writers be duly and orderly examined, will it be found that
there was any Homage performed for Scotland.

The Conqueror, says Holinshed, having subdued England, thought he had done
nothing unless he also subdued Scotland, and did therefore invade the same, and
forced M^^colm to surrender himself. This was not the true Cause of that War;
but when the English who could not bear the subversion of their Country, and
the Norman's Government patiently, fled to the King of Scots, they were all
most kindly and courteously received by Malcolm, who was mindful of the
Assistance they had given him to recover his Kingdom, and enriched them with
Lands and Fees; so that it is not without cause the English write, that the
whole Nobility of England went over to the Scots Westminster and Matthew. Paris.
The Conqueror being enraged at thi^* and imagining that it might come to pass
that the English drawing to an Head there, would sometime or other recover
their Country, in order to prevent that, he made War upon Scotland, and having
received several Defeats in the Persons of his Generals, he only came himself
to the Borders; but Malcolm meeting him with a well appointed Army, and both
sides waiting for the Signal of Battle, a Peace was at last concluded in the
Confines of both Kingdoms, by the Mediation of the Bishops; and seeing the
Terms of the same were harder upon the Conqueror than the King of Scots, it may
easily be inferred from thence, that the Scots were then superior in Arms: for
the Conqueror demanding three things; First, That all the English Exiles should
be given up; Secondly, That the King of Scots should receive no English Exiles
afterward; Thirdly, That the King of Scots should acknowledge him for King of
England, and do him Homage as usual for Cumberland, Northumberland and
Westmoreland; Malcolm agreed only to the last, as knowing that it did not
belong to him to determine who had the Right to the Crown of England; but the
two first he did constantly refuse, saying, that he would never be wanting to
any Englishman who sought Sanctuary under him, and on the other Hand, did urge,
that the English Exiles whom the Conqueror had dispoil'd, should be restored to
their Estates, and have a full Pardon for all that was past. This, though much
against the Conqueror's Interest, he granted however, against his Will,
perceiving that he must otherwise have come to a Battle; for the King of Scots
had at that time a most formidable Army, not only composed of his own Subjects,
but English Exiles: The gallant Sivard Earl of Northumberland had joined his
Nephew Malcolm out of Hatred to the Conqueror; so that he was forced nolens
volens, to restore the English Exiles: most of them however chose rather to
stay with Malcolm, and gave Name and Rise to many great Families which are
still in great Honor with us; and therefore I wonder so much the more, what
induces the English to write, that the King of Scots yielded himself to the
King of England. Nay Matthew Paris mentions a double Surrender, though others
do only take notice of one, and will have it that Malcolm became the
Conqueror's Liege Man (to use their own words) which imports nothing more but
that he did him Homage, and the same is to be understood, when Polidore says,
that Malcolm swore Fealty to the Conqueror, (in verba Conquestoris jur^sse) and
therefore according to the Judgment of all the English Writers, Malcolm did
only perform that Homage which he owed; but that it was performed for Scotland,
no Body writes but this Holinshed, and the counterfeit Nicholas Adams. Let them
then turn over all the Writings of the Monks till they sweat and pant, and let
them unlock all the Cabinets, they shall never find that Malcolm performed
Homage for Scotland, which is the Point in Hand; for we do not deny that Homage
was performed as long as we held those Northern Provinces, but after they were
taken away, there was neither any due nor performed. In matters of Money,
Judgment is never given except upon clear E^^dence, and how much less ought it
to be given in a Controversy which concerns the Liberty not of one Man, but of
a whole Kingdom, and that the most Ancient in Europe. And in Law, as often as
the same Discourse will admit of two Interpretations, that only is to be
received which is most agreeable to the thing transacted, and makes for
Liberty: Therefore what Holinshed or the Pettifogger Adams say, that Homage was
performed, to the Conqueror for the Kingdom of Scotland, is altogether false.
But this is their ordinary way, that whenever they find it mentioned that
Homage was performed to alledg, that it was for Scotland; but if our Historians
may be believed, there was not so much as any Homage done at that time: for the
Conqueror having attempted War upon Scotland unsuccessfuly, and finding when
present in Person, that the Issue of a War against the Scots might be
dangerous, he renewed the Peace, and restoring all the English whom he had
banished, returned Home: nor can the English themselves assert, that he reaped
any other Advantage from that War, though at the same time it (...) to be
observed, that we undertook the ^^me upon the account of the English, as we ^ad
formerly sustained the Attacks of the ^anes for their Safety and Government.

Rufus, the Conqueror's Son, having con^eiv'd, as well as his Father, that
Scotland might be subdued without much to do, did also prepare for an
Expedition against it; ^ut with no better Success than his Father: And yet you,
Mr. Holinshed, will have it that ^e received Homage from the King of Scots for
Scotland; but in what Place, Time or Year, you do not say, for fear of being
caught in a manifest Lie: for there is no mention of this Homage in William of
Newbriggs, though he came nearest those Times of all the English Writers; nay,
nor by Polydore himself in the Life of Rufus. I will subjoin his own Words:
Writers vary as to that Expedition which Rufus undertook against the Scots:
Some say that Malcolm, when he heard that Rufus was coming to make War upon
him, sought Peace of his own accord, and obtained it: Others, that Rufus
prepared great Forces by Sea and Land to subdue the Scots, (for so they always
speak in their Expeditions;) but his Fleet being cast away in a Storm, and his
Landforces having suffered much, he retired; and that Robert of Normandy made
Peace with Malcoln King of Scots, who waited for the Coming of the English with
a very strong Army near his own Borders; and by Agreement, restored some (...)
to the King of Scots, which he had enjoyed in England during the Reign of (...)
the First. So that you may perceive her^, Mr. Holinshed, if you can per^eive
any thing, that most of the Writers do wholly omit all mention of this Homage,
and that the (...) possessed the North-parts of England which were next unto
Scotland, both during the Reigns of Rufus and his Father Willi^^; though I will
not deny that they held them upon Fealty, as you did Normandy of the French
King at the same time. But what if it can be proven, even from your own
Writers, that Rufus received more Damage than Advantage by that Expedition, and
was the first that desired Peace; which he could not ob^ain, but upon yielding
up most of those Pl^ces which his Father had seized? Will not this subvert all
that you forge concerning Malcolm, ^iz. that he yielded himself? Let Us see then
what is the common Opinion of the English Historians upon this Head.

H^^eden agreeing in every thing with Polydore, says, that when the two Kings
stood in Battle array, Robert Duke of Normandy, who accompanied his Brother
Rufus to the Scottish Wars, perceiving Edgar Etheling in Malcolm's Army, and
having been familiar with him in times past, called upon him, and was the first
that mentioned a Peace; and by their means the two Kings were reconciled on
these Conditions, That M^lcolm should do the same Offices to Rufus which he had
performed to his Father, and that Rufus should restore to Malcolm the twelve
Towns which William had withheld from him, and pay him moreover ten Marks of
Gold per annum. Florence has the same thing, and adds, that at their second
Meeting, which was without Arms, Rufus demanded of Malcol^ to come to a Trial
at Law in his Courts; but Malcolm flatly refused, although he was his
Liege-man, which does not at all agree with the Homage then alleged to be
performed. Malmsbury has not any thing of the Homage; but only makes mention of
a Peace, procured by Robert Duke of Normandy; So that if Robert, who was
Brother to Rufus, was the first who mentioned a Peace, that Rufus was obliged
to yield up 12 Towns, and to pay 10 Marks of Gold yearly, as has been already
mentioned. What is asserted by the Monks Malmsbury and Hoveden, that Malcolm
being terrified with the Appearance of War, did profess himself Rufus's
Liege-man, must needs be false: For he who first makes mention of Peace, is
more desirous of Peace than War; and he that quits with his Possessions to
obtain Peace, is certainly inferior in Arms. But our Neighbors act according
to their usual Custom, in upbraiding us constantly with Cowardliness, or
something that is dishonorable. That Malcolm became Rufus's Liege-man, we
don't deny; but upon what account he became so, remains to be proved: but that
it was for Scotland, Mr. Holinshed, you have no Author to avouch.

There remain still two Calumnies with which our Malcolm is undeservedly
charged by most of the English Historians; one of them his inhumane Cruelty
toward Northumberland when he ravaged the same, and the other that he and his
eldest Son were slain in plain Battle: And though those things don't much concern
the Question of Homage, which is the Subject of the present Dispute, yet it is
not to be passed over, that all Men may see how unfaithfully our Neighbors
deal with us as to the Point of History. For the first Calumny; there was not a
more merciful, pious nor magnanimous Prince than Malcolm; and there is an
Instance of his Clemency and Magnanimity recorded by Polydore and Matthew
Paris: but while the common Rabble of English Historians search on all sides
how they may reproach us, they are not ashamed to charge us with the horrible
and barbarous Cruelties of the Danes; nay, what their more ancient Writers say
of the Cruelty of the Danes, they fasten Word for Word upon our Malcolm. It may
be indeed, as Hoveden relates it, that when Cospatrick (to whom the Conqueror
gave the Earldom of Northumberland that he might infest Malcolm with War)
harassed Cumberland, which did then belong to Malcolm, with Fire and Sword, and
besides other Cruelties burnt down St. Peter's Church in Cumberland; it may be,
I say, that Malcolm, being enraged at their violating the most sacred Places,
might command his Subjects to give no Quarter, and leave the Soldiers to their
Liberty; otherwise it is very improbable, that this most religious and pious
Prince would have done such things as they charge him with. Nor are they
content to throw those Aspersions upon Malcolm, but also upon his Son David,
the most religious Prince that ever was heard of, in the very same words.
Neither is there any more Truth in the second Calumny, that Malcolm and his Son
were defeated and killed in Battle: It Is a known Story. For William the
Conqueror being very lavish of his Faith, as the English themselves do testify,
detained some Garrisons in Northumberland: Malcolm having expected Restitution a
long time, but in vain, besieged Alnwick; and the Garrison being destitute of
all Relief, offered to surrender, Robert Moubray, Governor of the same, coming
out on Horseback with two Iron Keys on the Point of his Spear, presented'em to
the King, as if he designed to surrender: the King came out of his Tent to
receive them, and Monbray putting Spurs to his Horse, ruu the Spear into the
King's Eye; and leaving him half dead, was carried off by his swift Horse, on
the Confidence of whose Heels he undertook this memorable Enterprise. Edward,
eldest Son to Malcolm, pursuing him, fell into an Ambush which was laid to
favor Moubray's escape, and was also slain. Here Is no Victory, nor no Armies
which could fight: The Scots Army carried on the Siege, and the little Garrison
which resisted them offered to surrender; or let them tell us if they can, who
in that Army were slain besides the two Princes, or how many Colors were
taken. It is also plain, that from this Fact of Robert Moubray's, does the most
noble Family of the Piercies derive their Name and Original.

You will also have it, that Donald was elected King of Scots by Rufus, who did
afterward dethrone him, and substitute Duncan in his room, and that both of
them did Homage to Rufus But you cannot produce one ancient Writer Mr.
Holins^ed, who says that ever the English were allowed the Choice of one of our
Kings. We own, with Polydore, that Duncan dethroned his Competitor by the
Assistance of Rufus, under whom he did carry Arms for some time: For it was
then customary with the English, when we were broken into Factions, to assist
one of the Parties, that they might either destroy both, or when it fell out
that there was War betwixt the two Kingdoms, they might always have a Faction
amongst us: And this was followed by our Countrymen; who when Parties were at
variance, it was usual for the weaker Side to have recourse to the English for
Assistance. Mal^bury, Hoveden, and Huntington, do all of them take notice that
Duncan was made King of Scotland by the Assistance of Rufus; and Westminster
and Polydore do also make mention of the Homage: but there was no need of it;
for neither of them are numbered amongst the Kings of Scotland; and the Stories
of Donald and Duncan are very well known to us, viz. that they were no lawful
Heirs to the Crown, but Tyrants and Invaders; and therefore they were both of
them justly deprived of the Kingdom, and killed in the space of two Years. But
Holinshed will not take notice of this, that Duncan was not admitted to the Throne
until he took an Oath that he would entertain no English nor Norman Soldiers,
as is witnessed by Polydore in his 2d Book; than which there can be nothing
said more contradictory to the Laws of Homage, or Feudal Fealty, (if the
Soldiers of his Lord, and fellow Vassal, be not admitted into the Fiduciary
Kingdom:) And that same Author acquaints us, that all the English and Normans
which Duncan brought with him, were driven out of Scotland by Force. This was
certainly a great piece of Stubborness in a Vassal, and a piece of Ingratitude,
for which he deserved to have his Fee taken away. But the Matter speaks of it
self, viz. that the King of England could not then pre^end to any Superiority
over Scotland, when his Subjects were not so much as allowed to dwell there.

You write, that the most renowned Prince Henry I. received Homage from Edgar
and his Brother Alexander; although there be no mention of this Homage neither
in Polydore, Newbriggs, Stow, Mal^sbury, Westminster, nor any other Author that
I know of. However, we will grant this, though not for the Kingdom of Scotland,
but only for the Fiduciary Countries of Cumberland, Westmoreland and
Northumberland: For that most excellent Prince knowing the Norman Government to
be weak, and established by no Law in England, and that the Succession to both
Kingdoms was due to Margaret Queen of Scots, and her Children, he obtained
Ma^d, the Daughter of Malcolm and Margaret, for Wife, that he might from her at
least derive some Right to himself and Successors. This Maud was afterward
called the Good; nor is there any Queen of England whose Memory is recommended
to Posterity by so many Praises and Encomiums as hers. This I take notice of,
that our Neighbors may perceive that most of our Country-folks are naturally
of an ingenuous Disposition; and that Virtue and Education are in much esteem
with us, though they account us the most barbarous and vile People in the
World. Henry then lived in a most friendly Manner with the Scots; nor did he
ever demand Homage from that Prince, whose Sister he married; or if he did, it
was only on account of the Lands which the King of Scots held in England. Nay,
when he recommended his Daughter Maud to the Nobility, he made no Scruple to
assert her to be the true Heiress of the Crown, as being descended of Margaret
Queen of Scots, and the true Saxon Blood.

But Maud, Daughter to Henry, received Homage from her Uncle David. We will
grant you this, though it be not true; but Ma^d is not reckoned amongst the
Kings of England. You add, that she gave to her Uncle K. David for Wife, the
Daughter of Earl Woldeo^is, Heiress of Huntington and Northumberland; and
therefore because David was the first who did Homage for Huntington you in^er
as a necessary Consequence, that his Predecessors performed the same for the
Kingdom of Scotland; and that now you have left no place of Subterfuge for our
Countrymen, who hold that the Homage was performed for Huntington before they
obtained the Possession of it. As to the Heiress of Huntington, we own it; but
that he had a Right to Northumberland, Cumberland and Westmoreland, before that
time, I have proved sufficiently from your own Writers, and even from your self
Mr. Holinshed: So that this necessary Conclusion of yours comes to nothing; for
though K. David was the first that performed Homage for the County of
Huntington, it is certain that many of his Ancestors performed the same for
Cumberland, Northumberland and Westmoreland, which they held of the English;
for the Law allows that a Vassal may hold several Fees of one and the same Lord.

You object, that David refused Homage to Stephen, because he had performed it
to Maud before: But that was not for Scotland; for neither could he perform,
nor she receive that, but for other Countries which the King of Scots held of
the English. Nor have you any other Evidence but your own for this Homage:
Polydore, Newbriggs, Malmsbury, and the rest, have nothing of this Homage
performed to Stephen; nor if they had, would it any way help our Neighbors
Cause, as I said before. For we will grant that Homage was performed to Maud,
as the lawful Heiress of her Father Henry I. but Polydore says only, that K.
David held Cumberland in the time of K. Stephen, but refused to swear Fealty to
him for the same. However, he sent his Son Henry as was meet, who was gifted
with the County of Huntington by Stephen. This Henry, David's eldest Son and
Prince of Scotland, is also called Earl of Northumberland by that anonymous
Writer, and most others, left any Body should be ignorant that Northumberland
was at that time subject to the Scots.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Henry II. and by what Methods he would have settled that Homage upon
himself and his Heirs, and of the true Form of this Homage.
HEnry II. received Homage from Malcolm Prince of Scotland, according to you
Mr. Holinshed, for the Kingdom of Scotland; and that he was present with the
King of England in the War against the King of France, you take as an
unanswerable Argument, that our League with France was dissolved by Osbright,
and never renewed again. If you had writ simply, without any Addition, that
Malcolm had performed Homage, it might have been born with; for seeing Malcolm
enjoyed four large Provinces in England, viz. Cumberland, Northumberland,
Westmoreland and Huntington, which he did then hold of the English in Fee, what
wonder if he performed Homage for them? And therefore I beseech the candid
Reader that he would forbear giving Judgment for a little while, because the
Hinge of the Controversy turns wholly upon this Henry II. and Edward I. and if
I be not mistaken, the Truth of the Question will easily appear from the
English Annals themselves. We will therefore divide the Reign of this Henry II.
into two Periods, viz. into that before his taking William King of Scotland
Prisoner, and that after. As to the first you write, Mr. Holinshed, that
Malcolm King of Scots performed Homage for the Kingdom of Scotland: But in
truth, this smells of excessive Boldness and Impudence, to commit those things
to writing, which may be refuted out of other Writers; and indeed we do all of
us owe Thanks to your Hoveden, and to Savil, who lately took care to have him
printed, because they have lighted a Torch to guide us in this Controversy;
whereas we should have otherwise been in the Dark.

Hoveden then, Mr. Holinshed, does plainly give you and all other English
Writers, if there be any who agree with you, the Lie In prim. Hen. II.
His Words are these; That same Year Malcolm King of Scots met the King of
England at Chester, and did him Ho^age in the same Manner as his Grandfather
performed it to old K. Henry II. with a Salvo as to all his own Dignities. This
is the true Form of the Homage which was always paid to the Kings of England by
those of Scotland; in which their own Dignities are manifestly excepted. Now
the King of Scots had no other Dignities but Scotland, which was preserved safe
and entire in this Homage. Neither was this only true as to Malcolm, says
Hoveden, but also as to his Grandfather and Predecessors; and therefore if any
Man enquire after the Form of Homage paid by Constantine to Athelstan, it
necessarily follows that the same was performed with a Salvo to the Royal
Dignity: And so the Homage was performed to the Conqueror and Henry I. with a
Salvo to the Royal Authority, as will appear more plainly afterward in our
William and your Richard, that you may perceive I deal fairly with you: So that
the first part of your Assertion evanishes; and you are certainly a very
hair-brained Fellow, and one who lies at catch for other Men's Fame, seeing you
are not ashamed to assert what you cannot prove. That Malcolm accompanied Henry
into France, we don't deny; but that he took Arms against the King of France,
is false: Nor could Malcolm avoid the Suspicion of his Subjects
notwithstanding; for when he returned Home, the Scots being highly enraged
because they thought that he had carried Arms against the King of France his
Ally, they besieged him until such time as he cleared himself of that Crime;
and acquainted them, that having gone to London to perform Homage, he was
compelled by Force to accompany the King of England into (...); and so he (...)
the (...) of Scotland. You see then that your Argument from the Breach of the
French League, falls to the ground. But this you (...) passed over in Silence,
that when our K. (...) conferred the Honor of Knighthood upon Henry, that the
said Henry did swear solemnly and in express Terms, that he would never
redemand Cumberland, (...), Westmoreland nor Huntington, which David did then
possess in England. My Author is (...); and from hence we may easily gather not
only that this great Prince was guilty of violating his solemn Oath, but that
the King of Scots did at that time enjoy large Dominions in England; for which
he owed Homage, and not for the Kingdom of Scotland, as you do wilfully dream,
Mr. Holin^^ed. What you write of Henry the Second's having adjudg'd the four
Dominions above mentioned, to the Crown of England, because of Malcolm's
Rebellion, was never as^erted by any but your self; or if otherwise, tell us
when, by what Methods, or in what Place did this Rebellion happen: But so it is
ordered by Nature, that when a Man delights in an Error, he falls into an
infinite number of others for the defense of that; and to render the first Lie
probable, he is not afraid to make two or three more: And thus one Error, like
a teeming Sow, brings forth abundance of others. As to the Sentence of
Adjudication I think nothing strange; for how many times were Normandy,
Aquitain, and the rest of the English Provinces, which they hold in Fee,
adjudg'd to the Crown of France by the Senate of Paris? and yet they were never
restored until the English were drove thence by force of Arms. It Is certain
that the English themselves confess that K. Henry did at that time violate his
Oath; and when the same was told him to his Face by William King of Scots, he
had nothing to say in excuse of himself, but that he could not bear with such a
Diminution of his Kingdom: An excellent Way indeed of eluding his Oath. Now if
any of our Kings had been guilty of such a Crime, how strangely would you have
insulted over us as Perfidious, Perjured, and Enemies to Mankind, and whatever
else your paultry Choler could have suggested; as you are not ashamed to treat
us on much slighter Occasions? And in truth, if we go through all the Kings of
England one by one, to the time of Henry VII. there is not one of them whom we
shall not find guilty of breaking their Oaths, even you your self being Witness
in your History Mr. Holinshed; but you cannot perceive the Bunch on your own
Back. That we may return to the Sentence of (...), it might perhaps be easily
put in Execution in Hu^tington, which is a Midland Country, and far remote from
the Borders of Scotland; but as for Cumberland, Northumberland and
Westmoreland, which William of Newbrigs owns to have been possessed then by the
King of Scots, as his proper Right, the Execution was not so easy because they
were bordering Countries: and although the English Inhabitants did favor the
King of England, they were not reduced under the Dominion of England for an
hundred Years after that; for the King of Scots withheld them by Force, as the
(...) did Normandy, Anjou, Poic^ou, Aqui^^ etc. which were frequently adjudg'd
to the Crown of France. Any Man who has a Mind to see what your Writers have
left on Record concerning this Matter, may easily perceive it at one view; for
when the King of Scots demanded the Restitution of those Countries by his
Ambassadors, but in vain, Po^^dore says, he sought to right himself by his
Arms: and we shall prove from that same Polidore, and the rest of your
Historians, that Huntington remained in the Possession of the Scots until the
time of Edward the first, who took it from John Baliol; so that while you rage
against us, you quite forget what you ought to say. Nay, Westminster takes
notice of the Exchange betwixt King William and King Henry II. in 1157; for he
says, that the King of Scots restored Carlisle and Bamburgh Castle, with the
County of La^don, and that Henry restored the County of Huntington to him: and
yet Mr. Holinshed, you are not ashamed, so you can but reproach us on every
side, to say. that this County was never restored; for you are so prodigal of
your Faith, that you believed those things would never be read by any of our
Countrymen. Yea, Matthew Paris writes, that after William was set at Liberty,
viz. in 1185, the Earl of Huntington being dead without Issue, that Henry the
second gave that County with its Appurtenances to William King of Scots; so
little do your Writers agree amongst themselves, and you, Mr. Holinshed,
dissent from all of them. So much for Malcom's Homage.

You will have it that William King of Scots did Homage for his Kingdom, but
Polidore and most of the rest do only make mention of the Homage without any
Addition, and some do say that it was for the Kingdom of Scotland. That I may
reconcile your Writers amongst themselves, we will divide the Reign of this
William, as we did formerly that of your Henry, into two Periods, viz. that
before his being made Prisoner by the English, and that after. The Form of
Homage that he performed whilst (...) ^reeman, is threefold, as may be seen in
(...) and Matthew Paris; the first thus, William did Homage to King Richard, in
the (...) manner as his Brother Malcolm performed (...) and how that was, we
have said already, (...) with a Salvo to all his own Dignities: The second
thus, That William paid Homage to John his King with a Proviso, to secure his
(...) Right: The third is thus, as mentioned by Matthew Paris, That Willam did
Homage (...) the King of England for his Privileges in England. All which Forms
center in one, viz. That this Homage was performed with a Salvo (...) Royal
Dignity, and only in Right of those Lands which the King of Scots held in
England; so that it is certain from your own (...), that there was no Homage
performed by King William for the Kingdom of (...) while he was at Liberty: and
how (...) Fealty does extend which has a Salvo (...) or Ordine suo, is showed
by Matthew Paris, In Hen. II.
in the Oath of Fealty which Richard Prior of Dover took, when he was (...)
Archbishop of Canterbury, viz. he (...) Fealty to the King with a Salvo for
those of his Order, i.e. with a Proviso for the Ecclesiastical Liberty. But the
Truth o^ the Matter of Fact as to this Homage, is to be found in Polidore thus:
When William, say the English Historians, had sworn Fealty to Henry for the
Counties of Huntington Cumberland and Westmoreland, he hoped by this
Obsequiousness, to have also (...) obtained the County of Northumberland; (...)
finding that the King of England invented causes of Delay, he returned Home
very angry, with a Design to recover his Right by Arms, (which are always just
and necessary, when Right cannot be obtained without them) and when William had
tried (...) to recover his Due by Entreaties and all fair Means from Henry, who
was a hand and covetous Prince, he ravaged all Northumberland; and having sent
out his (...) to plunder the Country, as he was returning Home by way of
Alnwick accompanied only with sixty Horse, he fell into an Ambush, (for our
Princes were always more gallant than cautious or provident) and being taken,
was treated in a barbarous inhumane Manner, carried to Henry with his Feet tied
under the Horse's Belly, and kept in very harsh Custody for ten whole Years,
though Matthew Paris writes, that he was defeated in a pitched Battle In Hen.
II.
and that so great a Multitude of those Scots Pismires were slain, as cannot be
numbered; just as in another Place, he says, that we wage Wa^ like Women! In
Stephan.
But neither could the bearness of Blood, nor the Merits of (...) his
Grandfather, who exposed himself so often to defend Henry's Dignity, prevail
any thing in favor of William. And here you say, Mr. Holinshed, that he was
obliged to part with Huntington, Cumberland and Northumberland, for his Ransom;
from which it is apparent, that he was not only then in Possession of
Huntington, but also of Cumberland and Northumberland, which you affirm to have
been taken from him a little before; for he recovered Northumberland from Henry
the Son, as is witnessed by Hoveden: Therefore it is certain that the King of
Scots did always owe Homage for Gumberland and Northumberland, which overturns
all your former Arguments.

But you think this an invincible Argument to prove your vain Babbling, viz.
that King William offered a Cloak, a Saddle and lance, at the High Altar in
York-Minster, in Token of Homage. But pray, Mr. Holinshed, could not he offer
those things without professing himself a Subject to the King of England, or
what reference has that Oblation to the Fealty or Superiority of Scotland? But
every corrupt Judge, says Horace, is a bad enquirer into the Truth. Lewis King
of France offered at the Tomb of Thomus the Martyr, (as he is called by
Hoveden) a very large and valuable Golden Cup, and gave for the use of the
Monks who served there, 100 Vessels of Wine for ever, to be received at Poysy
in France every Year at the sole Charge of the King of France, with an immunity
from all Taxes, for whatever was bought for the use of the said Monks in
France; must Lewis therefore be said to have paid Homage to the King of England
because of this Oblation? So much for the time which preceded William's being
made Prisoner. You add amongst other Conditions of his Ransom, Mr. Holinshed,
that William promised that he and his Successors should hold the Kingdom of
Scotland in Fee of the King of England for ever. I shall not deny the matter of
Fact, which is attested by so many English Historians, the Tenor of the
Charter or Indenture being also exhibited by Hoveden, Matthew Paris and others,
whereby William in express Terms, without any Circumlocution or general Clause,
confesses, that he acknowledges the King of England his Liege Lord for the
Kingdom of Scotland; but I must say, that it was not only contrary to all Law,
but Humanity it self, to require of a Man who was not his own Master, but a
Captive, and at that time a Subject of England, an acknowledgment of
Superiority over Scotland. Let the Law of Nations plead for us, for all
Kingdoms agree in this, that there lies a Claim of Restitution against all
Actions extorted by Violence and Force: or let us have the Benefit of the
English Law at least, according to the Answer of William Brivier, one of King
Henry the 3d's Counselors, to the Archbishop of Canterbury; and the Barons
when they demanded a Confirmation of their Liberties by the King, viz. That the
Liberties which they sought, ought not to be observed in Law, because they were
extorted by Violence. Matthew Paris in Hen. III.
And therefore the Scots who served under Charles the seventh then Dauphin of
France, were altogether in the right in their Answer to King James I. (whom
Henry V. of England had taken at Sea, contrary to the Faith of a Truce, and
carried with him to France, that he might command the Scots to quit the French
Service) viz. That they did not acknowledge him for King, so long as he was in
the Power of their Enemies; and therefore would not obey his Commands seeing
they were not his Subjects. For other wise he being at that time a Subject of
England, they did reasonably infer, that they must also become such if they
acknowledged him for their Liege Lord. Certainly he who is in the Power of an
Enemy, or detained Captive, may easily be compelled to do any thing; but the
Laws allow him this relief, that being once at Liberty, he is not obliged to
perform what he promised against his Will, and therefore whatever was done,
said or promised by King William then in the Power of his Enemies, detained so
many Years in strict Custody, and having no Hopes of redeeming himself
otherwise, is accounted (...) and void in Law; and seeing Princes (...) but
seldom go to Law with one another, there is no need of a Declaratory (to use the
Law-Phrase) to make this void in Law. What if Richard King of England, when he
was detained Captive by Leopold Duke of Austria, subjected the Crown of England
so as to hold in Homage of the (...) Duke; must that Homage be therefore
accounted Legal, and the Kingdom of England subject to Austria? But that the
English may be sensible what Inconveniences they run themselves into by this
Argument' the same Hoveden writes, that this very Richard who was for his
Magnani^^ty called coeur de Lion, i. e. Lion's Heart, when he was sold by
Leopold to the Emperor Henry, and saw no other way of delivering himself from
his Captivity, he did divest himself of the Crown of England, deliver it to the
Emperor as Universal Monarch, and invested him with his Hat, and the Emperor
did straightway, as was agreed on or commun'd before hand in the Presence of
the Peers of Germany and England, restore him the foresaid Kingdom of England,
to be held of him the said Emperor, on an Annual Tribute of 5000 l. Sterlin,
and thereupon he invested Richard with a double Crown of Gold; but the said
Emperor did afterward on his Deathbed quit Claim the said Richard and his
Heirs of those and all other Agreements.

Let those two Princes William and Richard, and their Actions while Captives be
compared, and we shall find that one Egg is not more like another, for both of
them in their Captivity subjected their Kingdoms to the Power of another: but
it is perhaps more dishonorable on Richard's part, who promised to pay 5000 l.
Sterlin annually as a Tribute; and both of them being at Liberty, obtained a
Remission of this Homage which was extorted by Violence, either from the Lords
themselves, or their Heirs. In Richard's Case there was the Emperor's
Investiture, in William's none: therefore the English must either be very
partial in their own Case, or acknowledge the same thing against themselves,
which they object against us, viz. That the King of England did sometime pay
Homage to the Emperor for the Kingdom of England, as I made it appear before in
the Comparison betwixt our Constantine and Ethelred King of England,
Constantine having only made a Surrender, (if it be true what the English say
concerning him) but it is certain that Ethelred did reign precariously under
Sueno; so that they can find nothing in our William, but what they may find in
their own Richard: For as to Henry II. the Subject of the present Dispute, no
Body did ever esteem him a good Man, for the few Virtues that he had were
exceeded, or at least equaled by his Vices; and being unmindful of the Oath
which he had sworn to our David his Uncle, never to redemand Cumberland,
Northumberland and Westmoreland, he sought by all manner of ways, that is, by
Force and Fraud, to seize them as the King of France did the English Fees which
they held Beyond Sea; for that is a Fault natural to most Kings, that they
endeavor to enlarge their Dominions right or wrong. But this did not pass
unpunished in Henry, for on his Deathbed he cursed himself and his Childen,
and the Day of his Birth; nor could he ever be prevailed on by the Bishops to
absolve his Children from that Curse, though they did inculcate how much he
hazarded his Salvation thereby, But his Son Richard made an entire Restitution
to King William, renounced those Confessions that had been extorted from him,
and declared the Kingdom of Scotland free from Homage for all time coming,
having expressly testified, that the Homage which was performed by his Brother
Malcolm and his Predecessors, were only for the Dignities or Privileges which
they held in England: and Richard did mightily exceed his Father in Virtue; for
Hoveden says, that he did very much enlarge his Father's good Deeds, and
diminished his evil Ones; those whom his Father disinherited, he restored to
their Ancient Rights, whom his Father banished he recalled, whom his Father
imprisoned he let go free, and those on whom his Father did inflict several
Punishments unjustly, the Son did cherish and refresh. Let us also hear
Hoveden's words concerning the renouncing of this Homage, for he lived very
near those times In the first Part of the Annals of Richard I.
. William King of Scots came to Canterbury to the King of England in December,
and did Homage for the Dignities which he was to enjoy in England, (mark those
words for his Dignities in England) as Malcolm his Brother had enjoyed them,
and King Richard restored to him the Castles of Roxburgh and Berwick free from
all Claims by himself and the Kings of England for ever, and did at the same
time quit claim the Kingdom of Scotland from all Allegiance and Subjection to
the Crown of England: and for this Restitution of his Castles, and quit
claiming the Kingdom of Scotland from all Fealty and Allegiance; and in
consideration of King Richard's Charter to be had thereupon, William King of
Scots gave him 10000 Marks, and then Richard made him a Charter in this Form,
the Tenor of which I thought fit to insert, because Hoveden is not in every
Body's Hand, and that the Truth of this whole Controversy will appear from the
same.

Richard, by the Grace of God King of England, Duke of Normandy and Aquitain,
and Count of Anjou. To all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls and Barons,
Judges and Sheriffs, and to all his Servants and faithful Subjects of England,
Greeting. Be it known, that we have restored unto our most dear Kinsman
William, by the same Grace King of Scots, his Castles of Roxburgh and Berwick,
as his own Hereditary Right, and to be possessed by him and his Heirs for ever.
We do moreover quit him from all Agreements and Covenants, which our Father of
happy Memory, Henry King of England extorted from him by new Charters and his
imprisonment, so as he perform entirely and fully to us whatever Malcolm King
of Scots his Brother did, or of Right was obliged to do to our Predecessors;
and we shall do unto him whatever our Predecessors did, or of Right were
obliged to do to the said Malcalm, viz. as to his safe Conduct, coming to,
returning from, or staying in our Court, and in all Procurations, Liberties,
Dignities, and Honors of Right due unto him, as shall be agreed on by four of
our Peers chosen by the said King William, and four of his Peers chosen by us:
and if any of our Subjects have incroach'd upon the Borders or Marches of the
Kingdom of Scotland, since the Imprisonment of the said King William, without
Judgment, it is our Will, that they be entirely restored, and reduced to that
same State they were in before his Imprisonment. Moreover, as to the Lands
which he ought to hold in England, whether in Demain or Fee, viz. in the County
of Huntington, and any where else, that he and his Heirs for ever do enjoy them
in as full and ample manner as Malcolm possessed, or ought to have possessed
them* except that the said Malcolm or his Heirs did afterward let out any part
in Fee; and if so, that the Services of those Fees shall belong to him and his
Heirs; and if our Father gave any thing to the foresaid William king of
Scotland, it is our Will that the same be ratified and established. We have
also restored unto him the Allegiances ( Ligeantias,) Homages and Charters
which our Lord and Father extorted from him by his Captivity; and if any other
happen to be found or retained through forgetfulness, we command, that they
shall be of no Force nor Effect. But he becomes our Liege Man for all those
Lands for which his Predecessors became the Liege Men of our Predecessors, and
has sworn Fealty to us and our Heirs. Witness these Presents.

Matthew Paris subjoins these following Words to the same sense, William King
of Scots did Homage to Richard King of England for his Privileges in England,
and Richard restored unto him the Castles of Roxburgh and Berwick, and in
consideration of the Restitution of those Castles, the quit claiming of the
Kingdom of Scotland from Homage, and the Confirmation of his Charter, the said
King of Scots gave to the King of England 10000 Marks in Money.

Now do not those two Forms of Homage, the one for his Dignities, and the other
for his Privileges in England, make it evident to all Men, that the Fealty
which the King of Scots swore to the King of England, was only for the
Dignities and Privileges which he held in England. But you say, Mr. Holinshed,
that those Monuments are still in the Custody of the English: For my part I
don't believe it; for though your Faith be a Prostitute, or that at least you
do assert this upon another Man's Credit, yet I look upon those Peers of
England, and K. Richard, who says he restored them, to be hor^est and good Men.
So that I give you your choice, whether you had rather that you your self
should be accused of Falsehood, or your Countrymen of Perjury: for if you have
them not when you say you have them, you are guilty of writing a Falsehood; but
if you really have them, you charge your Countrymen with Perjury; when both
here, and in the Peace which was agreed on betwixt Edward III. and David Bruce,
the King and Peers of England declared upon Oath, that all those Monuments
which contained any Subjection of Scotland, were faithfully restored; as you
your self do also write: And Richard himself confesses that he had returned
that Charter or Indenture, which K. William had made during his Captivity, to
hold the Crown of Scotland in Fee of the Crown of England; and if any other
Monuments be retained through Forgetfulness they are to be esteemed void and
null Don't you see Mr. Holinshed, what Snares you have brought your self into?
As to what concerns those four Castles, they were delivered as Pledges* so that
on payment of the Money they were restored. But you say, that the Scots will
never be able to prove that the Money was paid. It cannot indeed be easily
proved at such an Interval of time, yet the Presctintion of so many Ages takes
away all Right of Demand; and the Restitution of the four Castles which were
laid in pledge, give ground to presume that the Debt was paid. The Testimony of
Robert Mountain which you adduce, is to: no purpose. By these it is as clear as
the Sun shine, that there were two Homages performed by William; one for the
Kingdom of Scotland, which was extorted by Force from him while he was a
Prisoner, and is therefore called a New Charter, because there was no such
Charter for Homage for the Kingdom of Scotland before that: And I pray you, Mr.
Holinshed, what need was there of a New Charter of Homage for Scotland, if
there had been any old one? Or what need was there to provide for that afresh,
which you say was sufficiently provided for from the first Original of England?
And as to those Lands which he had in England, whether in Demain or in Fee,
viz. in the County of Huntington, (which according to you, was lately taken
from him, and never restored) K. Richard says in plain terms, that K. William
and his Heirs shall for ever possess them in as ample manner as Malcolm did or
ought to have possessed them; and if his Father granted any thing to K.
William, he ratified and confirmed the same: And declares, that he restores all
those Allegiances and Charters which Henry extorted from him during his
Captivity. So that there cannot be a more express Renunciation in Law, than the
Restitution of the Obligation by the Creditor to the Debtor; and if it should
fall out that any others happened to be found, or were retained through
Forgetfulness, the King declares them void and null; reserving however, the
Homage of those Lands for which William's Ancestors were Liege-men to his
Ancestors.

For the better understanding of the Clause in this Charter, which is conceived
in those Words; As to his safe Conduct, coming to, returning from, or staying
in our Court: We must know that it relates to a Controversy betwixt the King of
England and King of Scotland, as Prince of Cumberland, Northumland and
Westmoreland, concerning the Prerogative of the King of England's Court; and
whether the King of Scots, because he was his Vasial, ought to appear in the
same. The King of Scots denied that he ought to appear in Person at that Court
which was held without the Limits of his Fee. The King of England insisted on
it, that he ought to appear wherever he held his Court. The Controversy was
decided by the Feudal Law thus; That the Vassal is not obliged to appear in the
Court of his Lord, without the Bounds of his Fee, but at his Lord's Charge; and
therefore it was transacted, that as often as the King of Scots should be
called to the King of England's Court, it should be at the King of England's
Expense; and that the King of Scots should be received on the Borders of
England by the Nobility of England, viz. one Bishop, one Earl, some Lords and
some Knights; who should also attend him back again to his own Borders at the
King of England's Charges, who was to allow the King of Scots 5 l. Sterlin per
diem for his own Expense. That would seem but a small sum now, though it was
then very great, as will appear, if we examine the old Accounts of the English
Exchequer. Those things I have touched before, and should not insist any
further on the Decision of this Controversy, but that Holinshed's Sawciness is
to be quelled; and that I am forced to it by the violent Extortion of that same
Homage from us by Edward I. seeing nothing can be said in more plain and excess
Terms than this Charter of Richard's: and indeed it is a Wonder, considering how
they strained their Wits to the utmost to ^ften this Calumny of Homage upon us,
that ever they should have printed Hoveden, or Ma^ew of Paris, who do so
expressly and plainly affirm, that this Homage for Scotland was violently
extorted from K. William (...) Henry III. and afterward remitted by Richard,
and that the Homage was only performed for our Possessions in England. They
should have at least curtailed something which, as I have already hinted, is
very fami^ar to them, that such an evident Solution of this Controversy might
not have been (...) in their own Historians: and now, (...) the Dormice in the
Fable, they are cast (...) their own Judgment. But to the rest of (...)
Objections.

As to the petty Kings of Galloway, who as you will have it, performed Homage
to (...) if there were nothing else in your whole ^ork to accuse you of Folly
and Falsehood, his alone is sufficient to make you be hissed out of all good
Men's Company; for every (...) knows that Galloway is none of the (...) nor
largest Counties in Scotland. Yet you have first dignified the same with the
Title of a Kingdom, and now with that of (...) Principality, that so your
Countrymen may reap the more Glory from a Trifle. If the Princes of Galloway
performed Homage to any other than their immediate Lord, they committed a very
great Absurdity; for Homage is only due to the immediate Lord although he
acknowledge another for his Superior. This then is altogether (...) concerning
Galloway, which is a Country no^ far from the Borders; for being Rebels to
their own Prince, they fled to the King o^ England, and offered or performed
Homage that by his Assistance they might be able (...) sustain the Shock of
their own King's Indignation: For the King of England was never wanting in his
Design, right or wrong, (...) lay Claim to any part of Scotland, how little
soever, as belonging to him. But the Inhabitants of Galloway having pacified
their own Prince, did quickly return to their Duty But what is all this to the
Superiority over the Kingdom of Scotland? Is it not plain that you endeavor to
attain that by foolish Arguments, which you can never do by solid Reason?
Cooper, another of your Historians says that this Henry II. did much enlarge
the Bounds of his Kingdom; having added Scotland, and all the Islands
thereunto. Which (...) i^ has no shadow of Truth, (for he never (...) Scotland)
so it is not taken notice of by any other than this unlearned Man; but every
one may see, that our Neighbors Historians are but too much addicted to praise
their own Countrymen.

CHAP. XXV.
That the Scottish Clergy are subject to no English Archbishop in Spirituals.
HOlinshed adds, That during the Reign of this Henry II. Pope Alexander granted
the Jurisdiction over all the Scots Bishops, to the Archbishop of York; which
he reckons a concluding Argument, that the Scots were also subject to the
English in Temporals. This place does require it, nor does there occur a
greater Convenience for it afterward, to discuss this Question, which is so
often hit in our Teeth by Holinshed and Polidore, viz. that the Arch bishop of
York originally had, and continues to have the Right of Jurisdiction and
Superiority over all the Bishops of Scotland; that by this Trick they may
cunningly open and pave the Way to the whole Superiority, though it is not the
same in Temporals as in Spirituals. For Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Dignities
depended on the Pleasure of the Pope; but Temporals are determined according to
Law and Equity, and the Bonds of Humane Society: And therefore let us in the
first place, examine the Form of this Conclusion. We except against it as being
founded upon no Reason nor Rule of Disputation; for it is a perfect Nonsequitur,
that because the Scots Bishops are subject to the Archbishop of York in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, therefore the King of Scots ought to be subject to the
King of England in Temporals: For by the same Argument, because the whole
Christian World is, or at least was subject to the Pope in Spirituals,
therefore they must also be subject in Temporals; and thus all Kings ought to
receive their Investiture from the Pope only. So all Diocesans acknowledge their
Bishops, Barons and other Vassals acknowledge the Rectors of the Churches and
their Vicars, their Superiors in Spirituals; yet they don't therefore
acknowledge them their Lords in Temporals. What Benefit of yours is there here?
What Exploit, what Valor, what Martial Glory, is there in this, that you would
thence inser a Superiority over the Kingdom? It is nothing but a mere
Paralogism; if because the Scots Bishops received their Consecration from the
Archbishop of York, therefore Scotland is subject to England. Who would think
that the English should argue thus, amongst whom Philosophy is diligently
cultivated in all its parts, but that their Passion perverts their Judgment:
For he was in the right, who said Impedit i^ a (...) possit cernere verum.

We shall say no more of the Form of this first Argument; but let us examine the
Truth of this Proposition, Whether the Scots Bishops did in ancient Times own
the Archbishop of York as their Superior; and whether it was not in the Reign
of this Henry II. that it was first ambitiously obtained by the Pope's Charter,
and stifled in the very beginning? But to repeat this Matter from the Original,
the Proof of the Proposition is brought from the Institution of three
Arch-flamins and Twenty eight Flamins, by Beli^^s King of Britain, Brother to
that Brennus who is said to have burnt Rome, and were afterward converted into
three Archbishops and Twenty eight Bishops, by Lucius the first Christian King
of Britain. But for my own part, I look upon all this Institution of Belinus,
and the Expedition of his Brother Brennus into Italy, when he is said to have
taken, plundered, and burnt Rome, and that (...) Inundation of the Welsh into
Italy, to be errant Fables, feigned by idle Men who had no other way to spend
their time. Nor is there any Reason to be more favorable to the Story of
Joseph of Arimathea's coming to preach in Britain Or if our Neighbors think
otherwise, let them, or any others who patronize those Fables, tell me whence
they had those things, what Writer or Author conveyed them down to Posterity,
and where they found it writ, painted, or suggested, and I shall willingly
yield. For my own part, there is nothing of which I am more desirous than that
Britain's Glory should be consecrated to everlasting Fame; but I am not well
pleased to have Fables obtruded upon us instead of Truth.

To return to our Bishops: The Pope, says Holinshed, who was then believed to
have a Jurisdiction over all Bishops, did by his Bull ordain, that all Scots
Bishops, should receive their Con^^cration from the Archbishop of York as their
Superior, and that according to the ancient Laws and Statutes. But, Mr.
Holinshed, if it was only believed that the Pope did so preside, that he could
invert the Dignities of the Church, and make one which was free before a
Servant and Handmaid, he did certainly put a Trick upon you, when he was only
supposed to have that Power which he had not; and therefore that Bull is null
and void, you your self being witness: Nor is it founded upon any shadow of
Reason. But what if he had had that Power which he was believed to have, is
there any Body so ignorant of the Canon Law as not to know that the Pope does
never tie up his own Hands; and that he shuts his Boso^ against none, but what
he has established by one Bull he can revoke by another, especially if he can
say that he has done it from his certain Knowledge; and that what he granted to
day to the Archbishop of York contrary to Law, that he could not afterward
revoke it according to Law? For it is certain, that when the Scots complained
grievously of this Bull, the Pope being there^^to induced by good Motives, did
grant as much power to the Scots Archbishops as to the English, as shall be
declared anon. But you assert, Mr. Holinshed, that this Privilege granted to
the Archbishop of York, was according to the Laws and Ancient Statutes. Then I
pray you, Sir, if you have any Law or Statute by which the Sco^s Bishops are
subjected to the Archbishop of York; if there be any Pragmatical Sanction, or
if you have any Ordinance or Decree either of Ecumenical or Provincial
Council, why don't you produce, or at least quote them? Say under what Consul,
(...) or Pope this Privilege was granted, if you would have us to believe you:
but you have carried your self in this Affair with so much Calumny and
Frowardness, that you are not to be believed even though you were upon Oath?
However, that this whole Controversy concerning the English and Scots Bishops
may be discussed from its Original, I will make it appear, that the Scots did
not only lay the Foundation of the Archbishopric of York, but of Christianity
it self in England.

Then to pass over that most silly Fable of the three Archflamins, and the
twenty eight Flamins; it is plain that there was no Bishop in Britain before
Palladius, who is by the English themselves called the Bishop of the Scots; or
if either the Brittons or English have any, let them name them, and at what
Time they flourished: but as for Palladius he lived about the Time of the Saxon
Conquest, and by his persuasion Constantine King of Scots, did for some time
maintain and bear up the Cause of the Britains against the Saxons. That there
was no Bishop in Britain in the time of the Romans, after whom the Scots, then
the Saxons made an Irruption upon the Britains, I prove from Mal^^bury, In
Prozm. lib. I. de rebus gest. Angl. Pontif.
whose words are as follow: Which were the Archiepiscopal Sees in the Time of
the Britains is very uncertain, because Antiquity has destroyed the Memory of
them. A little after he says, That he was destitute of all Assistance in this
History of the Bishops, and did only grope out his way through thick Darkness,
having no previous Light of History to direct his Path. Gildas takes notice of
Priests and Prefects of Churches in Britain, but mentions no Bishops. According
to Bid, Augustine Disciple to Gregory the Great was the first Bishop in
England, and received the Archbishop's Pall from the said Gregory, and yet he
was not Archbishop of any particular Place; but because the House in which he
dwelt, was given him by Edelbert King of the Kentish Saxons, he was called
Archbishop of Dover, and afterward Archbishop of Canterbury about the Year
600. And Paulinus Bishop of York began to preach about 625 or 630, and those
two were the first Bishops in England. About that same time Oswald reigned King
of Northumberland, who having fled to Scotland when a Child, where he was
brought up in excellent Discipline, but especially in Piety, he was the first
of the English Kings who professed Christianity, and was not only baptized
himself, but took care to have his Saxons diligently instructed in the
Christian Faith, which he had imbibed in Scotland during his Exile: And such
was the Opinion which that Age did enterain of the Learning of the Scots, that
nothing was accounted well done in Matters of Religion, where, of they were not
the Authors.

There flourisn'd at the same time in Ion^, one of the Hebrides or Scots
Western Islands, Columbanus a Pious and Learned Man, out of whose School, as
from another Trojan Horse, issued a great number of Soldiers and Professors of
Christianity for that Warfare, whose principal Care was to instruct the English
in the true Religion; and they preached the Gospel with so much Fervency and
Zeal every where, that when the Saxons who were ignorant of the Scottish Tongue,
did not understand what was said, O^wald himself sitting close by Aidanus the
Bishop, did interpret the same to his People: and by those Men's Ministry
Religion increased so much in England, that the Scots were thereupon ^referred
to be Bishops in England, and Superiors of Abbeys and Monastries. There
succeeded to Paulinus the first. Bishop of York, after he was driven from his
See, three Scots Bishops successively, viz. Aidan, Finnan and Coleman: but the
Controversy about Easter Day, which had also disquieted the Primitive Church
for too Years, was very prejudicial to the Scots, who did therein stoutly
oppose the Pope, and followed the Custom of the Eastern Church, though they
were obliged by the Pope to relinquish their Opinion afterward. However there
are many Episcopal Sees, and many Monasteries, which own Scotsmen for their
Authors, as may be seen in Mel^^^ury, Ingulf, Hoveden, Worcester and
Hu^tington; but I have no Time to divert from the Subject in Hand. During all
the Time from Paulinus to Egbert, Brother to King Egbert, the Bishops of Yark
were content with the single Name of Bishop: But Egbert being of an high Mind
because he was Brother to a King, and finding the Archbishop's Pall which Pope
Honorius had sent to Paulinus the first Bishop who had rejected it, he put it
upon himself without any Command or Authority, and so of a Bishop made himself
Archbishop, and was the first who was called Archbishop of York, having taken
the Pall without a Grant from any one. There were others who succeeded him
until the Time of the Conquest, and yet all the Time of the Saxon Monarchy
there is no mention made of the Scottish Bishops being subject to the Archbishop
of York, or having sworn Obedience to him. Nay, the English themselves don't
assert it, but confess, that that Privilege was granted to the Sea of York by
latter Popes, viz. Paschal and Alexander the third, that they should preside
over the Scots Bishops, who had not as yet an Archbishop of their own, that
they might be consecrated by him. But Polidore is very like to be in the right,
when he says, that those Popes endeavored to subject the Scots Bishops to the
Archbishop of York: the Scots protesting against it in general, and appealing
to the Sea of Rome, the Controversy was referred to Pope Alexander, who did not
decide the same; though honest Holinshed affirms, that it was decreed by this
very Alexander, that the Scots Bishops should be subject to the Archbishop of
York; whereas Polidore calls it, only an Endeavor of those Popes, not an
absolute Subjection, but that the whole Controversy was suspended by an Appeal:
and Polidore owns, that he had only seen Copies of those Bulls, but not the
Bulls themselves. Malmsbury, who has writ four Books concerning the
Transactions of the English Bishops, promises in the Proem of his third Book,
whose particular Title is, Concerning the Archbishops of York, that he will
omit nothing that ever he met with in the Relations of his Ancestors, reading
of Books or his own proper Knowledge, and yet in that whole Treatise concerning
the Dignity of the Sea of York, he has not one word of the Subjection of the
Scottish Bishops, tho afterward in the Reign of William, being deceived by
common Opinion, he reckons all the Scots Bishops, and amongst others the Bishop
of Orkney, the Suffragans of York, being ignorant that neither in that Age, nor
for some Ages after, was there any Bishop of Orkney; neither is the Bishop of
Orkney mentioned amongst the Scots Bishops in that Bull of Pope Clements, of
which afterward. If our Neighbors shall perchance argue, that in the Time of
the Conqueror, Thomas Archbishop of York did consecrate Michael Elect of
Glasgow, and Turgot of St. Andrews; I answer, that that is no Argument of
Superiority, for Bishops were wont to receive Consecration from others who were
not their Superiors: for Richard Archbishop of Canterbury Elect, was
consecrated by Henry Bishop of Rochester, as was also Roger Bishop of London
and Hugh Bishop of Ely that same day, yet none of them acknowledged the Bishop
of Rochester their Superior; and John Bishop of Whitehorn was consecrated by
John Bishop of Dublin at Pipenel, and William Malvaise Bishop of Glasgow was
consecrated by the Bishop of Lions in France: For our Countrymen chose to be
consecrated by those whom Fame gave out to excel in Learning and Piety. But if
they still go on and say, that the Scots had then no Archbishop, and therefore
must of necessity have been subject to the Archbishop of York as nearest,
seeing they could not receive Consecration as they call it from any other; I
answer, that according to the Canon Law, the Consent or Authority of an
Archbishop is not required to the Consecration of a Bishop: For it is statute
by the Canon Law, that when a Bishop is ordained, two Bishops should lay Hands
upon him and hold the Gospel over his Head, and one of them repeating the
Benediction over him, the rest shall touch his Head. And an Archbishop
according to the Canon Law, is only the Ordinary of a Province; and certainly
if Scotland be not a Kingdom, yet the English themselves will own it to be a
Province, in which the Archbishop of York ought not to claim any Jurisdiction,
seeing the same was without his Province. Nay, if I had to do with one who
understood the Canon Law, I doubt not but I could easily prove, that not only
Bishops, but sometimes also Archbishops were consecrated by Bishops: I alleged
some Examples before, and more occure every where in Hoveden, Paris and other
English Writers. I confess, that the English were before us in courting those
Dignities, and that there were Archbishops in England before there were any in
Scotland; but seeing those Titles had their rise merely from Ambition, and were
usually purchased from the Pope by Money, in which the English did always
abound, we don't envy them to our Neighbors: for certainly Ierom is in the
Right, who says, A Bishop and Presbyter are the same, and until that by the
Instinct of the Devil, there arose Dissentions in Religion, and that People
began to say, I am of Paul, I am of Cephas, and I am of Apollo, the Churches
were governed by the common Consent of Presbyters: then what would he have
said, or rather what would be not have said if in his time some had been called
Archbishops, and some simple Bishops?

But we must return to those Disputes which sometimes happened concerning this
Controversy, whether the Scots Bishops did owe Subjection and Obedience to the
Bishop of York: amongst other things which King William promised to Henry
during his Captivity, before he could be set at Liberty, this is one that he
should bring the Scots Bishops to a Conference and Dispute with the Archbishop
of York before the Bishops of England, and compel them to do what should appear
to be just and equal. The Kings of Scotland and England did thereupon meet at
Northampton: But it is better to repeat Hoveden 's words; William brought with
him Richard Bishop of St. Andrews, Jocelin Bishop of Glasgow, Richard Bishop of
Dunkel, Christian Bishop of Whitehorn, Andrew Bishop of Caithness, Simon Bishop
of Murray, and the rest of the `Priors and Abbots of his Kingdom: Who being
conveen'd before their Lord the King of England, their Lord the King commanded
them upon their Allegiance, and the Oath of Fealty which they had sworn to him,
that they should show the same Subjection to the Church of England, which they
were obliged to do in the Reign of the Kings his Predecessors. To which they
answered, That they never were subject to the Church of England, nor ought to
show any Subjection thereunto. To which Roger Arch bishop of York replied,
affirming, that the Bishops of Glasgow and Whitehorn were subject to the Sea of
York in the time of the Arch bishop's Predecessors; and did thereupon
demonstrate, and sufficiently instruct the Privileges granted to the Sea of
York upon that Head by the Popes. To which Iocelin Bishop of Glasgow rejoined,
that the Church of Glasgow was a peculiar Daughter to the Church of Rome, and
exempted from all Subjection to any other Bishops or Archbishops; and although
the Sea of York had the Superiority for some time over the Sea of Glasgow, yet
it is plain that she never deserved it: And because Richard Archbishop of
Canterbury, endeavored to have had the Church of Scotland subject to his See,
he effected so much against the King of England, that ^e permitted the Scots
Bishops to return home without making any Submission to the Church of England.

If we should diligently examine this Story, which is horribly perverted by
Hoveden, the Controversy would easily be decided. The* Scots had not then any
Archbishop; and the Bishops supposing that they ought to be consecrated by a
Superior, were accustomed to go to the Archbishop of York, as the nearest, to
receive Consecration; which was a foolish Superstition, seeing Bishops might
have been consecrated by Bishops, as I said before: and therefore the Question
was only, To whom the Right of consecrating the Scots Bishops did appertain?
The Kings then met at Northampton, and both of them, with the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the rest of the English Bishops, sat as Judges. The Archbishop
of York being Plaintiff, proposed his Plea; wherein he did not alledg that all
the Scots Bishops owed him Subjection, but only those of Glasgow and Whitehorn;
and as to their Subjection, he produced Bulls from the Popes: And therefore
it is false what Polydore and other English Writers assert, that the Pope
granted a Superiority over all the Scots Bishops to the Archbishop of York.
But the Bishop of Glasgow did clear himself and his Colleague, by this Answer;
That although the Pope had granted such a Privilege to the Archbishop of York
by Subornation, that yet Pope Clement, being well informed of the Injustice of
his Predecessor, did free all the Bishops of Scotland from the Jurisdiction of
the Bishop of York, and all other foreign Jurisdiction but that of the Church
of Rome: And the Bull of Exemption is also recorded by Hoveden; and therefore
when both Parties held by the Pope's Bull, they parted without doing any thing,
which Hoveden ascribes to the Archbishop of Canterbury's Fraud. But however
that is, it is plain both from Hoveden and Polydore, that the Question was not
then decided, but left to the Pope; and what was his Opinion in the Affair, we
shall see when we come to Edward III.

From what has been said then, it is manifest tha^ what Holinshed afferts
concerning the Scots Bishops being first subject to the Arch-flamin, and
afterward to the Archbishop of York, is altogether false; for if the
ambitious Archbishop of York did by any indirect Means obtain a Bull from the
Pope, his Successor being moved with the Equity of the thing, did annul the
same; and decreed that the Church of Scotland, after he had enumerated all
their Bishops, should be immediately subject to the Apostolic See, whereof she
was a peculiar Daughter, and none should dare to pronounce a Sentence of
Excommunication, or Interdict, against the Kingdom of Scotland, except the Pope
himself, or some Legate a Latere; and that if any happened to be pronounced
otherwise, it should be ipso facto void and null: adding, that none might
exercise the Function of Legate in Scotland but a Native of the Kingdom; and
that no Controversy should be carried out of the Kingdom, but in the case of an
Appeal to the Sea of Rome. And as there are many other things to this purpose
in the same Bull, which here I pass over; so it is evident, that all this
Commentitious Ecclesiastical Superiority, with the Fictitious Homage, depends
on a false Proposition or Paralogism, and dwindles into nothing. Most Men will
perhaps think that I confound things, by ascribing what was done in Richard's
time to that of his Father Henry; but I could not do otherwise: for seeing that
Homage which Henry II. extorted by Violence and Injustice from K. William, when
he was a Captive, was declared to have been so by Richard his Son; it was
necessary to join the Extortion of the Homage by the Father, with the
Renunciation of the same by the Son. I come now to Richard.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Richard and John, Kings of England; and what was the Form of the Homage
done to them.
YOU write, Mr. Holinshed, that William King of Scots, did Homage to K. Richard
for the Kingdom of Scotland; and because he assisted him with Money for his
Ransom to the Duke of Austria, you will needs have it that he did it as his
Subject. It Is but sorry Thanks that you return him for his Bounty: We confess
that he gave him Money for a part of his Ransom; but that he did it as his
Subject, is your Invention, as a true Trifler and Sophist. For your most angust
Queen has lent Money to the French King, Netherlanders, and many others, which
perhaps she will never have again. I say nothing of our selves, whom she has
very often assisted with Money; but if therefore any body should infer that she
was subject either to the French, to the Netherlanders, or us, he were justly
to be accounted a mad Man. The same may be said as to Henry VIII. who lent
300000 Angels to the Emperor Charles V. and yet was not therefore reckoned a
Liege-Vassal to the Spaniard. But of this Homage neither Polydore, Newbriggs,
nor Stow, make any mention. It Is certain that he owed Homage at that time upon
the Restitution of Cumberland and Westmoreland; which both our Writers and
yours, take notice to have been restored upon paying his Ransom: And it is
wanifest that many Offices of the strietest Friendship passed betwixt Richard
I. and William; for before that Richard undertook his Expedition into the Holy
Land, he obtained Auxiliary Forces from K. William, and invested their General
David, Brother to William, with the County of Huntington, who did him faithful
and gallant Service in the Holy War: And Richard standing in need of Money at
his return, all are agreed that William furnished him with some; which you
pervert, and alledg that he did it as his Subject. Richard, as I said before,
was second to none that ever swayed the English Scepter for Goodness of
Disposition, and Magnanimity: But he was very unfortunate in his Return from
the Holy War; for first being shipwrackt upon the Coast of Istria as he
returned, he was known and kept Prisoner by D. Leopold, whom he had offended in
that War; and being by him sold to the Emperor Henry, he was forced to accept
of hard Terms of Ransom: and though K. William and he were much of the same
Temper and Disposition, yet it appears by Hoveden that there was a sharp
Contest betwixt them for Northumberland, which Richard was defirous to retain,
and William claimed it as the Inheritance of his Brother Malcolm, who had
possessed it for many Years. The Matter however was composed during their Time,
as if it had been by a silent Transaction, while each of them was permitted to
enjoy what he possessed peaceably; so much did a Likeness of Disposition
reconcile them. Don't you see then, Mr. Holinshed, that you pervert the
Performance of this Homage by a reproachful Interpretation, contrary to the
Authority of your own Writers? And the Homage which William performed for the
Dignities which he held in England, in express words, you do without Evidence
or Authority, obtrude upon the World as if it had been performed for the
Kingdom of Scotland. Then where is your Understanding, your Reason, your
Modesty, and the Care of your Reputation, which is the chief thing that is
regarded by all honest Men?

William the Father, was the first who performed Homage to K. John; but Hoveden
testifies, that it was for Cumberland and Northumberland, that by this ready
Obedience he might also prevail with him fairly to restore Northumberland: But
as to the Tricks by which he was eluded, Hoveden has recorded enough. However,
this Homage was not for Scotland as you dream, which is very familiar to you.

But let us hear Polydore; The King of Scots, says he, came to London to salute
John, and is said to have taken his Oath, (he does not affirm it for a
Certainty, nor yet that it was for the Kingdom of Scotland) being desired to
assist him in his War against the King of France, he refused; than which
Refusal there could be nothing more said or writ against this Homage; for he
who owes Homage, is obliged to perform Military Service to his Lord whether it
be required or not.

The Letters of the Pope, that he might have the King of England's Assistance
for restoring the Archbishop of St. Andrews, can have no weight with any Man;
for that has always been customary with the Popes to set Neighboring Princes
together by the ears. But let us hear the Words of the Letter, which is
exhibited by Hoveden; Clement desires the King of England that he would advise
his Son William, King of Scotland, more seriously, and induce him by his Power,
wherein he excels him, if he find it necessary, that K. William would remit his
Rancour against John Archbishop of St. Andrews. What can be inferred from
these words, but that the King of England should by the Prerogative of his
Dignity and Arms compel William to obey the Pope, because he would not do it
otherwise? How often has that been practiced by Popes, that while one King
refuses to obey, they require and implore the Help and Assistance of another?
How frequently does this fall out amongst the German Princes? Of whom, if any
one refuse to obey the Decree of the Imperial Chamber, the next Prince is
commanded to take Arms, and compel him to obey: Yet one of them is not
superior to another. These things I mention only, that all Men may understand
upon what vain and frivolous Arguments our Neighbors have built this
fictitious Homage: There was a far other Event of the Friendship betwixt K.
John and K. William, than there was betwixt him and Richard, they being
altogether unlike in their Temper: For when K. John was for sometime taken up
in his Expeditions beyond Sea, that he might lay the Storm which he was afraid
of behind him, he did so elude K. William by his fair Speeches, Fictions, and
repeated Promises, that it had certainly issued in War, if William had not been
prevented by Death. Matthew Paris and Hoveden, have recorded these delatory
Answers, which were framed by K. John while he abused the Plain heartedness of
the King of Scots: for sometimes he obtained a Delay for six Months, sometimes
till his Return from beyond Sea, and sometimes till he could call the States
together that he might not do any thing without their Advice: And William did
thereupon promise to be a peaceable Neighbor, and keep his Subjects from
stirring. Nor will I deny but William did Homage to John, and also upon the
Cross of Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, in the Presence of many others, for
the Dignities which he held in England; but that he did the same for the
Kingdom of Scotland, is absolutely false. The Form of that Homage, and all the
rest, is extant in Hoveden; where there is no mention that the same was for
Scotland. Nay, Hoveden says expressly, that William swore Fealty to him against
all Men, with a Salvo jure suo; that is, reserving his own Royal Prerogative.
But there occur two things in John, which pluck up the Roots of this Homage:
One is, that when K. John had made himself a Vassal, nay a Farmer to the Sea of
Rome, and subjected himself and his Heirs, and Kingdom and Lands, by a
perpetual Bond of Fealty and Allegiance, he expressly mentions those Lands, and
covenants to pay 700 Marks annually for England and Ireland; and if Scotland
had been then subject unto him, why did he not add something for the Tribute of
Scotland, as Holinshed did formerly alledg in the Matter of Peter Pence? But K.
John was neither so impudent as to promise it, nor Pandulphus the Pope's
Legate, such a Fool as to accept of it. The other is, that when K. John lay
under the Infamy of his Nephew's Death, and all the Crimes which could be said
or thought of any Man, which rendered him odious to his own Subjects and others,
the English Nobility conspired together for the Choice of a new King; to whom
assented Alexander King of Scots, as one of the Peers of England. Lewis, Son to
Philip King of France, had married Bertha Daughter of Philippa Queen of
Castile, and Sister to that same K. John; to whom John being ejected, and
Arthur and his Sister being dead, the Right of Succession to the Crown of
England did belong: But when Lewis her Husband arrived in England with Forces
to seize the Crown in his Wife's Right, the Nobility of England swore Fealty to
him as King of England, and their Liege-Lord: And amongst others, Alexander
King of Scotland did also swear Fealty to him for the Provinces which he held
in England. The Form of that Fealty is also extant in Matthew Paris, whose
words are these: In the Month of Angust, Alexander King of Scots came to Dover
with a Great Army (for fear of K. John) to Lewis, and did him Homage for what
he held in England. Don't you see here, Mr. Holinshed, if you see any thing,
what the Form of this Homage was which the King of Scots paid to the King of
England? And therefore what you advance concerning the Homage for the Kingdom
of Scotland, are the Imaginations of a vain and impudent Man. Nor can you
produce or say any thing in Commendation of the Author of those Comments of
yours, as Lawyers speak; and those things do so much the more injure your
Fame, if you have any, as the Falsehood of your Assertion is to be clearly
demonstrated, even by the Testimony of English Historians.

Of this Henry the Father, and his two Sons Richard and John, there are many
things to be found in English Writers, that if they could be said against us,
Holinshed would take Heaven and Earth to be Witnesses of his Assertion: For how
often did Henry II. call the French King his Lord? How often did he submit
himself wholly to his Will, surrender himself up to him, and made his three
Sons, Richard, Henry, and John, become his Liege-men, to use H^veden's words,
Hoveden in Hen. II. Richard I. and John.
and take an Oath of Fealty and Allegiance to him as their Liege-Lord? When K.
Philip of France, and Richard King of England, did mutually bind themselves in
an Oath for the Recovery of Jerusalem, Richard did expressly promise to assist
`Philip K. of France against all Mortals, as his Liege-Lord: And 'Philip on the
other hand, promised to stand by him against all Mortals, as his Vassal. Paris
in Rich. I.
(...). And as for K. John, he never wrote to `Philip but under the Title of
his Lord; nay, he received the Kingdom of England to be held of him, during his
Brother Richard's being detained Prisoner in Germany; a mutual Oath of Lord and
Client having past betwixt them: and when he succeeded to Richard afterward,
was despoiled of his Provinces beyond Sea by the French King, and being also in
hazard of losing England, he submitted himself and his Kingdom, his Heirs, and
all his Lands, viz. England and Ireland, to the Pope to be held of him, under
an annual Tribute, or Farm, of 1000 Marks; which was also put in Execution: For
the Pope having lanc'd his Thunderbolts with Curses and Excommunications,
against the King of France and the Barons, he deterred them from their Purpose
of dethroning K. John; but Seditions and Conspiracies growing greater and
greater against him every day, he sent Ambassadors to Admiral Murmelin, then
the most powerful of all the Saracen Princes, signifying (which are Matthew
Paris's own words) that he surrendered himself and his Kingdom to him, to be
held under an Annual Tribute if he thought good; that he would also abandon the
Christian Religion, which he esteemed vain, and faithfully adhere to that of
Mahomet for time to come. Who were the Ambassadors, and what was the Effect of
the Embassy, is to be seen in Matthew Paris. I am really struck with Horror, as
relating those things; for his Submission, formerly mentioned, to the Pope, is
but Childrens Play in comparison of this Surrender. And if the English could
have found any such thing against any of our Kings, what a Tragical Business
would they have made of it long e're now?

You affirm, Mr. Holinshed, that at the Marriage of Alexander King of Scots,
with Margaret Daughter to K. John, he performed Homage to his Father-in-Law:
But what Author says so besides your self? For Polydore and Newbriggs pass over
the Matter in silence, as a thing which was never heard of. But at that time K.
Alexander held Cumberland, Westmoreland, and Huntington; and seeing Homage was
due for them, what Wonder is it if he performed it? But you, Mr. Holinshed,
according to your usual Manner, alledg it to have been performed for the
Kingdom of Scotland.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Henry III. and if any Homage were performed to him.
IT remains that we examine Henry the Third's Reign; who because he reigned 16
Years, his Reign did coincide with those of Alexander the Second and Alexander
the Third, Kings of Scots. But you seem neither to understand their History,
nor indeed the English History of those Times: For Alexander the Father, did
not marry Margaret Daughter to Henry III, as you imagine, but his Sister Ioanna
Daughter to King John; nor is there any English Historian who makes mention
that Alexander the Father performed Homage during the whole time of his Reign,
except at that time when both Kings took Arms, and were reconciled by means of
Richard Earl of Carn^al, and Emperor of Germany. That History is thus writ by
Polydore: Henry says he, that he might be in Peace at Home, made a new Alliance
with his Neighbors the Scots, by marrying his Sister Ioanna to their K.
Alexander: But this new Alliance was not able to contain the two Kings within
the Bonds of Friendship, whenever the Question of the Homage was renewed; as is
subjoined by Polidore, in those words: David Prince of Wales, flying into
Scotland, stirred up Alexander to war against the King of England, by giving
out that the said King bragged that the cowardly Scots were subject to his
Command, obedient to whatever he said, and lived according to his Prescription;
and therefore when Alexander, being provoked with these Calumnies, did invade
England, and Henry met him with an Army, just as they were ready to give
Battle, they were reconciled by the Industry of the Peers; who were vexed that
a War should be commenced on so slight an Occasion. Matthew of Westminster and
Matth^^ Paris, give us this Story a little otherwise: For says he, When Rumors
were brought to Alexander, that the King of England did give himself out as
Liege-Lord of Scotland, and that the same was held of him, he sent him a sharp
Message, signifying that he neither did, nor ought to hold one single Foot of
Scots Ground of him, and did thereupon bid him Defiance, (Defidabat) which is a
Word very frequent with them; and entering England in an hostile Manner,
haras^d, and laid waste all the bordering Countries. Henry that he might be
avenged for this Arrogance of the King of Scots, prepared an Huge Army
privately, having also sent for the Count of Flanders with his Auxiliary
Forces: Which being arrived in England, the English did murmur and fret that
foreign Aid should be sent for, bragging that the English were sufficient of
themselves to extinguish the Ne^e of Scots. But Henry having proposed the
entire Conquest of Scotland, mustered all (...) were obliged to do Military
Service in England; and having laid a Tax upon the Ecclesi^^^^^ for Payment of
his hired Troops, and gathered together the whole Nobility and Gentry of
England at Newcastle: When he heard that the King of Scots was ready to receive
him with an Army, and that the Matter was now brought to the critical Point, he
began to carry himself more modestly: For the Borders of Scotland, which were
within his view; having afforded him a dreadful Aspect of ^cng Spears; and Huge
Pole-Axes; and perceiving that he was likely to have a rugged Adversary to deal
with, he proposed a Peace by his Brother Richard Earl of Corn^al, and Emperor
of Germany; and by his means he obtained it, under a Pretense of Piety, and to
avoid such an Effosion of Christian Blood as was likely to ensue. And herein he
acted the part of a wise Man, in my Opinion: For according to Paris and (...),
Alexander had at that time in his Army 1000 Scots Horsemen well appoint^red;
and though not mounted on Ita^^^ Spanish Horses, yet they had those which were
very good: He had moreover, 100000 valiant Foot; who all having unanimously
coness'd themselves, and being animated by the Encouragement of their
Preachers, as those who were to fight in a just Cause for the defense of their
Country, they despised Death; and thereupon Henry went off without doing any
thing. Now if any Man, who had no Prejudice against, non particular Inclination
to either of these Nations, had the writing of this History, I am apt to think
he would have expressed himself thus: The King of Scots being informed by David
Prince of Wales, who had fled to him, that K. Henry did brag of his being
Liege-Lord of Scotland, and that that Kingdom did hold of him, he despised his
former Alliance, and signified to him by an Herald that he did not so much as
hold one Foot of Scots Ground of him; and did thereupon denounce War against
Henry: Who being enraged at this fierce Declaration, and designing to punish
the King of Scots according to his Merit for such an high piece of Arrogance,
he gathered together the whole Strength (...) his Kingdom, sent also for
Auxiliaries from beyond Sea, and hired Soldiers every where; but perceiving
that Alexander was marching against him, with a numerous and resolute Army,
that despised all Danger, to prevent the Effusion of so much Christian Blood
upon so slight an Occasion, he obta^'d Peace by means of his Brother Richard,
and returned Home ingloriously, as the Conqueror and his Son Rufus had done
before him: Who having attempted the same thing, but finding it impossible to
put it in execution, returned without effecting any thing. The Tenor of this
Transaction betwixt Henry III. and Alexander II. is recorded both by
Westminster and Paris; wherein there is nothing to be seen that does in the
least imply any Homage for Scotland: Nor does Alexander yield any thing in
point of Dignity to the King of England, in that part of the Transaction. But
Holinshed urges, that Alexander owns the King of England as his Lord: And what
wonder, when in reality he was so for the four Provinces abovementioned? And
so in all those Transactions or Indentures which were betwixt the Kings of
France and England, and most of which are to be found in Hoveden, Paris, and
others, Henry II. John, and Henry III. own the French King to be their Lord:
Nay, Edward the First himself, in his Return from the Holy War through France,
swore Allegiance or Homage to the French King as his LiegeLord. Walsingham in
Edw. I.
And the Princes of Germany, in 47 Contracts which they had made with the Kings
of France, professed themselves their Liege-Vassals; as does also the Duke of
Gelderland, though he was not so. Thus Philip de Valois, and Alphonsus King of
Castile, do mutually in their Writings call themselves one another's Vassals,
when indeed they were not so Bodin, ^ ib. 2. de Repub. c. 9.
: For words of Courtesy and Civility, are not to be drawn into Consequence; and
therefore according to the Opinion of Lawyers, one is not proved to be a
Superior because another has saluted him by the Name of his Lord, because
this is rather a Title of Honor than Right Bartol. in 1. cum quis ^sciam de
Leg. 3.
. But in this Transaction, Alexander did that which was not to be born with in
a Vassal; for the Kings having agreed betwixt themselves that this Transaction
should be inserted in the Pope's Books, the King of Scots did thereby submit to
the Pope's Jurisdiction in this Matter; which Henry would never have endured,
if he had been his Liege-Lord: And neither can the Vassal subject himself to
the Jurisdiction of any other than his own Lord.

You tell us Wonders if they be true, concerning Alexander the Third, Son to
this Alexander the Second, viz. that after his Father's Death he was delivered
by the Nobility of Scotland, being but then nine Years old, in Guardianship to
Henry King of England as Liege-Lord of Scotland; as if that Kingdom had been a
Military Fee of England, and obliged to deliver the Heir into their Custody.
It Is certain, that during the Life of Alexander his Father, a Contract of
Marriage was agreed upon betwixt Henry, in the Name of his Daughter Margaret,
and Alexander then Prince of Scotland: And such was the Confidence which Henry
III. had in Alexander his Father, that when he went beyond Sea, he put the
North of Engl^^d into the Custody of the King of Scots; that he might suppress
any Tumults which should happen to arise there Mat. Paris in Hen. III.
. Alexander the Father being dead, and Henry King of England urging the Nuptial
Contract, Alexander the Third came to York in 1252. with a pompous Train, says
Matthew Paris; nor had he ever before seen England, whatever you may seign Mr.
Holinshed: which Practice is so familiar to you, that I am ashamed of it. But
if Alexander had been delivered to be kept by K. Henry at nine Years of Age,
until the Tumults, which were then very frequent in Scotland, should be
appeased; does this infer either Military Wardship, Allegiance or Homage? It
cannot certainly infer it any more than it did when Henry II. Son to the
Empress Maud, was sent by his Mother to David King of Scots, to be kept during
the War betwixt himself and King Stephen. I perceive, that according to you the
Children of Princes cannot be educated in the Courts of their Grandfathers,
out they must needs owe Allegiance and Homage. But you are not only purblind,
but stoneblind in your own History, to assert that Henry III. never demanded
Homage from Alexander III. his Son-in-Law, because he was not of age to perform
it; at least you craftily dissemble as if you had not read that which cuts the
throat of all this Controversy: And therefore I will oppose to you the very
words of Matthew Paris, lest I should seem to have contrived any thing of my
own Head Matthew Paris in Hen. III.
. The King of Scots in the time of the Marriage, did Homage to the King of
England, upon the account of the Tenement (Tenementi) which he held of his Lord
the King of England, in the Kingdom of England, and the rest of the Lands of
Lenden, or Laudon, which is a Tenement of Northumberland; and when this was
agreed upon, it was also demanded, that the King of Scots should perform Homage
and Allegiance to his Lord the King of England, on account of the Kingdom of
Scotland, as his Predecessors had done to the Kings of England; as is evidently
set forth in many places of the Chronicles. The King of Scots answered, that he
came thither in a peaceable Manner, for the Honor of the King of England; and
by his Command, to enter into a Confederacy with him by Nuptial Ties, and not
to give him any answer to that Question; for he had not deliberated with his
Nobles upon that Head, nor had he a Counsel with him competent for so great an
Affair. In this Answer it is to be observed, that the Words [ as his
Predecessors had done to the Kings of England, as is evidently set forth in
many places of the Chronicles] are Paris's own words, and therefore ^rivolous
and vain: For neither does Paris, nor any other English Chronologer, ever make
mention of Homage performed for the Kingdom of Scotland, except that which was
extorted from K. William during his Captivity; of which I have treated before.
Or if they have any Author, why are they afraid to name him? For as to all the
former Citations, I have clearly refuted them already; but in this Performance
of Homage, Alexander did right in performing it for the Lands which he held in
England, but refused it for Scotland as he ought indeed to have done. I have
Authors who say that he added, that he came into England under safe Conduct,
and demanded that he might return with the same; and if Henry had not abolished
that Controversy, perhaps the Son had followed the Example of his magnanimous
Father.

You say that Henry being troubled with Seditions in his own Kingdom, obtained
5000, our Writers say 10000, Scots; most part of whom perished in that War,
fighting stoutly for Henry against Simon Montfort, and the rest of the English
Barons. But Alexander being now acquainted with the English Tricks, and that
they were accustomed to put a malevolent Interpretation upon those Auxiliaries,
as a Service that was due to them, he obtained Letters from his Father-in-Law
before they marched from Scotland, that they were not granted as due by
Military Service, but merely upon the account of Benevolence and Friendship.
And the like was done by Alexander, in relation to Edward 1. when he sent him
Auxiliaries to subdue Wales: And whereas you assert, that Alexander performed
Homage for Scotland at K. Edward's Coronation, you are plainly accused of a Lie
by Walsingham; who mentions the Homage indeed, which Alexander owed as
Beneficiary for the four Counties abovementioned, but he has not one word that
it was for the Kingdom of Scotland, And Westminster does not so much as take
notice of the Homage. And from this place it is manifest, how little Faith is
to be given to Holinshed; for wherever he ^inds Homage mentioned, he
presently, according to his own Punick Faith, adds that it was for Scotland.
Nay, that which is yet more, Alexander did not come thither till he had first
obtained it in Writing, that he did not come, as being obliged thereunto, by
Service, but only out of Good Will and Friendship. For the burnt Child,
according to the Proverb, dreads the Fire: And as in this Alexander, the
Father, and Son, we perceive a provident Caution to escape the Traps and Gins
of the English, who lay in wait for 'em; so in Henry the Father, and Edward the
Son, we may easily see an excessive Ambition: for over-looking all Bonds of
Affinity, they sought to ensnare the King of Scots, that under any Pretext
whatsoever he might seem to have done Homage for Scotland. But in those Kings
the Decision of the Controversy about the Homage, is no less manifest than it
was before betwixt Richard, and William King of Scots.

CHAP. XXVIII.
By what Tricks Edward the first sought after the Superiority of Scotland.
BUT now we are come to Edward I. who was not only the Renewer, Asserter and
Champion of this Homage, but in whom also this Homage, whatever it was, did
expire together with the Benefit: Nor since this Edward, that the Beneficiary
Provinces (of Cumberland, Westmoreland, Northumberland and Huntington) were
taken away, is it mentioned by any Author of Credit, that any of the Kings of
Scotland did Homage to the Crown of England upon any pretense whatever: and
whereas before the Controversy about this Homage was managed at a distance by
Reasons, Arguments and Threats; under this Edward the first it came to be
fought hand to hand, and the whole Controversy submitted to the Decision of the
Sword with such Animosity, and with so great Damage to both Kingdoms, that
three hundred thousand Lives were sacrificed to this Homage, and they fought
for it above threescore Years, (for so long it was betwixt Baliol's being
crowned, and David the 2d's being set at Liberty) without intermission, except
for two or three Years in the beginning of Edward the third's Reign, that a
Peace was agreed on, but could not be longliv'd betwixt two enraged Nations,
burning with mutual Hatred at one another; for neither could the Scots endure a
Superior, nor the English an Equal in Britain: and in this War those were
brought into greatest Danger who did nevertheless come off best in the whole
War. And at this time Britain was af^licted with greater Miseries than Italy in
the second Punick War, yea it was almost destroyed by its own Strength, which
afforded a pleasant Spectacle to the Neighboring Nations: Edward for
Magnanimity, enduring Fatigue and Knowledge in Military Discipline, was
inferior to none of his Ancestors; but his great Virtues were mightily
obscured by his inhumane Cruelty toward those that he overcame, his Rage
against Hostages, and most flagrant desire of rooting out the Memory of the
Scots; but he was at last disappointed in his purpose of establishing the
Dominion of the whole Island in his own Family. I shall faithfully extract the
History of this Edward against the Scots, from Walsingham and Westminster, the
one a Monk of St. Albans, and the other of Westminster, who lived about that
time, and shall say nothing from any Scots Historian, but what is sometimes
necessary to give light to the History which is miserably obscut'd and darkened
by them.

While Alexander the third lived, Peace was faithfully kept by Edward: for
Alexander was so cautious and provident, that he gave him no opportunity to
grow upon him; and when Alexander was desired to come to the public Meeting of
the States; wherein Edward received the Crown, he would not until Edward did by
a special Writing, declare, that he did not require it of him as a thing which
he was obliged to do; but as a piece of Friendship: and when he sent him
Assistance against the Welsh, he obtained a Writing in like manner, That he did
not send them as being obliged thereunto, but as a special Favor. Alexander
being dead without any Offspring but (...) Grandchild by his Daughter
Margaret, who was married to the King of Norway; Edward demanded that
Grandchild in Marriage to his Son from the Nobility of Scotland, that at last
the whole Island might be united, which he also obtained, though there were
some who conjectured, that the King of England would be a severe Master; But
dying in Orkney as the returned to Scotland, the Kingdom was divided into
twelve Factions; for there were so many Competitors for the Crown, but the
chief were John Baliol an Englishman great Grandchild to that Eber^^^^ or
Bernard, who according to Camb^^^^ had the Glory of taking William King of
Scots in an Ambush; Robert Bruce Son to Robert Bruce Earl of Carick, and
Hastings, who were Grandchildren to three Daughters of David Earl of
Huntington, and great Grandchildren to the said D^rvid, Brother (...) William
King of Scots: All these being afraid of the Power of their fellow Competitors,
and unwilling that the Kingdom should sustain any damage in the mean Time,
submitted the whole Affair to the King of England's Judgment, and chose him to
be Arbitrator of the Controversy with common Consent. But Edward perceiving
that the disposal of the Crown of Scotland was fallen into his Hands, which he
and his Ancestors had so often desired with the greatest Eagerness, he
conceived an immoderate Joy thereat in his Heart, raises an Army under a
pretense of suppressing any Tumults that might arise from his Decree, and
advanced with the same to the Borders. The Scots by a certain connate
Simplicity, put the best Interpretation upon all these things, being ignorant
of Edward's cra^ty Humor; who according to the Example of Lysander would each
out the Lion's Skin with that of the Fox; and by his cunning Tricks had lately
obtained the Superiority of Wales: for having broken them in several Battles,
yet not so much as to force them to acknowledge himself or any other Englishman
for their Sovereign, he attempted it by this Thracian Comment and Wile: He
sends for his Wife who was ready to lie in, to Car^a^^an, a Town almost in the
Borders of Wales, where she brought forth her Son, who was afterward called
Edward the second, or Edward of Carnarvan; having in the mean time plied the
Welsh with all his Crast, to acknowledge him for their Lord, which they did
constantly refuse, saying, They would receive none as such, but one born in
Wales, and who spoke that Language: Yet at last after many Difficulties, they
allowed Edward the Power of naming him, having taken an Oath, that they would
obey, if he named such an One: Whereupon Edward says, Yea verily, I will give
you a Welsh Lord and Prince, one born in Wales, altogether ignorant of the
English Tongue, and who knows not how to speak any thing else than Welsh, and
then named his Son. But although the Welsh did plainly perceive that they were
cheated, yet they looked upon themselves as bound by their Oath, and from that
time forward the eldest Son of England has been always called Prince of Wales.
He attaqu'd the Scots with the same Craft and Cunning, but only that he did it
also in Arms, that he might usurp the Sovereignty of Scotland to himself; for
when at first he seemed unwilling to take the Arbitration upon him, as being
unequal to so great a Burden, but assuring them that he would no less preserve
the Dignity of the Scottish Nation firm and inviolable than his own: First, he
bound them all by an Oath, to acquiesce in his Sentence, and demanded, that all
Castles, Garrisons and fortified Places should be delivered into his Custody,
under pretense, that the stubborn opposite Parties would not otherwise obey,
unless he could force them to it; therefore how great the Simplicity, or rather
the Madness of our Countrymen was, to deliver themselves thus, bound up in
Chains, into the Hands of any Enemy, let the candid Reader judge. But Edward
marched to the Borders of Scotland, to fight as Liege Lord, says Walsingham:
but I pray you, Mr. Walsingham, who expected War from him, certainly not the
Scots, who had committed their greatest Affairs to his Arbitration; and who had
then neither King, General, nor Army, as fearing no Enemy, and being summoned
by him, came with their usual Trains, but without Arms; and there when they
expected no such thing, they found Edward upon his Throne, giving himself out
for Liege Lord of Scotland, that he would pronounce Sentence as such, and that
the Cause could not be legally determined otherwise than before the Liege Lord.
The Scots were struck silent with Astonishment, and found themselves surrounded
on all Hands with the English Soldiery; so that Edward goes on, alleging, that
he did not demand any new thing, but only the Right of his Predecessors,
protesting, that he would desend the Prerogative of his Crown with his Blood:
and that he might the more easily persuade them of this, he made all the
Monasteries of England, Scotland and Wales, to be searched, that he might know
what his Right was on that Head. These are Walsingham's Words In Ed. 1. 1290.
, and it was found, says he, in the Chronicles of Marianus Scotus, William of
Malmsbury, Roger of Hoveden, Henry of Huntington and Ralph of Lysetum; that in
the Year 910, Edward the Elder subdued the Kings of Scotland and Cumberland:
And though those Bawbles have been already refuted, yet I must insist a little
further on them. And first, King Edward, that he might not be wanting in number
of witnesses, produces five, of whom Ralph of Lyset^^ did never yet see the
Light for any thing that we know: Nor does Balaeus in his Catalogue of British
Writers make any mention of him; and therefore as Logicians say, de non ente
nullum est Iudicium, we can form no Judgment of that which has no Being.
Marianus Scotus has no such thing, nor yet Mal^sbury, Hoveden nor Huntington,
for none of those Authors did ever commit it to writing, that those Kings were
subdued by Edward the Elder; they only say, that Cumberland was given to the
King of Scots by Edward, to be held of him that he might suppress the Danish
Tumults, and keep the disorderly People in their Duty. Nor if they had writ so,
could they prejudg our Cause, for those three, Malmsbury, Hoveden and
Huntington were late Writers, and flourished at the same Time with King Edward,
and wrote in the Time of Henry, or a little before, and therefore I submit it
to the Judgment of the candid Reader. If the King of England had brought those
three Men along with him, that he might have made use of their Evidence, either
for proving the Dignity of their King or Country, or this Superiority, what
just Judge would have admitted them, or have given Credit to them though they
had been upon Oath? And at last, if they had said, that the Scots were subdued,
what would have followed thence? For how often have subdued Nations recovered
their Courage; and not only repelled, but subdued the Conquerors? And therefore
this first Proof being destitute of all its Sinews, falls to the ground.

Walsingham adds, that the same Edward was chosen as Lord and Patron by the
Kings of Cumberland and Scotland; but we must take notice that the place is
corrupted: for Westminster says only, that he was chosen for Lord and Father.
Nor does it follow, because he was chosen as Lord and Father to sustain the
Impresssions of the Danes, that therefore he was constituted Liege-Lord of
Scotland; for many are saluted as Lords, and chosen for Fathers or Lords, who
cannot pretend however to any Right but that which results from the mere
Good Will of the Electors. Neither is it true that there was then any King of
Cumberland; for the Prince of Scotland taking at the same time the Title of
Prince of Cumberland, is by the ignorant Monks believed to have been a King.
Walsingham says that Athelstan conquered Constantine King of Scots, and
permitted him to reign under him: If you say that he permitted him when he
could not hinder him, we con^ess it; but that he reigned under Athelstan, you
have no Author to vouch, no more than you have for Edred's Victory over the
Scots, and the Fealty that was sworn to him, except you understand the League
against the Danes. But that Edgar overcame Rivadus, Son to Alpin King of Scots,
is not only void of all Testimony, but Reason: For besides that there was never
any King of Scots of that Name, his supposed Father Alpin was dead 200 Years
before him, and by that same Authority he is called King of Denmark, Scotland
and Norway, though there be no Writer who mentions that ever he did enter into
any of them. Nor did ever Malcolm receive the Kingdom of Scotland to be held in
Fee of Edward: Nor is there any English Historian who says so; but they do only
make mention, that the Auxiliary Forces of Northumberland came thither under
their General Earl Sivard: on whose Assistance Malcolm having relied, he
deprived Mackbeth the Tyrant, who had invaded the Scottish Tnrone, of his Life
and Dignity: Although it is also manifest, that Earl Sivard brought those
Troops (...) Malcolm his Sister's Son in the Recovery of the Crown of his
Ancestors, without any Command from Edward. Who could believe except he read
them, that such ridiculous Instances should be brought as dence? That Malcolm
was overcome both by the Conqueror and Rufus, is not to be found any where, but
they were both obliged to return Home, after the Conclusion of a
disadvantageous Peace, upon Malcolm's coming against them with an Army. As to
Malcolm's two Sons, the Bastard was executed for bringing English Auxiliary
Forces with him into Scotland, and the English were forced to retire; the other
of them did Homage, but not for the Kingdom of Scotland. If Alexander succeeded
his Brother Edgar, with the Consent of Henry the first, what Wonder! for
Henry's Wife was his Sister: but that David did Homage to Stephen, is contrary
to the Credit of all Historians, who do plainly assert, that David could never
be induced to perform Homage to Stephen, because he had obliged himself to be
true to Maud beforehand. As to William and Alexander, we have lately spoken;
Homage was certainly due to the King of England, nor was it unusual to have it
performed: but what is the Difference betwixt this in our Kings, and those of
England, or wherein was the State of Scotland different from that of England?
for the Conqueror and his Son Rufus, and Henry the first, Henry the second,
Richard, John, Henry the third, and lastly Edward the first himself, did all of
them swear Homage and Fealty to the King of France, as their Liege Lord, and
yet they did not acknowledge him as Superior of England.

But let us see what the Scots answered to these Proofs brought by Edward. The
Scots s^y they answered, that they knew nothing of this Superiority; nor could
they without an Head, answer to such things, insinuating, and that not
obscurely, that they owed no such Homage, and that if they had had a Head or
King at that Time, that Edward would not have demanded that Superiority: The
Scots must needs have been Stones or Toad-stools, or something yet more stupid,
if they did not know their Lord, of whom they held their Lands; Non obtusa adeo
gestabant pectora Scoti;
Nec tam aversus equis nostro Sol jungit ab Orb.
Such gross Ignorance is not to born with in the most savage Barbarians, for
even the Inhabitants of Gothland, Island and Finland, know their Lord, and pay
their annual Tributes very willingly. But Plutarch in Lysander, is very much in
the right, the Argives contending with the Spartans about the Boundaries of
their Lands, and affirming, that their Arguments were stronger than those of
the Spartans; Lysander the Spartan General showing them a Sword, said, he that
holds this shall have the best in the Controversy about the Boundaries of the
Lands, and Edward followed his Example in this Controversy: But say our
Neighbors, there are Confessions of some of the Scots, recognizing the King of
England as Liege Lord of Scotland, the Forms of which Confessions being drawn
up in French, are exhibited both by Westminster and Walsingham. If what
Walsingham and Westminster relate be true, this Confession was extrorted from
the Scots by Violence, being surrounded with armed Men who would have cut their
Throats if they had not done it: But there are very few Scots there mentioned,
for Florence Earl of Holland, Baliol, and Hastings of Bessy, who signed instead
of his Father, were not Scots but Englishmen; and as for Bruce, it is evidently
false, for he might have made such a Confession more to his Advantage
elsewhere: Nor are there three Scotsmen in that Charter, neither did they at
that time understand the French Tongue; so that whatever was offered to them,
they subscribed so they might escape safe. By these Methods did Edward proceed
to Sentence, but finding the Pretensions of two of the Competitors to
overballance all the rest, he called Bruce apart, and promises to make him King
if he would acknowledge him for Liege-Lord; but Bruce answered magnanimously,
that the Kingdom which he had received free from his Ancestors, he would never
inslave nor render subject to another. Edward being amazed with this fierce and
resolute Answer, calls upon Baliol, and offers the same Condition to him,
which, he being an ambitious Man thirsting after the Crown, and thinking he had
made a good Bargain if he could purchase a Throne at any Rate, did willingly
embrace. In the mean time King Edward dissembling this underhand Transaction,
pretended that he would decide the Matter according to the Opinions of the best
Lawyers of France and England, and propounds the Case thus. A certain King
holding his Kingdom from another King in Fee, and neither being accustomed to
be Crowned nor Anointed, but only placed in a certain Chair, etc. It Is truly
wonderful how he could propose the Case thus, for here he takes the thing in
Controversy for granted that the Kingdom of Scotland was a Fee of England,
which was never so much as once heard of before that time: but it is yet more
strange, that he should say, that the King of Scots did neither use to be
Anointed nor Crowned; when he himself ordered all Baliol's Equipage to be
searched as he was hastening through England to France, and finding therein the
Crown of Scotland, he took it from him, and dedicated it to St. Thomas
Walsingham in Edw. I.
. But to return to Balibl whom Edward preferred, having rejected the rest, he
declared him King, and received Homage from him according to the Terms of the
Agreement beforementioned, and in such Form as he thought most suitable to his
Affairs, and which he did dictate to Baliol, that new King refusing nothing;
for Baliol was really an Englishman and great Grandchild to that Bernard, who
had the Glory of taking William King of Scots by an Ambush, as I marked before
out of Cambden, and was rewarded with many Lands in England upon that Account:
So that in this I dissent from my Countrymen, who say, he was a Norman, and
Lord of Harcourt: It may be he had some Possessions in Normandy, for his
Predecessors came thence with the Conqueror. But Baliol being thus declared
King, he did not only pay the Price of the Sentence agreed upon before, but
also renounced all his Right to Cumberland, Northumberland and Westmoreland,
and only retained Huntington, with the Consent of the King of England, who knew
that he could easily divest him of that at any Time: nor is it to be wondered
at, that an English Man and a Subject of England, should procure the Advantage
of his Lord, especially when by his means he was made capable of obtaining the
Crown, which he did so much long for, according to that of the Poet, Si
^iolandum est I^s Imperii causa
Violandum est aliis reb^^ pictatem colas.


CHAP. XXIX.
Whether or not that Sentence was just, which Edward gave for Bruce against
Baliol.
But the English will say, that Edward pronounced a very just Sentence, in
adjudging the Succession of the Crown of Scotland to Margaret, eldest Daughter
to David Earl of Huntington and her Offspring, and rejecting Isabel the second
Daughter, who married Robert Bruce Earl of Carrick, and her Offspring; for
there is no Body who does not prefer the Firstborn to the second, in Individual
Fees, and by consequence, the Offspring of the First, to the Offspring of the
Second: although indeed most men think that this Sentence of King Edward's was
according to Law, yet because of his being corrupted, and receiving a Reward
for his Sentence, he ought not to have been Judge; but if the Matter be
thoroughly canvass'd, perhaps it will be found that this Sentence was not
pronounced according to Equity neither: for besides the other Reasons brought
by our Countrymen, and the Custom of the Kingdom then observed in Judgment,
that in the Offspring of diverse Sisters, the first Male is preferred, and the
Case of the Count of Nivern and the Duke of Burgundy for the County of
Flanders, approved by all the Parliaments of France, and especially the Senate
of Paris; I appeal them also to the Feudal Law it self, which was at that time
tenaciously observed by the Noblest Kingdoms in Europe. I shall here cite one
Text, which agrees so well to this our Hypothesis, that nothing can be more
like: The words of the Text are these, The like if any Man be invested in a
Fee, so that it descend upon Women, and leave only two Daughters, of which the
one has a Son, and the other a Daughter, whether after their Death the Male
ought only to have the Fee; according to Gerard, the Male only: Obertus on the
contrary: And on the other Hand if he have Sons. That we may adapt this Text to
our Hypothesis, David Earl of Huntington and Chester, to whom as the next of
the Paternal Line, the Right to the Kingdom of Scotland, (the whole Offspring
of his Brother William being extinguished) and its Succession devolved, of
which Succession a Woman and those who descend from her are as capable as a
Male. He left two Daughters, Margaret the eldest, who married Alan Earl of
Galloway, of which Marriage was born Dornagilla Mother to John Baliol,
afterward King; the other was Isabel, married to Robert Earl of Carick, of
which Marriage was born Robert Bruce Father to King Robert the first. The
Question is, whether Robert Bruce though born of the second Daughter, yet the
first Male, or Dornagilla Grandchild by the first born Daughter, is to be
preferred in the Succession to the Crown, which admits of no Division: In this
Question the two great Lights of the Feudal Law, Gerard and Obert are opposed
to one another; but the Opinion of Gerard, that the first Male is to be
preferred, is not only confirmed by other Places, as well of the Civil as
Feudal Law, but also by the Suffrages of all the Interpreters. Baldus
Alvaroltus the President, and the Moderns Hottomannus Duarenus, Baro, Conerus
and Cujacius; nay, and Hortensius himself does in other Places, approve of the
Opinion of Gerard as the truest: Nor is there any Reason to doubt, be^cause the
Text does not express, whether this Son be born of the eldest or second
Daughter; for if this Son had been born of the eldest Daughter, there had been
no place for doubting. But as to this Question, the Reader may see more in my
second Book de Feudis.

Neither is this Decision without a Precedent in the Succession of the English
Crown: For Henry I. his Male Issue being dead, and having a Grandson,
afterward Henry II. by Maud his Daughter, who was married to Geffrey
Plantagenot Earl of Anjou, he was solicitous how to secure the Succession of
the Crown to them, and made all the States of England swear Fealty to them as
those who were to reign immediately after him. Nevertheless, he being dead,
Stephen, Grandson to the Conqueror by a Daughter, took the Crown. Nor is it
likely that the English would have received him contrary to their Oaths, except
the Law had been for him: For Henry II. Son to Maud, having the Title by a
Woman, and Stephen having the same, he affirmed himself to be first in the
Succession, because he was the first Male, though descending from a Woman: nay,
he urged that if Maud her self had been alive, he ought to be preferred to her,
as being the first born Male, and by consequence his Offspring ought to be
preferred to Henry II. This Matter was debated a long time in England; yet
Stephen was never accounted an Usurper or Tyrant, but looked upon as lawful
Heir and King: Nor were ever his Laws r^scinded by succeeding Kings, as those
of one who had no lawful Authority. Nay, that which is more, at the Agreement
betwixt Him and Henry II. his own Son Eustace being dead, he adopted Henry II.
that so he might derive the Right of Succession from his Person. Which he would
never have done, had he been looked upon as a Tyrant or unlawful King: And in
most places of Hoveden it appears, that the first Male descending from a Female
Line, is judged to have the best Right. For the Ancients were of Opinion, that
a Male in the same Degree of Consanguinity was always to be preferred: and thus
a Brother is preferred to all the Sisters, and so amongst Cousins (for the Case
of Sisters is the same) the first Male was preferred in the Succession to the
Grandfather, to a Woman, though begotten by the eldest Son. But the Case is
not the same in Brothers; for the first born excludes the younger: but in Women
the Case is the same; for they all succeed alike, none of them being preferred
to one another.

This is sufficient to be taken notice of at present, seeing I know that there
were then other Rules of Judging: for, as it appears by Bodinus, it was
customary at that time in most places, that the eldest Son dying before the
Father, and leaving a Son behind him, the second Brother was preferred to the
Grandchild in the Succession to his Father; and he instances in Cases having
been determined thus. Then let others think as they please, (for I offer
Violence to no Man's Judgment) it is my Opinion that, both according to the
Rules of the Feudal Law, and the Custom of the Country, which Edward ought to
have observed, he gave a very unjust Sentence: Which was not to be expiated any
otherwise than by the Lives of Multitudes, as the Event verified.

CHAP. XXX.
Whether Sovereign Princes can render themselves, and their Subjects, Vassals
to another Prince: And how by the Act of this very Edward, the Superiority was
destroyed.
I Hinted above, that a Prince who governs a free People cannot render them
Slaves, or subject to the Dominion of another Prince: Nor can the Barons of
that Kingdom transfer the Prerogative of that Liberty they have received from
their Ancestors, upon any other than their own Lord. The Authors of this
Proposition are Alexander Cardinalis, Jason and Imola; who do all of them hold,
that the Rights of Majesty have that Prerogative that no Prince has Power to
dispose of them in any manner; that they cannot be alienated, renounced, or
taken away from a Sovereign Prince, or suffer Prescription by any tract of
time; and therefore Baldus calls those Rights Sacra Sucrorum, Cynus calls them
Individua, which cannot be separated from the Crown or Royal Majesty. For those
who are entrusted with the chief Care of the Commonwealth, cannot so much as
diminish one foot of the Public Patrimony, much less give away the Property of
it: For Kings, or Sovereign Princes, (says Bodin, a most famous Lawyer) are so
far from having the Dominion or (...) of the Public Farms, that they have not
(...) entire Usufr^it, but must content themselves with the Use of it; for they
are only Proctors or Administrators of what belongs to others, and all the rest
are owing to the Commonwealth, with the Government whereof they are entrusted:
and if a King who is subject to none, do either of his own Accord, or be forced
against his Will, to serve and obey another, he loses the Title and Rights of
Majesty. Hottomannus handles this Question expressly, Lib. Illust. Quaest.
quaest. 1.

But to return to the Transactions of those Times, Baliol was the first, and
the only one of all the Kings of Scotland, who acknowledged the King of England
as Superior of Scotland, as he did Edward according to his Covenant; which
as soon as it was known to the Scots, who had received Baliol as King because of
their Oath, they took it very ill (as Alexander the second had done before:)
and although all the fortified Places were in the Enemies Hand, that the
Nobility were bound by their Oath, that a great Army of English were ready to
pour in upon them, and though they were destitute of the Assistance of the
great Ones, and the most part as is usual in such Cases, adhered openly to the
English for fear of being undone; yet first, they chid Baliol severely, for
rendering the Kingdom subject to an Enemy, which he had received free from his
Ancestors: but he promising to be afterward governed by the Peers, took Arms
with all Expedition against Edward's return from France; and when at his coming
Home, he redemanded Homage from Baliol, Walsingham, Polidore and Holinshed say,
the Scots answered, that they were born Free, were subject to none but their
own King; nor would they acknowledge any other Sovereign, but their own Prince.
Edward being incensed, says Polidore, did not only deprive Baliol of the
Earldom of Huntington for his Ingratitude, but led a great Army against the
Scots, and having killed many thousands, took Berwick by Storm; Walsingham
says, that there were 60000 slain there: At Dumbar he routed all the Scots
Forces under B^liol, in which Battle Bruce took part with the English, as he
did a long time after, in hop^s that the King of England would eject Baliol,
and set him upon the Throne; for so Edward had promised him underhand after he
began to hate Baliol, that he might thereby draw him over to his side. So that
Baliol's Courage being quite broke, because he found himself unable to maintain
such a War, being despised by his Subjects, and contemned by his Adversaries,
he resigned the Kingdom into the Hands of Edward, having received in lieu
thereof some Lands in Normandy, where he might live the rest of his Days. But I
would pray the kind Reader to have a little Patience and Attention, while I
beat the Assertors of this Homage with their own Weapons.

This Edward was the first who established the Homage in a King of his own
Choosing and Appointment, nay his own Liege-man and Subject. Nor is it any
wonder that this cowardly Man, who was altogether unfit for Government, and yet
blinded with an Ambition to reign, and above all being an Englishman, did this
Homage in favor of his Sovereign. And though we should grant what they will
never be able to make out by any probable Argument, that the Kingdom of
Scotland was a Fee-Liege of England, and that the King of England had before
that time been Liege-Lord of Scotland; yet I will make it plainly appear, that
that Homage and Superiority was destroyed by Edward. Then the King of England
was, as they say* Superior of Scotland, and Baliol his Vassal for the same, if
the Gods will have it so. But Baliol, who was a cowardly Man, being deserted by
his Subjects, and unable to maintain the War, he came to the King of England at
Brechin, and resigned all the Right which he had to the Crown of Scotland, with
the Homage of his Scots, into the Hands of Edward his Lord, as Liege Lord,
which is recorded by all the Writers of both Nations. This Resignation being
made, Edward was no more Superior or Liege Lord of Scotland, but
Lord-Proprietor of all Scotland, no less than he was of England; for then there
was no Vassal for the Kingdom of Scotland: but the Property was consolidate
with the Superiority, which Consolidation Lawyers call, Confusio Dominii utilis
cum directo^; and so Edward himself says, that by this Resignation, he was
legally constituted Possessor of the full Dominion, that all the Scots were his
Subjects, and performed Fealty and Homage to him as to their immediate Lord:
and therefore if by this Resignation the Property and profitable Dominion be
conjoined and consolidated with the Superiority, it follows of necessity, that
the Superiority is extinguished, for there can be no Superior or Lord, where
there is not a Vassal or Inferior; for these are Correlate, and if one be
wanting, the other must of necessity fall. And therefore what is principally
urged for the Confirmation of this Homage by our Neighbors, is the chief thing
that subverts it; and if they confess that to have been a true and lawful
Resignation, it is not needful to confess any Superiority or Property
afterward, except they can make it appear, that the Kingdom of Scotland was
given in Fee de novo, by the Kings of England, which no Man who has not
declared open War against the Truth, will as I believe attempt: for there is no
Englishman who can for shame assert this Homage, or affirm, that Scotland was
given after that to be held in Fee of England; nor is it credible that the King
of England would so easily part with it, who had so often sought an opportunity
to be possessed of Scotland; and therefore it appears by their own proper
Confession, that the Kings of Scotland from that time, which is now three
hundred Years, have not been Vassals to the Kings of England, nor owed them any
Allegiance or Homage. But if our Neighbors ask by what Right then do our Kings
possess Scotland at this time, I answer, by one much better than the English
possess England; but another Place is more proper for this Controversy: It is
sufficient now that I have evinced, that this commentitious Superiority was
overturned by this Act of Edward the first's, which is supposed to have
promoted it most of all.

They did not cease from Arms after the Resignation by Baliol; for when the
Scots did assert that that Resignation was void and frivolous, they took Arms
with great Expedition, and routed the English in many small and some great
Battles, tho the English Writers do only take notice of two, one at Sterlin
Bridge, where half the English Army, with Hugh Cressingham their General was
slain, and the other at Roslin, where under the Conduct of Simon Fraser their
General 8000 Scots scarcely half armed, did in one Day rout three English
Armies, whereof each did at least consist of ten thousand Mercenary Soldiers;
for Ralph Confrey who had 30000 English under his Command, for fear that he
should want Provisions and Forage, divided his Army into three Parts, yet so as
they might not be far asunder, but help one another as occasion required. But
Fraser watching for an Opportunitiy, as soon as he saw their Forces divided into
three Bodies, he attaqu'd them one by one, and in the space of one Day, did
almost totally cut them off; and so the English who did now promise themselves
sure footing in Scotland, were all thrown out, and their bordering Countries
exposed to the Ravages and Devastations of the Scots. Edward being enraged at
these Successes of our Countrymen, he assembled not only the whole Strength of
England, but also that of the Provinces which he did then command Beyond Sea,
and marched into Scotland, and when he arrived there, most of the Nobility of
Scotland joined him, and amongst others Bruce with his Forces, which did
mightily increase his Army. But the Scots being nothing terrified by such
numerous Forces, tho at the same time deserted by most of the chief Nobility,
they raised an Army, and being lifted up by their former Victories, they
prepared for Battle in a plain Ground called Falkirk; but Ambition proved their
Destruction, and, as it is said of Eris, threw in an Apple of Contention
amongst them, by which Troy was afterward consumed, because she was not
invited to the Marriage of Peleus and Thetis. The Scots Army did not exceed
30000 Men, under the Command of three Generals, John Cummin at that time the
most powerful of the Scots Nobility, John Steward and William Wallace: But a
fatal Contention happened amongst them about leading on the Van against the
English, for that is the Post of greatest Honor amongst us: Cummin claimed it
as his due, nor would Steward yield to him in Dignity, and Wallace said it was
his Right, and due to his Authority as Viceroy. Hence rose Discord and Factions
in the Army, and Cummin perceiving that the Soldiery favored the other two
more than him, he went off with all his Forces, for the rest suspected him as a
favourer of the English; nor was it without ground, for Westminster and
Walsingham do both of them exhibit the Form of the Oath which he swore to be
true to Edward before that time; and by this his Family which was then, as I
have already said, the greatest and most potent of any in Scotland, was so
brought under, that the name of Cummin is now very rare in Scotland. As to the
other two, Steward and Wallace, the first claimed the leading of the Vanguard
because of his Nobility, and the latter demanded it because of his Valor and
the Suffrage of the People: Steward being enraged at it, upbraided Wallace with
the Fable of Aesop or Horace's little Raven, which did so exasperate Wallace,
that not being able to master his Passion, he did also march off with all his
Forces; the only Blot that can be charged on him during the whole Course of his
Life, that he should not have sacrificed the Resentment of the Injury done to
himself, to that of his Country at such a critical Juncture: but in all other
respects, he may be compared to the Ancient Hero's, either for Endowments of
Body or Mind. Steward being left alone in the Field, did (lest he should seem
to be fiercer in Words than Deeds) give Battle to the English with a great deal
of Gallantry, tho he had but one third part of his Army; but that which proved
most fatal to him, was his engaging on plain Ground, and not being aware of
Bruce, who fell upon his Rear; so that being encompassed with a multitude of
Horse and Foot, he was cut off with most of his Men. Bruce is branded with the
Infamy of this Battle, for having brought great Forces into the Field against
his own Countrymen, and fought with too much Bravery in favor of King Edward.

I have insisted the more upon the Event of this Fight, because the English
please themselves too much with the Relation of it, and give out, that above
60000 Scots were slain in this Action, whereas they themselves did not lose
above thirty Men: Westminster says, there were 200000 Scots in this Army;
Wals^ngham does not pitch upon any Number, but says, it was an horrible Battle,
the whole Scots Army being destroyed by the English Cavalry. However that is,
it is certain that the Battle was great, and that abundance of Scots fell
therein: but though they were broken by this Battle, they did not abandon their
Cause; for Wallace's Anger being assuaged, he brought back his Forces into the
Field; and although he durst not give Battle to the numerous and victorious
English Army, yet following them close, he did by falling on their Rear, and
cutting of the Straglers, so much pinch the English Cavalry for want of Forage,
that Edward was forced to return into England; Bruce followed him by reason of
his dependence upon him, and requiring him to fulfill his Promise, was rejected
with Di^dain: whereupon he began privily to sound how the Scots stood affected
to him, and to solicit them to declare him Heir to the Crown; but all of them
being jealous of him, his business went on but slowly at first.

CHAP. XXXI.
A sharp Epistle from Pope Boniface the 8th, to King Edward about the Injustice
of his War against the Scots, and Edward's Apology.
IN the mean time there happened a Controversy betwixt Boniface the 8th, and
Edward I. about the Right of this Superiority over Scotland: For when the Scots
being inferior in Arms, had recourse to the Help and Assistance of the Church
of Rome, and had plainly instructed the Injuries done to them by Edward,
Boniface being moved with their Entreaties and the Justice of their Cause,
wrote Letters to Edward, accusing him of Injustice in undertaking of this War,
and threatening him with Ecclesiastical Censures if he did not desist from
troubling the Scots: But this Controversy being copied both by Walsingham and
Westminster, I shall go over the Heads of it in a few Words, seeing by them the
Decision of this whole Controversy will be manifest; for the Pope proves by
very strong Arguments, that this whole. War was unlawfully undertaken, and that
Edward did unjustly vex the Scots upon the Account of that Superiority, which
he did falsely conceive he had a Right to over their Kingdom. Walsingham, that
he may lessen this Authority of the Sea of Rome, does fabulously assert, that
the Scots had corrupted the Pope with Money, as if ever the Scots had so much
abounded therewith, as to be able to out-bribe the English: But pray let us hear
what Boniface the 8th has to say for Scotland. First, he alleges, That the
Kingdom of Scotland did not belong to any other but the Sea of Rome that it
neither is, nor ever was a Fee of England, as Edward alleged: He brings no
Proof for this Proposition as being Negative, and has not only a manifest
Presumption of Law, seeing the Presumption is always reckoned on the side of
Liberty, but Notoriety and perpetual Custom. But afterward he proves the
Matter plainly by Deeds of Edward himself, and Henry his Father: for when
Alexander the third King of Scots sent Auxiliary Forces to Henry III. in his
War with Simon de Montefort, he demanded an express Caveat, that they should
not be looked upon as sent on the Account of any Subjection or Right; which
Henry did also testify by his Letters Patents, viz. That he had received those
Auxiliary Troops, not as any Assistance any way due to him, but as a special
Favor from his Neighbor Prince. And certainly this Argument of the Pope's,
does utterly destroy the Homage; for if Scotland had been a Kingdom held by
Edward's Bounty, he might have demanded those Auxiliaries, not as a Favor, but
as a Debt: For the Vassal is obliged to assist his Lord both in War with his
Military Force, and at Home with his Counsel and Advice; for Favor and Debt
cannot agree, but the supposing of the one, implies a Denial of the other: Nor
could Henry declare that Scotland owed him no Service, in more express Terms,
than by desiring Assistance from the King of Scots as a Favor.

The third and a most powerful Argument brought by the Pope, is from the
Practice of Edward himself in his own Person: for when Edward required the
Presence of his Neighboring Monarch Alexander at his Coronation by his
Letters, the King of Scots not being ignorant of the English Tricks, refused it
until Edward himself, did by his Letters grant him a Gaveat, that his Presence
was not required as that whereunto he was obliged, but only as a special
Favor. Now what can be said more plain or express against this Homage, seeing
the Vassal, as has been alreaddy hinted, is always obliged to appear at his
Lord's Court when he is required?

The fourth Argument, and that which is still harder upon Edward, is, that when
the King of Scots appeared before him in Person, to perform the usual Homage
for Tynd^l and Penreth (which are both in England) before he took the Oath, he
did openly, and in the Presence of a great many Persons, viva Voce, declare,
that he swore Fealty for the Lands which he held in England, and not as K. of
Scotland: for he neither owed nor would perform any Homage or Fealty to the
King of England, for the Kingdom of Scotland; and that Edward himself did then
agree to what was spoken, though nothing could be said or thought more express
for the confutation of this Homage.

The fifth Argument which the Pope makes use of against Edward, is stronger
still: for when Alexander died, leaving only a Grandchild by Edward's Sister,
who was his Wife, behind him as Heiress of the Crown, Edward did solicit a
Marriage betwixt her and his Son Edward, then Prince of Wales, by all Methods
imaginable; whereas had he been Liege Lord of Scotland, the Wardship of the
Damsel who was Heiress, and that also of the Kingdom it self, would have fallen
to him by Law as the Superior: but the Pope evidences the contrary, viz. That
there were Guardians of the Kingdom chosen by the Nobles of Scotland, who
should take care of the Government and the Damsel, until a dispensation of
Consanguinity could be obtained from the Pope, (for Edward the Son and Margaret
were in the second and third Degree of Consanguinity, as I said, and so could
not contract Marriage without a Dispensation:) and the Pope adds, That there
was an express Proviso made by Edward in Writing, that in case the Marriage
should not be agreed on either by the Default of the Nobility, or otherwise,
That he should leave the Kingdom of Scotland free and subject to no Man for
ever; and if there happened to be Children by that Marriage, that he should
leave the Kingdom in its ancient State, and restore it as he received it, that
it should retain the Name and Dignity of a Kingdom as before, both in enjoying
its own Laws, appointing Officers of State, holding of Parliaments, and
deciding ^auses within the Kingdom, and that none of the Inhabitants should be
obliged to go out of the same for Judgment. Now none can call Parliaments but
those who have the Rights of Majesty; so that if this Proviso granted by
Edward, do not put this Question about the Homage out of all Controversy, I
know not what to say: but that all those things were contained in Edward's
Letters Patents thereupon granted and produced before him* the same Pope does
testify yet more plainly and fully.

The Pope's sixth Argument is, that this Margaret being dead, and a Controversy
arising amongst the Nobility about the Suc(...) of the Crown, the greatest part
were willing that the King of England should (...) Arbitrator, and thereupon he
came to ^wrod^ Borders with an Army to support those of his own Faction; the
rest being called (...) were somewhat afraid, and not trust^^^ the King's bare
Word, that their Obedience ^wrod^ be no way prejudicial to the Kingdom, (...)
infer any Servitude, they would not come (...) the Borders into his Presence,
except he did first assure them by his Letters Patents, that they were not
required to do the same, as being thereunto obliged, but out of a special
Favor, (...) that the Liberties of the Kingdom should (...) prejudice thereby;
and these Letters (...) were then produced before the Pope. and to prevent an
Objection which Edward (...) raise, viz. That the King of Scots (...) Homage to
him afterward, the Pope subjoins, that tho the same was performed by (...) in
whose Favor he had: unjustly pronounced Sentence, and that, some Innovations
were thereupon made by him contrary to the usual Custom* yet all these things
were extorted by Violence and Fear, which may be^al a constant Man^ and
therefore they ought not to subsist in Law, nor to redound to the Prejudice of
the Kingdom. From this sixth Argument of the Pope's, these three things are to
be inferred; First* That the Nobility of Scotland, though at that time without
an Head, ((...)) the word used by the Pope, would not then acknowledge the King
of England as their Lord or Superior; but being called out of the Kingdom in
order to an Agreement* they obeyed, not as being thereunto obliged, but out of
a special Favor, wherein they followed the Example of the last King Alexander.
The second is, that this Homage being extorted from Baliol, could not subsist
in Law, which is the same Reason given for that extorted from King William when
a Captive. The third is, that the Sentence pronounced by Edward in favor of
Baliol, was unduly given, the Modesty of the Word tempering the Injustice of
the Senteno^; for he might have said* which he certainly thought, that the said
Sentence in favor of Baliol, was given contrary to all Law and Equ^ty: and
that therefore Bruce was the true (...) of the Kingdom, which is confirmed by
the Pope's Sentence, of the Authority (...)

The 7th Argument is, from the Custom of the Church of Rome; for when a Legate
was sent into England from the Apostolical See to exercise his Function, he
could not upon that Pretext proceed to do the same in Scotland; neither ever
was he, or ought he to be admitted by the Scots, except he brought special
Letters from the Pope to the ^ing of Scotland, which was not necessary if
Scotland had been a Fee of England, or that the King of Scots had been subject
to the King of England; for in that Case, as Lawyers speak, the Embassy into
England had been sufficient alone: and in fine, that the Pope might leave
nothing untouched, he brings in also that Controversy betwixt the ^ishop of
York and the Scots Clergy concerning the Superiority which the Bishop of York
did arrogate to himself over all the Scots Bishops, which as I said before,
being brought into Judgment in England could not be determined, though the
English Bishops themselves did preside, but both Parties appealed to the Pope;
and therefore Boniface does expressly write in that Epistle, that the Bishop of
York could never obtain Judgment for himself, because he produced nothing for
the Confirmation of his Cause, but a Letter from some Scots Bishops, in which
they had writ to the Bishop of York, Memento quod tui su^us, Remember that we
are yours; a most excellent Argument indeed for a proud Bishop, who was seeking
to overthrow other Men's Liberty, for writing to him officiously, Nos tui sumus,
we are Yours. But to return to the Pope, he in fine, condemns the Design and
Intention of the King of England, to subdue Scotland, especially being then
without a Head or Captain, and trusting themselves wholly to the King of
England; and he admonishes him sharply to withdraw thence on Pain of
Excommunication, and leave the Scots to their own Liberties and Laws; and if he
had any equitable Plea to alledg for himself, that he should appear before him
by his Ambassadors within six Months, to answer the Scots upon that Head, for
there were then Scots Ambassadors at Rome, and in their Calamities they did
implore the Assistance of the Pope as Liege Lord of England. The Archbishop of
Canterbury brought this Denunciation of the Pope's to Edward, then raging in
Scotland; and admonishing him to leave that Kingdom on pain of Excommunication,
Edward being nothing afraid of the Pope's threats, swore by the Blood of God,
for Sion 's sake will I not hold my Peace, and for Jerusalem will I not be at
rest, (alluding to those words, Sion and Jerusalem, in the Pope's Message)
while there is Breath in my Nostrils, but will defend my Right, which is known
to all the World, to the utmost of my Power. And therefore that he might
obviate the Pope's threatenings, he sent two Letters to him, one from himself,
and another from his Nobility, both of them Apologetical, in defense of his
Superiority over Scotland: The Tenor of those Letters, is to be found both in
Westminster and Walsingham; therefore I shall go through the Heads of them
briefly, that all Men may see how strong and concluding the Pope's Arguments
were for the Liberty of Scotland, and what weak, empty and trifling Arguments
Edward brings for maintaining his Homage. Beginning then with the ordinary
Preface of kissing the Pope's Feet, he says, That he and his Ancestors in all
Ages past, had a direct Lordship, and presided over Scotland, and gave the
Reins of that Government into whose Hands they pleased, and dethroned them as
they saw occasion; and to elude all Probation, alleges, that these things are
so notorious, that they need no Proof, because he was sure, that if Proof was
required, his Nakedness would be exposed, and that he should not be able to
produce any: But lest it should be thought he had done nothing, he brings the
first Argument for his direct Dominion, from the Fable of Brutus, and his
division of Britain amongst his three Sons, reserving the Royal Dignity to
Locrinus his eldest; whereas neither the names of Homage nor Superiority were
known to the World for 2000 Years after Brutus, as I said before, if ever there
was any such Man as he. The second is, that Dunwallo killed Staterius King of
Scots for his Rebellion, and had Scotland yielded up to him, which does not
infer a Superiority, but the manifest Subversion thereof, if there was any; if
the Vassal's Fee be yielded up to the Lord, and consolidate with the
Superiority. But this Dunwallo reigned before Rome was taken by the Gauls, at
which time if there was any such thing as the Name of Scots, or a King of
Scotland, I leave it to the Judgment of the candid Reader. The English
Historians do stiffly maintain, that the Scots did not come into Britain before
the time of Ho^orius and Arcadiu^; but that there was any such King of Scots as
Staterius, Monm^uth himself the inventer of these Fables, does not so much as
suggest. It Is really strange, that Men's minds should be so much set upon
Fictions, that they are not afraid of saying any thing, so it may but reproach
their Enemies. What is subjoined concerning Brennus and Belinus, is of the same
stamp; for if Brennus was King of Scotland or Albania, and did with his
Countrymen (...) France, Italy, Germany, and at last see Rome it self in
Flames, to what a height of Glory has this imprudent Man raised the Scots
against his Will? but it is strange that he should say, that the Law of
Prim^geniture had its first rise from the Customs of the (...), when its
Original is to be found in the Holy Scriptures many Ages before Troy. We be to
that ignorant Sciolist who dictated these things, and did thus impose upon his
Magnanimous Prince, as to suggest to him such things as have no Evidence nor
Author, (...), not so much as an English Monk. Of the (...) sort are those
things which are forged concerning Arthur, as I said above, for that there was
a King of Scots called Auguselinus, is not to be found in any Author. But let
us go on, The English succeeding to the Kingdom of the Britains, they did
together with their Monarchy obtain this Dominion over Scotland, says Edward;
but I pray by what Right? for this is not a good Consequence, that if any one
despoil another of his Country or drive him into Exile, that therefore he must
be his lawful Heir. I have answered what relates to Ed^ard, Athelstan, and the
ridiculous Miracle of St. John of Bever^y, as also what concerns the Cle^t in a
huge Rock at Dumbar of an Ell in length made by Athelstan's Sword, the Monument
of which is still to be seen there, says Edward, though I believe that whoever
goes to seek it in that Place will lose his Labor, there are so many gaping
Rocks there. There are two things which he brings as most strong Arguments,
one, that this Miracle is ^ead weekly in John's Legend; and what if he could
have said, that it had been read in the Golden Legend? but pray where is the
Miracle if the Scots beat the English, or the English beat the Scots? for that
was not such an unusual thing in either of the Nations. The second is, that the
King of Scots was Godfather to Athelstan's Son; cannot that Honor be done to
one Prince by another, but they must needs be said to perform Homage? But by
the same Argument some idle Brain may argue, that the most august Queen of
England is subject to the King of Scots, because by her Ambassadors she was
Godmother to the King of Scots and his Son the Prince. As to E^red I said
before, that it does not follow that he who swears Fealty to another, must
needs be his Subject, except it be Liege Fealty, for every Body knows that
there is a social Fealty. As to the feigned Irisius, let them say what they
please, so long as there is no such Person to be found in the Catalogue of the
Scottish Kings, but feigned Names agree best to feigned things. What they alledg
(...) Kinalidus, or Rinaldus, E^genius, and the (...) of the Kings of
Cumberland; I answer (...), that there never was any King of Cumberland, but
only the eldest Son of Scotland who called Prince of Cumberland; and no Man of
any Sense did ever call them King: but if he performed Homage for Cumberland, a
Country of England, he did no more than what he ought; yet this is
reproachfully imputed to the Kingdom of Scotland. For Edward II. Edred, Edgar,
Ethelverd, Edmund, Canute and Edward III. I have already answered, that never
one of them did so much as see the Borders of Scotland, having enough to do at
Home to oppose the Danes and Norwegians, wherein the Scots did them faithful
and gallant Service: and if at any time they demanded Homage of them, it was no
more than what was their Due for those three Beneficiary Provinces; and if the
King of Scots had denied it, he should have dealt injuriously with his Lord. As
to the Conque^or. Rufus, Henry I. Stephen, and Henry II. I have already said,
that they were taught to their own Cost to abstain from invading Scotland.

If the Princes of Scotland did then perform Homage to those Kings, they did no
more than what was their Duty. William King of Scots, when he could obtain no
Justice from Henry II. endeavored to redrest himself by force of Arms, and
wa^ted England far and near, but with no good Success in the issue: For having
been very prosperous in the Undertaking, on his return Home he dispersed all
his Horse to plunder the Country; and being attended only with 60, was taken in
an Ambus^ upon the very Border; and while he was Prisoner, Homage was extorted
from him for the King^^^ of Scotland. Whereas there is not so much as one
English Monk, who say^ that this Homage was performed before for the Kingdom of
Scotland by any of the Kings of Scotland: But however that is, Richard, (...)
to Henry, understanding that there would never be any durable Peace with the
Scots so long as that Pretense of Homage was kept up, he renounced it to him,
as I said before. So that those things alleged by Edward in that Apologetical
Epistle to the Pope, Nec pueri credent nisi qui nondum are ^avantur, will not so
much as find Credit amongst Children.

But as to the Pope's Objections, by which he infers the Freedom of Scotland,
both from his own, and his Father's Act and Deed, there is not one word; for
what would you have a Man do, who had nothing to say? For according to the
Practice of Rhetorician^ those things which cannot be answered, must either be
passed over in silence or eluded. The Nobility of England did write to the Pope
to the same effect concerning that Question; and affirmed, that the Homage was
not at all to be doubted of, and therefore they could not bear it that their
King should abate one ace of his Right: and they do importunately request of
the Pope, that he would not give any Credit unto, or admit of any Probation
from those perjured, pe^fidious, traitorous Scots, the Pests of Mankind. I
believe truly, that it happened to us, as it did of old to the Britains; who
though they took an Oath of perpetual Fidelity from the Saxons, who were their
Guests and Mercenaries, yet were at last dispoil'd of their Country, deprived
of all their Riches, driven into Wales, suffered all manner of Injuries that
could be done or said by the Saxons, and were also lashed with all manner of
Reproaches. Nay, Bed^ himself does frequently upbraid them with Perfidiousness;
though I don't find in any English Historian, that ever the Britains swore
Fealty to the Saxons, or much less broke their Oath to them.

These things I have added concerning the Letters that passed betwixt Boniface
and Edward, that from their Controversy we might have the full Knowledge of this
Affair; for we could never have a better nor easier View of what is to be said
and thought concerning this Homage. But our Neighbors will say, that their
Cause is no way prejudged nor affected by this Papal Verdict, which is false;
for if Scotland was then a Fee of England, as they assert without either Shame
or Authority, the Pope was the most lawful Judge and Ordinary of this
Controversy: For John, Grandfather to this Edward, did subject the Kingdom of
England to the Sea of Rome, and took the Jurisdiction thereof upon him: and
therefore if the King of Scots was a Sub vassal, to whom should he complain
concerning the Injury done him, but to his Liege-Lord? The People of Aquitain
being oppressed with Tributes and Impositions by Edward Prince of Wales, they
made their Complaints to the French King, which occasioned the Loss of
Aquitain: and according to the Feudal Law, if the Sub-vassal be cruelly and
unjustly used by the immediate Vassal, he has liberty to sue him before the
Lord who is superior to them both. Not that I do think the Pope was ever Judge
in Scots Affairs; but that it was common at that time for all who were
oppressed with Calamities, and unable to resist, to implore the Assistance of
the Pope in their Adversity, because he was then believed to have a
Jurisdiction over all Christian Princes: Nay, he did arrogate the same to
himself; alleging that of the Prophet Isaia^, The Kingdom, or People, which
will not serve you, shall be ^ooted up. When he called himself Lord of France
upon that account, and threatened Philip the Fair with a Pontifical Thunderbolt,
except he would acknowledge him as such; the French King ordered his Letters to
be burnt in the public Marketplace at Paris, the Sorbonists assisting at the
same. Nor did he desist from his Purpose, until he deprived the Pope both of
his Life and Dignity. This I bring only, that all Men may know that the Popes
did at that time usurp a Power over Emperors and Kings, that so they may wonder
the less at his asserting, that the Kingdom of Scotland did appertain to him.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the v^^ious Success in this War against the Scots, (...) how all the
English were at las^ thrown out of Scotland.
HItherto we have managed the Question, Whether this Homage was d^e by Law or
otherwise, with Reasons and Arguments; but the remaining Part of the
Controversy was submitted to the Decision of the Sword, and managed with the
whole Strength of both Kingdoms, unt^l Br^ce did constrain the King of England
by force of Ar^s to abj^re that Homage which Edward extorted from Ba^^ol by
F^aud and Force: And thought I should willingly (now that all things, by the
Goodness of God, tend to a perpetual Peace and Friendship) abstain from (...)
this old Sor^, le^^ the Wound which is now healed up, should at some time or
other bleed afresh; yet Holinshed will not suffer me to forbear, but attacks
our Reputation by all Ways and Means imaginable. But to return to Bruce; Baliol
being thrown but, and his Memory condemned, so that there is no Footsteps of
that Family left in Scotland, Bruce and Cummin bewailing the Ruin of their
Country, to which they themselves ^ad so much contributed, they entered into a
mutual Covenant, that (...) should be invested with the Crown, which was his
Due, and that Cummin for ^is Assist^nce should enjoy all the Patrimony which
Bruce had in Scotland. But Bruce ^^ving returned to the English Court, to avoid
all Cause of Suspicion, Cu^min either (...) ^ightned with the Greatness of the
Danger, or thinking that he should the more easily attain the Crown, for which
he was one of the 12 Competitors, if Bruce were out of the way, he sent the
Compact which was signed by both their Hands, to K. Edw^^d, and discovered the
Conspiracy. The Letters being received, Edward accused Bruce of T^^achery, and
shew^d him them. Whereupon Bruce, dissembling the Matter, ^romis'd he would not
go from Court till (...) made the Charge appear to be false. Ed^^rd having
formerly experienced his Faithfulness and Gallantry, did not at first believe
that the Letters were real, but supposed that they might be forged by his
Rival. Bruce in the mean time, made his Esc^pe; and having inverted his Horse's
Shoes, beca^se of the Snow, that he might not be ^rac'd, he fled with all speed
into Scotland: And having ^ound (...) and reproached him with the Treason, he
killed him; and took the Crown upon him at Scoon, according to the usual Manner
of his Ancestors: but the Solemnity was not great, because most of the Nation
did still suspect him. However, being inferior to no Man in Magnanimity, he
resolved to try his Fortune; and being accompanied with some of his Countrymen
ill-armed, he engaged Edward Prince of Wales, and A^d^mar Valence the King of
England's Deputy, but was defeated and put to flight. Our Countrymen say that
he was worsted in thirteen Battles, or Rencounters, before he fled to the
Western Islands; and being supposed to have been drowned as passing a River,
the English left seeking after him. Then they raged against all Scots-men
without any Dis^inction, disarmed them every where, and th^ust them into
Prisons and Workhouses. Nay, according to the Command of Edward the Father,
the Son thought and talk^ of nothing less than the utter Extermination of the
Scots; but the murdering of such a great and dispersed Multitude, s^em'd too
difficult; and the Remainders were reserved for a miserable Servitude. Edward
in the mean time, that he might cut off all hopes of any Change, commanded all
the principal Men of the Scots to be searched for, promising and granting great
Rewards to those that would ^etray them: Nor was he deceived in his ^opes; for
`Bruce's three Brethren were taken, and according to Westminster the (...)
Simon Fraser* as also the invincible (...) who was betrayed by one that had
little reason to have done so: and all of 'em being brought to London, they
were barbarously executed, being drawn at Horse^^ils, affixed to Gibbets, and
their diss^cted Members hung up in the Public Places of Scotland to the Terror
of others: For Edward was not contented with the bare Death of his Enemies, as
is recorded of him in History for his Cruelty toward Leolin and David Welsh
Princes, who were betrayed before that time into his hands. The English give
this Reason for his Cruelty toward the Nobility of Scotland, that they were
perjured Traitors and Covenant-breakers. Whereas not one of them could ever be
induced either by Entreaty or Reward, as is witnessed by Polydore, to
acknowledge the King of England for their Sovereign: But Edward being afraid of
them, made no bones to violate the Laws of War; yet he found himself much
mistaken in his Opinion, for what he contrived for the Terror of the Scots did
so enrage them, that every Man had recourse to Arms: Whereas in my Judgment,
Edward might have done what he pleased with the Scots at that time, if he had
treated them with more Clemency; but they being rendered mad, looked about on
all hands for a General to renew the War, not being solicitous for Arms in the
least, though they were disarmed, as knowing that a strong Man never wants a
Weapon, Bruce lurking mean time in the Hebrides, and understanding that ^arrick
was grievously oppressed by the English, being accompanied with some of his
Countrymen, and some Soldiers from the Western Islands, he made a Descent
upon ^arrick, rather with a design of Revenge than any hopes of recovering his
Crown; and surprising the English, who did not look for any such thing, he cut
them off, stormed the Fortresses which they possessed: and having spread his
Terror far and near, the Remainders of the Scots who either lurked, or were
oppressed by grievous Servitude, flocked to him from all parts, armed
themselves with the Spoils of the English; and continuing in action Day and
Night, he prevented his own Fame by a sudden March to the Northern Parts, put
the English there to rout, and took and demolished all their Fortifications: So
that having ga^^^red together a great Army, his Subj^c^s coming in to him on
all sides, he hastened Southward, first routed the Cum^i^i, and then the English
in diverse Batte^s; and in one or two Years time, dispos^^ss'd them of the whole
Kingdom, all (...) two or three Castles. Edward the Father, being filled with
Indignation, ^^rch'd toward Scotland with a mighty A^^y, but died on the
Borders. How he was affected toward the Scots, appears by Westminster and
Walsingham; for his whole Discourse when alive, and his Orders to (...) Son
when a dying, was utterly to root out the Scottish Nation: and for that End he
commanded that his Bones should be carried about with the Army, at the very
Sight of which he said the Scots would flee. Our Historians say, that being
asked, when he was at the Extremity, what should be done with the fifty Scottish
Youths whom he had as Hostages, he commanded all of them to be hanged. A cruel
Sentence, especially at that time; and so by the just Judgment of God, all his
Victories vanished into Smoke: And `Bruce having gone through much Fatigue,
restored the kingdom of Scotland to his ancient Dignity* This is that Bruce,
the Champion of his Country's Liberty, who never being dispirited by his
Adversity, nor rendered haughty by the Height of Prosperity, turned the Disgrace
of the Scots, and the Calamities of War, upon the Authors of it; and purchased
so much Military Glory to the Scots, that in his time, says Walsingham, twenty
Englishmen durst not rencounter three Scots. Walsingham in fine Edw. I.
And that same Author in another place, says that a hundred English would fly
at the Sight of two or three Scots. Walsingham in Edw. II.
Such is the Difference betwixt Man and Man, and General and Geral. But now I
return to Holinshed, and his Edward II.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Edward II. and III. and Henry IV. and whether they received Homage from the
Scots.
THIS Edward II. says he, did at first enjoy Scotland peaceably; such is the
Madness of this Man, that he blabs whatever comes into his Head without Author
or Semblance of Truth: For Edward II. after his Father's Death, led a vast Army
into Scotland, and was joined also by abundance of Scots; but Bruce having
wasted the Counttry through which he was to march, Edward was forced to retire
into England for want of Forage, pretending that he durst not trust the Scottish
Auxiliaries. But Bruce pursuing him, ravaged the most fruitful Provinces of
England, and maintained his Army there most part of the Winter; and at his
return abundance of the Scots who perceived the Fortune of the War changed with
the General, did also join him. Edward being exasperated with these things,
designed to destroy the whole Nation, and gathered together a numerous Army
from all parts of England; to whom he joined abundance of foreign Soldiers
from Normandy, Britany, Aquitain, Flanders, and other transmarin Provinces,
which were then subject unto him. There did also flock to him all Men who were
drowned in Debt, Spendthrifts, Criminals, those of desperate Fortunes, and such
as had neither Credit nor Wealth to live upon at home, that the Scottish Nation
being destroyed they might settle there, as thinking that the very Sight of
such an Army was sufficient to conquer the Scots, or at least that by one Day's
labor they should purchase Estates to the themselves for ever. Some say there
were 300000 fighting-Men in that Army, others 150000, and the least Number
mentioned by any Historian is 100000: But Bruce marching against them with
30000 chosen Men, inured to all the Fatigues and Hardships of War, routed and
put that vast Army to flight, killing 50000, and taking as many: but he behaved
himself with much more Magnanimity and Clemency than Edward did after his
Victory at Falkirk; and was so far from revenging the barbarous Execution of
his three gallant Brethren, and others of the Scottish Peers, or the numerous
Calamities which the Scots had suffered before, that he used his Victory with
the greatest Humanity, took care of the Wounded; and ordered the Corpse of those
of Quality to be carried as far as Berwick: By which, (...) Walsingham, he
procured the inviolable Love of a great many of the English. And yet their
Writers do frequently upbraid us with Barbarity and Inhumanity. But the War was
not ended thus; for Edward was thrice (...) afterward by Bruce, twice near
York, and once when he besieged Berwick. Nor did the Scots content themselves
with their Victories in Britain; but sailing over into Ireland under the
Conduct of Edward Bruce, Brother of K. Robert, they maintained a War there for
four Years together, and Edward was declared King of Ireland; but not knowing
how to moderate his For^^ne, and pushing on his Victories too fast, he engaged
with the English and Irish in unknown Places, and so was cut off with all that
followed him. In this War, which lasted only about four Years, Polydore says
there perished 60000 Scots and 30000 English. This I mention that our
Neighbors may understand how many Men, and what Loss of Christian Blood this
their Commentitious Homage has cost both Nations. So that what Holinshed says
of this Edward II. that he enjoyed Scotland peaceably at the beginning, is most
false; for in ^ the very beginning of his Reign, he was wholly driven out of
Scotland by `Bruce, and forced to fight for his own Kingdom of England: and
whereas they have writ upon the Tomb of Edward the first at Westminster,
Edvardus primus Scotorum malleus hic est;

They ought to have writ on Edward the second's Tomb, Filius Edvardus Scotorum
funditur armis. Nor did the English act any thing considerable against the
Scots during the Reigns of this Edward, which they ascribe to his ill Fortune;
nor should we be angry at them for doing so, provided they would allow the
Scots to impute their Calamities to Baliol an Englishman, and moreover, an
abominable Coward.

But Holinshed tells us wonders of Edward the third, viz. That he restored this
Homage, the King of Scots having covenanted to pay him 30000 l. Sterlin in
three Years time* certainly this Man ought to be sent to a Mad-house; but one
Fault draws another after it, and the Sparks of the former Crime is a Firebrand
to the latter; for Holinshed has so inured himself to Falsehood, that for the
maintaining of one Lie, he is not ashamed to forge a thousand more, and that
also against the Credit of English Historians; for the Truth of the Story, as
re^orded by Polidore himself, Froisard and Walsingham, is thus.

Edward the third, whom the English call their Hector, desiring to revenge his
Father's disgrace, in the beginning of his Reign assembled a great Army, having
also sent for abundance of Forces from Hainault and the Netherlands to invade
Scotland; but being eluded and kept in play by a small Army of Scots, and
almost slain in the middle of his own Camp by James Douglas the Achilles of
that time, who entered the same courageously with two hundred Horse, Edward was
obliged to retire without so much as seeing Scotland; and finding himself
scarce able otherwise to bear up against the Valor of the Scots, that he might
consult the quiet of his own People, he married his Sister Ioanna to David
Bruce, by consent of his Peers, having abjured all right of Dominion or
Superiority, and restored all the Monuments which contained the Homage, even
Holinshed himself being witness; and therefore I wonder at the Impudence of
that Man, who asserts, that all those Monuments are still kept by the English.
Walsingham says, that he made Charters to resign all right and claim of
Superiority, which either he or his Progenitors had over the Kingdom of
Scotland. Then what could be said more express? Homage was twice extorted for
Scotland, once from King William, and afterward from Baliol, and the King of
England was twice compelled to abjure it.

As to what was done by Edward Baliol we don't regard it, for he followed his
Father's footsteps; and the Scots did drive both him and the King of England
out of their Nation by force of Arms, though I confess, they received many
overthrows first: and this is wonderful and worthy to be observed, that in all
those Wars the English were still victorious at first, yet at long run they
were constantly forced to quit the Kingdom, though not without mutual
Overthrows: But it is still a greater Wonder, that this Edward being a
magnanimous Prince, and otherwise worthy of all Commendation, having when he
married his Sister to David King of Scots established a perpetual Peace by
Oath, which was promised to be sincerely observed on both sides; and did at the
same time abjure that Homage, that he should nevertheless assist Edward Baliol,
Son to John Baliol, with 4000 armed Men, to recover the Kingdom of Scotland;
and Polidore does mightily ^orment himself, while he seeks a Vail every where
to cover this matter with, but all in vain: for Edward, according to the manner
of his Forefathers, did so greedily gape after this Homage, that it is hard to
say, whether the English did covet, or the Scots refuse it, with the greatest
Eagerness; but there is none but your self, Mr. Holinshed, who ever asserted,
that David performed Homage to him; for though he was not so fortunate in War
as his Father, yet he never ^eased making War upon England while he was able,
but what he did during his Captivity is uncertain, for that he performed
Homage, is neither writ by Walsingham, nor any other English Historian of that
time. But if he performed it during his Captivity, which yet is not said by any
Historian, the King of England did little consult his own Honor, to extort
Homage from a Prisoner who was not his own Master: for there is nothing so
inhumane, nay I may say, so dishonest as to demand any Right from a Man who is
not his own Master, but has lost his Liberty, and so is not obliged to perform
such Obligations, as I said formerly in King William; and all Laws and Nations
agree in this, that there ought to be a Restitution where Consent has been
obtained by Force and Violence. That is also vain, and derogates mightily from
the reputation of the English, which Holinshed says, that Baliol the younger
resigned into the Hands of Edward all the Right which he had to the Crown of
Scotland, and that the said Edward the third received the Royal Crown of
Scotland from him. How came it to pass then, that this King who was the most
fortunate of all their Kings in War, and was called the Hector of England, was
dispossessed of the Crown of Scotland? But all those things which are writ by
Holinshed, are to be marked with the Censor's Note, as also what he subjoins
concerning Robert and Henry.

You write that Robert the third delivered his Son James to Henry the fourth as
into Wardship, wherein you do manifestly pervert the History against Polidore,
and all the other English Writers: For King Robert being afraid of intestine
Broils, sent his Son James privately for France with only one Ship, that he
might live retiredly there; but he was taken by the English Fleet contrary to
the Faith of the Truce in his Passage, which Polidore does not dissemble, and
was detained there eighteen Years, there being in the mean time a most cruel
War betwixt England and France. The Historians of both Nations say, that he was
ransomed with Money, and that the King of England might ensure his Friendship,
he married him to his Kinswoman the Duke of Somerset's Daughter, having no
Daughter of his own; but neither his being admitted to ransom by the English,
who at that tim^ enjoyed the Sovereignty of France, nor his Wife's Entreaties,
not any other consideration whatever, could withhold him from assisting the
French, whose Affairs were then in a ruinous Condition with two complete Armies
which he sent into France: I grant it is true, that during his being detained
Prisoner, he accompanied Henry the fifth into France, that he might withdraw
the Scots Army, who defeated the English, and killed George Duke of Clarence,
Henry the fifth's Brother, from the Assistance of the French: but that I may
here repeat what I said before, the Scots who did at that time serve in France,
answered, that they would not acknowledge James for their King so long as he was
in the Power of his Enemies; but as soon as he was ransomed, he attaqu'd the
English with so much Vigor, that he prevented their sending Forces or Recruits
into France, and so that Kingdom was delivered out of the Hands of the English.
What James did while he was in the Enemies Hand, is nothing to the Purpose, and
if Holinshed may be credited, the King of England acted very dishonourably, in
forcing him at that time to perform Homage; but there is no English Historian
that I know of, who makes mention of the same, nay, not so much as Holinshed
himself, in the Life of Henry the 5th, or 6th; and therefore it must of
necessity be a Fiction, ^eeing he has no Authority for it: Polidore puts
himself to a great deal of Trouble, to ward off the Disgrace of the English in
breaking the Truce, but in vain. The Prince who thought himself safe because of
the public Faith, was contrary to the same committed to Custody; I would not
for any thing that Holinshed could object so much against us. After that time
there is none who received any Homage from the Scots, though Henry the eighth
sent the Duke of Norfolk into Scotland with a vast Army to receive the same;
but he having only crossed Twede, and burnt a Monastery upon the Bank of it, as
soon as he saw the Scots Army marching toward him in order of Battle, he
quickly retired over the River with so much Precipitation, that to show good
Example to his Men, having alighted from his Horse, according to the British
manner, he waded through the R^ver up to his Shoulders.

CHAP. XXXIV.
A B^ief and Su^^ary* Conclusion of the whole Controversy; with some new and
strong Arguments against this Fictitio^s Homage.
BUT that we may now put an end to this Dispute, it is certain that in the (...)
of the Britain Kings, there was no such (...) as Homage in the World; nay, nor
^u^ing the Reign of the English Saxons, un^il Athelstan's Time: nor is there
any mention of the same by any English Writer, for it was impossible, that they
should make mention of that thing which had no Being at that time in England.
But I have just ground of Complaint against the English Historians, who by a
direct Paralogism, A dicto secundu^ quid ad dictum simpliciter, as Logicians
speak, would obtrude this Commentitious Homage upon us by Sophisms; for whereas
this Homage was only due and performed for the Countries given us in Fee, that
Posterity might know, that those Countries were ^ot of the Patrimony of
Scotland, but of England; yet they have only left it upon Record in general,
that this Homage was per^orm'd, and think they committed no Fault therein; and
thus by not being accurate and exact, they gave a fair Occasion to Posterity,
either of deceiving others, or being mistaken themselves: for later Writers (as
it is usual for every one to favor the Honor of their own Country) drew what
former Authors had said, a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simplex, or formed an
universal Conclusion from particular Premises; and they again mistaking yet
more grossly, perverted things a dicto simplici, ad dictu^ secundum quid, viz.
finding it mentioned simply in former Writers, that the Scots had performed
Homage, they applied it as dictum secundum quid, contrary to the Mind of their
Predecessors, viz. that Homage had been performed for the Kingdom of Scotland,
which is but too familiar with Mr. Holinshed. But that I may come to the Kings
of the Norman Race, who of all the Kennel of Cloistered Monks did every say,
that Homage was performed for the Kingdom of Scotland, either to William the
Father or Son, or to Henry the first or second, before William King of Scots;
but the Form of this Homage is manifest and clear in Hoveden and Matthew Paris,
which Malcolm and William used, viz. with a Salvo for their own Dignities and
Rights; and sometimes it was expressly added, for their Lands or Dominions in
England; that this was the true Form of the Homage performed, not only by
Malcolm and William, but also by every one of their Predecessors or An^^stors,
is plainly testified by King Richard, and that Scotland was always independent,
both in his Time and that of his Predecessors; why then should we fatigue our
selves in a Matter so plain, seeking a Knot in a Rush, ^s the saying is, when
the Kings of England themselves do testify, that the Kingdom of Scotland was
free from any kind of Homage, and own, that the Homage was due only for the
Beneficiary Provinces? What William King of Scots did, or what Right was
extorted from him when he was not Master of himself, signifies little, as I
have said before. After King William's time, the Kings of Scots, Alexander the
second and third, when they heard of some Rumors spread by the English
concerning this Homage, declared War against them, that there might be no
suspicion of their Servitude conveyed to Posterity: nay as it appears plainly
by that Epi^^le of Boniface, Alexander the third when he performed that Homage
to the Hammer of the Scots (Scotorum Malleo) as they call Edward the first,
declared plainly and expressly in the Audience of a great Multitude, that he did
only perform the ^ame for the Beneficiary Counties which he held in England,
but that he neither owed, nor would perform any for the Kingdom of Scotland,
and Edward accepted of the Homage on those Terms: and in Truth according to my
Opinion, he had acted more wisely, and consulted the Interest of himself and
his Subjects better, if he had still left those Provinces to be held in F^e by
the Scots; for they had neither been so soon dispossessed of their Hereditary
Possessions in France, nor should have found their own Subjects so mutinous.
But let them see to that, we will return to our purpose.

That Scotland is neither a Fee of England, nor that the King of Scots owes any
Homage to the King of England, appears from this, that the Vassal is obliged to
seek a Renovation of the Fee, as often as either the Person of the Lord or
Vassal is changed within the Year, otherwise he loses all Right to his Fee: But
at the Inauguaration of our Kings, the Consent of the King of England was never
required, nor was ever the renewal of the Investiture demanded from any
Successor to the Crown of England; but for almost 2000 Years, the next of the
Blood did constantly succeed in a continued Series, the like whereof is not to
be found in any Nation in Europe, no not in France it self, without Vanity be
it spoken; so that they were not subjected to the Choice of any Man, nor was
there any Room for the Judgment or Command of the King of England in the Case.
Baliol was the only Man who ever had Investiture from the King of England, and
that he purchased by Bribery: but never did any King before him, nor any of
those who came after him, receive the Ensigns of Royalty from the Hands of any
other than their own Countrymen; and as for Edward Baliol who followed his
Father's Example, and swore Homage to the King of England, we never
acknowledged him for King.

There can be neither War, Peace, nor Truce betwixt the Lord and the Vassal;
for those things are transacted betwix^ ^^ch as are of equal Dignity: for when
a P^^ce is published, the Names of both Princes are expressed and placed in the
some Degree of Honor; but that there has been Peace, Truce and War, betwixt
the Scots and the English, is owned by all the English Historians, though
Holinshed does here call it Rebellion.

And as for your Court and Parliament, we did not only never acknowledge their
Superiority over us, but were never summoned to them: So that from those
things, the impartial Reader will be able to judge, whether the King of England
could claim any Right of Superiority over Scotland.

To this we may add, that as in a military Fee, the Wardship of the Heir is due
to the Lord, who during the Vassal's Minority has the Administration of the
Fee, and in the mean time ^e enjoys all the Product thereof: and though since
the Conquest so many of our Princes have happened to be Pupils or Minors, as
Edgar, Malcolm, Alexanders the second and third, David, Bruce, James the first,
second, third and 4th, Mary, and James the sixth; yet where is it ever read
that they were delivered into the Wardship of the King of England, or that the
Revenues of Scotland were returned into the Exchequer of England during their
Minority, or that the Scots were obliged to be accountable to the English on
that Head? What Bene^ices, which were then numerous and rich in Scotland, are
either recorded or reported to have been bestowed by the King of England?
Though during the Minority of Vassals, the Right of Patronage or Presentation,
and the Administration of the Fee, do according to the Laws of both Kingdoms,
belong to the Lord: and who ever read or heard that the Government of Scotland
was adminis^r^d by the King of England, in the Mino^ity of so many Princes? Nor
is it credible that the Kings of England would have been wanting to have
demanded their Right, who did so greedily catch at every Opportunity of
enjoying this Kingdom especially when their Kings were not capable of defending
the same during their Nonage.

Moreover, who ever writes that the Consent of the English King was required in
matching our Princes? or who i^ it that takes notice, that ever ^^ey demanded
the single or double Value of the Dower, according to the Laws of Wardship? But
that which is more, seeing according to the Feudal Law, the Heir can neither
contract Friendship nor Alliance with his Lord's Enemies; our Princes did
often, nay, almost always marry amongst those who were greatest Enemies to the
English. Those things will be easily perceived by any Man, who is not as dull
as a Stock, to be no part of a Vassal's duty to his Lord, but the quite
contrary, and that all this counterfeit show of Homage or Tutelary Fealty, is a
mere Fiction.

Nor is this to be omitted, that according to the Feudal Law, if there be any
Con^roversy betwixt the Lord and the Vassal, about the Lord or the Fee, the
Judgment mus^ go for him who has been in Possession for thirty Years, in which
time the direct Dominion does also prescribe: but our Countrymen have been in
Possession of their Liberty now for three hundred Years since Baliol's time,
the English themselves being witness; nor have any of the Kings of England
obtained that Homage from us for so long time.

Who ever heard that the consent of the English was demanded in calling or
holding our Parliaments? When did the King of England preside, o^ when was he
present at them in Person, or by his Deputies? Were our Laws made or published
by his Authority? for Laws cannot be made by any one who has a Superior, nor
can any Man call a Parliament who has not the Right of Sovereignty and
Majesty. Have not Feudal Dignities, such as the Titles of Dukes, Earls and
Barons, been conferred by our Princes, and yet those Honors cannot be
performed by a Vassal or any other but a Liege Lord? In f^ne, be^ides the vain
Ostentation of the Monastical Writers, who don't know what Homage is; What has
there been hitherto done by them or us, which makes us Vas^als?

We have hitherto retained the Sovereign Majesty inviolable, without being
subject to any Body; our Kings administered Justice according as they themselves
thought meet, made War and Peace with whom they pleased, granted Letters of
Reprisal and such other things which never use to be done by any other than
real and independent Kings: On the other Hand, what has the King of England
done that we should acknowledge him for Sovereign, seeing that Bond betwixt the
Lord and Vassal does not so much consist in Words, as in Fealty, Benevolence
and good Offices?

Valvasors, Valvasins, and the rest of the inferior Orders of Beneficiaries,
if they be unjustly oppressed by their Lord, they use to appeal unto their
Superior, to whom the Cognizance and Examination of the Grievance belongs: This
the King of England was made sensible of when Edward the Black Prince did
oppress Aquitain with Taxes and Impositions. The Aquitains appealed from their
immediate Lord the King of England, to their Liege Lord the King of France, who
did also give Sentence in their Favors; which the King of England refusing to
obey, Aquitain was taken away from him, and restored to the Crown of France,
which holds it to this Day. But when did Scotsmen, though frequently injured by
their Kings, appeal to the King of England, or when was the Cognizance of our
Offenses devolved upon you? Inferior Valvasors are obliged to assist their
Supreme Lord against their immediate Lord with their Lives and Fortunes; but
when did we assist the English against our own Prince?

Nay our Kings have not only been always looked upon and acknowledged as
supreme and independent in the Kingdom of Scotland by Foreigners, viz. the
Emperor, Kings of France, Spain, Denmark, Sweden and Poland, but the Kings of
England themselves have always given as great Titles of Honor and Dignity to
our Kings, in their Letters, and Contracts of Alliance or Peace, as ever they
received from ours, or as ever they gave to the most potent Kings of Europe who
are invested with the Rights of Majesty: Which is a most certain Evidence, that
the Majesty of our Kings had never suffered any Diminution, and this is unusual
to be performed by a Lord to his Vassal.

There is lastly, that adamantine or inviolable League betwixt the French and
the Scots; which could never be infringed by any Revolution of time, and
wherein both Kings do expr^sly promise upon Oath to assist one another against
their common Enemy the English, with offensive and defensive Arms: and that
this League was made 200 Years before the Norman Conquest, Holinshed himself
bears us witness. And though that League has cost us the Ransom of three
Kings, and the Lives of 100000 Men, yet it may be said concerning it, that --
Nec Iovis ira, nec ignis,
Nec potuit ferrum nec edax abolere Vetustas.
Nor Jove himself, tho armed with thundering Dart,
Nor Sword nor Time the French and Scots could part.
Nor is there any thing that makes more against that fictitious Homage, than
this League, which is still kept in the Archives of both Kingdoms. For where
was it ever heard of, that another King's Liege-man, or Vassal, entered into a
League with his Lord's Enemy? For the Vassal is obliged to take Arms for his
Lord and his Dignity, whenever his Lord requires it, and to lay them down
again at his Command.

But here some of our Countrymen will object, that all this Labor is in vain;
for where is the Dishonor of it, that we being formerly Vassals to the English,
have now shook off their Yoke for 300 Years? and that it is certainly more for
the Disgrace of the English, that they have been beat from the Possession of
this feigned Homage. I answer, that I am sensible of the Truth of the things
objected: For Bodinus being misled by the English Writers, when he writes that
Constantine King of Scots reigned as Vassal to Athelstan, and that Baliol did
professedly hold the Crown of Scotland as a Fee of England; he subjoins, but
the Scots Kings ever since Baliol's time, have abjured the English Homage, and
never would acknowledge the King of England their Superior, nor themselves his
Vassals; though David King of Scots, being Edward the Third's Prisoner, did
importunately demand Leave to do so from his Subjects; yet finding it in vain,
he was at last dismissed by Edward on this Condition only, that he should
entertain Peace and Friendship with him. Alphonsus III. King of Portugal, is
much esteemed by all Men for his refusing Homage to the Kings of Castile,
though it had been formerly paid by his Ancestors: and since that time the King
of Castile ceased to be accounted Superior, or Lord of Portugal. And in our
time, Basi^ius Duke of Muscovy, who formerly was accustomed to give Audience to
the Ambassadors, or receive the Letters of the Cham of Tartary upon his Knee,
and in a Posture of Adoration; yet the shook off his Yoke in 1524* and now
assumes the Title of a Great Emperor, for which no Body blames him. But as to
what concerns that Homage, the English can object nothing against us which does
not militate against themselves; for the Conqueror performed Homage for
N^rmandy, Henry II. for Nor^andy, Anjou, Poicton, and Aquitain: and so did all
the Kings of England from him to Henry V. do Homage to the French King in the
Posture of Supplicants, with their Hands stretched out, as is observed by
Bodin^s, who has transcribed the Form of this Homage out of the Archives of
France: And the Homage continued as long as did the Bounty; but that being
re-demanded by the French, they ceased to be their Vassals. And the Emperor
Charles V. who was far more potent than the Kings of England, before he was
made Emperor held all his Dominions in Fee from other Princes, Flanders from
the French King, Brabant, and the rest of the Dominions of the Netherlands,
Milan and Austria of the Emperor, the Kingdoms of N^ples, Sicily, Cor^ica,
Sardinia, Arragon, ^astile, and at length Navarre, of the Sea of Rome: And
therefore we ought not to be upbraided for that which was common to us, with
the most Potent Princes.

But as for Holinshed, there can be nothing in the World vainer than he; who
has packt up together Truths, Falsehoods, things doubtful and feigned, into one
Bundle, without any Distinction or Judgment, so he could but vomit out his
Fooleries and Scurrilities, or exercise his saw^y Pen against the Scots; for he
brings those things as Truths against us, which he acknowledges to be Fables in
the History of the Britains. However, Holinshed has done right in this one
thing, in consulting his own Reputation by not putting his History in Latin;
for if he had done it in that Language, he had exposed himself to the Laughter
of all Men: and there is no doubt but he was wonderfully pleased with his own
History, when he perceived his old Wives Fables read by ^is Country ^men with
so much pleasure; certainly he thought himself in Heaven, and there we leave
him, s^eing he despises us who are here below him. But the more that the
English contemn us, so much the le^s is their own Glory; who have never been
able hitherto either to drive us out of our Country, or make us their Subjects,
how despicable, vile, poor, cowardly and barbarous soever they are pleased to
account us. We will grant you Riches, Honors and Power; but will not yield to
you, nor any Nation in Europe, either in Antiquity of Government or Lineage.
You have also Riches with which you are accustomed to hire Mercenary Soldiers:
You have moreover, Public Navies, Fleets, Great Guns; and above all, you do
cultivate Military Discipline. For us, our Wealth is but small to hire
Soldiers; we have no Public Armories, no Great Guns, are much inferior to
you in Number, have no Royal or Public Fleet, no Fortified Towns, and scarcely
a Castle or two which are safe from the Attacks of Enemies; and which has
always been much to our Disadvantage, no Military Discipline.

Certainly we should have been in a very ill Condition long e're now, if there
had not been something to supply such, and so many Defects. King Eumenes, when
his Affairs were in a ruinous Condition, and that he had nothing left which he
could call his own but the Castle in which he was besieged, yet when a Peace
came to be treated of betwixt himself and K. Antigonus, who was superior to him
in Power and Dignity, he answered, That he would acknowledge no Man his Superior
so long as he could hold a drawn Sword in his Hand.

But that I may at last finish this Controversy, I shall only by a single
Tetrastick, revenge upon Holinshed the Injury done to our Boethius by Leland,
in a Satirical and bitter one at the End of Ortelius his Theater; to which they
may subjoin this if they please.

Ad Lectorem.
QV^ris Holinshedii Historia^ cognoscere Lector,
Augeae stabulum dicere jure po^es:
Non hanc Eurotas, non hanc Tyrinthius ipse
Expurgare potest spongia sola potest.
6 March, 1602.
FINIS.

