THE Second Volume OF Mr. Stephen Crisp's SERMONS.

THE acceptance which the First Volume of the Sermons of this Author has
obtained from Persons of different Persuasions has occasioned the Publishing a
Second, of which many seem very desirous: I shall say no more of thew, let the
Works speak for themselves; but will only add, that the Writer is still willing
to satisfy any Inquisitive Doubter (none of whom he has hitherto met with)
that these as well as the former are the Genuine Declarations of Mr. Stephen
Crisp, without any addition or alteration, he having used the utmost exactness
in taking and Transcribing them, and his care and acuracy therein has been
acknowledged and confirmed by many Ear-Witnesses, who have heard them from the
mouth of the Preacher.

THE Second Volume OF THE Sermons OR DECLARATIONS OF Mr. Stephen Crisp, Late of
Colchester in Essex, Deceased.

Exactly taken in Characters or Shorthand, as they were Delivered by him at the
Public Meeting Houses of the People called QUAKERS.

In Grace Church Street, and Devonshire-House, London.

And now Faithfully Transcribed and Published.

With some of his Prayers after Sermon.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.
1693

Sermon I. Truths Testimony against the Power of Sin and Satan. Preached in
Grace Church Street, June 13. 1688.
My Friends,
GOD has made you Witnesses of the great Work of this Day, the Lord I say has
given you Eyes to see, and Ears to hear, and Hearts to understand the great
Work of the Day; he has called you forth that you may be faithful Witnesses
every one in your measure of that which he has brought to pass in your sight,
for he has revealed his Power, the Eternal Power by which the World was made,
he has revealed and manifested that power for the raising up of Life, for the
subjecting and bringing under death, and the Power of it; for a great while a
Testimony that has been born in the Nation has been unto Death; he that has
the Power of Death, that is, the Devil, he has had a great many to sound out
his Power, to declare the continuance of his Power, how that Death must Reign,
and Darkness must continue, and that the Kingdom of the Man of Sin, will never
be brought down.

But now in our Day, Glory to God on high, here is another sound come forth,
the Lord Jehovah has uttered his voice, and who can but Prophecy? The word of
Prophecy is given of God, and many are raised up to publish it, and to sound
forth the Name of the Lord in the Expiration, the Ruin and Destruction that is
and shall be brought upon the Kingdom of Iniquity, upon the Kingdom of the Man
of Sin, and to Prophecy and declare in the name of the Lord that Righteousness
shall run down like a stream; this is, the Gospel, the glad tidings that we
receive from God, and have ministered unto you, that you might believe, and that
believing you might come to wait upon the Lord, and behold the accomplishment
of it.

For, my Friends, herein has consisted all the labor, and travel, and
exercise of the Servants of the Lord; and for this cause have we suffered many
things, and gone through many Trials, because we have steadfastly believed, and
therefore we have spoken it, that the Lord will certainly by his Almighty
Power, lay waste, destroy and bring to an end that Power that the Wicked one
the Devil has had upon the Minds and Spirits of the Sons and Daughters of Men,
and that he will set up and establish in the very same Soul a Law of
Righteousness, and a Law of Truth, and will cause the Beauty of Holiness to
shine forth through them, where Iniquity has Lodged, where the wicked one has
Ruled.

Now you that have believed this Testimony, you have received it, as glad
tidings unto you, for you are weary of that old Service, you are oppressed
under the Power of that strange Prince: there was a kind of Spirit and Power
that had Ruled over you, that neither gave you life nor breath, nor had done
any good thing; and yet you were subject; and many there were who through the
grace of God, that came to see that State and Condition of Sin and Iniquity was
not a happy State, and by a secret kindling of the Sparks of Gods Love in your
Souls ever you knew him, there was a Cry raised to be delivered, if it be
possible: If there be any Deliverance, O why may not I be delivered? If there
be any Redemption, why may not I be redeemed? If there be a Power that can set
me free from the Service of this Wicked one, why may not I be set free?

Ah Friends! remember the Days and Nights in which these Living Cries did run
through you, then you was poor indeed; then you was humble and broken, and the
Lord beheld you in those days, he saw your State and Condition, he saw how
helpless you were, and did not he arise to help you? Did not a Power spring
forth in the Day of your humility, in the day of tenderness by which you became
able to make War against the Lusts of your own Hearts, and did not you overcome
and prevail in your War? did not you make progress by the Power and by the
Grace that first raised desires in you? and as you made this progress and
gained ground, as I may say, of your own Corruptions, your Faith came to be
strengthened, and you were confirmed in the belief and in the obedience of the
Truth, and the more you trusted and relied upon him, the more did he magnify
his Power in you, he made known his ability, and his strength in your weakness,
so that you did become Living Witnesses, every one in your measure; that there
was such a Power, and that that Power was able not only to save from a little,
or from a few, but was able to save to the uttermost, to save out of all that
was polluted and defiled, and to cleanse and purify the Conscience from all
dead Works, and to enable you to serve the Living God.

Now the Lord having thus established you, and confirmed you by his Power, that
you were sound in the Faith, and firm in the believing of the Truth. My
Friends, all the Labor, and Travel, and Doctrine, and Exercises of the
Preachers of the Gospel, to those who were Converted and Confirmed became very
acceptable. So we preached, and so you believed; here was an Unity in our
Faith, here grew up a Fellowship, a Communion in the Faith, and the Lord became
glorifi^d in the Assemblies both of them that preached and of them that heard,
because each one had a place in the Body, and each one had a Savior of the
word of Life by which the Body was nourished.

Now my Friends, that which lies particularly upon me to leave with you for my
Testimony; and I pray to God it may be placed in the hearts of all you that
have believed; that is, that you may all wait upon the Lord to see all that
brought to pass which you have believed: For I take notice by the Eye that God
has opened in me, by which he has made me to take care of his Flock, and
sometime put his word in my mouth, that I might speak a word in due season. I
say, by this Eye, I take notice of many that have received this precious Faith,
and thereby have believed, thereby have believed the great and high state;
their Faith reaches so far, they know that Power is able to bring them into a
perfect Dominion over their Lusts, and Passions, and Corruptions, and over the
Spirit of the World, over Pride, over Anger, over all things that are opposite
to the Divine Life; their Faith is as sound as we can Preach it in respect of
the extent of it, but their Faith has not reached thus far in its operation
upon their hearts; they have not had the power going on, to accomplish and
fulfill that which remains.

Are there not some here and there that are settled in the belief of the Truth,
but are got into an ease from the Labor of the truth? but if I be sound in the
Faith, my Understanding is opened; I do not only believe this matter, but have
inward Evidence and Demonstration that I am certain, past all doubt and
question of it, that the Lord reveals the power in them that believe, that
purifies them, and makes them every whit clean; and here I have a Fellowship
and Communion with them that preach, and them that believe.

But my Friends, all this will not give you Communion with God, though there is
Communion with the Church of God with respect to Men who are come into one
Faith and Doctrine, yet for fellowship with God it stands in a life beyond all
Doctrines, and beyond all words and expressions; therefore your business and
mine, and every one that we first undertook when our faces were first turned to
God, that we may be followers of Christ in the Regeneration. For many may be
firm in point of Doctrine, and yet may not follow Christ Jesus: Many hold the
Truth, but do not hold it in Righteousness, but unrighteousness.

Now my Friends, have a care your Religion and your Souls Eternal Welfare are
concerned. This Doctrine I leave you in Charge in the name of the Lord God:
Flatter not your selves never a one of you because of the soundness of your
belief, but look for soundness of heart, and for a right Spirit to be created
in you, a Spirit that can no way endure any thing that the light of Christ has
made manifest to be evil; if it be Truth, you own, then Exercise Faith upon it,
and whatsoever Sin or Temptation assaults you, say, I shall overcome in the
Name of the Lord Jehovah; I shall bring thee under, be what Lust Passion or
Corruption soever thou will, in the name of the Lord, I shall overcome thee and
bring thee under.

Travel on in the Faith committed to you, and you will be more than Conquerors;
you will not only grow into external Fellowship with the people of God in the
sight of Men, but into fellowship with the Church of the first born, whose
names are written in Heaven; and your Communion will not be in Words and
Doctrine, and Principles of Faith; But your Communion will be with God the
Father, and his Son Jesus Christ; and so in all your Meetings together, the joy
of the Lord will be your strength, and the joy of his great Salvation your
Covering, and he will manifest his gracious Presence with you; and that Power
which has kept you to this day from your Childhood, and preserved you in all
your Battles and Conflicts with the World, and strengthened and encouraged you
when you sometimes went sorrowing and mourning night and day, and fearing lest
you should not overcome your Adversaries; that Power that has kept you
hitherto, will do greater things for you than you have yet been Witnesses of.

Therefore Dear Friends, this I would leave with you, there is nothing will
keep you and me in that little time that remains to us here to spend on Earth,
but that which will keep us in the exercise of Faith toward God, and his Son
Jesus Christ, who is able to save us to the uttermost; let us wait to see the
power of God for Sanctification and Holiness, that will reach as far as saving
us from our Sins.

This has been the greatest reproach that ever our Adversaries have thrown
upon us, that there are some among us that talk of believing in the power of
God, and talk of an ability for overcoming their sins, and living a Holy life,
and living without sin, while they themselves live in it: This is the greatest
reproach that ever our Adversaries have thrown upon us; Whosoever have been the
cause of this reproach, God will require it of them, for the Lord is jealous of
his Name and Glory, and he will have the Praise and Honor that is due to his
Great Name for working in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure, says
the Apostle; though I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified.
When you come so far as that, that you cannot charge your selves, then the Lord
will not charge you, but take heed that therein you place not your
Justification, hereby you are not justified.

Therefore have an eye to Jesus the Author and the Finisher of your Faith. He
begins the work of Faith, and he will carry it on until he be the finisher of
it, and the justifier of you; he is the Mediator of the New Covenant that alone
justifies the Children of God: depend not upon your own Holiness and
Righteousness for justification; keep your eye to Jesus the Author of your
Faith, who will also be the finisher of it; keep your hearts with all
diligence, and walk humbly with God, watching lest your Adversary that you have
overcome prevail against you. By going from the Power there is no safety for
the Flock, but only while they keep in the Shepherds Fold; be faithful and keep
your selves in the love of God, and he will be present with you, and keep you
to be his Witnesses to the end of your days, and will raise up another
Generation to be Witnesses to his Power when he has taken you to himself.

To that Mighty Power of God I commit you for preserving of you in humility of
Mind and Soul, and my Prayer for you shall be, that you may go on and make a
progress in the good ways of the Lord until his Work be finished in you.

His Prayer after Sermon.
HOly and Powerful God of Life, who art the Creator of us all, in whom we live,
and move, and have our being, thou have made us all for the purpose of thy
Praise and Glory, that we might serve thee in the Land of the Living, among the
Sons and Daughters of Men, and not only so, but thou have given us thy Holy
Spirit, as thou did to thy People of old. O Living God of Life, thou have
ordained a remnant to give up themselves to be led by it, thou regardest them,
and art with them, and they enjoy from time to time thy Holy Presence which
makes glad their Souls, and they have Fellowship and Communion with thee, and
thy Son, through thy Spirit, by which they are quickened to offer up pure and
living Praises upon thine Altar. O living God of love and life! thou have shed
abroad thy love upon their hearts, by which they are enabled to pray for their
Enemies that they may come to enjoy Salvation, and the pleasures which are at
thy right hand, which are infinitely better than all the Pleasures of this vain
World. Holy and powerful Father, have respect to all our Souls, and touch all
our Hearts with a sense of thy Divine Love, that we may feel the Cords of thy
Love drawing our Souls nearer to thy self, and assuring us that thou have a
gracious purpose to save us; O Powerful God of Life show forth thy Power, that
our Hearts may be touched and quickened thereby to come to fear thee and
reverence thy Name, and be acquainted with thy Operation in their own Hearts,
that they may be humbled and broken before thee, and bow down and Worship in
the sincerity and uprightness of their Hearts; so Holy God of Life, if it be
thy pleasure none may depart out of this Assembly without some sense of thy
Love, and feeling of the Powerful Drawings of thy Grace, and without being
raised up to purity of Heart, and convinced of the evil of every thing that is
contrary to thee, and serve thee in Holiness and Righteousness, and pursue it
with all their Hearts and Minds, and Soul, and Strength, that thou may have
mercy on them, and pardon their Iniquity, and love them freely, for so thou
have ordained in thy Son Jesus Christ, that we may receive Remission of Sins,
through the Belief of thy Everlasting Truth; and Holy Powerful God of Life,
that all thy People may partake of Holiness and Sobriety, to the praise of thy
Name, and that they may all come to obtain a Victory over all those Spiritual
Enemies that War against their Souls, that thy Holy Work of Redemption and
Regeneration may be carried on, to the praise of thy Grace, and the exaltation
of thy Holy Name, to whom Praise belongs, Honor belongs, and Wisdom belongs,
and pure and humble Thanksgivings; and unto thee the Living God of Life we
desire to offer our Praises and Adorations, for thou alone art Worthy; who art
God over all, blessed for ever and ever, Amen.

Sermon II. Bearing the Cross of Christ the true mark of a Christian. Preached
at Devonshire-House October. 12. 1690.
HE that knows (...) the Lord and the stretching forth of his Arm, is
quickened to feel the Power that is in Christ Jesus, the Head of the Church;
that so he may be enabled through his Power to bring forth Fruit unto God.

The Eye of the Lord is upon you all, and he expects at the hand of every one
that they bring forth Fruit unto God, that according to the aboundings of his
Mercy toward you, and of his patience and long suffering concerning you, there
might at last be an answer in the Soul of every one, unto the mercy and
goodness of God; they that do not know and experience this, that the long
suffering and patience of God leads unto Repentance, they know no part of
Christianity; let them make their profession never so high, and proclaim their
notions never so loud; they that know not the Work of Repentance wrought in
their hearts, as yet, need to Learn the first Principles of the Christian
Religion. You know it has been the Custom of People to learn their Children
Principles, and they that have learned their Principles, they go for Christians
whether they repent or no, though they go on in Sin and Iniquity all their
days, yet they go under the Reputation of Christians, and it is high time to
examine and find out, if you can, a reason for this, that a Man should be
accounted a Christian upon any other terms now in this age, than the Lord
Christ did Preach and Publish in the days of his flesh; for he did absolutely
deny that any Man could be his Disciple, without taking up a daily Cross, and
without self-denial: Now how should a Man at this day be a Christian, or a
Disciple of Christ, without taking up a daily Cross, and without self-denial?

It may be some will tell me, that they are Baptized into the Christian Faith,
and have been taught and have made a profession of Christian Principles, and
associated themselves among those that make a profession of Christ, but here is
not a word of a daily Cross in all this, nor of self-denial; so that they would
have you to understand in this that the terms of Christianity are changed, and
that Men may be Christians without the terms of Christ, or at least reputed so.

And this has been occasioned by the great Apostasy that has been brought
into the Church, by a long night of darkness, and by the revealing of
Antichrist: Antichrist has been discovered and revealed, and has set up in
despite of Christianity a false Christianity, and there came in the terms of a
Man's being accepted and reputed a Christian upon Antichrists terms; and if you
will conform to do thus, and say so, you shall be admitted into the Christian
Society; now all these terms of Antichrist have been such things as an
unregenerate Man could conform to and comply with.

And the opening of this door has let into the Church abundance of Hypocrites
and Evil doers, because they were able in their unregenerate state to conform
to those things that were required, for in the public Society of Christians it
was not said you must be regenerate and take up a daily Cross, and deny your
selves, and walk as becomes Saints, and so behave your selves that God may be
glorified, and the profession of Christianity honored by you; these were the
terms of old, but there are other terms of a later date of being Christians.

Now seeing this Apostasy has prevailed and spread over whole Nations and
Countries, not a few, so that whole Kingdoms have become Christians upon these
later terms, and God is greatly dishonored among us, and Christ the Holy one
most horribly profaned among us. It is not so common among Heathens and
Infidels; to find People wronging and deceiving one another, and killing and
destroying one another, and yet it is the practice of many that are called
Christians; these are the fruits and effects of those later times of
Christianity. Now seeing it is thus, which no mortal man can deny, I have this
Question to ask, and I desire that you would seriously weigh it in your Hearts
and Souls, both while you are together, and when you are separate one from
another, whether it is not high time for all of us to return again to the first
terms of Christianity, and to reckon no man a Christian, let him profess what
he will, saving such a one as does know and witness that the long-suffering and
patience and goodness of God does lead him to Repentance, and saving such a one
as has so much Faith toward God, that for Love to God he will deny himself
and take up his Cross, and be a follower of Jesus in that way and Life he lived
in.

It is high time for all of us to return again to the terms of Christianity,
that were set up by a higher Authority than ever Antichrist had, and before
Antichrist was revealed; for though it is true that Antichrist has obtained
power on Earth to establish his sort of Christianity, that is, without the
Cross, and a sort of Religion whereby they indulge themselves in whatsoever
pleases their Carnal Hearts, and Corrupt Minds, yet Antichrist has not all
Power, he is not Almighty, I hope, Antichrist, nor the Beast, nor the Dragon,
nor the False Prophet, nor the Whore, they have not all Power on Earth, though
they have a great deal, and by that Power they have established Laws; Decrees,
Canons, and innumerable things about Religion, and some cry, this is the way
you must walk in, others cry, the way to Heaven lies here, and here you must
travel if you will come thither. Some cry, this is the truth, others say, it is
error; so that the World is divided, Antichrists Government in the World is
divided; and when the House is divided against it self, there is hopes that it
will fall at last.

But there is one to whom all Power in Heaven and Earth is given and committed,
and his Christians are not divided among themselves, but they are of one heart,
and of one mind, and he that has all Power in Heaven and Earth committed to
him, can crush and bruise that power that others have. Herod had some, and
Pilate had some, but says Christ, your Power is limited, this is your hour,
and the power of Darkness, and thou had not had Power, says Christ to
Pilate, were it not given thee from above; here is power given to the Dragon,
to the False Prophet and the Beast to speak great things, but this Power of
Antichrist is going away, but Christ Jesus was sent into the World in his day
to bring people back again to God, and to the Primitive Religion and Obedience,
and to the first terms of Society and Communion, and to a fellowship in Christ
Jesus through the Holy Ghost.

Now if we had set up a way of Religion as other Folks have done, which is
contained in some Canons, Articles, Doctrines, and such and such Observations
and Commandments of Men; and if Men will confess these Articles, and observe
these Canons, they shall be of our Society; then we had done like the rest of
the fallen Christians, but we have declared from the beginning, that professing
our Doctrine and the Principles of Religion does not give any Man Fellowship
and Communion with us, but our Communion is in the Self-denying Life, and a
daily Cross in opposition to sensual Lust, Vanity, Pride, and bitterness of
Spirit, Corruption, Enmity and Wrath; this has brought us to a Holy Fellowship
and Communion in the Holy Ghost, and to live in Unity from one Head which is
Christ Jesus; so that there is not this Man's Church, and the other Man's Church
among the People of God.

Do you read in the Primitive times that Paul had his Church, and Peter his
Church, and James his Church, and Jude his Church? Indeed they had their
Meetings as we have now, in many Cities and Countries among the Jews and
Gentiles; but these Holy Apostles that were the first Publishers of the
Everlasting Gospel, after their Great Lord and Master Christ Jesus, they never
did appropriate any Church to themselves, that was not their business, but our
Work and Business, says the Apostle, is to gather you to Christ, and present
you as a Chaste Virgin to Christ, our work is to turn you from Darkness to
Light, that you may walk in it, and be the Children of it; our work is to build
you up as a Spiritual House to be presented to Christ the Mediator.

This is Primitive Christianity that has its Foundation in Holiness and
Righteousness, sincerity and truth, not in Words, and Terms, and Articles, and
Canons, and Decrees, and other Observances; this is not the Foundation of true
Christianity, nor will be again, when the Devils Kingdom is destroyed, which is
a shaking, for he in whom we believe, has power from his Father to break the
Devils head, Antichrist and the Dragons head. Christ Jesus is signified by
diverse Names, The second Adam, Lord from Heaven, the Way, the Truth, and the
Life, but he is the same Christ; so Antichrist is expressed by several Terms
and Names, but he is the same Power of Darkness, he has made the Nations
drunk, and to stagger and destroy and devour one another.

This has been done in the fallen state of Christians, and the design which
the Lord Christ has in sending his Ministers and Workmen to labor among you,
is to restore Men to the first Christianity, and to bring Men to God, that
Religion is not made up of Doctrines, Articles, Canons and Decrees of Men, but
it has the word of God for its Foundation: he that has an ear to hear let him
hear: there is some Spirit, and Power, and visible work in a true Christian,
which the false Christian never had. The false Christians have taken the Name
and the Profession of Christ, and their Fruits have been dishonorable to him:
they might as well make profession of Antichrist and Satan, they have a form of
Godliness, they have some of the Word, but they deny the Power. What is their
Religion and outward Profession, when they want the internal Life, and the
motions of the Holy Spirit; if they bring forth the Cursed Fruits of the flesh,
enmity, wrath, Lust, and Corruption, which belongs to the fallen Nature and the
unregenerate state?

The Apostle takes notice of this deceit and hypocrisy in Religion, which was
growing up before he died, Men having (...) form of Godliness, and denying the
Power thereof, from such turn away. If there be any Brethren that walk
disorderly, have no Company or Fellowship with them, if you would have the holy
Name of Jesus free from scandal.

This has been the design of all the Faithful Ministers of Christ, to keep
their Holy Profession of the Name of Christ free from reproach; that the
holiness of Gods ways might be seen in the holy Lives of the Professors of
them. Till men come to know this and take up their Daily Cross, and exercise
Self-denial, their Christianity is good for nothing; I would not have you trust
in it; neither in Articles, Tenants, or Observations; but see how with your
Lives you answer your Profession: Christ was Holy, Harmless, Undefiled,
Separate from Sinners. And why should not Christians be so too? How can
Christians be followers of Christ, and not separate from Sinners? Christ was
so. He went one way, and Sinners went another; they followed their Sins and
Lusts, but he followed the Work his Heavenly Father sent him about. If thou art
a follower of Christ thou art worthy of the Name of a Christian. Do Drunkards
and Swearers follow Christ? Do the Wanton and Proud follow him; Do the Unclean
and Hypocrites follow Christ? You know they do not, why do you call them
Christians? This is a reproach and shame to the Holy Name of Jesus, and to true
Christianity, that any of these Folks should be called Christians, but such as
are followers of Christ, who are Holy, Harmless, and Undefiled, and Separate
from Sinners.

This is such a strange kind of Doctrine, yet if it had been Preached in the
Primitive Times, there was People that would have received it as Apostolical
Doctrine, that a man should Crucify the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts:
For, says the Apostle, Mortify your Members which are on Earth; If you
through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body ye shall Live, but if ye
Live after the Flesh ye shall die. And to be Carnally minded is Death, but to
be Spiritually minded is Life and Peace: This was sound Doctrine then.

Now come and tell a man he shall certainly Perish and come to Damnation for
all his Profession, if he does not mortify the deeds of the Flesh; If he lives
in Sin and dies in it he is like to perish: How many have been haled to Gaols
and Dungeons, only for Preaching this Doctrine, and when we were first sent to
Preach we durst not do otherwise? And God did not send us to Preach till he had
washed us, and sanctified us, and fitted us for the work of the Ministry. Now
when we saw in the Holy Scriptures, that God did work upon others by his
Spirit, before he sent them to Preach the Gospel; was not here sufficient
Authority given to Preach the downfall of Sin, and destruction of it? One would
think that such a one, thus called and sent of God, had as good Authority to
Preach the Everlasting Gospel, as the Laws enacted by all the Princes of the
World could give him; a man sure that had such Authority for Preaching the
Gospel, would not need to wait for Orders and Approbation; he would not stay
for an Induction. The Apostle Paul took it for a Commission that was creditable
when he tells you of his mission, It was not by Man, but by the will of God
that he was called to Preach the Gospel. If we should say we were made
Preachers, if you ask by whom, never a man in the World can tell you; but we
were made Preachers many years ago: Not by Man, or by the Authority of Man; but
by the will of God. What was your Commission? to turn men from darkness (that
darkness we had formerly lived in) To turn them from darkness unto light, and
from the power of Satan unto God. The Apostle sums up his Commission in a few
words; the Lord told me I must turn men from darkness to light. This is our
Commission that we have received from God in this Age, to turn men from
darkness.

But some will say, that we have not Humane Learning and Qualifications for the
work of the Ministry: To this I answer, If I heard a man Swear or tell a Lie, I
could tell him that this was not of God, I had Learning enough to know, and
tell men, and say that Whoring, Drunkenness, and Swearing, and Lying were works
of the Flesh, and fruits of the Devils Power; I would have you turn from these
works to the Power of God. What is that Power of God? I will tell you, it is a
manifestation of Grace in your Hearts, that will draw you away from the Love of
all these things; the Grace of God, i^ the Power of God to Salvation to them
that believe: To as many as received Christ, to them he gave power to become
the Sons of God; to such as believe in his Name. Such Christians will show
forth the Power and Life of Religion in their Conversations; So that her is a
sufficient Authority, no want of Authority.

I have been sometime examined by what Authority do you Preach? By the highest
Authority in Heaven and Earth, by the Authority of God that came by Christ, the
Redeemer. What do you Preach? Truth in the inward parts, Grace and Truth, and
against all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit.

As long as Antichrist has a Rule, you must not Preach down Sin without
Authority; you must have power, you must be Ordained, and have an Induction
before you undertake to preach the Gospel, and preach down Sin and Wickedness:
the Devil has got such Power and Rule, that some tell us, that no Man can live
without Sin; if it please God here, and there to raise a Man and bring him to a
Holy and Righteous Life; this Man wants a Patent, a Commission, an Induction,
an Ordination to Preach and Cry down Sin in other Folks; what Commission had
the Psalmist when he said, Come all ye that fear the Lord, and I will tell you
what he has done for my Soul.

Is it not high time for People that have Evidences of the Love of God shed
abroad upon their hearts by the Holy Ghost, to bear their Testimony against sin
and wickedness? Is it not high time for every bodies mouth to be opened, that
God has been pleased to open, to testify against such a horrible mist of
darkness that is come over Men: to testify against Hypocrisy, Uncleanness,
and Unrighteousness?

It was the great design of the Primitive Preachers of the Gospel, to cry down
that which some Ministers cry up, so that Christianity is not like what it was,
for then they told them that there was no Happiness but by breaking off from
Sin by Repentance. No possibility of Salvation without confessing and forsaking
Sin, and trusting in the Mercy of God through Christ for the Pardon of it. Tell
them of the mercy of God, and the blood of Christ, they will tell you that they
cannot be cleansed from all Sin, they cannot live without Sin. How comes it to
pass that there are Ministers that Preach an impossibility of Living without
Sin, when we are assured in the Holy Scriptures, that without holiness no man
shall ever see the Lord? and that there shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom
of God any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or
makes a Lie? Rev. 21.27. How comes this; that Ministers preach an
impossibility of living without Sin? Will any of you, says he, be so
presumptuous as to say a man may live without sin? I will prove it from good
Authority, both from Scripture and Fathers that no Man in the World can do it.

If any set themselves to it in their own strength, the Devil will make a fool
of them; some indeed have gone about it in their own Power and Will, and have
Cloystered themselves up in Monasteries, and shut themselves up between two
Walls, that they might be separated from all Society, and live without Sin,
they would do it in their own power, and the Devil is stronger than they.

Let me tell you, Men of the greatest Wisdom, Courage and Strength, of the most
excellent natural parts that any Man can have, are not able to grapple with
their Enemy the Devil by their own power; there are Seeds of all Sin, and Lust
and Concupisence sown in their hearts; so far this is right and sound Doctrine,
that no man can do any thing in his own power and strength; but here is the
mistake; a Man has been a long time wrestling with his Sins and Lusts, to get
the Victory over them, but by woeful experience he finds his weakness and
insufficiency, he is sunk in his harness, and so has given over the Battle,
saying, I shall never overcome the Devil and his Temptations, my Sins and Lusts
are too hard for me, I despair of ever overcoming them in my own strength, by
all that I can do; that is true enough, but thou must needs perish because thou
can never overcome thy Corruptions: if ever I be saved it must be the free
Grace of God that must save me. How can thou come to lay hold on the free
grace of God? I am told I must lay hold on Christ by Faith, who is the
Mediator between God and Man, and he is my only Redeemer, there is no
Salvation in any other; this is very well, now thou art a Believer, what do
thou expect, what do thou hope that Christ will give thee? He will not give
me power over my Corruptions so as to live without Sin, that is more than I
hope for, but I expect that Christ will reveal his power in me, and give me so
much strength and power against my Lusts and Corruptions, that they may not
have Dominion over me; now if you tell me that you hope for strength and power
from Christ against Sin, Satan, and Corruption, do you now tell me that it is
still impossible? It was impossible before indeed to live without Sin when thou
did trust in thine own strength, but now when thou come to have grace and
assistance ^^om the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God and Savior of the World,
that gives thee ability to withstand Temptation, and overcome thy Corruptions,
and the Lusts of thy own heart What, is it impossible still to live without.
Sin? then thou may say the Devils Slave I am and must be, for there is no
other Power in Heaven or Earth for thee to lay hold of, if thine own power, nor
Christ's power neither can do; then thou do say that the Devil is Almighty.
Thus they tell us, when Christ has revealed his power it is impossible still.

If I should call this Antichristian Doctrine, I could make it out. Blessed be
God, I do believe that Christ is able to preserve me from the Devils
Temptations, and all his instruments, if I believe, though I could not do it in
mine own Power, yet by Christ's power I may be preserved an hour without Sin: If
so, then a day, and if one day, then a thousand days if I live so long; Christ
has promised that he will bruise Satan and tread him under feet, and destroy
his works, and judge you whether Sin be not the Devils work, shall I despond,
or despair to have the Devils work destroyed in me?

Here is ground for you all to believe, he that has Faith may lay hold of this
Power which is offered of God, therefore lay hold of it, else your Religion
will be good for nothing. This is the enjoyment of a true Believer, that he
receives power from Christ to deny himself, therefore all their pretended
Christianity and Profession at the day of Judgment will melt away like Snow.
These Canons, Articles, Forms and Liturgies, these will melt away when the day
of the Lord comes to burn upon them; none but they that feel the redeeming
virtue of the blood of Christ, that have their Souls filled with the Love of
God, and whatsoever they love in the World, they that will part with it for
Christ's sake, shall be accepted.

I am not for setting up this and the other Sect or Opinion; if it be among
those of my own profession, if they profess holiness, and bring forth
unrighteousness it is all one; I shall not value their Profession. There are
many in this City and Nation that have sheltred themselves under the profession
of Truth, and talk of perfection, and have brought their Lusts and
imperfections with them: here Antichrist is trying another Game to bring them
under a profession that will serve his turn; the Devil will allow men
Profession if they will but live according to their own Hearts Lusts, so that
they may save his head from the blow that Gods power will bring upon it, so
they may dishonor the Holy Name and Religion they make profession of; thus
says the Apostle, I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, they were
Christians so called to whom he spoke, but they are Enemies to the Cross of
Christ, not to the Profession of Christ; he did not say they were strangers to
the Cross of Christ, but Enemies to it; they let it fall, they kept the Name
Word and Doctrines up, but they let the Cross fall, how much were these
Christians worth, sure but very little?

Nay, Antichrist has been so silly, that because the words are so put upon the
Cross, No being Disciples of Christ without the Cross; the words of Scripture
are so put upon it. Thinks Antichrist I shall never persuade the People to be
at ease, unless I give them a Cross; therefore he sets them a making Crosses.
They must be Baptized with the Cross; they say we deny not the Cross of Christ,
we hang it about our necks, we set it up in all our Meetings and Academies, and
many Princes and Wise Men, and Learned Men have been so bewitched and drunk
with delusions, that they have called this the Christ which they have made with
their own hands; they have made Christ's and prayed to them, and all their
Religion has been putting together Crosses, Crucifixes, Forms and Liturgies
which they have made with their own hands.

Here is Christianity in an empty profession, but where is the Soul of it? I
would enquire for the life of it, I would see Christianity living in love to
God above all, and loving our Neighbors as our selves; When this Christianity
comes, there will be no killing one another, nor persecuting one another, nor
fulfilling the Lusts of the Flesh, nor pleading for it neither.

Blessed be God, that our eyes have seen the Witnesses-raised, and life from
Heaven come into them; and now Religion begins to have a Life and a Soul, and
shows it self in a little remnant; there is a people raised by God that feel
life in their Worship, in their Families, in their Conversations, and in their
behavior toward Relations, they do what they do as to God; many Lads and
Lasses, Menservants, and Women Servants, they do their Work and Service not
barely to please their Master and Mistress, but to please God: the life they
live is by the Faith of the Son of God; they live as becomes the Members of his
Body; Husbands love their Wives not simply because they are their Wives as the
Men of the World do, but they do it upon the account of inward Religion, and of
the Divine Fellowship and Communion they have in Christ Jesus. Husbands should
love their Wives as Christ loved his Church and laid down his Life for it; so a
Man should love his Wife, and be tender over her, and Minister to her.

The Life of Christianity has taught us to behave our selves so as God may
have Glory, and Christianity be restored to its ancient Luster and Beauty that
it had in former days.

But some will say, do as well as you can, Men will never love you; if you have
the Soul of Christianity you shall be reviled and scandalized: Men will make
works against you, and strew Papers against you, and set the Magistrates
against you; live as well as you can they will follow you, and disturb you.

That is more than you know; if a Man once come to feel the life of
Christianity working in him, and the power of it keeping him from doing evil
and wishing evil to his Enemies, and disposing his mind to a frame of praying
for them, inclining him to pity them; if a Man come to this state, he is at
peace in himself, and enjoys tranquillity of mind; he looks up to the Mediator
Christ Jesus, and feels an answer of peace in his own Soul, and is come to rest
in himself.

Now concerning Persecution, Hatred and Enmity between the Woman's Seed and the
Serpentine Seed, and how long it will last; God whom we serve did say to the
Devil in Paradise, I will put enmity between thee and the Woman, and between
thy seed and her seed, it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his
heel. So that it is not to be expected that the Seed of the Serpent, that those
that are born of that seed can love those that are born of the Woman's Seed; it
is possible that those that are born of the Seed of the Serpent should be
translated and brought out of that corrupt state, but it is impossible that
those that are born of the Flesh, should love those that are born of the
Spirit, while they continue in their unregenerate State, but will persecute
them: it is like a natural instinct as for water to run downward, and fire to
fly upward; were not all Men and Women born Children of wrath, and naturally
Enemies in their minds to Christ Jesus? And did he die and suffer for them all?
so that the very nature of the thing is the very reason why Christ died to
Redeem those that were his Enemies to be his Friends.

Suppose I or any other to be a Member of Christ, and Men do persecute me and
revile me, and hate me, should I not love them, and do good unto them; when I
see one infinitely better than either you or I, do it for us? when we were
Enemies, Christ has sent his Spirit into our Hearts that we might become
Friends of him, and of him that sent him; this is the effect of the
Righteousness of Christ, and of his innocence, that Enemies may become Friends;
thus have many been brought to a Friendship of Truth that were Enemies of it;
if we could not suffer for the Testimony we have received of God, what were it
worth? but seeing God has not only given us to believe, but to suffer for his
Name, many have been turned by this means from darkness to light, and many more
will; the light breaks forth apace, notwithstanding there has been so much ado
to stop it.

It has been the design of many Learned Men of this Nation, how shall we stop
these men's mouths that preach the Doctrine of Truth in the inward parts, the
Light within, and Christ within them? I will not repeat the many Laws that have
been made against them that will not Preach Lies, but the power of Christ and
his truth, now what will you do? You cannot lay hands on them as you used to
do; no, but we will reproach them with the tongue, we will render them odious
to the Government, as persons that will over-turn Church and State, and that
preach false Doctrine; and when all is done, and they have said their worst,
People will still believe that Sin and Wickedness is hateful to God, that God
takes no delight in Sin, and that the Devil will lead us to Sin; he that keeps
most from Sin, keeps most out of the Devils Clutches, and he that lives most
Holy, is most like to God.

These things we will Preach, and we will go on in this Testimony, that the
best way that men can take is to break off their Sins by Repentance, and turn
to God their Maker with their whole hearts, and that they will look to their
ways, and search and try and examine their hearts, and if they see evil to keep
out of it; this is such a thing as there is no withstanding of it, it will go
through this Nation, and all the Nations of the Earth.

What if a Company of People should combine together, and say, we will not have
the Sun to shine upon the City of London, what course must we take? when the
Sun is down we will build a Bank or high Wall to intercept its Light; but
notwithstanding all their endeavors, when the Sun rises it will get over all
their high Banks and Walls; so all the Designs and all the Contrivances against
the Light of the Gospel, and against Christ the Sun of Righteousness, and
against the Spirit of Christ, the Light will ascend and get over the heads of
them all; and it will confound them, and break through all opposition.

I Exhort you all (my Friends) that laying aside all Doctrines and Tenants, and
Controversies among Christians, to come to this simple Thesis and Position; it
is no matter what I profess of Religion if my Life be not answerable to it, if
there be not a love to God, and my Neighbor, and to mine own Soul; there is no
Life nor Power in my profession of Religion: I will rest satisfied in the
measure of Knowledge that God has given me; I must not do to my Neighbor what
I would not have my Neighbor do to me; I must be upright and sincere toward
God; God will not accept of any Worship from me, when I am unclean in Body and
in Mind too; we must see that we be Purified, for God will not accept of an
Offering from an unclean heart; you cannot bring a clean thing out of an
unclean, says our Lord Jesus Christ, the great Preacher of Truth and
Righteousness; I must first make the Tree good before the Fruit will be so;
you, and I are these Trees, 'till we have something good in our selves, we
cannot bring forth good Fruit.

Therefore you must have respect to the Principle of Sanctification in your own
hearts, and turn you to what you may feel an experience of in your selves, some
Principle of Grace and Light in your hearts, that can distinguish between good
thoughts and evil thoughts. Is this good for me to do? I will go on in it with
faith and courage, but if it be evil, I will not touch with it, though there be
profit and pleasure to allure and draw me to it; I will not touch with it
though I might gain the World by it.

Here is Christianity with Life and Soul in it; we have been scandalized as if
we Preached up Error for Justification: We say there is no Justification
without Sanctification; so you that know the Power, live it, and you that
desire to know, turn your minds to the Light and Grace of God, and you will
feel the Power that will oppose Sin in its Motion, and it will never trouble
you in its Action and Workings. If I would not do ill to my Neighbor, and I
judge such a Motion when it is suggested; it will never tro^ble my Conscience,
because when the Devil mo^^d me to it I rejected it; I would not follow him. It
is no Sin to be tempted, for our Savior that was perfectly Holy and free from
all Sin was yet tempted; he had motions in his mind, but he withstood them; and
resisted the Devil in all his Temptations: Christ was tempted that he might be
able to succor us when we are tempted; and he will do it for all those that
wait for him.

Therefore, Friends, trust in the Name of the Lord, and you shall feel the
stirrings of that Power, that Has called you out of darkness into the
Mavelous light of the Sun of Righteousness wherein you live, and which will
shine to his Immortal Glory and Praise, and the Everlasting comfort of your
Immoral Souls.

Sermon III. The Spirit of Christ the only True Guide. Preached at
Grace Church Street, October 29. 1690.
YOU that are met together in the name of the Lord, and have your expectation
from God, and are really waiting to receive a blessing from his Bountiful hand;
you are they to whom the Lord will communicate the good things of his kingdom,
and instruct you in the Divine knowledge which the wisdom of this World cannot
find out; you shall have your portion in the blessings prepared for you, and
laid up in Christ for you; to be handed forth to you from Day to Day for your
support: And hereby you have been preserved and kept alive unto this Day: You
have received your Nourishment, and Divine and Spiritual Refreshment always in
the presence of God; when you have been out of his Presence you have met with
troubles, and darkness has Gendered upon your Minds, and Veiled and Clouded
your Understandings, that you have been sometimes in danger to lose your way,
until you have returned again unto the Great Shepherd and Overseer of your
Souls, by whom you have had Access unto God. You that have had these
experiences, O! Let your Hearts and Souls be engaged to continue together in
one Heart and one Mind, serving the Lord and waiting upon him for something
that may do you good, that may strengthen you and confirm you in the present
Truth.

For there are a great many that are convinced, that do yet want establishment;
there are a great many that know the Truth, yet cannot be brought to abide in
it; but are sometimes drawn out of it, and then they meet with trouble in their
minds, and Distress and Anguish lays hold upon them; and they do not enjoy that
Tranquillity and Peace, and that Inward Joy which they believe others do enjoy
^t the same time; and which they might have enjoyed if they had abode steadfast
in the Truth. Now what is it that will establish such a one, but their waiting
upon God, to receive Power from him to resist the Temptations, and the manifold
Wiles and Snares of their Souls Enemy? whereby they are daily in danger to be
drawn away from God; drawn out of the way.

You know Friends, how the Lord brought us into this Exercise of waiting upon
him, by making us sensible that there was none could help us but him. Teachers
we have always had, and Men that have spoken of God, spoken of his Power, and
spoken of his Wisdom; but how to dwell in that Power, and stand established in
it, as at all times to resist the Power of the wicked one; this is that which
no man can help us to, and upon this account it was that the Lords People were
fain to cleave close to him, and by Faith to have their dependence upon him;
and cry in their Souls, Lord, unless thou establish me, I shall never be
established.

The confirming power that stays and settles their minds upon the Lord, it
comes from him, it is handed to us through the Lord Jesus Christ, whom we have
believed in; they that kept their Faith in him have had longings and breathings
of Soul, that they might receive some Divine blessing by him, and through him.
So that they that meet together in this mind, they feel a settlement in the
Truth as it is manifested and revealed in them, and goes down into the deep
where Unity is known, where they are of one mind, and the Soul is made capable
of putting forth strong Cries to God, and Living Breathings and Prayers to God,
that he will teach them how they shall profit, how they shall grow, how they
shall serve him, and honor him in their Day; that he will reveal his Power in
them, to expel any Darkness or Vail that has been gathered upon their minds,
that does hinder them from beholding so much glory and excellency in the Truth,
and in the Ways of God as at sometime they have beheld. And so these are
Travelers that are Traveling with the Lord in Faith to receive a blessing at
his hands. Their minds are not left to this, or that, or the other man; or to
mere words or visible things, but they feel the word of Truth answering the
Truth in themselves; and they receive comfort and benefit because they find a
blessing to arise in them. These words reach my Soul, these administer help to
me, and I am comforted in them, because I find those works working in me, or
wrought in me.

For Alas! my Friends, you know many of you, some hear the word, and the
Declarations in the Word are but sounds unto them, that have no experience of
the work that is signified by the word; so many such people do hear the lovely
sound, and they are affected many times to hear talk of the work of
Regeneration, and of the enjoyments of Gods people, and how they are born up in
all their Trials by an inward and divine Power, and how they are always kept
alive to God, and preserved in his living presence; but this does not bear them
up in a time of Trial, but if a Trial or an Affliction comes they sink under
it, and they are filled with anguish and perplexity, so that the word barely
heard spoken, and heard, and not rooted in the mind, does not minister to the
work; the words spoken do not carry that kind of operation upon them as to
witness an inward work wrought upon them.

But where there is an effectual work and operation in the Soul, it continues
in its labor and travel from Death to Life. And as those Heavenly things,
those Divine operations of Gods Power are spoken of, there is an Amen in your
Souls, saying as far as you have traveled; thus has God dealt with me, he
has indeed by his power carried some beyond my State and Condition, and my
Faith is hereby streng^hned, and my Hope is confirmed: he that has begun a
good work so graciousl^ in my Soul, will carry on his own work, and bring me to
higher seize and further experiences that some of his Servants bear
witness of.

So that now being exercised, the work goes on, and the pleasure of the Lord
prospers in Christians, that when they meet together in the name of the Lord,
they know for themselves that the Lord is present with them, they know what the
word of the Lord is unto them; if they hear the word preached to another State
and Condition then what is their State and Condition, yet they abide in and
keep that which makes manifest to them their own State: and this suffers not
the Soul to be carried away with the word, and sight and vision of a higher
state than their Faith can witness to; and they keep low, and humble, and
tender, and have a care of their own Souls; as the Apostle when he was come to
glorious and high seize in the work of the Lord, yet he would not glory
of any thing, but what the grace of God wrought in him: We do not boast of
things that are not wrought it us.

It is possible for the Creature to gather in, and comprehend the form of
things, that they have not the work of in them; and a great many have done so
to their great damage, and some (it is to be feared) to their utter ruin. They
have comprehended high things, and the notions of great seize, they have
heard them declared and spoken of thus, and so, and some have in their
speculations declared to others their Conceptions about those things, yet those
things were never wrought in them: they could Preach of humiliation when the
root of Pride was not removed: they could Preach of Regeneration and the Old
Man not put off, and the New Man Created in Righteousness not put on. All this
kind of Preaching has been in the World, and is still too much in World, but
it has not produced and brought forth any profit and advantage to the Soul,
either to Preacher or Hearer; for it has not been accompanied with a Divine
and Heavenly Blessing, but the true Ministry Ordained of God brings forth a
work of Holiness and Righteousness in the Soul.

And therefore every one that God has thus reached, and has opened your
understandings, and has made you capable of comprehending and of understanding
Divine Things, take heed lest by the subtilty of Satan and the wiles of your
great Enemy, you be at any time lifted up, and exalted in your Minds in the
notion of the things that you have not attained; not that you should not so
understand the things of God that God opens to you, as they are many times
opened to the Creature, before the work of them is in the heart of the
Creature: and why so? Why are they opened to me? It is for thy encouragement
that if thou do hold on, and be steadfast in waiting upon the Lord, these
things God has in store for thee.

Now the Creature waits, and says, though I have not attained such things as I
have seen, yet the very sight of them encourages me to wait upon the Lord,
that I may experience the witness of them in my self: there are many that have
had some taste of great joy, and apprehensions of Heavenly things which they
have not attained, but they know what they are waiting upon God for; not that
they may have a little joy which passes through them, but come to have that
joy and tranquillity which will accompany them in all their Doings, and their
whole Conversation. God has opened many things to you, and you have seen the
way of Righteousness which he has cast up for you: and many have taken strait
steps to themselves, till they have attained to sa^, Now my Salvation is near^r
than when I at first believed. Let such go on and follow that Guide by which
they have been directed, and they shall at last attain to a further State, not
only to know that their Salvation is now nearer, than when they at first
believed, but that they may come through the Divine Spirit of Grace that they
followed, and so closely cleaved to, as their blessed Guide in their way, to
have an entrance administered to them abundantly into the Salvation of God,
whereby they may sit down in the Kingdom of God with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and have a Wall about them which is the Salvation of God.

Here is a great encouragement for Sinners, and Upright ones to follow on to
know the Lord, and then they are sure they shall know him, for they shall
behold his Glory, and their Souls shall be satisfied, for nothing else will
satisfy them.

People may have great openings and great discoveries of things, and may have
delight and joy in the opening of things, as it was with the Disciples, when
Christ our Lord Conversed with them in the Flesh. he opened many things to
them, and they had great J^y and Comfort in those things which he opened to
them, yet there was something wanting to suffice them, John 14.8. Phillip said
unto Christ, Lord show us the Father and it suffices us: there was something
further to be discovered and revealed, so that they could not find their Souls
to be satisfied and sufficed, till they had it. Christ gave them such an Answer
as relates to that Administration that we are now under; he that has seen the
Son, has seen the Father. Now they had seen Christ daily, and conversed with
him, and had eat and drank with him in that fleshly and bodily appearance
wherein he Conversed with them; but they had not a sight of the Eternal Son of
God in a Spiritual manner as he was the Son of God, and their Savior, so they
had not seen him. And he that had seen Christ in a Spiritual manner, he had
seen the Father also.

So it is with us in our day, we have in our Profession the Teachings of this
and that Man: we have Conversed with Christ, as it were, as to his Fleshly
Appearance: we have read the History of his Birth, and of his Life and great
Miracles, and of the great love he had to Mankind, by which he laid down his
Life for them. We have been Conversing with Christ as to his Fleshly
manifestation; but consider whether there does not till now remain an empty
place in our Souls, something that is not sufficed, and satisfied?

What would you have? Have you not Scripture? Read you not there of the Birth,
Life, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ? I would still have something
more, for that will not suffice me; I would have Pardon of Sin, and my Peace
with God, and the Light of his Countenance lifted up upon me, and further
manifestations of Christ to my Soul. We can never see the Glory of God but in
the face of Jesus Christ. This is the discovery that Christ makes to the Soul
that believes in him; this is that which gives satisfaction.

A Christians Work is to be Conversing with him, and exercising his mind under
the gathering and ^^^ching of him, that can lead him to the Father: none but
Christ can do tha^, lead them to the Father, and show (...) the Father, and he
has in our day reveal^^ himself and made himself manifest by his Spirit, that
Spirit by which we come to know his Holy Teaching, Reproof, and Instruction,
daily discovered in our Souls: the Spirit is our Guide, that Spirit we are led
by, and are to walk in. Let men go under what form and denomination they will,
They that have not the Spirit of Christ, are none of his until they come to be
guided by his Spirit.

People are not led into Sin by the Spirit of Christ; they will tell you these
are the Devils Temptations, and the Frailty of our Nature, and the Corruption
of our Hearts by which we are led into Sin: it is not the Spirit of Christ. It
would be a horrid thing for men to say that the Spirit of Christ led them into
Sin; there are few or none so wicked as to say so. The business we are to do in
the World is to obey the will of God, and where the understandings of Men are
so illuminated that they are satisfied in their minds that God has been
pleased to give them a manifestation of the Spirit to profit withal: All those
that have this Spirit of Christ are directed by it to do the Will of God, and
to deny their own Wills, and the Will of others, that would draw them from
their Duty that they owe to God in their Generation.

It is an excellent state and condition for a man to be guided by the Spirit,
and to be brought under the Government of Christ, who is The Way, the Truth and
the Life. So that they that come under his Government, are directed and Pointed
out every day to do the will of God. This thou must do and God will be pleased
with thee, and this thou may not do, for if thou do it the Lord will be angry
with thee; it is Sin against God. So that we have a Heavenly advantage to be
taught of God by his Spirit, to have the Divine and Daily teaching of the
Spirit of God revealed in us; if we are at a loss, or make a question, or
dispute about a matter, the Spirit will lead us into all Truth, if we give up
our selves to his Guidance and Teaching.

This has been our desire and labor many years, not to draw People to observe
what we say, for who can direct another Man in all things relating to the
Service of God? If we were never so certain our selves, we cannot convey
certainty and infallibility upon all occasions to another, if we should speak
never so much, and be never so much conversant with them. Therefore our work
is, that all People in all things relating to their Souls, might have recourse
continually to the infallible Teacher and Guide, which God through Jesus Christ
has made known to them. If People be ruled by this, they cannot but live in
Unity, and Love one another: they will not fall into malice, contention and
hatred one against another. It is impossible for Nations to make War, and
Destroy one another if they would be guided by the unerring Spirit of Christ,
for how should it contradict it self? For how can any thing that agrees with
the Standard of Truth which Christ has set up, act in contradiction to it? for
nothing is Truth but what concurs with it, therefore it must needs agree with
it self. If we be directed by the Spirit, we shall call that good which is
really good, and that evil which is so. If there be thousands directed by the
Spirit of Christ which leads into all Truth, that which is good to one is so to
all; and that which is evil to one is so to all. We must first know what is
good, and then receive power to do it. If we come to be instructed by the
unerring Spirit, To know what is the good and accep^able will of God, We shall
receive daily power from him to do the will of God, we shall all speak the same
thing, and be of the same mind, and live in Love and Unity. There is no evil
wilfully done against God where the Spirit of Christ, the Gospel Spirit comes
to prevail upon us: it will bring us to a peaceableness of Spirit, to live in
Love and Unity: And the great work we have in the World, will be to do the good
and acceptable Will of God, both with respect to our solemn Worship of God, and
our Duties toward our Neighbor: then there will be Tranquillity, Peace, and
Joy, and Comfort to all the Churches of Christ that are under his Government.
And it is given to the Sons and Daughters of Men every where, when they come
under the Yoke of Christ, and take up a Daily Cross, and live in Self Denial:
this will bring Peace and Concord among them.

Many will come to our Meetings, and spend a little time to hear what we say:
We exhort them to give up themselves to the peaceable Government of the Spirit
of Christ, that will finish Transgression and make an end of Sin; and bring
into the Soul (where Sin reigned) Everlasting Righteousness. Where there is a
great deal of Pride, Malice and Envy the Spirit of Christ will root it up, and
all that evil that the Enemy has Planted in men he will pluck it up and bring
in Everlasting Righteousness, and Plant Love in the same Soul, and establish
and settle it: such a one will have more Joy, Pleasure and Delight under the
Government of the Spirit of Christ in one day, than any one can have that is
governed by the Evil Spirit in a thousand days.

You say the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man to profit
withal, what profit shall we get? How does it appear, that the manifestation
of the Spirit is given to profit withal? Because there is that Life and Grace
stirring in the heart that makes it profitable, and Truth does so prevail, that
it makes us to do those things that are good and profitable, and to avoid those
things that are reproveable. If thou would hearken to the Spirit, that is
the Reprover, that convinces of Sin, thou must turn away thy mind from that
which will lead into those things that are reproveable, otherwise thou will be
under Condemnation in thine own bosom.

When the Spirit of God illuminates Men to see Sin, the evil of Sin, he will
give them power against it; but when they come to receive power against it, and
stedfastness in the ways of God, what will be the effect of that? If I become
Righteous and live a Holy Life, and my Companions be wicked, they will mock me,
and reproach me, what profit and benefit shall I have by being Righteous? I see
evidently I shall lose many advantages which I might otherwise reap, and reach
with mine own hand. I must forsake my Profits and Pleasures, and all the
Delights of this World.

The Disciples said to Christ, we have forsaken all and followed thee, what
shall we have? People before they would forsake all, would see some thing they
must have in the room of it. Christ tells them, that he that has forsaken all,
Father and Mother, Brothers and Sisters, and House and Land for his Names sake,
shall have in this Life an hundred fold, and in the World to come Eternal Life:
what is the meaning of that? They shall have in this Life 100 fold; Christ that
is Truth it self, that cannot Lie, has promised that they that forsake all
shall receive an hundred fold: now people are ready to grasp at it, they think
it must be something that will answer the loss of that they part withal: that
thou receivest in this promise must not be of the same sort and kind with those
things ^hou did part withal; but when thou have parted with all for Christ's
sake, and the Gospel, thou shall receive that which thou shall acknowledge is
an hundred fold better, and will make thee an hundred fold richer and happier,
and that it will give thee more an hundred fold, than all that thou parted with
could give thee.

If we part with Sin, we part with that which brings bondage and fear of Death,
having parted with that when thy fear and bondage is gone, and thou live then
the rest of thy Life time at liberty: but this is not all, thou live in the
enjoyment of the favor of God, thou shall have the sense of his Love, and the
Comforts of the Holy Spirit, and you shall live in Peace and Righteousness, and
treasure up to your selves Glory, Honor, Immortality, and Eternal Life;
whereas before you did treasure up only wrath against the day of wrath, and the
Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God; thou shall receive an hundred
fold, that which is an hundred fold better. Those that part with the things
that are reproveable, and do what Christ in his day performed, the good and
acceptable will of God, the Enjoyments that he has in Christ, and the Comfort,
Peace, and Tranquillity he enjoys is an hundred fold better and more delightful
than all the pleasures of Sin, and the pleasures and delights of Shows, and
Sights, and Plays, and Comedies, which vain Men entertain themselves with in
their Carnal State. A Carnal Man cannot understand and discern the things of
God, and the pleasures that are to be had in his holy ways; he only looks at
the things that are seen, which are Temporal, and not at the things which are
not seen which are Eternal.

But, my Friends, those things which are unseen, are not so unseen, but that
when a man has an eye opened within him of the same Nature with those things,
he can see them: blessed be God that we have an eye opened to see Spiritual
things, to see the Heavenly Treasure and enjoy it in these Earthen Vessels.

For all that have an ear to hear, it would be a profitable change to part with
all that is evil in the sight of God, and put themselves under the Yoke of
Christ, and receive a Principle of Grace which he will Communicate to them,
that they may do the good and acceptable will of God, and so may enjoy an
hundred fold, and have comfort, peace, and joy, before they go hence and are no
more seen.

You to whom God has so graciously and mercifully appeared, that have an
understanding, and a taste and feeling of those things which are Divine and
Spiritual, and which pertain to Life and Godliness. Of all the People in the
World you are an engaged People to serve the Lord: great obligations lie upon
you that you should abide and continue in that, which God has revealed and
discovered to you; I mean Grace, for you will never grow till you be under the
Government of the Grace of God, that Grace that appeared to you before you came
to the Knowledge of God and his ways, that has been with you in your travel
from Death to Life, and from Darkness to Light. Prize it as a Heavenly Jewel,
as that which contains in it all those things that your Souls stand in need of.
If you have any strength to resist Temptation, it is from the Grace of God that
you receive Power to withstand Temptations; if you have any living openings in
your hearts, it comes to you from that Grace that is in Christ. When this, and
that, and the other Prophecy of the Prophets of old is opened to you,
Prophesying and Foretelling that State and Condition which you are traveling
toward, how the Lord will subdue your Enemies under you, you are encouraged
hereby to go on cheerfully in your way to that Rest which you are traveling to.

There are many of those that believe the Truth who are not come to
Establishment; and they will find the Reason and Cause in themselves. Do but
ask and enquire how it comes to pass that such and such are established, and
not so subject to fear, and horror, and perplexity as I am; a little thing
will turn me over, and shake and unsettle my mind; this has been the cause;
want of keeping close to the grace of God in your Convers^tion in the World:
when you and your Children and Servants are governed by the grace of God in all
you undertake, then the Devil will endeavor to bring you into darkness, and
bring discomposure upon your Spirits, for the purpose of Christ Jesus our
Savior, is to settle you, and the purpose of the Destroyer is to discompose
and unsettle you, and to marry you to this and the other changing thing; if he
can fix your hearts upon this and that Object, then there is instability upon
the Soul; take away that thing, and it brings disturbance upon you. Have thou
any Obj^ct that thy mind is set upon? Thou will be much disturbed at thy
parting with it, but whose fault is that? The truth manifested to thee from the
beginning of thy Conversion, did engage thee to separate thy self from all
visible sensible things, that God might have thy heart and thy chief Love. If
he had been thy God, nothing could disquiet thee, when separated from thee: If
ye will have other Gods besides him, you will lose your Gods, when they are
taken from you, and you will be like Micah, and say, ye have taken away my
Gods, and what have I more? (Judge. 18.24.) The reason of your discomposure, and
anguish, and sorrow, was this; when you had some other Gods besides the Lord,
and your hearts did cleave to some temporary thing, and that when the Trial
comes, that thou must part with it, thou can not bear it.

If you would live a Serene Life, a Life of Tranquillity, set your minds upon
nothing but upon the Lord, let him be the object of your Souls love, live in
the light of his Countenance, and you may always rejoice: Consider, as for
Temporals you hold them of the Lord, God gives you this Husband, that Wife,
that Child, that Estate, God has entrusted you with it; but not so, but he
that has it must part with it, and be bereaved of it when God pleases. Now,
if you give up your hearts to God, here will be your establishment and
settlement, and you will have an an abundant entrance into the Everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And would we seek to know and
feel wherein the Communion of the Saints stands; does it not stand in partaking
together of the Bread of Life, which our Father gives us from Heaven? The
Father spreads a Table for us in the sight of our Enemies, and we are
satisfied. They that come to partake of this Table of the Lord, find strength
and refreshment, so do I, and also my Brethren and Sisters that sit at the same
Table. We are daily confirmed and strengthened by what we receive from God, and
enjoy there; here is our Heavenly Fellowsh^p and Society; and where this is the
root of Love, Love cannot be wanting in the branches. There must be a departing
from the Bread of Life, before there can be any jarring and contention among
the Members of the same body, for we receive Life from the same Head from which
all the Body by joints and bands, having Nourishment ministered and knit
together, increase with the increase of God, and are built upon the Foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the Chief
Cornerstone, in whom all the Building fitly framed together, grows unto a
Holy Temple in the Lord.

Now that you may be all preserved in Christ, this is the end of our Labor,
that so every one that has begun in the Spirit, may go on in the Spirit, and
never look for perfection in the Flesh. That you that have begun in humility,
tenderness, and brokenness of heart, may in that meet together at times and
seasons, and have daily the presence of God among you, and have that Bread of
Life, which will nourish you to Life Everlasting, and that you may show forth
to the World the Glory, Brightness, and Excellency of that Holy Life, which in
Christ Jesus is manifested to you.

Sermon IV. Pure and Spiritual Worship. Preached at Devonshire-House, November.
12. 1690.
THE Worship of God, of the Great God is Pure; he is a Holy God, Of Purer Eyes
than to behold Iniquity: and all they who will Worship God, whose Souls are
breathing to have the return of a Testimony in his sight, must offer Pure
Worship, and it must come from that which is Pure. For that purpose the
greatness of the Love of God is made manifest in Christ Jesus; and there is a
diffusing of his Grace and Virtue in the Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of
Men, whereby he has laid a Foundation for his own Worship; because his Worship
must be Pure. Therefore he has freely given unto us through his Son, the
knowledge of that Pure Principle of Life and Grace, from whence and out of
which all true Worship does Spring, and all true honor to God arises, and
real obedience to his Holy Will springs forth out of that which is from himself.

And therefore all that will be Worshipers of God aright, must first know and
be sensible wherein the ability and capacity stands, that may enable them to so
great and so good a work. Some have conceived it to stand in their own Will,
and according to the working of their own Will they have framed Worships,
Religions, and Observations; thinking thereby to please God: But you know the
Apostle in a few short words lays down a positive Christian Doctrine, Without
Faith it is impossible to please God.

Now this does declare and signify that there must be something upon which
this Faith must work, that must be the Object and Foundation of it: Faith as it
works in the Creature, works upon something: It lays hold upon something in
which there is a capacity of pleasing God. Now if we are all by Nature Children
of Wrath, and that no one of himself can please God, then there must be
something that is Supernatural that must be the Object of that Faith by which
men alone can please God; and this must be made manifest to the Creature for
its help, for to be its director and supporter in that work that is too mighty
for himself, too great a work for a Man or Woman, too deep, too profound for
any Man's Abilities, Power, Wisdom and Acquirements that he can attain to in
this World to Worship God aright: To Worship God, that is, to perform a Pure
Worship to a Pure God: Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Now if we
are all obliged to bring a clean Worship, a pure Worship to a Pure and Holy God
who has Created us and all things; where shall we have it? Not out of an
unclean Heart, not out of a defiled Mind; there is no bringing of it forth from
thence, for that is the state and condition that men are fallen into by Sin; in
which their minds and Consciences are defiled, their Hearts are polluted, and
their Affections depraved and set upon wrong Objects; and in this state none
can serve God aright. That which is Pure and Holy must be first made known,
revealed, discovered and believed before People can perform a Right Worship to
God.

And therefore in vain is it to go and drive People to this and that Worship,
and force People to this and that Service and Conformity upon the account of
the Worship of God. This is vain Worship, when they have done all it is not
acceptable to God; the poor Creature has no Return from the Lord, for God
accepts no Service or Worship, but only through his Son. And if so be men
cannot Pray and Preach in the Spirit of his Son, and cannot present their
Complaints and Supplications to God, but by the assistance and help of his
blessed Spirit, there is no reason in Religion why People should expect a
return and answer from God of the Prayers they make. For it is the General
Doctrine of Christendom that Christ Jesus is appointed of God for a Mediator
between God and Man, and all the acceptance we have, or desire to have must be
through him: and therefore if we Pray without him, and perform this and the
other Duty without him: It is contrary to the Doctrine of Christianity to think
that ever we shall have acceptance in Gods sight.

Therefore there is a necessity for every Man and Woman that desires to be
Religious, that has a Religious mind and is willing to Worship God, and Serve
God aright, there is a necessity that they come to the knowledge of Christ, who
tells us that he is The way to the Father: They that go any other way, go a
wrong way; but they that go unto God by Christ, they do receive from him power
to draw near to God; and through him they receive from God all those blessings
that their Souls stand in need of.

So here would be an end of all Religions the World is full of, of all the
several Worships that men have made: they have invented and found out several
ways for People to Worship and Serve God: This and the other Ceremony, this and
the other observation and Method of Preaching and Praying: If all this be
without the Assistance and Divine Help of the Mediator, through whom alone we
can justly expect acceptance at Gods hands, it is all good for nothing.
Therefore the first Lesson of a Christian in point of Worship, is that he come
to the knowledge of Christ by whom, and through whom he may expect favor with
God.

Now say some People, we are already come to the knowledge of Christ, we have
read the Relation in the Gospel of his Conception, Birth, Life and Death,
Resurrection and Assension; now whether this Belie^ does give a man this kind
of Christian knowledge, that does open a Door and Way for him into the Presence
of God; This is (...) Question that ought seriously to be considered; for if we
err in this Question, we err in all; this is like stumbling at the threshold,
and never coming into the house. If we mistake in laying hold of Christ, we
mistake in our Worship, and in all matters that relate to Life and Salvation.

For if we must have another sort of knowledge of Christ, than we can have from
the reports of others; if I must have Christ revealed in me before I can have
the hope of Glory; if I must have the Spirit of Christ in me to help me to put
up my requests and supplications before he can present them to the Father, then
all literal knowledge and faith cannot stand Men in any stead, but this is
evident by the Testimony of all the Writers of the New Testament. Christ and
his Apostles did concurrently signify that the hope of a Christian, that the
power and strength of a Christian, it all lies in this, in that they had known
the revelation of Christ, and the powerful operation of the Spirit working in
them; this was that which was well pleasing to God; many Scriptures might be
spoken of, but you know the Scriptures, and can read them and see in them the
concurrent Testimony of all Holy Men to this day, that the knowledge they had
of Christ was a Divine Knowledge, a Spiritual Knowledge, it was a knowing him
after the Spirit, it was a Revelation of Christ in them that separated and
distinguished them from Reprobates, even the knowledge of God through Christ
Jesus their Lord: why should not we come to this Knowledge as well as they? the
Lord is the same, and his Power is the same, and his Arm is not shortened: we
may see as much need of Divine Assistance, and Divine Love as ever men did; we
can perform no duty either of Prayer or Preaching without Divine Assistance,
nor so much as a sigh or a groan that may have acceptance with God, without the
help of his Spirit, Romans 8.26. The Spirit helps our Infirmities, for we know
not what we should Pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. If we go about the
Duty of Prayer without Divine assistance, we see what sad work we make of it;
if we Pray not in the Spirit and with understanding, how can we receive the
thing we pray for? but if we Pray in the Spirit, and with understanding also,
then the Spirit helps our infirmities: the Spirit that came from God brings
us the things that we stand in need of.

So that a Christian has a foundation for his Worship and Christian
performance: what is that foundation? Nothing that is corrupt, if it be, it is
good for nothing; for nothing that is corrupted and that defiles, can be
acceptable and pleasing to God: we are all polluted and defiled by Nature, how
can Carnal Men Worship a Spiritual God? Carnal Men that are in Death and
Darkness cannot Worship that God that is Light, and dwells in Light, that is
inaccessible, that is of purer eyes than to behold Iniquity. Carnal Men want a
Foundation for their Worship, and will do till they come to that foundation
that God has laid.

Now, that I may speak intelligibly what the Lord has laid upon my heart, I
would say thus: There is an Universal benefit and privilege distributed and
given freely of God, unto the Sons and Daughters of Men, in their Natural State
through his Son Jesus Christ, in that he has caused his Light to shine, and
his Grace to be extended to every Man; for the Grace of God which brings
Salvation (for it is not by Works) has appeared to all Men, and brings
Light, by which every Man may see how to Worship God. God has enlightened every
Man, and this Light comes by Christ the Mediator, this Mediator is the way
that Men must walk in if they will come back again to God, for Men are run out
and departed from God; if Men will draw near to God, and take some footsteps
toward the Kingdom of God, from the Kingdom of Sin and Satan, they must mind
the way, the way must be their Director, they must not go which way they list.

This is that which was prophesied of Christ, says God by the Prophet Isaiah,
I will give him for a Leader, I would fain return to God, and go out of the
Kingdom of Sin and Satan, to the Kingdom of God: God has given Christ to lead
me, if I knew that way he would lead me in, I would go that way. As soon as a
man takes hold of Christ, his Grace, and Spirit, and Life, he will be ready to
say, I am corrupt, my senses are corrupt, my mind is depraved, my Conscience
defiled and polluted, but I have found out something that God has bestowed
upon m^, that is essentially holy and pure, that did never consent to my
corruption, but is a witness for God against it: here now a Christian lays hold
on Christ the Leader, which way will he lead me? If thou layest hold on this
guide, he will lead thee out of evil, he will teach thee to cease to do evil,
and speak evil: This Light will lead thee to nothing that will dishonor God,
or defile thy own Soul. But this is not all, we must not only cease to do evil,
but we must be doing something; there must be a breaking off from Pride,
Foolish Jesting, Evil Communication, but this is not all that he will lead me
to; let us learn that lesson, cease to do Evil. This Doctrine was Preached
before Christianity was Preached, as it is now Preached, the Prophets of old
Preached this Doctrine to the Jews that were under an outward Administration,
cease to do evil, and learn to do well, then I will plead with you, and
discourse with you, says the Lord; Come now let us reason together, says the
Lord, though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow, though
they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.

This is the first Lesson that a true Christian learns in his turning to God,
in his change and translation, to cease from that which is evil: here is a
Cessation of Rebellion, and here is some hopes of being reconciled to God; a
man has been a Rebel against his Maker, but he has now received help to
resist those Temptations that prevail over him: but there is no worshipping yet,
there is a forward mind in men to do something that is pleasing to God, but
there are some that are not troubled at all for their evil ways, and dread not
Gods anger, but make a mock at sin, that draw others to it, and make themselves
merry in it: but there is a sort so far touched with a Divine sense of Gods
Love to them, that they have also a sense of his anger and indignation, because
of their Sin; and they would fain be out of his anger, and who can blame them?
When a Man feels the anger of God burning like fire in his bosom, who can
blame that Man if he desires peace with God? if he be under a sense of the
displeasure and indignation of the Almighty, he must not have too soon out of
that Condition he is brought into; for this is Gods purpose, and this is the
fruit of all his troubles and afflictions, to take away Sin: God had no other
end or design in the affliction that came upon him, than to take away Sin; when
God has brought a People into a distressed and dejected State for their Sin,
the fruit that God expects is the taking away of their Sin, and he will hide
Pride from them, and humble them before him; if this be the purpose of God that
he intends to purge and purify his People, then says the poor Creature, if
God design to purify me from Sin, then I will pray to God to support me, and
bear me up under his indignation: that is the cry of the Soul that he may not
be brought too soon from under ^he judgment of God, but that he may be
supported and hid in the hollow of Gods hand until the time of remission and
refresh^ng comes, that he may behold the light of Gods Countenance.

Here is encouragement for every one that ^s acquainted with this Divine
Principle of Grace, that will be led by it, and follow it so far, as to be led
out of evil; then they will be fitted to do something in the work of God; every
sigh and groan that thou have, ^he assistance of the Spirit of God to help ^hee
in, is part of Worship; all thy brokenness of heart is part of worship; hereby
^hou acknowledgest the great God, that he is ^ble to help thee on in thy way,
and to pardon thy iniquity, and blot out thy transgression, and give thee all
those Heavenly ^lessings that thy Soul does stand in need of: ^hen thy Soul
will bow down to God in ^cts of holy Worship, and say, with an humble
confidence and expectation, God will do all those things in me and for me that
will promote my Salvation. It is nothing in Religion for People to go from
Praying and Preaching to Sinning, but God must have a Holy Sacrifice, and that
must come out of a pure heart; now when a Man is brought by the help of God,
and by the Divine assistance of the Mediator Jesus Christ, to break off from
his Sin, then he stands fair to become a Child of God, and to be a Servant of
God, and to do something for God in his generation, and to offer to God Praise
and Thanksgiving, and to perform all other Duties that God shall lead him into.

But some will say, what, must we do any thing? I have deeply weighed that
Question, what a poor Man or Woman must do, that is come out of bondage? there
is a propensity in People to be doing, they would fain do something, they would
be doing, they say, what shall I do? If I do something that pleases not God, I
had better let it alone, and I can do nothing acceptable to God without Divine
assistance: such a one that sees his own impotency and inability will cast his
care upon God, and will say, the Lord is able to lead me and guide me, I am
ready to do thy will, O God, make it clear to me that this is thy will, and
that this is that which thou requirest, I am ready to do it, though it be cross
to mine own will; he is ready to go on in Gods way, in the way of Christianity;
such an one that has the true knowledge of Christ, if he speaks, the Spirit of
Christ speaks in him, if he prays, it is through the assistance of the Spirit
of Christ, through whom God alone is appeased and reconciled, and through whom
they may receive a blessing from Gods hand: but for Men to run on in their own
wills, and to do a thing because they will do it, they had better sit still;
this doing in their own wills has filled the World with a sort of Christians
that want acceptance with God, which is to be had alone through the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the want of the Guidance of Gods Holy Spirit is the misery and
downfall of Christianity in our days.

Therefore it is our Work and business to build upon that foundation which God
has laid; no Worship is pleasing to God but that which arises from that
Spring that is pure and holy; if I cannot find that which will keep me from all
Pollution and defilement, if I cannot find that, I must stay till I can; for to
begin a Worship and a Religion without that which I know is acceptable to God,
it is but lost labor, and time spent in vain.

Therefore, Friends, let every one that desires to be Religious, turn their
mind inward, wait for the gift of God which is essentially pure, that never did
consent to evil, that never mixed with the corruption of Nature, but bears
witness to the Light, that will guide you, and lead you, and conduct you, first
out of Sin; then it will lead you into that Worship and Religion, and the
performance of those things that are pleasing to God. They that are come thus
to Worship, they do not only know what the Lord requires of them, and when he
requires it of them, but they are given up into the hands of God; they Pray,
Preach, Exhort, and Live according to the will of God.

It is hard for People in a Carnal state to believe this, but you that are
Believers, that are come to know the gift of God in your selves, and the
necessity of being ruled by him; you will believe us, for none else will
believe us; let us Preach to as many People and Nations as we will, none will
receive us as true Ministers, but those that have the truth in their own
hearts; if there be any that despises the Grace of God in his own heart, he
hates that which chides and reproves him; if there be such a Man, he will hate
me because I am a Minister and a Witness of the Grace of God, and of that truth
in the inward parts which is the ground and foundation that a Man has of
acceptance with God. A Wicked Carnal Wretch will say, I hate such a one, I hate
the Light, that which checks me, and witnesses against me; thou art such a one
as bear witness against me, therefore I hate thee: It is very true, it
cannot be otherwise: now our desire and labor is, that Men may come to the
love of the truth in themselves.

You know there are a great many other Ministers, whose Labor is to persuade
People to believe what they say; to lay down a Doctrine and prove it by
Scripture and Reason, and set it home upon their Minds by such testimony as the
Scripture affords, and hereupon they prevail upon the minds and judgments of
People to believe what they lay down.

It is easy to lay down a Position and prove it, and convince People that it
must be according to Scripture; but when a Person is convinced of a Principle
of Truth, he is not Regenerate thereby, and come to God; therefore though he
cannot deny the Doctrine of Truth in words, yet he can deny it in works, and
does not rightly come to love it. If People would believe what we say, and
observe what Arguments we bring for proving a Position, they may be convinced
of the Doctrine of Truth, and come to a profession of it, and yet be strangers
to it, till they come to love it in themselves; if it were not for this we
would leave Preaching, if God had not given a measure and manifestation of the
Spirit to every Man to profit withal: you have it in your selves, we are but
as Monitors to you to put you in mind of it; you have so much business in the
World that you have not had leisure to take notice of it.

A Man may have a Rich Jewel and be Poor notwithstanding, till he come to know
the value of it.

A Man has a Rich and Precious Jewel, a Pearl bestowed upon him that would
make him Rich in Faith and Love to God, and qualify him for the Kingdom of
God, and make him an Heir of it, but he knows not nor understands the value of
it, and esteems it not, therefore God has raised up Ministers to put you in
mind of it, that you may be happy for ever, and live in Blessedness to all
Eternity; whoever has an ear to hear let him hear, and when they hear what we
say, let them take the benefit of it to their own Souls. We bring not truth to
you, but God has bestowed it upon you; you will be Rich indeed, if you do as a
Man that bought a Field where the Precious Pearl was, and dug till he found
it. Come to the foundation upon which you should build all your hopes of
happiness, and depend not upon your own Works or Religious Performances for
acceptance with God, for there is no acceptance with God but only through
Christ, we are only accepted of God through him; those that will become
Christians indeed, and worship God as he has ordained and appointed himself to
be worshipped; they must come to the Principle of Light and Grace in their own
hearts, which they have in, and through Christ, and then they will find
acceptance with God.

Sermon V. The Divine Life of Christ Jesus. Preached in Grace Church Street,
March 16. 1691.
THE Blessed Life of Christ is not of this World, and it ought to be your care
in all your Religious Assemblies, that you be gathered into the inward feeling
sense of this Divine Life; that you may feel your Fellowship and Communion in
that Life of Christ, that is not of this World. And may all of you lay hold
upon it, for this is the Nourishment and the Heavenly Bread with which the
Children of the Kingdom are fed and nourished from day to day; there are many
that feed upon words, that are not the Children of the Kingdom of God, but the
begotten of God are come to know the virtue of the Divine Life of Christ Jesus,
their feeding and their nourishment is by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God, and they grow up to Life Eternal by that Divine and Heavenly
Gift, that God the Father has bestowed upon them, through his Son Jesus
Christ; and they enjoy the Communion of Saints through this Divine Head of the
Church that Communicates of his Life and Virtue through every Member, by which
they are Sanctified, and every day more and more prepared for that Living and
Eternal Inheritance, prepared for the Children of God.

And where there are a People that are thus gathered into the Life of the Lord
Jesus Christ, they are able to draw nigh to God, they feel the Power of
Entrance, because their Sin is removed that did formerly lie at the door, and
the way is opened and consecrated for them to draw nigh and partake of the
Table of the Lord; by which they grow stronger and stronger in his Might and
Power, and are thereby enabled to perform the whole will of God, and that
Divine Worship and Religious Service, which God requires at their hands in
their day.

For it is very certain, and we have found it by experience, the words of our
Lord to his Disciples of old, without me (says he) ye can do nothing. For
though People may meet together, and may pretend and set up a Form of Worship
and of Religion in their own will, yet it all amounts to nothing with respect
to acceptance with the Lord; there is no return in their Souls, no addition of
Life, nor increase and growth of Life; they are not nearer the Kingdom than
when they first believed, but many times further off, by leaning upon a
formality, and not really entering into the work of God, nor traveling out of
Death into Life, for there must be Path, and a traveling in it; the Soul must
have an exercise through the Power and Life of Jesus for the overcoming of
Death, that did separate from God, and a preparing for Life, that Life that
unites us to God again; and when People are in earnest in this travel, they are
really resigned up to the government, direction, and leading of him that is
gone before, that has made a way for us, and will further our Progerss toward
the Kingdom of God.

And therefore, my Friends, you know the way, and know how the Power has
reached to you, and has opened your understandings that you may be faithful to
that power in your own Souls, and may have the true use and improvement of
this, and all other such Mettings as this; for the gathering of your Minds out
of all visible and changeable Objects, unto that Life which God has revealed,
that so in the exercise of it, you may hold your fellowship with God, and with
one another; here is the bond of Perfection, here is that in which God has
Created Peace and Rest, and Joy for his People, so far as every one is Partaker
of this innocent Life, and feels himself changed into it, they are gathered
into the Church, and they are gathered into fellowship with the head of it, and
are comforted in their Membership, in their partaking together.

Though I be but a little one, yet I partake of the same virtue which the Lord
ad-administreth to the greatest Saints, while I am waiting upon him, and of the
same Divine Consolation, and Operation, and Power that weaneth me more and more
from the World, and that which is corruptible, and raises up in me daily more
and more fervent desires after that Bread which perishes not.

Now herein Men and Women have an evidence of that Christianity in themselves,
the Spirit of God bearing Record and Witness to their Spirits, which all the
loose Professors of Christianity in the World are strangers to, their evidence
in themselves, being against them; they seek to have evidence without them, and
to gather up some kind of marks and tokens, and sayings, and sentences from
without, to make them believe that they are in Covenant with God, and that they
are in a state of Salvation by Christ; but he that ttuly believes, has an
evidence of his Christianity, and of his Reconciliation with God: and he has
this evidence in himself, a Divine Spiritual Testimony that answers to his
own Spirit that witnesses to him, that he is one of the Children of God.

And my Friends, to this you are called, whether you are come to it or no, it
is this you are called to with a Heavenly call; that you might no longer live
in the Rudiments of this World, to be seeking and looking here and there, for a
ground of Peace and of Rest; a ground of Hope, but may know and feel the same
thing, the same ground of Eternal hope that the Saints of old had, what is
that? What reason did they give and render of their hope of Eternal glory? The
Apostle tells you plainly the ground or reason of their hope of being glorified
in the World to come, was Christ in them the hope of Glory? they witnessed that
Christ gave his Life for the World. Take the Glorious Testimony that the
Apostle did bear in one of his Epistles, says he, the life was manifested in
me; it was not covered up or hidden that People could not find it: God was
pleased to bring it to Light by the Gospel: When a thing is brought to light
you may see it. This he affirmed in his day, and the same is affirmed in our
day. The Life is manifested, what Life? Not the Life of this World, but a Life
not defiled, not polluted, but the Life that is of God, a Heavenly Life that is
Holy and Pure; that Life is manifested; we have seen it, and we exhort all to
lay hold of it, to lay hold of Eternal Life; some had a sight of it, that had
not laid hold of it; they saw it in a Vision, and they might say possibly, Oh
that I could live such a Life, that there were no sin in me, in my words, or
thoughts, or actions, what a gracious Life would that be! They had seen that
Life, they had tasted of it, but they did not lay hold of it, but let it go by
them: take heed of that, when you have seen it with open eyes. Blessed are your
eyes for they have seen, and your ears for they have heard, says Christ to his
Disciples. They saw that Life that was holy, harmless, and undefiled; lay hold
on this Life, especially when you are thus assembled together in a solemn
manner in the presence of the Lord waiting to behold it, and to see it more and
more discovered to you, and labor to have that gathering Power that will bring
you to it, that you may know the strength, that comes by it to the Soul.

There is none of you but you will meet with Temptations in this World, that
will draw you into Death and Darkness, to things That are Carnal, and Sensual,
and Devilish sometimes. How shall I stand if I be not centered in that Life,
that was before the World began, and before the Devil was? If I labor to feel
the influence of that Divine Power, this is able to keep me; my Faith tells me
so: I know that Power is able to keep me, if I keep in the exercise of it. The
trust of a true Believer is, that whatsoever Temptations and Trials they are
exercised with; they know one already come In whom they have trusted, who is
both able and willing to deliver them. So by this means he is kept harmless,
and innocent, and blameless in his Life and Conversation. Thus you might be
kept if you would regard, and have respect to the Life that is manifested in
you.

Whosoever comes to know, and feel, and witness in their Souls the discovery
and revelation of the Life of Jesus; they know there is in it a certain
Dominion over that which is contrary to it, and you have many of you had
experience of the exercise of the Power of God in your own Hearts; that has
enabled you to reign over those things, that have formerly ruled over you: That
you can now subdue vain thoughts, and evil desires, that you can withstand
Temptations that come from without and from within. Now if you could do this,
and if ever you have done it; you did it by that Power that God discovered and
revealed in you from Jesus Christ: You had not such hold of this once before
you believed, but by believing the word of God sent unto you; it being fixed by
Faith in the Heart, That Faith which is the operation of God; You could then do
that which you could not do before, and forbear that which you was led away by.
These experiences which God has given you should encourage you to hold on in
your Labor and Travel, and engage you To grow in the Grace of God, and in the
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Whatsoever is propounded by men in the
Profession of Religion, this ought to be our design and end in the discovery
that is made to us of the Life of Christ; that we may grow in it, and live in
it; (indeed there is great talking of it) but we should labor to show forth
the Resurrection of that Life in us.

They that come to be baptized for the Dead, baptized into the Death of Christ:
The Apostle tells you, In that he died he died unto Sin. There are none
baptized for the Dead, made partakers of the Death of Christ, but those that
die unto Sin as he did. Though Christ had no Sin, yet he died unto Sin. What
use did he make of this? That Christ knew no Sin, but yet did take our Sin upon
him; He died unto Sin, that they which did partake of his Death, might be
partakers of his Resurrection. He Lives again, and after Death Rises again.

Those that partake of this Death unto Sin, are Crucified unto this World, and
have taken up Christ's Cross, and are Dead to all the Pleasures and Delights of
the World, which are whithered away and come to nothing. What do they Live to
now? To Righteousness, Holiness, Chastity, Temperance; these are pleasant to
them, these come to live to Righteousness through the Power of him that loved
them. This shows the Glory and the Power of the Grace of God: It is the Grace
of God that works such a change in a Man or Woman. They that delight in Sin
and Wickedness, in that which is corrupt and ungodly, they have no delight in
this, no delight in Sobriety, Chastity, Holiness and Purity of mind. Where did
it work such a change? In all that are freely given up to it: Where any one is
given up to that Life, the grace of God has the praise of it: This is the
Exaltation and Praise of the Power of God; so that others may find by this,
they may by it come to believe, and by believing to be saved.

Thus the Gospel has gone forth, from one to many, and from many to many more,
and is increasing more and more; for Grace, Mercy and Peace are multiplied, by
which the Heritage of God, and so every Man and Woman that partake of this
Life, are gathered into their Fellowship.

So that your end in coming to these Meet^ngs, is not so much to hear what
this, and that, and the other Friend says; but what you have in your selves to
witness to: The Divine Operations of the Power of God in your Souls, bringing
down something that is to be brought down, and raising up something that is to
be raised. Temptation to Sin has more prevalency upon me, than it has upon
this, and that, and the other man. I am not come to their degree, yet it is
better with me than it was at my first convincement: If thou do say this to
deceive others, Cry to God, and Pray earnestly that all that may be brought
down which is contrary to his Grace. If thou say and profess this, if at the
same time there is a deceitful Heart to strengthen that which is known by the
Light of Christ, to be against the truth of God: How will this appear at the
Great Day of God? The Eye of God is upon thy Hypocrisy, He that Never Slumbers
nor Sleeps, he beholds thee; if there be any Sin that thou would keep and
save alive, if thou make a Profession, and notwithstanding say, this Sin I
will keep: The Lord Pardon me in this thing (...) Like Naaman the Servant of
the King of Assyria who said to the Prophet, Thy Servant henceforth will
neither Offer Burnt Offering, nor Sacrifice to other Gods, but unto the Lord.
In this the Lord pardon thy Servant, that when my Master goes into the House o^
Rimmon to Worship there, and he leans (...) my hand, and I bow my self in the
House of Rimmon: When I bow my self in the House of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy
Servant in this thing. He knew if he bowed not, the King would take notice of
the alteration of his gesture, therefore he would bow in the House of Rimmon:
That Sin he would save alive under a Profession: That Hypocrisy the Lord did
abominate.

Be upright in the sight of God, and be faithful to your own Souls; if it be
so, then every Sin will be a burden, and you will long to be rid of it; if it
be so, you know whose hand it is that has brought you so far; if you be real
and cordial, and give up your selves to Jesus, That Work which he has begun in
you, he will finish for you. He will finish it for you, stand out with him in
nothing; you give up your selves to him, and join not with his Enemies; take
heed of harkening to them, take heed of every Sin that will at last be a burden
and oppressive to your Souls.

But if you Live this Heavenly Life of Jesus, you will be set at liberty, to
have Dominion over Sin, and stand without Guilt before the Throne of God.
Friends, let your Hearts be deeply affected with the great mercies that God
has bestowed upon you, and for giving you that Divine Life that Is acceptable
in his sight.

Many things have been done upon the account of Religion, and we could never be
satisfied whether they were acceptable to God; we could not be satisfied
whether we did any thing pleasing to God; we may say of them as the Apostle
Paul of the Jewish Sacrifices, there remains a conscience of Sin, an accusing
Conscience that tells us that Guilt is not removed, nor the Sin taken away,
'till the Lord opens this Divine Mystery to us, that our Justification must be
by Faith in Jesus, that nothing could reconcile us to God but the Life of
Jesus, and the merit of his Death.

This Life of Jesus was a holy, blameless, harmless, and innocent Life, which
Life he gave for the World, which Life is the Light of Men; and our Souls being
turned to this Life, we see the Glory and the Excellency of it, and desires are
kindled in our hearts after it. Many have pursued and labored and traveled,
that they might come to the enjoyment of it: the very discovery of this Life
ought to be highly prized, and your Souls affected with it, and when you have
obtained it, you will say, O what a blessed Condition am I come into! that
Christ has manifested his Divine Power in me, not only in Reconciling me to
God, but taking away the Conscience of Sin; by that also the Accuser is cast
out, and I may now sing to God Songs of Deliverance. Now you taste of the
Mercies that God has bestowed upon you, this will affect your Souls with a
Child-like submission and subjection to him, that has begun to save and
deliver you, that so you may resign up your selves to his will, and forsake the
World, and the things of it.

Now when they come to such a Meeting as this, their minds may be retired, and
they may be sensible of the Power of Truth upon their hearts, but for want of
keeping their subjection to the Divine Power that has opened their
Understandings when they come into the World again, they are ensnared and
entangled, and many times, for want of watchfulness, through a looseness of
mind, and unruliness of their tongue, they run into anger and passion, and this
grieves the Holy Spirit of God. And how should you come to God through the
Mediator, when you grieve his Spirit, and quench the motions of it?

These things have been hurtful to many, that for their time might have been
Pillars in the House of God. Take heed of this, and let the goodness of God
dwell upon your minds, that you may feel and experience the inward
administrations of it; there are many that are much affected with the outward
Ministry, and are very desirous to hear the Servants of God declare the things
that God has wrought for them, and in them, and the wonderful things that God
has opened to them; yet when you have heard all that Men can say about it, if
the Divine Ministry of the word of God does not make powerful impressions upon
you, and sanctify and renew your Souls, the outward Ministry of the Word will
do you no good.

Now that you may be established in the truth that you have been taught, this
Testimony arises in me, to desire every one to heed and attend to the
manifestation of this Life of Jesus in your selves. Whatsoever God has
bestowed upon me or another, you may perish for all that, and I am not the
better for what God has bestowed upon you, but may perish notwithstanding; but
that God has manifested Eternal Life to my Soul, let that be every ones
Center: this will make you holy and blameless, and preserve you in every State,
and in the hour of Temptation, and in the midst of Snares; this will be a
Bulwark to you; this will (...) as the Walls of Sion, which is the Salvation of
the Lord. That so you may be preserved sensible of the goodness of the Lord:
That Grace, Mercy, and Peace may be multiplied in your bosoms; this will make
you dear and affectionate one to another.

Though there may be an external Fellowship among those that Preach and profess
the same Doctrine, yet when they break off from that, when once Men depart from
the power of truth, they grow stubborn and rebellious; but when Men come to be
gathered into the inward Fellowship that stands not in terms and words, but in
the Revelation of Christ, and in the Participation of his virtue and goodness;
the more you are united in this, the more you are Knit one to another, and
become one, and useful and helpful one to another.

The Lord vouchsafe to every one of you a taste of his goodness, and you will
prefer it above all that the Devil and his Instruments can present; but if you
retire more into this Heavenly and Divine Life of Jesus, you will feel and
enjoy more Peace and Satisfaction, and true Consolation in your Souls, than I,
or any Man in the World can tell you of.

Sermon VI. The Kingdom of God within. Preached at Grace Church Street, July
26. 1691.
YOU have read and heard much concerning the Day of the Lord, as a Great and
Notable Day; many of you are now Living Witnesses that the Great and Notable
Day of the Lord is coming, in which the Accomplishment of Great and Notable
Things, the Mighty Works of God, which have been Prophesied of may be lawfully
expected. It is the work of every Christian to wait upon the Lord in the light
of this Day, and to be acquainted with the Works of the Lord, both inwardly and
outwardly; for the Day of the Lord is a Day of Power, and that Power of God
works wonderful things; and if we are not kept in the light of that Day, the
Lord may work great things, and we not know ^t; we shall be looked upon as
careless and negligent Witnesses of the Works of the Lord, as those that do not
regard them. If you would be Faithful Witnesses, you must have regard to the
Works of the Lord, and the Operation of his hands. One that ^s minded to be a
Faithful Witness, he will ^ake notice of what is said and done: you ^re called
to be Witnesses of the Works of ^he Lord Jesus Christ, and of his doings; ^ou
must stand where you may hear, and see, and understand what the Lord is about
^o do at this time.

In your Testimony and Witness-bearing, ^he greatest thing we have to expect in
this Day of the Lord, is, that God will set up ^he Kingdom of his Son Christ
Jesus: and unto this all the Prophets did bear witness ^n their time, and now
it is our turn to bear witness of it by sensible and living expe^iences of the
accomplishment of those things that they Prophesied of, that the Lord will ^et
up the Kingdom of Christ, and bring ^own and lay wast the Kingdom of
Anti^hrist. This our Savior taught his Disciples ^o pray for Sixteen Hundred
Years ago, that the Kingdom of God might come: and all the true Disciples of
Christ ever since have prayed for the coming of his Kingdom, and many of them
have seen the coming of it, and rejoiced; and others have died in the Faith of
it, and have been gathered into the Kingdom of Heaven.

But, my Friends, that which chiefly concerns us at this Day, is to behold the
Kingdom of Christ, the Eternal Son of God within us, to go forward and prosper;
and the Kingdom of Antichrist suppressed and destroyed, and utterly laid wast;
and this is wrought two ways, 1. inwardly, 2. outwardly.

First, inwardly, there is a greater inclination in the minds of People to look
more at the operation of Gods power in this great work outwardly, than to look
at it inwardly, but unto that there must be a daily Cross taken up, and it is
my business at this time to tell you in the Name of the Lord, that your Duty
and mine is to turn our minds to the working of the Power of God in our selves,
and to see that other Kingdom of the Man of Sin weakened and brought down within
us, and the Kingdom of the Son of God set up within us; then there is no fear
but he will carry on his work outwardly, and we shall see as much of that work
as belongs to our Generation: but the great Matter and chief Concernment of you
and me, is to see the Kingdom of God set up within us, which stands in Holiness
and Righteousness; our business is to wait till we see the Righteousness of
this Kingdom set up within us in our Hearts and Souls, and to have a real
change made.

We all know, and we must confess, that we have been subject to the Man of Sin,
whatsoever we are now. We have seen the Reign and Government, the Rage and
Tyranny of the Wicked one that has led us into Rebellion and Disobedience to
the Lord our Maker; how do we like that Government to be Ruled by the Devil,
and to be led Captive, and to be made to do his Will, and to Rebel against God
that gave us our Life and our Breath, and Being? how do we like that Government
of Satan? I hope we do none of us like it. It was so with me, and they that are
under the Tyrannical Government of Satan, have many Cries and Wishes in their
Souls, that they were freed and delivered from it, and brought under the
Government and Obedience of Christ Jesus; and that they were able to serve God
as they ought to do, that they might be translated from the Kingdom of Sin and
Satan, into the Kingdom of the blessed and dearly beloved Son of God.

This has been the cry of some ever since they have known the World, and I am
persuaded it is the cry of many at this day; I have good news to bring you, not
that the day of your Redemption draws nigh, but that it is come; the day of
Redemption is now come, and there are a great many blessing and glorifying the
Name of God that they are redeemed and delivered from the bondage of
Corruption, and have more joy and delight in the service of God that made them,
than ever they had in the service of the God of this World.

But may not some say, how shall this great work be wrought? for it is a great
work, and we verily think that nothing but an Almighty Power can effect it; for
there are many in this Assembly have been trying to no purpose, and done what
they could in their own strength to deliver their own Souls from Death, and yet
they find themselves in bondage still, nay, they have called in the help and
assistance of those that they thought to be stronger than themselves, and all
have failed, and they are yet weak and entangled, and they cannot find
themselves at liberty to serve the Lord as they ought to do.

I am of this mind, that nothing but the Almighty power of God can do it; and
when you come to to my experience, to know this as I have done, then I hope you
will seek after that, and you will see good reason for it, and you will then
come to this Position, if the Lord does not help me I am undone; if the Lord
puts not forth his Almighty Power I must then perish, for there is no other
Power can deliver me: when you come to know this, what must you do? Why, you
must wait for the Revelation of that power that will take you off from all
trust and confidence that you have ever had in any thing else; a Man that has
nothing to trust to but the Almighty Power, and Mercy and Goodness of God, he
puts his whole trust and confidence therein, or else he knows he must perish.

When a Man or Woman comes to this pass, that they have nothing to rely upon
but the Lord, then they will meet together to wait upon the Lord: and this was
the first ground and motive of our setting up Meetings; and I would to God that
that was the use that every one would make of them that come to them, then they
would be justly and properly used according to the end of the institution of
them at first; we should use them as poor desolate helpless People that are
broken off from all their own confidence and trust, and have nothing to rely
upon but the mercy and goodness of God; and if he pleases to reveal his power
among us, we know that he is able to save us, and we have met with the
Revelation of Gods Power, and when we have met together in simplicity of Mind,
the Lord was pleased to communicate his Spirit to us, and open a door for us,
and discover and reveal to us that it was the day of his Power. And when we
came to examine our selves whether we were willing in this day of Gods Power
(for the Prophet gives us a note of distinction between the People of God, and
other People; Thy People shall be willing in the day of thy Power; which is as
much as to say, God discovers and reveals his Power to them, such a People are
willing to give themselves over to the government of it, when we found we were
subject to it,) we had joy in believing, before we attained the end of our
hope; it was gladness to us that we found our selves willing, and I am
persuaded that every one of you would be glad to find your selves willing to
part with that which you cry out of.

What a cry is there of our Bondage and Corruption, and of our being led
Captive by our Lusts? we may hear such a cry from one end of the Kingdom to the
other: People cry out of the Bondage of Corruption, and of their subjection to
Sin and Satan: I would they were in earnest; there is not that earnestness and
reality in Men and Women that God looks for, and so there comes nothing of it.
There is no redemption and no deliverance, the Lord does not hear them; though
they come now a days into his Presence to offer up their Prayers and
Supplications, I would have you be in good earnest, I wish well to you all, and
it would be hard to say that you do not wish well to your selves: Here lies
your welfare, that you find your selves willing to be subject to the Power that
made you; you have been subject doubless to the Power that destroyed you; that
Power that never gave you Life and B^eath, has been instrumental of your
Destruction: The Power of the God of this World never did men good, but
destroyed them, deceived them, and deprived them of their Lives.

Now if there was but a willingness in every one of us freely to give up our
selves to that Power that Created us to obey his will: I am sure there is never
a Man or Woman among us shall long be without the knowledge of it. If I am but
willing to be subject to the Law of him that made me, it will not be long
before he discover it to me, and reveal his Power in me in the glory and
excellency of it; that Power which is more able to preserve me, than all the
Power of Men on Earth, or all the Power of the Devils in Hell is able to
destroy me. When the Lord shall discover and reveal his Power in you, you will
be willing to be subject to it.

But methinks the sound and noise of Flesh and Blood grows loud here. I would
be subject to God, but I would not have him cross mine interest, and deprive me
of that I love and thrist after; I would not have him imbitter my Carnal
Delights and Pleasures, and undo me as to my Reputation in the World.

You may see whence this comes that you would make a bargain and draw a
contract with the God of your Lives about these things, this is a Nonsensical
thing; because of all People in the World, you are a People that have had a
veneration for the Holy Scriptures, the Scriptures of Truth; and have been
acquainted with them so familiarly as with any Book in the World, wherein you
find Articles drawn, long ago fixed and sealed, and no new ones are to be
drawn. If any one will be my Disciple, John or Thomas, James or Peter, or
whoever he be, he must take up his Daily Cross and Deny himself, and Follow me.
Now here is a contract made, therefore turn aside from all kind of Reasoning
and Consulting with Flesh and Blood.

If you will become Spiritual, and partake of Spiritual Blessings and Benefits;
I would advise you to turn from all kind of reasonings that come from the Pit
of Darkness, that has thus far deceived you, and will ruin you for ever, if
you hearken to them: For assure your selves new Gospel terms no man can make,
and if any come to Preach new Gospel terms, count him a deceiver; for there is
no possibility of being a Disciple of Christ, but by taking up a Cross Daily,
and Denying our selves and Following him as our Leader and Guide. To him I must
go, and go in no other way, speak nothing, or do nothing but what is Holy and
Pure; he must conduct me in my walking, guide me in my way, and justify me in
it: This is to be a true Disciple of Christ.

As soon as he comes to adhere and join to the Power of God revealed in his
Soul, he sees the coming of the Kingdom of God: he sees it at a distance, he
says within himself, and makes this conclusion, I will follow my Captain. I
will become subject to the Kingdom of Christ. If I obey this Divine Principle
of the Grace of God and the Gospel of Christ, I shall be his Disciple. I read
in his blessed Book, That as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the
Children of God. I am not to propose new terms, but to accept of the old terms
of the Gospel of Christ; I see that the Kingdom of God is to be set up, and the
Kingdom of the Devil to be brought down in me: If I followed this Divine
Principle, I should never follow the Devil more; if he would have me Lie, I
shall refuse and say I cannot do it; if he would have me run into vain and
corrupt Communication and foolish jesting, that will be a bridle to me that I
cannot do it.

I speak now to persons that live under the Light of the Gospel of Christ, and
that are subdued by his Grace; I would speak that which all the Logic in the
World cannot overthrow, that which the most cunning Logician with all his Wit
and Quirks cannot refute and prove erroneous: If a man be ^ed by the Spirit of
God he cannot Lie; this ^s a common cure for all men, if I be led by ^he Spirit
of Truth, and hearken to the Principle of Truth in my own Soul; this will cure
and heal me of the wounds and maladies of my corrupt Nature, and set me at
^iberty from my old Master; I do not like his Service.

I hope if any of you like the Servitude and Bondage of Sin and Satan, you will
desire Liberty before you die. Why do not you desire it now? It may be thou
think ^o enjoy a little Liberty, and Reputation, and Pleasure in Sin for
many years, for Six or Seven, Nine or Ten years, and then break off from it,
and repent and turn to God; How do thou know that thou have ten days ^o live?
It is of high concernment to every ^ne of us to wait for a discovery of Gospel
Liberty, and an ability and power in his Soul to enable him to break off from
the Servitude and Bondage of Sin and Satan that he has so long lived under;
and to wait upon God with Patience for the setting of his Soul at Liberty, and
setting up the Kingdom of Christ within him, and pulling down the Kingdom of
Satan, that he may be brought into the Kingdom of Christ; that consists in
Peace and Righteousness and Joy in the Holy Ghost. These are the things that
follow one another: when Righteousness is set up in me, I shall not be
disturbed, I shall have Peace; and if I have Peace I shall have Joy, and this
Joy is in the Holy Ghost; the Apostle says the Kingdom of God consists in
these things.

Now that every one mighe be persuaded that God has given a measure of his
Grace to them, as well as to other folks: Let them consider and say within
themselves, God has not shut me out of the number of his People. He has
knocked at the Door of my Heart, to bring me to Repentance, he has waited upon
me so long, surely he has a mind to save me: Would he call upon me, but that
he intends I should repent and turn to him?

But where is the Power, You will say, Knocking at the door of the Heart? and
checks of Conscience we understand them, but we understand not where the Power
is to be conformable to the Will of God.

People will never understand it while they are in the Kingdom of Satan, and
under the the Power of the Prince of Darkness; the Apostle tells us, That the
God of this World has blinded the minds of them that believe not; lest the
Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ who is the Image of God should shine
into them. If men saw the Beauty of the Gospel they would run after it, and
embrace it; therefore ^he Devil blinds their minds that they should not see the
Beauty and Amiableness of the Gospel, and like the terms of it: He has the
Rule and Government of the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience. So long as I
live in Subjection to that Devilish Hellish Power which leads me forth into
Sin; I shall be a stranger to Gods Power that would enable me to break off from
it.

You never read in Scripture of any that ever came to be saved by the Power of
God, but there was Faith mixed with it, that came to join with that Power of
God. Our Savior said to the impotent man, Thy Faith has made thee whole; thy
Faith joining with that Power of God: We shall be made strong in the Lord, and
in the Power of his might; and be able to withstand Temptations.

As soon as the Soul of Man joins with the Grace of God, he does forsake the
service of his old Master and Governor: Sin shall no longer have Dominion over
him; though he may meet with the same Temptation, i^ shall not have the same
power over him but he will be enabled by the grace of Go^ to withstand it, and
overcome it. If you ask such a Man, how it is that he overcome that Temptation
that formerly prevailed over him; he will tell you* I have now an^ Helper, I am
now joined to the Grace o^ God in my Soul, therefore do I withstand
Temptations, and have power over them. Thus comes the Kingdom of Christ to be
set up in the Soul, and this is that which will fit and prepare us for the
everlasting Kingdom of God: they that do wait upon God, shall see this work
wrought inwardly in them, they know more by Faith than they can see by Sense.

I know and am certain that the Power the Devil has in the World shall be
broken down, and Righteousness shall be exalted, and justice and equity shall
prevail in the Nations. I shall not perhaps live to see it, but I may see it by
Faith, I may see enough for my generation, and they that live in the next
generation shall see it also; for the Church of God is the same from one
generation to another. Now unto us it is given to see the things that in former
generations were Prophesied of, God having (says the Apostle) Provided some
better thing for us, that they without us should no be made perfect.

The Church of God from one Genera^ion to another have their measure and de^ree
of service, and bear their proper. Testi^ony, and leave the rest to succeding
Gene^ations: it concerns us in our Generation to ^ee a change made inwardly in
our Souls, and ^he Kingdom of Christ set up within us, and ^he Kingdom of Satan
brought down in our ^elves. This does not concern my Son or Grandson only, but
it concerns me, and when they grow up to mature Age, in their ^ime it will
concern them: therefore that which is most profitable to us, is, that we have
such a station, and stand in such a place ^n our time, where we may see the
work of God carried on.

I have considered many a time that there are many brave Men and Women in this
Age, that might have been eminent Witnesses of God in the World, and born their
Testimony to his truth, but their Faith has been weak and ineffectual: they
have discovered their unbelieving hearts, and have joined with the common herd
of the World, because they thought such great things could never be done, that
the Kingdom of Satan could never be pulled down and destroyed, and the Kingdom
of Christ set up within us. But I would hope better things of you, things that
accompany Salvation; and that he that has begun a good work in you, will carry
it on to perfection: that Living Praises and joyful Thanksgivings may be
rendered to him who alone is worthy, who is God over all, blessed for ever; to
whom be Glory and Dominion for ever, and ever. Amen.

Sermon VII. The undefiled Way to Eternal Rest. Preached at Devonshire-House,
July the 29th. 1691.
My Friends,
THE Lord will be with all his People, that are undefiled in the Way; that are
Spiritual Travelers walking in that undefiled Way, that leads to an ^ndefiled
Rest. There are some that by ^his Way are entered into Rest, that Rest which
God has prepared for them. We cannot apply to our selves that promise that
(...) made to us of entering into Rest, unless we ^e real and true Travelers in
the Way that ^ads to it, for if we do, We deceive our ^wn Souls.

Therefore you that have had a Sight and Vision of the Way Everlasting, that
lead^ unto a Holy Rest, you are Engaged People to make straight steps therein,
and to have i^ your daily Care, and make it your continual Business, to look
that your Goings and Footsteps are of the same nature and kin^ that the Rest
is that you desire to enter into For it is an undefiled Rest, that we all are
or ought to be Traveling after; therefore every one of us must be undefiled in
the Way and every Foot-step must be of the same kin^ and nature, and separate
from all that which defiles it and polluteth it; that so it man have a
tendency to the bringing of the So^ nearer to its Rest.

This Holy Rest many Travelers have a^tained by this Holy Travel, and many a^
still in hope to attain it.

But now they that are full of hope of ^taining this Rest, but their Footsteps
a^ Goings are not of the same nature and kind they are not holy and pure, they
are not u^ defiled: These have not their Faces tru^ Sion-ward, though the Face
of their Prof^sion may stand that way; but the Lo^ looks at the Heart of every
one, and (...) knows which way the Heart stands; the who have their Hearts
truly turned to t^ Lord, they have the mark of Holiness (...) their Eye, and
the mark of purity and righteousness in all their Undertakings, because they
know there is no attaining to that Divine Rest, but by a Holy Way and Travel,
therefore their trust and reliance is alone on the Lord, that is to keep them
in all their Way, for if they be never so clearly convinced that Holiness and
Righteousness is their Duty, and is the way whereby they may attain to the
Kingdom of God, though they are never so fully convinced of it, yet there lies
an impossibility of any walking therein without the Divine Assistance of the
Grace of God; for though they have been convinced by the appearance of his
Grace, and have had a light that opens to them a sight of these things, it is
not this Sight and Vision that will enable them. To run the Race that is set
before them.

For the manifold impurities and hindrances which are in our Way, between our
coming out of Egypts Land, the Bondage of Corruption and our entering into the
Kingdom of God, are too mighty and too great for any Man with his knowledge and
strength to overcome. The Children of Israel might as well have gone through
the Red Sea without the help of God, as the Christian Traveller can go through
the many difficulties, and the many impediments that he is to meet with in his
Way, without the assistance of God's holy Spirit.

My Friends, It has been a Labor and Travel at this time upon my Mind, that
all whom God has so signally Blessed with the Knowledge of the Truth; that you
may see your Way, and most clearly know and understand, that your Way leads to
Life Eternal; that all and every one of you in your particular Meetings, are to
have a dependence upon that which can help you in your Way.

For I have seen too many that have had a wrong dependence, after they were
rightly Convinced, and after they have had a true knowledge of their Way
wherein they should walk; they have too much trusted to openings and sights
which they have received* they have thought their Mountain so sure, and that
their Feet have been past sliding, that there has grown up a state of
presumption that they have thought they should never turn aside, and have not
had due regard to the renewing of the divine Power of God in their Souls, that
God's Children always mus^ have. They have (as I may so say) forgotten what our
Lord said, Without m^ ye can do nothing; they have passed a Sentence upon that
Doctrine in their minds, and they have thought they could do something, that
they could withstand Temptation, that they could do some Work for God, and
Service to God without the divine assistance of that Power that did beget them;
and alas, the least they have sustained has been, that they have fallen into
Evil, and they have defiled their Way, and run into Temptations, though it has
pleased the Lord, whose Mercy is Infinite, to pull them many times back again
out of the snare which they were fallen into, and to take them up again, and to
wash them, and cleanse them, and purify them, and set their Feet on a sure
place. This was more than they deserved, but his Mercy and Goodness and
Tenderness is over all his Works.

This he has wrought for many a one, and not only once, but many times; it is
hard venturing; it had been better if such a one had never fallen, or that
their Footsteps had never slid from the ways of the Lord, than after they are
fallen to be renewed again by Repentance. It has caused sore Judgment and
Condemnation and Anxiety of Spirit: And they have given their old Enemy an
advantage to whisper in their Ears. Thou have lost thy ground; thy Sins are
gone over thy Head; and thou shall never find Repentance. These are the Words
of the Wicked one, who seeks occasion against us; and through our carelessness,
and not being watchful we put an advantage into his Hand: Now seeing you know
he is vigilant, and seeks occasion that he may turn you out of your Way* before
you attain to the end of it; you ough^ to be vigilant to keep occasions from
him.

But some may say, how may I keep occasions and advantages from the Enemy (...)
I answer, the way has been often told you, and I dare say most of you have
tried it, and found it to be true; that so long a^ you have remained in a
watchful State and Posture, and have had your minds exercised by the Grace of
God; by which you were convinced of your Sin, and by which you^ Duty was
manifested to you: So long you gave the Enemy of your Souls no occasion; but
the Truth preserved you wherein you trusted, and wherein you hoped and waited
for the virtue and power of it. Did you find want of ability then? Did the
Enemy prevail then? He did not cease to Tempt when you was in the most watchful
State of a Christian, the Devil did not the^ cease to tempt you; but you found
in you a power that resisted him; and said, Get thee behind me Satan.

So long as you are upon your watch, so far as you keep your mind fixed upon
the Divine Power; so long you are in a sure place, and whosoever turns aside
from this they suffer great harm and prejudice; and if ever they be restored
again it is with loss and damage and sore exercise; and if they be not
restored, they are lost to all Eternity: Then it had been better for them not
to have known the way of Righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn
from the Holy Commandment delivered to them: And then they said within
themselves, this must be the way.

Sirs, these things pertain to your Everlasting welfare; I speak to you as to a
People that God has abundantly Loved; and it has been far beyond any thing of
desert. He has made known his ways to you, the Lord may say concerning you of
this City as of old; What could I have done more for my Vineyard that I have
not done? So he may say concerning you: What could I have done more to make
them a grown People? a holy People, an entire People that They may bear my
Name, and walk before me in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of their
Lives. What should have been done more for them?

But this is an Exercise to us whom God has blessed and set as watchmen, to
behold and see the state of his People; and to fee^ and bear the burdens that
are to be born; and this is the great burden, that after al^ that God has
done, and that we do in the hands of God; all that is necessary for the welfare
of the People: Yet here are some that turn aside, and here are some that have
defiled their way, and we testify in the name of the Lord, that whosoever
walks in a defiled Way, shall never come to an undefiled Rest; therefore that
you do not attain to that undefiled Rest, it is because ye have been defiled:
Seeing the Holy conversation of the People of God is the effect of the working
of his own Power and Spirit.

Here comes the Rest, by and through a Mediator, even Jesus Christ the
Righteous; who is the Mediator between God and Man, and the Leader of all his
People in the way of Holiness and Righteousness which he has made manifest to
them that believe and obey the Power: And He has purchased Eternal Salvation
for all that Believe and Obey the Gospel. But the Transgressors do not obey the
Gospel; the Spirit of Christ does not lead you to Transgression, and the Power
and Light that comes from Christ does not lead you to Pride, Vanity, Envy and
Bitterness: Wherever these things are led into, there is another Spirit, and
that other Spirit has another tendency, and it leads into the wrath of God.

And my Friends, this is that which my Soul desires at your hands, and it is
for your good and advantage; it is my Duty to discharge my Conscience, and to
speak plainly as the Lord shall give me utterance, to warn you that you abide
in the Truth; for if so be you be not saved, but will turn aside after your own
Hearts Lusts, after your Pride and the Vanity of the World, and the Lusts
thereof; you may blame your selves, and your Iniquity will be your Ruin. We
that have given up our selves to God for your sakes, and for the Churches sake;
we speak these things which we have Learned of God, and we earnestly press you
that are convinced that you walk in the Truth which you have believed: There is
no great need of more knowledge, and of the Vision of Heavenly and Divine
things; for abundance of you have seen more of the things of God than ever you
have traveled and come up unto. I would to God that every one of you that are
convinced would come up To the measure of the knowledge you have received: O!
that you would answer the Lords Power in opening and discovering his Mind and
Will concerning your Travel, and the things that belong to your Everlasting
Peace, that your footsteps may be directed thereby. If you will walk in this
undefiled way, you may lie down at Night, and rise in the Morning with Peace,
and in the favor of the Lord, and have the answer of a good Conscience in his
sight.

The means that must help and conduct us in this way, must be that familiar
Converse that the Soul must have with something greater then it self; the
Familiar Converse that the Soul must have with the Divine Power, with that
manifestation of Divine Light and Grace, which through Jesus Christ God has
given unto you. For if a man prize and esteem the Truth never so much, and
suffer never so much for it, and Love the Minister never so much; if he keep
not a Familiar Converse with the Truth; notwithstanding all his Profession of
Love to the Truths of the Gospel, and the Preachers of it, he will Reproach it:
Though he Profess and say I love thee, I love thee; though he has suffered
much in the way, yet if he love not the Truth in his own Heart, and desire not
to feel the excellency and the virtue of it; that man will certainly dishonor
the Truth, and grieve the Holy Spirit of God.

We warn you to take heed to your Way, and to your Feet in your Christian walk,
that you may come to have an Abundant entrance into the Kingdom of God. Pray to
God that the work of Regeneration may be wrought upon you, that you may be born
into another seed, and partake of the Divine Nature: Then, though the Devil
assault you, he cannot overcome you; he will find nothing in you whereby to
betray you into his hands, when that change i^ wrought, and when God has made
an alteration, and has brought you out of the Love of the World, and the Love
of Earthly things; And set your Affections on things above, where Christ sits
at the Right Hand of God. Now you can say here comes a Temptation with this
instrument, and the other instrument, and the Devil lays things before me that
he would have me to do; but I have no inclination to it, I have no mind to be
sucking at the Worlds breasts; but my mind is set upon this, that I may reach
acquaintance with God, Who will be a present help unto me, and tread Satan
under my Feet.

There is need of your continual care and vigilance, and that you Watch and
Pray that you may not enter into Temptation. It is not so easy a thing for a
Man or Woman while they are in this World to do any thing without Sin, but God
has called you to a Holy Profession; which is, that you should do all you can
do, to do every thing you do without Sin: For whether you Eat or Drink or
whatsoever you do; you should do all to the glory of God. Here is your
Profession, but where is the Life of it? It is only The Children of God that
are led by the Spirit of God. This Spirit we would have in you, and we would
have all you That have received Christ Jesus the Lord, to walk in him as you
have received him: Then you shall be kept undefiled in the Way, and delivered
from Temptation.

To this end you must be still waiting upon the Lord that you may have
acquaintance with him from Day to Day; you are in the World, but you should not
be of the World: The Prayer of our Lord Jesus Christ to his Heavenly Father for
his Disciples, was not that he should Take them out of the World, but keep them
from the Evil.

Merchants, Tradesmen, and Shopkeepers have always something to do in the
World, but they should Pray earnestly that they may Be kept from the Evil of
the World. There is nothing can be done in the World but there is evil in it,
which we shall be overcome by if we do not keep our watch. In the Government of
a Family there are occasions and provocations given men to be Passionate and
Furious; many occasions are offered to Men and Women, but we should not be
transported and overcome: Our Profession obliges us that when a Child or a
Servant gives a provocation, we are not to behave our selves unseemly and
unbecoming our Holy Profession; for it is not in their Power, nor in the Devils
Power neither to kindle your Wrath and Anger into a Flame: If you be upon your
watch, and wait upon the Lord; he will give you Wisdom and Strength to stand
against all Temptations whatsoever; and To order your Conversation according to
the will of God, and as becomes the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

In Merchandise and Buying and Selling there are Snares, and there is evil we
may run into, but here is our comfort and joy, there is no coertion, we cannot
be forced to Sin, the Devil can only lay a temptation before me; if thou will
tell a lie, equivocate, dissemble, here is an advantage for thee, but the Devil
with all his subtilty, power, and allurements, cannot say, thou shall run into
this Sin, and be overcome by this Tempation; for though of our selves we can do
nothing, yet in the name and strength of our Lord Jesus Christ we can do all
things; we can do that which is just, and stand over the Temptation, and
trample upon it, and not be overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. When
we have bought and sold, we may look back upon what we have done with pure
Minds, and clean Consciences in the sight of God, and we may come off Victors,
and more than Conquerors over Temptations, through Christ that has loved us.

The more a Christian keeps himself unspotted, and the more watchful he is in
his walking, he may go on from day to day, and see the snares of the Devil that
lies in this Vanity, and the other Vanity and Temptation, and escape it.

I would I could say of some of you that when the Devil laid a snare before
you, you did not run into it when you saw it. I have known some that have had
understanding enough, that they need not to be told where the snare of the
Devil lies; yet so it has been, the Devil and their own hearts lusts have
agr^ed together, and they have run into the Snare. This is from the Old
Confederacy that Men have with Gods Enemy; you are my Friends, says Christ, if
ye do whatsoever I command you; if you are the Friends of Christ, you will be
his Subjects, and yield Obedience to him: When he shows them a Snare they will
keep out of it; this is the proof of a true Christian, that he will be true in
a time of Trial, and will trust in that Divine Power that keeps him out of the
Snare.

One thing more I would say, that Divine Fellowship that you have with Christ
Jesus, it consists in holiness of Life and Conversation, and the exercise of a
good Conscience toward God, and toward Men. It is in vain to tell me that you
will walk in Unity with the Truth, unless you have Unity with the Truth in your
own hearts; you cannot deceive the Lord, nor long deceive his People neither.
Here is the Fellowship that you are to live in all your days, to live in
Fellowship with the People of God, and Communion of Saints; can the Saints have
Communion in any thing but Holiness? and Holiness is a Blessed Sacred thing, it
becomes the House of God for ever; they that are Saints are sanctified and made
holy; and he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are all of one,
for which cause he is not ashamed to call them Brethren, Heb. 2.11. They that
are sanctified are become Saints, they bring forth the Fruits of Holiness and
Sanctification, and they are come into Fellowship with God, and one another;
Every Branch in me (says Christ) that bears not Fruit he takes away, but
every branch that bears Fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more
Fruit. That branch which bears not Fruit, is cast into the Fire and burned.

There are some that bring forth Fruit, but it is Fruit to the Flesh, and the
Wicked one, but I hope you are not of that number. These separate themselves
from the Life of the true Vine, these have no Fellowship nor true Membership
with the Church of Christ, while they walk as Captives to the Devil, and Sin;
these are of the World, and not of the Church. If you would have Fellowship
with the Church, do not think to have it by outward Conformity. Do not think
that this will maintain your Fellowship with Christ, without a Life of inward
Holiness and Righteousness; for that day you break with the Truth in your
selves, you break off your Fellowship with the Church of God, and break your
peace with God, and can no way be restored again to the favor of God, but by
an unfeigned Repentance, For the Mystery of Faith is to be held in a pure
Conscience; how is my Conscience defiled if I wrong not this or the other Man
or Woman? some can hold the Mystery of Faith so far as it consists in a
Profession, they can profess it, and they can Preach it, but they have not held
the Mystery of Faith in Christ, so as to receive Life, and Virtue, and Comfort
from him. You have got the History of Words and Doctrines, but as soon as you
defile your Consciences by doing evil things, and depart from a Principle of
Grace, as soon as you defile your Consciences; you make Shipwreck of Faith.

But (my Friends) as you have a mind to continue and abide in the Faith, and in
this Travel and Heavenly Journey, I would give you this as a certainty, it may
do you good when my head lies low. The way to continue in the Church of God,
and Communion of Saints, and to retain your Peace with God, is to keep a
Familiar Converse with the Truth in your own Souls, and it will keep you from
falling, and lead and guide you in your Way, in your Travel and Journey to
Heaven. As the Mother when her Child cries after her, but cannot go, she takes
it by the hand and leads it: so if you keep close to the Truth, it can lead you
through all Difficulties, through great Business as well as little, and deliver
you from Snares and Temptations, and when you are assaulted it can bring you
off clear. As for Communion with God, and Communion with the Saints and People
of God, it stands in that Peace, and Purity, and keeping a Holy frame of mind
in your Heavenly Travel, in the undefiled Way, that will at last bring you to
the Undefiled Everlasting Rest that remains to the People of God.

Sermon VII. The Dawning of the Day of Grace and Salvation. Preached in
Grace Church Street, August 2. 1691.
My Friends,
YOU cannot but know and be sensible, that a Gospel Day, a Day of Grace and
Salvation has Dawned upon you, and that the Light of it has broken through
many Clouds of Darkness, which sometime you could not see through: This is an
inestimable and unspeakable mercy of God unto us, that the Light of the Gospel
of Salvation shines upon a People, that without it must be miserable.

There has been a very Dark and Cloudy Day upon our Forefathers, and also
upon us, in the days of our Ignorance. We are apt to wander hither and thither,
and to be turned aside with the wind of Men's Doctrine, that we could not find a
rest, a home or a settlement for our Souls in order to Life Eternal. And there
be many have cried unto God that he would please to reveal hi^ Way, and to make
it known unto them; and they have been apt to Covenant with the Lord, that if
once they could come to a certainty, they would walk in it: Unto such as these
the Lord has bowed his Ear, and has answered them; and in his answering the
cry of the Soul, he has brought Salvation near, and has revealed the Power by
which he would bring it to pass in every particular Soul that receives the
Gospel of his Son.

But now Friends, you that are sensible of this Blessed and Glorious Visitation
of this Gospel Day, in which Salvation is brought near; It is needful for every
one to examine their own Hearts whether they have really received the Gospel,
whether they have received and embraced the great bounty, and unspeakable
blessing of the Gospel, with which the Lord God of Life has visited us; or
whether they have rejected it: For though it is our happiness to know the
Visitation of Life, yet it does not follow that every one that is Visited will
be made an Heir of it; for There are many that fall short through their
unbelief. For there are many that have received the Gospel, who do disobey the
Gospel of Christ; and so have not Eternal Life by it.

When People come to this serious Examination of themselves herein, then the
Light and Grace that comes from Christ unto every one of us; both to him that
rejects it, as well as to him that receives it; that will make known to them
their State and Condition with respect to the Gospel of Christ: For there be a
great many that by an Alienation of their minds from the Light of Christ Jesus,
are apt to be mistaken in their State, and to make a better judgment of
themselves and of their state inwardly than really it will amount to in the day
that the Lord searches and tries them: But they that make a judgment of
themselves, by the openings and discoveries that they have, through the Light
of Christ Jesus (for so we are to do in this weighty matter;) they make a
judgment of there state and condition, according to the Evidence that the Spirit
of God bears to their Spirits; and this I hope you will all say is a most
certain Way: For if we go to compare our selves one with another, and say, I am
better than thee, and that man is better than I; here we are liable and subject
to a great many Errors where there ought to be none. But if we come to measure
and determine our present state and condition by the Evidence of the Spirit of
God, bearing witness with our Spirits; here we have a foundation to place an
infallible and certain judgment upon: And they that are obedient to the Gospel
of Christ, are capable of giving a sound judgment of their state, because they
are made partakers through Christ of that Grace and Light and Truth which they
should be obedient to; and they are brought into a kind of knowledge and
understanding of their Duty, whether they do it or no: And this knowledge and
this understanding that God does give them, makes them capable to pass a right
judgment upon their own state. They will not call it a good state, if it be an
evil state; and they will not call it an evil state if it be a good one: They
know it is good by the principle of Truth in their judgment.

Therefore since there are so many uncertainties in the World, and that men are
so apt to take hold of an uncertain way of judging and determining, even in
matters relating to their Souls: There is a greater aptness in People to take
hold of uncerta^nt es in judging about the matters of their Souls, than in
those things that relate to their Bodies: Seeing People are so liable to it, it
can do none of us harm to exhort one another, and move and stir up one another
to make a calculation of their state by something that will not deceive. There
are abundance deceived in this Country as well as other Countries; we shall
not need to go into foreign parts to find People deceived and deluded. It will
not be amiss to say, the Drunkard, the Swearer, and the Liar, and the
Oppressor, the Proud, the Malicious are deceived: If they were not so, they
would never be overcome by the wicked One; the Author of all evil, he has
deceived them in that they should think to go on in these things, and cry
peace, peace, to one another, and in their own Souls; this is a great Delusion,
and the Devil is the great Deluder that they are deluded by: And it would be
worth the while to find out that which should make a man think himself in a
happy state and hope to enjoy Eternal Life with God and Christ while he goes on
in Sin and Iniquity; it would be worth the while to find out the Delusion.

There is nothing so proper to turn every one to the Grace of God, as To search
their own Hearts, and try their Ways. This is that which will discover their
thoughts, and make them known to themselves; this is Gods Grace and Gift to men
while they are yet sinners and disobedient; he does not withold his Grace,
but gives his Grace, and Light, and Truth, Even to the Rebellious: He gives
Gifts to men, even to the Rebellious; that he might have a Place and dwelling
among them, that they might know there is a God That searches the Heart and
tries the Reins, and judges all Unrighteousness. If God has given thee so
much Grace, that he might have a dwelling in thy Heart; Should not that
restrain thee from Sin? That the Devil by his Temptations might not defile
thee, and unfit thee for the Kingdom of God. When the Lord comes to search the
Heart, it is in order to the purging of it, and the taking away of Iniquity and
Sin that would unfit thee for his Kingdom. This is a better Way, and more
excellent than Living to the Flesh, and fulfilling the Lusts thereof. Let
People live never so much to their own Corrupt Wills in Pride, and Wantonness,
and Looseness and the Vanity of their Minds; they will not find so much true
satisfaction and delight as in living a Holy Life, living in the fear of God,
and avoiding Sin, and keeping themselves from the Temptations and Snares of the
Devil.

This is a more excellent Way, and it is our work and business to declare to
People this more excellent Way, which all one time or other will confess: This
is Irksome, will some say, this will abate my Pleasure and Delights in the
World; and spoil my Secular Interest; if it were not for this reason, they
would grant it were better to Live a Holy Life, and to Live in the Fear of God,
than Live in the Service of the Devil; their carnal Interest lies in the way,
and ^^ig^^ ^own the Scale, but it is because thou joines^ with it, otherwise
the Devil, and all the P^wers of Hell could not weigh it down; I^ People would
consider these things seriously, they would say, it is better to serve God that
made them, and gave them Life, and Breath and Being; than him that would
destroy them. And then when they meet with the Pleasures and Delights of the
World that the Devil lays before them, they would never weigh down the scale
against a Divine Reason; if thou will give thy Heart to it, and seriously
consider it, it will weigh down the scale against all Temptations t^ live in
Sin, and Pleasure, and Jollity. I^ thou will but join with this Divine Reason
that tells thee, these Carnal Pleasures and Enjoyments are not necessary for
thy Soul* but it is necessary to live a Holy Heavenly Life, and to serve the
Lord that gave thee Life and Breath and all Things; that has vouchsafed thee
manifold Preservations If thou will but join with the Divine Reason, and
hearken to that which opens the Truth in thy own Heart, all the Dev^^ can do
cannot make thee serve him, for the Devil has no Coercion, no Power t^ force
thee to commit Sin; he cannot mak^ a man to work wickedness against his Will He
must first cloud the Understanding, an^ work upon the Will, and allure and
inti^^ the Affections by Earthly things: So tho^ can not be forced by the
Devil against thy will to yield to his Temptations, t^ commit any Sin; but thou
must say, I wi^ do it.

I confess when the understanding is br^bed and the will allured and seduced by
the Devils Temptations, there is no withstanding them: But on the other hand,
if me^ would give up themselves to the Power o^ God; they would have Divine
assistance, an^ joining with that Power; they should Be more than Conquerours.
Therefore we cannot but be encouraged to keep in the way of the Lord, and have
acquaintance with the Power of God which will preserve you, and give you
victory over all the Temptations and Assaults of the Devil; and without this
Power you cannot overcome, but if you have the assistance of this Power,
nothing will be too hard for you. When you are in straits and in a helpless
condition; you say sometimes, and are ready to cry out, I shall not overcome my
Spiritual Enemies, I shall never get victory over Sin and the World, and the
Flesh and the Devil; I shall never be able to withstand his Temptations, but
they will prevail over me all my days. No wonder you make this conclusion when
you have parted with your Trust and Dependence on that Power that is able to
overcome the Devil, and baffle him in your Thoughts, Words and Deeds.

You may be ready to say, alas, of my self I can do nothing, I am not able of
my Self so much as to think a good Thought; yet by Divine Assistance I do many
times think good thoughts: In me, that is, in my Flesh, there dwells nothing
that is good: Not in my Flesh abstractly; separate from the Power of God and
the Divine assistance vouchsafed unto me. In my Flesh dwells nothing that is
good. But if you take me as one that has Faith in Christ the Mediator, this
Faith embraces the tender of the Love of God in the Redeemer. And when I have
this Faith, there dwells a good thing in me; and from this good thing that dwells
in me, there flows forth good words and good actions; then you come to be
acquainted with a Power greater than your own, and if you will trust in it you
will be able to withstand Temptations: And when you are Tempted to any Sin, you
will not be only able to withstand the Temptation, but to overcome it too; and
to be more than Conquerors in your Spiritual Warfare. This relying upon, and
trusting in the Power of God, is that which we call Faith; and this Faith is
the Operation of God.

To speak in plain words, God will operate upon thy mind and make thee know
that this is his Power, his Light, and Truth, and Grace, by which he would save
thee. And after God has wrought and operated upon thee in this manner, it is
thy Duty then to believe in it, to put thy Trust and Confidence in it to be
delivered. But though Faith be offered unto me, yet it is not forced upon me;
God has offered Faith to all all men, but he does not force it upon all men:
All have an opportunity offered to them if they will but join with it; they may
have Faith wrought in them, and be fitted and prepared for the Kingdom of God.

There are many that are convinced of the Truth of the Doctrine that we Preach
to them, but they do not get into the Power of Truth; they will hear us Preach
of the Power of Truth, and will hear what this man says, and what the other
man says; and this will serve their turn, that they may talk of Religion, and
make a Profession: But they do not seek after that Power that should enable
them, To work out their own Salvation. These persons grow in knowledge, but
they do not grow in Grace; they will embrace Truth as far as Doctrines and
Words will go; they have Professed it, and they have suffered Reproach for it,
and yet they have not received the Truth in the Love of it; they cannot reach
to the Power of it; they glory in their knowledge and their understanding, but
they come not to that which sanctifies them, they are not able to resist the
Devil, and to stand against his Temptations; when a Temptation comes they join
with it, but they cannot withstand it: They come to the knowledge of Truth in
Words, but they come not to the knowledge of the Power of it in there Hearts and
Minds so as to make them prepared vessels for Gods Honor; God is more
dishonored by them, than by those that never Professed his Name. They fall
into the Temptation of the Devil, and never discern the Operation of Gods Power
in their own Hearts.

2. There is another Error as great as this; there are a great many that when
the Lords Power has wrought in their Hearts, and they have Truth opened to
them in the Power of it, yet they have not believed in it, they have not had
Faith wrought in their Hearts, they have not trusted in, nor relied upon the
Power; so they are weak and feeble; they have little Faith, which is next to
none at all. If they have never so much knowledge, how easily can the Devil
tempt them to Sin if they have not true Faith? This is the Victory, says the
Apostle that overcomes the World, even your Faith. This is not my Victory, that
I see the Subtilty and Wiles of Satan, and know much; but that which is my
Victory is my Faith: My trust is in the Power of God, and my relyance upon him
who is God mightier than all the strength of Men and Devils; that God who knows
my Heart. If I be faithful to him, and rely upon him by Faith, I shall resist
the Devil and withstand his Temptations, I might get Victory over them.

This Power you may have by the Gospel, but then you must be true to the Power
of it in your selves, for I do distinguish between the Gospel, as it is a
Doctrine and Word Preached, and an Invisible Divine Power working upon Men by
the Preaching of the Gospel; you will all hear the Gospel Preached, though you
be never so proud and huffy, and you will say it is true, but you can never
come to the saving knowledge of the Gospel it self, till you find it working
inwardly upon your selves.

We do not pretend to any power of opening Men's hearts, as God opened the heart
of Lidia; but when People come to wait upon God with a serious and religious
Mind, you will find the Power of the Word working effectually upon you, and so
the Gospel will become the Power of God to your Salvation. This is and shall be
my Prayer for all Religious Assemblies, that the Lord will be pleased to teach
them by his invisible word, and beget living desires in them toward himself,
and bring them to an esteem of Holiness and Righteousness, that they may adorn
the Gospel of Christ, by living Gospel Lives; for want of this what dishonor
have Men brought to God, and what reproach upon the Gospel? O that People would
come to hear the word Preached with desires to profit by it, and say, Lord do
me some good this day, give me a powerful refreshing Visitation at this time;
give me some living experience of thy Almighty Power working upon my heart,
that I may not be led by this Man's Word, and that Man's Opinion, for if they
mistake, I shall be mistaken; but if I build my Faith upon what God in his word
reveals to me, I shall infallibly know what I am to Believe and Practice, and I
shall receive from God some good thing, and shall know what is the good and
acceptable will of God; I shall find that there is Power in the Gospel for
building me up in my most Holy Faith, and that it is Mighty through God for the
pulling down of strong holds of Sin and Satan, and I shall see the Salvation of
God brought near to me.

When the Gospel becomes the Power of God, and works upon the Hearts of Men
by the operation of the Divine Power, they may distinguish between that Faith
that is built upon the Declarations of Men, and that which is wrought by the
Revelation and discovery of the mind of God in their own Souls; this is that
which we may bottom upon, and have an Anchor sure and steadfast in our own
Souls; when we depend upon Christ the Rock of Ages, both of this Age, and all
other Ages; my Faith must be placed upon him; and when I hear the word of a
Man, I must have an eye to God, that will reveal his power in my heart; this
will make me believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and to receive that ingrafted
word which is able to save my Soul. I shall not only hear the word, but live in
obedience to it. What signifies it to make a Profession that I have the Light
within, if I do not give obedience to it? for without that, it is all
Hypocrisy, all Pretense to Holiness, Righteousness, Mortification, is but
Hypocrisy any further than we find the power of Truth making an impression
upon our Hearts and Minds, bringing us to the obedience of Faith.

Let them therefore that profess Righteousness, live Righteously, and they that
hear the Gospel, live in obedience to it, and those that profess to be
Christians, let them live like Christians indeed: When every one comes to know
within himself so far as the Gospel has shined upon him, that they have
received the Truth in the Love of it, and love the Truth as it is in Jesus, and
are obedient to the Gospel, they shall know the Salvation of it. There is a
discovery of Gods Power in the Gospel, and there is a believing of it, and a
hoping in it; this is that which belongs to a Christian; this is the beginning,
and the first step to a Christian Life; we must believe in Christ, for without
Faith it is impossible to please God. He that believes, should be careful to
walk in the truth that he has received, and then he shall have a Testimony of
the Power and Virtue of it in his own Soul. This Virtue and Power, if he joins
with it, has the Government of his Heart and Life, and gives him Victory over
the World, and the Temptations of Satan.

You know in the Primitive Times, there were Believers that not only had Faith,
but lived by Faith, and by that Faith they got Victory over all the
allurements, and pleasure, and vanities of the World. I have fought a good
fight, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have finished my Course, I have kept
the Faith, henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the
Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me at that Day, and not to me only, but
unto all them also that love his appearing. I have got the victory, and there
remains an Eternal Weight of Glory for me.

My Friends, this is our ambition, and all our Labor among you, that you may
be built up in your most Holy Faith, that you may be brought home to Christ, in
all your Meetings, and gatherings together; you should desire to be enriched
with Faith, and to have your own Storehouse filled with all the Fruits of the
Spirit, and not only seek for the knowledge of the truth, but be subject and
obedient to what you know, otherwise by your Religion you will but hurt your
selves. And the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 1.12. speaks of knowing the Truth, and of
being established in it, and of some that, after they had escaped the
Pollutions of the World through the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, and the latter end with
them is worse than the beginning; for it had beed better for them not to have
known the way of Righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the
Holy Commandment delivered to them. There is a Power goes along with the
Preaching of the Gospel, that will enable you to do what you know; the Gospel
is a powerful Doctrine, whether you know it or not; or whether you submit to it
or not, yet pray remember that Gods People are a willing People in the day of
his Power, they are a certain sort of People that are devoted to God, and
submit all their Worldly Honors, Interests, Profits, and Pleasures to the
pleasure of God, and desire no other pleasure or happiness but to enjoy his
presence and favor; they are satisfied with this, and they are a happy People,
being made a willing People in the day of Gods Power; they are willing to deny
themselves, to take up their daily Cross, and to follow Christ, and have
Salvation upon his terms.

There are a great many Professors that have notions, and outside appearances,
but they want that Virtue, and Life, and power that should settle them in
Religion, and a love of the Truth. The Lord that knows our Hearts, knows that
our Labor and Travel among you has been designed for your good, and that our
hearts desire is, that you may be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus. We would
have People consider, and attend and hear what God speaks, and remember what he
has taught you by the Ministers of the Gospel: We have all ears to hear, let
us thank God for that, blessed be God that there is a power and an ability of
hearing with an outward ear, but there are many that will not so much as give
the hearing to what might from the Lord be spoken to them; He that has ears to
hear let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches; and what he says to
his own Soul; hear what the Spirit says of your own State and Condition; if it
be good, bless God for it; are you in so good a Condition that you have no
trouble, no distress to lament, no wants to supply, blessed are you that have
none; but if you find you have done amiss, and if the Lord should call you this
Night to give up your account, the Lord has a great deal against you I am
sure; and I tell you it is your duty to turn to the Lord with unfeigned
Repentance, that through Christ Jesus you may receive Pardon and Remission of
all your Sins, and so hear what the Spirit says to your selves, and in your
selves.

Pray come and make it your work and business the rest of the time that you
have to live, to work out your Salvation with fear and trembling, that when
Christ comes, you may say, come Lord Jesus come quickly, purfie me, and
sanctify me, and prepare me to be presented to the Father without spot, and
blameless; the day is coming that this will be the desire of every one of you.

And it is the earnest breathing and desire of my Soul, that every one of you
may have an eye unto the Lord, and he will look down from Heaven, and have
regard to the cry and the sighing of the Needy Soul. God will arise, and find
out the People that breath after him, and that desire to be reconciled to him
through the Mediator Christ Jesus; the Lord loves to find out such a People,
and I am glad to Preach to such a People the glad tidings of the Gospel, and to
teach them, as God has taught me, Good and Upright is the Lord, therefore will
he teach and guide you in the way which you should go. Walk humbly with God, he
will resist the Proud, but he will give Grace unto the humble. Walk uprightly
before the Lord in this Gospel Day that shines upon you; love the appearance of
God, and prize it, though it has not been so Glorious to you, as to some
others, yet despise not the Day of small things, live in subjection to that
Grace that the Lord has given you, and the Lord will give you more Grace, and
pour out his Spirit, and multiply his Blessings upon you; the Lord has begun a
good work in you, and he will carry it on to the day of Christ, and will
vouchsafe to bring the Glorious Day of his Visitation upon you.

To the Lord I leave you, to his Favor and Protection I commit you, remember
that there is no Salvation but by Jesus Christ, and none to be had by Christ,
till you come to Believe in him; to him that searches the Heart, and tries the
Reins, that pardons Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin, for the sake of Christ
Jesus the Mediator, to him I do commit you, not doubting but that he that has
begun a good work in you, will at last complete and finish it to his own Praise
and your Salvation.

Sermon IX. The Excellency of Peace with God. Preached at Devonshire-House,
August 5. 1691.
My Friends,
IT is Man's great happiness in this World to have Acquaintance with God, with
the Lord that made him, from whom he has Life and Breath here, and his Eternal
welfare hereafter; this doubtless every one will acknowledge one time or other,
that peace with God is a great Jewel, and the best Estate and Riches. It is the
great desire of every one that they may attain this one time or other and there
is a great neglect of happiness among the Sons and Daughters of Men, in not
seeking of it, and not laboring to attain it while it is to be had, Oh! how
many trifle away their time about fading and perishing Objects, and they know
at the same instant that they are yet destitute of the favor of God, and of
peace with him. Oh, Friends, the very thoughts and consideration of the worth
of this Jewel, and of the misery of being without it, and of the uncertainty of
our time while it is to be attained, might put every one upon a serious,
diligent enquiry after the way and means whereby they might attain it, that so
they might have a resting place for their Souls, and satisfaction to their
inward Man, that it shall go well with them, when time shall be no more.

And they that come to this Consideration, and are resolved in their hearts and
minds that they will labor after this, and set their whole endeavor after i^,
they will in the first place seek the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness
thereof: These do need a daily encouragement in their way to Heaven, and there
is nothing on the Lords part wanting to such Souls, but that they may attain
their desire.

But, alas, this has been, and is still the misery of thousands, they are
seeking after peace with God, but they err in the way to it, they do not seek
in that way, nor take hold of those Methods by and through which God has
promised Peace; you shall scarce meet with any body, but they would have
Eternal Life and Peace with God; we shall not need to persuade People to wish
for, and to desire to have Peace with God when they shall come to die, and lay
down their heads in the dust. There is not a Balaam but he desires to die the
Death of the Righteous, and that his last end may be like his. There is not a
Scribe, or Pharisee, or any that profess Religion, but they are seeking after
Eternal Life. The Lord Jesus did witness concerning them, that they were an
envious, proud, persecuting People, yet that they did seek after Eternal Life,
and they pitched upon some Methods and Ways whereby they thought to get and
enjoy it, but all this was error still, they were out of the way of attaining
it, and so are a great many people at this very day; they are in a State and
Condition wherein they are never like to enjoy it; the Methods and the ways
that they have chosen to themselves to find Eternal Life by, and to obtain
peace with God, will never answer the end.

And God has been pleased to discover to us the many by ways that People have
chosen and seek after peace with God by, therefore we are willing at all times
to show People their error in these great matters of highest concernment to
them. If they did err in their way of seeking to obtain some earthly good, and
missed of their end, they know the price of it, it is but a loss of so much,
which if they had taken a right course they might have attained; but it is an
unspeakable loss, an inestimable loss, if they lose peace with God, and all the
pains and labor they are at to obtain it.

I beseech you, Friends, consider these things, they are of great weight, and
you will say so one day or other; for, says our Savior, what will it profit a
Man to gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul, or what shall a Man give in
exchange for his Soul? O how sad is it to consider that a Man has not made
provision for his Soul, that he has not a place of rest for his immortal Soul,
and that the arms of the Lord Jesus Christ are not open to receive his Soul,
when his Body can retain it no longer. If this be a Man's state when he comes to
die, it had been better for him that he had never been born; Men may live, and
gather Riches, and enjoy a plentiful Estate, but if they be destitute of the
favor of God, and peace with him, what will they do with these perishing
enjoyments? they cannot possibly satisfy themselves with these Transitory
visible things, but if these persons only mind their Bodies, and neglect their
Souls, do they not live like the Beasts that perish? The Beast seeks after his
Meat, and when he finds it he eats it with delight and pleasure, and in a
little while he lies down and dies, and there is an end; so it is with careless
Souls, that have no regard to their future State; but they say, Let us eat and
drink and be merry, for to morrow we shall die.

Oh that every one of us here did apply our hearts seriously to the
consideration of the weight of these things that concern our Eternal State; if
persons did this, then they might come to an enquiry in their own Souls, what
method and way is most safe for the attaining of so blessed an end. For you
know there are abundance of People if you look up and down in the World, you
will see every body almost hunting up and down in some way of Religion or
other, and are engaged in Religious Performances what is the matter? what would
you have? We would have peace with God here, and everlasting Rest hereafter in
the Kingdom of Heaven, that we would have. Thus have the Nations been scattered
and driven up and down in the pursuit of Happiness and Satisfaction.

There is a general Belief amongst people, that there is a Heaven and a Hell,
and that they must have their part in one of them; there are none that desire a
Portion in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone. Those Profane Wretches
that cry to God to damn them, they do not mean what they speak, they would be
saved for all that; every one will cry at last, Lord have mercy upon me, if he
has but time to say so: Let us cry Lord have mercy upon me now, Lord bestow
thy Favor upon me Lord lift up the light of thy Countenance upon me, Lord
touch my hard heart, and soften it, and break it by the power of thy Spirit;
open mine eyes that I may see the wonderful things of thy Law; open mine ears
that I may hear thy voice. It is good for People to make use of time while they
have it, for whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, and God
will pour out his wrath upon those that call not upon his Name. He that calls
upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved, and God gives great encouragement to
People to seek after him.

What mean you by seeking after God? I have gone to Church, and said my
Prayers, I have gone in that way which my Fathers have lead me, and directed
me, I hope I shall find mercy at last; I am a Believer, I believe in Jesus
Christ that died for my Sins, and rose again for my Justification; I hope
through the merits of Jesus Christ I shall be saved. What mean you by seeking
after the Lord? Do not we all hear of him, and pray to him every day?

Is there any thing more common than this that People speak to one another
generally about? as for the general knowledge of God, you and I may see to our
sorrow, that a great many cry Lord, Lord, that are never like to enter into the
Kingdom of God. If all that take the name of God in their mouths should enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, it would be a very foul Kingdom: If all the
Drunkards and Whoremongers of England, and all profane ungodly Persons that
will take the name of God in their mouths should enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, it would be a very unclean and impure Kingdom; ^here is nothing enters
there that is unclean, that is ^bominable, that loves and makes a lie. So
that ^here must be some more peculiar People that shall have an abundant
entrance into the Kingdom of God, and there must be something that will
entitle them to it. For you may remember our Savior says, No Man knows the
Father but ^he Son, and he to whom the Son shall reveal him. So much as may be
known of God by works you and I may know without the Revelation of Christ, we
need not wait for this knowledge, we can have it by Books, we can have it
without Christ's Revelation. Nothing would serve some in our Saviors time but
Eternal Life, and our Lord Jesus bids them search the Scriptures, for in them
(says he) you think to have Eternal Life, and they are they which testify of
me. Yet for all the profession they made, he tells them, No Man has seen God
at any time, neither seen his shape, nor heard his voice; they were strangers
to God, though they had a general knowledge of God.

So it is at this day, there is a general knowledge of God, and people hope to
attain peace with God, and Eternal Life. Their Parents and their Tutors have
instructed them in the Principles of Christianity, and about the Attributes of
God, but all this will not bring a Man to a saving knowledge of God, and
reconciliation with him. For a Man that is as wicked as the Devil can make him
knows these things, and yet may be a Servant of the Devil, and do his work; he
is not born again and become a Child by all his External knowledge. Now he that
desires to come to the true saving knowledge of God, our Savior has told us,
That none know the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him,
that is a sure way to come to the true knowledge of God by Jesus Christ, he
has the Key that opens the Heart, and he will bring us to the true knowledge
of God the Father. Christ has the Key of David which opens and no Man
shuts, and shuts, and no Man opens. He can bring us to behold the glory
of God in his own Face; without him we are never like to come to the saving
knowledge of God.

Poor Man is in a lapsed fallen state, he is fallen into Sin, and is in a state
of alienation from God, and therefore he cannot come to him but by a Mediator;
There is one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, and he must
make peace for him, else he will never have it; how then shall we come to
Christ if he is the only means, and there is no other by which we may come to
the knowledge or God, as the Scripture speaks? hearken to it, how may we come
to Christ? I answer, you will never come to him, if he first come not to you,
you will never be able to do it. It is not coming to Christ when you say you do
believe that Christ died and rose again, and ascended up into Heaven, and sits
at the Right hand of God, and lives for ever to make intercession for his
People, and to read those words and Doctrines which he preached up and down at
Meetings, and solemn Assemblies; but if you believe that he is the Eternal Son
of God, and the Author of Eternal Salvation to all that obey him, you must come
to him, and entirely give up your selves to his Glory and Service; without this
you cannot come to him, nor will he bring you to the Father; Christ is come
near to us, he stands at the door of our hearts, and he stands and knocks;
behold, that is a word that calls for attention, for People to take notice of.
Behold I stand at the Door and knock; what do thou knock for? says Christ,
that thou may open the door of thy heart; for if any Man open I will come in
and Sup with him, and he with me, and my Father will come to him, and we will
make our Abode with him.

Now People are loath to be at this pains and trouble to open the door of their
Hearts to Christ, or they will not believe it is Christ that knocks, and that
rebukes and checks them when they refused to open to him; when they find
something within that reproves them for their Sin, and does condemn them that
they cannot be quiet: They will never believe that this is Christ; How can this
be Christ say they? He is Ascended up to Heaven, and he is at the Right Hand of
God the Father: Will you make me believe that this is Christ knocking at the
door of my Heart, I cannot believe it; but what says our Savior, Unless you
believe that I am he, you shall Die in your Sins. For there is no body else can
help you out of them.

There is a twofold consideration that we are to have of Christ; one is as he
is Made of a Woman, made under the Law; and another consideration of Christ is,
as he is the Eternal Son of God. Men have very gross thoughts of Christ to
think that because he is in Heaven, therefore he cannot be here too: They
measure him by themselves; they know because a man is at London, therefore he
cannot be at York at the same time. Thus these men object, Christ is in Heaven,
How can he be here? His Doctrine and Precepts are here, let us make use of them
all; he will come again at the Day of Judgment; but there is a Day of Judgment;
Does not he Judge you now? He is the Judge both of Quick and Dead, and he is
the searcher of Hearts, and the tryer of the Reins; so that thou can not
think an ill thought but he will tell thee of it; he is nearer to thee than the
Wife of thy bosom, or thy Husband that is near to thee: Husband and Wife may
think an ill thought, but they cannot tell one another of it; but Christ is one
that comes so near thee, that thou can not conceive an ill thought against
thy Neighbor but he will tell thee of it.

This is the Lord Christ, as a Spirit, a quickening Spirit who is made manifest
in the Flesh; He has given to every man a measure of the Spirit to profit
withal: The Grace of God which brings Salvation has appeared unto all men.
Notwithstanding the distinction by Learned Men between Common Grace and
Spiritual Grace; this Grace That brings Salvation has appeared to all men:
This manifestation of the Spirit and Light within we have from Christ. These
are the Ways and Methods that the Lord Christ has taken to approach near to
us. Now your own reason will tell you, if this be the way and means that Christ
takes to approach near to us, we cannot take another way to approach to him; if
Christ has taken (I say) this way to approach to us, by the Light and
Manifestation of his own Spirit which convinces us of Sin: If this be Christ's
way of coming to us, there can be no other way of our coming to him, but by the
same method of his Grace. He says, If you have the Light, Believe in the
Light. I have the Light, I am Enlightened, there is something that Discovers
my evil Thoughts; Why must I believe in the Light? That you may be the Children
of Light, as our Savior speaks, They that are the Children of Light shall have
it for their Inheritance; and they that are Children of Darkness, must have
Darkness for their Inheritance: While we have the Light, we must believe in it;
and we shall be made Children of Light: God has sent his Son, and the Son has
sent his Spirit and his Heavenly Grace into our Hearts, that we may draw near
to him, and be directed how to attain acquaintance with him; and to do that
which pleases God, and come to be in union with him, and do the works of God.
This is that which God requires of us, That we will believe on him whom he has
sent: That we may embrace the Light, and believe in the Light, in the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Pray what do you mean by believing? there is something within me Checks and
Reproves me for Sin, and calls me off from it, and bids me turn over a new
Leaf: Must I hearken to this? Is this that which you mean by believing? As to
this degree of believing, they that reject it now, shall believe hereafter; for
all the World at last, and the Damned in Hell shall certainly confess, that
there was Grace, and Light, and Means afforded to them, and they might have
gone farther and have escaped that misery that they are fallen into.

But there is a more precious Faith that I would have you partake of, a Faith
that works by Love. Since the Lord has been so gracious as to extend his
mercy and Love to me, I am so taken with the Love of God that I will be
obedient to him; this Faith that works by Love, is the Faith of Gods Elect;
that by which we may obtain Victory over our Passions and Lusts, and over Satan
and the Snares of the World; when we are come to close with the Grace of God,
and to believe in Christ; this is well: But we must also yield obedience and
subjection. Yet when Faith has brought forth obedience, you cannot be
justified by it, you cannot be saved by your obedience, but by Christ alone: He
is the Author and Finisher of our Faith, and a Mediator from first to last.

Now all that come to close with the appearance of Christ in their own hearts,
they have laid hold on the method appointed for their coming to him. It is
Christ they must hear, he is come so near to Men that they may hear his voice,
and hear him tell us our very thoughts. Why should not I hear him when he
checks me and reproves me for Sin? he comes near and tells me I have done
amiss; Lord, I have done iniquity, I will do so no more. Thus Christ Converseth
with his People, and does not only check and reprove them when they do that
which is evil, but persuades them and enables them to do good. He is a
Mediator, he is a middle Person, and has taken Flesh upon him, that he might
reconcile them to God, that do believe in him.

Now, when we come to have acquaintance with God, and have chosen him to be our
God, he teaches us to do what is good, and reproves us for what evil we have
done. Who can choose a better guide to lead him into acquaintance with God, than
Christ that is conversant with us, piercing into our thoughts, and speaking to
us? I may hear him with the inward ear of my heart, when I do evil he checks me
for it, and tells me the thing I should seek is of inestimable value, and if
through my unbelief and carelessness I miss of it, it had been better for me
that I had never been born; now we are in the way of coming to receive the end
of our Faith, the Salvation of our Souls, let us not neglect so great
Salvation. No Man can save himself, nor save the Soul of his Brother, nor find
a Ransom, nor procure an Offering for the expiating of his Sin, therefore let
every one that would have his Sin expiated and pardoned, and cannot be
satisfied and quieted till he has peace with God; let him come to Christ the
Mediator, and come with Faith and Truth in the inward parts, and submit to
him, and be willing to be ruled by him, then Christ will save him, and present
him without spot and blemish to his Father.

Consider that those that are the People of God are led by the Spirit of God,
and they have missed their way to reconciliation with God, that love any other
way, or think to come to God any other way than by Jesus the Mediator, their
labor will be lost, therefore I must exhort and persuade you that are out of
the way, that you would take Gods method, and come into Gods way. The torments
I have told you are made already; the bargain is not to make now, I will give
you so much to be at peace with God, or I will part with this and the other
thing that is dear to me. No, the Agreement is made between God and Christ, and
his Covenant is ordered in all things, and sure, and his Covenant stands sure
with none but those that are in Christ Jesus. There was a Covenant made with
Abraham. In thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. The
promises made to the Seed, that is to those that are in Christ, the Faithful
are counted the Seed, now the Faithful art those that are obedient to Christ,
who is the seed of the promise, in whom all the Families of the Earth are
blessed. They must come to Christ the seed, they must not rebel against him,
they must come to him and believe in him, be there never so many Nations and
Families in the World, the Promise is not to them, but to as many as the Lord
our God shall call.

Here is the way for People to lay hold of, for coming into acquaintance with
God, which is of so great necessity before they die, they must come to Christ
himself by his Spirit in their own hearts. We need not go to this and the other
Learned Man, and inquire of this and the other sort of People, but we must cry
to God for help and direction and come unto him, and give up all the powers and
faculties of our Souls to him to be governed by him: God will have Servants
that will be obedient to him; if ever we come to obtain Salvation we must have
another Master, one is your Master even Christ, I must come under the
government of Christ, and he must lead me and rule me if I will be a Child of
God*

When People come to see there is no effectua^ way but submitting to the grace
of God in their own hearts, and yielding themselves up to the dictates of the
Spirit of Christ in their Souls; when they come to this, there are many hazards
and difficulties to be encountered with; there is the appearance of the Cross
of Christ, and we must tak^ up this Cross if we will follow Christ, and be
obedient in all things unto him. This is that which wi^ kill all my pleasures,
lay wast all my Religion, an^ destroy all my hopes; I must be like a Man tha^
has built a house without a good foundation; must pull it all down again, and
I must come t^ build again upon a new foundation.

Here many have turned aside, the Cross of Christ has seemed to them so sharp,
and hard and intolerable, that they could not bear it; they would not be at
the charge of such a Religion, what must I part with all my delights, and my
beloved lusts and pleasures, and all my interests in the world for Christ? I
cannot part with these, these things lie in my way, I must rather lose my Soul
than part with what is so grateful to me, and join with the light of mine own
Conscience, and the truth in my inward parts? What must not I have so much as
liberty of thought? What must my thoughts be regulated by that which is so
cross and repugnant to my mind? Must I throw out all evil thoughts out of my
heart, and suffer none but good thoughts to remain there? Who can stand here?
Who can bear such strictness as this? Rather than endure this, I will choose to
lose my Soul; many have lost the Truth on this account, and many are in danger
to lose their Souls.

If there be in you, Sirs, any desire of peace with God, that you may not go
hence before you have attained it, take hold of the present opportunity;
hardness of heart is a desperate plague, it comes from a long obstinate
continuance in sin, when we have withstood the day of Gods Patience and
Long-Suffering, and grieved the Holy Spirit of God, then God gives us up to
our own Hearts Lusts; because we will not hearken to the voice of the Charmer,
charm he never so wisely; when we stop our ears and will not attend to the
Calls of God; when Men will go on and nothing can stop them in the career of
their Lusts and Pleasures, but they will retain their Carnal Delights and
Friendship with the World; this hardness of heart is a desperate plague; take
heed of it, that it does not overtake you, and bring ruin and destruction upon
you: Consider the Patience and Long-suffering of God, and let his goodness lead
you to Repentance; Consider God has waited to be gracious to you, he has
exercised much long-suffering and patience toward you; whereas he might have
cut you off long ago, and given you your Portion with the damned in Hell, but
he has hearkened to the Mediatou^ that has pleaded for you; he has extended
his patience and Long-suffering to the Wicked and Rebellious also; and for this
reason the Apostle tells us that Christ is the Savior of all Men, especially
of them that believe.

Now the Patience and Long-suffering of God has been lengthned out to us all,
and we have no^ improved it. Conscience has been sensible of the inward
strokes and rebukes of God for sin, and o^ the inward calls of his Grace to
bring us to Repentance; but we have not regarded those Calls, no^ hearkened to
the voice of God so as to hear that our Souls might live. O let us not put off
our Repentance any longer; but to day while it is called to day let us hear his
voice and not harden our hearts, but be of a tender heart, let our hearts be
softened, and entendered under the word of God, and under the strokes of his
Judgments. If ever the Lord bring you unto a tender frame, you will receive the
word of God with meekness, and mix it with Faith, then it will work effectually
to the amendment of you^ Lives, it will work Faith in those that are
Unbelievers, and strengthen the Faith of those that Believe. Then we shall have
cause to bless the Lord and Praise and Magnify his Great Name for hi^
Patience, Long-suffering, and Mercy, which at thi^ Day he has lengthned out,
and graciously extended to us.

Sermon X. True Christianity. Preached at Grace-Church street April 10. 1692.
THE Institution of the Christian Religion was for this purpose, that Holiness
and Righteousness might be brought forth in the Earth; that God through his Son
Jesus Christ might take delight in the Sons and Daughters of Men; that they be
reconciled to him; For that which the Law could not do by reason of its
weakness, God has had a purpose to do by his Son, and to him he gave all Power
in Heaven and Earth: that thereby he might be enabled to perform the great work
of God, in establishing Righteousness, and in bringing forth a Holy People, to
serve a Holy God. This is the great blessing that is come to us, and to all
Mankind, through our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that came to turn
every one from the evil of their ways. That is the way and method by which our
Lord Jesus accomplished the end of his coming, and the Will of his Heavenly
Father; Moses and all his Washings, and Offerings, and Sacrifices, could not
make clean and purge the Conscience, and by all his Offerings and Sacrifices,
he could not reconcile us to God: But Jesus by his once Offering himself did
forever perfect them that are sanctified: and by one Offering reconciled us to
the Father, and so brings forth a Holy Generation unto God, through
Regeneration and the Sanctification of the Spirit.

And seeing the Lord has been pleased in the Riches of his Grace, to open this
new and living way, for man's returning again into unity, and fellowship with
his Maker. The Question my Friends that I would put to you on the behalf of
God, is for all of you to consider, whether it is not best for every one of us
to lay hold of Salvation, to lay hold of that blessing wherewith the Lord has
blessed us, that so the principal institution of Christianity, might not only
be named and noised, but might come to be enjoyed and witnessed in every one of
our own Souls; And that all might wait with expectation on the Lord Jesus
Christ, for fulfilling of this great Work in themselves.

There is a general Notion among People, that Heaven is a Holy Place, and that
nothing that is unclean can enter into it to have a habitation there, when time
in this World shall be no more with us, and that time which we have given us, I
am sure is given us of God, as an opportunity of fitting and preparing us for
his dwelling place, and every day and hour of it ought to be employed in that
great Work, that so we might draw nearer and nearer to that state and condition
that suits and befits that holy dwelling where Saints and Angels, for evermore
praise the Great and Glorious God; So that I am persuaded you believe, that you
and all of us, are to be accountable to God for all the time which he has
bestowed upon us, whether we use it to the purposes for which he has given it,
or whether we mispend our time upon those things that are not profitable to us,
and upon these considerations we had need all of us to take heed to our present
state that we are come to, and are arrived at in the present time. As for the
future time, that we all know we are not sure of, and the future state that we
may hope to come to: There is no certainty of it, unless there be an
Improvement of the present time, and the opportunities of our present state,
therefore every one should apply their Hearts unto the seeking of Wisdom and
Understanding, and unto God that he may give us to understand our present
state, and our present fitness or unfitness for the Kingdom of Glory and
Happiness, and of that Holy dwelling we hope to enjoy for ever.

If I will but turn my mind inward, to the serious consideration of my present
state and condition, I can tell whether I am fit or unfit, to approach Gods
presence; And if I find I am unfit, I must have recourse to the Divine Working
of that great Power, which God has ordained and appointed for this purpose, I
must come to him to work all my works in me, and for me according to his good
pleasure; And that he never will do, unless it be by crossing me in my Carnal
Pleasure and Corrupt Inclinations, for that which pleases man, does not please
God: And God will not revoke the Holy Scripture that tells us, That they which
live in pleasure are dead while they live, they that are indulgent to their own
Affections and their own Delights, and their own humors, they are not at all
ready to please and glorify God, they are not fitted for it, therefore he
never sanctifies, nor brings any into a true Christian state, but through a
daily Cross, so that if I am not fitted and prepared to do that which is
pleasing to God I may be fitted by taking up a daily Cross to Glorify God
here, and enjoy him for ever.

What those things are that you are to do, I need not tell you, nor what you
have done, I judge no man: There is one that judges, he will tell you if you
ask him, what your state and condition is: He will tell the Drunkard if he ask
him, whether he is fit for Heaven, and also the Proud and Haughty person,
whether they are fit for Heaven; Let such as are guilty of these or any other
Sins, enquire of the Oracle in their own bosoms, am not I fit for Heaven,
notwithstanding all this? He will tell thee no, there is no unclean thing shall
enter there, nothing that defiles, nothing that hurts or oppresses; The Proud,
Peevish, Malicious person that is hurtful to others, that hurts his Neighbor,
he is shut out, Rev. 21.27. There shall in no wise enter into Heaven any thing
that defiles, and Rev. 22.15. For without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and
Whore-mongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a
Lie. None shall enter into the Holy City of God, but those that are purified
and purged from all Iniquity: Therefore God has sent his Son Jesus, seeing
none else could do it: Moses and the Prophets could not do it, therefore he
sent Jesus to bless us in turning every one of us from our Iniquites, and from
our evil ways; one man has this evil way, another that evil way: It is all one
to him, his Work is to turn every one of us from our evil ways.

But why then (you may say) are so few turned from their evil ways throughout
Christendom? Where Christ is Believed in, Professed, Read, and Heard, that yet
so few are converted and turned, for we see great numbers of Liars, Swearers,
Drunkards, Unclean Persons among us, where Christ is cried up at a mighty rate,
and yet people are not turned from the evil of their ways, there is something
sure that is the reason of it.

I would have all of you consider what the reason of it is, that those that
profess to be Christians are not turned from the evil of their ways, for Christ
has all Power in Heaven and Earth committed to him, and he is able to do it,
and he was sent from God on purpose to do it, but this is a certain truth, it
is not done, and what is the reason of it? He came to his own, and his own
received him not, what is the reason? He has caused his Grace to appear to
every man in the World, and yet they are not taught by it. Here is an object of
Faith for all, and God has offered Faith to all men, since he has raised up
Jesus from the Dead, yet men have it not; what is the reason that this Nation
as well as other Nations, have been puzzled about it, to find out things that
are so plain in Scripture, in relation to the Love of God to Mankind, and in
relation to Christ Jesus the Savior and yet so little of this work is wrought
among us?

Some say there is never a man in the World turned from the evil of their ways,
they live in Sin, and they are under a fixed necessity of continuing in it, and
lying under it all the days of their Life, for all this belief of the Love of
God, and the Power of Christ, and the Profession of it, some say there is never
a Christian in the World, can live one day without Sin, but will defile himself
with one thing or other, that the Devil will prevail over men, and Sin will
mixed it self with our Prayers, and Alms, and all our Holy Duties, so that there
is nothing clean, nothing pure that we can perform to God. There are others
that are not so rash in their Judgment, and not so inconsiderate but they will
believe some Men and Women may come to a Power and Ability to withstand Satan,
and resist him in his Temptations, and that there are those that have been
turned from the evil of their ways, but they are not. What is the matter? You
have spent time about this, what is the Reason you are not turned from the evil
of your ways? The Devil has told the People in former Days, that the reason
why men live in sin, is because God has appointed it so to be: and that has
stopped the mouths of many a plain-hearted, tender Christian: They have cried
unto God under the weight of their Sin, and they see no deliverance after all
their Prayers and Tears, because they have been told they cannot do it, and
that God has appointed it should be so, and required them to do that they
cannot do, and with some the Custom of Sin has taken away the Sense of Sin,
and they go on to Perdition in their security.

I hope my friends that God has opened your Eyes, and that you have better
thoughts of God, than that he has set you a Work and a Labor to do, and by
his Eternal Power and Decree, has Ordained that you should never do it, but
Damn you after all. Consider there are Men and Women in Bondage and Captivity,
and God has sent his Son into the World, to redeem them from all Iniquity, and
turn them from their evil ways; we are not turned, what is the reason of it? I
beseech you in the Love of God, be serious in this matter, serious you must be
one time or other, when you come to the Tribunal of God, there must be reason
given, or if not you must be speechless, therefore find it out here. What is
the reason that I am not turned from my evil ways, since God has sent his Son
Jesus to do it, and given him power to do it: why then is it not done?

Some persons upon enquiry, and after their search have brought forth this
reason: They have alleged the great power the Devil has; The Devil is so
strange and has such a Power to darken their minds, and inchant their
affections; He injects and brings things into their minds before they are aware
of it: I confess this, and I would say a little to it, I will confess as much
as the argument will bear, that the Devil has great power, and a way of
injection of things into the Spirits and Affections of People: He is Gods Enemy
and ours too, and he lies in wait and will do as much as he can against us,
that never a one shall get to Heaven, if we come thither it shall be against
his Will; I have heard some magnify the Devils Power to such a degree, that he
has such power over a man or woman, that he is able to keep them in sin all
their Life, though God has put forth the exceeding greatness of his power for
their Redemption: This is hard to believe, that the Devil is stronger than
Christ Jesus; Well, as great as his power is, we are in a capacity of knowing a
greater power, the Apostle did comfort Christians, notwithstanding all the
power the Devil used with them- to defile them, and keep them from inheriting
the, Kingdom of God, 1 John 1.4 You are of God, little children, and have
overcome, because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the World. I
would have you believe this, I do believe it heartily, the Devil only rules in
the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience, and he that has the Holy Ghost in
him, has one greater than be that is in the World: If you believe this, then
the question is thus far answered, that we have a Savior, a Deliverer, that is
more able to Redeem us, than the Devil is to keep us in Bondage; I hope we are
pretty well, now we know we have a keeper; We are assaulted with the Devils
temptations, and they are powerful, How powerful? He has so much power, as he
finds in us an inclination to yield and join with his temptations: If he comes
with a temptation to a man or woman that has no inclination to that thing he
tempts them to, if they hate that thing, then there is an end of it; The Devils
power lies in this, when he brings a temptation that I have an inclination to,
then he has a party within me, if that be rooted out what signifies his power,
let him bring never so many temptations?

There are many of you that understand what I say, if a temptation comes to a
man to commit an act of uncleanness, if he be a chaste man, there is no
inclination in him to yield to it, or join with it, he hates it, it is an
abomination it self, and grievous and provoking to God, if he does it, a man
abhors it, then what powerful temptation is it? If it light upon a man of an
unclean mind, that is defiled in his Heart, he has not only the Devil but his
own Lust and corrupt inclination to contend with, but if a man believes in
Christ, he relies upon him, and he will say, Lord thou see I am under a
temptation, here is a great and a powerful temptation, I can never withstand
it, but I trust in thy name and power, do thou arise and deliver me from it:
Thus when God does arise his Enemies will be scattered; Tho the Devils power be
great, yet there is a Deliverer that is stronger than he; The reason of men's
being overcome does not lie in the greatness of the Devils power, but in the
frailty of our nature.

Some will say that our natures are so frail and weak, and depraved, that we
can do nothing as we ought to do, this is given for another reason, and there
is truth in it, but that truth is but a delusion, they would excuse themselves
when they have yielded to a Temptation, I am weak and frail, I cannot resist
the Devil, tho the Devil is not stronger than Christ, yet he is stronger than
I, he works with all his might, power and subtilty to deceive me, and ensnare
me, and overcome me, I am a poor frail Creature, therefore I must yield to him;
This is a carnal reason, if I were to grapple with the Devil in mine own
strength, and to deliver my Soul, as if God had left me to my self; If thou say
Lord thou have set me to grapple with the Devil, and to withstand his
temptations, Lord I am not able to do it my self; God will answer thee, I have
laid help upon one that is mighty, that is able to save to the uttermost, all
that come to me by him; So that thou are not to overcome the Devil by thine own
power and ability; If any man reason thus, the reason is out of Doors, for we
are saved by Christ, therefore I cannot plead mine own frailty, seeing God has
provided a Rock for my defense that is stronger and higher than I, that I may
trust and rely upon.

So that you see the frailties of our nature is not a sufficient reason, we
must seek further for it yet, and when we come to search narrowly, and to the
bottom of our Hearts, I will tell you here it rests it has its center in the
perverseness of the Will that is in man, that is contrary to the Will of God;
It is the opposition of our Will to the Will of God, we may talk what we will
of Salvation and Christianity, that we have a mind to be saved, and go unto God
when we die, and to enjoy the happiness of Heaven to Eternity: We may talk
thus, but as long as the perverseness of the Will continues, I am the cause of
mine own ruin, if I grow in a profession, this perverse Will will grow up with
me under that profession, and under any profession; change your judgment and
opinion as often as you List, this will go along with you, the reason and the
bottom of things will come to this none can overcome the Devil, nor be a
Disciple of Christ without a daily cross. When people come to this to see a
necessity of taking up the cross of Christ, and denying themselves: When it
comes to this there are such shifts and evasions and arts that men have to
cover themselves, to make themselves and others believe, that such and such a
thing is consistent with the Will of God, and that they may do it, and save
their own Souls, but they boast of their own deceit, and are glad that they can
make a shift to save their own Souls, so that there is no hopes of their ever
being purged and cleansed, and of having any holy work brought forth by them;
but when a man comes to be sensible of his spititual condition, and is sincere
and honest, he will be ready to say unto God, if I be deceived in any thing,
open mine Eyes; Lord if I indulge my self in any thirg that has a contrariety
to thy holy Will: Lord I beseech thee discover it to me; such a man will lay
aside his own Will, if it be contrary to Gods Will: Now here is one that is a
very fit Object for Christ to work upon, he will not be long before he be
savingly convinced; When a man comes to the Word, he is convinced of such an
evil in his Conscience, where no body but God and himself were privy to it, or
had any knowledge of it: It is discovered that he lives in such a practice as
is contrary to the mind of God: God has convinced thee, that thou love it,
and live in it: And if thou will but break off that evil practice that has
sent his Son Jesus Christ to turn thee from every evil way, and to Redeem thee
from all Iniquity.

This truth has a savor in it, and if thou art sincere and upright, there is
nothing for thee to say or do, but to set thy self against every thing that is
contrary to the mind of God, and thou will have light from Heaven sent to guide
thee and direct thee in thy way thither, if thou will but receive that Grace
that is freely given of God unto thee through Jesus Christ, he will certainly
purge thee and cleanse thee from thy Sin, and turn thee from every evil way,
notwithstanding the perverseness of thine own Will and Power of Satan; And he
will work in thy Heart by his Grace, till it has wrought thee off from thine
iniquity, and wrought iniquity out of thee, and so bring forth a holy work to
God.

Without Faith it is impossible to please God; We cannot please God without
Faith, nor with it neither, unless it be the gift of God; There is a great deal
of Faith in this Nation, and in this City: But do you believe all their ways
are pleasing to God? We must distinguish of Faith here; When the Apostle would
give a description of saving Faith, he tells you that it is the Operation of
God, if I have not that Operation, and a regard to it, how can I have that
working? But since it is the dispensation of the Gospel of Christ, and design
of Christ to turn people to the operation of God in their own hearts, we would
have them believe it.

If there be a drunkard or a profane person, if God work faith in his Heart,
he will be convinced and say, what a stroke has the Lord given upon my
Conscience, and he will see it is the Lords work; Then believe whoever thou
art, and lay hold of this, for this is the Operation of God for thy Salvation,
this is the Operation of God upon a believing Soul, the stroke of Gods hand and
the Power of God, and then thou have the work of Faith, by which Faith thou art
enabled to keep thy self from that thing, that God smote thee for, and before
he give thee over, the same hour thou will find the same hand, smiting thee for
another sin, this will be like fire in thy bones kindling up thy zeal and
hatred against thy sin, and will kindle in thee a holy fire of Love to God,
that has not let thee lie in thy misery, but minded thy condition and had
compassion on thee; This love God will shed abroad, which will run over thy
Heart, He has shed abroad his Love, (says the Apostle) Romans 5. upon our
hearts by the Holy Ghost, to constrain us to yield obedience when thou fallest
into the way of Faith, which is the Operation of God, the Devil comes and
knocks and bounceth on this side and that, and will tempt thee to walk in thy
old course, but God will not fail to give thee the power to withstand
temptation.

The Lord Jesus Christ he works in peoples Hearts to turn them from the evil
of their ways that so he may bring forth holiness and righteousness, and redeem
a people from under the Bondage of Sin, and fit them for the Kingdom of his
Father, (and to use the Apostles words) present them before the Throne of God,
without spot and blameless, he will purify them, and sprinkle them from an
evil Conscience, their bodies being washed with pure Water, he will sanctify
the Creature, his Word is nigh them and in their Hearts, he begins a good Work
in many and will carry it on in one and in another.

Here lies the chief Work, it is the good hand of God must work all our works
in us and for us, according to the good pleasure of his will. work in you a
willingness to bear the Cross of Christ, and to deny your selves; he will
operate for you for this purpose, therefore you must commit your selves to him.

It is not our Preaching which will Convert Men to God, but it is the word of
God that is pure, which Converts the Soul to God, and that cleanses and fits
and prepares it for the Kingdom of Heaven, Psalm 19.7. We must come to the word
of God, that will convince us, reprove us, strengthen, encourage, illuminate
us, and do in us and for us all that we stand in need of; to him be all the
praise that works all in you, and prepares you to be a Peculiar People to
himself. To the word of his Grace I commit you all, take heed of doing any
thing contrary to it; if you do, that which would be your Comfort, will be your
Condemnation.

His Prayer after Sermon.
BLessed God, and Father of Life, thou art Glorious in Holiness, Infinite in
Power, the Eternal God, thy Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, thy Kingdom is
without end; O Lord, we bless and praise thy Glorious Name, that thou have made
known thy self among the Sons and Daughters of Men; thou bast revealed to us in
thy word the manner of the coming of thy Kingdom among us, in setting up
Righteousness and Truth, and throwing down iniquity. Powerful God of Life,
subject the Minds and Hearts of all thy People to thy Divine power and
pleasure, and let the dread of thy self rest upon our Spirits, that every one
of us may fear to Sin against thee, and to do despite to thy Spirit, the Spirit
of thy Grace, that we may every one of us turn from our iniquities, the evil of
our hearts and ways that we may praise thee in the Land of of the Living, and
may become faithful witnesses of that Salvation which thou have wrought for us,
and for all them that believe. Powerful God of Life, the Souls of thy People
which thou have gathered out of the World do praise and magnify thy Name for
what they have seen, and for what thou have wrought; thou have wonderfully
appeared in thy love, and brought Salvation near, and gathered many into it, it
is become a Wall, and a Bulwark to them that they are defended from the Evil
One, and from the evils of the world; O dearest God of Life raise up poor and
needy Souls out of the dust, that they may serve thee, and obey thee, and do
thy will, and show forth thy power and strength in their weakness and
infirmity, that they may trust in thee, and rely upon thee in the time of their
distress. Blessed Father of life and power, give grace to the humble and meek,
and teach them in thy way. We have had experience O Lord, of thy fulfilling thy
promises, thou art still fulfilling of them to all that truly wait upon thee;
thou have begun a good work, will thou carry it on to the praise and exaltation
of thy great name. Blessed Father reveal thy Power more and more in the Nations
round about, that they that long after the life of the living God may come and
find thee, and behold thy Divine appearance through the Son of thy Love in
their own Spirits, that so they may receive thy word, and thy word may quicken
them, to stand up from the dead, and live; for it is the living, the living, O
Lord, that praise thee, that honor thy Name, that offer praise and glorify
thee. O Blessed Father of Life carry on thy great work with power throughout
all the Earth, gather a remnant of thy seed that are scattered, and bring them
home into the Kingdom of thy dear Son, that we may praise thee together, and
rejoice in thy Name. Dear Father, thou have saved this Nation, the Land of our
Nativity to this day, by a wonderful power, by thy powerful arm; our Souls are
deeply sensible of the stretching forth of thy Almighty hand in our
preservation at this day; so living Father, if it be thy heavenly pleasure,
lengthen forth our Tranquillity, and the enjoyment of thy mercy and goodness to
the Inhabitants thereof, that they may learn to fear thee, and turn to thee
with their whole hearts, and break off by true Repentance from all those sins
that grieve thy Holy spirit; that so living Father of life, they may come to
walk in Love and in Union with the heavenly Power, and have Concord one with
another; and show forth the Power of thy Grace manifested to them, and magnify
thy love and power, and give thee honor and renown for that great salvation,
that thou have wrought for them, that so thy great name may be exalted, and thy
will may be done on Earth as it is in Heaven; that the Souls of thy People may
be refreshed with thy love, and the joys of thy presence, and the revelation of
thy Heavenly power, for this, Living Praises, and Christian Thanksgivings, we
offer up to thee, in and through the Lord Jesus Christ, for thou art worthy of
all Praise, and Glory, and Dominion, for ever, and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for Nath-Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultrey;
near Cheapside.
History.
1. ENglands Monarchs: Or, A Compendious Relation of the most remarkable
Transactions, from Julius Caesar to this present; adorned with Poems, and the
Picture of every Monarch, from K. Will. the Conqueror to K. Will. and Q. M.
With a List of the Nobility, and the number of the Lords and Commons in both
Houses of Parliament. Pr. one shilling. 2. THE History of the House of Orange:
Or, a Brief Relation of the Glorious Achievements of his Majesty's Renowned
Predecessors, and likewise of His own Heroic Actions, till the late wonderful
Revolution. Together with the History of K. W. and Q. M. Being an impartial
Account of the most Remarkable Passages from Their Majesty's Happy Accession to
the Throne, to this time. By R. B. Pr. 1 s. 3. THE History of the two late
Kings, Charles the II. and James the II. being an Impartial Account of the most
remarkable Transactions, and observable passages during their Reigns: and the
secret French and Popish Intrigues and Designs managed in those times. Pr. one
shilling. 4. THE History of Oliver Cromwell being an Impartial Account of all
the Battles, Sieges, and other Military Achievements, wherein he was engaged
in England, Scotland and Ireland; and likewise of his Civil Administrations,
while he had the Supreme Government, till his Death. Relating only matters of
Fact, without Reflection or Observation. By R.B. pr. 1 s. 5. THE Wars in
England, Scotland and Ireland, containing a particular and impartial Account of
all the Battles, Sieges, and other remarkable Transactions, Revolutions and
Accidents, which happened from the beginning of the Reign of K. Charles I. With
his Trial at large, and last speech; and the most considerable matters till
1660. With Pictures of several Accidents. Price one shilling. 6. HIstorical
Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and Present State of London and
Westminster, showing the Foundations, Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges, Churches,
Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals, Schools, Inns
of Courts, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with the most
remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other occurrences, for
above 900. years past, Pr. 1 s. 7. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities and Wonders
in England, Scotland and Ireland; or an account of many remarkable persons and
places; likewise of the Battles, Sieges, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders,
Lightnings, Fires, Murders and other Occurrences and Accidents for many hundred
years past: Together with the Natural and Artificial Rarities in every County
in England With several curious Sculptures. Price one shilling. ^. THE History
of the Kingdom of Ireland, being an Account of the Ancient Inhabitants, and of
all the Battles, Sieges, and other considerable Transactions both Civil and
Military in that Country, from the first Conquest thereof, under King Henry
II. till its entire Reduction by K. W. Together with the most remarkable
Passages, that have since happened there to this time. By R. B Price one
shilling. 9. THE English Empire in America, or a prospect of His Majesty's
Dominions in the West Indies, namely, New Foundland, New England New York,
New Jersey, Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina, Bermudas, Barbuda,
Anguilla, Monserrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antego, Mevis or Nevis, St.
Christophers, Barbados and Jamaica: With an account of their Discovery,
Situation and Product: The Religion and Manners of the Indians, etc.
Illustrated with Maps and Pictures. Price one shilling. 10. A View of the
English Acquisitions in Guinea and the East Indies: With an Account of the
Religion, Government, Wars, strange Customs, Beasts, Serpents, Monsters and
other Observables in those Countries ^ntermixt with Pleasant Relations. Price
one shilling. 11. THE English Hero: Or, Sir Francis Drake Revived. Being a full
Account of the dangerous Voyages, admirable Adventures, notable Discoveries,
and Magnanimous Achievements of that Valiant and Renowned Commander. By R. B.
Pr. 1 s. 12. TWo Journeys to Jerusalem, Containing first An Account of the
Travels of two English Pilgrims some years since to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo,
Alexandria, etc. 2. The Travels of 14 English Merchants in 1669. from
Scanderoon to Tripoly, Joppa, Ramah, Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Jericho, the River
Jordan, the Lake of Sodom and Gomorrah, etc. Beautified with Pictures. Price
one shilling. 13. EXtraordinary Adventures of several Famous Men: With the
strange Events, and signal mutations and changes in the Fortunes of diverse
Illustrious places and persons in all Ages; being an account of a multitude of
stupendous Revolutions, Accidents, and observable matters in diverse States and
Provinces throughout the World; with Pictures. Price 1 s. 14. THE History of
the Nine Worthies of the World: Three whereof were Gentiles; 1. Hector Son of
Priamus. 2. Alexander the great. 3. Julius Caesar. Three Jews. 4. Joshua. 5.
David. 6. Judas Maccabeus. Three Christians. 7. Arrhur K. of Britain. 8.
Charles the Great. 9. Godfrey of Bullen. Illustrated with Poems and the Picture
of each Worthy. By R. B. Price one shilling. 15. FEmale Excellency, or the
Ladies Glory, Illustrated in the Worthy Lives of nine Famous Women, who have
been renowned in several Ages of the World: As 1. Deborah the Prophetess. 2.
The valiant Judith. 3. Queen Esther. 4. The virtuous Susanah. 5. The Chaste
Lucretia. 6. Voadicia Q. of Britain. 7. Mariamne Wife of King Herod. 8
Clotilda Q. of France. 9. Andegoua Princess of Spain. The whole adorned with
poems and pictures to each History. By R. B. Pr. 1 s. 16. WOnderful Prodigies
of Judgment and Mercy discovered in above 300. memorable Histories; conraining,
1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists, etc. 2. The miserable ends of Magicians.
3. Remarkable predictions and presages of approaching Death. 4. Fearful
Judgments upon bloody Tyrants. 5. Admirable Deliverances from dangers at Sea
and Land. Lastly, Divine goodness to Penitents. Pr. 1 s. 17. Unparalleled
Varieties, or the matchless Actions and Passions of Mankind; displayed in near
400. notable Instances and Examples. Pr. 1 s. 18. THE Kingdom of darkness: Or,
the History of Demons, Specters, Witches, Apparitions, Possessions,
Disturbances, and other wonderful and supernatural Delusions, Mischievous Feats
and Malicious Impostures of the Devil. Containing near 80 memorable Relations,
Foreign and Domestic, both ancient and modern. Price one shilling. 19.
MEmorable Accidents and Unheard of Transactions, containing an account of
several strange Events: As the Deposing of Tyrants, Lamentable Shipwracks,
Dismal Misfortunes, Stratagems of War, Perilous Adventures, Happy Deliverances,
with other remarkable Occurences, and select Hi^torical passages, which have
happened in several Countries in this last Age. Printed at Brussels in 1691.
And Dedicated to His present Majesty K. William Published in English by R. B.
Pr. 1 s. 20. MArtyrs in Flames, or Popery in its true Colors, being a Brief
Relation of the horrid Cruelties and Persecutions of the Pope and Church of
Rome, for many hundreds of years past, to this time. Price one shilling.
Miscellanies.
22. DElights for the Ingenious, in above Fifty Select and Choice Emblems,
Divine and Moral, Ancient and Modern, curiously engraven upon Copper Plates,
with 50 delightful Poems and Lots, for the more lively Illustration of each
Emblem, whereby instruction and good counsel may be promoted and furthered, by
an honest and pleasant Recreation. Collected by R. B. Price 2 s. 6 d. 23.
EXcellent Contemplations Divine and Moral, written by the Magnanimous A. L.
Capel Baron of Hadham; with some account of his Life, and his affectionate
Letters to his Lady the day before his Death. As also the Speeches of D. Ham.
and the E. of Holl. who suffered with him. Price. 1 s. 24. WInter Evenings
Entertainments, in two parts, Containing, 1. Ten pleasant Relations of many
Rare and Notable Accidents and Occurrences: 2. Fifty Ingenious Riddles, with
their Explanations, and useful Observations and Morals upon each. Enlivened
with above 60. Pictures. Price one shilling. 25. DElightful Fables in Prose and
Verse, none of them to be found in Aesop, but collected from diverse ancient and
modern Authors, with Pictures and Morals. By R. B. Pr. 1 s.
Divinity.
26. THE Divine Banquet, or Sacramental Dev^tions, consisting of Morning and
Eveni^ Prayers, Contemplations and Hymns for every day* the Week, in order to a
more worthy Receiving (...) the Holy Communion, representing the several steps
and degrees of the Sorrows and sufferings of our blessed Savior, till he gave
up the Ghost. Pr. 1 s. 27. A Guide to Eternal Glory: Or, Brief Directions to
all Christians how to attain Everlasting Salvation: To which are added several
other small tracts. Price one shilling. 28. YOuths Divine Pastime; Containing
Forty Remarkable Scripture Histories, turned into English Verse. With Forty
Pictures. Pr. 8 d. 29. THE Young Man's Calling, or the whole Duty of Youth, in a
serious and compassionate Address to all young persons to remember their
Creator in the days of their Youth. With the Lives of several excellent young
Persons of both Sexes; and twelve curious Pictures. Price 1 s. 6 d. 30. MOunt
Sion, or a draught of that Church that shall stand for ever. Together with a
view of that World which shall be broken in pieces and consumed. By Will. Dyer,
Author of Christ's Famous Titles. Price one shilling. 31. JACOB Wrestling with
GOD, and prevailing: Or, a Treatise concerning the Necessity and Efficacy of
Faith in Prayer; Wherein diverse weighty Questions and Cases of Conscience
about praying in Faith, are stated and resolved. By Tho. Tailor formerly at
Edmunds Bury, now Pastor to a Congregation in Cambridge. Price one shilling.
FINIS.

