A short, But a Strict Account Taken of BABYLONS MERCHANTS Who are now Forcing
the Sale of their Old, Rusty, Cankered Ware, upon the People of these Nations.

And a stretching them out by their Line, (which as they say) is the Scriptures
in the New Testament, as they call Themselves Christian Ministers; Also a
comparing them with those that spoke them forth as their Examples, that all
People may see with whom they run Parallel.

By one that has fed upon the Whores Flesh these many Years, Handed to him by
these Merchants, and their Brethren; But now Witnesses it in him Consumed by
Fire.

RICHARD CRANE.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Sign of the Bull and Mouth, near
Aldersgate, 1660.

To the READER.
READER,
WHoever Thou art, or to whose hands this may come to be Read, be not hasty to
Judge, or Censure, before thou have, with that which is just of God in thy
Conscience, weighed the thing, and then with that, moderately Judge, and
Honestly in the sight of God, search the Scriptures, which makes mention of a
Christian Ministry and Ministers, and see if amongst them all a Parallel be
found of our Ministry of England, in this Generation, (who calls themselves
Ministers of the Gospel, and of Christ Jesus,) either in Call, Doctrine,
Practice, Maintenance, Life, or Conversation; and if by true search, and by
measuring and compareing them, they be found neither to answer Rule, nor
Example, spoken of in the Scriptures of Truth, where mention is made of
Christian Ministers, thou will and must with me conclude, that they are to be
denied; for such as is found in the Words, and not in the Life, are false,
Being compared with them who in the Life spoke the words that they now Read and
Preach out of the Life, which is Abomination and a Lie; For the Scriptures that
were spoken forth by the Apostles, and Ministers of Christ Jesus, through the
motion of the Eternal Spirit, were not left upon Record for that end, for to be
a Foundation to build Inventions, and Imaginations there upon; And so declare
and Preach People into the Words, but not into the Life of the Words, which the
Ministers of Christ did; For they said, be ye followers of us, as we are of
Christ Jesus; So here the Life and Words were not separated, but went together;
now the Life and Words are divided, and so the form of Godliness, but not the
Power, is held forth; And such as are Ministers of the Form, we are commanded
to turn from, and not own in the least; Now if they be found Parallel with
Antichristian Ministers which were such as had the form, but denied the Life,
let them be esteemed even such as they are, for that is a thing just and equal,
to say or speak of men even as they are, and no otherwise, being the Tree is
known by his Fruits; I have not the least hatred or prejudice upon me, to these
men's persons who calls themselves Christian Ministers, the Lord God bears me
record; but to that which works the wonders of deceit and lies, in the
Creature, I have absolute enmity with, and it is that which in the fear of the
Lord God I testify, with my Life, Soul, and Spirit, against, and my whole
strength; that the Creature may know to witness Redemption from the Bondage,
with which it is Captivated, and may come to be set free; which cannot be done,
till the mind come to be turned to a measure of Gods Spirit, manifest in the
Creature; by which thou will see, and know what is thy duty in short, both to
God and man, as he has (unto thee) made it known; that is to do justly, love
Mercy, walk Humbly with thy God, Mic. 6.8, And profess what thou will, I tell
thee, except thou comes to have thy mind turned to the Light of Christ Jesus,
which is his manifestation in thee, thy profession will not hid nor cover thee,
from the day that is coming upon all Hypocrites, both Teachers and Hearers, and
all Drunkards, Swearers, Whore-mongers, Liars, and all profane Persons
whatsoever, which is for the Lake of Gods fearful vengence, except true
Repentance be witnessed, and the evil turned from.

R. C.

GO to now ye Merchants of Babylon, who are now in this day bringing forth and
exposing to Sale, your old Cankered, Rusty and moth-eaten ware, unto the People
of this Nation of England; for in the Light of the Lord God I have beheld you,
which makes both you and your confused ware manifest; Rage not, neither be you
angry if you be brought to your Rule, which you say is the Scripture, and to
your examples which are they that spoke them forth, and you thereby measured
and compared, First you call your selves Christian Ministers (if so) we will
see whether you run parallel with the Christian Ministers in the Scriptures of
Truth mentioned, if you do; then you are to be owned, if not, then to be
denied; The Disciples who were followers of Jesus was sent forth into his
Ministry; and his command was, Provide neither Gold, nor Silver, nor Brass in
your purses, nor Scrip for your journey, neither two Coats, neither shoos, nor
yet staves; for the workman is worthy of his meat; and whatsoever City they
did enter, they were to enquire who in it was worthy, and there abide till they
went thence, and they did so, Mat. 10. And they were freely to give as they had
received; and when they returned they were asked if they lacked any thing, and
they said nay; now what is your Rule for your indenting with people in a
Parish, and saying I will be your Minister, provided you will give me so much a
year, and if they will not give it you, you will be none of their Minister, but
looks out for a better Market; Is your Rule for this in Scripture, and where is
your example for so doing? do you answer your examples? (the Disciples of
Jesus) you dare not say you do; then why are you to be owned Christian
Ministers, answering neither Rule nor example in Scripture; neither are you
Gospel Ministers; for the Gospel of Christ is the Power of God, and the Power
of God you never knew, neither witnessed; and the Gospel of Jesus owns no such
Ministers as you, neither does the true Church of whom Christ is Head, and
whose Faith he is defender of, know any such as you are to Minister unto them;
and where is your Rule in Scripture for the compelling your false maintenance
by Tithes, and sueing men at Law, and not only so, but casting into Prison and
taking treble damage; did ever the Ministers of Christ do so? Read the
Scripture and see Christ's Command was, Sue no man at the Law; and these
pretended Christian Minsters, they take no notice of that, as though his
comands were not to be observed in this generation; you take not them the
Apostles speaks of for your examples; that wandered up and down in sheepskins
and Goat Skins, and lie in dens and Caves of the Earth, and had no certain
dwelling place, of whom the World was not worthy; But your condition is far
otherwise, for you have certain dwelling places, if not the best in a Parish,
the second best; and so the world that lies in wickedness is worthy of you,
and you Minister unto them; I have even stood amazed when I have beheld you, as
you are every way in deceit in your Functions, or trades, your calls unto it,
your names, your gestures, and actions, your lives and conversations, and all
false and a lie; because you call your selves Christian Ministers and are not,
But Antichristians; for in nothing you parallel the true Ministers* but in many
things the false, as I shall make it appear, for the sake of the Ignorant,
amongst whom is your chief seat; the Scriptures makes mention of two sorts of
Ministers (that is to say) of Christ and of Antichrist; Ministers of Christ you
cannot say you are, because you examplifie not Christ's Ministers mentioned in
Scriptures; if you were, your Fruits would declare it, for by your Fruits you
are known; and so in the Light of Christ your cheat is seen; for truly never
did I hear or read of amongst all the Tradesmen and merchandising Artists in
the world, so gross and sordid a cheat, as Preaching in your way; the general
Term of preaching amongst you is called (Soul cure.)

I have often asked of several of the Brethren of your function, to satisfy
me what the Soul is, that the great outcry is made about, which is by your
medicine to be cured; and I never could be satisfied, neither answered; but
some would say one thing some another; One said it could not be defined because
it comprehended the Body with all its faculties; and the Lesser never
comprehended the Greater, but the greater the less; and so being ignorant of
the soul or what it is, your cure is you know not what, or to what, and so
truly Physicians worth nothing; where is your parallel in Scripture of this?
Search the Scriptures, the Ministers of Christ spoke what they knew, and
testified what they had seen, and what they had tasted, felt, and handled, even
the Good Word of Life, that they Ministered unto the true Church; and they were
edified, confirmed and strengthened by it, and in it; That which is imortal was
known, and so they knew what their Ministry was too; And such Ministers I own,
Love, and can receive, and have unity with; for such in this day are not to you
known, but as enemies, and so you deal with them, and persecute and imprison
them; If there was nothing else to make you manifest, it would make you
Antichrists Ministers; for the Ministers of Christ never persecuted, nor
imprisoned any for Conscience sake; search the Scriptures, and if you find that
ever the Ministers did so, call me liar; and if you cannot, rail not upon me if
I call you deceivers, and Antichrist, for you are so assuredly.

I have something to say to your Medicine, which you pretend to cure Souls
with; I would ask whether it be a Simple, or a Compound? You will hardly say it
is a Simple, because it is made as of so many Fragments, and of diverse sorts,
therefore a Compound; I shall speak something to some of your Ingredients you
use in the Composition so much cried up; first you have Prayer, called Common,
and indeed so it is, I hardly know any thing more Common, except Cursing, and
Swearing.

You have Music, called Organ, with Surplice, Tippit, Hood, Scarf, Girdle,
and a hideous noise of singing (which the Lord God will turn into howling) with
Men and Boys, trained up in that exercise; and there is a thing called an
Altar, with Railes to fence it in, and there is bowing, and cringing to a many
turned Pillars; then there is a getting up into a thing called a Pulpit, and
there is a Prayer as an Exordium to the Preachers Oration, then a verse, or
part of a verse out of Scripture is taken, to be his Theme, or Text; and then
he raises Doctrines, consequences, uses, and applications, and so rakes many
Old Authors, as Jerome, Ambros, Augustine, Basil, Calvin, and Luther, with many
several others not here mentioned; and so an hour or there abouts, puts an end
to that Market, where this Medicine for soul-cure is sold, and the sale of it
is much more abominable and a greater cheat, then the thing it self, if
possible; For in the first place, they sell it at an exceeding dear rate, and
when they have sold it, they have it again, and does so, may be ten or twenty
times over, and many times more; and when the poor people comes to consider
what they have had for their money, and comes to examine it with the Light of
Christ Jesus, then they see they have had nothing but a Lie all along; and if I
should know any Trads-man either Manual, or Artist, whatsoever, should so deal,
as to sell his Commodities, and have it again, once, much more so many times
over, truly I should post him up for a Cheat, and a Jugler, and ever renounce
having dealings with him more; now you outstrip all Tradsmen, or Artists
whatever, in selling your Medicine, (called soul-cure) for if any that are
convinced of the deceit of your ware, refuse to buy of you, you have a Law to
compel them to buy; if they will not buy, nevertheless you will have their
money, which is a thing not practiced in any public Market or Shop in England,
or in the World (I may say) except in your own; for if men come into a public
Market, or Shop, the sales-man of what Trade soever, does not compel any to buy
their ware, but leaves all to their freedom for their money; neither do they
sue men at Law, and cast into Prison, and when they have their bodies there,
they do not plunder and spoil their Goods, as you do; Now if it were lawful for
any Trads-men so to do, I should think, it should (rather) be lawful for such
as sold something for their money; for what you sell, is neither Meat, Drink,
nor Cloth, but a Jugle, and a Lie; for not only I, but many thousands in this
Nation, has left dealing in your Moth-eaten ware; Rage not because it is so
called, for it is so, The Light of Christ Jesus has manifested it, And this I
speak to your torment, that Thousands, and ten Thousands, has in these Nations
for ever renounced your Sorcery, and Witchchraft, GLORY, GLORY to God be given
for ever, and for ever.

And though you gather some heat from the Sun, that is newly arisen, and from
it receive some small vigor, and like the Insects, and the Reptilia of the
Earth, who creep out of their holes, as they feel the Suns warmth, by which
they are vivified and made strong; yet know such are not Parmanent, but the
withdrawing of the Suns heat from them, some returns to their holes, and some
perish; You may take this as a figure, for the Lord will cause the Sun to set,
which has quickened you; Then what will become of you? You will desire
strongly to set with it also, but you shall not; For there is a cup prepared
for you, being mixed with Plagues, Woes, Miseries, Sorrows, Torments, and
Eternal burnings, which you shall not pass; for you are found from the Lord
God worthy, and a treble portion is to be given unto you; And so much for your
unparaleld fraud of your Soul Cure, which you impudently force the sale of,
upon people whether they will or nay, for which there is no example to be found
amongst all Christian Ministers, mentioned in Scriptures, neither amongst sober
Tradsmen.

We have somewhat to say, as to your entering into that Trade, or Function,
which you call, Soul Cure; How came you thither? Prove your call, according to
the Scripture, which you say is your Rule, and see with whom you run Parallel;
The Apostles were made Ministers by the will of God, and not by the will of
man; You are made Ministers by the will of man, and not by the will of God;
therefore you run not parallel with them, who were Ministers of Christ; And as
to your Names, Orders, Gestures, and Inventions, being no example is found
amongst the Ministers of Christ, they are all out of the Life and Truth, and
for Judgment; You assume to your selves names of Bishops, Deacons, etc. There
is such names mentioned in Scripture, but what is that to you? are you ever the
more to be reverenced, because of these names? (Nay,) except you were found in
the Life of those the Scriptures speaks of, You are never the better for the
(...), but much the worse, except you be found in the Life of Bishops and
Deacons spoken of, Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5. etc. I own the name Bishop, and
likewise Deacon, if they be as is there spoken of, viz. Vnreproveable, the
husband of one Wife, Watching, Sober, Modest, given to Hospitality, apt to
Teach, not given to Wine, no Stricker, not given to filthy Lucre, but Gentle,
no fighter, not Coveteous; Let me ask of you, are you so in all, or any of
these things? Let that which is just of God in all your Consciences, (Judge and
Answer) if you be not, blame us not for denying of you; for we cannot own any
to be a Bishop, or Deacon, over us, except the name and Life go together; These
Bishops and Deacons mentioned in Scripture, had not only the names, but they
had the Life, from which the name proceeds; You have the name and want the
Life, and so stands in a Lie; And when we come to compare you with those that
were in the Life of Righteousness, which is so in deed, and not in name, you
are found utterly false, and to be denied of all that fear the Lord.

You have many old Names, whereby you distinguish your Orders, and Places,
which the Scriptures of Truth neither knows nor owns; as Deans, Archdeacons,
Prebends, Country Deanes, Bishops, called Suffragans, and several other;
Whence had you or who gave you those Names? Came not these from Rome? I am sure
the Ministers of Christ left them not (upon record in Scripture;) so you cannot
fly thither for shelter and refuge, neither can you cover your selves with
their words; for the Light of Christ Jesus which is the Life is arisen, which
does divide betwixt the Words and the Life, and has ripped up the false
coverings, and so you stand quite naked, and woe is to him that is covered, and
not with the Spirit of the Lord.

You likewise rage if any call you Priest, and swell, and take that to be
ignominious; but know, Priest was a good Name in its time, such as were once
ordained of God; But seeing you are angry at that, we grudge not the name of
Minister unto you; for the prodigal Son was once a Minister, yea, and an
Hireling too, as some Translators renders it, read Luke 15.15. (as you are)
Read what he Ministered, and to whom, but the Lord received him again after true
Repentance, and then he left off serving of husks.

And where is your example in Scripture, among the Ministers of Christ? For
your running to the powers of Earth, and crying unto them for help, to setle
you in your livings, and to get your false maintenance, called Tithes; With
whom run you parallel? (Can you answer) and seeing Christ's Ministers did not so,
you must needs be Antichrists; For there are but two sorts of Ministers, as I
have said; And where as you have said and say, you are Christ Ministers, and
upon true search it appears no such thing, neither by your rule, nor example;
Yet you run parallel with some mentioned in Scripture, (though not Christians)
and because you rank your selves amongst such as were Christian Ministers, we
will not go about to find out your parallel in the Old Testament; Though we
might mention the orders of Priests there; for Aarons Order you have nothing to
do with, for it was appointed of the Lord; Now there were other Orders of the
Priests besides Aarons, as Baals Priests, Priests of the Grove, and Jezebels
Chaplins, which drew the same breasts as you do; But because you say you are
Christian Ministers, we shall say little more to them; But to those which
Christ and his Ministers cried woe against, for they were in the same life you
were in; The Scriptures of Truth make mention of such as loved greetings in the
Markets, and the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and in the Synagogues, and
Assemblies, and loved to be called of men Master; And do you not these things?
Is it not so that you love greetings in the Markets, and the uppermost Rooms in
your Synagogues, and Assemblies, and at Feasts especially; and you dearly love
to be called of men Master.

I will give you an instance of one of your Brethren of the (confused)
Function, (though not of your Order) as he accounted himself; I met with him in
the street, and he had some words with me, and I did call him by his Name,
being known to me very well; for he had often wrote his name as I called him; but
the proud devil got up in him which would be called (Master) which was a name
not for me to call him, except I had been his servant; and truly he denied his
name, and said, his name was Master such a one, before such a Generation as I
was got up; I asked him how he came by the name Master, for I told him I had
assuredly seen him write his name otherwise; He told me he had served for it at
the University, and would be so called; And I told him that he that went by two
names, was reckoned a cheat; Now you that loves to be called Master, do not
call this man a fool in this, though truly he was so, except you your selves be
clear of his folly, least another may call you all fools; for you as dearly
love to be called so as he; I am sure though I never saw any man of that Coat
manifest his folly so much, but as to his art he had as much to say in it as
most of you all whatsoever; we are commanded to call no man Master, for One is
our Master, even One that you know not, for if you did, you would dread and
fear him; and we do ordinarily call men by those names as they call themselves
in their writings, if it be truth; and if you run not parallel with the above
mentioned in Scripture, being found in the same life and practice, let that
which is Just of God in you Judge; for I have laid you to your direct line,
Read Mat. 23. the chapter through.

And the Scriptures of truth makes mention of such as were Blind guids, and
that if the blind lead the blind they shall both fall into the Ditch; now
perhaps you will say you run not parallel with the blind guides there spoken of,
but I shall make it appear; know you wherefore they were called blind, they had
eyes as well as you, and yet they were so, because they could not see him who
was come in the figure or flesh, to fulfill and put an end to all that they did
profess and practice in their worship and Religion, according to the Ceremonies
of the Law; and because they had been worshipping in the types shaddows, and
ceremonies, which held forth Christ till he came in the figure or flesh, and
when he was come and all these things in him fulfilled and ended, yet these
that took upon them to be Teachers, Instructors, and guides of the people could
not see him, but continued still in those things which in him was fulfilled and
ended; now were not these blind guides justly so called; and were not they that
were led by them blind also, answer me; and did not the blind lead the blind,
and was not the Pit the end of their journey; and did not these blind guides
seduce people from the Doctrine and faith of Christ? which said which of the
Rulers have believed on him? was not this blind seducing? but perhaps you will
say we cannot parallel with them, for we are Christian Ministers, and we believe
he is come and has fulfilled what is here mentioned; but I deny you are either
Christ's Ministers or yet believers, for if you were his Ministers, you would
feed his flock, and not destroy them, and not Lord it over them as you do, and
if you believed in him you would do his works; but doing neither, you are
neither Christian Ministers nor believers; The Scripture of truth makes
mention of seducers, John's Epistle. 1, 2.26, 27.

These things have I written unto you concerning them that seduce you, but the
anointing of the Father which ye have received of him, abides in you, and ye
need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all
things, and is truth and is no lie, and even as it has taught ye, you shall
abide in him; now you that are Ministers of Confusion, I ask you is this
Scripture true or is it false? if it be true, as I think you dare not be so
impudent as say the contrary, then your ministry is at an end, and utterly to
be denied of all that have received the anointing, for they have received that
which is truth and no lie; you deny the Light of Christ within which is the
anointing of the Father; therefore your preaching is a lie, seducing and
Antichrist, and utterly to be denied; for as the blind guides saw not Christ
when he came in the flesh, to end and fulfill all their worships which stood in
the Ceremonies of the Law, so you blind guides in this generation, see not
Christ come in spirit, to lead, and guide, and instruct his people by the pure
measure of his light manifested in this age and generation; and all that has
received this, they have no need of your teaching; and therefore let all flesh
be silent before the Lord.

And as the blind guides did of old, so do you now; for they persecuted Christ
in the flesh, and you persecute him in spirit where ever he appears either in
Male or Famale; and the blind guides would go on in their way, that was in
their Temple worship, and observing days, and offering Sacrifices, though
their house were left unto them desolate, and so do you go on in your way,
though the witness of God rise in you to condemn you for so doing; yet I put a
vast difference between the Jews worship and yours, for it was true as it was
once commanded of God, and it was a type of Christ's coming in the flesh; but
yours was never commanded of God, therefore a lie, but invented of them that
were enemies to the appearance of Christ every way; and I desire to know of you
one thing, that is, what your worship is a type of, being you are enemies to
the coming of Christ in spirit, and cannot endure him where ever he appears,
and what it is that must fulfill it; but this is a Doctrine you cannot endure
to hear of, it is as the pangs of Death to you; what to speak of having your
Doctrine to come to an end? how will those sayings be fulfilled then (...),
allwaies learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth? For
this will please you better, that you may be ever teaching, though betwixt the
Womb and the Tomb, people be never the better, but much the worse, and them
that hangs on your Doctrine to the end, they are undone for ever.

Now Read your selves parallel with the blind guids.

And as to all your trinketts and inventions not worth nameing, and even as it
were numberless, has God chosen or required this at your hands, to be his
worship, (if he have) then without doubt he has chosen you to be Ministers, of
it; but I am sure he has neither chosen this for his worship, neither you for
his Ministers, for this is the worship God has chosen, even spirit and not art
and invention; and so likewise his Ministers that he has chosen, are poor,
weak, despised Ones, which is to the confounding of you and your Doctrine.

The Scripture makes mention of one Simon which used sorcery and witch-crafts,
read Acts 8, 9. In some things you parallel him, for he used sorcery and
bewitched people, But he believed and continued a season, and he profferd money
for the gift of the Holy spirit, that he might do as the Apostles did, but he
was cursed with his money, because he would purchase the gift of God with it,
which is not to be done; now had it been possible that the gift of God could
have been bought with money, however Simon (had bought the truth) and it is no
doubt but he would have made sale of it again, he would have sold the truth
though his end was cursed, because it was for gain; now you are found not to be
of Simons mind, for you are far from buying the truth, for you buy lies and
sell them again, and has them, and sells them again many times over; now
Simons Condition was more innocent and harmless then yours, for there was a
place of repentance found for him, and an exhortation unto it, verse 22. Truly
I cannot say so of you, I desire I could.

The Scripture makes mention of one Elymas a sorcerer, being by interpretation
so called Acts 13.8. And with him you run parallel; for the Deputy having
received the faith of Jesus, he with stood the Apostles and sought to turn him
away from it, but he was struck with blindness which was his reward; and you do
as your Brother did, for if any, especially Rulers or men in Authority, do come
to own the truth as it is manifest in them by the Light of Jesus, Oh what
stirring and striving, by reviling and reproching, by shifts and lies, do you
make to smother and stifle it; and what calumnies, aspersions, and slanders do
you cast upon the Ministers there of, calling of them Seducers, Deceivers,
Heathens, and Jesuits, with many other filthy names, to turn the minds of any
who have received it, from it again; and not so contented, but calls the Light
within damnable Heresy, damnable Blasphemy, a Doctrine of Devils, Popery, and
so forth; now is not this Elymas like (or worse) for it may be he might not
cast so many slanders upon the Apostles and the faith, as you do upon them now
who Minister in the faith; but Elymas withstood the Apostles to turn the
Deputy from the faith, and who knows but Elymas might have a great part of
his gain from that Deputy; it is very probable that before he received the
faith of Jesus at the Apostles preaching, he might believe Elymas his sorcery,
and so truly Elymas might receive much pay for it of him, for Sorcerers and
deviners, such as Elymas and you are, gives not your commodities (Gratis) But
are paid for them to purpose, as Thousands of my Friends in England and other
parts can witness, though they receive none of your sorcery, yet you take by
violence their goods and money from them, like Thieves, and pretends a Law for
it; Truly in this you outstrip all your Brotherhood mentioned in Scriptures
both in old and new Testament, as ever I read of; I have read of some who took
the wages of unrighteousness, But I know not whether (by force or nay) as you
do; I never read of any that took treeble damage as you do, and yet woe was
pronounced against such who took such wages, and if woe were their portion what
will be yours who exceeds them in all their wickedness and abominations?
surely, surely Hell has enlarged her lips wide for you, and it was high time
for Elymas to withstand the Apostles and the Faith, being the Deputy had
received it, and stand up for his God, which had received such a knock, as
could not be recovered, but by turning the Deputy who had received the Faith
from it again; What a condition was Elimas in, his socery would not serve, for
the Truth was received, therefore his God must famish; And truly so it is with
you, for if any comes to receive the Truth, then comes your sorcery and deceit
to be made manifest; and though formerly it has been accounted good ware,
whilst no better was known; But now that is a risen in people in this Nation,
which has laid open all your deceits, and false cheats, and rips up all your
deceitful coverings, and has turned your inside outward; I speak not this only
of you who are now the Merchants of the time, but I speak of all, and of all
orders whatsoever, called or known by, out of the Life of Truth, which the Lord
God has manifested by his Light, You are all utterly to be denied in the sight
of God for ever; and as to most of your brethren which you have supplanted, and
turned out of their Markets and Shops, a while since they pleaded more right to
them then you, now you plead more right to them then they, and so one brother
supplanting another; You need not deal so cruelly with them as many say you do,
they are your brothers, for you have all one Mother, and has sucked all one
breast, and so you are all of one nature, and they are as ready in the work of
persecution, and as active as you can be; Therefore according to the equity of
that, they might join with you in your trading, as some already has done, for
they are very diligent and hand^e, and if they may not be allowed to be
shopkeepers, let them be, shop-sweepers, for rather then sit our, they will do
any thing; I know they are stiff and proud, but they must acknowledge you to
be their Eldest brother, and your Father does so compute you; But know this
assuredly, you are brethren in iniquity, and your whole lives, practices and
professions, being condemned by the Spirit of God, and the Apostles, and
Scriptures, stands in a lie, and so to be denied of all that fear the Lord; You
are even discovered and known to be as you are, viz. Antichrists, Deceivers,
Socerers, and ravening Wolves, and you rage, and your fury is kindled, and
casts out whole floods of slanders, and reproaches, after the Truth, because
your God which is your belly is in danger to be starved and famished, for you
know not, neither will you know, any way of preparing your sacrifices for your
God, but that cursed way, that is, by extracting of them from the drops of
sweat that runs from other men's faces; for you abominate and abhor labor, and
the Scriptures which says, In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread,
and he that will not work shall not eat, you seldom or never make use of, and
so you may offer fat Sacrifices unto your God (which is your belly) obtaining
them at those rates; but know assuredly as you have taken and wrung the drops
of sweat from the faces of such as have had no dealings with you, (especially)
the Lord God has put them with their Tears also up into a bottle, which he
keeps for a perpetual memorial of their Innocent sufferings, and your cruelty,
and tyranny, and injustice; therefore Flames, Flames, Flames of fire is
prepared by the Lord to consume you as dry stubble; In the Light of the eternal
God I have beheld you and all your actions, and take them all together, and
Rake the pit of confusion, and bind up your stuff in a bundle, and indeed there
is no parallel nor never was, that ever I could read of, or hear amongst any
Ministers, Christian, or Antichristian, or amongst sober Tradesmen, or Artists
whatsoever, but you outstrip all of them in your way of wickedness; if I
should parallel you with Salvage Beasts, I could not truly do it, I think be
they never so fierce, for they stand in kind, Beasts of prey, answers the end
of their Creation, and so does all other Creatures of the Salvage kind; but men
of prey such as you are, is quit out of kind, and not to be paraleld by any
thing that draws breath; Oh what shall I say of you, I have seen you, I have
seen you, in the eternal, and you are the poorest, Creatures that has
Communion with the Common air; every Creature answers the end of his
Creation but man, yet notwithstanding as man is in the simplicity found, there
is a remedy for him; but for you the worst of men, Oh full of all subtilty,
Children generated of the seed of deceit, brought forth out of the womb of
wickedness, and nourished up at the breasts of witchcraft, and rocked in the
cradle of Idleness, woe is me for you, for the day which I see is coming upon
you from the Lord, and all them that you have made drunk, by putting your
bottle of Poison to their noses, who have drunk deep, and so are become one in
nature with you; it had been better you had never been born, It had been better
for you, that you had been strangled in your Mothers Wombs, and still births
had been presented to them, then Living Children into their Arms; Oh what
shall I say concerning you, Gods everlasting decree is Sealed against you,
burnings, burnings, burnings, with unquenchable fire is your portion from the
Lord God of Heaven and Earth, whose pure spirit you have long grieved; Oh how
have you been warned, admonished, exhorted, and reproved, and in true love to
your souls, by the Servants of the Lord, of the day which is even coming upon
you, and you have not taken warning of them, but for their love you have
rewarded them with whippings, stocks, and imprisonments, and spoil of goods,
and some loss of life, whose blood is treasured up against the day of your
account; dreadful will it be to you for there is no covering found for you,
neither refuge to fly unto, it is the hand of the Lord that has searched you
out, and there is no resisting of it; Oh it is the hand of the Lord that is
strong and mighty, And Oh that men that are brought forth in time, stands in
time, and ends in time, should contend with eternity; did ever the lesser
comprehend the greater, speak and answer, if not, then how dare you presume to
frame and invent a worship to the eternal God, and under the name of
Gospel Worship, and Christian Ministry; is he worshipped in Temples made with
hands, or Stone-houses, falsely by you called Churches, or think you your
Altars and turned Pillars called Railes, your Organs, your Singing-Men, and
Boys, with Surplices, Tippits, Scarffs, Long Garments, and Girdles, with your
invented prayer called Common, with your preaching, and the best of your
sacrifices, enters into the ears of the eternal God; (nay) you are highly
mistaken, A pure God must have pure praise, God praises God; his praise and
worship for ever and ever, is from thee unto thee; now if you cannot read this,
let your mouths for ever be stopped; and cease your Invented Instruments for
worship, for an evil Savor does your sacrifices send forth, even a loathing to
the Lord God of Heaven and Earth; but the God which you Imagine, let him be
worshipped according to your Imaginations and inventions; and think not to mock
the Eternal God by your Devices; I tell you again, as I have said, it is Spirit
and not Art, except you will dare to presume to make the Lord God any thing
else but a Spirit, if you do, you are Blasphemers in the highest degree: Oh I
have seen eternity, I have seen eternity, and a dreadful day is very near at
hand to be revealed, Oh the overflowing scourge, Oh the Besome of destruction,
Oh the plague and vengeance that is to be powered upon the wicked in this
Nation, both Priest and People; howl, howl, Hireling Priests of all Orders, for
the Wine Press of the wrath of God Almighty is even near to be trod, into which
you are to be cast, for the Lord God has spoken it, and he will not repent; a
trebble portion, a trebble portion of the Plagues of God Almighty, are you to
have above all others; Just, Holy, and True, Art thou God eternal that has
thus judged, and thy judgments are holy, just, and true, Praises, Praises from
the immortal pure seed, in all thine be given unto thee for ever and for ever.

What more shall I say of you, Oh you miserable and most wretched! you have
been the ringleaders to bloodshed, you have been the ringleaders to
persecution, your hands are full of it; You have been the men that has spurred
on the Magistrate, to lay violent and cruel hands on the Innocent, when many
times they would not have done it, and you have given them no rest, till they
have fulfilled and satisfied your bloody minds; and very few of you, but have
changed with every change, you have served every Power, and have been true to
none; Oh most deceitful! you have in all these overtures and changes, which
has been wrought in these Nations, of late years, Kept your heads above the
water, and have floated along with the streams when many who have gone hand in
hand with you, has sunk in every change, and especially this late; Oh! what
shall I say, my bowels, my bowels, I bear a burden for you, which I cannot
utter; Oh! your deceitful flattery; Oh! how have you blasphemed God, and has
ascribed to man, whose breath is in his Nostrils, that which belongs not unto
him, especially if he stands in his unregenerated estate; Had, and have you not
cursed ends in this? Answer, Are, or were they so as you bespeak, and do
bespeak them to be? One thing I assuredly know, that the Powers since, and the
Powers present, never said so of themselves, whatever they thought and think,
as you said, and say; And all for the sake of your God, which is your Belly;
Did not many of you to the Powers gone, ascribe names, to them that they never
knew nor witnessed the Life in the least, of whom you spoke? And do you not now
ascribe to the chief Power, that which I am sure he calls not himself? As the
express Image of the Heavenly Father; Witness your Surry address to him,
signed by so many Doctors of D. St. of. D. See it in the public Intelligence
given forth the 16. of the 6. Month D. D. St D. L. L. D.
as you call your selves; Now was ever any called the express Image of the
Heavenly Father, but Christ Jesus? And think you the chief Magistrate of these
Nations, does not see your ends, and your flatteries in this, and many other
things? I am persuaded, when ever his mind comes truly to be turned, to that
which is just of God in him, He will see you to be even so as I have said, the
greatest Sycophants, and Flaterers, that lives in these Nations; Woe, woe, woe,
unto you, for you are of that Generation, upon whom all the Righteous blood,
from Abel, even to this day, have been charged; Oh! dreadful God, must it be so
that thy decree which thou have sealed, must come to pass, and be fulfilled in
this Generation; And must these fill up the cup of their great Grandfathers,
Bonner and Gardener, etc. By pouring out the blood of thy dear purchased Lambs
in this Generation; (If so) Thy will Infinite God be done, and Glorify thy
self in what thou have decreed, Eternal God, for thou art right worthy to be
Feared, Praised, Honored, and Glorified, of all thy Children and dear Lambs,
for ever and for ever.

But certainly know this, it must be your bloody Sacrifice, which you will
offer, viz. The Lambs of Jesus, That will sink you into the Pit of Eternal
destruction; for your next fall will be as the fall of a Millstone into the Sea,
(Read that) GOD ETERNAL has spoken it, and I faithfully believe it, and most
of you are the men must perform it, and shall see it, and feel it, before you
go away from hence, and be no more seen.

And as for me, an object of the living mercy of the Eternal God, who as a
brand plucked out of the fire, and as a Fowl that narrowly escapes the Fowlers
net, so I, even I, am brought out of your confusion and sorcery, Praises,
praises, be given to the Imortal God, from thy, pure seed in me, and all, for
ever, and for ever; And by thy pure Power am I made to stand a witness,
against all false teachers, both in England, and the rest of the Nations
whatsoever, in my measure, and by whatsoever names they are called and
distinguished, being all out of the Life and Truth; And rage not against me
because of my testimony here written; for I have said you to your line, and
stretched it over you, and if you fall short, let that rise in you, that will
show you the cause; And I have compared you with your example mentioned in
Scripture, viz. Christian Ministers, And answering not them, you have reason to
be silent, and stop your mouths, and sit down contented, to be ranked and
paralel'd with them that lived the same life, that you are found in; For to
compare you with such, is truth, and no slander; and so I finish this my
Testimony concerning you.

THE END.
Errors.
Page 4. line 7. for know read come, Page 7. l. 16. for Ministers read
Ministers of Christ, l. 22. for as read up.


