Christ Exalted, AND Dr. CRISP Vindicated IN Several Points called Antinomian,
being Cleared, From Neonomian Suggestions Alleged, By some Remarks on Mr. A --
his Rebuke to Mr. Lob.

Showing from Scripture, and most Orthodox Authors, the Invalidity of his
Rebuke, in taxing the Doctor to be Apocryphal, and his Doctrine Antinomian.

WITH Some Observations on the Bishop of Worcester's Letter concerning the
great Point of the Change of Persons between Christ and Believers, wherein he
differs from the Doctor, but yet mildly and genteely treats him, though he
comes short of the Truth, as contained in the Doctrine of the Church of England.

With a Table to find the Heads insisted on.

Done by a Happy, though Unworthy, Branch of the said Doctor.

It was needful for me to write to you, and exhort you that ye should earnestly
contend for the Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. And once
professed by the Church of England.

His Neighbor comes after him, and searches him, Prove. 18.17.

LONDON, Printed for the Author; and are to be had at Mr. John Marshall's at
the Bible in Grace Church Street. School.

ERRATA.
PAge 11 Line 22 for thereof read there, of. 25. l. 6. r. Arminian. 34. l. 22.
r. Arminian. 36. l. 1. r. as Believers. 45. l. last, r. She. 46. l. 1. of r.
our. 47. l. 22. r. by the Power. 48. l. 20. r. laid. 65. l. 5. and 6. r. (...)
not (...). 68. l. 37. r. Racovia. 81. l. 24. make the stop at allowed, 83. l.
9. r. he bare. 27. r. and act. 96. l. 27. r. Reporter. 97. l. 5. the stop at
for, 98. l. last, r. zanachta. 100. l. 5. r. reprobavit. 10. r. kareu. 103. l.
15. r. perfection. 109. l. 5. for them r. him. 111. l. 15. r. chattathi- 115.
l. 27. r. with a Passage. 31. make the stop at doing, 116. l. 10. for as to say
r. by saying.
To his several Particular Friends of the late House of Commons, Assembled in
Parliament.
Gentlemen and Right Honorable Patriots,
MANY Daughters have done Virtuously, and thou excellest them all, was a Motto
on the Memorial of Q. Elizabeth, hung up in most Churches, for the good Laws
she made against Popery. What high Encomiums of Praise, and great Retributions
of Thanks, then are due to you, right Christian Senators, for your warm
Addressing His Majesty to suppress the Blasphemy and Debauchery which the
Nation abounds with? And upon His wise referring back so great a Work to your
selves, to effect it by an Act of Parliament, for your thereupon forming the
late good Act, wherein it is, to your great Honor, Enacted, That if any
Person........ shall by Writing, Printing, Teaching, or advised Speaking, deny
any One of the Persons, in the Holy Trinity, to be God, or shall assert or
maintain there are more Gods than One, or shall deny the Christian Religion to
be True, or the Holy Scriptures, of the Old and New Testament, to be of Divine
Authority, shall suffer so and so. Although there be no Reward to the
Prosecutor, it is hoped you have thereby, in a good measure, put a stop to the
carriere of the Profane Tongues and Pens of a debauched Crew of this Age, that
Impiously deny the Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, that mock at all Revealed
Religion, as contained in the Scriptures, that call the Scriptures an Inken
Divinity, and the Blood of our Lord Jesus, as the Blood of another good Man,
and make his dreadful Agony and Sufferings, but Facile Representations of what
Christ does in us, and that could Print, That when God has glutted himself,
etc. (as in the Book): For your Zeal to God's Glory in which, may you have an
Eternal Reward above, and many good days of God's Blessing here, is my
Supplication to the Throne of Grace. But besides these Dragons against the
Christian Religion, which you have been quelling, we have the Foxes running
about that spoil the Vines; those that under the fair Species of Man's
Holiness, would undermine God's Righteousness in our Justification: For going
about to establish their own Righteousness, they have not submitted to the
Righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. That is, they are against being justified
freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus, against having
his Righteousness imputed to them, to be unto, and upon, all that believe,
though the Scripture is clear herein. But besides the pure Word of God, which
is the Sheet-Anchor of our Religion, it is a great Mercy that in Disputes, with
Men of corrupt Minds, that we have the Fundamentals of Christianity contained
in the Doctrines established by Law, in the Book of the Homilies, wherewith to
encounter such Foxes as would spoil our tender Grapes, by denying our very Sins
to be born by Christ, and bringing in some degrees of our Obedience, though
imperfect, to join, as it were, with Christ's Righteousness for our
Justification, and to make such our Obedience pass current, by bringing in God
making a Law that in effect allows of Sin, which are excepted against in the
ensuing Treatise; which I put forth to vindicate, according to my poor Talent,
not so much Dr. Crisp, but the Doctrine of God our Savior, delivered by the
Doctor consonantly to the Sacred Scriptures, and to the said Homilies, as you
may perceive, upon perusal of these my Collections, from Scripture and sound
Authors: Which I humbly recommend to your leisurely serious Considerations,
hoping you will think it necessary, in this degenerate Age, to contend for the
Faith delivered to the Saints; and that your selves, so many of you as shall be
chosen for the next Parliament, (which I suppose will not be a few), that you
will think it worthy your Pains and Labor to endeavor to suppress all
Socinian and Arminian Tenets, that, to uphold Man's Free Will to do good,
strike at our being saved freely by God's Grace, contrary to God's Word; We are
saved by Grace through Faith; and that not of our selves, it is the Gift of
God: Not of Works, lest any boast. Our Holy Forefathers, in the Nations
shaking off the Popish Yoke, spoke plainly, We in Christ paid the Debt: We in
him are fulfillers of the Law: He on his Cross made a perfect cleansing of thy
Sins. But this will not go down with Arminianizers of this day, that bring in
our Gospel-Holiness to concur with Christ's Righteousness in our Justification.
This I address to your Pious Thoughts; and, I suppose, not improperly to you,
as expected Members of the House of Commons, hoping the next Parliament may
begin where the last left off, in taking Care of the True Christian Religion:
And that you may be the better fortified, I quote a Vote of a former House of
Commons, March 2. 1628. Whosoever shall bring in Innovation of Religion, or by
Favor, or Countenance, seem to extend Popery or Arminianism, or other Opinion,
disagreeing from the Truth and Orthodox Church, shall be reputed a Capital
Enemy to the Kingdom and Commonwealth. Which Spirit, against Popery and
Arminianism, through the great Mercy of God to this Nation, has been kept
alive and warm in all Parliaments since 1628, even in the Reign of King James
the Second; and there is no doubt of losing it in this Reign, wherein His
Majesty has given good Proof that he is neither Papist nor Arminian, nor
inclining thereto. Now whether the Quotations, in this Treatise, do not show,
that some mentioned therein go against the Orthodox Church, judge ye, and the
Lord give you Wisdom to withstand. Thus hoping for a favorable Construction
of my Endeavor, pro modulo si non pro voto, to vindicate the Truths of the
Gospel, I beg the Lord's Blessing on you, and am,

Your Humble Servant, Hananiel, Philalethes.
28 July, School.
To my Dear Kratiste, the Author of the Rebuke, and Vilifier of Dr. Crisp.
SIR,
I Cannot but be troubled that in your declining days you should inflame the
Reckoning, as you have done in your Rebuke, to the Grief of your best Friends,
among whom my self am particularly concerned, that you should so violently let
fly against those Truths of the Gospel, which have solaced the Souls of
Thousands, as held forth by the Doctor, whom you have very ungravely treated,
as an Heterodox wild Monster, to the Eternal Infamy of his Name and Family.
what in you lay. I hope, e're this, God has caused you often to mourn over
your intemperate Management of your Rebuke; and lest you should come short
therein, that I may provoke you seriously thereto, I think it necessary to lay
before you the Character, I had lately from a Worthy Minister of the Gospel,
and Friend of yours, concerning him you have so unmercifully traduced, which
was given by one that, sometimes in the height of his Zeal, was as bitter as
any against Dr. Crisp, except your self; that is, by Mr. Richard Baxter upon
his Deathbed but two days before he dyed, as this Friend of yours assured me,
once and again, that Mr. Baxter told him, and he related it to you very lately,
as thus, that Mr. Baxter said to your Friend, There has been a great deal of
Talk about Dr. Crisp, but I look upon him to have been a Godly, Holy Man, and
that he was Sound and Orthodox, and that he brought in more Souls to Christ
than any of us; but this was his Fault (said Mr. Baxter) that being a Popular
Man, and mightily flocked after, he would preach Extempore Sermons, which
exposed him to deliver Things undigested, which needed to be corrected, but for
the main he was Sound and Orthodox. For which Testimony I thanking the Relater,
desired him to give me it in Writing in ipsissimis Verbis; but being prudent,
he desired Excuse, and repeated the same again to me, and afterward to others.
I told him, as to the Extempore Sermons, that was a great Mistake to my
knowledge; and I was glad God had convinced so great an Enemy to the Doctor.
Now if this be true, as there is not the least grain of ground to doubt, it
coming from a Faithful, Holy Minister, then surely Dr. Crisp was not such an
one as my Kratiste has blackned him to be, God having provided for the
embalming his Memory with sweet Odours, even from his gainsayers when
launching into Eternity, to give an account of their hard Speeches unrepented
of. I hope it may please the Lord, by his Holy Spirit striking in with this and
other Occurrences, to lower the topsails of my good Friend, before he brings
you to the brink of Eternity, when your Natural Parts will signify nothing;
and that you may have more Time, than Mr. B -- had, to testify to the World
your high prizing the Free Grace of God in Christ, as held out by many besides
Dr. Crisp, as in the ensuing Treatise; and that you may testify to the World
also, that your Father in Law, Mr. King, mistook in his Prophecy, saying, (as
I am told) That his Son in Law (your self) had good Parts, but his Pride would
undo him. But I hope, and pray, the contrary, viz. That God would undo him only
of Natural self, and do him up again by the renewing of the Spirit. To his
Grace I commend you, and am,

Your real Friend, a Happy, though Unworthy, Branch of the Doctor, Hananiel,
Philalethes.
28 July, School.
To all that love our Lord Jesus in Sincerity, Grace, Mercy, and Peace, with
Growth therein, while they peruse a few Remarks on a Rebuke to a Report
concerning some Differences between the Congregational Ministers and
Presbyterian; wherein the Rebuker, to Vindicate Mr. Williams, has bespattered
not only Dr. Crisp, and others he calls Antinomians, but some great Doctrines
of the Gospel, which are Established by Law in the Homilies, and which by Act
of Parliament are to be Read in Parish Churches, when there is no Sermon.
SECTION I.
I Who account my self a Happy, though Unworthy, Branch of the said Doctor,
finding in the abovesaid Rebuke, that the Author has flown into frothy and
bitter Invectives against the Reporter, Mr. Lob, for a very Modest Account he
had given of the Differences among some Ministers, and that the Rebuker has
branded Dr. Crisp, and his Sermons, with Crispian Heresies, etc. though mostly
consonant with the Scripture, and the Judgment of Thousands of serious
Christians; but chiefly I finding the great Doctrine of the Free Grace of God
in Christ, as asserted by the great Reformers, to be in the said Rebuke
obscured, whereby Socinianism and Arminianism gets ground; and being encouraged
by Augustine in Antisozzo his saying, That all Men, that can handle a Pen, are
obliged to say somewhat against the Enemies to the Free Effectual Grace of God;
I therefore think it my Duty, for the Honor of our Lord Jesus, to spend a few
Hours in some necessary Remarks on the said Rebuke; and though but in a mean
manner, yet humbly to offer this Mite of my Testimony to the Truth, so far as
the Lord shall guide me; which I humbly implore his assistance in, by detecting
several Blemishes cast on the Truth in the said Rebuke, which I premise with
that saying of our Lord Jesus, Wisdom is justified of her Children.

. II.
So I desire these Remarks may be, which begin with noteing the Sarcasms or
Taunts the Rebuker casts on Mr. Lob for his Report; which first entrance shows
with what an unbeseeming Spirit he manages his Design: To which I may say, Do
Men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? By their Fruits you shall
know them. Can any expect our Lord Jesus should be honored in such a
Discourse, which begins with treating a Reverend Minister with such opprobrious
Language, as in the two first Pages to cast these Eleven Reflections on him?
As, Prevaricating. Partial. A Learned Divine. (In a Jeer.) Insolent. Scribler.
A Huff. Little Fooleries. Fireballs. (So he calls his Papers.) Poison.
Pedantick. Great Wit. (In a Scoff.)
To which I Remark, That doleful is the Consideration that God should suffer an
Eminent Person, a Reverend Divine of the First Rate in the Presbyterian
Society, to fall so much below himself, as to use such Terms as are very
indecent in small Matters, but much more in so weighty a Matter as the Debate
was about, viz. The Justification of Sinners, and the Satisfaction of our Lord
Jesus. O whither will the gratifying of a fluent Wit transport a Man, that is
in love with himself, when the luscious Humor of advancing it is a float!
However his Juvenile Strains of Wit might be pleasant, yea laudable, in a
Protestant Almanac, they are not at all palatable but distastful in a grave
Divine, especially when treating of the greatest Points of God's Glory in Man's
Salvation by our Lord Jesus. O that he and I could often mind that blessed
Advice of our Lord, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly; who when he was
reviled, reviled not again.

. III.
From this blustering Porch let us see if we may find better Weather in the
House, though some Men find the worst Storms within doors; I come therefore to
Page the 5th of the Rebuke, where he says the Reporter has left out New
Obedience and Good Works, out of the account he gives of the Substance of the
Gospel; and then by way of a smiling Banter, he says the Reporter said, The
Substance of the Gospel lies in what Christ suffered for them. This he seems to
disallow; which I look on with a sad Eye: For if what Christ has done for us,
(all his Life as well as his Death being his Suffering); if this be not the
Substance of the Gospel, what will become of us? If the Rebuker consults Luke
2.10. he will find that our New Obedience and Good Works are not the Substance
of the Gospel, but that to us is born a Savior. The Angel tells the Substance
of the Gospel there; I evangelize to you great Joy, which shall be to all
People; for to you is born this day a Savior, Christ the Lord. Evangelizomai,
I Gospelize this to you. Here we see what the Gospel is; it is glad Tidings.
And what is this glad Tidings? It is that Christ, a Savior, was born. Here Is
not one word of New Obedience or our Good Works, to be part of the Substance of
the Gospel; they come in as Fruits of the Spirit upon receiving the Gospel; but
are no more the Substance of the Gospel, than the Holy Law of God is the
Substance of the Gospel: But the Law came by Moses, and Grace and Truth by
Jesus Christ. Surely the Spirit of God knew better how to give an account of
the Gospel, what it is, than any he calls, We poor Presbyterians: And for any
to jeer at Christ's Sufferings for us, for its being called the Substance of
the Gospel, it may trouble their Consciences one day, when they shall be forced
to fly to that as their tutissimum est, as Bellarmine did, though some think
too late. O! how should we have a Care that our Wit do not put us on jesting
with the Gospel; which in its discovering Christ to be all in all to us, our
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, is the Power of God to
Salvation. We should consider what the Apostle counted the Substance of the
Gospel, when he said, I determined to know nothing among you but Christ, and
him crucified. This was his great Study, Christ and his Sufferings, so it
should be ours.

. IV.
In Page 6. he says, Give me my Bible again. This Jest may be returned with
seriousness, It is well he called for his Bible again, for he had spoke without
Book sadly before, in saying, Good Works are to come in in the Substance of the
Gospel. This it is for Men to speak without the Bible, which alone, by the
Spirit, makes wise to Salvation: But I fear some sad use he will make of his
Bible; for it soon follows in the same Page, that which I grieve at, viz. his
making a Jest of Christ's putting himself into our Place, State and Condition,
which he jeers with the Socinian Retort; If so, then (says he) Christ was
destitute of a Righteousness, and we too, to entitle us to Eternal Life. For
Answer, If Christ was not in our Place, State and Condition, what is become of
the Gospel? We have lost it, if the Just did not suffer for the Unjust, if the
Lord did not lay on him the Iniquity of us all, if he was not the Man of
Sorrows that bare our Griefs. Was he not in our Place, State and Condition, in
all this? And to say that then he was destitute of a Righteousness, is to deny
his being God-Man; or not to distinguish between his being Perfect in himself,
and so holy, harmless, separate from Sinners, and his being made Sin and a
Curse for us, as being our Representative. Methinks those that call themselves
Poor Presbyterians, should not so coalesce with the Socinians to enforce such a
Consequence from Christ's being our Surety, as the Socinians do to say, That if
Christ stood in our Place, then he wanted a Righteousness in himself. You may
as well say, that Christ was not made Righteousness to us, if he was made Sin
for us: how could he be both? Very well. He was made our Righteousness, as we
having his complete God-like, yea, God's Righteousness; as it was his
Righteousness the Son of God imputed to us, so he was made Righteousness to us;
and he was made Sin for us, by the Lord's imputing and laying our Sins on him,
and yet he, though made Sin, was still the most holy Son of God, without Sin in
him.

. V.
In the next Assault, he insults over the Reporter, for saying, we are Sin.
What though that very word is not in the Text? What is it less, to be sinful,
to be sold under Sin, conceived in Sin, yea, to be a Body of Sin? But the fling
is against the Change; Christ's being made Sin and a Curse, and we thereby
delivered from Sin and the Curse. Suppose Man is not said in Scripture to be
Sin, Sin it self, and that that is a debasing Man below, being born in Sin, and
having a Body of Sin, will you find fault with him, or any, for lessening of
Man so; whereas Christ is far more lessened? For it is said positively, God
made him to be Sin for us; and that no Man can have the Face to deny that owns
Revealed Religion. But many will so mince his being made Sin for us, that at
last it shall be like some Minced Pyes, that shall not taste a jot of the Meat
in them: They say in words, he was made Sin; but they distinguish away every
bit of the Sin, and say, Christ only bore the Punishment due to Sin. As if God
should be so Unjust, as to punish Christ for Sin, when no Sin was upon him. If
Christ our Lord, in being made Sin for us, had not our very Sins laid on him by
God, and borne by himself on the Tree, why was he punished? Will you make God
Unrighteous, to lay Sin upon him, to bruise him for our Iniquities, and these
very Sins and Iniquities not made his, or accounted his by Imputation?

. VI.
In Page 7. O! how does the Rebuker fly out against this Sentence of the
Reporter, By this blessed change, Christ is made Sin and Curse, and we
delivered from Sin and Curse; as if the Reporter had imposed the Turkish
Alcoran on our Faith: whereas he no where denies the Order of the Gospel for
our enjoying the Blessedness of our being delivered from Sin and the Curse,
viz. the intervening of Faith and Repentance. And yet this the Rebuker calls,
Learning to quibble at Cambridge. Sure this is not a Style becoming a Grave,
Learned Instructor of Souls; and yet the Rebuker cannot refrain his own
Quibbles, dish'd up with much Tartness, calling the Reporter's Substance of the
Gospel, A superfaetation of Articles, spawning of Creeds, equipping Confessions
every Campaign. O! whither will not a fertile Fancy transport a Man, that
prefers his Wit before his Master Christ's Humility.

. VII.
The great Objection comes in Page 9. about the Change of Persons between
Christ and Sinners. The Rebuker owns there was a Change of Christ for Sinners,
but denies that Christ took the Person of Sinners: But if we read John 17.
there we may find for our Comfort, in Christ's Prayer, Christ says, Thine they
were, thou gave them me, and I am glorified in them, that they may be one in
us. Is not this taking their Persons into Oneness with himself? And v. 23. I in
them, and thou in me, that the World may know that thou have loved them as thou
have loved me. And how can we be said to be Crucified with Christ, to be Buried
with him, Risen with him, if he took not our Persons? He has made us sit in
Heavenly places in Christ Jesus. It is not said only with him; but in him.
Surely then Christ has taken the Persons of Elect Sinners into himself; and to
deny this, looks like denying being chosen in him from all Eternity, and real
Union to him, and Incorporation in him in time.

. VIII.
In Page 10. the Rebuker seems to swerve very much from the Orthodox, in his
opposing the Terms laid down, and contradicts them very Dogmatically; and in
the place of that which he calls the Reporters Terms of Art, he gives us his
Sense concerning the Change of Persons, All that the Case of Sinners required
for Satisfaction to Divine Justice, was a Substitute or Sacrifice to be offered
for our Sins; for the Substitute to take on him the PUNISHMENT due to them:
(That Is all he allows, not the Sins, not the Guilt, not the Offense, only
Punishment, that is all that Justice requires) But to take on him the Person of
Sinners, as the Phrase is new and uncouth, so it is to me unintelligible, till
they who have invented it shall interpret it. O! that Men were wise to
Sobriety, and not in effect to tax the Holy God with speaking uncouth, new,
unintelligible Things. It Is evidently not true, that the Term is new, how
uncouth or unintelligible soever it may be to some who will repel Scripture
Truths. Will any pretend to teach the Most High how to speak of our Sins laid
on Christ, by saying, he only bare the Punishment due to them, and that is all
that our Case required? God says expressly, The Lord laid on him the iniquity
of us all; and he shall bear their iniquities. Their very Iniquities it was:
And he bare their Sins iii his own Body on the Tree. Our very Sins, our very
Iniquities. And is all this dwindled to nothing but the Punishment due to them?
Bearing Sin is in Deed and Truth, if God say true, bearing Sin, it is not
bearing Punishment, that follows bearing Sin. Bearing Punishment is a word
invented to nullify Christ's bearing our Sins, and so to evacuate the Gospel:
For if Christ bare not the Sins as well as the Punishment, the Sins must lie on
the Sinner to all Eternity. For Sin being once committed, must be born by us,
or our Surety. I can find but lew Texts where Christ is said to bear Punishment
due to Sin; but through Infinite Rich Grace, many Texts of Divine Truth show
that he bare Sins, and did them away. In bearing the Chastisement of our peace,
he bare our very Sorrows and Griefs, which is more than bare Punishment due for
Sin.

. IX.
But this is new, uncouth and unintelligible, that Christ should take on him
the Person of Sinners, till they interpret it, who invented it. For this we may
raise the Dead, without a Miracle, to prove the Expression, though not the
Invention of it (that being Time out of mind.) I at present omit Calvin and
Luther, Twiss and Davenant, Men of great Name, and propose the Famous Dr.
Harris, who was an Eminent Member of the Assembly in 1642, and in opposition to
the Poor Presbyterians, as the Rebuker calls Mr. Williams and his Friends,
though the said Doctor was an Honorable one, he says plainly, Christ
sustained the Person of a Sinner, in his Treatise fol. 215, thus, Christ he
stood in our room, and sustained the Person of a Sinner, though in himself
sinless. I add, (says Dr. Harris) if this were not true, that Christ sustained
the Person of a Sinner, how could God punish him? So that this uncouth and
unintelligible saying, was not only intelligible to this Learned Doctor, but is
by him well interpreted by his Question, Else how could God punish him, if he
sustained not the Persons of Sinners in himself? As much as to say, God could
not justly punish Christ, if our New Neonomian Doctrine be true, That Christ
bare only the Punishment due for Sins, that he did not bear the Sins, the very
Sins, the very Iniquities of his People. Now says this Doctor, he was so far
from not bearing their very Sins, that he bare their Persons; which surely must
include their Sins, and all the horrid Appurtenances belonging to them. But
well may this be unintelligible to such as call Mr. Cole's Works, Mysterious
Nonsense. What then is the great Armah's saying, fol. 192. in the Sum of
Christian Religion? Our very Nature, Body and Soul, being coupled to the Body
and Soul of Christ. Is not this unintelligible? But says the Rebuker, This new
Phrase, that Christ took on him the Person of Sinners, is a Phrase to puzzle
and confound Men's Understandings. Answer, So does the whole Doctrine of the
Gospel do to some Understandings: As that we should be Righteous by the
Righteousness of another, that we should be Christ s Delight from all Eternity
before we had a Being, Prove. 8. How may that of the Apostle confound a Man? I
live, not I but Christ in me; I sin, not I but Sin that dwells in me; and we
were planted in the likeness of his Death, our Old Man crucified; when? With
Christ; we are dead to the Law; how? By the Body of Christ. What Nonsense and
puzzling Stuff is this to the Natural Understanding? Was I in being when Christ
was Crucified? No: How then can I say, I was Crucified with Christ, or that
Paul was Crucified with Christ? Surely no otherwise than he was chosen in
Christ from all Eternity, by Christ's being the Representative of all the Elect
from all Eternity, and as he sustained all their Persons in time when he hung
on the Tree. And this though uncouth to the wise and prudent of this World, is
couth and of a ravishing sweetness to those that taste this Grace of our Lord
Jesus; and owned by Mr. Alsop in Antisozzo, p. 376. Duos Populos in se suscepit
Christus. Ambrose. How is the wind turned? And 394, it is Mystical Union; but
now unintelligible.

. X.
In Page 16. he brings in Doctor Crisp's Works, as the Ground of the present
interruption of the Union; thus, In 1690, a new Impression of Dr. Crisp 's
Works came into the World -- creating a Suspicion in some tender Minds, lest
some Doctrines were openly vouched or secretly couched, which might disturb the
Harmony of the Confession, and might weaken and dissolve the Union. Answer,
Here is some Modesty to the Doctor. One Would wonder how those Doctrines here,
creating Suspicion only, are by and by exclaimed against as Heterodox Heresies,
Antinomian Dregs. This would give one Jealousy that the Rebuker in these last
Terms was acted not by himself. But here follows a Query, How those Sermons of
the Doctor's which were Reprinted in 1689, not 1690, could prejudice the Union
which was Two Years after, viz. 1691? Sure the Brethren that united in 1691,
had Time sufficient to digest the Doctors Sermons in Two Years time: And it
appears by that Union, so long after, that these Sermons could not indamage the
good Correspondence between the Brethren. If they had been Reprinted in 1692,
this Argument might have some weight. But it is manifest rather, that Mr.
Williams, and they who set him a work, had a Mind to break the Union; which
they effectually accomplished, by letting fly so hotly against the Truths of
the Gospel, asserted in those Sermons: For they knew well, that most of the
Congregational Brethren held with Doctor Crisp in many Things, called Errors in
Mr. Williams his Gospel Truth (mis) stated. So that the Rebuker's assigning
those Sermons, a Reason of Suspicion, is brought in by Head and Shoulders, to
cover Mr. Williams's Head from the Charge of breaking the Union, by his so
formidably treating those Sermons, and therein the Favorers of them, such as
the Reverend Mr. Cole, Mr. Mather, and many others.

. XI.
Let us see how the Rebuker imbellisheth and inamels this dividing Book of Mr.
Williams. His brief Encomium is this, A Book, to say no more, ingeniously
Penned, exactly Methodized, the Truths and Errors fairly stated, and, for ought
I can see, Piously designed. Who would not run the risque of being taxed for
setting all the Town together by the Ears, to have such a Plaudite? But however
ingeniously Penned and Methodiz'd, there is a Bar put in to the fair stating
the Truths and Errors, whereby Dr. Chancy has evinced fully to the World great
unfairness, and some Falsity; though the Doctor has been very favorable in
omitting several Blunders of Ungrammaticalness therein, which others have taken
Notice of. But as if that Book was not enough to break the Union, he comes
forth in 1694, with his Man made Righteous; and therein confirms the Breach, as
if he designed it should never be made up; and in a few Lines, gives these
Epithets to his Opposers; Mr. Mather, by Name, is a Boutefeu and kindle Coal,
that gets others to blow the Flames, Dr. Chancy is Billingsgate, Esquire Edwards
that wrote against him, and challenged him to prove, that Dr. Crisp wrote
nothing but what Dr. Owen's Writings concurred with, he is by Mr. Williams,
called Hell-hot Fire and thick Darkness, the Author of the War of the Angels,
is Falsehood and Profaneness, and for Mr. Cole, that Profound and Excellent
Scholar and Divine, he is Mysterious Nonsense. All these Titles he bestows
without one word of Proof. And is not this a Gentleman-like Divine, who
deserves so great a Champion, as our Rebuker, to give him this great Character,
Ingeniously Penned, and, for ought I can see, Piously designed.

. XII.
But his Acuteness for Grammar, is somewhat like his not being the point of
Courtesy for Manners, of which, for the lowering his Plumes, I shall give a
Taste out of his Man made Righteous, p. 171 and 173, where he insults over Mr.
Mather, for saying, Christ's Incarnation was no part of his Humiliation;
wherein Mr. Mather meant, without doubt, his mere Incarnation, not including
any part of his Mediatory Work. And here Mr. Williams, to show his Skill in
Greek, makes a bluster on the word (...), Phil. 2.7. translated, made of no
Reputation; but Mr. Williams would correct the Translation, and calls it
exaninition. I was amazed at his exaninition, not knowing what to make of it,
and thought it might be a slip of the Pen, or Printer, to put exani-nition for
exinanition; but when I found it three times exani-nition, then I concluded Mr.
Williams had forgot to construe inanis, from whence he fetched his exaninition,
instead of exinanition; but exaninition may serve for some Gentlemen, that
cannot accuse Oxford or Cambridge for their breaking Prissians Head. If he had
committed such a Fault at School, his Master, with a Ferrula, might have told
him, he was as much an exany-wigeon, as (...) would produce exani-nition.
Behold the Champion for fairly stating Truths and Errors, ingeniously Penned,
exactly Methodized.

. XIII.
But why must the Rebuker be put on the drudgery of bearing up his Name and
Reputation? Is it to make some Compensation for the severe Discipline of a
faithful Rebuke indeed, when Things went high against him of another nature
than blemishing Gospel Truths, instead of fairly stating them? But of this
Altum Silentium, waiting for God's blessed Gift to him, of a sound
incontestible Repentance, which, if true, will appear in a profound Humility;
which when visible, will rejoice the Hearts of all that pity and pray for him.

. XIV.
In Page 17, he says, Many and grievous Crimes were laid to Mr. Williams 's
Charge. This methinks looks faltring in the Rebuker, the Champion's Champion,
to give an intimation of the Charge against Mr. Williams, which one would have
thought should have been laid to sleep; but it seems many Crimes he was charged
with, and was nothing proved, was the Old Disciple Mr. K. his Testimony
nothing. But all the Crimes are washed off by Three Eminent Divines leaving the
Pinners-Hall Lecture to countenance Mr. Williams, after the Merchants had
declined his Service there, that so the heavy Charge against him might not
lessen his Reputation, though by it they have not increased their own; but have
given a blessed Occasion for a fuller and clearer Publication thereof, the Free
Grace of God in Christ Jesus, without any concurrence of our Works to justify
us, than was preached there before, by their Places being supplied at the said
Lecture, by Free Grace Preachers. O the Infinite Goodness of God! that out of
this Collision, and by their Causeless departure from that Work which God had
called them to, he has made his Grace to superabound in that place.

. XV.
All Objections made against Mr. Williams 's Book are accounted for. O! how
happy would it be if this were made out. What all accounted for? This is so
high that, I dare say, the Rebuker will think twice before he say it again;
because there are many Objections or Exceptions in Dr. Chancy's, Esquire Edwards,
and other Books, unaccounted for, to which no Satisfaction was ever given; and
particularly, that of his saying, The Righteousness of God by Faith, which the
Apostle desired to be found in, Phil. 3. did principally intend our Gospel
Holiness: Which dismal Interpretation, I do not find, had any Public
Recantation made to it; and so all Objections are not accounted for.

. XVI.
If Mr. Williams shall hereafter Write, or Preach, any thing in derogation of
the subscribed Articles, it will oblige him to make Satisfaction; but for his
Book, that has received its Compurgation. I must beg your Pardon here. Can it
suffice the whole World, where his Book has been sent, and his Errors taken
vent, that at last he has subscribed the Articles drawn up, but never
published, so as to counterpoize his Book? His Book still speaks, being
countenanced by 49 Ministers, whom he has drawn in to sign his fair stating
Truths and Errors: And what less than a public renouncing the Errors found
therein, attested by those that subscribed his Book, can be a Satisfaction,
especially renouncing that of Phil. 3.9.? O! that we had as warm a Zeal for the
Righteousness of God as holy David had, then we should not say, that all in Mr.
Williams's Book is accounted for, so long as that mention of Christ's
Righteousness being to be found in, is called our Gospel Holiness, and that
this is not publicly renounced: For David says in Psalm. 71.15. I will make
mention of thy Righteousness, even of thine only. What have we to rejoice in,
or boast of, but this Righteousness only, and not set up our Gospel Holiness in
the place of Christ's Righteousness, which is the Righteousness of God?

. XVII.
At length our Rebuker is come into the Field of Battle against Dr. Crisp; and,
without any Prologue, falls foul on him in page 23, charging the Dissenting
Brethren (as he calls the Congregational Pastors, Mr. G. G. T. Cole, Nath.
Mather, etc.) with having dipped too deep in Dr. Crisp's Doctrines, which he
calls Crispian Heterodoxies, thus, It Is an unquestionable Truth, that some of
them had vented such strange Doctrines, that it gave umbrage that there might
be found among them one or two, or so, that had dipped very deep in those
CRISPIAN HETERODOXIES; of which one is, That (the Elect) any are in the sight
of God justified or entitled to Eternal Life, before they are effectually
called. To which, in the Spirit of Meekness, I would say first, this is a
Scurrilous Term at best, to say it is a Crispian Heterodoxy, for the Doctor to
say, with many Famous Divines before the Doctor was extant, That in the sight
of God such are entitled to Eternal Life before called; of which there may be
a taste by and by: But for the Rebuker to cast such Dirt on the Name of one
whom his great Opponent, Mr. Williams, could bestow a Commendation on, that he
believed Reverend Dr. Crisp a Holy Man; this is the Rebuker's setting up a Sign
over his own Door, with this Title, Here lives a Bespatterer of a fervent
Exalter of the Lord Jesus. Solomon tells us what he is, who condemns the just,
Prove. 17.15. which I pray God may not be said of the Rebuker, that he is an
abomination to the Lord: But righteous Lips are the delight of Kings, Prove.
16.13. Not fulsome flattering Lips to a Supporter of Antichrist. It had been a
due piece of Modesty, before he had stigmatized the Doctor thus, to have
evinced some Heterodoxies of him he scoffs at; but thus to run a tilt, and stab
his precious Name, before any Proof of Heterodoxy, is not becoming a Minister
of the Gospel, or a Gentleman, much less does it become an Old Disciple of
Jesus Christ our Lord, who was meek, and though reviled, reviled not again; but
he has told us, Judgments are prepared for Scorners, Prove. 19.29. which I
beseech the Lord to divert from the Head and Family of the Rebuker. What a
Scoff, or Scorn, is here put on a fervent Servant of the Lord Jesus, (his
Enemies being Judges) to Nickname him at the first dash Crispian Heterodoxy,
and so to make his Name and Family the Reproach of City and Country; whereas
many Thousands in both, have for Fifty and Five Years since he dyed, accounted
his Name, under Christ, as sweet Ointment, having had their Souls refreshed
with the Savor which was cast abroad, in his opening the Excellencies of his
Lord and Master, in his Sermons, among so many Thousands. I Will give one of the
greatest Instances that is, in an Expression of that Great Divine, the Reverend
Mr. Thomas Cole, who departed this Life the 16th of September, 1697, who was so
ravished and transported with the Sermons of Dr. Crisp, that he said, over and
over, in the presence of many, That if he was worth but 100 l. in all the
World, and Dr. Crisp' s Sermons were not to be had under 50 l., he would give
it rather than not have them; and this he said several Years after his first
saying so. And said before a great Number of Eminent Ministers, whereof the
Reverend Mr. How was one, That if Dr. Crisp be an Antinomian, then I am one;
and he told me that Mr. How said, And so I am also, if he be one. And, if I
mistake not, he said Dr. Bates was one in the Company that said, And so am I.
But now that the New Law is set up, they draw off their Suffrage, and the
Doctor's Works are called Crispian Heterodoxies.

. XVIII.
In Page 23, the Rebuker brings in the Dissenting Brethren, called upon by the
United ones, to renounce some odd Notions, as he calls them; the third of which
I note, it being, That any are in the sight of God justified, or entitled to
Eternal Life, before they are effectually called, etc. This is to be renounced
as a Crispian Heterodoxy, though countenanced by Men of greater Name than Dr.
Crisp. If known to God are all his Works from Everlasting, which the Rebuker
cannot deny, then in the sight of God, all are Justified from all Eternity, I
say, in God's sight, that are not actually Justified in their own Persons, till
united to Christ by Faith. But besides, that sort of Justification of the
Elect, in God's sight, from Eternity, there are several Scriptures which import
that which is tantamount to Justification of the Elect actually, though not
personally, in God's sight, from Eternity, as Jer. 31.3. Yea, I have loved thee
with an Everlasting Love: Which Everlasting Love, all agree, is as well from
Eternity past, as to Eternity to come; and if loved from Eternity, what is that
short of being then justified? For God loved them as he saw them in Christ
undertaken for to be justified by his Righteousness: But that which goes
higher, they were the Delight of Christ from all Eternity; Prove. 8.26, 30, 31.
While as yet he had not made the Earth -- I was by him, as one brought up with
him; I was daily his Delights, and my Delights were with the Sons of Men. Here
was the high Effect of Eternal Love, Jesus Christ, the Wisdom of the Father, he
from all Eternity, and in all Eternity, he was the Delights of the Father; and
during the same Eternity, the Son's Delights were with, or in, the Elect given
him of the Father; Thine they were, and thou gave them me. So that there was
an Eternal Complacency in the Lord Jesus, in and to all that he was to redeem,
by laying down his Life; and if so, did not he delight in them, as having Grace
given to them in Christ before the World was? And so he looks on them as
Redeemed, as Justified, and as Sanctified by him; though it was not actually
accomplished in their Persons, yet it was actually concluded between the Father
and Son, in the Council of Peace, Zach. 6.13. and God thereupon took Christ's
Word, or Covenant, for it, as if it were actually done, upon which account
Abraham, and all the Old Testament Believers, were justified and saved before
Christ had actually paid the Ransom for many. Thus being undertaken for by
Christ from Eternity, they were looked on by God as having a representative
being in Christ from all Eternity, when chosen in him, and Grace given them in
him from all Eternity in 2 Timothy 1.9. And this our Representative being from all
Eternity in Christ, even Mr. Clark himself, in his Notes on the Bible, was forc
d to allow. Therefore to renounce absolutely that the Elect are justified in
the sight of God, before their effectual calling, is to bear hard on those
Scriptures that declare God's Everlasting Love to them, and Christ's Delight in
them, from all Eternity, and Grace given them in Christ before they are
effectually called; of which see Mr. Pemble, and Dr. Twiss, by and by.

. XIX.
I cannot pass without a Remark on the different Epithets the Rebuker gives to
Socinianism, and his Crispian Antinomianism. How softly does he tread on the
Graves of Horrid Socinians, and how ruffly he deals with the Independants, for
that which he calls in them Antinomianism? It is in fol. 25, where Socinianism
he calls but an Error, but Antinomianism is Heresy; thus, The United Brethren
had given demonstration -- against all Socinian Errors -- They did try these
Dissenting Brethren (Mr. Griffith, Cole, Mathers,) whether they were sound in
the Faith, in opposition to the Antinomian Heresies; of which he gives a
Catalogue of 21. So that with them it is but an Error, or a small Peccadillo, a
little Trip, to deny the Deity and Satisfaction of our Lord Jesus, with the
Socinians; but it is an Heresy, a damning Heresy, to say, That an Elect
Person is, in the sight of God, justified before effectually called: or to say,
A Believer works from Life, and not for Life, with those he counts Antinomians.
O Kratiste Theophile! (so I call the Rebuker now) where is your Zeal for our
Lord Jesus, to be so favorable to the Socinians, as to call it only an Error
in them to deny our Lord Christ's Deity.

. XX.
I cannot but stand in admiration, and can scarce believe my Eyes, when I look
on this Catalogue or Bed-roll of 21 Antinomian Heresies, my Dear Kratiste has
loaded his Brethren with, for dissenting from Mr. Williams his Gospel Truth
stated (a-mis). I hope it may not be unprofitable to my self, and some others,
to spend a few Thoughts, by searching what the Scriptures of Truth say about
them; for which I implore the Holy Spirit's assistance, that he would bring to
remembrance the blessed Truths therein, relating hereunto.

. XXI.
The first is, That a Gospel Threat, if not a Katachresis, is a Bull. This
methinks is ridiculously called a Heresy, to say, a Gospel Threat is a Bull.
What of Heresy can you make this? But let us see what the Spirit says
concerning the Gospel, what it is: He says by the Angel, Behold I bring you
glad Tidings, a Savior is born; or, I Gospelize this to you, that Christ is
born. And what is it but a Bull, or a Calf like a Bull, to put a Threatening to
Glad Tidings, and call that Gospel? One may as well say that, Cursed is every
one that continues not in all things written in the Law, is Gospel, as any
other Threat: But if Curses, because written in the New Testament, are the
Gospel, then our Neonomians have done their Business effectually, and we have a
new Thing, a Curse, for what they call Gospel, besides the Lord Christ's
Gospel, which is, that he Jesus is come to save his People from their Sins; not
but that the Threat is made use of in the hand of Christ in publishing the
Gospel of Salvation by him; but to say that the Threat is the Gospel, is the
same as to say, that Condemnation is a Pardon, which whether Bull or Calf
matters not, but to be sure it is very near to a Contradiction; and my Dear
Kratiste must strain hard to make the saying so, to be an Antinomian Heresy:
But here he marshals it as the Captain General of the 21, how formidable then
must the following 20 be, if this Man of Straw must lead the Van, that it is an
Heresy to say, a Gospel-Threat is a Bull. But leaving this Moon calf,

. XXII.
His second Heresy is, That Pardon is rather the Condition of Faith, than
Faith is of Pardon. That is to say, That Faith rather flows from Pardon, than
Pardon from Faith; and for any to say so, is with him an Antinomian Heresy;
which is a strange Strain, for the Scripture says, We are justified freely by
his Grace; which Justification includes Pardon; then we are Pardoned freely by
his Grace, not of Works, lest any boast; if so, then we are not pardoned upon
account of Faith, as a Condition of it, but upon account of Christ's Blood
washing away our Sins, which is called the Righteousness of God, and this is
received by Faith: but Christ, with this Righteousness of his, first receives
or apprehends us; and then being apprehended by him, we, by his Spirit, are
enabled to apprehend him by Faith; and so the Righteousness of God is revealed
from Faith to Faith. The Apostle does not say, the Righteousness of God
(wherein our Pardon is included) that this is made ours by Faith, or that Faith
is the Condition of our having it; but Faith is that whereto it is revealed to
us: It was given to us before when Christ first apprehended us, but it is
Revealed, made manifest to us, that it is ours by Faith wrought in us, and more
and more Revealed as Faith increases, it being revealed from Faith to Faith,
mark it is to Faith. So that this Heresy amounts to no more than this, as for
a Person to say, That Christ (and Pardon with him) first takes hold of us, is
the Root of an endless Life in us, and so works Faith in us: This with you is
Heresy, but with us sound Truth, else we should never have either Pardon or
Faith; and this we must averr, rather than to say, that Faith is the Condition,
or Root or Principle, from which our Pardon flows or grows, because to call
Faith a Condition of Pardon, any other way, than as it is an Eye that Pardon is
revealed to, and an Hand that receives a Pardon first given, is to make Faith a
Co-partner with Christ's Blood, and God's Free Grace, which must not be
asserted.

. XXIII.
His third Heresy to be renounced, I think, is as Ridiculous as the first, and
that is this, It Is a Heresy to say, It was Sin as to the Anomia that Christ
bore; The Fault of Sin was laid on Christ. That is, with them Christ did not
bear the Anomia, the Iniquity of Sin, and Christ did not bear the Fault of
Sin, that is to say, with the Neonomians Christ bore Sin without the Anomia of
it, or Christ bore Sin without the Fault of it; which is the same as to say,
Christ bore Sinless Sin and Faultless Sin; which is, besides its being a
Catachresis, or Bull to bear Faultless Sin, it is a total Overthrow of the whole
Gospel, and of all our Salvation by Christ's Sufferings; for if Christ bare
only Faultless Sin, then he bare only the Punishment, and that very
Unrighteously too, and left the Fault for us to do away as well as we can, with
Tears of Repentance, and with our New Obedience, which will never wash our
Black-a-moor Souls White, or else we must bear the Fault to all Eternity, for
nothing can wash away the Stain and Pollution but the Blood of Christ: But by
their Doctrine Christ has not done away the Anomia, nor borne the Fault. But
in plain English, I must say to my Dear Kratiste, and all his Friends, that
vent and vend such Doctrine, It looks very Boldly and Affrontingly, to teach
the Holy God to speak; He says over and over in the Old and New Testament,
that Christ bare our Iniquity, our Transgression, our Sins; he bare our Sins in
his Body, he has done away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself, he bare our Sins,
our very Sins, without any distinction of Punishment, Guilt, Stain, Fault or
Filth; he bare our Sin, and for these Gentlemen to talk of bearing Sin without
the Fault, or to talk of Faultless Sin, how bold a Stroke at the Root of the
Gospel is this, and how dreadful a Thought must this make, in all that come to
God for Pardon through the Blood of Christ, to hear it asserted by the great
Gospel-Staters, that Christ bare Sin, it is true, but he left the Fault for the
Sinner to wash off by his Holy Life, and to do otherwise they call Antinomian
Heresy. But for Argument, If Sin be laid on Christ without the Fault, then
it is no Sin, for what is Sin but the Transgression of the Law? And what is that
but Fault? And besides, this is to make God infinitely Unjust, and also Cruel
to our Lord Jesus, his Dear and Only begotten Son, to inflict the Heavy
Dreadful Punishment which was laid on him for Sin, when this Sin, as to the
Fault that deserved the Punishment, was not laid or charged on him: So that
Christ was by such Doctrine punished where no Fault was charged: From such
Doctrine the Good Lord deliver all that desire Salvation by and through our
Lord Jesus: This is strange Doctrine, to tell us of Faultless Sin borne by
Christ: But it is the same sort of Divinity as a Gospel-Threat, or a
Glad-Tyding-Threat; first we have Gospel Threat, that is our New Gospel; and now
comes Faultless Sin, and that is the Curse that Christ bore. But by the way,
there could be no Curse in Christ's Sufferings, if he did not bear the Fault
as well as the Punishment: But Blessed be God our Good Old Bibles have no such
Language in them, but tell us plainly he bare our Sins, our very Sins, and has
washed us from our Sins (that is, from all the Fault, Stain and Pollution) in
his Blood. Therefore leaving this Idle Heresy, let us ever adore him that has
done away our Sins, our very Sins, all that appertains to them, by the
Sacrifice of himself, to whom be Glory for ever and ever.

. XXIV.
He proceeds to aggravate this third Antinomian Heresy, as he calls it, and
says, it is Heresy to say, Christ was reputed a Criminal, not only by Man, but
by God. This is the more strange, because my Dear Kratiste, the Rebuker, owns
that Christ suffered, loco nostro, vice nostra, in our place, in our stead. And
how this could be, and he not a reputed Criminal, is a Paradox, unless he means
in our place was no more than as the Socinians say, for our good only; it is
true, this he is charged with, and he gives but too much occasion for it, but I
cannot believe he excludes Christ in his Suffering, making Satisfaction to God
in our stead, and his bearing away our Sins by his Suffering, and imputing his
own Righteousness to us for our Good. But whatever he grants, here we see he
brings in this Clause, of Christ being reputed a Criminal by God, to be one of
those which he calls Abominable Doctrines. In the same page 25. Which if not
Antidoted against (he says) will prove a Bane and Poison to the Soul. O
whither is my Kratiste driven in the Hurricane of his disturbed Zeal for Mr.
Williams. Could Christ bear our Sins, and be punished for our Sins, even to
that Extremity, as to cry, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me: Could the
Just suffer Justly for the Unjust, and not be a reputed Criminal? What shall we
make of the Justice of God, to say, Awake, O Sword, against the Man that is my
Fellow: If this Fellow of God, this Blessed Holy Spotless Lamb of God, had not
the Sins of his People so charged on him, that he was looked on as a reputed
Criminal, standing in their place, with all their Sins laid on him; and so
though he was not a Criminal in the least actively, yet he was looked upon by
God as a Criminal representatively, in their stead whose Crimes and Sins he
bore. This is the General Argument of all the Orthodox, How could God justly
punish him, if he was not a reputed Criminal, as standing a Surety for us? What
was Imputed to him, if not our Sin, when he bare our Sins, and cried out, My
Soul is exceeding Sorrowful to Death? But to be plain, it appears our Lord
Jesus was a reputed Criminal, when Innocent to Perfection in himself, in that
he owns all the Sins of Believers to be his Sins, as in Psalm. 40.7. compared
with the 12th Verse, he says, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God: Then it
follows, Mine Iniquities have taken hold of me, so that I am not able to look
up: They are more than the hairs of mine head. This is spoken by our Lord
Jesus, as is plain in Heb. 10.9. here he owns they are his Iniquities; How were
they his? but as he sustained the Persons of all the Elect, and so was a
reputed Criminal in their stead, and their Sins being by the Lord laid on him,
he takes them on himself as his own Iniquities, and says, They are more than
the Hairs of his Head. And again, in Psalm. 69.4, 5. Christ says, Then I
restored that which I took not away, O God, thou know my Foolishness, and my
Sins are not hid from thee. Then it follows, The Zeal of thine House has eaten
me up: Which is plain of Christ. So that our Foolishness and Sins being laid on
him, he calls them his, and says right, for they were really his, though but
by Imputation, as a Debt is really a Sureties, though he be but a Surety, yet
that is enough, and so our Lord Jesus found it, when he was in his Agony,
Sweating clodders of Blood, and on the Cross, crying, My God, why, etc. sure he
did not cry out so terribly for faultless Sin, but as a reputed Criminal for
real Sin laid on him.

. XXV.
The Fourth Heresy, as he calls it, is, As to the Elect, there never was any
Guilt upon them, in respect of the Righteous Judgment of God in foro Dei, but
that which accompanied the Letter of the Law setting in with Conscience. Where
he picked up this Offensive passage he shows not, but that it goes among his
abominable Doctrines this he declares. Now how far this is Heresy, we will at
present only consult Famous Twiss, who was no Antinomian, and see what he says
of Pardon in the sight of God before Faith, nay from Eternity, as it was an
Immanent Act of God, Twiss de Electione, Sect. 25. Fol. 294. he proves
Forgiveness to be before Faith, even at Christ's Death, nay from Eternity. His
words are these, Quanam erit illa peccatorum remissio quae fidem consequitur?

This is his Question, then he answers as follows.

Remissio enim peccatorum si Quidditatem inspicias nihil aliud est quam aut
punitionis negatio aut volitionis puniendi negatio, sit ergo peccata remittere
nihil aliud quam nolle punire, at hoc nolle punire ut actus immanens in Deo
fuit ab aeterno, nec fidem consequitur nec Spiritus Sancti operatione in nobis
terminare deprehenditur, Quod vero operatione Spiritus Sancti nobis hac part
per fidem contingit aliud esse non poterat quam SENSVS Gratiae Dei. Ex quibus
conficitur non potentialem tantum, sed and actualem peccatorum remissionem
Christum morte sua a Patre impetrasse nobis paucis concludimus immediatam
mortis Christi effectionem esse expiationem Peccatorum. Sive pro peccatis
plenariam Satisfactionem quae quidem nobis non innotescit nisi per Fidem and
Spiritus Sancti operationem. Which is to this purpose: What is that Forgiveness
of Sins which follows Faith?

Which he answers thus: Forgiveness of Sins, if you consider the Quiddity (or
Essence) of it, is nothing else but either a denying of Punishment, or denying
a Will to punish: Therefore to remit or forgive Sins, is nothing else but not
to will to punish. Now this not to will to punish, as it is an immanent Act in
God, it was from Eternity, neither does it follow Faith, neither is it held to
terminate by the Operation of the Holy Spirit in us; but what belongs to us by
the Operation of the Holy Spirit, in this matter, can be nothing else but a
SENSE of the Grace of God; from which it is gathered, not a Potential only, but
also an Actual Remission of Sins, Christ obtained of the Father for us at his
Death. In short, We conclude the immediate Effect of Christ's Death to be
Expiation of Sins, or a full Satisfaction for Sins, which truly is not made
known to us but by Faith, and the Operation of the Holy Spirit.

Here you see this Famous Doctor evacuates your charging it to be an Antinomian
Heresy to say, in foro Dei, there never was Guilt on the Elect in respect of
God's Righteous Judgment; and to make good your Charge, I hope you will not
call him an Heterodox Apochryphal Antinomian.

. XXVI.
His fifth Heresy he charges, as Antinomian, is, that Union to Christ is
before Faith, at least Natura, and we partake of the Spirit by virtue of that
Union. It is to admiration that this firm solid Truth should be called Heresy.
Can any thing be more clear, than that Faith is a Fruit of Union to Christ,
unless it be a dead Faith? Can a Branch bring out Grapes before it is united to
the Vine, Christ Jesus? Does he not say, Without me you can do nothing? I would
ask, whence can a living Faith come, but from Union to Jesus Christ? Can it
spring out of corrupt Nature, and so bring us to Christ? A dead Branch may be
tied to the Vine, but a living Branch grows out of the Vine. The Apostle was of
the mind, that Christ first takes hold of us, before we can, by Faith, take
hold of him; according to Phil. 3.12. I follow after, if that I may apprehend
that for which I am also apprehended of Christ Jesus. Here he was first
apprehended of Christ, as Dr. Manton told us well at Pinners-Hall, and from
thence inferred, (as well he might) that all that partake of Christ are first
apprehended of him, and so he unites himself to them before they can act Faith
on him, which is their apprehending him. They must make Christians to be
Monsters, that make them to live as Members of Christ by Faith, before they are
united to him. How can a Man possibly, that is dead in Sins by Nature, come to
believe in Christ, unless Christ comes first and quickens him, by uniting
himself to the Soul? Hence the Apostle said, It pleased God to reveal his Son
in me, Gal. 1.16. Till then he was a zealous persecuting Pharisee, and could
have not only called all Christ's Disciples Antinomians, but have slaughtered
them too, as some now slay their Names; but when Christ took hold of him, and
God revealed his Son in him, then he conferred not with Flesh and Blood, but in
the way that they counted Heresy, he worshipped the God of his Fathers;
believing what is written, Acts 24.14. The second Adam is the quickening
Spirit, and quickens all his Seed before they can live: You who were dead in
Sins has he quickened. Sure here was Union of Christ to them, thereby
quickening them when dead in Sins, before they could put forth any living Act
of Faith in him; or else we must feign, that a Believer has a Spiritual Life
in him, that is not from Christ, if he have Faith before he is united to
Christ, as some pretend; and so there would be two Spiritual Lives in a
Believer, one before Union to Christ, which works Faith, and the other from
Christ upon acting our Faith: But this Ass of our own Spiritual Life, and the
Ox of Christ's Life in us, will not draw well together. So that I think, I may
safely conclude, this is no Heresy to say, that Union to Christ is before
Faith; much less is that which follows an Heresy to say, that we partake of
the Spirit by virtue of that Union. This is brought in as part of the fifth
Heresy. Whence do the Branches partake of the Sap of the Vine, but from the
Root, by Virtue of Union to the Vine? It Is strange to admiration, that this
should be questioned by those who, like Peter, seem to be Pillars in the
Church, to call it an Antinomian Heresy to say, We partake of the Spirit, by
virtue of Union to Christ. If the Spirit be not in us before Faith, how can he
convince of Sin in not believing, and thereby work Faith? Does not the
Scripture say plainly, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9. To one is given, by the Spirit, the word
of Wisdom, to another Faith by the same Spirit? Does the Spirit give Faith, and
is he not then in the Soul to work Faith before it is wrought? Is not the
Former before the Thing formed? If so, then sure my Dear Kratiste was in a
great Mistake, and has sadly imposed on those that profess Faith in our Lord
Jesus, to rank this for a Heresy, That we partake of the Spirit by virtue of
our Union to Christ, which in Natura is before Faith.

The sixth, as being much akin to the former, I pass only with the naming of
it. It Is Heresy, he says, to say, Justification, in regard of Application,
must be before Believing. Whose Saying this is, or whence it is taken, I know
not: If the meaning be, that God applies it to us, or reckons it to us, before
our Believing, that we are Justified: This is so far from Heresy, that I think
the contrary is a Contradiction: Or it is Nonsense for me to believe a Thing is
mine, before it is given me, or applied to me, and so made mine. And in that
Sense the Application of Justification, by God's Spirit, to my Conscience, that
God has loved me, and given his Son for me; this must first be applied to me
before I can believe it, or else my Believing is but Presumption. But if by
Application of Justification before Believing, he means, that the Soul does
apply it to himself before his Believing, I think he is to seek for any that
hold that Tenet.

. XXVII.
His seventh Heresy is this, That the first Application, ordine Naturae
saltem, is to an Ungodly Man, eo nomine, that he may believe. That this is a
blessed Gospel Truth, and no Heresy, appears by what our Blessed Lord Jesus
says, That he came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners. And his immediate
Call made them follow him; as Levi from being a Publican to be a believing
Disciple: Nay, says our Lord, Publicans and Harlots enter into the Kingdom of
God before you. Ye believed not; but the Publicans and Harlots believed, Matthew.
21.31, 32. Here was Application to ungodly Wretches, eo nomine, that they might
believe; and when Publicans and Harlots they did believe, and so came off from
their Ungodliness: Yea, the Dog Syrophenaecian, as Christ called her, she had
Faith given her while she was a Dog, even to the Admiration of Christ himself;
who said, O Woman, great is thy Faith! And says the Apostle, for a full Proof
that the Application is to an ungodly Man eo nomine, While we were Enemies, we
were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son: Nay, as God will have it, the
very word ungodly, which they oppose as Heresy, is asserted in the Scripture,
that the first Application of Christ is to an ungodly Man, in Romans 4.5. To him
that believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is counted for
Righteousness. If the Blessed Apostle says, God justifies the ungodly, I
trow, this is no Heresy in him; but if Heterodox Dr. Crisp say the same words,
then it is an Antinomian Heterodoxy. Now there is a great outcry, what do you
make God to be? Is God such a Friend to Sin as to justify the Ungodly? Does it
become the Holiness of God to justify an ungodly Man? This is the way to
vindicate all licentious Antinomianism, That God justifies the Ungodly; and
that while he is an Enemy he is reconciled to God. O out upon such profane
Antinomians! We can allow the Apostle Paul to use such Language, because we can
distinguish this into, he does not justify the Ungodly, that the Apostle means
so whatever he says; but we cannot bear it, that Apochryphal Tobias should say
so, nor that Mysterious Nonsense say so, as Mr. Williams called Mr. Cole, we
cannot bear it in him; for this is to open a gap to Profaneness, to say, God
justifies the Ungodly.

. XXVIII.
The eighth Heresy is to assert, That we believe that we may be justified
declaratively. The Case I take to be thus: The Apostle says in Gal. 2.16. We
believe that we may be justified by the Faith of Jesus; from whence the
Neonomians conclude, that the (...) credere, our Act of Faith, is that very
Thing which justifies us, or that we are justified by our Work of Faith; if not
by Works of Faith and Holiness, (which sometimes they join) yet at least by a
Work, by our Act of Believing: Whereas the Orthodox, according to the Homilies
and Doctrine of the Church of England, from plain Scripture, put Faith it self
from us, as that Act that justifies, and say, Faith justifies only
declaratively, as it manifests to the Conscience our being justified by
Christ's Blood, Romans 5.9. and freely by his Grace (not our Grace of Faith)
through the Redemption that is in Jesus. Romans 3.24. Titus 3.7. It is still
ascribed to his Grace, not any Grace in us; our Grace of Faith being only the
Instrument, or Hand, given us of God to receive Christ, and all in him. If
Justification be as they would have it, from any Act of ours as the Ground or
Cause of it, then we are not freely justified by his Grace, but by our Work of
Believing; which, if not a Popish, is an Arminian Tenet, to blemish the Free
Grace of God in Jesus Christ So that it may be safely concluded, that it is no
Heresy to say, our Justification by Faith is declarative, in as much as the
Essence of Justification is by the Blood of Jesus, and the Grace of God,
imputing it to us, is the form of our Justification; which being received by
Faith, is thereby manifested or declared to the Conscience by the Illumination
of the Holy Spirit, concurring with our Spirits therein. See the Assemblies
Catechism.

. XXIX.
The like sort of Heresy to this last, we find well spoken to by Famous
Pemble, in his Treatise of Grace and Faith, in fol. 22, to prove God's being
reconciled to the Elect before they believe, and so to take off the Clamor
from Dr. Crisp; as if it were Antinomian Heresy to say, we believe that we may
be justified declaratively. Mr. Pemble argues solidly thus; Now that God does
actually love the Elect before they are regenerate, or can actually believe,
may appear thus: (1.) Where God is actually reconciled he actually loves, but
with the Elect, before they actually believe, God is actually reconciled;
therefore he loves them before their Faith. The Minor is evident; because,
before they are born, a full Satisfaction and Atonement is made by Christ, and
accepted on God's part, whereon actual Reconciliation must needs follow: He was
the Lamb slain from the beginning of the World. (2.) If God did actually love
the Elect before Christ's time, when an actual Reconciliation was not made,
then much more may he actually love the Elect after the Atonement is really
made by Christ's Death, even before they do believe it. The former is true by
the Salvation of the Patriarchs, therefore the latter may not well be denied.
(3.) Election, Vocation and Faith, are Fruits of God's Love to the Elect; which
Graces he bestows on them, because he loves them. Now I argue; If God loved his
Elect from Eternity, and this Love neither increases nor diminishes, as in
God, as Mr. Pemble says anon, then it is plain, that in the Righteous Judgment
of God, foro Dei, there was never any Guilt on them, after they were delighted
in by Christ: For God does not take a Sinner by the Hand; that is the same as,
he may be said, not to love guilty Souls; but he does take the Elect by the
Hand from Eternity. As they are chosen in Christ from Eternity, so they were
delighted in by Christ from Eternity; therefore the Elect, as Elect, are not
guilty in the sight of God: For if they were, how should they be delighted in
from Eternity, as having Grace given them in Christ, by the Father, from
Eternity? 2 Timothy 1.9. and Prove. 8.

. XXX.
And now my hand is in with Mr. Pemble, and because the Rebuker, and others,
may, if the Lord please, see their Mistake in their hard Censure on Dr. Crisp,
and others, to say it is Heretical for them to say, That Justification is before
Faith, I shall a little enlarge on this eighth Heresy. It Is well known Mr.
Pemble was no Antinomian, yet he says, in concurrence with Dr. Twiss and Dr.
Crisp, thus; In foro Divino, in God's sight Justification goes before our
Sanctification; for even whilst the Elect are unconverted, they are then
actually justified and freed from all Sin by the Death of Christ, and God
having accepted of that Satisfaction, is actually reconciled to them. (2.)
There is Justification, in foro Conscientiae, in our sense, which is but the
revelation, and certain declaration, of God's former secret Act, of accepting
Christ's Righteousness to our Justification. And why is not the outcry of
Heresy against this Good Man? who asserts so plainly the actual Justification
in God's sight before the Conversion of the Elect; and that the Justification
in our Consciences, is but the revelation and declaration of the former secret
Justification before God.

. XXXI.
To the like purpose is the Confession of the Assembly at Westminster, on the
Article of Justification, which says, Christ by his Obedience and Death did
fully discharge the Debt of all those that are justified. Here our Sins are
called a Debt, which our Rebuker makes a dangerous word, and here this Debt is
fully discharged; when? even at Christ's Death. And if so, then I argue with
the Apostle, if the Debt was discharged then, Who can lay any thing to the
charge of God's Elect, either of Sin or Guilt? It is Christ that dyed, yea
rather, that is risen again. Sure this was no Antinomian Assembly, yet they
make the Debt discharged at Christ's Death.

. XXXII.
But Mr. Pemble goes farther in this Point, and says, That Faith does not
precede Participation with Christ, appears: (1) Our Sanctification wrought by
the Spirit, conveys Life and Grace into our Souls when we are void of Faith,
and before it is asked. (2.) Our Justification in God's sight, which was long
before we were born, is purchased for us by Christ: It Is vain to think, with
the Armenian, That Christ's Merits only made God PLACABILEM, not Placatum; no,
the Ransom is paid and accepted, all the Sins are actually pardoned; this grand
Transaction between God, and the Mediator Jesus Christ, was dispatched in
Heaven, before we had a Being; yet the Benefit of it was ours, and belonged to
us at that time, though we never knew so much, till after that by Faith we
apprehended it: As Lands may be settled on an Infant, though he knew nothing of
it till he come of Age. O! what clear Testimony is here, to convince the
Neonomians, that besides express Scripture, those that the Rebuker calls
Antinomians, have very good Company going with them.

. XXXIII.
Here I cannot omit from the word Placabilem, to reflect on what one of the
Deserters of Pinners-hall Lecture, well known to the Rebuker, said there, about
April 1693, not without great Trouble to some of the Auditory, That Christ's
Death was to make God PLACABLE. As rank Arminianism as can be, which was well
answered there the sixth of June 1693 by Worthy Mr. Lawrence, though the same
Person was never answered there as I heard, to a worse piece of Arminianism
that he uttered there, to the Scandal of Pinners-Hall, viz. That Adam' s first
Sin was not ours, or We did not Sin that first Sin, that Sin only corrupted our
Nature. Which is clean contrary to the Apostles (...) in whom all Sinned, Romans
5.12.

Now we may no longer wonder to see such Persons Symbolize with, and be
Champions for unsound Mr. Williams, who holds, That more than the Elect may be
Saved; Witness these words of his by way of Scorn to his Opposers, in his
Appendix to Gospel Truth stated, It is not enough (says Mr. Williams) that we
own that Christ absolutely redeemed the Elect, so as to purchase saving Graces,
as well as Benefits, to be infallibly theirs, unless we add, that all others
are in state of Devils, as having no real offers of Life on Gospel terms: Nor
is their Salvation possible if they will Repent and Believe. Here he holds it
possible, that others, besides the Elect, may Repent and Believe, and so their
Salvation is possible. Nay herein Antisozzo, whom my Dear Kratiste has a great
value for, does partly coalesce in Page 103, saying, When God gave the Promise
to the common Parent of Mankind, there was a possibility in the thing, that
that means of Salvation might have been derived to all those Rivulets into
which his Posterity should be sub-divided: If it was not, I conceive the Fault
was theirs, not God's, (as if it would have been a Fault in God, if he did not
give means for all to be Saved, when they had Damned themselves.) Thus
Antisozzo has in a manner laid Salvation open in common, to Elect and
Non-elect, to Vessels before of old ordained to Condemnation, Jude 4. as well
as to Vessels of Mercy, for whom the Kingdom was prepared from the Foundation
of the World, Matt. 25, directly contrary to the Confession of the Assembly,
which they both have Subscribed, though I find not that they ever recanted this
Expression. The Assembly say, on the Point of God's Decree directly, that none
but the Elect can be Saved thus, These Angels and Men, their number is so
certain and definite, that it cannot be increased or diminished; neither are
any other redeemed by Christ, effectually Called, Justified, Adopted,
Sanctified and Saved, but the Elect only. For the proof of which, they quote 2 Timothy 2.19. John 13.18. and 17.9. and 6.64, 65. and 10.26. and Romans 8.28. I lay
down my Life for the sheep, and ye (Pharisees) ye believe not, because ye are
not my sheep. Thus these great Men have asserted, and this our Neonomians
subscribe to, in order to deceive the Simple, to believe they are Orthodox,
when here it is visible, how Heterodox these two great Contenders for the New
Law are, plainly deviating from the Assembly, in allowing a Possibility for the
Non elect to be Saved. But I beg for them the Mercy of God, to give them the
Eye Salve of his Spirit, to show them their Mistake.

. XXXIV.
The Ninth and Tenth Heresies are scarce worth mentioning, they being only some
curtailed Expressions, that the Antagonists to the Free Grace of God, in his
eternal Love to poor Sinners in Christ, do take from the Writings of some of
the Asserters of our Sins being fully done away, by the Death of our Lord
Jesus, and from thence this Pharisaical Spirit quarrels at them, and charges
them for laying a ninth Heresy, It is denied that God requires Faith, as an
indispensible Qualification, in them whom he will Justify by Christ's Merits.
How this is worded by his Antinomians he mentions not, whether they deny Faith
indispensibly in Infants or Lunaticks or no: So that this Quarrel needs little
answer, seeing they know that we are as much for Faith as themselves, if not
more, as it excludes Works in the Point of Justification; but not for Faith to
take the Crown off from the Head of Jesus, and it self to wear the Honor of
Saving us in whole, or in part.

. XXXV.
Such another is his Tenth Heresy, All that a Believer can pray for, is the
farther Manifestation of Pardon; for he knows that all his Sins are pardoned.
This is a manifest Breach of Charity, for he knows they pray for more; and
though they may at some Seasons, have full Assurance of being accepted in the
Beloved Jesus, wherein they see all their Sins were done away in his Blood,
when he, to Sanctify the People, Suffered without the Gate: Whereupon they,
upon Believing, cry, Glory to him who has loved them, and washed them from
their Sins with his Blood. Yet they daily pray for fresh Discoveries of the
same, which, as to their Consciences, is a Fresh Pardon, or renewing of Pardon.
I hope my Dear Kratiste will not deny, That by one Offering, he has for ever
perfected those that are Sanctified; and that he Sanctified the People with his
own Blood, when he Suffered without the Gate. If so, then all successive
Pardons, upon fresh Acts of Faith, are only the Clearing up of Pardon to the
Conscience, that there should be no more Conscience of Sin: Whereas the Grand
Pardon in the Court of Heaven was, as Mr. Pemble says, when Christ was
delivered for our Offenses, and raised for our Justification; which is not
manifest to the Conscience till Faith comes. And thus this Heresy vanishes,
having only left us a Testimony, that the Neonomians do Boggle in the point of
Pardon, and would hook in our Faith to be a Joynt-Saviour with Christ, by being
a procurer of Pardon, rather than a Manifestation of it.

. XXXVI.
It is an Amazement his 11th Heresy, which is this, A Believer is to work from
Life, and not for Life. For answer, If a Man be a Believer, he is a Living
Member of Christ, and so he Works from Life in Christ: Sure then this cannot be
the Heresy intended here, to say he works from Life: Then this is his Heresy,
That a Believer works not for Life. But how can that be Heresy? to say, A
Believer does not work for Life; when the word says, The Gift of God is
Eternal Life, Romans 6.23. If it be Gift, then it is not Worked for by us, do Men
call that a Gift that is wrought for? that is, Wages; Death indeed is wrought
for by Sin, for the Wages of Sin (which is in our best Works) is Death, but
Life is the Free Gift of God: How then can it be called Heresy to say, A
Believer works not for Life? Antisozzo was once of another Mind I find, but the
Rebuker does well to conceal his Name, for to call this Heresy, must needs
cast a sad Reflection. What more substantial Truth is there, than that a
Believer works from Life, and not to gain Life by his Works? Whither shall we
run, if we do not maintain this for Truth, That a Believer works not, that he
by his good Works might procure to himself Eternal Life? No; but he works from
a Divine Principle of Life in him, that he may glorify God for the Gift of
Eternal Life, through his Son Jesus Christ. O! how true is that of Luther,
Every Man has a Pope in his Belly; and how ready are we to run into the Dregs
of Popery to Work for Life.

. XXXVII.
The Twelfth is, It Is Heresy to say, It Is a great Truth, that God sees no Sin
in a Believer. I hope it is a great Truth, and no Heresy, that God says, I
have blotted out, as a thick Cloud, thy Transgressions, and as a Cloud, thy
Sins, Isa. 44.22. And if blotted out, it is to show that God does not see them:
And if God says, He has cast them into the Depth of the Sea, and he has cast
them behind his Back; and he will remember them no more: Is it not the same
thing, as not to see them? And does he not say, He has not beheld Iniquity in
Jacob; not but that they had Iniquity enough; but when their Sins are covered
with the Robe, the fine white Linen of Christ's Righteousness, then it may be
said, without Imputation of Heresy, it is a great Truth, and a Blessed one,
that God sees no Sin in a Believer: Sure my Dear Kratiste had strangely forgot
himself, to call this glorious Truth a Heresy.

. XXXVIII.
The Thirteenth, Sin can do no real hurt to a Believer.

Answer. If, as Sin abounds, Grace much more abounds, (which nevertheless is no
Encouragement to any to Sin but a Devil) and if all works for good to those
that love God, then though Sin may bring dreadful Chastisements, they are for
good, and not for real hurt, to a Believer; not that we are to continue in Sin
that Grace may abound, God forbid.

. XXXIX.
The Fourteenth, God is not displeased with his People, nor angry with the
Persons of Believers for their Sins.

I answer. God says, whom he loves, he loves to the end; whom he loves, he may
Rebuke and Chasten, and yet not be angry with them; he is angry with the Wicked
every day; but as to his People he is God, and changes not, and his Kindness
endures for ever: This is such a Maxim, that it is the conclusion of every Verse
of the 136th Psalm, we translate it, His Mercy endures for ever, but the word
is, chasdo, his Kindness, it is that which endures for ever. I know the Rebuker
loves a learned Testimony from Man, to concur with the Word of God; take it
then from one never accounted an Antinomian, though in this as great an one as
Dr. Crisp, nay, such another as the Apostle Paul. I say in this particular,
concerning the Unchangeableness of God's Love to his People, even Famous
Pemble, who says thus in his Tract of Grace and Faith, Fol. 22. I would have
you (says he) learn a Distinction between God's Love in it self, and its
Manifestation to us. The first is PERPETVAL, from all to all Eternity without
CHANGE, Increase or Lessening, toward every one of the Elect: But the
Manifestation of this to our Consciences begins in time at our Conversion. We
may truly say, that God's Love to us, when he decreed to Save us, is one and
the same, without Addition, with that which he manifests to us when he
glorifies us, (if not, say I, there is a Change in God) That holy Flame of Love
burns as hot to us now as then; his Love to their Persons is from Everlasting
the same; nor does their Sinfulness lessen it (though it may hide it) nor their
Sanctity increase it; because God, in loving their Persons, never considered
them otherwise, than as most perfectly Holy and Unblameable in Christ. God
approves of their Persons, while he disallows their Corruptions; and when his
fiercest Wrath was showed against their Sins, in the Person of Christ, then did
God most compassionately love the Persons both of Christ, and of all the Elect.
O! that our New-law Men, would or could well weigh these Passages, highly
consistent with the Unchangeable unvariable immutable Nature of God. This
Testimony, though but Humane, is founded on good Ground, I the Lord change not
Had Dr. Crisp written this, then we had had an Outcry of Notorious Antinomian
Heresy. But we must wait at the Throne of Grace in behalf of Opposers, for
it is God alone gives Eye Salve, to see into the Mystery of the unsearchable
Riches of his Grace, to poor Sinners in Christ, that their Sinfulness does not
lessen his Love to the Elect; though he still hates Sin in them, as much as if
they were Damned to Eternal Burnings for every Sin which is due to them; but
they are borne and suffered for by our Blessed Lord Jesus, the Just for the
Unjust, by his once Suffering for Sins (even for all and every Sin of those
given to him from Eternity) that he might bring us to God: To whom be Glory for
ever.

. XL.
The Fifteenth Heresy, as he calls it, is, Legal Convictions before Saving
Faith, are no more than Sin, it is but the filthy Conscience polluting Guilt of
Sin.

Answer. Surely my Dear Kratiste forgot himself here, or rather the Word of
God, which he should ever steer his Course by: Does not the Scripture say
plainly, Whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin? Romans 14.23. And does not the
Apostle show what he got by his Legal Convictions before Faith, that the Law
wrought in him all manner of Concupiscence, Romans 7. I was alive without the
Law, but when the Command came (when Legal Convictions came) Sin revived, and I
died; and Sin taking occasion by the Command (or by Legal Convictions) wrought
in me all manner of Concupiscence. Here we see the Fruit of Legal Convictions;
O! how ill does it become such as would be accounted Ministers of the Gospel,
to run thus to Moses, and to talk at that rate; as if any Work of ours, before
true Faith, were ought but Sin; and if Sin, it must be Conscience-polluting;
And where is the Heresy now? If there be Sin in our best Duties after Faith
(or else why was the High Priest to have a Plate of Gold on his Forehead, to
take away the Iniquity of their Holy Things) what then are Works before Faith,
but Conscience-polluting? I desire my Kratiste to take another Turn with the
Reverend Assembly, and see what they say of this, viz. Works done by
Unregenerate Men, because they proceed not from an Heart purified by Faith,
they are sinful. Titus 1.15. To the Defiled and Unbelieving, is nothing pure.

. XLI.
The Sixteenth, All imperfect Holiness is Sin. This methinks the Rebuker may
blush to mention for an Heresy, seeing the Scripture says, He that errs in
one point, is guilty of all, and Cursed is he that continues not in all things
written in the Book of the Law to do them. So that the discontinuance a moment
from doing all things commanded in the Law, brings a Curse, if there be but the
least Deviation from the perfect Rule: So that if our Holiness be in the least
short of the full Requirement of the Law, it brings a Curse, which it could not
do if it were not Sin. But here lies the Core, the Heart of the Armenian Spirit
as I take it, That God accepts imperfect Holiness for Christ's sake, in the
stead of perfect: As for the first part, that God accepts imperfect Holiness
for Christ's sake, the Orthodox do hold; but it is only as Christ has taken
away the Sin of the Imperfection, by his once offering himself for all the Sins
of the Elect; but God never accepts it as perfect, or in the stead of perfect,
that would be to accept it for what it is not, much less does God accept us for
our imperfect Holiness: Besides the Scripture says, All our Righteousnesses
are as filthy Rags, What is that but Sin? And the Assembly say, The best Works
wrought by us are defiled; and if so, then it is no Heresy to say, All
imperfect Holiness is Sin. And one would wonder how it should enter into the
Thoughts of these Antagonists, to subscribe what they have done of the
Assemblies Confession, and yet assert that to be Heresy, which is owned by
them for solid Truth.

. XLII.
The seventeenth Heresy is to say, Turn ye, Turn ye, why will you dye? is but
the triumph of the Law over a dead Sinner. Answer, The bare outward Call to
Sinners to turn, you will grant, is not sufficient to turn them; for they are,
by Nature, dead in Sins and Trespasses, and there must be an Almighty Power put
forth to quicken them, besides the bare Call, Turn ye, turn ye. It is God that
must work both the Will and the Deed; for without me, says Christ, you can do
nothing. If so, what is the Call to turn, without the Spirit of God effecting
the turn, but a manifestation of God's Right to command, which you may call the
triumph of the Law? You will not say, that God has lost his Right to command
us to turn to him, though we are dead, and are not able to turn, till there
goes forth from God, with his Call, an Almighty saving Power of turning us to
him; and on this account the Church prays, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned,
Jer. 31.18. And till then, the Call is but God's triumphing in his Sovereignty,
in the Law, over poor dead Sinners.

. XLIII.
The eighteenth is a very weak Heresy, though a long one, and in truth no more
a Heresy, than it is Heresy to say, Christ took not the Nature of Angels, but
the Seed of Abraham; but however this comes in the Bed-roll, to fill up the
number; and it is thus, The Eternal Life, in which the Angels were created and
confirmed by Christ, differs from that Eternal Life which Believers have in
Christ: The one is a Creature Life, or a created Life, the other is the Eternal
Life of God communicated in time. This, though not of the Essence of
Christianity, or a Fundamental, may be a little explained, and so it will
appear that it is no Heresy. But some Persons are glad of a small Occasion to
quarrel. The only Ground for quarrelling at this Expression, is, That the Life
of a Believer is the Eternal Life of God; by which, I suppose, is meant of
God-Man, the Lord Jesus Christ. Now take it in that Sense, then Christ being
the Life of every Believer, they have the Eternal Life of God-Man in them, so
as the Angels have not. Christ took not their Nature; they are not Members of
his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones, and Believers are; Ephesians. 5.30. He is
not their Resurrection and Life, as he is the Believers. Is it not a great
Truth, that by Virtue of their Union to Christ by Faith in his Flesh and Blood,
the Flesh and Blood of him who is the Eternal Son of God, they have that
Eternal Life in them, from him, which the Angels have not? As to the Eternal
Life which the Angels have, and shall enjoy, what is it but a created Life?
Whereas the Life of Christ in his Saints, and with them to all Eternity, is
their participation of his Life, as he is more than a mere Creature, as he is
God-Man; and they one with him, partaking of the Divine Nature, as the Branches
partake of the very Nature of the Vine; not that they are Godded with Christ
God-Man, but in an ineffable manner they partake of his Divine Nature, being
made one Body, incorporated into him, and so one with him; which must
comprehend an Eternal Life being in them, which is more than merely created,
they being filled with all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19. That is, as they have
Christ in them, the hope of Glory, in whom dwells the fullness of the Godhead
Bodily, but in Believers he dwells only Spiritually.

. XLIV.
The nineteenth they make a great one, viz. That Believers are as Righteous as
Christ; I mean, not in a way of Similitude, but in a way of Equality. Here is
high Disingenuity, to quote part of a Sentence. For Mr. Mather, from whom this
is taken, though he said somewhat to this purpose at Pinners-Hall, yet he put
in several Qualifications of the Expression, whereof one was, That they were as
Righteous as Christ, as they did partake of his Mediatorial Righteousness, and
of that part only, of that Righteousness, which was wrought out for them. To
this there may be more said, when I answer the Rebuker's saying, That Mr.
Williams had denied his Redeemer, if he had not denied Dr. Crisp's Assertion,
of a change of Persons. In the mean time, I leave this Scripture to be
pondered, That we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, (Christ), 1
Cor. 5.21.

. XLV.
The twentieth is, That Christ's Incarnation was no part of his Humiliation.
This is brought in (I suppose) to insult over the Grave of Mr. Mather, who
could doubtless have so explained his meaning, as it needed not have put Mr.
Williams on showing his great Parts and Learning, to go to confute it for an
Antinomian Heresy, in interpreting (...) by a new English word, well enough
agreeing with the Neonomian Doctrine, calling (...) exaninition, which he might
as well call exany-thing, or to make it chime, his next Interpretation of
(...), exinanition; instead of his calling it exany-nition, it may be
exany-wigeon, or any thing else, as his mighty Learning may coin for it. If Mr.
Mather, in that Expression, meant it of mere Incarnation, without respect to
Mediation for Sinners, how was his Incarnation any Humiliation, more than God
the Father his dwelling in the Heart of the Humble and Contrite is his
Humiliation? May not God the Father, or God the Son, assume what shape they
please, as well as the Holy Spirit assumed the shape of a Dove, and yet that no
Degradation or Humiliation? It is true, God is said to humble himself to behold
things in Heaven, but that is spoken Figuratively, as his Eyes behold, his
Eyelids try the Children of Men; but to say, God is humbled by it, is harsh;
and so to say, that Christ's mere Incarnation was his Humiliation, is to deny
him the liberty to assume what form he pleases, or to make it a diminution of
his Glory, is what, I suppose, cannot well be maintained. I am sure his
Incarnation was a Glorious Exaltation of our Humane Nature; and would it not be
harsh to say, he could not exalt our Nature without depressing his own? God is
able of Stones to raise up Children to Abraham, much more is Christ able to
take our Nature, when made Sinless, and not thereby degrade his own. But let
Mr. Williams run away with his Triumphs over Mr. Mather, calling him
Blow-flame, and make an exaninition, or an exany-thing of him, when all is
done, this Expression, among wise Christians, will hardly pass for an Heresy
to say, Christ's mere Incarnation was not a part of his Humiliation, though his
Incarnation, as Mediator, was.

. XLVI.
The last, the one and twentieth, is, We coalesce upon believing into one
Mystical Person with Christ, which is distinguished from Legal Union, which is
before Faith. Whose Expression this is, I am to seek, but methinks it is very
harmonious with the Gospel; and if this deserves the Name of Heresy, we must
seek a New Gospel. What can be more coalescing than that of Christ? You in me,
and I in you. Or that of the Apostle? We are Members of his Body, etc. Ephesians.
5.30. And he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit. Is not this one Spirit,
one Person? Is the blessed Holy Spirit the Third Person in the Trinity? Is he a
Person, and are not Christ and his believing Members becoming one Spirit, are
they not become thereby one Person? Why else are they called Christ? 1 Cor.
12.12. Is this novel, uncooth and unintelligible, to my Dear Kratiste, a Master
in Israel? Need Christ, and they, go into his Mothers Womb to become one Person?

. XLVII.
As for Legal Union before Faith, I know of none, unless he means a faederal
Union, such as Children of believing Parents have, or bare nominal Christians
have. Sure these may be distinguished, without Offense, from such as have a
Mystical Union by Faith, without any Heresy attending it. Thus we conclude the
21 Antinomian Heresies, which have met with a Presbyterian Lash, as the Great
Apostle Paul did with the like from the Jews. They appear not so formidable as
the Neonomians would make them, but rather, some of them, shine forth with
brighter clearness, for great Gospel Truths, by their being so set forth. This
I am comfortably satisfied in, that God has, by the late Abuse put on
Evangelical Truths, held out by the branded Dr. Crisp, Mr. Cole, and many
others, he has enlightened many Souls thereby; and I wait, in assured hope,
that God will in his blessed time, which is hastening, make the Light of the
Sun of Righteousness, shining in the Gospel, to be as the Light of seven Days,
when Men will not put Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light. Which the
Good Lord, for the sake of thy dying and interceding Son, our Lord Jesus, do
thou hasten.

. XLVIII.
In the mean time, to our grave Rebuker, I say, Kratiste Theophile, most
excellent Sir, take heed you be not a Theomaikos, a Fighter against God, while
you design to justify a Man whom you cannot vindicate with Honor, till he
renounce some Expressions in his Books which fight directly against the Gospel,
especially that Soul-endangering one in his Preface to Gospel Truth stated,
which is this, I affirm that the Righteousness of God, Phil. 3.9. principally
intends the Gospel-Holiness of a Person justified by Christ's Righteousness:
Which is an Interpretation that is directly opposite to all sound Protestants
Judgments. From such Interpreters of a Gospel Truth the Lord in Mercy deliver
all his People, and from being a Champion for such an Interpreter, the Lord
deliver the Rebuker, and all his 49 Vouchers.

. XLIX.
In Page 27 he bewails the Case, and says, And thus the Breach became beyond
the United Brethrens making up. He means, I suppose, beyond their Power of
making up; that is, because these Antinomian Heresies were not recanted. And no
wonder that it was beyond their Power to make up the breach that these Points
made; for how can Truth and Error coalesce? If the Poor Presbyterians, as he
calls them, do insist on the renouncing these 21 Doctrines, as Heresies, which
have much of the Marrow of the Gospel in them, as appears from plain Scripture,
and sound Authors, already quoted, they may enjoy their Repose in their own
benighted Sentiments, but may not imagine, that they who are clearlyer
enlightened in the Mysteries of the Gospel, having tasted the good old Wine of
God's Everlasting Love of Electing them in Christ, that they will come to the
new Wine of a pretended New Law given them by Christ, That we performing
Gospel-Obedience with our sincere endeavors to fulfill that New Law of Faith,
Love, Repentance, Holiness, and perseverance therein; this, though imperfect in
its self, shall be accepted instead of perfect, by Virtue of the Righteousness
and Merits of our Lord Jesus. Which in effect is to say, that we are not saved
by Grace, but Christ has merited that we should save our selves.

. L.
That this is their meaning, appears by what Mr. Williams (who seems to be
their general Mouth) has said, in his Preface to Man made Righteous by Christ's
Obedience: Where he rebukes his Antinomians for owning no Law of God, that
admitted of faulty Obedience; and by way of Contempt to Mr. Cole, etc. he
says, They own no Law but the Law of Works, which admitted nothing short of
perfect sinless Obedience. So that he looks on it as an horrid Error to hold,
that no Law is given by God that admitted of Obedience, that had Sin in it:
Which shows plainly that they hold, that God has set up a Law in the room of
the Moral Law; and that this their New Law, which they have invented for God,
and wretchedly impute to God, it does admit of Sin in the Obedience to it; than
which there cannot be a more horrid Affront offered to the Holy God, viz. That
God should set up a Law that allows Sin. Now if contradicting such Doctrine as
this, is accounted Antinomianism, then to be freed from their Slanders, we must
rob God of his Honor, nay, deny him to be God, to comply with their Doctrine
of charging on God his making a Law, that allows Sin in our Obedience to it.
For I dare be bold to say, in Contradiction to such an Assertion, and in Zeal
to the pure Holy Nature of God, God never did, nay never can, and that is a bold
word, but true, if God be God, and Holiness his Nature, he never can make a Law
that admits of any thing but Sinless Obedience: For God says, he cannot behold
Iniquity; and for any Man, or number of Men, or for any Angels of Heaven, to
talk at that rate, for God to make a Law that admits of Sin, let him be
accursed. To talk of a Law that admits of Sin, is to make the Maker of such a
wooden Law to be little better than a wooden God. It is enough to make ones
Flesh to tremble, and Spirit rise into a rage, against the bold strokes of some
Ungodly Pens that corrupt the Gospel and Minds of Men, to talk of a Law of the
Holy God that admits any thing of Sin. Mr. Williams and his Justifiers, have
subscribed to the Assemblies Confession of Faith, and they say upon the Head of
Repentance, There is no Sin so small, but it deserves Damnation; and they
justify it by that Scripture, The Wages of Sin is Death. But our Neonomians,
our New-Law Men, bring in God making a Law, that admits of Faulty Obedience, or
Obedience that is not Sinless, which is all one with Faulty Obedience. Now my
Dear Kratiste, this Man's Champion, pray where is this accounted for? And if
not, how can it be expected, that the Breach between the Orthodox and these
should be made up? Offenses will come, but woe to that Man by whom they come.
To such a Man as would impose a Law, allowing Sinning Obedience: And if
Sinning, then it has Sin in it; and if so, and that the Assembly say right,
(from the Wages of Sin being Death) the least Sin, never so small, deserves
Damnation, then they will bring in God making a Law, in complying with which
Men shall be damned: For Men shall be damned for Sinning Obedience, so far as
the Law has Power over any Man; and if they are saved, it cannot be by a
Sinning Compliance with their New Law, but merely of Grace, on account of the
perfect Holy Law of God, which admits of nothing but Sinless Obedience, by its
being fulfilled by our Lord Jesus for us, and by his Blood taking away our
Sins, in coming short of the Holy Law of God. Now if our Rebuker will continue
rebuking, I would pray he would employ his Talent in rebuking such Doctrines,
as bring in a Law of God that allows of Sin, rather than on saying, We work
from Life, and not for Life. Whereas it is a mad sort of Work for Life, to work
under their New Law that allows Sinning Obedience.

. LI.
In Page 31, Mr. Williams is brought in, with an Ecce Homo! Behold the Man! by
the Rebuker, in magnifying his Soundness in the great Point of Christ's
Satisfaction; and says, I will speak a great Word, NONE (no none, not the
Apostle Paul himself) has ever more clearly stated this Truth (of Christ's
Satisfaction) than Mr. Williams, (says my Kratiste), for which I refer you to
his Gospel Truth, Chap. 2. (where Mr. Williams says) Though our Sins were
imputed to Christ with respect to the Guilt thereof, so that he, by the
Father's Appointment and his own Consent, became obliged, as Mediator, to bear
the Punishment of our Iniquities; and he did bear those Punishments to the full
Satisfaction of Justice. Here Is a great Word, ( None ever more clearly stated,
etc.) for this great Confession of Mr. Williams, and I am glad he owns our
Guilt was imputed to Christ, so much of our Sins was imputed: But we have a
Proverb, That some Cows will give a good mess of Milk, and kick it all down,
and spill it when they have done; so our great Truth-stater has, in a few
Lines, kicked all this down: For though he allowed that our Sins were imputed
to Christ, as to the Guilt of them, and that he bare the Punishments, yet he
warily hides the Socinian here, and forbears saying, Christ bare the Sins; it is
only the Guilt of them was imputed, and the Punishment borne. This it is true he
owns; but what became of the very Sins, if Christ did not bear them? We know
what God says of them, He laid on him the Iniquity of us all; and he bare our
Sins in his Body on the Tree; but if Dr. Crisp, or Mr. Cole, say so, it is
Antinomianism. But what says the Admired Gospel stater, after his none more
clearly stating this Truth? Why, he plainly denies Christ's bearing our Sins;
for within four Lines after his extolled vindicating the Doctrine of
Satisfaction, he has these words, It is an Error (says Mr. Williams) that he
laid all the very Sins of the Elect on Christ. Is not this a Man to be admired?
that in flat opposition to the Scripture, denies God's laying the Sins of the
Elect on Christ: For to say he did not lay the very Sins on Christ, is to give
God the Lie in plain English; for the Scripture says plainly, without a Trope
or Figure, The Lord laid on him the Iniquity of us all. Did God lay our
Iniquity on Christ, and not our very Iniquity? Did he bear the Sins of many,
and not their very Sins? Will he have so much audaciousness as to make God a
Cheat? To make us believe he laid our Sins on Christ; but when it comes to the
up-shot, it is not our Sins, not our very Sins, but somewhat like our Sins;
that is, Guilt imputed and Punishment borne, but for the very Sins they were
not laid.

. LII.
I confess it is much to find from such a Pen, That God imputed the Guilt of our
Sins to Christ; but if he comes after, and says, he means by Guilt imputed, as
he says of Sins laid on Christ, it is not the very Guilt; where are we then? We
must stand to his Courtesy for not saying so. He may better say so of Guilt
imputed, than of Sins laid, because Sins laid is very Scripture, whereas Guilt
imputed is a borrowed Term. Therefore I beseech my Dear Kratiste to stay his
Admiration of him, in saying, None has ever more clearly stated this Truth, for
fear it be found that none has more sullied it: For what can the rankest
Socinian say more, in derogation to the Truth of Christ's Satisfaction for our
Sins, than to say, It Is an Error to say our very Sins were laid on Christ? Nay,
such an Error as, I fear, my Dear Kratiste can sublimate (by his Art of
Bespattering) to make it to be the Dregs of Antinomianism, to say our very Sins
were laid on Christ.

. LIII.
Let us see a little what Consequence he makes of this Error, Why then Christ
was the Murderer, (says Mr. Williams) Christ was the Blasphemer, Adulterer,
etc. And for this Dr. Crisp must be arraigned, with the Dregs of Antinomianism
laid to his Charge, as if he was the Author of such horrid Expressions, that
Christ was such an one in himself; whereas he has excellent Authority, both
Humane and Divine, for all that he has asserted. If Dr. Crisp had said, that
Christ was made Sin and a Curse, and the Scripture had been silent therein, Mr.
Williams, and his Champion, might have had Ground for the Accusation: But if
so, why should not Dr. Luther come in for a Snack, and Dr. Calvin for a Lash?
But as the Case is, Dr. Paul, the Apostle, must have the severest Stroke, for
saying, God made our Lord Jesus Sin for us, and a Curse. But because, for
Shame, they will not charge him with gross Blasphemy for so saying, they will
distinguish away the force of the Words, by saying, he meant that Christ bore
the Punishment, and not the very Sins; but left the Sinner to bear them.

. LIVE.
And farther, that Dr. Crisp may not bear all the Load that these Rigid
Gentlemen lay on him, I shall give some Humane Testimonies, which concur with
him, though they have had abundance from Dr. Chancy, and others, which must
needs convince their Conscience, they being many of them unanswered; but for
the present purpose they must have some of them again; therefore let us see
what Mr. Calvin says on Gal. 3.13. It is thus; Two Things are here to be
considered, not only in the Person of Christ, but also in his Humanity: One is,
That he was the Lamb of God, without Spot, full of Blessing and Grace. The
other, That he took our Person; therefore he was a Sinner, and under the Curse,
not so much in himself as in us. O my Dear Kratiste, why do you not spend some
of your Talent on this uncouth novel, unintelligible Stuff of this Great
Person, as well as on the Apochryphal Story of Tobias? And when your Hand is
in, pray let Bold Martin Luther have a taste of your sour Sauce on his sweet
Meat, which he gives you on Gal. 3.14. for he deserves it more than the Doctor
you are so displeased with; Luther saying, We may apply to Christ's that whole
27. Deuteronomy. For as Christ is Innocent in this General Law, touching his own
Person, so he is also in all the rest; and as he is guilty in this General Law,
in that he is made a Curse for us, and hanged on the Cross, as a Wicked Man, a
Blasphemer, a Murderer, a Traitor, so he is guilty in all others: For all the
Curses of the Law are heaped together, and laid upon him. He was therefore not
only accursed, but made a Curse for us. (And a little above he said), That he
putting off his Innocence and Holiness, and taking thy sinful Person on him,
might bear thy Sin, thy Death, thy Curse. Why is not this criminated for the
Dregs of Antinomianism? Being read with Arminian Spectacles, it may pass for
such, but if read by the Light of the Holy Spirit, in the Glass of the Word, it
will be found pure clear Water of Life flowing from the Fountain of Israel, the
Rock that followed them, our Lord Jesus Christ; Whom, for our Everlasting
Comfort, God made Sin for us, though he knew no Sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him:

I must confess I am amazed at the Uncharitableness of some Men, in charging
the Doctor with making Christ a Murderer, etc. as if he meant any otherwise
than all sound Orthodox Christians do; that is, that he was only a Sinner by
Imputation. And let my Dear Kratiste but examine his Conscience on consulting
the Doctor's Sermons, when his fierce Anger is allayed, and he will say, there
is as Great and as Adorable a Sense of the Glorious Excellency of our Lord
Jesus in his own Person, in those Discourses, as he can find in any writings he
most applauds; and that notwithstanding it must be still asserted, or we must
all be damned, That for the sake of poor Sinners he was made Sin and a Curse
for us: And it is well known that the Doctor meant, and so expressed himself,
that he was so only by Imputation.

. LV.
The next is a very unbeseeming and dreadful Charge against the Doctor in Page
38, where the Rebuker says, The Doctor had affirmed a wild, monstrous Sense of
Change of Person between Christ and the Elect; for which he quotes Mr.
Williams, citing Dr. Crisp in these words, pa. 31, of Gospel Truth, Mark it
well, (says the Doctor) Christ himself is not so completely Righteous, but we
are as Righteous as he; nor we so completely Sinful, but Christ became, being
made Sin, as completely Sinful as we: Nay more, we are the same Righteousness,
for we are made the Righteousness of God; that very Sinfulness that we were,
Christ is made the very Sinfulness. So that here is a direct Change; Christ
takes our Person and Condition, and stands in our stead; we take Christ's
Person and Condition, and stand in his stead. So that if you reckon well, you
must always reckon your selves in another Person, and that other in your
Person.

This is the monstrous Sense of the Doctor, upon which the Rebuker makes this
dreadful following Comment; And now you have it, that Change of Persons which
the Doctor affirms, and Mr. Williams denies; which had he not, he had denied
his Redeemer, and betrayed the Gospel. So then the Doctor has in these words,
in his Judgment, denied his Redeemer, and betrayed the Gospel; Cujus
contrarium: For upon search of Scripture, and keeping to it, it will be found,
that the Doctor has said nothing but plain Scripture, or clear Scripture
consequence: And if so, it will appear that the casting this Dirt on the
Doctor, is not on him, but on the Scripture, and the Spirit of God in the
Scripture. Wherefore it is good to consider that word, Acts 5.39. If it be of
God ye cannot overcome it, lest happily ye be found even to fight against God,
(...). Our Rebuker and Mr. Williams think to blast the Doctor; but if his
Assertions be clear deductions from the Word of God, then their calling this a
wild Monster, may prove them to be (...).

. LVI.
It matters not much how the Doctor is traduced, but his plain Scripture
Assertions to be called Antinomian Heresies, will prove dangerous, and to call
them a wild Monster, may make such fall under the character of fighters against
God; therefore to the Law, and to the Testimony. I pass by Luther, who in the
Doctor's Sense says, Christ was the greatest Sinner in the World; that is, by
imputation of Sins to him. I say no more of Famous Dr. Harris, Christ sustained
the Person of Sinners, how else could God punish him? But the Word of God must
be our Shield; and I will oppose those two Scriptures, The Lord laid on him the
Iniquity of us all, and God made him to be Sin for us, with those other two, He
shall be called the Lord our Righteousness, as well as He shall be called the
Lord of Righteousness, the 33. and 23. Jer. with, We are made the Righteousness
of God in him. These I oppose against all the Assaults of the Enemies of the
Truth, or Mis-staters of this Gospel Truth, of the Change of Persons.

. LVII.
Did Dr. Crisp say, Christ himself is not so completely Righteous, but we are
as Righteous as he? And did he not say, in the same Breath, We are made the
Righteousness of God, which is plain Scripture? Now, I pray, what difference is
there between our being as Righteous as Christ, and our being the Righteousness
of God? God goes higher in his Expression of our being Righteous, in saying, We
are the Righteousness of God, than if he had said, We are as Righteous as
Christ: And God may well be allowed (to speak after the manner of Men) to
declare his own Mind in higher Terms, than it is meet for Man to do. Then let
us turn the Tables, and say, If God had said in Scripture, by the Apostle Paul,
that Christ himself is not so completely Righteous, but we are as Righteous as
he; and if the Doctor had inferred from thence that we are made the
Righteousness of God; we that are poor Sinful Creatures in our selves, we are
made the very Righteousness of God in the abstract of it, (that is, by
imputation) then there might have been some Ground for Dirt to be cast on the
Doctor; but when he goes a degree lower than the very words of Scripture, and
instead of saying, We are made the Righteousness of God, says, We are as
Righteous as Christ: The opposing this must be accounted fighting against the
Truth, not the Doctor. Pray what will Men make of this Righteousness of God,
which is the Righteousness of God-Man Jesus Christ the Mediator, his
Righteousness made ours, imputed to us, he being made of God to us
Righteousness? Do they make to be made this Righteousness, is less than to be
completely Righteous as Christ? Sure they will not so lessen Christ, to make
his Righteousness to be ours, to be our being less Righteous than himself: If
not, then this Righteousness made ours, makes us, by Imputation, completely
Righteous, as he is Righteous; which is the same as is his Name, The Lord our
Righteousness. And I will presume, these Opposers will not be so base as to
pretend the Doctor meant any other way, of our being completely Righteous as
Christ, than by his Righteousness made theirs, and imputed to them; whereupon
he says, Thou art all fair my Love, there is no spot in thee. And if so, where
is the wild Monster that he is so ungenteely, if not invidiously, charged with?

. LVIII.
It may be they will show the Monster in the next Passage of the Doctor, Nor we
so completely Sinful, but Christ became, being made Sin, (mark, this is
Scripture, being made Sin) as completely Sinful as we. Here, without doubt, is
the Monster: But if the Spirit of God looks steadfastly in the Face of him that
makes this to be a wild Monster, that Christ, being made Sin, became as
completely Sinful as we; if the Spirit look with dazzling Light on him from this
Scripture, I suppose it may terrify him for casting Contempt on plain
Scripture, to call it wild and monstrous. And what can be more plain? If Christ
was made Sin, by his having our Sins laid on him, and imputed to him, than that
thereby he became, by Imputation, as completely Sinful as we, and that in the
same way as, by Imputation, we become the Righteousness of God, and so are
completely Righteous as Christ, still by Imputation.

. LIX.
This daring Contempt cast upon plain Scripture Consequence, with my hopes that
the Spirit of God will cast Beams of Conviction on the Consciences of those
that expose it as wild and monstrous, by his Glorious Irradiation into their
Hearts of the Power of the Blessed Word, that Christ was by God made Sin for
us, that we might be made the Righteousness of God. This puts me in mind of an
amazing Conviction, that I lately had assurance of from an extraordinary
credible Hand; it was of one Allen a Stage Player. About Eighty Years ago, he
the said Allen was acting the part of Dr. Faustus, conjuring up the Devil, and
he performed it so intently and effectually, that the Appearance of the Devil
came before him in a dreadful Shape, with Noise and Stinks, that so terrified
him, that he resolved never to Act on the Stage more: Nay, it is said, that he
repented so mightily that he vowed all his Estate to the glorifying God; and in
pursuit thereof he builded Dullidge College, Four Miles from London, and
endowed it so as to maintain a great number of the Name of Allen, with a
Minister of the same Name to preach to them. Which I would apply thus; That it
may please God when Men will endeavor to evacuate plain Scripture, and call
genuine Consequences from it a wild monstrous Sense, he may cause their
Consciences to stare them in the Face, as a wild Monster, and terrify them for
so doing, which may be in great Mercy; for it is not good to kick against the
Pricks, to load the Divine Truth, that Christ was made Sin, with being
monstrous, because the short Line of our Reason cannot fathom it. And to say
the Truth, it is a Deep unfathomable, for our weak Understandings to conceive
of by our Reason, that the most Holy, Harmless, Innocent God-Man Jesus should
be made Sin for us, or that we Wretched, Vile, Miserable Sinners should be made
the Righteousness of God in him: But that which Reason cannot comprehend, we
must beg of God Faith may receive, and live upon; For the Just do live by
Faith, not by Sight or Reason.

. LX.
The Doctor knew when he preached he had Enemies lay at the Catch, so he says,
and therefore guarded himself so strongly with that clear Scripture, as clear
as possible, to justify his Assertion, and says, Christ being made Sin,
became as Sinful as we. If he had said, (and not God) That God made Christ Sin;
and if God had only said what he said, Christ became as completely Sinful as
we, he had spoken presumptuously; for he would by it have said more of Christ's
being Sinful than God had laid: But he sheltering under God's Word, of God's
making Christ to be Sin, he from thence infers only, that Christ was as Sinful
as we; which of necessity must be taken for his being so by Imputation only,
that is, by the Lord's laying on him the Iniquity of us all; and this being
Sinful as we, is less derogatory to Christ than to say, he was made Sin: For my
Dear and Learned Kratiste will grant, to be made Sin must be more dreadful than
to be Sinful.

. LXI.
But our New Law Men have an evasion for Christ's being made Sin, and make it
no more than that Christ bore only the Punishment of Sin; and some go farther,
that he bore the Guilt; but for the Sin it self they utterly deny it, though by
it they evacuate or exinanitiate many Texts of Scripture, and come very near
one, I may call a Prince of a Quaker, their Head and Glory, Mr. William Pen, a
Gentleman beyond any of them, but to his dreadful Shame has told the World in
Print, that Christ's Sufferings were only the Facile Representations of what
was to be accomplished in Man. Thus he brings it in, in opposition to John
Faldo, in his Rejoinder, page 336 and 337, It is strange (says W. P.) that
those Transactions of Christ, who dyed as a Malefactor, etc. should be counted
most difficult, that were, by the Divine Wisdom of God, ordained as so many
Facile Representations of what was to be accomplished in Man. How much short of
this shameful Doctrine, is it for Men to deny Christ's bearing our very Sins,
and put it off with his bare bearing Punishment due for Sin, which is Ten
Thousand Millions of Times less than his bearing their Sins? Methinks these Men
should not dare to teach God how to utter the Truth, and his Mind, concerning
our Sins being borne by Christ. God says, he made Christ to be S^n: Man says,
No not Sin, not very Sin. God says, he bare our Sins: Man says prodigiously,
shamefully, God ordained Christ's Sufferings to be Facile Representations. Yea,
says Mr. Williams, in ^e^minis, he bare our Sins, not our very Sins, which is
the same as Mr. Penn's Facile Representations; which, in plain English, is to
say, O thou Holy, Blessed Spirit of God, who have inspired Holy Men to write
the Holy Scriptures, thou tellest us an Untruth, in saying, Christ bare our
Sins in his Body on the Tree: I, William Penn, say they were Facile
Representations; I, Daniel Williams, say he did not bear our very Sins. But I
pray, what difference between bearing our Sins, and bearing our very Sins? It
looks as if he meant, he bare our Sins; that is, the Shadow of them, the Facile
Representations of them, the outside Shell of them, and the Punishment of them;
but for the very Sin, which deserved the Punishment, Christ bare it not. And so
they would make God Unjust, to punish him for Sin, when the Sin was made none
of his. This is the Fruit of his denying the Change of Persons, to make God
Unrighteous, to punish his Holy, dearly Beloved Son, without having our Sin
made his, by God's Imputation and his own voluntary Acceptance, that poor
Sinners might go free.

Once again, let us try how the Scripture will run in Mr Williams's Language,
He was once offered to bear the Sins of many; that is, with Mr. Williams, to
bear their Sins, but not their very Sins. Again, He shall save his People from
their Sins; but not from their very Sins. He has by himself purged our Sins;
ay, says Mr. Williams, but not our very Sins He was manifested to take away
our Sins; but not our very Sins. This is a bold Attempt, to teach the Spirit of
God to speak, and all to cast Dirt on Dr. Crisp, and Free Grace Preachers, as
Antinomians, which in truth is casting Dirt, and a wild monstrous Sense, on
what the Spirit of God speaks of God's making Christ to be Sin, which they make
not very Sin; and so leave Sin to be borne by the Sinner. But if one Glare of
Sin should stare, in its hideous hue, in the Sinners View and Conscience, O!
what frightful work would it make? If Sin on Christ made him in that Agony, and
cry out, my Soul is exceedingly troubled, what would it make a poor sinful
Wretch do? I never heard any Man set it out like Excellent Mr. Christopher
Fowler; O, says he, if God should let one flash of Sin, in its true Nature,
fly in the Face of a Sinner, there would be such, yelling, screeking and
roaring, and tearing themselves, that this (great) Room (the Meeting Place by
Three Cranes) would not hold them, they would make away themselves immediately,
if possible. And yet Mr. Williams, and the Socinians whom he follows, will not
grant that Christ bore our very Sins, but has left them on the Sinner; and so
David's Murder and Adultery must be upon David to all Eternity, notwithstanding
Christ's bearing the Punishment and Gu^lt thereof; and this, though God has
said, Their Sins, and Iniquities I will remember no more; their Sins shall be
sought for, and not be found. O that this Socinian Divinity, that our very Sins
were not borne by Christ, were cast, by the great Angel, into the bottomless
Pit, and chained up there the Thousand Years, that it might deceive the Nations
no more: And in the mean time, let all the maintainers of such Doctrine know,
that thereby they contradict the Spirit of God, and will be found (...).

. LXII.
But it may be he means this to be Dr. Crisp's Monster, his saying, We are the
same Righteousness, for we are made the Righteousness of God. I Answer, To call
this a monstrous Sense, of Change of Persons, is very strange; for it is plain
Scripture, that we might be made the Righteousness of God, 2 Cor. 5.21. And is
there any difference between our being the same Righteousness (of Christ), and
our being made the Righteousness of God? Sure not any in an unprejudiced Mind.

. LXIII.
But the Doctor said, That very sinfulness which we were, Christ is made that
very sinfulness. Answer, If Christ was made Sin, it was not his own Sin, but
our Sin: And if made Sin, it was very Sin: And if made very Sin, and our Sin,
then for him to say, Christ was made the very sinfulness that we were, is the
same as to say, he was made Sin. Do but grant that God made Christ to be Sin,
when he laid on him the Iniquity of us all, (or you must deny plain Scripture,
and that on which our Salvation depends:) I say, grant this, and you grant all
that the Doctor has said, in as much as to be made Sin, is as much, if not
more than to be made Sinfulness.

. LXIV.
The Doctor proceeds, saying, So that here is a direct Change. Is this the wild
Monster? I am sure it had been an hideous Monster, to say, Christ was made Sin,
any otherwise than being made our Sin, or our Sinfulness. And if he was made
our Sin, then sure this is a direct Change: But if you will not allow the
Change, then Christ was made his own Sin, which is horrid Blasphemy: And at
whose door will the wild Monster lie now? Therefore let me, a poor Worm, advise
you to have a care of disallowing the Change of Persons between Christ and us,
when he was made Sin for us; lest happily you be found not only a (...), but a
(...), not only a fighter against God, but a murderer of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which I know my Dear Kratiste will be aware of; and I will pray that his
Friend, Mr. Williams, may escape from being so.

. LXV.
But it may be he is gravel'd at this that follows in the Doctor, Christ takes
our Person and Condition, and stands in our stead. If he allows loco nostro,
how can this, taking our Person and Condition, confound him as uncouth, novel
and nonsense? Whereas, in our stead, is brought in to explain what he means by
taking our Person and Condition. Most Men know what a Surety in a Bond of 1000
l. is, he sustains the Person of the Debtor; and is he not in his Condition,
when he lies in Goal for him, and pays his Debt for him? If the Rebuker had
felt the smart of that, he might better understand this, Christ's taking our
Person and Condition, than to call it unintelligible Nonsense. When our Lord
Jesus was sweating clodders of Blood in his Agony in the Garden, and when
nailed to the Cross, did he sweat Blood for himself, and pour out his Soul in
extreme Anguish for himself, or did he then sustain the Persons of the Elect
Sinners? Were they his own Sins, or the Sins of the Elect, that he cried out
of, My Sins are more than the Hairs of my Head, Psalm. 40.? Surely not his own,
but the Sins of those given him of the Father, from all Eternity, whose Persons
he sustained or stood in the place of, which is all one; and so accounted
(before my Dear Kratiste could handle a Pen) by Men of great Integrity and
Sense.

. LXVI.
Well, but what shall we think of this part of the Monster, We take Christ's
Person and Condition, and stand in his stead? I hope it is no Monster to say,
Thou art all fair my Love, there is no spot in thee, as our Lord Jesus says of
his Spouse, who was fair through his Comeliness put on her, Ezekiel. 16.14. though
she, in the sense of her Sins, said of her self, Look not on me, because I am
Black. Did not she appear as in the Person of Christ, clothed with his
Righteousness? Nay, was she not joined to him, when thus all fair, and so,
being joined to the Lord, became one Spirit? Could she and Christ be one
Spirit? Could she have the Comeliness of Christ upon her, and not appear in his
Person? How could her Name, as well as his, be the Lord our Righteousness, Jer.
33.16. and 23.6. if she did not take upon her the Person and Condition of
Christ? Or how else could she be called Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12.? O that we did
more taste the Sweetness and Comfort of this Relation and Condition every day;
then, instead of calling it uncooth and novel, we should give Glory to God, for
his Infinite Rich Grace, to marry us to his Son Jesus, and be ravished with his
amazing Love, to make such vile Creatures, as we are in our selves, in whose
Flesh, as the Apostle says in Romans 7. dwells no good thing, that we should be
Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones; which is to take his
Person and Condition with a witness. What new coined business is it to say,
Christ and Believers are one; that they take his Person, and he theirs; when
the Scripture so frequently speaks of, I in them, and they in me; I the Surety,
they the Discharged; I standing in their stead, taking their Sins on me, and so
sustaining their Persons? Thus they, taking his Person and Condition, are made
the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. O that we could well conceive and
receive this; that we could feed and feast on this Marrow and Fatness of the
Gospel every day, and drink deep draughts of this Unsearchable Rich Grace of
God; then we should adore his Goodness; and not call it a Monster, or a wild
monstrous Sense, this Change of Persons.

. LXVII.
For the Conclusion, the Rebuker is pleased to leave the dreadful Tail of his
wild Monster, in his Comment on the Doctor's Scripture Assertion, in these
words, And now you have it, that Change of Persons which the Doctor affirms,
and Mr. Williams denies; which had he not, he had denied his Redeemer, and
betrayed the Gospel. Here Is a deadly Sting in this Tail, a very malignant one;
for it is neither better nor worse, than to say, the Doctor, by his wild
monstrous Sense of the Change of Persons, has denied his Redeemer, and betrayed
the Gospel: Bona verba, easily and dangerously enough said, but not at all
proved. I am sure, he that denies Christ being made of God Sin for us, very
Sin, not the shadow or shell of Sin, and that denies our being made the
Righteousness of God, the very Righteousness of God-Man Jesus Christ, in him,
he by having our very Sins laid on him, he therein sustaining our Persons, and
we by having his very Righteousness imputed to us, and being upon us, whereby
we stand in his Person, and appear Righteous in the sight of God, as he is
Righteous, as being clothed with his Righteousness, he is the denyer of
Christ, and betrayer of the Gospel; nay, he wholly evacuates and exinanitiates
the Gospel. For what Benefit can we have by Christ's Death, if our Sins were
not made his, and laid on him, and he made Sin for us? Or by his Righteousness,
if it be not made ours given to us, and we appear in it, in and through Jesus
Christ, before God? How could the Apostle say of any Man, 1 John 3.7. He is
Righteous as God is Righteous, but by his believing in Christ, where his Faith
is accounted to him for Righteousness? As Abraham's Faith justified him, not
his Act of Faith barely, but the Act taking in the Object of it, viz. Christ's
Righteousness; and so he truly does Righteousness that believes in the Lord
Jesus his Righteousness and Strength; and thus doing Righteousness, he becomes
Righteous as he is Righteous, and to deny this, is to betray the Gospel, in
order to bring in our own Righteousness to join it with Christ's, as it were by
the Works of the Law, Romans 9.32. Or how are we accepted in the Beloved, if we
do not appear in his Person before God, and so sustain his Person? Is this a
denying Christ, and betraying the Gospel? O that God would anoint Men's Eyes
with the Collirium, the Eye Salve of the Spirit, then they would be able to
bear the light of the Glory of God, as it shines on and in poor Creatures, in
the Face of Christ, to make Righteous as he is Righteous, and not dazzle them,
to make them call this betraying the Gospel.

. LXVIII.
It may do well for all Calumniators to consider the Judgment that God
inflicted on the Children at Bethel, that mocked Elisha, saying Come up thou
bald Head, Come up thou bald Head, (which is a thousand times less detracting,
than to say, thou denyer of Christ, and betrayer of the Gospel); whereupon
there came out of the Forest two She-Bears, and tare in pieces 42 of them:
Which was a far less Judgment than what God has inflicted on some, to leave
them to write against the Truth, and thereby to harden themselves, and grieve
the Godly. So far as the Rebuker has dipped his Pen in Gall in this kind, I only
say, The Lord rebuke thee. Is not this a Brand plucked out of the Fire? What!
call a faithful fervent Servant of our Lord Jesus, the Air of whose Sermons
carries such a favor of Love and Honor to our Lord Jesus, and such a Zeal for
Holiness, that his very Enemies, even Mr. Williams, could say, he believed he
was a Holy Man; I say, for my Dear Kratiste to call such an one, A wild
monstrous denyer of his Redeemer, and betrayer of the Gospel, has a dismal
Aspect; as if God had left such, if not to the hardening their Heart against
the Truth, yet to such an high towering Opinion of themselves (in order to the
greater humbling them), that for their falling into such contemptuous Language,
they may be made contemptible by some sharp Pen. We read that Michael, when
contending with the Devil about the Body of Moses, he durst not bring a railing
Accusation against him, but said, The Lord rebuke thee. And so I beseech the
Lord in Mercy, to do to all that call the Advancers of Free Grace in Christ by
such virulent Names, as we have seen.

. LXIX.
In Page 41, our Dear Kratiste seems mighty angry with the Reporter Mr. L. for
saying, It Is impossible to establish the Doctrine of Justification on its true
and proper Basis, any otherwise, than by clearing the Point of Commutation of
Persons. And yet the Rebuker himself owns this to be Articulus stantis vel
cadentis Ecclesiae. Then sure it ought to be cleared. And how can that be, That
the Holy, Innocent Jesus should be made Sin, and the Unholy, the Nocent Sinners
should be made the Righteousness of God, but by a Commutation of Persons? He
standing in our stead, being our Surety, sustaining our Persons on the Cross,
suffering for us, as Calvin, Luther, Twiss, Pemble, Harris, with a multitude
more, do affirm, whom the Rebuker will own to be of the First Form of Learned
Holy Divines, not Apocryphal Tobiases; and we standing in Christ's Person,
being found in him, having put on Christ and his Righteousness, as the Apostle
Paul has it, in Phil. 3.9. who according to some Men's way of dogmatizing, and
making Antinomians, is the King-leader of them all, by saying, as we frequently
must quote, That God made him Sin for us, and us the Righteousness of God in
him. I must beg Pardon for casting this Salt so often into the bitter Waters to
make them sweet, these two Passages into their Broth of Antinomianism; and
until you race them out of the Bible, they will be a good defense of the Change
of Persons, between Christ and Sinners.

. LXX.
These Two Pillars are the Jakin and Boaz (Establishment and Strength in him),
that King Solomon, our Lord Jesus, has erected before the Temple, the Basis of
the Commutation of Persons, Christ made Sin for us, and Righteousness to us;
and I am sure, The Gates of Hell will never prevail against them, let the
Socinians, or Deists, or Quietists, and let their Friends the Arminians, be
never so rampant. One Athanasius, one Hylary, one Mr. Cole, could withstand Ten
Thousand Batteries, and be no more shaken than a pair of Three penny Fellows
can shake down the Monument, and so extinguish the Memory of the Papists
burning of London in 1666; witness Mr. Cole's sealing his Doctrine with Triumph
at his departure, dying in the Joy of what he had preached, (though by Mr.
Williams called Mysterious Nonsense), he saying, a little before his Death, in
opposition to our Modern (...), the resisters of the Truth, Now I can spit in
the Face of the Devil; and so dyed in the Joy of having preached the Doctrine
of Justification, by Free Grace, through Christ, without any Works of ours
concurring thereunto.

. LXXI.
In Page 43, he asks, Where has this Doctrine of Justification been settled all
this while, since the Reformation? This is just copying after the Papists,
Where was your Religion before Luther? We answer, It was in the Scripture, and
in abundance of faithful Witnesses; and so was this Doctrine in particular.
Read but the Apostle Paul, and he will tell you where it was settled, viz. In our
being chosen in Christ before the World was, and in Grace given us then in him,
and in Christ's being made Sin for us, and the Righteousness of God to us.
Besides, if you will read Calvin, Twiss, and Luther, with multitudes more in
your Study, you will find how they settled it. Antisozzo has it in part also;
and why may not Dr. Tho. Goodwin come in for an Author? O no, now I remember a
great Reason, for said Kratiste, he speaks in his Treatise on the Ephesians of
the Spirit himself dwelling in Believers; but I utterly deny it, said he: And I
affirm (said he) he dwells in Believers only by his gracious Operations: To
which was opposed, The Spirit himself witnesses with our Spirits, that we are
the Children of God. And besides, the Rebuker, it is like, will say, he is as
dreadful an Antinomian, as wild a Monster, as the Dregs of it Dr. Crisp,
therefore I will not allow him to be an Author in this great Point of
Justification, for he is all for Free Grace.

. LXXII.
He proceeds, It is strange to me, That Councils General and Provincial,
Synods, Assemblies of Holy Learned Men, should so often so strenuously assert and
confirm, by the Word of God, this great Truth, and yet never once dream of Dr.
Crisp' s Commutation of Persons, upon which to superstruct the Doctrine of
Justification. But it will appear more strange by and by, I am persuaded, that
my Dear Kratiste, with his Eagle-eyed Talent, should so far over-shoot himself,
as to talk as if he had read all Councils and Synods, etc. when it will appear
he has not well read our English Homilies, setting forth clear Gospel Truth in
the Doctrine of the Church of England. He is got into a large Field with a
mighty Challenge, like a Goliath, defying all Councils, etc. to show the
Commutation of Persons. He wages War, under the Banner of all Councils, etc. as
he thinks, whereas one little David with a Stone out of the Brook of Life, the
River that makes glad the City of God, one Text of Scripture, will answer all
his Rodomantado Challenge. What if Councils, etc. that contract principal
Articles of Faith into short Terms, have not used the Doctor's very words, yet
if they are consonant to Scripture, one would think they may pass without such
a strangeness? Are there no Sentences in Antisozzo and Melius, that are not in
Synods and Councils, and yet pass for Authentic? I am confident the Doctor
could not think it worth his while to tumble over the Records of all Councils,
etc. to authorize him to speak to the Rebuker's approbation; if the Scripture
do but warrant him in his Change of Persons, it is enough; and that is very
abundant in Terms that may bear him out: As where it speaks of Christ in us,
the hope of Glory, do not we sustain his Person there, or rather, he being in
us our hope, he sustains our Persons in hope? It speaks of our putting off our
Sins in the circumcision of Christ, Col. 3.11. which cannot be otherwise than
by Christ's sustaining our Persons when he was circumcised; and so our putting
off our Sins is by our being in him representatively, when the Foreskin of
Christ's Flesh was cut off, in order to the putting off our Sins in our Faith
in a circumcised Christ. It speaks of our being buried with him, of our being
raised in him, of our being found in him. What is this but a Change or
Commutation of Persons? I live, says the Apostle, yet not I, but Christ lives
in me. Is not this a Change of Person that answers Dr. Crisp's Commutation? And
yet still we are not Christ Personal, but Christ Mystical; and Christ was not
Paul Personal, but Paul and all Believers Mystical, as sustaining their
Persons, as many Eminent Divines, besides the Doctor, speak without being
accounted strange Monsters.

. LXXIII.
For further Satisfaction in this great Point, I refer the Rebuker to the great
Pains of Dr. Chancy, who has gathered the Sentiments of very great Men, among
whom take this of Luther, on Gal. 3.14. who says, It behooves him to bear the
Punishment, and Wrath of God, not for his own Person, but for our Persons; and
so making A HAPPY CHANGE with us, he took upon him our Sinful Person, and gave
unto us his Innocent and Victorious Person. Is not this as monstrous a wild
Sense as Dr. Crisp's? But my Dear Kratiste has more Sense than to call this
new, uncooth, unintelligible Nonsense, because of the great Name of Martin
Luther. Another, of Dr. Chancy's Quotations, is out of Mr. Stone of New
England, no Antinomian, (unless made so by the Rebuker), he adds in the same,
Page 102 of Dr. Chancy, There must be an Exchange between the Mediator and us,
1 Timothy 2.6. There must be an Exchange of Person for Person, which is the surest
Exchange in War or Captivity, when nothing but one Person will be taken in the
room of another.

. LXXIV.
One would wonder how it should happen that my Dear Kratiste, and his Friends,
should be ignorant of such Passages as these, so, as he should speak, as if
this Term was never dreamed of before, when the Great Luther is so precise in
the Term, and other Excellent Men. Therefore, I beseech you, be not too
confident of your grasping all Things in all Councils, Synods and Assemblies,
lest you lose all. O how much better is it to say with the Apostle, He that
thinks he knows any thing, knows nothing as he ought to know it; and with
Agur, I have not the Understanding of a Man, than to Challenge all the World
with what is said in all Councils, General and Provincial. The humble he will
teach, and the mock he will g^^^^ in Judgment: Which the Lord grant to us all;
and that we may be ever learning of our Blessed Lord and Master to be meek and
lowly.

. LXXV.
My Dear Kratiste goes farther in Bontering the Phrases, of Christ's taking our
Person and we his Person, and spares not to call them Apocryphal Phrases,
though they are such as many Holy Men have made use of to clear up the great
and comfortable Doctrine, of Christ's being our Surety, and making Satisfaction
for us. Well may he call Tobias, Apocryphal, if he calls his great Teacher,
under Christ, the Apostle Paul, Apocryphal; as I shall show by and by. He is
pleased to come forth in great State, in Page 49, as my Lord Chief Baron of the
Exchequer, with his Quo Warranto, against the Commutation of Persons, and thus
Harangues the World; Quo Warranto? Why must all the World be Hereticated, that
dare not subscribe to these Apocryphal Phrases, which neither Scripture, nor
Ancient Fathers, nor General nor Particular Councils, nor Synods, nor
Assemblies, nor single Churches, ever brought into their Creeds? etc. What a
scampering flourish is here over all Councils, Fathers, etc. circuating the
Universe, as if our Author were the Magazine of all Learning, and had fortified
himself on every side against this Change of Persons, and Christ's sustaining
our Person, as if the Phrase were intollerably uncooth? I shall only attack one
Fort, which is the first Out-Fort, the Scripture, and if that be taken he must
yield all the rest, The Scripture is the Pillar and Ground of Truth. We will
see if that does not bring into our Creed this Term, of Christ's bearing our
Person, and we his Person; or that which is plainly tantamount, does not the
Apostle say, Col. 2.6, 7. As ye have received the Lord Jesus Christ, so walk in
him: Rooted and built up in him? What is this but to be in his Person by Faith,
joined to the Lord, and so he coming one Spirit, as the Apostle says, which is
the same as to be one Person? But as if God would at once, by one stroke, quell
all the Quarrels and Exceptions against the Truth, and calling it
unintelligible Nonsense, (as in Truth it is to the (...) Philosophers) he
condescends to the very Term of our being in the person of Christ* and says in
2 Cor. 2.10. by the Apostle Paul, If I forgave any thing, for your sakes
forgave I it, in the Person of Christ? What thinks my Dear Kratiste now? Is
this Term so novel, as never to be brought into our Creed by Scripture,
Councils or Fathers? O how good is it to be humble, and not to tower to the top
of all Learning, denying this phrase to be in Scripture, Fathers or Councils,
when at the very threshold we see one may fall: For here the very express
Scripture uses the phrase of the Apostles being in the Person of Christ, and
forgiving an offending Brother in the Person of Christ. And so I hope we shall
all learn to forgive one another, and not to rebuke with immoderate strains, as
our Rebuker has very unwarrantably done, in charging the Doctor with wild
monstrous Sense, and Apocryphal Phrases, when he speaks the Apostle Paul's
Language.

. LXXVI.
I hope you will allow the Apostle to bring this Term, of our sustaining
Christ's person into our Credenda, or Things to be believed, though the Doctor,
whom for it you charge with Antinomian Heresy, may not use the word without a
severe Lash. Is this to learn of our Lord Jesus, who would excuse his
Disciples, under failings, and not presently bring them to the block, much less
would he tax them with a wild monstrous Sense of Things, when they spoke only
the Sense of the Scriptures? But why this Expression should be Heresy in the
Doctor, though Orthodox in the Apostle, I can quickly tell: It being, I reckon,
from his having some Men's persons in admiration. Our Kratiste having, some time
since, pressed hard on the Conscience of Mr. Williams, he is now raising up his
Reputation; which he might suppose this a proper way for, by loading the Doctor
with the Title of a Dreggy, Apocryphal Heretic, because Mr. Williams had
written so much against him in his Gospel Truth stated* and so the Rebuker here
seconding Mr. Williams in aspersing the Doctor, would redintegrate the said Mr.
Williams into the good esteem of those who had occasion given them for low
Thoughts of him, upon account of what the Rebuker had reflected on. Now to make
him amends, if Mr. Williams has criminated the Doctor, the Rebuker must do so
also; or how can Mr. Williams stand Rectus in Curia, or in statu quo, with
those who had taken some Offense at those Things he was charged with? So that
Things being thus, Mr. Williams being to be redintegrated into public
applause, now if Mr. Williams say, I deny a Change, Kratiste can do no less
than say, The term of a Change is novel and unintelligible: If Mr. Williams
say, This is Dr. Crisp' s Error or Mistake, Kratiste will exemplify, enlarge
and perfect the Crimination, and call it Heresy. Which how Christian like it
is, or the contrary, I hope the Lord will one day convince him.

. LXXVII.
In Page 51, he offers us a moot Point, worthy to be taken notice of, thus, I
would propound a moot Point, whether the Socinians, who have blasphemously
degraded the Person of Christ into a God by Office, though a mere Man by
Nature; or the Antinomians, who own him to be a God by Nature, yet affirm him
to have been a Sinner, the greatest of Sinners, nay, Sinfulness it self, do
more derogate from the Honor of our Redeemer?

For Answer, This is so far from being a moot Point, that it is no point at
all; unless you can find any of your Antinomians that assert what you here say
they affirm. You cannot but know your Antinomians own and assert strenuously,
That the Lord Jesus was ever holy, harmless, separate from Sin, a Lamb without
spot in his own person, being perfect God and perfect Man; nay, they assert, he
is so far from being a Sinner in himself, that being God-Man he cannot sin,
nay, he never could commit Sin, or be guilty of any Sin of his own All that
they affirm of his being a Sinner, is only that he was so by Imputation only:
As a King's Innocent Son, undertaking for a Criminal, may be a Thief or
Murderer by Imputation, if he suffers for the Thief. And so Luther calls Christ
the greatest Sinner in the World; and yet Men dare not call Luther an
Antinomian, whatever they think. And so to repute Christ an imputed Sinner, we
are taught by the Blessed Apostle, when he says, God made him Sin. And my Dear
Kratiste knows in his Conscience, that not a Man of his Antinomians have any
such thought, expressed by word, that our Blessed Lord Jesus is a Sinner, any
other way than by our Sins imputed to him; which nevertheless were as really
made his, so as to bear them, and suffer for them, as if they had been
committed by him; and yet though they were laid on him, and so made his, they,
nor ten thousand millions of times more Sins, were not able to defile or
pollute, in the least, his most Holy God like Body or Soul. So that it is mere
strain, and looks like Malice, to say, they make Christ a Sinner, because they
say he was made Sin by Imputation.

. LXXVIII.
I suppose this may rather be a moot Point in our New Divinity, or New Gospel,
Whether be the greatest degraders of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Socinians, that
say Christ is not God by Nature; or the Neonomians, that make Christ to be the
Mediator upon a New Law of God's making? Such Law admits or allows of Sin in
obedience to it, or does not require Sinless Obedience: That is, That Christ
has purchased, that our imperfect Obedience shall be admitted for perfect, for
his sake. This is by the New Law of their coining; which is to un-God the Holy
God, and to make void the Death of Christ: For if God be such a God, as makes a
Law that admits of Sin, then he is not the true God; for God cannot behold
Iniquity with the least allowance, no, not the least Iniquity of a vain
Thought. And if the Blood of Christ does not take away the Sin that cleaves to
our most sincere Obedience, we must perish to all Eternity; because the Soul
that sins must dye, either himself or his Surety for him, even for the least
Sin. And did not some Men count little Sins, to be little Things, they would
not trifle with the Holy God, as if of course he past by little Sins, or that
he has made a Law that admits of that which is not Sinless Obedience. And
because Man's Law will not hang a Man for stealing a Pins head, they will have
a God like themselves, that cannot damn a Man for it; whereas God's Law is
without exception, the Soul that sins shall dye; and the stealing a Pins head
may be with as felonious an intent as stealing a Kingdom. So that stealing a
Pins head needs the Blood of Christ, to wash the Guilt away, as well as robbing
1000 l. on the Road needs it; for both need it, though the latter be the more
heinous. And besides their ungodding of God, by charging him with making a New
Law that admits of Sin, they hereby make vain the Death of Christ: For if our
imperfect Obedience may be accepted for perfect, without washing away the
Imperfections or Sins in it, by Faith in the Blood of Jesus to wash away those,
and all our Sins, then Christ's Death is in vain. For if little Sins may pass
without the Redeemer's Blood, washing them away, then may great ones also; for
without shedding of Blood there is no remission; and it is the Blood of Christ
which cleanses from all Sin. If from all, then from little, as well as from
great; and if not from little ones, then also not from great. But it does
cleanse from all; therefore there can be no Law of God's making that admits of
Sin. And if you will be making Antinomians, here you have matter for it; they
being the true Antinomians that are against Sinless Obedience; and if so, they
are for Sinning Obedience. And it is their own brainless Brains, and not the
Holy God, has set up a Law that admits Sin in the Obedience. If this be not
Antinomianism there is none in the World. I own God accepts sincere Obedience,
that has respect to the pure, perfect, holy Law of God, though there be Sin in
such Obedience, provided the Obedience be done in Faith, looking to the Blood
of Jesus, and trusting to it to take away the Iniquity of our holy Things: But
to talk of a New Law that admits of Sin, is so far to un-God God, the Maker of
such a Law, that it may well be a moor Point. Who are the most to be abhorred,
the Socinians, that un-God our Lord Jesus, or the Neonomians, that un-God the
Father of our Lord Jesus, by attributing such a Law to him to be the Author of,
even a Law that admits Sins, as Mr. Williams does?

. LXXIX.
He procoeds, and says, This is a day wherein Antinomianism is triumphant.
That is to say in the Neonomian Dialect, It is a day wherein Free Grace flowing
to poor Sinners, through the Blood of the Lord Jesus, as the only ground of our
Justification, Sanctification and Salvation, without any thing of our Works,
yea, or Faith it self concurring as any cause thereof, that this Free Grace is
triumphant. I wish you could make good your Position, then the Doctrine of our
English Protestant Religion in the Homilies, then the Truths that have been
delivered by Luther, Calvin, Twifs, Dr. Goodwin, Crisp, Cole, Mather, etc.
would be triumphant. But alas the new way, the Cassandrian way, the going about
to establish our own Righteousness, and not submitting to the Righteousness of
God, by Faith, but as it were by the Works of the Law, Romans 9.32. and 10.3.
this Doctrine has its ten thousands among Papists, Arminians, common
Protestants, who are only for their doing well, and so dying well, and leaving
out Jesus; or if he come in, it is but like some Flowers on the brims of the
Dish, to garnish it in many Men's Sermons and Prayers; while the other Doctrine
of our Lord Jesus being all in all; the Lord our Righteousness made of God to
us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption; that there is no Name,
or Thing, under Heaven, whereby we can be saved, in whole or in part, but only
the Name of Christ; this Doctrine has for its followers but its single
hundreds. But the day of the Lord is coming, that will burn as an oven, and
will burn out all the Dross and Tin that is among his own People, and utterly
consume all that will not submit to the alone Righteousness of his Son, to be
saved by that, and that alone, imputed to them for Justification: For other
Foundation can no Man lay, than that which is laid, Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11.
and all hay and stubble upon it shall be burnt: Which every sincere lover of
our Lord Jesus daily prays may be hastened; Even so come Lord Jesus.

. LXXX.
Our Rebuker, like some Captain General in the Confederates Army in Flanders,
where most of them are Papists, or very sorry Protestants, is in the next place
giving orders for a kind of Popish Barriere to be set about the Divine Justice,
in pa. 51, though by the way, a Barriere against an Enemy, had been more like a
General's Word of Command, but let it go for the Neonomian Word of Command, a
Barriere about Divine Justice, his Sentence is this, I would have (I your
General) a Bar, a Barriere, about the Divine Justice, that Men may not dare to
represent him (or it for better sense) as a Tyrant, in making so many millions
to damn them eternally, to damn them without respect had to their demerits.
This is plain Arminius, or worse, and such as I never suspected from my Dear
Kratiste, to justify the general out cry of corrupted Natural Religion; What
did God make us to damn us? How could we help our first Parents Sin? But does
not the Scripture say, In Adam all dyed (for that or) in whom all have sinned;
and by the offense of one, judgment came upon all Men to condemnation, Romans 5.?
And will you now run with the Herd, and cry, God made Millions to damn them, as
a Tyrant, without respect to their Demerits, because they are condemned in
Adam? Now I see some Reason why the Rebuker said once, in the Pulpit in Pinners
Hall, We did not sin Adam' s Sin. But I am sure he must own that in Adam all
dyed; then he must own with Augustine, In Adam all are damned: Damnati antequam
nati, Damned before Born, and yet God no Tyrant, but Holy and Just, as well as
Gracious and Merciful. Has not the Potter power over the Clay, of the same
lump to make a hundred Chamber-pots and but five drinking Vessels? Shall proud
insolent Man teach God what Vessels of Wrath prepared of old to this
Condemnation, to make, Jude 4. and what Vessels of Mercy? Or whom he will to
have Mercy on, and whom he will to harden? O that Men were wise, and not to set
Barriers of their divising! God has set his Barriere, and let Men stand, and
adore, and tremble at that word, What if God, willing to show his Wrath, and to
make his Power known, endured with much long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath,
fitted for destruction? Is God, by saucy, profane Man, to be called a Tyrant,
for showing his Wrath on Vessels of Wrath, before of old ordained to this
Condemnation, having fitted themselves, by their Sin in Adam, for this
destruction? Shall we say it is without their own Demerits, when God says, in
Adam all dyed? O that Men were wise to Sobriety, and would not think to jostle
God out of his Throne! Let us adore Free, Rich, Sovereign Grace, that is
published in the Gospel, that whoever will may take the water of Life freely,
Rev. 22.17. All in the sound of the Gospel being invited to come to Christ, and
they shall find rest for their weary Souls. Those that charge God as a Tyrant,
for damning Millions without respect to their Demerits, when they are lost and
condemned in Adam, will not condemn a Temporal Prince, for a Tyrant, to take
and sieze the Estate of a Traitor condemned, and to take it from all his
Posterity ever after to the Worlds end. And shall Man be justified as no
Tyrant, and God be charged so arrogantly? Let us adhere to God's Barriere, that
in Adam all sinned; and the Wages of that Sin is Damnation to all that have not
an Interest in Christ.

. LXXXI.
In his hedge about Justification, I take notice of his indispensable Bulwark,
that is, That Faith be made indispensably necessary to it in all the Adult.
Here one might ask, what precise time should be fixed for the Adult, it being
an odd word and unscriptural? The Scripture says, He that believes shall be
saved; he that believes not is condemned already. And if there be not the Seed
of Faith in Infants before they dye, (which God alone gives, as Sanctification
in the Womb, or afterward when he pleases), I know not how, according to the
Scripture, (our only Rule to judge by) they can be saved, if they have not the
Seed of Faith in Sanctification. Would you have one way for Infants to be
saved, and another for the Adult; when Christ alone is the Way, the Truth and
Life? But passing by that, it may be asked, what kind of Faith is it that is to
be so necessary? There is bare assent to the Truth; and this many call a Faith
sufficient, provided they live good Lives (as they call it); but this Faith the
Devils have, and tremble: Then there is Historical Faith and Temporary Faith:
There is above and beyond these, a Faith of assurance, which some make
absolutely necessary. I would hope he means none of these; but a Faith of
adherence to the Lord Jesus for Life and Salvation by him, and him alone; of
relying on him, trusting to him, renouncing our selves, and our best
performances as loss and dung in the matter of Justification, or as any cause
of our Salvation This might have given some Light into his indispensably
necessary (...) about the Doctrine of Justification. I fear there lies a snare
in this (...), this indispensably necessary. Some, and those mighty, Friends to
the Arminians, make Faith necessary as a Cause or Co dition, that stands in the
place of Works of the Law. Some make it a Condition as joined with Repentance,
and pers verance in Gospel-Obedience, and so put it in the place of Christ's
Righteousness imputed to us; and make Faith, as it is our Work, to be imputed
to us for Righteousness. And so the Hedge is become a hodge-podge of our Gospel
Righteousness joined with Christ's Righteousness, under the notion of Faith a
Condition. O how good is it for us to fence our selves with God's Word, that
the Foundation of God stands sure! Whom he did foreknow, them he did
predestinate, and them he called, and them he justified, and them he glorified.
Here Is not a word of what we do, that we predestinate, we call, we justify, or
we glorify our selves, it is God does all: And if instead of our pleading to
justify and glorify our selves, we would endeavor to justify and glorify
God for his free justifying and glorifying us, through and for the sake only of
his dearly beloved Son, our Dear and Blessed Lord and Savior, it would be much
better than to make a pother about the Conditionality of Faith, when all is of
Grace.

But I hope in this indispensably necessary Faith to Justification, he does not
exclude some mixture of doubting with Faith, though he names not the least
allowance for that; and yet where is the Faith absolutely free? If some poor
Souls have not power to put forth clear direct Acts of Faith on the Lord Jesus,
for Righteousness and Life by him; if they have strong desires after him, and
hunger and thirst after his Righteousness to be fed with it, as their alone
true Food, shall they not be filled? Though their fears make them cry out of
their Unbelief, I hope my Dear Kratiste does not intend that his Thorny Hedge,
as he called it, about God's Justice, that this shall keep such out. No, if you
will put your Thorny Briars before him in the way of his Free Salvation to poor
miserable lost Sinners, that come to him in the Name of the Lord Jesus, he will
pass through and burn them up, Isa. 27.4.

. LXXXII.
But methinks our Hedger has left a wide gap open, which I overlooked, in page
46, where he makes light of a Surety, of our Lord Jesus his paying our Debts as
our Surety, and bids us have a care of that notion; at least, not to insist so
strictly upon it: For which, instead of Scripture, he quotes one that he calls
a Learned Author, probably Mr. Baxter, saying thus, None need think themselves
obliged to maintain that Opinion, That Christ paid a rigid and proper
Satisfaction for the Sins of Men, under the Notion of a Debt. And why forsooth,
because the Socinians Arguments are levelled against it? This Learned Man might
say the like concerning the Notion of Christ, being God Essential, because the
Socinians Arguments are alike levelled against that Notion But what says
Kratiste, of this Arminian Caution, against the rigid and proper Satisfaction
of Christ for the Sins of Men, under the Notion of a Debt? He says thus, I
wish I were worthy to advise this confident Man (Mr. Lob) not to insist so
strictly on that Notion of a Debt, and Debtor: And on that occasion he brings
in his Learned nameless Author. O how would some Men triumph over an
Antagonist, to have him under Correction, as the Rebuker seems here to be! But
I lament over him. Some Persons question his owning Christ's making a full
proper Satisfaction; I wish that he had not given too much occasion, by such
passages as these, not to insist so strictly on it, that Christ paid a rigid,
proper Satisfaction for Sins. What he means by so strictly, I know not; but I
am sure we cannot be too strict in insisting on Christ's proper Satisfaction.
This, so strictly, seems at first only to loosen the stake in the Hedge, and by
and by it must be pulled up, and Satisfaction must be evacuated: For if Christ
did not make a full, proper, and that which they may call a rigid Satisfaction,
then he made not a complete Satisfaction; and if not a complete one, then how
is it called Satisfaction? O! why should we not insist strictly on that which
is one of the most comfortable Notions in all the Book of God, in all the
Revelation of Grace, by Jesus Christ, That our Lord Jesus paid our Debts? Why
does our Lord Jesus bid us pray to the Father to forgive us our Debts, if he
had not made Satisfaction to the Father, and paid them? Would you have God
forgive our Debts without receiving Satisfaction? That Is Socinian Language
indeed, and you pretend to be much against them. But it must not be a Pecuniary
Debt you say. Who ever said our Debts to God were Pecuniary; that is, That we
owe God so much in Milled Money or in Guineas? Yet we may, and do, owe God that
which is a better Coin than any ever made in the Tower; and that is perfectly
Pure, Holy, Spiritual, Heavenly Obedience to his Holy Law; and we owe God
Satisfaction for our Disobedience to the same. And though Leather Farthings, or
Copper, may go in some poor Kingdoms, as Shells in Guyny go for Money, and in
richer Kingdoms the chief Payments are in Gold and Silver, yet in the Kingdom
of Heaven no Payment passes there but perfect spotless Obedience; and is not
that as much a Debt to God as any Pecuniary Debt between Man and Man? And who
ever paid that but our Lord Jesus in his doing and dying for us? But why not
insist on that Notion of a Debt, and Debtor? May we not, without a Rebuke,
insist on that which Christ insists upon in Matthew. 5.25, 26.? He insists
strictly on a proper rigid Satisfaction there, and says, Agree with thine
Adversary quickly, lest he at any time deliver thee to the Judge, etc. Thou
shall not come out thence till thou have paid the uttermost Farthing, (...),
the last Farthing; plainly showing, that God will never abate a Sinner one
Farthing that has not agreed by the way, that has not fled to Christ, his
Surety, who has paid to the last Farthing. And this we may be sure of, God
never made a Composition with Christ to take Ten Shillings in the Pound for our
Debts, no, nor Nineteen Shillings and Eleven Pence Three Farthings; for it is
said plainly in Romans 8. God spared not his Son; no, not one Farthing. Therefore
it is Socinian Language, I conceive, to prohibit Men's looking to Christ as
satisfying for us, under the Notion of a Debt, and Debtor. This puts me in mind
of Christ's Speech, and sweet Rebuke, to Peter, which I hope may have a sweet
influence on our Rebuker for his Caution, Simon, I have somewhat to say to
thee, Luke 7.40. There was a certain Creditor, had two Debtors; the one ought
five hundred Pence, the other fifty. Will any one say now, that our Debt to God
must not come under the Notion of a Pecuniary Debt, when in these two
Instances, from the Lips of our Lord Jesus, nothing is more plain than that God
makes use of this Notion? Why then should we be cautioned against it? I must
confess my self much ashamed, that my Dear Kratiste should be found thus in the
Camp of the Enemies of our Lord Jesus, who would not have us insist strictly on
a rigid proper Satisfaction. O whether shall we drive, if we let loose this
sheet Anchor of the Gospel! The Ship will split in a thousand pieces, and the
Arminians and Socinians will run away with all the broken pieces, but not have
one plank to carry them safe ashore. O! let us never let go this Notion of
Christ, our Su^ety, paying our Debt. Does not our Lord Jesus set it off, with
wonderful Consolation to all that truly believe in him, by saying, He came not
to be ministered to, but to minister; and to give his Life a Ransom for many?
What is a Ransom, but the paying a Debt that is agreed upon for the redeeming a
Slave? Now this Debt our Lord Jesus paid, or else it could not be said to be a
Ransom. So that it is no hazardous Thing, but a strong Duty, for us to insist on
Christ's Satisfaction under the Notion of a Debt.

. LXXXIII.
And O that my Dear Kratiste, and the Neonomian Brethren, would, or could,
return to the simplicity of the Gospel, and pray as our Lord Jesus teaches,
That God would forgive their DEBTS for the sake of Christ our Surety, who has
bought us with the Price; not of corruptible Things, as Silver and Gold, but
with the precious Blood of the Lamb without Spot, the Lord Jesus Christ, that
Blood being the only Current Coin in Heaven for poor Sinners Debts. Shall God
say, ye are bought with a Price, and shall vain Man dehort us from the Notion
of a Pecuniary Debt? Take away this, and you will take away all the Gospel in a
little time, It will soon be lost, if the Rebuker's Learned Man's Doctrine must
pass for current, That we must not insist on Christ's paying a rigid proper
Satisfaction. If by rigid he means a full, complete, perfect Satisfaction, to
the last Farthing; then, I say, to deny or wave this, (and the Apostle warrants
it), let him be accursed; for by it he overthrows the whole Gospel, which lies
in this, That Christ has ransomed, bought and redeemed us by his Blood, which
cleanses us from all Sin: And this gave a full complete Satisfaction to God;
upon which account he said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased;
and on the same account the Apostle says, If any bring any other Gospel let
him be accursed

. LXXXIV.
I cannot but continue an admiration, that my Dear Kratiste, once famous for
strenuous arguings for the Truth, should quote and confirm such a Passage, as
is fitter to come from Raconia and Rome, than the Pen of a Gospel Divine. What
not insist on Christ's proper, yea rigid Satisfaction? If not a proper one, and
a full one (that is a rigid one) then it is none at all. But they would abate the
Poison of it, by saying, not insist on it under the Notion of a Debt and
Debtor; so the Rebuker. But, I pray, why may not God's Terms and Notions be
insisted on rather than the Socinians? God bids us pray, forgive our Debts, and
says, We are bought with a Price. And what is that Price, but Christ's paying
our Debts? For the sake of which Price only, God in his infinite Mercy forgives
the Debts of all that believe in the Lord Jesus. But to insist on this Notion,
looks like our Rebuker's Antinomianism he charges Dr. Crisp withal. If we say
that Christ paid our Debts, by the Price of his Blood and Life, then this looks
as if we were discharged in God's sight from all our Sins at Christ's Death, or
rather, at his Resurrection; and then that of the Apostle would be rigidly
insisted on for our Justification at Christ's Resurrection, He was delivered
for our Offenses, and raised for our Justification, Romans 8. But of this the
Neonomians must have a care, lest they by it come over to the Antinomians.
Therefore it is necessary for them to wish, with the Rebuker, they were worthy
to advise, not to insist so strictly on that Notion of Debt and Debtor.

. LXXXV.
To answer his Wish with another Wish; I heartily wish I were worthy to advise
all Neonomians, all New Law Men, to be so humb^e and good to themselves, as to
peruse and learn the Sentiments of our Reformers from Popery, that made the
Book of the Homilies, in which are many excellent Passages to uphold this
Notion of Christ's paying a Price for us. In the first part of the Sermon of
Salvation, they have these Heavenly Expressions, God provided a Ransom for us,
that was the most precious Body and Blood of his own most dear, and best
beloved Son, Jesus Christ, who, beside the Ransom, fulfilled the Law for us
perfectly. And a little further they are more clear, saying, He for them paid
the Ransom by his Death, he for them fulfilled the Law in his Life; so that now
in him, and by him, every true Christian Man may be called a fulfiller of the
Law. O what can be more positive and plain! Is not here a rigid-proper
Satisfaction, and that in the Notion of a Debt, calling it a Ransom? Nay, he
paid their Ransom And what can be a more rigid Satisfaction, than fulfilling
the Law (every tittle) for them in his Life, and paying a Ransom in his Death?
O! that my Dear Kratiste would, by himself, a little blush at this, and what
the Church of Scotland, in Knox his Reformation in Fol. 8, he calls the Gospel,
Christ's being a Debtor for our Sins, and Christ paid our Debt. The Law says,
Pay thy Debt; the Gospel says, Christ has paid it for thee.

. LXXXVI.
I pray, what Titles may we expect in the next Rebuke to be given to these Holy
Men, these Fathers in our Church of Christ in England and Scotland, upon the
emerging out of Popery? Sure they must also be called a parcel of Antinomians.
Sure Dr. Crisp got his Dregs of Antinomianism from you, a company of Apocryphal
Tobias's. What did we fulfill the Law in Christ? Sure you wont dare to say so:
Then all our Neonomian Scheme is spoiled, of our being accepted in part on
account of our Evangelical Righteousness, in Obedience to a Law wherein God
does not require Sinless Obedience: Then if we fulfilled the Law in Christ, all
our thundering Anathemaes against Antinomianism will fall on our selves. If this
be true that you Reformers have said, then how shall we be able to flourish our
Colors with a bravado, that this is unintelligible, uncooth, novel Doctrine,
such as never any Council, Synod, or Nation, ever brought into their Creed? But
my Dear Kratiste knows, that what is said in the Homilies is said by the whole
English Nation; that these Sermons have many Acts of Parliament to confirm them
for True, Sound, and Orthodox Doctrine; and particularly this, that we in him
fulfilled the Law. And I wish that all our Divines, as well Conformists as
Nonconformists, would seriously lay this to Heart, and be humbled, so far as
they swerve from this blessed Truth, That he paid the Debt for us, and we in
him fulfilled the Law.

Where is the Neonomian Vaunt now? O how good is it to be humble, and not
challenge all the World against the Notion of Debt and Debtor, or the like! For
here the Great Assembly of the Nation, King, Lords and Commons in Parliament,
for the utter Confusion of Neonomianism, have confirmed this almost One Hundred
and Fifty Years ago, and many times since; which has stood for Sound Doctrine
in the Church of our Lord Jesus, in England, many Years before Dr. Crisp was
born, and Fifty Five since he went to Rest; viz. That in him, and by him, every
true Christian Man may be called a fulfiller of the Law. If they fulfilled the
Law, in him and by him, did not Christ sustain their Persons in himself, when
he fulfilled the Law for them? How else can they be said to fulfill the Law in
him, if they were not in him, and sustained by him? This we are taught here for
the utter silencing and shame of those that call it Antinomianism.

. LXXXVII.
This great Expression of our Reformers from Antichristian Dotages, That in
Christ, and by Christ, we are fulfillers of the Law, may help our Rebuker to
rectify his saying in Pa. 47, If Christ's putting on the Person of Sinners be
left out, it is better out than put in, till it be known what it signifies. It Is
strange that our sharp sighted Rebuker cannot tell what it signifies, when the
first emergers out of Popery, the Reformers, are so positive that we fulfilled
the Law in Christ; which cannot possibly be without his sustaining our Persons.
Could all those Worthies of the last Age, Luther, Calvin, etc. know what it
signifies, and we that stand on their Shoulders, cannot we see as far as they?
But they cannot see that will shut their Eyes. Doubtless many of our New Law
Men would say, but for the outcry of every sound Protestant, that this
Expression, That we fulfilled the Law in Christ, had been better left out of
the Doctrine of the Gospel than put in; for it has strengthened a many of
those he calls Antinomians. So that now we cannot, without great difficulty,
run down the Doctrine of Christ's sustaining our Persons, but these
Antinomians, as we call them, will be too hard for us, so long as the Epistles
of Paul, and the Doctrines Established by Law, are so armed against us.

. LXXXVIII.
But some may say, Why should these old musty Homilies be trump'd up now
against the Great Baxter, and his Successor, the Gospel-stater of Truth? Those
Good Men are gone to Rest, and with them let their Homilies sleep. No say I,
they being dead yet speak; and their plain honest simplicity will go farther
with every good Christian, that we in him fulfilled the Law, than the Skeptical
Notions of Mr. D. Williams, such as this, That God provided for his own Glory
while he promises Life by forgiveness, and yet insists on some degree of
Obedience. Here instead of our fulfilling the Law in Christ, this Gospel Truth
stater brings in our Obedience (in our selves) insisted on by God in his
forgiving Sins. Such a medly of God's forgiveness upon our Obedience, the
Reformers rejected as spurious Popish Doctrine. They are so far from
attributing our Obedience to be insisted on by God, in forgiving our Sins, that
they will not allow Faith it self to come in for any share in farthering our
forgiveness; but say plainly of Faith thus, Our Faith in Christ (much more our
degrees of Obedience) says unto us thus, It is not I that take away your Sins,
but Christ only; and to him ONLY I send you for that purpose, forsaking therein
all your good Virtues. (What Is that but your degrees of Obedience)? Thus
through the good hand of God we are helped, by our great Reformers, to quell
this New Law Doctrine of the Neonomians, setting up some Gospel-Holiness of
ours in co-partnership with the everlasting Gospel, of being saved only by
Grace, through Faith; and that (Faith) not of our selves, it is the Gift of
God; to whom be Glory, for that he has freely given Christ, and all with him.

. LXXXIX.
My next Notice I take is, with Grief and Sorrow, at the dismal contemptuous
treatment the Rebuker gives of Christ's sustaining the Person of Sinners. This
great tremendous Point, which is sustained by many Reverend Persons, my Dear
Kratiste makes a Banter of in Pa. 53, saying, What then can these Expressions
signify, but that Christ wore the mask, the vizor, the disguise of Sinners,
that he was personatus histrio, like a Stage player that puts on the Person of
a King, when indeed he is but some sorry fellow? Do such Terms of our Blessed
Lord become the Pen of an adorer of the Blessed Jesus, to impose such a Sense,
and such horrid Consequences, from a Doctrine professed by all sound
Protestants, when God himself says, he made him Sin for us? And Thousands of
Adorers of him, adore him for this Thing, that he was made Sin for them, though
he knew no Sin; and on that account say, he sustained their Persons; that is,
that they were in him, and fulfilled the Law in him, and by him, as the whole
Nation of England have declared for Good, Sound, Orthodox Doctrine almost 150
Years: And now shall such an Inference be fetched from it as scoffs thus at our
Lord Jesus? As if the Parliament of England in establishing that Expression by
Law for good Doctrine, as if they had thereby declared that our Lord was a
sorry Fellow, a Stage Player acting the part of a King, that he wore a Mask, a
Vizor, in so doing. If such Language had been used in any Interlude, Show,
May Game, Stage Play or Pageant, then the Act of Parliament would have forced
the Rebuker to pay Ten Pounds: For it says, If any Person, in any of those
five places, shall Jestingly or Profanely use the Name of God, or of Jesus
Christ, or of the Holy Ghost, or of the Trinity, which ought not to be used but
with great Reverence, they shall forfeit Ten Pounds. 3 James 1.21. And if a
Stage Player, or Buffoon, shall forfeit Ten Pounds, what shall a Divine, who
should both know and teach better Things, what should he forfeit, if he print
such profane Jesting with our Dear and Blessed Lord, whose Name is dreadful?
O! that Men were wise to Sobriety, and not suffer themselves to launch into
such exorbitant Expressions concerning our Blessed Lord. To tax his opposers
with such an Inference from Scripture Premises, it puts me in mind of what
Antisozzo says in Fol. 191, Sed male dum recitas incipit esse tuus, He that
recites such Passages without necessity and abhorrence, they begin to be his
own Passages. But I hope my Kratiste will never fall into such Language again.

. XC.
There is a very great word to the Point of Christ's sustaining our Person, in
Ephesians. 3.6. which is this, (...), which we render, That the Gentiles should be
fellow-heirs, and of the same body; but may be rendered fellow-heirs, and
fellow-body, or co-body. As Believers are heirs, fellow-heirs, coheirs with
Christ, and of Christ; so they are of the same body, fellow-body, co-body with
Christ, and in Christ. And as before the Apostle forgave in the Person of
Christ, so here the believing Gentiles are fellow-body with Christ. And what is
this but his sustaining their Persons, and they his Person? But this is to the
Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness. To our learned, topping
Gentlemen, it is uncooth, unintelligible, and better left out than put in, till
it be known what it signifies. Just so the Socinians, concerning the words
Trinity in Unity, it is to them Nonsense and Contradiction; as all the Gospel is
to Flesh and Blood; as that a Wicked Man should be saved by the Righteousness
of one that he never saw in his Life, by a crucified Jesus; but to them that
are ca^ied he is (as sustaining our Persons as we are in him (...) co-body he
is) Christ the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God. And for my part, if I did
not look on the Lord Jesus as sustaining my Person on the Cross, and sustaining
it every moment, not only by his common Providence, but in himself, and by
himself, as Flesh of my Flesh, I must look on my self (as I am in my self) a
lost, wretched, forlorn Creature, to be miserable in Hell to all Eternity. But
I flee for refuge to him to be kept in this Faith, I in them holy Father, and
thou in me, that they may be perfect in one, John 17. That is in himself, the
blessed Lord Jesus sustaining our persons, to whom be Glory for ever.

. XCI.
I come now to his Postscript, which is sharp and stinging to purpose, as if he
had not sufficiently degraded Dr. Crisp in the body of the Rebuke, he blackens
him by comparing the Doctor to Apocryphal Tobias, and Mr. Williams to Canonical
Daniel, thus, All this is nothing but a trial of Skill between the Apocryphal
Story of Tobias, and the Canonical History of Daniel. Tobias and Daniel being
the first Names of the Doctor and Mr. Williams, as much as to say, all the
Doctor's Sermons are Apocryphal Stories, but Mr. Williams s Books of
Gospel Truth are Canonical History. To which I may return, there is also the
Canonical History of Tobias, and there is the Apocryphal Story of Daniel,
relating the filthiness of the Elders with Susanna: For instance, Tobijah,
which signifies my good Lord, has near as honorable a memorial put upon him
in Canonical Scripture, as Daniel, God my Judge. It Is true, Daniel is called O
greatly beloved; and God grant that our Daniel may be so also, upon a due sense
of his Miscarriages in his Books and Converse. It is also true in Zach. 6.10,
14. of Tobias, he was to take Silver and Gold, and make Crowns: And it is said,
The Crowns shall be for Helem and Tobiah, etc. Here was a Crown for Tobijah,
signifying the Crown of Righteousness; and I question not but your traduced
Tobijah has been wearing one before the Throne, and before the Lamb, and
casting it down before him this Fifty Five Years. Here were several Crowns
made, and I hope one remains for my Dear Kratiste; for the blessed Jesus
pardons, and so overlooks innumerable Failings, and will give a Crown of
Righteousness to all that love him, that will submit to his Righteousness. Then
for the Apocryphal Story: It Is true Tobiah is brought in with his Dog following
him, but no Dogs barking at him: Such Things are reserved for these latter
days. But how is Daniel brought in? He, like my dear Kratiste, comes in, giving
a faithful Rebuke to a sad Report of a Lascivious Elder, and says, O thou
(Elder)! that art waxen old in Wickedness, thy Sins are come to light.

. XCII.
What Issue have we of this trial of Skill? Is your Tobias the more Apocryphal
because his Name is in the Apocrypha? And is your Daniel the more Canonical in
his Writings, because his Namesake was (...) Man greatly beloved? Or on the
other side, may not your Tobias have a Crown given him, as well as Tobijah had
one? And may not your Elder have a severe Rebuke given him, as well as Daniel's
Apocryphal Elder had one? For every one shall receive according to his own
Work. So that this Apocryphal Witticism might have been spared, for any honor
it can bring to your Daniel, or dishonor to Tobias. But this is plain evidence
that the Rebuker hereby declares, that he takes all the Discourses of Dr.
Crisp, of the Free Grace of God in Christ, to be Apocryphal Stories, and all
that Mr. Williams has writ is Canonical History; especially his Gospel Truth
stated, which is supported by himself, and Forty Eight more Vouchers. This must
pass for Canonical, though he makes room therein for more to be saved than ever
God chose in Christ, and though he says to this purpose, That God has set up
a New Law that does not require SINLESS Obedience.

. XCIII.
In the next place he treats the Doctor more roughly, if not profanely; for he
calls the asserting the necessity of Repentance, Regeneration and Faith, the
unpardonable Sin against the Doctor; whereas we know of no unpardonable Sin,
but that against the Holy Ghost, which some in opposing clear Gospel Free Grace
come very near, unless they do it ignorantly: But to talk of an unpardonable
Sin against the Doctor, and that for asserting what the Doctor never denied, is
a strange strain of Wrath against his Memory. His words are these, in Pa. 56
and 57, That although the express Word of God does express the necessity of
Regeneration to our entering into the Kingdom of God, and requires Repentance
that our Sins may be blotted out, and Faith in Christ that we may be justified.
This the Rebuker calls the Brethrens fully bearing Testimony against the
Antinomians; and adds, that their asserting this is the unpardonable Sin
against Dr. Crisp. The Rebuker means, that Mr. Lob accounts this Testimony of
the Rebuker to be the unpardonable Sin against Dr. Crisp; which I may say is
Gratis dictum, sed non gratiose, It is freely said, but not graciously. I do
not see what could be spoken with more malignity, to say it is never to be
forgiven by Dr. Crisp's Vindicators, to say Regeneration, Repentance and Faith,
are necessary. Sure my dear Kratiste cannot be thought not to have read Dr.
Crisp, where he may find this Charge, That the Doctor accounts it a horrid
Crime to assert Faith, Repentance and Regeneration, necessary, to be most
false. I appeal to the Rebuker's Conscience; for I (...) not but he has read
the Doctor's Sermons, or Dr. Chancy's Quotations, where he brings in Dr. Crisp,
saying in express words quite contrary to this Charge, and fully owning the
need of Sanctification, etc. In Fol. 46, Dr. Crisp says thus, There is no
Person that is a Believer, but after he has received Christ, he is created in
Christ Jesus unto good Works, that he should walk in them. I say, he that
sprinkleth them with clean Water, that they may become clean from all their
Filthiness, writes his Law in their inward parts. So that I say, mark well my
words, That Sanctification of Life is an inseparable companion with the
Justification of a Person by the Grace of Christ. Now can any Thing be more
clear, than that it is no unpardonable Sin with Dr. Crisp, to assert the
necessity of Regeneration, Repentance and Holiness? For that he says,
Sanctification (which includes them all) is inseparable from Justification;
that one is never without the other: As much as to say with the Apostle, Christ
who is made of God to us Righteousness for Justification, he is at the same
time made of God to us Sanctification.

. XCIV.
Now methinks it is strange that he should be branded with your Titles of
Apocryphal wild Monster, Crispian Heterodoxy, especially to blast him in the
business of Holiness, Repentance, etc. who so strenuously has asserted its
inseparableness from Justification; of which you may find whole Sermons on that
Text, Tit. 2.12. The Grace of God teaching us, that denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, we should live godly, righteously and soberly. So that from his
Doctrine, there is no Reason to make that an unpardonable Sin, to assert the
necessity of Regeneration; and as little Reason to do it on account of his
Conversation, which, through the Grace of God, was by the Report even of his
Enemies, untainted; yea, exemplarily holy, as several at this day in this City
can witness: For farther Satisfaction, be pleased to read him on the Sermon
entitled, Free Grace the Teacher of good Works, where he says, in Fol. 35,
Good Works are necessary, ex part Dei, ex part Rei, ex part nostri, on the
part of God, on account of the Thing it self, and on our own account. O! that
it might please God to fill my Dear Kratiste's Bosom with fervent Charity, to
prevent, for the future, his charging a fervent Servant of our Lord Jesus, as
if it were an unpardonable Sin against such an one to urge the necessity of
Holiness: Though still I take it to be an unaccountable Contradiction to the
Gospel, and the Free Grace of God in Christ whereby we are saved, for any to
assert the necessity of our Holiness, so as that it shall come in to have any
share with our Lord Jesus in the saving us; for in that respect we must always
say with David, Psalm. 62. He only is my Rock and my Salvation; and in Psalm.
71.16. I will go in the strength of the Lord God, I will make mention of thy
Righteousness, of thine only. There must not come in one Rag of our own; no,
not so much as to wrap about a cut Finger. It Is only the fine white Linen of
Christ's Righteousness can recommend us acceptable to God; with which the good
Lord cloth us.

. XCV.
The next excursion to be lamented, in my Dear Kratiste, is his branding all
that dissent from the Writings of Mr. Williams to be whaffling Whelps, that can
bark and not bite. In Fol. 58, he speaking of Exceptions that were made, or to
be made, against Mr. William's Writings, says thus, Was ever a poor Creature
thus tied to a Stake, to be baited by the English Molossi, and (by) every
whaffling Whelp, that could bark though not bite? This is very hard Language
against his dissenting Brethren in the Ministry. I cannot now wonder at what an
Eminent Person told me lately, That the Rebuker had better have cut off his
Fingers, than to have written that which he calls, A Faithful Rebuke. Was it
ever heard of, that a Gentleman, a Scholar, a Divine, one Sagacious to an high
degree, should so far indulge his Heat, as to call the Reverends Mr. Cole, and
Mr. Mather, now with the Lord at Rest, dying in the Joy and Comfort of opposing
Mr. Williams's Errors, and to call Hundreds of Able Divines in this Kingdom,
and in effect to call all the reformed Churches abroad, and our Reformers at
home, that made the Homilies, wherein they do oppose his Errors, to call them
all whaffling Whelps, that can bark and not bite? O! that there might be a due
Reflection, then there would be smiting on the Breast, and saying, What have I
done, to reflect so indecently on the Servants of the most High, lest our Lord
Jesus cast him to the Ground, with a Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

. XCVI.
O how sad is it that my Dear Kratiste should so far engage himself in such a
Cause, as he should think might need such Railings as suit only to a Rabshakeh,
not a Protestant Divine! This is the way to have Ismaels Character, his Hand
against every Man, and every Man's Hand against him. O! that the Lord would
cause him, upon a Melius Inquirendum, to pour some Oil upon this Vinegar of
whaffling Whelps; and that he would follow Holy Austin, and retract such
Language, and own, Humanum est errare. One would stand in admiration at such an
Expression, from one that would surely be accounted a lover and learner of our
Lord Jesus, who was meek and lowly, and so far from calling any of his
followers whaffling Whelps, that he called Judas, his betrayer, Friend, Mat.
26.50. and when he was reviled, he reviled not again; and when he was forced to
chide his Disciples, how sweetly does he do it, Ye know not what Spirit ye are
of. And so, I suppose, may be said of this Rebuker.

. XCVII.
What if Paul and Barnabas differed, so that they parted one from another, did
Paul call the other a Whelp, a whaffling Whelp? Sure our faithful Rebuker, when
the Lord shall be pleased to convince him of his excess herein, he will go and
bewail this before the Lord, that he has opened the Mouths of Scorners, who
may say, we may well call these Parsons a parcel of pitiful Fellows; for you
see how one of the first Rank calls his Brethren Whelps; whereas the Servant of
the Lord must not strive, but be gentle toward all, 2 Timothy 2.24. How happy
would it be if all, that fear the Lord, would learn of Abraham, who said to
Lot, Let there be no strife between thee and me, for we be Brethren.

. XCVIII.
He having provoked the Reporter, now he fears his Friend Mr. Williams, whom he
has taken this Pains for, may be set in the Pillory, there to be palted with
rotten Eggs; and all this because it had been propounded that he should give
Satisfaction about what might be excepted against him: And I pray where can the
hurt of this be, that he should be desired to satisfy those that object
against him? Is this palting him with rotten Eggs? If he be to be palted with
Eggs of his own laying, that are not very sound, I know one that has got
together about a hundred out of his Nest of Man made Righteous, besides what
are laid in his Gospel Truth. If it should happen that some of these be cast on
him, and defile him, it is not his Friends flattering can make him clean; it is
only his going into the Fountain of Life, the Lord Jesus, can take away all the
uncleanness that such Eggs will bring upon him. I will cast none of them at
him, but only break three of them before him, which I am sure have a worse
savor than the rottenest Egg in the Town; these I take out of Fol. 140 of
Gospel Truth, where he says, The respect to Glory which our good Works have,
they are as Seed to the Harvest, (that is one), and as the Foundation to the
Building, (that s a second), and as Work to Wages, (there is a third). So that
he makes our good Works to be our Christ Jesus. I begin with his second, as
being most of the Romish scent, Our good Works have the same respect to Glory
that the Foundation has to the Building. Was ever any thing more Popish? Does
not the Scripture say, I lay in Zion for a Foundation, a Stone, a tried Stone,
Isa. 28.16.? Is not that our Lord Jesus, of whom the Apostle says, Other
Foundation can no Man lay? And Christ says, On this Rock I will build my
Church. And shall we now have this Egg laid, That our good Works are the
Foundation to the building us up unto Glory? Sure this rotten Egg can never be
endured in the Nostrils of any good Christian. The first is like it, as one Egg
can be to another, That our good Works have the same respect to Glory that the
Seed has to the Harvest. Now every one knows that the Harvest grows
immediately from the Seed; and if we had no Harvest of Glory but what grows out
of the Seed of our Works, it would be a very dark dunghill Glory; for our best
Righteousness, as to getting us Glory, is but as menstruous Rags: But for our
Comfort the Scripture says, One sows and another reaps. Christ has in
Infinite Grace sowed his Body as a grain of Wheat in the Earth, John 12.24. out
of which all our Glory must grow. O how contrary is his Assertion to the whole
Gospel, which says, We are saved by Grace, and not of Works, lest any Man
should boast. Our Glory is so far from being the Harvest of our Works, that the
Apostle says, He has saved us, not according to our Works of Righteousness
which we have done, 2. Tim. 1.9. Neither for our Works, nor according to them.
O how sad is it that my Dear Kratiste should by his Hand, together with Forty
Eight more, midwife this rotten Egg into the World. The third is of the same
brood, That Glory is the Wages of our Works; which is diametrically opposite to
the Apostle, who wholly excludes Works, saying in Romans 11.6. If it be by Grace,
it is no more of Works; otherwise Grace is no more Grace. But if it be of
Works, it is no more of Grace. And the Apostle concludes, to the shame of
self-justiciaries, Romans 3.27. Where is boasting then? it is excluded. By what
Law? of Works? Nay; but by the Law of Faith. So that Mr. Williams must not lay
this Egg at the Apostle's Gate; it being as rotten an one as any in the whole
Council of Trent: But one dash of the Rebuker's Pen, That he has accounted for
what he has written, by subscribing the Assemblies Confession, shall cleanse
him from all; whereas his subscribing that, without his recanting this, is but
like some of the Clergy in Antisozzo, that snatch up the Pen to subscribe the
Articles of the Church of England, and to their shame, immediately preach
against some of them, in advancing Man's Free Will in opposition to God's Free
Irresistible Grace, and denying particular Election, and the like: For which we
may mourn and say, Proh Dolor.

. XCIX.
It is not to be unminded how the Rebuker slides off the three first
Conditions, on which Mr. Williams his acceptance was to be grounded; which are
these, If he concur in the Doctrine of Justification, and the Change of Persons
between Christ and Believers, and Christ's undergoing the Father's displeasure
for our Sins: These, he says in 58, I will not mention to save Time and Paper.
A great Husband of Time and Paper. But would not Time and Paper have been
better employed by far, in setting these three Points in a true Light, than to
talk of whaffling Whelps and rotten Eggs? I fear there are greater Reasons,
than to save Time and Paper, that he waves them. It being judged by many, from
his Writings, that he is not extraordinary tight in the Point of Justification;
and therefore, being conscious thereof, he might not be free to expose himself,
by declaring his Judgment therein, as to the Conditionality of Faith, and New
Obedience, and how far our Works have any concern in our Justification,
notwithstanding the Scripture says, We are justified freely by his Grace. And
it may justly be suspected, that he who could say, We did not sin Adam 's Sin,
(so denying the Apostles (...)) might as well say, That that Sin of his was not
ours, and so we not concerned in it, so as to be condemned for it. And thence
might as well say, that Christ's Righteousness, which he performed in obeying
and suffering the Law, is not ours, it was only wrought for our Good, and so we
not justified by God's imputing it to us; but that we have only the Effects of
it, or this is the main, viz. Pardon of our Sins, if we repent, and believe,
and walk in holy Obedience, and so continue to the end of our Lives (thereby
denying assurance till the last breath); and then for the sake of Christ's
Righteousness, on our sincere performance of our Duty, we shall have Heaven and
Happiness; as his Gospel Truth stated, and before him Mr. R. B. But if this be
current, how can the Scripture be true, that we are justified freely by his
Grace, and that we are justified by his Blood, that he was raised for our
Justification, without one word of our Gospel-Obedience concurring thereto, it
being not according to Works of Righteousness which we have done? And whereas
the Word says, we are justified by Faith; all sound Protestants, the
Assemblies Confession, and the Doctrine of the Church of England, do uno ore
with one mouth agree, that it is not the (...) credere, it is not our Act of
Faith justifies us, but the Object of Faith; that Righteousness of Christ which
he wrought out for us, which we lay hold on and receive by Faith. It is that
Righteousness made ours, given to us by God, and reckoned by God to us, which
alone does justify us; on which account it is said, It is God that justifies,
Romans 8. But this my Kratiste waves, lest he should bewray (it is feared) some
halting in this, as the Reporter says he has done in the Point of Christ's
Satisfaction: Or else, if he be right in it himself, and if he had declared it,
he must have left his Friend Mr. D. W. in the Ditch, who is sadly tardy in this
case.

. C.
As to his second Point that he waves, The Change of Persons between Christ and
Believers, this he might be allowed for; he had said enough, and too much, of
that, in ridiculing it before with Christ's wearing a Mask, a Vizor, etc. when
he bare the Persons of the Elect in himself. For which, I beseech the Lord to
give him Repentance and Pardon.

. CI.
But as to the third, of Christ's bearing the Father's displeasure for our
Sins, he having said little or nothing of that before, it might have been
expected he should have said somewhat of it now, if it had been only to confirm
his Friend Mr. Williams, who had abused the Doctor, when he took the Doctor to
task about it: But this is so fully handled by Dr. Chancy, and such full
Evidence brought in by him, of our Lord Jesus his undergoing the displeasure of
God, and sustaining the Wrath of God for our Sins, when by God himself they
were laid upon him, that I suppose the Rebuker had little list to enter the
Lists in that Debate.

. CII.
But it being a Subject of infinite concernment to every poor Soul, that hopes
for Eternal Life by and through our Lord Jesus; it being that on which hangs
all the hopes of a poor Sinner for his escaping the direful, terrible,
tremendous and eternal Wrath of God, due to every one for his Sins, by our Lord
Jesus his bearing that Wrath which was due to us, I shall quote somewhat of Dr.
Chancy's collecting, in his Vindication of what was expressed in Dr. Crisp's
Sermons, and shall afterward add some Animadversions on the Rebuker, about the
Lord Christ's bearing the Father's displeasure: And I begin with what Dr.
Chancy quotes from Mr. Calvin, in his Discourse on Gal. 3.13. The Apostle does
not say (says Calvin) that Christ was cursed, but a Curse, which is more; for
it shows, that all Malediction was included in him -- God was not ignorant of
what kind of Death his Son should dye, when he said, Cursed is every one that
hangs on a Tree -- He took our Person, therefore he was a Sinner, and under the
Curse; not so much in himself, as in us -- He underwent his Wrath, else how
could he reconcile the Father to us? -- Again, How could he free us from the
Wrath of God, unless he had TRANSLATED it from us to HIMSELF? Therefore he was
wounded for our Sins, and experienced God as an angry Judge. Can any thing be
more positive and plain for Christ's bearing the Father's displeasure, which is
so cried out upon by the Neonomians, as if it were heterodox, monstrous, wild
Antinomianism, when so great a Man as this says, that Christ translated the
Wrath of God from us to himself, and that he experienced God as an angry Judge?
And this is no Testimony from an Antinomian; though in this saying as much an
Antinomian, in saying Christ was thus a Sinner, as Dr. Crisp in saying the like.

. CIII.
A second Witness to confirm this Truth, out of Dr. Chancy, is Martin Luther,
who goes a step or two higher in the Rebuker's Antinomianism than Calvin; and
faith on this Point, in Vindication of Dr. Crisp, thus, Then have thou him
(Christ) indeed, when thou believe that this more pure and innocent Person is
freely given to thee of the Father to be thy Priest and Savior, yea rather thy
Servant; that he putting off his Innocence and Holiness, and taking thy SINFVL
PERSON upon him, might bear thy Sin, thy Death, and thy Curse. As Paul applied
to Christ that place of Moses, Accursed is every one that hangs on a Tree, so
may we apply to Christ not only that whole 27 Deuteronomy. but also may gather all the
Curses of Moses's Law together; for as Christ is innocent in this General Law,
touching his own Person, so is he also in all the rest; and as he is guilty in
this General Law, in that he is made a Curse for us, and hanged on the Cross as
a Wicked Man, a Blasphemer, a Murderer, a Traitor, even so he is guilty in all
others. Here Luther makes Christ to bear the Father's displeasure with a
Vengeance, bear our Sin, Death and Curse; yea, all the Curses in Moses's Law.

. CIV.
But what need have we of Humane Testimony for this, although such Testimony is
more authentic with some, and will pass farther in Proof with some than
David's Psalms, or Paul's Epistles, for God's displeasure with Christ, as
bearing our Sins, and our Persons, and as being our Surety and our
Representative? Therefore because Mr. Williams is so foul on Dr. Crisp, for
asserting God's displeasure against Christ for our Sins, and my Dear Kratiste
seems afraid to declare his plain Sense in this Point, pretending to save Time
and Paper, and thereby leaving Dr. Crisp under the foul Pen of Mr. Williams,
whose Cause the Rebuker vindicates, on this account I think it necessary to
bring good Scripture Proof of God's displeasure against his own ever-dearly
beloved Son; our Lord Jesus, as he stood in our stead bearing our Sins; for
which I produce the 22th, the 25th, the 69th and 89th Psalms, to show that
Christ was under the displeasure of God. In Psalm. 22.1. he cries out, Why art
thou so far from helping me? Why have thou forsaken me, and are far from the
words of my roaring? Surely God's forsaking was sufficient ground for his
roaring. In Psalm. 35.17. he says, Lord, how long will thou look on? Rescue my
Soul. And ver. 22. O Lord, be not far from me. So that here is forsaking even
to make him roar; and here he minds God of standing far off, and looking on
while he is in his Agony. And can any one think there was no displeasure in God
when he did so? In Psalm. 69.3. he cries, Mine Eyes fail while I wait for my
God. (Surely then God had withdrawn from him). Reproach has broken my Heart,
says he, ver. 20. I looked for pity, but there was none. Thus we see God
looking on, and not comforting him under this terrible Dispensation, when his
Heart was broken with Reproach; and could God withold his Comforts so long as
he did, if he had not executed his displeasure on Christ, which was due to us
for our Sin? But that which puts it beyond doubt, is that direful, doleful word
of our Lord Jesus, in Psalm. 89. where he shows, how Reproach had broken his
Heart, in ver. 38. he says, But thou have cast off and ABHORRED, thou have
been wroth with thine Anointed, (thy Christ). That this abhorring was spoken in
the Name of Christ appears farther, in ver. 50. I do bear in my bosom the
Reproach of all the mighty People; wherewith they have reproached the footsteps
of thine Anointed. This the Apostle shows is spoken of Christ, in Romans 15.3.
The Reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen on me, says he. Whence
it is clear, that if the one is spoken of Christ, viz. the Reproach, then it
follows that the other, the abhorring, is spoken also of him; for they are
joined together Psalm. 89. And if so, what Sunbeam can be clearer than this,
That our Lord Jesus, if under this abhorring, he was under the sore displeasure
of his Father, as bearing our Sins? Now for Mr. Williams to tell the World his
dreadful Story against Dr. Crisp, for his using the same words of Christ as the
Spirit of God does, and with the same Sense, viz. That this displeasure of God
was only upon account of Christ's bearing our Sins, and that he was made a
Curse for us, not in respect of his own Holy, Innocent Person, but as bearing
our Persons; for Mr. Williams to load the Doctor so foully as he does, and for
the Rebuker to say nothing hereto, is seemingly to justify Mr. Williams, and
makes one fear he does not reckon that Christ was under any displeasure of the
Father, nor that Christ bare our Sins, our very Sins, or was made a Curse, a
very Curse, any more than Mr. Williams does. But Mr. Williams absolutely denies
that Christ bare our very Sins; and if the Rebuker did not concur with him
therein, he would doubtless have spent a little Time and Paper on so important
a Point, rather than in calling his Opposers whaffling Whelps. But of this, God
willing, more anon in another Section; in the mean time, this Testimony of
Christ's bearing the Father's displeasure may humble us all.

. CV.
But whaffling Whelps is a trifle to some Expressions which the Rebuker's
Genius taxes his Antagonists with; the remembering him of which, I hope, may
work some Shame in him, for whom his Friends are greatly ashamed. I tremble to
think whither his Passion had transported him when he wrote this Passage, in
Pa. 25, Some of the biggest Name from the Press and Pulpit had disseminated
such horrid Opinions, as filled all Intelligent Persons with equal Astonishment
and Indignation. O the Rage of Corrupt Nature against Free Grace (say I)! Here
my Dear Kratiste leaves Dr. Crisp as a petty Antinomian, and falls very foul on
two of the biggest Names in our cognizance, for strenuous asserting the
Doctrine of the Free Grace of God in the Gospel, Mr. Cole and Mr. Mather, now
with their dear Lord Jesus, and calls their Sermons and Books, such Things as
filled (yea, brimful they filled) the Intelligent with Astonishment and
Admiration at their horrid Opinions. In his Fury and Wrath in this Storm and
Tempest, he had a good steady pair of Balances that did not pendulate an Hairs
breadth, there was an equal (an exact equality to a grain of) Astonishment and
Indignation. And we have Proof what the latter was, his Indignation, in that he
vents himself somewhat like him that Solomon speaks of, who casts out
Firebrarnds, Arrows and Death, Prove. 25.18. and it is to be feared we shall
find him triumphing in their seasonable Deaths. O! how unlike is this to the
blessed meek Jesus, or to him the Apostle speaks of, viz. The Servant of the
Lord should be gentle? So we see how he leaves this great Point, to be a good
Husband of his Time and Paper, and fastens on that wherein he had an
opportunity to magnify a Juvenile Talent of Serene Wit, in bringing out his
Molossi and whaffling Whelps, and crying, Stoo Dogs, stoo; which I would call,
Ludere cum Sanctis, a jesting with Holy Things, but for Reverence to so
celebrated a Divine as my Dear Kratiste: Yet, I hope, I may say without
Offense, yea for his future Caution and Advantage, That such Language better
becomes a Terrae Filius in the Schools, than Kratiste the Aged Divine; or a
Merry Andrew on the Stage, than one that was sometimes valued for his Melius
Inquirendum.

. CVI.
This Melius helps me to consider what the Eminent Antisozzo says against the
then Rector of St. George's, now Dean of P --, for which Piece many have
honored him, with my self, this 21 Years. There he writing against
Arminianism, turns perfect dreggy Antinomian, according to his Modern Style of
them; though now, (in his vindicating the grand Neonomian, the New Law
establisher, who blasphemed God with setting up a New Law; which Law, not the
Gospel; but which Law admits of Obedience that is not Sinless), now I say
Antisozzo leans on the contrary side, and Arminianizeth, by calling it
Heterodox Antinomianism, to say that the Fault of Sin was laid on Christ, and
that Christ bore Sin as to the Anomia, that Christ was reputed a Criminal not
only by Man, but by God. Pray mark! This in Kratiste's Rebuke is reckoned the
third Antinomian Heresy. This is part of that, of which, he said, some of the
biggest Name had from the Press and Pulpit, with such horrid Opinions, filled
the Intelligent with equal Astonishment and Admiration. Now can any one believe
that the Rebuker was once guilty of this horrid Opinion, or any thing like it,
That the Fault of Sin was laid on Christ? Of which I may say, If he is not of
that Opinion, I would not be in his condition for all the World: For if the
Fault was not laid on Christ, of every Sin he has committed, it must lie on
him to all Eternity. For it was by that one offering of Christ, once made on
the Cross, that he put away Sin; and all Sins, that were not put away by that
offering, must remain on the Sinners to Eternity; for there remains no more
Sacrifice for Sin. This by the By.

. CVII.
But to return: Whatever he may now say to uphold Mr. Williams, I am satisfied
my Dear Kratiste was (when in Antisozzo he vindicated Dr. Owen) one of Dr.
Crisp's Antinomians. Witness some Passages following. In Pa. 686 he is
inferring Antinomianism from Mr. Sherlock's saying, God bestows the Rewards of
Righteousness on those who, according to the strictness and rigor of the Law,
are not Righteous; that is, says Sh --, They shall be justified and treated as
Righteous Persons. Upon this Antisozzo turns Antinomian, and infers thus, If
God can treat them like Righteous Persons, who are not really so, because he is
so well pleased with Christ's Obedience, why may not God conceive Me to have
DONE that which I have NOT DONE, as well as to be what I am not? Why not to
have OBEYED IN CHRIST, to have SVFFERED IN CHRIST'S SVFFERINGS? Here it is
plain, that the Rebuker allows that God may conceive me to have done and
suffered what Christ did and suffered; nay, that we obeyed in Christ, and
suffered in Christ's Sufferings. What is this but Commutation of Persons, and
Christ's sustaining our Persons in his Sufferings? What is this but justifying
Dr. Crisp's Heresy of Antinomianism? Why then all this Noise about the Town of
uncooth, novel, unintelligible Change of Persons, when your self argue for our
obeying in Christ?

. CVIII.
In Fol. 703, Antisozzo goes farther in the behalf of Dr. Crisp, though now he
opposes him, and here he owns Adam's Disobedience is ours; though in the Pulpit
in P. H. he said, We did not sin Adam 's Sin. In Page 703 he reproves Mr. Sh --
for saying, Not that Christ's Actual Obedience is reckoned as Done by us, which
is impossible. To which the Rebuker, or Antis. answers, But why is this so
impossible? There Is no more impossibility in it, than that Adam 's Disobedience
should be reckoned as mine: Which if it be not, let Men shift and evade with
all their cunning, they shall never be able to justify God's procedure with
his Posterity in intailing Evils, many Evils; and Death it self upon them, for
Adam 's sake, if they be not guilty of the Crime. Here Is an abundant Proof that
he then owned Adam's Sin was reckoned as his; and if reckoned so by God, then
certainly it was his: Nay, he reproves Mr. Sher -- for saying, It Is impossible
Christ's Actual Obedience is reckoned as done by us, and says, Why impossible?
And a little lower, in Pa 703, he again confronts his nowself Arminianizing for
Mr. Williams, by his then self Antinomianizing for Dr. Owen, and therein for
Dr. Crisp, and says thus, If then the Penalty of Sin may be inflicted, there is
a necessity that the Guilt of Sin be imputed. Now to talk of Guilt imputed and
not the Fault, is Nonsense: For what Guilt is there where there is no Fault?
Did Christ bare Sin and Guilt without Fault? Then he bare faultless Sin, and
faultless Guilt; which is ridiculous Well, but my Dear Kratiste goes on
currently for his Antinomians, and says, It Is impossible indeed that we should
personally have committed Adam 's Sin, or performed that very Obedience which
Christ performed, but not impossible that the Disobedience of the one, or
Obedience of the other, should be reckoned AS committed and performed by us.
How does this agree with his equal Astonishment and Indignation at the horrid
Opinion, to say, That the Fault of Sin was laid upon Christ? O! that he would
humbly own his hasty heat. O! that he might recover himself, and return to the
Truths he owned in Antisozzo, and not call it an horrid Opinion, That the Fault
was laid on Christ, when himself owns the Guilt was, lest he exasperate his
tart Answerers to call him not only an Ecclesiastical Droll, but a Terrae
Filius Droll, to talk of Guilt without Fault. This might possibly occasion that
severe Reflection of Fits in the Rebuker, not fit to be mentioned; but meliora
speramus, we hope better Things, and such as accompany Salvation, by his
freeing himself from halting in the Point of Christ's Satisfaction, which the
Reporter charge him with.

. CIX.
I proceed to convince (if it may please God) my Dear Kratiste of his unbenign
Temper, in his treating the Opposers of Mr. Williams, in Pa. 60. O! how unlike
are those Passages to any thing we find of our beloved Lord and Master Jesus,
the meek and lowly, who had no Guile in his Mouth; and who being reviled,
reviled not again. But so it fares not with the Rebuker, who though he was not
reviled in the Report, yet he Banters and Jeers his Friends that concur not
with him, in Page 60, with this Expression, speaking of his Opposers, he says
of them, They will make no farther Contest (with Mr. Williams); I mistake,
(says the Rebuker) but private Whisperings, and evil Surmizes, and insinuated
Slanders, and clandestine Reproaches, may be multiplied while Mr. Williams
lives. O what a dire Charge is here in this climax and constellation of
Accusations! Here are Whisperings, Surmises, Slanders and Reproaches, and these
epethited with being private, evil, insinuated and clandestine: Nay, it is to be
feared they will feed upon his Carcass. See here what Cannibals he makes all
the Gospel Ministers, that cannot, that ought not to concur with Mr. Williams
his unsound stating of Gospel Truth. May not Men write and plead for the Truth,
which it is obvious Mr. Williams has wronged, as on that Text Phil. 3.9. but
they must be invidiously loaded as above? O my Dear Kratiste, I beseech the
Lord to mollify your Temper, and to give you an humble, broken Gospel-Sense of
your too much giving way, through the Temptation of the Floridness of your
Style, to an excess of Carnal Passion in your Rebuke. Does not the blessed
Apostle tell us, in 2 Timothy 4.2. that his beloved Timothy, though but a Young
Divine, that he should rebuke with all long-suffering? How much more is it a
Duty for the Elder Divines, to exercise long suffering, yea all long-suffering,
in their Rebukes cujus contrarium we see. Some talk of having a Commission from
all the Systematical Divines, as Antisozzo had; but I fear you have exceeded
that, as well as the Apostle's Admonition, in your Rebuke to the Report.

. CX.
Are all accounted, by the Rebuker, as Cannibals, that write against Mr.
Williams? How then shall I escape, who put my Mite into the Treasury of
pleading for Free Grace? Every one has not a Face of Brass, neither does God
say to all Contenders for the Truth, as he did to Ezekiel, in Ezekiel. 3.9. As an
Adamant harder than a Flint have I made thy Forehead, therefore fear them not;
and must we not therefore plead for Truth, for fear of being called Man-Eaters?
I hope my Dear Kratiste will remember what Antisozzo says, in his Preface,
That Austin would have every Man, that can hold a Pen, write against Pelagius,
that sworn Enemy to free discriminating effectual Grace. And if so, why may not
the Reporter, or any Penman, write against Mr. Williams (and all those Forty
Nine Vouchers) who declares, That a degree of our Gospel-Obedience to a Law
that admits Sin, does concur to our Justification quite contrary to the
Scripture, which says, We are justified freely by his Grace, through the
Redemption that is in Jesus? Are we bound to contend earnestly for the Faith,
and will you load with multiplied Sarcasms, those that cannot swallow such
distastful Morsels as he cuts out? Such as this, That our being found in
Christ, Phil. 3.9. is principally meant of being found in our own
Gospel-Holiness: Than which nothing is a greater misprision of Treason against
the Righteousness of Christ imputed to Sinners for their Justification. O! that
God would show, that such profane words do eat as does a Gangreen. What bring
in our Holiness to sit jigg by joul with Christ's perfect Righteousness: And
for opposing this, shall the Servants of the Lord be accounted Cannibals, to
feed on Mr. Williams his Flesh?

. CXI.
The next hard word, bestowed on Free Grace maintainers, is calling them
Bigots; nay, Bigots that never will forgive: That is, because they do and must
contend for the Truth, therefore they are accounted implacable. Though I am
bound to forgive all Injuries done to my self, am I ever bound to suffer the
Truth to be invaded, and silently to sit down satisfied with it? Was not meek
Moses in a Transport when Aaron made the Calf, yet not implacable? Must many
whole Churches of our Lord Jesus, be called unforgiving Bigots, for holding
fast the Faith once delivered to the Saints? Is not the Spirit to war against
Fleshly Principles, as long as they war against the Spirit? O! that my Dear
Kratiste might obtain to descend from his lofty strain, and follow our dear
Lord who dyed for us, leaving us an Example that we should follow his steps, in
being meek and lowly of Heart, and not fly into Astonishment and Indignation
for being mildly opposed.

. CXII.
O! how unlike is this treatment of this Rebuker, to the treatment our blessed
Lord Jesus gave to his Disciples, when instead of watching with him, when he
was under the dreadful conflict in his Agony, and instead of praying with him,
they fell a snoring? Did he scour them off as our Rebuker has done? No, he
sweetly, gently, mildly reproves them with an Excuse, The Spirit is willing,
but the Flesh is weak. Nay, when they called for Fire from Heaven on the
Samaritans, does he call them wild Monsters, as our Rebuker? No, but tenderly
reproves them, Ye know not what Spirit ye are of. He does not cast Firebrarnds,
Arrows and Death at them, calling them horrid Heretics, that fill with equal
Astonishment and Indignation, as of late we see in the froth of my Dear
Kratiste.

. CXIII.
I now must write in Tears this next Paragraph, and O that my Head were Waters,
and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears over my Dear Kratiste, to see that a Good
Man, and Eminent, should be guilty of the following Passage, which I fear has
been tragical and bloody. O what is poor Man, when the Lord leaves him to the
exercise of his mere Wit and Reason? The Rebuker turns quick, and plays at
sharp with the Manuscriptor, and accosts him for saying, What a Negative of the
same import with an Affirmative? Whereby the Manuscriptor reflected on Mr.
Williams for his former asserting, no Change of Persons between Christ and
Believers, and saying afterward, that he meant this, No Change does allow that
he was for a Change; on which the Manuscriptor says, What, a Negative of the
same import with an Affirmative? Upon which the Rebuker lets fly, and fastens
his Talons on him, with this Answer, I make no question but he had heard of
(...) and (...), a Marriage and no Marriage, grating on his tender Conscience.
Here we must take the word tender to be Ironically spoken by the Rebuker. O!
how can he look on this Passage without blushing, and a few Tears, if the Lord
graciously give a due Sense of the Uncharitableness of it, when he sees the
direful Consequence of it; the Lord's taking the blessed, holy Servant of his,
this object of your boasting over a repented of miscarriage, from this World to
himself. And who knows but such a Reflection as this, of (...), might hasten
his Death; to be wounded so in the House of his Friends, by a Brother in the
Presbyterian Ministry? If the Righteous fall seven times a day, how can you
look God in the Face with Peace, while you insult in (...) ^ner over one, you
cannot but own, God had raised up a^^er his ^ail. and raised to a higher pitch
of Zeal for the Glory of God, and for the publishing his Free Grace in the
Gospel, through our Lord Jesus Christ? Is such a Retort like the moving of the
Spirit of God in a Christian, who should in love, gentleness and meekness, do
every Thing (especially when writing a Tract relating to the great and glorious
Truths of the Gospel) to the Glory of God in the Name of the Lord Jesus? Was
this in the Name of Jesus, who when reviled, reviled not again, to criminate a
Servant of the Lord Jesus in the Ministry of the Gospel? We have heard of a
Cham that discovered what he should have concealed, and of the Brand, yea,
black Curse, that is upon all his Seed to this day, if the black Ethiopians be
his Seed, as is most probable. O blessed Lord, let not the like be on the Seed
of my Kratiste. The Apostle tells us, Ye have heard of the Patience of Job, but
draws a Vail over his Passion, and says farther upon it, and the end of the
Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender Mercy. O that the Rebuker
were like him: But the tender Mercies of some are cruel. What would, and it may
be thereby kill, a Man whom God had both wounded and healed! The Lord give a
due sense, and forgive.

. CXIV.
Again, We have heard of the mocking of Ishmael, Genesis 21. of which the Apostle
says, He that was born after the Flesh, persecuted him that was born after the
Spirit, Gal. 4. So that in God's sight, a mocking, fleering, jibing, taunting
Spirit, though done with the smartest Wit, is accounted Persecution; and if it
be to those born after the Spirit, it may issue in great Judgment. The Dragon
was cast into a bottomless Pit, that cast water out of his Mouth to swallow the
Woman, Rev. 12. and 20.3. I beseech the Lord, that such mocking may not be laid
to the Charge of the Rebuker in the great day of the Lord, when he comes to
convince not only the ungodly of their ungodly Deeds, but of their hard
Speeches. O that he might lay it to his own Soul now, that it may not be laid
to his Charge then. God has taken this aspersed Servant from the malevolent
Aspersion of Man; and I hope the Blood of Jesus applied to, by Faith, with
Repentance, may prevent this Man's Blood from crying for Vengeance: Which I
pray his Adversaries may flee for, to the hope set before them; and that they
take heed how they secretly, Joab like, stab, by vituperation, any of the
Servants of the Lord for the time to come. O! how ill might it look, if any
should return a worse Reflection than (...), on some that lift up their Heads
very high, being held up by the Chin by mighty swimmers. But the Lord rebuke
their uncharitable Spirit, is the best return I can make.

. CXV.
I am amazed, or as in a Dream, to see the prevaricating of the Rebuker in Page
61, where speaking of Mr. Williams's Gospel Truth stated, etc. he says,
Reader, thou have heard much noise about that Book, and of the Subscription to
it by some Ministers, I could wish thou would be so just to the Subscribers,
as to view with thine own Eyes, how far the Subscription extended -- It was no
more than this, They judged that he had, in all that was material, fully and
rightly stated the Truths and Errors therein mentioned. I viewed this over and
over, never suspecting a plain untruth in the Rebuker, but took it for granted
that this was all that he had subscribed to, That he judged that Mr. Williams
had, in all that was material, done as there is declared: But being provoked to
be just to him, and see with my own Eyes, I turned to the Subscription, and to
my amazement found the old saying useful, It Is good to tell Money after ones
Father; for he fell far short of saying the Truth, and the whole Truth of the
Subscription; for it extended far beyond what he says it extended to: For
there, to set off the Book, he styles Mr. Williams, our Reverend Brother; and
such a Character to the Book, is no small extolling it, that he is by Forty
Nine Divines called our Reverend Brother, whereof my Dear Kratiste is one of
the first three. But looking forward with mine own Eyes, I found he went ten
times farther in celebrating the excellency of that Piece, which made such a
Noise; a Noise that has sounded into the Low Countries to indamage the Truth,
as I have heard, and that is this, We do account (say the Forty Nine) that he
has done considerable Service to the Church of Christ. And what could they say
more of Calvin, Melancthon, Luther? Nay, very little more of St. Paul's
Epistles; I wish they said as much of some passages therein, Christ made Sin
and made a Curse.

. CXVI.
But with mine own Eyes, with the help of Free Grace Spectacles, (not Arminian
ones) I find his Subscription extends yet far higher, and is got near the Third
Heavens; for to their Commendations of a Reverend Brother, and their
celebrations of doing Service, they add their Supplications with expectations,
saying, Adding our Prayers, that these Labors of his may, as we hope they
will, be a means for the reclaiming of those that have been mislead. Is not
here a plain demonstration, of a great abuse put upon his Reader, and an open
untruth in matter of fact, to say, that the Subscription was no more than this,
They judged that he had, in all that was material, fully and rightly stated the
Truths and Errors therein mentioned? Was his doing considerable Service to the
Church nothing? Were their Prayers for the Success of the Book nothing? Is this
a Faithful Rebuke to a False Report? Is it not rather a very False Report of
his own Fact? What then may be expected of his Report concerning others? O how
could he say, it is NO MORE, when it is visibly three times more, Proh Dolor!

. CXVII.
It calls to my mind, that dear Equivocation of Saphira to Peter, Acts 5. when
he asked her, whether she sold the Field for so much, she answered, Yea, for so
much. This was not downright; for no more: Upon this Peter charges her to have
tempted the Spirit of the Lord; and says, Behold the feet of them that have
buried thy Husband: Then she fell down strait-way-at his feet, and yielded up
the ghost. There might have been some plea, by a Sophister, in her behalf; he
might, with an Arminian Wit, have said, what Saphira said was true; she
answered, Yea, for so much; so it was, but she did not say it was for no more,
and yet she tempted the Holy Spirit, which cost her at least her Natural Life:
But he must be a Gigantick Sophister, that can remove the Block our Rebuker has
laid in the way of a true Relater. I don't see what Invention can save his
Expression from being a solemn Untruth, for him to say, it was no more, when it
was much more, a great deal; and so much more had they subscribed, in
commendation of Mr. Williams's Book, as might well make his Head giddy and turn
round, to be carried (I will not say by what Spirit) to so high a Mount, yea,
to the Pinnacle of the Temple, as to have so many Ministers avouch to the World,
That he had fully and rightly stated Truths and Errors, so as to do
considerable Service to the Church of Christ.

. CXVIII.
My Heart is troubled for exposing the Rebuker thus in this particular; but how
should I be faithful to him in his Remarks, or better invalidate his supporting
Mr. Williams's Errors, if I should not show what shifts some are driven to,
that will justify him, or themselves, for being his upholder? And though this
failure be discovered, in one accounted a great Master in our Israel, yet the
Apostle advises, that when some Men sin, they should be rebuked before all,
that others may fear, 1 Timothy 5.20. When the whole World must be told in Print
so great an Untruth, it is necessary they should be undeceived, that the Author
may retract it, and own himself to have erred. The Lord grant we may all learn,
by this fall, to fear and tremble; lest being left by the Spirit of God, when
we go to vindicate what we ought not, we fall before all. O that my Dear
Kratiste might here see the fruit of a towering Spirit.

. CXIX.
I would gladly contrive some Figure in speaking, or writing, to salve the
Veracity of the Faithful Rebuke, in saying, the Subscription was no more, when
in Truth it was abundantly more. I can find nothing but a far stretched
Synecdoche, of a part for the whole, will do the feat; and so I may say, it was
no more; that is, no more to be owned to the World, when we see how many
Exceptions are against the Book we subscribed to. So a Man that owes him 100 l.
may come to him, and say, Sir, I have brought you 20 l. and I owe you no more.
How, no more than 20 l. is not here your Bond for 100 l.? That Is true; but I
owe you no more but 20 l. because I intend to pay you no more. So the
Subscription was no more, because we intend now to own no more. But if his
Apocryphal Tobias had been guilty of making such Figures, he would have been
branded justly, with a wild monstrous Sense of Change of Persons. But my
Kratiste may possibly be excused for haste; and I wish this were the greatest
Fault in his Rebuke.

. CXX.
One word to the trite and tart Conclusion, he says, If these contenders go on
to exact so much, and yield so little, for the sake of Union, they sell their
own Innocence, and the Churches Peace, for nothing. This is smart and quick;
pretty biting for a Conclusion. What nothing less than selling Innocence for
nothing, and Peace for nothing? Is the Truth nothing? Half an Eye may see, that
it is Truth is contended for. When Hezekiah had a Sentence of Death sent him,
his Answer was, Isa. 39.8. Good is the Word of the Lord; for there shall be
Peace and Truth in my days. He was not for a pretended Union, and a formal
Peace, without the great Pillar of Truth to support the Building. Do not the
Papists argue at the same rate for Peace? They are all for submitting to the
dictates of their Antichristian State, for the sake of Peace and Unity; but the
Apostle exhorts to contend for the Faith, and says, We gave not place, no not
for an hour, that the TRVTH of the Gospel might continue. When the Truth is
opposed, oppugned, undermined, by bringing in Evangelical Obedience to a Law
that a^ows some Sin, and this Obedience of ours, to have some share in our
acceptance with God; and when the vindicating the Truth shall shake the
Foundations of a patched up Peace, we are not long to question, which is to be
preferred, the holding fast the Truth, or keeping such a Peace. But how can
contending for the Truth, be said to sell Peace for nothing? Is the Change of
Persons, between us and Christ, nothing, whereby he was made Sin for us, and we
the Righteousness of God in him? I think this is something, though Mr. Williams
once absolutely denied it. Is the bringing in a New Law, that admits of Sin in
our Obedience, nothing? Is denying that Christ suffered the Idem of the Law for
us, nothing? Is Mr. Williams's denying our Redemption, in a way of Justice,
nothing? As he does, Fol. 15, of his Man made Righteous. I suppose those that
see the Infinite Concernment of their Souls in these Points, will say, they are
something; yea, Things of more value, than the Peace that all the
Plenipotentiaries made at Ryswick; for that Peace is but finite, but these
Truths are of infinite duration. The Wise Man bids us buy the Truth, and sell
it not: And if not sell it at all, then not for Peace. But we are to contend
earnestly for the Faith, once delivered to the Saints; which Faith seems to be
taking wing, and leaving us under that sad word of our Lord, When the Son of
Man comes, shall he find Faith on the Earth? There being very little of it
now; what with open Enemies scoffing at all Revealed Religion on one side, and
seeming Friends, though as bad Enemies, on the other side, that join Man's
Obedience with Christ's Righteousness, as concurrent causes or means of our
Justification and Salvation, and so bringing in our Gospel-Holiness as
co-partner with our Lord Jesus, the Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last,
the Author and Finisher of our Salvation: To whom with the Father and Blessed
Spirit, even to him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb that was slain,
and is alive in the midst of the Throne, and to the seven Spirits before the
Throne, be Honor, Glory and Praise for ever.

. CXXI.
Now that these plain Remarks, on some of the great Truths of the Gospel, which
have been struck at, may be beneficial to the humble Peruser, to settle him on
our Lord Jesus the only Foundation, in order to be built up in the most holy
Faith, by him who builds all Things, who is God, Heb. 3.4. is the fervent
Prayer of the unworthiest, I say, of the unworthiest in his own Eyes, of any
that sincerely desires to cast in his Mite to the Treasury of the Testimony of
Jesus, God blessed for ever.

. CXXII.
Having taken the freedom, out of love to the Truth, and zeal for the Glory of
God's Grace therein manifest, to be a little plain with my Dear Kratiste,
hoping for a Blessing of the Lord thereby on his and others Souls, I find my
self engaged to make some Remarks on the Reporter, the first occasioner of this
thus-handled Debate. And first, I must and do own, that I humbly judge, that he
has done great and good Service to the Truth, by delivering his Report with
much plainness and perspicuity, however it be censured by the Adversary; and I
take it, that he deserves Thanks of Thousands (besides my self), who make the
Truths of the Everlasting Gospel their daily Study, for his ingenious
Vindication of his Report, from the Slander of its being called false by the
Rebuker.

. CXXIII.
But two Things, wherein I take him to have exceeded, I hope may be rectified;
that is, his hard pressure on my Dear Kratiste, and his tart Passages on Dr.
Crisp.

As for the Rebuker, was it not enough, when the Reported had sufficiently
foiled him, nay, and had laid him so flat on his Back, as to be for ever unable
to stand upright again in that Cause, by clearing his Report from being false?
But when he had him down, sure he should not have pressed him to Death, or worse,
by his Printing such a Letter, as taxed him, not only with Buffoonry, but with
being by fits delirous, and to charge him with denying Christ's Satisfaction
for our Sins.

. CXXIV.
As for the first, I that have known him above Twenty Years, never heard
before, or saw, the least Tendency to those unhappy Fits: Though upon inquiry
of the ground of such a Charge, it is said, The Writer knew well what he said.
But however, this I take to be too severe a Reprimand for his Rebuke,
considering how terrible a blemish it is, to so eminent a Person's Ministry, to
be taxed with being delirous. O how few can be free, if every Transport shall
lay a Man under such a Censure! Therefore this I would advise the Reporter, to
be humbled before the Lord, for considering how in many things we offend all.

. CXXV.
As for the Reporter's Argument, That the Rebuker denies Christ's Satisfaction
for Sin; because he says, Christ's Death was for our good, and it was
impossible it should be more; and that therein he Just^fies the Socinians. I
answer this Conclusion, That he denies Christ s Satisfaction hereby, looks like
a strain upon the words, beyond the meaning of the Rebuker; for it seems
apparent in this Rebuke, especial^y in his other Writings, That he expressly
owns Christ's Satisfaction for Sin: Though in that Expression of his, in Fol.
37. he has unhappily gratified the Socinians too far, by saying, It is
impossible that Christ's dying in our place and stead, should signify any
more, than for our Good. God forbid that my dear Kratiste should mean by that
word, only for our Good; as the Socinians do, That Christ's dying was only for
our good, as an Example, or to confirm his good Doctrine only. No: He means (I
hope) That Christ, by his Death, took away the Sins of all the Elect: That he
bare their Sins, and bare them away into a Land of Forgetfulness, never to be
remembered more, as our Escape goat: That he suffered for their Sins: That he
washed them from their Sins in his Blood: And so he died for our Good, that we
should have the Good and Benefit of his taking away our Sins, and of his
becoming a Propitiation for us, a Sin-offering for us, a Ransom to the Father
for us, and also himself to be ours, the Lord our Righteousness; for which let
us ascribe Honor and Glory to him continually, for that he has loved us, and
washed us from our Sins in his Blood.

. CXXVI.
Then for the Reporter's Tartness against Dr. Crisp, I am Amazed so florid a
Person should so far blemish his Discourses, be so Dis-ingenious to the Doctor,
as to say, He believes there is somewhat Dangerous in the Doctor's Writings, in
Page 87. of his Vindication, and not to give one Instance of it: His words
being these, If there is any thing Dangerous in the Doctor's Writings, as I
believe there is. It would have been fair to have given one dangerous Passage
at least, but for want of that, I turned to some of the most severe Passages of
Mr. Williams's against the Doctor, and to Dr Chancy's Apology for the Doctor,
to see what was so dangerous; and I found in P. 37. of Gospel Truth, Mr.
Williams had loaded the Doctor thus, Reader, how horrid a sound must it have to
a Christian Ear, to say, A Christ odious to God, abhorred by the Father. Here
Mr. Williams speaks, as if Dr. Crisp had said these words, A Christ odious to
God, abhorred by the Father. But Mr. Williams deals unjustly herein, for as to
the word, A Christ odious, there is not such an Expression in the Doctor; and
as for abhorred by the Father, the Doctor s words are, Christ is, as it were,
abhorred by the Father. But suppose it were as Mr. Williams brings it in, How
much more Horrid a Sound is it, to say, Christ is odious to God, than to say,
Christ is made Sin by God himself? If we had due Thoughts of the Horridness of
Sin, and that Christ was made Sin, that is, by Imputation; we should think it
as much a Debasing of our Lord Jesus, to be made Sin by God, as to be accounted
Odious or Abhorred of God. O these severe, great, tremendous Things! How should
we revere them?

. CXXVII.
This I find ingeniously and fully answered by Dr. Chancy, who asks Mr.
Williams, What difference there is between God's wrathful Indignation, as Mr.
Williams owns; and to be, as it were, abhorred of God, as Dr. Crisp mentions?
But that I may more fully clear this, from being a dangerous Notion of Dr.
Crisp's, I have recourse to the Scriptures of the Old Testament in the
Original, to see what is there said, of Christ's being under the Father's
Displeasure; and there I find, in Terminis, that our Lord Jesus Christ is
spoken of, as abhorred of God, when made a Curse for us, bearing our Sins, and
made Sin. The place is plain, in Psalm. 89.38. there it is said, Thou have cast
off and abhorred, thou have been wrath with thine anointed. And who is this
anointed one, whom the Lord did cast off and abhor, and was wrath with, but our
blessed Lord Jesus? So the whole Psalm shows, especially the 36th Verse, His
Seed shall endure for ever; and Verse 51, Thine enemies have reproached the
footsteps of thine anointed: And that these Reproaches are those that Christ
bore, compare Psalm. 69.9. with Romans 15.3. The Reproaches of them that
reproached thee, fell upon me, says Christ. Hence it is plain, that these are
the words of our Lord Jesus to his Father, Thou have cast off and abhorred: The
words are severe in the Hebrew, ve attah zanashta; and thou have eloyned, or
cast me far away; vat-timeas, and thou have reprobated; so arius montanus at tu
elongasti and reprobasti. Here he makes the word go higher than our Translators
render it, he renders it, Thou have reprobated thine anointed, thy Messiah;
whereas our Translators do rather mollify, than exasperate, the word timeas,
and say, Thou have aborred. This word timeas comes from maas in other
Scriptures; by the due weighing whereof we may the better understand, and so be
the more affected with the dreadful Sufferings of our Lord Jesus, and so love
him the more for his being abhorred of the Father, as he was made Sin and a
Curse for us, while at the same time he was in his own Person, the Holy,
Spotless, Beloved, ^lessed Son of God.

. CXXVIII.
As to this word maas, used in Psalm. 89 of Christ; we find it used in Lev.
26.13. God speaking of the reason of his forsaking Israel, says it is,
be-mis^pata i maasu, because they despised my Judgments; so we render it; but
Montanus renders it strictly thus, In Juditiis meis reprobaverunt, against my
Judgments they had reprobated. The same Reprobation Job makes on himself, when
he considered his former Passion, and says, Job 42.6. Wherefore I abhor my
self, yal cen emeas idcirco reprobabo, therefore I reprobate my self. So that
in strictness, the Original Text, with Montanus, is, That God did account the
Lord Jesus, as one that he had reprobated for a Season, in Psalm. 89 38. For
says our Lord, attah zanachta vat-timeas, thou have cast far away, and thou
have reprobated. And surely Christ Jesus, who felt the Bruises of God, the
Pains of Hell that caught hold of him, when our Sins were on him, when he
cried, yea, skreemed out upon the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Surely he could best tell how to express himself, as he did, in that place,
Thou have cast off, and abhorred, or reprobated.

. CXXIX.
So again in Lev. 26.44. God in his infinite Mercy says of his beloved People
Israel, When they are in the Land of their Enemies, I will not abhor them; loa
meastem non reprobavi, I will not reprobate them. O wonderful Love and Grace!
Though our Lord Jesus said Reprobasti concerning himself, thou have reprobated
me. Yet God says of his Israel, now in strange Lands, non reprobavi eos, I
have not reprobated them. As much as to say, Therefore was our Dear Jesus
reprobated, in that Sense, that we his People might not be reprobated for ever:
For which, to him be everlasting Praise.

. CXXX.
The same word is in Psalm. 78.15 imeas meod be-israel, we render, He greatly
abhorred Israel: Montanus, Et reprobavis valde in Israel, which is, And he
reprobated exceedingly against Israel. And though our Translators have been
very shy, of rendering that word maas for reprobating, yet in Jer. 6.30. there
they take the word, as Montanus does, for Reprobation; in that place the Hebrew
is, ceseph nimas karen la hem, which in Montanus is, Argentum reprobatum
vocarunt eis; Silver Reprobate they shall call them; and we have it translated
so word for word almost, Reprobate Silver shall Men call them; and if nimas is
Reprobate here, it is the same when our Lord Jesus uses the word of himself,
Psalm. 89.38. where he calls himself as abhorred of God. Thus we have full
Testimony of the high Displeasure of the Father against his beloved Son, as to
Manifestation, when he, as our Surety, had our Sins laid on him.

. CXXXI.
But Montanus his Version of maas, which we translate abhorred, being but one
Witness for so great a word and thing, and by the Mouth of two Witnesses every
Truth being to be confirmed, I therefore, (for the better ascertaining the
Sense of that word, which so fully proves the Father's displeasure against
Christ) I turned to the word maas, in the Incomparably Learned and Laborious Dr
Edmund Castle's Polyglot Lexicon, of the seven Oriental Languages, of which my
Dear Kratiste, I am sure, had one given him, to see what Collections he has
made on that word, it being of infinite Consequence, to see, and know, what our
Lord Jesus suffered for us; most of which Sufferings being contained in that
word maas, abhorred of the Father. This I thought the more worthy of diligent
inquiry into, that we, seeing its import, might the more admire and adore the
Infinite Love of the Father, so to treat his well beloved, his only begotten
Son; and the equally Infinite Love of this blessed Son of God, manifested in
his spontaneous free willing, accepting and undergoing that dreadful Punishment
from the Hand of his Father for us, so as thereupon to skreem out upon the
Cross, My God, my God, why have thou ^o^saken me? In turning to which word
maas, there I find these rendrings following given to it, maas, says Dr.
Castle, upon it signifies Sprevit, Respuit, reprobavit, abjecit, aspernatus,
Aversatus est: All dreadful words to be attributed by our Lord Jesus to
himself, as he does that maas, in Psalm. 89.38. saying to God, ve-attah timeas,
which according to Dr. Castle is, and thou have reprobated, and thou have been
averse against me, or thou have spued me out, or thou have cast me away. Thus
was our Blessed Lord under the Father's Wrath for our Sins, when it pleased the
Father to Bruise him, that by his Stripes we might be healed. O was ever Love
like this God-like Love of our Lord, to bear this for us! For which, to him be
Honor, Glory and Praise, for ever.

. CXXXII.
Dr. Castle, to confirm the Version of maas to be reprobavit, he has
reprobated, he brings Proofs from Jer. 6.30. Isa. 35 15. Prove. 15.32. Ezekiel.
21.10, 13. Jer. 14 19. in which last Proof are these words, ha-maos maasta eth
Jehudah, which in English is, in reprobating have thou reprobated Judah; which
Montanus renders, Nunquid reprobando reprobasti Jehudah; whether or no, in
reprobating, have thou reprobated Judah; which we translate only thus, Have
thou utterly rejected Judah? By the same Rule, what our Translation of maasta
or timeas is, in Psalm. 89.38. thou have abhorred; Montanus renders it, thou
have reprobated thy Christ; which is proof sufficient to show his Father's
Wrath, and abhorring of him.

Dr. Castle goes on to Prove. 3.11. and Isa. 54.6. where is this word, The Lord
has called thee as a Woman forsaken and grieved in Spirit, and a Wife of
youth, when thou wast refused, says thy God: The word for when refused, is, ci
timeas; which Montanus renders, quia reprobata fuisti, because thou wast
reprobated.

. CXXXIII.
O Blessed! thrice blessed word to us poor Gentiles; that when we were
reprobated, when we were refused, that then our Lord Jesus should say, Thy
Maker is thine Husband; and the Lord has called thee as a Wife of Youth, when
thou had been forsaken, and refused or reprobated; and in lieu of it, that he
should say of himself to God, as Psalm. 89.38. timeas meshi che-cha, thou have
reprobated or abhorred thine anointed one, That we poor Gentiles might become a
Wife of Youth, the Lord Jesus stands in our place, as forsaken, as refused, as
abhorred of the Lord; or as Montanus and Dr. Castle renders it, the I

. CXXXIV.
A little farther in the Lexicon, the Chaldee word means, the Doctor renders
Com^utruit, saetuit, faetor, Putor, Corruption, faetens, most dreadful words all
of them, to be used by our Lord Jesus concerning himself, when under the
forsaking of God; and yet all this far short of his being made Sin for us, and
a Curse. And if we, at any time, feel any thing of the Sting of Sin in our
Consciences, to cry out with Heman, Psalm. 88.6. Thou have laid me in the lowest
Pit, in Darkness, in the Deeps. Thy Wrath lies hard upon me. We may thence
think of the dreadful Horror on the Soul of our Lord Jesus, when all the Sins,
of all the Elect, were stinging and gashing him, which made him Sweat great
Clodders of Blood in a cold Night, upon the approach of that dreadful Hour and
Power of Darkness upon him in the Garden, a little before he felt the weight of
God's wrathful Indignation (as Mr. Williams calls it) when on the Cross he was
made Sin for us, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. O how
should we, instead of quarrelling at the Expression, Prize and Adore our
blessed Lord Jesus, who willingly underwent the being thus treated by his ever
dear and tender Father, for our sakes; so as to be thus stricken, smitten of
God, and afflicted; to be thus wounded, bruised and oppressed, and that, by the
Pleasure of the Lord, for our Iniquities, for our Transgressions, and for our
Sins, Isa. 53. laid on him by the Lord: O adorable Grace to us! in this thus
punishing the Son of God for us.

. CXXXV.
Lastly, I must make an Apology for my Dear Kratiste the Rebuker, to clear him
of the Load that the Reporter has laid on him, accounting him an Ambodexter,
one while for Dr. Crisp, and one while against him; for him, by affixing his
Name to the Re-printing the Doctor's Sermons; and in his Argument, to vindicate
him in his Preface to Mr. Flavel's Book; and now against him with a Vengeance
(treating him as an Apocryphal wild Monster of Nonsense) in his Faithful or
Frightful Rebuke, to which, in defense of the Rebuker, I may plead, That when
he favored Dr. C --, it was soon after he had been vindicating Dr. Owen,
against the Charge of the Rector of St. George's, for which he had the deserved
Applause of many Thousands: But he having lately fallen in with the Neonomian,
or New-law Doctrine, from Mr. Williams; or rather lying under some
unaccountable Engagements to him, after some severe Reprimands of him, now to
the saddening his best Friends, he seems to discard his first Love, which
seemed warm, to clear Gospel Free Grace, through the Blood of Jesus, to
Justify and Save us; and to take up with Mr. Williams his some Degrees of our
Obedience, in the Matter of our Justification. Hence, let him that stands, take
heed lest he fall, by looking to him that is able, and has promised, to settle,
strengthen and establish.

. CXXXVI.
Then my Dear Kratiste could own, in terminis, we work from Life, not for Life;
but now this he Ranks among the Antinomian Heresies or Heterodoxies, though it
is, in it self, a Nonsensical Contradiction, to say, a Man may work, and not do
it from Life: Can a dead Man work? And dead we are, till quickened in Christ.
Then he could say, in Antisozzo, Page 205. How God might be said to need Sins,
to set forth the Persecution of that Blessed Attribute of God, his Sin
pardoning Grace, which is as high a piece of Antinomianism, to say, God needs
Sins, as any passage in Dr. Crisp's Sermons: But now he can vindicate that
Popish Assertion in Mr. Williams, That Glory has the same Con^exion with Good
Works, as the Building has to the Foundation: That is, That our good Works are
instead of Christ, who is the Foundation that our Glory is built on.

Now the Apology I make, is, That then Dr. Owen, the Mirror of the Age for
Learning, one honored by all Christians hereabout, he was living, and it was
the way for Antisozzo, then living in an obscure Village, to get a General
Acceptance among the most refined Christians about the City, to write
consonantly to the Doctor, when traduced as aforesaid. But now Mr. Williams
has, by 49 Vouchers, been set up for the great Champion of the New-Law
Doctrine, bringing in our Obedience into our Justification, instead of being
Justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus. This
might be a Temptation to the Rebuker, to strain his Wit in the vindicating him;
by casting Dirt on the Apocryphal Tobias; and thereby he might hope to exalt
his own Name. But God has let most of his Friends, and, I hope, himself too,
see how much he has failed, to the Grief of all that love my Dear Kratiste as I
do.

. CXXXVII.
Wherefore I beseech the Lord he may seriously apply the Advice of our blessed
Lord Jesus, to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.2. I know (says he)
thy Works, and thy Labor, and for my Names sake thou have labored: (Witness
Antisozzo, etc) Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, because thou have
left thy first Love. Remember therefore whence thou art fallen, and repent, and
do thy first Works, So let Kratiste do, in putting forth the remainder of your
Strength and Parts, in writing against such as called forth your Antisozzo, and
not in calling it a Crispian Heresy, to say, A Believer is to work from Life,
and not for Life; or a Crispian Heterodoxy, to say, Christ bore the Anomia of
Sin; whereas the Scripture says, He bare our Sins. And if you can separate
Anomia from Sin, then it is not Sin; and then according to you, Christ did not
bear Sin. But I hope, upon a sedate recollection, my Dear Kratiste will give
Glory to God, and own his intemperate and unbecoming Heat against the Reporter,
and his Apocryphal Tobias, or rather against the Truth, being under the violent
hurry of a Temptation to exalt his Wit and Fancy, whereby he has grievously
showed his weakness in trusting too much to his Parts.

. CXXXVIII.
Now that the Lord would please graciously to make some of these Remarks
useful, to some serious considering Servants of our blessed Lord Jesus, as they
have been refreshing to the Composer, and that we may lay out all our Time and
Strength, all our Parts and Estate, That Christ alone may be exalted; That all
may honor the Son, as they honor the Father, for which end all Judgment is
committed to the Son, and that thereby we may advance the Glory of the Free
Grace of God to poor Sinners in Christ, and in him only; Our whole Salvation
being of Grace, and not of Works, lest any Man should boast. And that through
Faith in Jesus, we may daily, duly, humbly, and yet with holy boldness, wait,
with our Loins girt with the girdle of Truth, for our Lord from Heaven in the
^lory of the Father, in his own Glory, and in the Glory of the Holy Angels, and
all his Saints with him, is the Prayer of a very unworthy, and yet, in some
sense, a happy Branch of him whom my Dear Kratiste has unmercifully traduced.

P. S.. CXXXIX.
FInding the Controversy maintained, concerning a Change of Persons between
Christ and Believers, and Dr. Crisp much reflected on in a Letter, that Mr.
Williams has procured, from the Reverend Bishop of W -- in order to justify
himself from the Charge of his denying a Change, I cannot well avoid saying a
word or two to the said Letter, with great deference to the Author. I commend
Mr. Williams for fleeing for Refuge to Men of Name; but all the Names and Men
in the World cannot help him in this Case, when he had absolutely denied a
Change. Now to be thought to own a Change, unless he first plainly owns his
Error in his flat denying a Change, he may not fairly shift it off, that he
owned it in a Sense, but disowned it in the Doctor's Sense; when, without any
distinction, he said plainly thus, Whether there be a Change, this the Doctor
affirms, and I deny. Which is so manifest a denial of a Change in any Sense, as
words can in general make it. It Is as if I should say, I went into Paul's
Church to hear the Organs, and there was not a Man there. I saw a Singing-Boy,
and he said, there was a Man there. The Boy affirmed there was a Man there.
This the Boy said, and this I deny. Can I help my self, and say, there was a
Man in a Surplice, but there was not a Bishop there, or a Doctor there? This is
a sorry shift, with an untruth into the bargain, for me to say, there was not a
Man there; and then shift it off with, I owned there was a Man in a Surplice
there. So Mr. Williams, Whether there be a Change, this the Doctor affirms, and
I deny. This, a Change, here must, in all ordinary acceptance of the words, be
taken for any Change, without any sort of distinction. This I deny said Mr.
Williams. Now to help him over this style, he troubles the Bishop, whom I
honor as a Person of great Worth and Learning, though I cannot admire that
sort of Station, of Lord-Bishop, in the Church of the Living God, which very
Station might occasion the Treatise of The Mischief of Separation, and produced
my Dear Kratiste's Mischief of Imposition, yet I make bold to say, with Thanks
to the Bishop, How warily soever he writes, as to clearness in the Point of
Commutation, yet he writes with wonderful Modesty, and, in every Tittle, like a
Gentleman, not be-heriticking, not bemonstring Dr. Crisp, as the Rebuker has
unaccountably done; but like a Christian Gentleman, and Scholar, says mildly,
This I take to be Dr. Crisp 's Sense of the Change of Persons, not with a
ruff-hewen Pen, This is Dr. Crisp's Dreggy Antinomianism, This is his Heterodox
Heresy, This is his Wild monstrous Sense, And this is his Apocryphal Story.


. CXL.
But to the Bishop's Argument; he says, This I take to be Dr. Crisp 's Sense
of the Change of Persons; It is such a Sense as implies an Actual Translation
of the Personal Guilt of all the Sins of Believers on Christ, and his Personal
Righteousness on them. But note, the Doctor mentioned not Personal Guilt, nor
Actual Translation, but kept himself firm on the Scripture Foundation, of
Christ being made Sin for us, and we made the Righteousness of God in him. From
whence he infers, If Christ was made Sin for us, he was as sinful as we, that
is, by Imputation; and if we are made the Righteousness of God, we are as
Righteous as he, that is, as Christ God-Man with his Mediatorial Righteousness
wrought out for us, and imputed to us; than which, what can be a more clear
Consequence, if we are the Righteousness of God? But to evade this, or to
reflect on the Doctor, the Bishop says, Concerning the Translation of Guilt,
which results from the Act of Sin committed, if this Guilt be translated,
Christ must become the very Person who committed the Sins; and so he must be
looked on, not only as an Actual Sinner, but as the Person who committed all
the Sins of those for whom he dyed? Which comes near to horrid Blasphemy. This
is a strange Inference, for one of the Bishop's Learning. Could not Christ as
our Surety, sustaining the Persons of Sinners, stand in their place and stead;
and as their Sponsor, pay their Debts, and answer for their Sins laid on him,
unless he become the very Person that committed the Sins? This takes away all
Suretyship. Surely he may be in the place of David, and bear the Sin of his
Murder and Adultery; and it being imputed to him, he may bear it away, and he
may be reckoned as, and reputed as, the Murderer, and yet not be the Murderer;
or else how could God, in Justice, punish him, and take pleasure to bruise him,
as our old Protestant Divines argue all along from Isa. 53?

. CXLI.
Well, what does the Bishop own then? As far as I can see, not one Tittle of
our Sins being by God laid on Christ, or of Christ's bearing our Sins, which is
the Life and Soul of the Gospel, and of all Consolation to poor Sinners that
flee for refuge to him; but only that Christ under-went the deserved Punishment
of our Sins; that is, he was punished for nothing, in a manner: For if he did
not bear our Sins, if they were not made his by God's laying them on him, why
was he punished? His words are these, A Mediator was accepted so as, upon
acceptance of his Sacrifice, the Offenders may be pardoned, and received into
the Grace and Favor of God, on such terms as he has declared in the Gospel:
And in this Sense (says the Bishop) the Guilt of our Sins was charged on
Christ, as our Mediator, who was to bear the Punishment of our Sins. Here Is a
Sacrifice accepted, but no Sins done away by it. Here Offenders may be
pardoned, but it is on their complying with the nameless Terms of the Gospel,
which, at the bottom, is our sincere Holiness to the end of our Lives: Much
like the Papists, Christ merited that our good Works should procure Salvation.
Here is likewise the Sense on which the Guilt of our Sins was charged on
Christ, viz. If the Sinner complies with the Terms of the Gospel, then he may
be pardoned and received into the Grace and Favor of God. This is so strange a
Sense of the Guilt of our Sins charged on Christ, that it is next door to
Nonsense, to say, he did bear them 1600 Years ago, if we comply now: For either
the Guilt was laid on Christ, when he was on the Cross, when he bare our Sins,
or it was never laid on him, and never shall be; for he suffered once for all.
And if it was then laid on him, then we are not to merit Pardon, Grace and
Favor now, by our complying with the Terms of the Gospel now? Which Gospel is
taking the Waters of Life freely; but Pardon, Grace and Favor, is all merited
by Christ's bearing our Sins, and the Guilt, and the Punishment, he being all
in all, the alone and complete Savior, who saves his People from their Sins.

. CXLII.
The Bishop has by this account of Christ's bearing only the Punishment of our
Sins, and the Guilt, in a Sense, if we comply with Gospel-Terms, he has evaded
those Glorious Texts of Scripture, that are multiplied in the word of
Salvation, that testify that our blessed Lord Jesus bare our very Sins, and
carried them away. As for instance in a few: It is said in Isa. 53. he bare our
Griefs: Our very Griefs, that were due to us, he bare them. Then it is said, he
carried our Sorrows. As a Porter carries a Pack, so our Lord Jesus had this
burden laid on his Back, and he carried away those very Sorrows that we should
have groaned under to all Eternity. Then he was wounded for our Transgression;
which could not be in Righteousness, unless he had our Transgression charged on
him. Then he was bruised for our Iniquities: Ours by committing of them, but
his when bruised for them; or else you make God unjust, to bruise one for the
iniquity of another, if that other did not take them on himself. And in the
next place, The Chastisement of our Peace was upon him: That Chastisement which
effected and wrought out our Peace, without any work of ours, that Chastisement
was upon him. Surely none will say now, that Christ bore the Chastisement which
procured our Peace, and that God will lay Chastisements on his own Children,
for that end, to procure their Peace with God: No, God's Chastisements are for
another end, on his People, viz. to make them partakers of his Holiness; but
their Peace was made before, when the Chastisement of our Peace was on Christ,
which was when he was on the Cross. But how came all this on Christ, that he
should bear our Griefs, our Sorrows, our Wounds, our Bruises, and our
Chastisements? This he shows in ver. 6. because the Lord laid on him the
Iniquity of us all. Here, here, is the crowning Point, this dashes to pieces
the Head of Leviathan, the Lord himself did this great Work, he caused the
Iniquity of us all to meet on Christ; there the Lord fixed it, there the
poisonous Dart, of the Iniquity of us all, stuck in the side of the Blessed
Jesus, till he cried out, It is finished; and gave up the ghost. Sure here is
more than bare Punishment in this great word, The Lord laid on him the Iniquity
of us all. His bearing the Punishment was insisted on over and over before,
when it was said, he was smitten, stricken and afflicted, he was wounded,
bruised and chastised; but here the Lord brings in the Ground and Reason of all
this, how he came to endure all this, the Lord laid on him the Iniquity of us
all: The word is, Vaihovah hiphgiya, and the Lord made to fall, or fall foul,
on him the Iniquity of us all. So that our Iniquity, our very Iniquity, fell
foul on Christ, and put him to that Punishment, to those Wounds and Scourges,
that crowned him with Thorns, that nailed him to the Cross, that pierced his
Side. The Lord laid on him the Iniquity of us all, the Lord did this, I may
allude to Saul, who sent Doeg the Edomite to fall foul on Abimelech, the Priest
of Nob, Go thou, said Saul, 1 Samuel 22.18. do thou turn, and fall on the Priest.
The word is the same as Isa. 53.6. do thou phegay, do thou rush on them. Then
Doeg the Edomite, he did iphgay, the same word, he rushed on him, and slew in
that day Eighty Five. So our Iniquity, the Lord made that to rush on Christ,
and slay him; that was the Doeg, the Edomite, which the great King, the Lord
God Almighty, caused to rush on Christ, and slay him. As much as to say, God
could not justly punish, wound and bruise, his dearly beloved Son, he could not
give him Grief, Sorrow and Stripes, for our Iniquity, unless our very Iniquity
was laid on Christ; the Prophet proceeds, because God knew all these
Testimonies were not enough to silence the proud quarrelling Nature of Man,
against Christ's bearing our very Sins; and says in ver. 10. It pleased the
Lord to bruise him. Jehovah chapetz dacce-o, the Lord took delight in pounding
him, as Spice is pounded in a Mortar, or as the Israelites pounded the Manna in
a Mortar, Numb. 11.8. it being the same word. Then he shows, why it pleased the
Lord thus to pound him; for says he, Thou shall make his Soul an Offering for
Sin; or thou shall make his Soul a Guilt Offering. Then in ver. 11. he shows
what this making his Soul a Guilt Offering consisted in, viz. bearing their
Iniquities; for he says expressly, He shall bear their Iniquities, Yavonoth-am
hu isbal, their very Iniquities himself he shall bear, or carry, as a Porter
carries away a pack. He don't mince the matter, or say with the Bishop, he
shall only bear the Punishment due to their Iniquities, and in a Sense the
Guilt on the Offenders complying, but he says roundly, He shall bear their
Iniquities; that is, those very Iniquities which deserved the Punishment before
mentioned. And the Scripture foreseeing what distinctions and evasions would be
made, the Holy Ghost to fortify and complete the matter, sums up all in the
last Verse, and says, He poured out his Soul unto death, and he BARE the Sin
of many. Here is another word for bearing, and the proper word it is for
bearing away, Chete rabbim nasa, the Sin of many he bare. Now put all these
together, and can the Wit of Man, or Wisdom of Angels, find out Words more
plain and full, more clear and nervous, for Christ's bearing our Sins, our very
Sins? The blessed Lord knowing what shifts, windings and turnings, would be
made to evacuate, to exinanitiate this great Point of Christ's being made Sin,
and bearing our Sins, therefore in his Grace and Wisdom, to stop all mouths, he
reiterates the Expression and delineates the matter with all the Flowery
Varugation, to invite our ^ttention and consent, that can be imagined, and so
to obviate the Objections of Men, of corrupt Minds, that cannot endure this
sound Doctrine, That Christ bare our very Sins; therefore the Lord says, The
Lo^d laid our Iniquity on him, Hiphgiya b-o yavon; and again, He shall bear
their Iniquities, I^ball yavonoth am; and again, His Soul was made a
Sin-Offering, and he bare the Sin of many: All full home to the Point. And that
which makes it most conspicuous, is God's making Christ Asham, in ver. 10. we
render it, When thou shall make his ^oul an Offering for Sin: But the Bishop
knows full well, that Asham. in the Hebrew, is the proper word for Guilt. So
that the strict rendering that which we make to be, Thou shall make his Soul an
Offering for Sin, which in Hebrew is, Tasim naphsh-o Asham) it is, Thou shall
constitute his Soul Guilt, where Guilt (we may easily see) is put for
Guilt-Offering, but the very words are, Thou shall constitute his Soul Guilt;
that is, God himself in laying our Sins, and our Iniquities, and our
Transgressions, on his Dear Son, he therein did constitute, or make the Soul of
Christ to be Guilt, or a Guilt-Offering; which directly answers that direful
word of the Apostle, God made him to be Sin for us. And now is all this, by our
new sort of Divinity, dwindled to his bearing of Punishment only? Dr. Harris,
of the Famous Assembly at Westminster, was very free in this Case, and says,
This would look like Injustice in God, to punish his Son as guilty, if he had
not laid on him, or imputed to him, those Sins that deserved that Punishment.

. CXLIII.
There are many other Scriptures, that show plainly that Christ bare the very
Sins of the Elect; that is a famous one where God's Name is proclaimed, Exodus
34.6. there he styles himself Jehovah, God Merciful and Gracious, etc.
forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin. Here Is the Name of the Blessed
Jehovah at length; but it is to be noted, the word in the Hebrew, which is by
our Translators rendered Forgiving, is nose, which is properly bearing, and so
is used at least 100 times in Scripture, and is the same word as is in Isa. 53.
last, he Bare the Sin of many it is, nasa chete Rabbim. And it is to be lamented,
that our Translators should not as well translate it so here in Exodus 34. as in
Isa. 53.12. so that the plain Name of God is among other glorious Titles, he
is, nose yavon, etc. bearing Iniquity, Transgression and Sin, that is, our Lord
Jesus, Jehovah, our Righ^eousness, he is Gracious and Merciful in this, that he
has borne away our Iniquity, Transgression and Sin: Here lies the transcendent
^ender Mercy, and the Riches of God's Grace, that the Lord Jesus has ^orn, and
born away our Iniquity, our very Iniquity; so says the Blessed God; but this
cannot go down in the shallow Reason of poor Man, till God shine with the
glorious Light of the Spirit, to convince him, and enable him to believe it,
because God faith it. The like Expression we have in Psalm. 32 1. Blessed is the
Man whose Transgression is forgiven; it is the same word for forgiven, it is
nesu. O the Blessedness of the Man whose Transgressions are born away, that is,
by Christ, who bare the Sin of many; so in Verse 5. I said, I will confess my
Transgressions unto thee, and thou forgavest the Iniquity of my Sin; it is in
Hebrew, ve attah nasatha yavon chattash-i, and thou have born away the Iniquity
of my Sin. He did not only bear the very Sin, but he bare also the Iniquity of
it, all the Iniquity that was in his Sin, in his great and crying Sins, all the
Guilt and Obliquity in it; God says of it, that it was borne away, let Man
mince it as he pleases, God says, It is borne away. So in many more
Scriptures, nose is translated forgiving, whereas the proper rendering is, it is
borne away. As for the proper word for forgive, that we have in 1 Kings 8.30 in
Solomon's Prayer, salachta, When thou hear, forgive; which in the Hebrew is,
ve-shamayta ve-salachta; and thou hear, and do thou forgive. Thus we have
plenty of Testimonies in the Old Testament, that the very Sins of God's People
were born away.

. CXLIV.
The New Testament concurs in the same way of expressing Christ's taking away
our very Sins, as in 1 John 3, 5. The Son of God was manifested to take away
our Sins: He not only bare the Punishment, but he bare the very Sins; and he
bare them so effectually, as to take them away; and therefore he is called, The
Lamb of God, that takes away the Sin of the World, John 1.29. How could he
take them away, if he bare only the Punishment, upon account of the Guilt laid
on him on the Offenders compliance, whereas the Fault is denied to be laid on
him: So that with our New Divinity, he took away Faultless Sin, which in most
Men's Opinions, must be no Sin at all: But the Scripture is plain, He took away
Sin, he appeared to put away Sin, by the Sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9.26. So
that to insist on Christ's bearing Punishment for Sin, and not bearing the Sin
it self, is not Scripture Dialect; we shall lose the Gospel, and our Christian
Religion, if we forsake Scripture Terms, especially in this great Case, of
Christ's being made Sin, and bearing our Sin, and taking it quite away, so as
never, by God, to be remembered more; for these are his words, their Sins, and
their Iniquities, I will remember no more, Heb 9.22. and repeated, for the
Confirmation of that which Flesh and Blood cannot receive, in Heb. 10.17. Now
can any one imagine, that when our Lord Jesus took away Sin, by his Death and
Oblation of himself on the Cross, that he left the Guilt, or the Fault behind.
This is Nonsense, to take away Faultless Sin, we should be but little the
better for the Death of Christ. If he left the Guilt or Fault for us to remove
by Repentance, or any of our good Works, which at best are so far from helping
to wash away the Guilt or Fault, that they need to be washed in the Blood of
Christ, to take away their own Guilt and Fault; and the making one Debt for our
Lord Jesus, to satisfy even that of the Fault in our best Works, is a strange
way for our clearing our selves from a former Debt or Fault.

. CXLV.
I would humbly recommend to all that stagger in this Point, but especially to
the Dignified Persons of the Church of England, to look again and again into
the Sound Fundamental Doctrines of the Church, as they are exemplified in the
Homilies, appointed, by several Acts of Parliament, to be read in the Churches,
when there is no Sermon; which Acts have never been yet repealed; and I may
say, are as necessary in this Degenerate Age, of the evacuating the great
Truths of our Religion, as when first made. These Homilies speak home to the
Point that the Bishop is upon, of Christ's bearing our Sins; Those Holy
Servants of the Lord that composed them, soon after the Nations coming out of
the Blind Popish Religion, they say, in the second Sermon of Man's Misery,
thus, He (Christ) paid our Ransom to God with his own Blood, and with that he
CLEANSED us from our Sin. They don't say he bare the Punishment only, but he by
his Blood (shed on the Cross then at that time) he cleansed us from our Sins:
How could that be, if our Sins, our very Sins, were not then translated to
Christ? as Dr Crisp, from the Scripture, and these Homilies, says. So that for
Mr. Williams, or the Bishop, or any Man, to say, it is near Blasphemy, to say
our very Sins were laid on Christ, is to run a Dagger to the Heart of the
Doctrine of the Church of England, and to evade plain Scripture, as well as to
make Dr Crisp an Antinomian for it; for the Doctor herein runs parallel to the
Sound Orthodox Doctrine of the Church, for which, besides the main Bulwark of
the Scripture, he has many Acts of Parliament to back him from the Slanders of
the Despisers of the Free Grace of God.

. CXLVI.
I being now perusing these Homilies, and considering how the Reverend Bishop,
in his Letter, insists so much on Conditions, required by God of Man, in order
to God's Favor, I make bold to make a little Remark, how much the Bishop
differs from those Ancient Doctors of the Church, and from himself, if he be
true to his Subscription to the Doctrines of the Church. First, let us see what
the Bishop says; then, what the Homilies say. In Page 67, the Bishop says, I
could easily prove, that in all the Transactions between God and Mankind, some
Conditions on our side were required in order to his Favor: So it was in the
State of Innocence, (a tydy Argument) so it continued after Man's Fall -- But I
pass over these, and come to the Terms of Salvation, as declared by Christ
himself -- The main Business of his Preaching, was to put Men upon performing
such Conditions as were necessary to their Salvation -- Promising Blessedness
to the Humble, Merciful, Pure in heart, Matt. 5.3, 4, etc. What do these things
mean, if they be not Conditions on our parts, necessary in order to Happiness?
-- But (God) he still insists on our own endeavors, by striving to enter, etc
Do not these note the necessity of the Performance of Conditions on our side?
And therefore all Imaginary Notions, of such a Change of Persons as has no
regard to any Act of ours, is wholly repugnant to the main Scope and Design of
the Gospel. Thus the Bishop. What is become here of the whole Tenor of the
Gospel, we are Saved by Grace, being Justified freely by his Grace, through the
Redemption that is in Jesus, not of Works, lest any boast, this is thrust quite
out of doors; for what are these Conditions, and these Acts of ours, but Works,
which though called for, and necessary to glorify God by way of Service and
Thanks, yet not any way to Justify us, or Save us, For we are Saved by Grace,
and not of Works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace. It Is for another end, that
all our Holiness is called for, to Repent, be Humble, Pure of Heart, and
Merciful: It Is to magnify God, that has saved us by Christ: Saints shall be
Holy, Humble, Pure of Heart in Heaven: Is that in order to get God's Favor?
No; but to serve and glorify God for his Favor; and we are to do the Will of
God, as near as we can, on Earth, as it is done in Heaven; not to get Heaven
(which Christ alone has bought for us) but to magnify God for giving himself,
Son and Spirit to us; and for giving Heaven, and all Spiritual Blessings, with
him, begun in this Life, and perfected above, to make our Works Conditions on
our parts, to get Heaven, is to Rob our Lord Jesus of his Crown and Glory, and
to set it on the Head of our sorry imperfect Works. But besides the whole
Current of the Gospel, that we are saved by Grace, let us see what the Bishop
has signed to, and is dignified by, even the Doctrines of the Church of
England, and they are clear for our Interest in Christ, and Salvation, to be
all of Grace; they drive us from all Works of our own, and say, in that second
Sermon of Man's Misery, No part of our Justification is of our selves, no part,
not the least dram of our Works is to come in for any share in our
Justification. And in the next line they say, Our Justification comes only by
Jesus Christ: Here is not the least tittle of our Acts of Obedience insisted
on, or Gospel-Conditions, to get Salvation, it is only by Christ; all they
insist on, is to render Thanks to God for Free Salvation by Christ, as it
follows, What Thanks, worthy and sufficient, can we render to him? Let us burst
forth with joyful Voice, praising this Lord of Mercy. Then they reiterate our
not being able to do any thing of our selves, wholly to renounce our selves,
and say, very unlike the Bishop's Letter, In our selves we may not glory, which
of our selves are NOTHING but Sinful; neither may we rejoice in any Works we
do. How! nothing but Sinful; and no rejoicing in any Works we do; May we not
Joy in performing the Conditions, and doing Acts to obtain God's Favor? No,
no; there is no rejoicing in any thing, for we are nothing but Sinful: As for
Conditions to get God's Favor, they knew none but Jesus Christ, he was the
great Condition, he being the great, only, complete Savior, the Alpha and
Omega, first and last, in our Salvation. This Doctrine would be accounted Rank
Antinomian^sm in Dr. Crisp, a dangerous Error, to take Men off from good Works,
to tell them, we are nothing but Sinful, and we may not rejoice in any Works we
do. But this is honest, good, sound Orthodox, yea, glorious Doctrine, in the
Hearts of those that have tasted of Salvation by Free Grace; and is
established, as I said, and need say again, over and over, by Parliament, and
subscribed to by all the Bishops and Ministers of the Church of England, and
that which, I conceive, they are bound still to read in their Parishes, when
there is no Sermon, which is much neglected: And hence it is, that Men warp
from their own avowed Doctrines, which they get their Living by: Which Neglect,
the Governors of the Church would do well to see rectified, or rather His
Majesty in Parliament, for the Defection from the true Doctrine of the Gospel
is great. For which plain dealing, need I beg the Bishops Pardon.

. CXLVII.
They proceed to evacuate our doing good Works, in order to get Salvation by
them, and say farther, When we were perished, he saved us: And all these
heavenly Treasures are given us, not for our Deserts, or good Deeds, which of
our selves we have none (mark that we have none) but of his mere Mercy freely.
Where do they leave room for Conditions, to make us meet for an Interest in
Christ? Not a tittle of that; it is (they say) of mere Mercy freely. They
proceed and say, If all this be freely, for whose sake is it? and answer
roundly, Truly for Christ's sake; for whose sake God is ('it is already done, God
is) fully satisfied, pacified, and set at one with Man; He is the Lamb of God,
that takes away the Sins of the World. They aver, that God is now already
pacified with Man; nay, and set at one with Man: They also scruple not to say,
That Christ took away our very Sins; and enforce it from that excellent
Scripture, With that one Oblation he has made perfect, for evermore, them that
are Sanctified. And this excellent Sermon they conclude a passage, which is for
the great abasing of Man, to take him off from trusting to his complying with
the Terms of the Gospel, or expecting to get God's Favor, as the Bishop does,
by any thing that we can do. Thus they conclude, which I recommend to all that
set up for doing so, as to expect acceptance with God for it, Let us learn to
know our selves (say they) without any cracking, and confess, that as of our
selves comes all Evil and Damnation, so likewise of him comes all Goodness
and Salvation. This must sound harsh in our new Neonomian Divinity, nay, with
some that pretend to go much nearer the Gospel strain, That nothing but Evil,
nothing but Damnation, comes of our selves: What is our Prayers, Tears, Alms,
Fasting, nothing but Evil, nothing but Damnation? Sure you great and good
Reformers, you mistake. No, we are sure we are in the right: We don't say, you
must not do good Works; no, not for a World: But we say, all our best
Righteousness, in point of Justification, or acceptance with God, as it is of
our selves, as it is defiled and tainted by our corrupt Natures, so it is
nothing but Evil, and so it is nothing but Damning. Now we see (may our Modern
Opposers of free Justification by Christ alone, without any Works or Conditions
of ours, say) how you have tainted Dr. Crisp; we see it is you have helped him
to be such an Antinomian, by putting such a slur on good Works, on our best
Deeds, as to say, from us comes all Evil and Damnation, and nothing but Sinful.
No, say they, if any have taught him, it is the same that taught us, and that is
the Word of God, which says, all our Righteousness is as filthy Rags. Nay, we
learnt it from the Apostle, who said, after his Conversion, his Righteo^sness
was Dung. This we learnt also from the Church of God of old, when she was in a
sad pickle to gain God's Favor for an Interest in Christ, in Ezekiel. 16. When
thou wast in thy blood, I said to thee, Live: That was the time of Love. Thus
we see God sees not as Man sees; that which to Man would have been a time of
Loathing, to God was a time of Love. The like case we have in the Apostle Paul,
what good Deeds did God insist on with him (as the Bishop pleads) that he might
gain God's Favor, when he was breathing out Blood and Slaughter against Christ
in his Members, then it was our Blessed Lord Jesus made it a time of his Love:
For which, to him be Honor and Glory in the Churches, for ever and ever.

. CXLVIII.
But the Bishop insists on it, that it is but an Imaginary Change, because
(says he) it is not proved, that Christ is that Sinfulness that we were, by
his being made Sin, and we are the same Righteousness as he is, we being made
the Righteousness of God in him, the Bishop says, Here is a Change supposed,
but I do not find it proved. What, not proved, when it is backed with plain
Scripture, That he was made Sin for us, and we made the Righteousness of God.
Does not this of necessity prove a Change? Could Christ possibly be made Sin
for us, without taking on him our Persons? Would you have it, That Christ was
made Sin for himself? That would be horrid Blasphemy: But to be made Sin for
us, must infer, That he did truly bear, or sustain, our Persons, which is the
Change argued for: Or if not, then he did not bear our Sins. And if so, What Is
become of the Gospel, and our eternal Salvation? For if Christ did not bear our
sins, as our Surety and Representative, as our Head, and sustaining our
Persons; then we are yet in our Sins, and there remains no more Sacrifice for
sins; so we must dye in our sins, and Christ died in vain, but Absit: So on the
other hand, We are made the Righteousness of God, that is, of God-Man Jesus
Christ: Is not here a Change of Persons? we Righteous in the Person of Christ,
or in Christ, having his Righteousness put upon us, imputed to us by God, which
is not an Imaginary, but a real Imputation, and putting it upon our Persons;
the Righteousness of God being unto and upon all that believe, Romans 3.22. And
so we the blessed Ones, to whom the Lord imputes Righteousness without Works,
or any Acts of ours, to get into God's Favor, Psalm. 32.1. though this is
strenuously argued against by the Bishop.

. CXLIX.
The Bishop says, This is no ground to build our Faith on, viz. This Change of
Persons, that Christ was made Sin for us, and we the Righteousness of God in
him. I say, God help us, if this be not good firm rocky Ground to build our
Faith on, I am sure other Foundation can no Man nor Church lay, than Jesus
Christ the Lord our Righteousness, to build on; That he was made Sin for us,
that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him; and that we might
receive thereby, the Blessings of Abraham. from him, that in his Seed, which is
Christ, all the Families of the Earth might be blessed with Believing Abraham.

. CL.
I might refer the Bishop again to the Doctrines of the Church; (whereof he is
an Honorable Presider), which, in this Case, run very clear Streams from the
Fountain of Israel; and they (as I quoted before, out of the first part of the
Sermon of Salvation) are wonderful clear, for such a Change as the Doctor
affirms, and Mr. Williams denies, saying, So that Christ is now the
Righteousness of all them that truly do believe in him. He for them paid their
Ransom by his Death, he for them fulfilled the Law in his Life; so that now IN
HIM, and BY HIM, every true Christian Man may be called a fulfiller of the Law.
This Golden Sentence, which might be for an Ornament in Gold Letters, in every
House in England, does fully vindicate, to a Tittle, Dr. Crisp's Change of
Persons, Christ himself is their Righteousness, he paid Ransom for them, they
were fulfillers of the Law in him, and by him. What can be more full to the
Point? I hope the Bishop will not charge these great Men, the Composers of this
Sermon, as he has done the Doctor, with an imaginary unproved Change.

. CLI.
One word more to the Bishop's Argument, to prove that it is but an imaginary
Notion, to think that we are completely Righteous, by the Righteousness of
Christ, without any act of ours; which Argument of his is in these words, I
could easily prove, that in all the Transactions between God and Mankind, some
Conditions were required on our side, in order to his favor: So it was in the
State of Innocence, so it continued after Man's Fall; as it appears by those
words of God to Cain, If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted; if thou
do not well, Sin lies at the door? Genesis 4.7. It Is strange so great a Man
should offer so weak an Argument, to argue from a state of Innocence, or from
the state of Reprobate Cain, or from the Covenant of Works, what belongs to the
Elect under the Covenant of Grace, and under the Gospel, where Works and Grace
are made opposite Terms; If of Works, then no more of Grace, says the Apostle.
Was not Abel first accepted, and then his Offering? Is not the first Promise
all of Grace, He (Christ) shall bruise thine (the Devil's) Head? And is not the
last Promise the like, Whoever will, let him take of the Water of Life freely?
But by the Bishop's Doctrine, a clever way is made to overthrow the whole
Gospel, To you is born a Savior, and to subvert the Orthodox Doctrine of the
Church of England at once, by bringing from the Dead the Covenant of Works, to
be saved by our doing well, and not by Christ's doing and dying for us: Whereas
Abel's Sacrifice was accepted, he himself being first accepted, and his
Sacrifice being offered in Faith; but Cain and his Sacrifice rejected, being
not offered in Faith, not looking to Jesus alone for Salvation by him. The
Bishop seems to run counter diametrically against the Apostle, who argues
strenuously, Not of Works (of no sort, kind or degree,) lest any boast; and by
the Deeds of the Law shall no Flesh he justified: He sums it up in Ephesians. 2. By
Grace ye are saved, through Faith; and that not of your selves: it is the Gift
of God: Not of Works, lest any boast: And Christ is the end of the Law for
Righteousness, to every one that believes. Thus the Scripture is plain against
this Argument of the Bishop, That our performing of Conditions, must be in
order to gain God's Favor.

. CLII.
Then for the Doctrine of the Church, see what that says of Conditions, or of
any Works of ours, to gain God's Favor. In the second Sermon of Salvation, the
good Christians of those days, that were singed by the Popish Fires in Queen
Mary's days, they tell us, So that the true understanding this Doctrine, That
we be justified by Faith freely without Works, or that we be justified by Faith
in Christ only, is not that this our own Act, to believe in Christ, or this our
Faith in Christ, which is within us, does justify us. A Sentence fit to be
engraven in every Church in England, in order to take Men from trusting to
their Repentance, or good Works. The like again is in the same Sermon, as
follows, We must renounce the Merit of Faith, Hope, Charity, and all other
Virtues and good Deeds -- And we must trust only in God's Mercy, and that
Sacrifice, which our High Priest and Savior, Christ Jesus, once offered -- As
great, and as goodly, a Virtue as lively Faith is, yet it puts us from it
self, and remitteth, and appoints us unto Christ, for to have only by him
Remission of our Sins. Observe these Eminent Stars, of the first Magnitude, in
the Heaven of that Church of Old, they are so far from bringing in our
Repentance, Charity and good Deeds, or any act of ours, to obtain Favor with
God, which the Bishop pleads for, that they exclude Faith it self, as having
any hand in justifying us, any farther than as it remitteth us to Christ. But
alas! how is our Gold become Dross? How are our great Men fallen from the Pure,
Primitive Doctrines of the Church of England? And though they live splendidly,
by subscribing to these Doctrines, yet in their Preaching and Writing they
miserably warp (as here in part) from them. Witness the setting up some Acts of
ours to be done, in order to obtain God's Favor. And because God treated with
Adam, on account of Do and live, therefore it is supposed monstrously, that Men,
when dead in Sins, must work for Life; or as the Bishop, The Ministry of
Reconciliation in St. Paul, is wholly founded on Conditions on our side, which
he calls Acts of ours, and may as well be called our good Works: And all this
because the Apostle prayed them to be reconciled to God, which cannot well be
construed to be more, than to pray them to accept the Reconciliation which God
had made of Sinners to himself, by Christ at his Death: For if, as the Apostle
says, God was in Christ, reconciling the World to himself, then the Work was
done when Christ cried out on the Cross, It is finished. And if the word of
Reconciliation was committed to the Apostles, to publish to the World the
Reconciliation that God had made of Sinners to himself by Christ, what could
his Ambassadors mean, in praying Sinners to be reconciled to God, but to accept
of what he had mentioned before, of the act done long before, viz. That God had
reconciled Sinners to himself by Christ; and to let them know, that they were
some of the reconciled ones, if they would accept thereof, and take these
Waters of Life freely, and so accept the Exhortation, as Titus did, 2 Cor. 8.17.

. CLIII.
O! how sad is it to eclipse the glorious Gospel Truth, That our Sins were laid
by God on Christ, as the Doctor insists on it, while the Bishop is pleased to
load it with such very bad Consequences, as might deter the weak and
unconsidering from believing the plainest Positions in the Scripture, viz. That
the Lord laid on him the Iniquity of us all, and he bare the Sin of many, by
the Bishop's saying, This makes us apt to lessen the Divine Perfections, and
our just sense of the difference of Good and Evil, and our Obligations to all
sorts of Duties. Cujus contrarium, Nothing more contrary: For what can honor
more the Glory of God's Holiness, and the Infiniteness of his Grace and
Goodness, than his sending his own Eternal Son to undergo that horrid Task, by
his own consent, of bearing our Sins, that we might be free? And what greater
Argument, of the difference of Good and Evil, than Christ's suffering so great
an Evil, as the bearing our Sins, that we might have so great a Good as
Reconciliation to God, Pardon and Eternal Salvation, thereby? And what greater
spur, to all the Duties of Holiness, than our being delivered from all our
Enemies, Sin, Death and Hell, by the precious Blood of his Dear Son? O! what an
engagement is this to serve him, without fear, all the days of our Lives? And
this Love of God in Christ, being shed abroad in our Hearts, will constrain us
so to do, much more than all the thundering Terrors of the Law, which only work
Condemnation. But this Grace of God bringing Salvation, this teaches
effectually to deny ungodliness, and to live righteously, etc. Therefore I
humbly conceive the Bishop is out, in saying, It makes us apt to lessen the
Divine Perfections; whereas all the Torments in Hell, of all final Unbelievers
to all Eternity, cannot so heighten and glorify the Justice and Holiness of
God, as our Lord Jesus shedding his precious Blood, which is called the Blood
of God, does heighten and glorify both his Holiness and his Grace, to all that
believe in this Lord Jesus, and accept of him, and this way of Salvation by
him, and him alone.

. CLIV.
But the frightful Charge against Dr. Crisp, is, That this Change of Persons
makes Christ the Sinner; then Christ is the Murderer, and the Adulterer, not
David. I answer, Could not Christ bear the Sin, and be the reputed Criminal,
without his being really, and personally, the Sinner? What more common, among
Men, than for a Surety to bear the burden of that Debt which he never
contracted a penny of, yet lies in Goal for the whole, and before he comes out
pays the whole? So our Lord Jesus, standing in our place, paid the whole, as
the voluntary Surety in our stead, and yet was no more the Murderer, than David
was the Christ: But he took David's Person on him, and put himself on David to
be his Righteousness, as David sweetly sings, O God my Righteousness, Psalm.
4.1. But the great Jealousy is, That Men think, if Christ did really bear the
Sins of the Elect, the very Murder and Adultery of David, etc. that this did
defile and taint the Holy Nature of Jesus Christ; and so they would infer, that
the Free Grace Teachers would be saved by a defiled, polluted Savior: Whereas
there is nothing more inconsistent; for there is none that believes the
infinite, incomprehensible Holiness and Purity of our Lord Jesus, Holy with all
the perfection of Holiness, as God his Eternal Father is Holy, but must
conclude, it is impossible that his Holy Nature should be tainted or polluted
by the Sins of the Elect, charged upon him, and lying upon him; for if instead
of bearing the Sins only of all that the Father had given to him, he being
God-Man, he had born the Sins of Ten Thousand Worlds full of Sinners, they
could not have defiled his Holy Nature, there being an infinite disproportion
between his infinite Holiness, and Man's finite Sins; so that they could no
more defile him, than a Viper's, or a Toad's, spitting Poison against the Sun
can defile the Sun: Therefore I say with boldness, If we believe our Lord Jesus
to be true God, and consider the infinite Purity of this Holy God, our Lord
Jesus Christ, in our Humane Nature, we cannot conceive that this Humane Nature
could possibly be tainted or contaminated by his being made Sin for us, and by
bearing our Sin; for the same Scripture that says, God made him to be Sin for
us, says also, He knew no Sin; that is, so as to be in his Holy Person guilty
of any Sin of his own, or to allow of any Sin to go unpunished.

. CLV.
It would do well for all that stumble at our Sins, our very Sins being by God
laid on Christ, and he, as our Surety, made Sin for us; and that think, that
this will lessen the Divine Perfections, and our Sense, of the difference of
Good and Evil; to consider that our Lord Jesus is called by the same Name as
the Sacrifices of old were called, that had the Sins of the People laid on
them, they were called Sin, so is our Lord Jesus. Nay, he compares himself to
the Serpent; Was the Serpent cursed beyond all the Beasts of the Field? Christ
is said to be made a Curse for us: Did the Brazen Serpent lifted up, heal all
that looked to it, of their Stings of the Fiery Serpents? So says our Lord
Jesus, As the Serpent was lifted up, shall the Son of Man be, That whosoever
believes in him, (that being taken for looking to him and being Saved) he
shall not perish, but have everlasting Life. Can any sober Christian think,
that God himself would lessen the Divine Perfections of his Nature, or of his
Son Jesus who is one with himself? Whom he charges all Men to Honor, as they
Honor the Father, by his giving up his Son to Death for us all; and by putting
our Sins on him, and giving the Name of Sin; and comparing him to the Serpent
for being a Curse. We should rather, from hence, learn the Infinite Love of the
Father and the Son, and his Infinite Hatred of Sin; insomuch as nothing could
expiate it, or take out the Stain of it from us, but the Blood of him that was
God.

. CLVI.
And because our whole Concern, to all Eternity, depends on God's making Christ
to be Sin for us, and thereby glorifying the Divine Perfections of his Wisdom,
Holiness and Goodness, not lessening them (as is intimated.) I think it may, to
some, be useful, to give an Instance or two of the Sacrifices, that had the
Sins of the People laid on them, how they, as Types of Christ, were called Sin,
they are in near 100 places called Sin and Guilt, and yet at the same time they
were called Most Holy; as in Lev. 6.17. it is said of the Meat Offering, It is
most Holy as the Sin-offering and the Trepass Offering; and more plainly in v.
25. This is the Law of the sin-offering, it shall be killed before the Lord: It
is most Holy. Nay, so Holy it was, that in Verse 27. it is said, Whosoever
shall touch the flesh thereof, shall be holy. Now though these were so Holy,
yet it is to be observed, that in both these places, the 17th and 25th Verses,
that the word which we translate Sin-offering, is in the Original only Sin, the
word being Chattath: So that when the Peoples Sins were laid, by God's
appointment, on the Beast, then the Beast was, by God, called the Sin, as
Christ was called Sin, or made, by God, Sin for us, by our Sins being laid on
him; and yet notwithstanding that, the Goat had the Sins of the People laid on
him, and therefore called Sin; yet at the same time it is most Holy, or
Holiness of Holinesses, Kodesh Kadashim: In answer to which, when God made
Christ to be Sin, he says of him, That he knew no Sin, he being most Holy,
Holiness of Holinesses, untainted, undefiled with our Sins; he was at the same
time the Lamb of God, without Spot in himself, and need there was for it, for
if he had not been Holy to the Extremity of Holiness, in his own Nature and
Person, he had not been fit to be made a Sin offering for us: If he had had the
least speck of Sin in him, or could have been tainted with our Sin, he had not
then been a meet Sacrifice to take away our sin; Though he was made sin, yet it
was our sin, he was made sin for us: Was the poor Beast made sin in it self, or
for it self, when the sins of the People were laid typically on it? No sure;
for if it were, the Scapegoat could not have been led into the Wilderness, but
the sin would have sunk it down dead immediately: The sin it was made, was the
Peoples sin, as the sin Christ was made, was our sin.

. CLVII.
This may possibly be the better understood, and the more readily assented to,
by seriously considering the Infinite Perfection of the Holy Nature of the
Blessed Son of God, which was and is the same in the Man Christ Jesus, as in
the Godhead of the Father; he and the Father being one in Essence, and in all
the glorious Perfections of the Godhead. This Consideration may, by the
Operation of the Holy Spirit, reconcile our Thoughts to this Truth, That though
Christ was made Sin for us, and a Curse for us, by having our Sins laid on him,
and by his hanging on the Tree for us, yet his Holy Immaculate Person was not
in the least tainted or defiled thereby; nay, God so ordered it, that his holy
Flesh, when dead, should not see the least Corruption. This appears clear,
because the Infinite Holiness of the Godhead, in the Man Christ Jesus, was of
such Infinite Perfection in him, that the Sins of Men falling on him, they
being but Finite, must of necessity be evacuated, exinanitiated, expiated and
purged away by Infinite Perfection. As a little for Illustration, Suppose a
small drop of Water, out of a Smith's Trough, should fall on a glowing red-hot
large piece of Iron, Can this defile or hurt the Iron? No; it is immediately
evaporated in Smoke. It Is true, the Humanity of our Lord Jesus, might be, and
was, affected with our sins, so as to cry out, My Soul is troubled, but he was
not in the least infected with them, his Humanity being made perfectly Holy, by
Union and Oneness with the Divine Nature in an ineffable manner (at his very
first Conception, his Humane Nature being called that holy thing Luke 1.35.) so
that he was untainted by our sins being laid on him, which he purged away by
the offering up of himself in the Fire of God's Wrath upon him for sin.

. CLVIII.
We will suppose again, That all the Gold in the World should be put into a
vast Cauldron, and Ten hundred thousand load of Charcoal under it, and about
it, melting the Gold; and while this vast Fire is glowing with an unconceivable
heat, the Refiner should cast a small drop of Poison into the Furnace where
this boiling Gold is, Would not this drop of Poison be consumed at its first
falling into the Furnace, without defiling the Gold? So the sins of the Elect,
though they deserve Hell Fire to all Eternity on the guilty Sinners, yet these
sins, when laid on the Person of God-Man Jesus Christ, who has infinitely more
Holiness than our sins have of Deliquity or Malignity in them: When these sins
were laid on our Lord Jesus, they could no more taint our Lord Jesus, than the
drop of Poison could taint all the Gold in the Furnace. Wherefore it is said by
the Holy Spirit, when he is giving an account of the glorious Perfection of the
Divine Nature of Christ, in Heb. 1.3. calling him the Brightness (the
Effulgency) of the Father's Glory, the express Image of his Person, the
Upholder of all things by the Word of his Power: The very first, and next,
effect of all this glorious Excellency in the Person of Christ is, when he had
by himself purged our Sins: As much as to say, this great Character that is
here given to Jesus Christ, which mortifies the Socinians, is given for this
very purpose, to show us, how he, by himself, by his own glorious Perfection,
as the Brightness of the Father's Glory, when our sins were laid on him, he by
himself, without any assistance or Cooperation of us, or any Man or Angel, he
by himself, says the Holy Ghost, purged our sins, he made a perfect Expiation
of them, the glowing Holiness of the Divine Nature purged them clear away, so
as never to be remembered more; and that without any taint to himself, that
being impossible, he being the brightness of the Father's Glory, so pure and
Holy is our blessed Lord God, the Lord Jesus Christ God blessed for ever, to
whom be glory for ever.

. CLIX.
By this I hope we may see, that the Consideration of the most adorable
Holiness in our Lord Jesus, may reconcile us to such Passages as we find in the
Scripture, of his bearing our sins, and his being made Sin and a Curse for us,
without any ground of charging it with such bad Consequences as the Bishop
intimates, That this tends to lessen our Reverence of the Divine Perfections,
whereas nothing can heighten our Reverence more: for this shows, that his
Divine Perfections were so Infinite, that by bearing our Sins in his Body on
the Tree, and by offering himself, with our Sins on him, a Sacrifice to God for
Sin, he thereby expiated and purged all the Sins of all the Elect; one of
which, by reason of the infinitely Holy Nature and Law of God, would have sunk
all the Angels in Heaven to Hell, if by God laid on them: Therefore, instead of
diminishing our Esteem of the Divine Perfections, because Christ has borne
away our Sins for ever, freely, without any Conditions or Works of ours to
induce him: Let us, by all means, endeavor to magnify them; and for the
Riches of the Grace of God, and our Lord Jesus therein, Let us fall down and
adore him that sits on the Throne, and the Lamb in the midst of the Throne, for
that he, of his free Grace, has loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his
Blood; and sing with the four Beasts, and 24 Elders, with the People in the
four parts of the World, and with the Ministers of our Lord Jesus, Thou art
worthy, for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy Blood (without
one word of Condition, but) with thy Blood, thy Blood, thy Blood. And let us
say as that Number did, which was ten thousand times ten thousand, and
thousands of thousands, with a loud Voice, with highest Acclamations, Worthy is
the Lamb that was slain, to receive Power, Riches, Wisdom, Strength, Honor,
Glory, Blessing: And every Creature on the Earth, under the Earth, and in the
Sea, heard I, saying, (says St. John) Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power, be
unto him that sits on the Throne, and the Lamb for ever. And the same says he
that begs Pardon of God for his Failings herein, and all other his Sins and
Unworthinesses, and of any Person that thinks he is not heartily dealt with
herein; with Thanks to the Bishop for his genteel treating the Root and Stock
of the happy, though unworthy Branch of Dr. Crisp.

July 23. School. Hananiel, Philalethes.

FINIS.
Heads handled in this DISCOURSE.
A.
ANtisozzo, for all to strive for the Truth. 1 -- That many Clergymen are
against their Doctrine. 98 -- For a possibility of all to be saved. 33 --
Antinomian li^e Dr. Crisp in. 107, 108 Altum Silentium of the Reprimand of
Williams. 13 Antinomianism called Heresies, Socinianism but Errors. 19 The
Anomia of Sin Christ did not bear, says the Rebuker. 23 Actual Remission at
Christ's Death, Dr. Twiss. 25 Awake O Sword, shows Christ a reputed Sinner. 24
We apprehend that for which we are apprehended. 26 The Ass and Ox, of Works
and Faith, not draw together. 26 Arminianism that our Faith, as a Work,
justifies. 28 Atonement at Christ's Death, Pemble. 29 The Asse^bly say, the
Debt paid at Christ's Death. 31 Actual Pardon before we had a Being, Pemble. 32
Adam's Sin we sinned not, said the Rebuker. 33 The Assembly say, only the Elect
saved. 33 and 72 Abounding Sin makes Grace abound. 38 Angels Life differs from
Saints. 43 Accursed to say, God allows Sin in his Law. 50 Allen, the
Stage Player, the Devil appeared to. 59 Agars Humility condemns the Rebuker. 74
Apocryphal he calls the Change of Persons. 75 How his Antinomians call Christ a
Sinner. 77 Adult and Infants saved the same way. 81 Accursed that brings
another Gospel. 83 Apocryphal Tobias brought in. 91 Abhorred of God how Christ
was. 89, 104, 130, 131 Apology for Mr. A -- as if Ambodexter. 135 Abel first
accepted, then his Offering. 151 Christ affected, not infected, by being made
Sin. 157
B.
The Bible called for again by the Rebuker. 4 Dr. Bates to Mr. Cole about Dr.
Crisp. 17 Branches in Christ before Fruit. 26 It Is betraying the Gospel, to
deny Christ's being Sin for us. 67 Bald Head they called Elisha, and what
followed. 68 Buried with Christ shows he sustained us. 72 Brainless Brains to
set up a Law that allows sin. 78 The Barrier of the Rebuker. 80 The Blood of
Christ the only Coin in Heaven. 83 The Bishop of Worcester's Modesty. 139 --
His way of Christ's bearing Sin. 140 -- His evading plain Scripture. 142 -- His
Arguments for Conditions. 146 and 151 Blood, Blood, Blood redeemed us. 159
C.
Crispian Heresies and Heterodoxies. 1 and 17 Of the Change of Persons. 6, 7
and 9 Dr. Crisp's Works brake not the Union. 10 Mr. Cole's Character of Dr.
Crisp's Works. 17 Dr. Chancy showed unfairness in Mr. Williams. 11 Crimes
charged on Mr. W -- owned by Mr. A --. 14 Christ first receives us, and then
gives Faith. 22 No Curse on Christ if he bare not the Fault. 23 The Call of
Christ makes Sinners Saints. 27 No Change in God's Eternal Love, Pemble. 39
convictions before Faith to be Sin is called Heresy. 40 Coalescing into Christ
another of their Heresies. 46 Christ and Believers one Mystical Person. 46
Christ made Sin, the ground of Charge of Antinomianism. 53 Calvin how Christ a
Sinner. 54 Dr. Crisp's monstrous Sense cleared. 55 -- He denies his Redeemer,
says the Rebuker. 55 The Church called Christ. 66 Commutation of Persons our
Basis. 69 Cole spit in the Devils Face at his Death. 70 Dr. Chancy proves a
Change of Persons. 73 Christ could not sin. 77 Challenging all the World a
Boldness. 74 In our Credenda to speak in the Person of Christ, as Paul. 75, 76
The Cassandrian way has its Ten Thousands. 79 Coheirs and co-body with
Christ. 90 Canonical Daniel and Tobias. 91 The Clergies subscribing what they
recant. 98 Calvin that Christ bare Wrath and took our Person. 102 The Climax in
Mr. A -- Charge against Mr. Lob. 109 Cannibals to write against Mr. Williams,
says the Rebuker. 109 Cham discovered Nakedness, so the Rebuker. 113 To
contend for the Faith. 110, 120 Dr. Castle's Poliglot for maas abhorring. 131
The Chaldee meaus abhorred. 131 Christ cleansed us at his Death, the Homilies.
145 The Change a ground for Faith against the Bishop. 149 The Change proved
from the Homilies. 150 Conditions argued for by the Bishop, and against by
Homilies. 151, 152
D.
The Elect Christ's Delight from Eternity. 18 Dead Sinners quickened by Christ.
26 The Dog Believers Faith, even when a Dog. 27 Christ's Death discharged our
Debt, the Assembly. 31 The Spirit in form of a Dove no degradation to him. 45
No denying Christ Dr. Crisp's Change. 55 To deny Sin laid on Christ is to deny
Christ. 67 David's slaying Goliath the Rebuker. 72 Degraders of God and Christ
Socinians and Neonomians are. 78 The day of the Lord coming. 79 Millions made
to be damned answered. 80 Damnati antequam nati, Austin. 80 Debt and Debtor not
to be insisted on, says Mr. A --. 82 Degrees of Obedience in being pardoned,
Mr. Williams. 88 The displeasure of God on Christ for Sin. 102, 104 The Rebuker
not delirous, as is charged. 124 The dangerous Passage in Dr. Crisp what, and
cleared. 126 Christ not defiled by our Sins explained. 154 A Drop of Poison not
defile a Ton of melted Gold. 158
E.
Epithets of Mr. Williams on Mr. Cole, etc.. 11 Exinanition called by Mr.
Williams Exaninition. 12, 145 Everlasting Love a sort of Justification. 18
Enemies reconciled by Christ's Death. 27 The Elect only saved, say the
Assembly. 33 Elisha mocked at, so Dr. Crisp by the Rebuker. 68 Rotten Eggs of
Mr. Williams's laying. 98
F.
Faith not a Condition, but hand to receive Pardon. 22 Faith not before we have
Christ, Pemble. 32 Faith necessary, but not to uncrown Christ. 34 What is not
of Faith is sin. 40 Faith indispensably necessary. 81 Faith says, I don't take
away sin, the Homilies. 88 Faith sends to Christ only, the Homilies. 152, 88
Faultless sin is what Christ bore, with Mr. Williams, etc.. 23 Forgiveness
before Faith, Twiss. 25 Freely justified by his Grace, not ours. 28 Foederal
Union of Infants. 47 Faulty Obedience allowed by God's Law, Mr. Williams. 50
Facile Representations, Christ's sufferings, William Penn. 61 Found in Christ
shows a Commutation. 72 No Foundation but Christ. 79 We fulfilled the Law in
Christ, the Homilies. 85 Fellow heirs with Christ, and fellow-body. 90 Of God's
forsaking Christ. 104 Firebrarnds cast against Free Grace. 105 The Fault of Sin
on Christ, or we bear it. 106 The Froth of Kratiste in his Rebuke. 112 His
Falsity in saying, No more subscribed to. 118
G.
Grapes not of the Rebuker's Thorns. 2 Gospel Truth of Mr. Williams
imbellish'd. 11 Life the Gift of God then not worked for. 36 Dr. Goodwin
refused by the Rebuker, for saying the Spirit himself is in Believers. 71
Grasping all Councils by the Rebuker. 74 Gratis dictum non gratiose, to say,
Dr. Crisp against Repentance. 93 The Gigantick Sophister. 117 The Guilt of Sin
how Christ bare it, Bishop of Worcester. 141 Golden Sentences in the Homilies.
152 Gold not tainted by Poison, nor Christ by Sin. 158 The Glowing holiness of
Christ purged our Sin. 158
H.
Dr. Harris of Christ's sustaining us. 9 Crispian Heterodoxies, Cole, etc. dipped
in. 17 Mr. How said, If the Doctor be an Antinomian, so am I. 17 In what Men
called Heresy, so Paul worshipped. 26 No Hurt of a Believer by Sin is called
Heresy. 38 Holiness imperfect is Sin. 41 Hilary withstood a World, so Mr.
Cole, etc.. 72 The Homilies against the Rebuker, and made Law. 72, 86, 145,
146, 147 The Homilies Antinomian as Dr. Crisp. 147 The Homilies Golden
Sentences. 152 Horrid Opinions charged by the Rebuker on Mr. Cole, etc.. 105
Hard Speeches Christ will convince of. 114 Heman's Groans under Sin little to
Christ. 134 To Honor the Son as the Father. 155 The Holiness of Christ purged
our Sins. 158
J.
Justified before called, is Heterodox they say. 17 Judgments for Scorners. 17
Justified in God's sight before called. 18 He Justifies the Ungodly. 27 --
freely by his Grace. 28 -- at Christ's Death, Pemble. 30 Justification, where
settled before now. 71 -- slid off from by the Rebuker. 99 -- not by Faith, as
our Act Homilies. 152 Injustice to punish Christ, if very Sin not on him. 23
Faith an Instrument of Justification. 30 The Ineffable Life of Christ in
Saints. 43 The Incarnation of Christ, how no Humiliation. 45 Our Imperfect
Obedience makes not accepted. 49 Imputation of Sin made Christ a Curse. 54
Judgment on Mockers of Elisha. 68 Jakin and Boaz Commutation is. 70 Jestingly
to speak of Christ, forfeit 10 l.. 89 Ismael's hand against all, so the
Rebuker. 96 Indignation of the Rebuker against Mr. Cole. 105 The Insult of the
Rebuker against Mr. Cole. 113 Ismael's mocking like the Rebuker. 114 The Joab
like Stab. 114 The Idem of the Law Christ suffered, denied by Mr. Williams. 120
The Imaginary Change of the Bishop. 148, 151 No Infection to Christ by our Sin.
157
K.
Kratiste Theophile, the Rebuker called. 19 Kicking against Pricks, to deny
Christ made Sin for us. 59
L.
Lips of Righteousness God's delight. 17 Land settled on Infants that know it
not; so our Inheritance before Faith. Pemble. 32 Mr. Laurence took up the
Rebuker at Pinner's-Hall. 33 To work from Life, not for Life, is called
Heresy. 36 Love in God perpetually the same, Pemble. 39 The Life of Saints,
how it is the eternal Life of God. 43 Of Legal Union to Christ before Faith. 47
A Law that allows Sin Mr. Williams is for. 50 Luther of Christ, a Curse, a
sinner with our sinful Person. 54 Luther on the Change of Persons. 75 -- of
Christ bearing Wrath. 102 Little sins need Christ's Blood as great.. 78
M.
Meek and lowly, learn of me. 2 They Mince Christ made sin for us. 5 Man made
Righteous, Mr. Williams's Book. 11 Dr. Manton, Christ first apprehends us. 26
It Is Monstrous to live without Union to Christ. 26 Manifestation of Pardon
prayed for. 35 Mr. Mather of Christ's Incarnation. 45 Mess of Milk kicked down,
of Christ's satisfaction. 51 Christ the Murderer falsely taxed. 53 The Monstrous
Change taxed on the Doctor. 55 Michael durst not rail as the Rebuker. 68 The
Moot point, if Socinians or Antinomians be worse. 77 Making Millions to Damn
them denied. 80 Melius inquirendum of the Rebuker. 96 Meliora speramus of Mr. A
--. 108 Christ called a Mask profanely by. 89 Misprision of Treason against
Christ, Mr. Williams. 110 The Mildness of Christ when they slept. 113 A
Marriage and no Marriage, trump'd up by A --. 113 The Mockers Judgment, and
Ismael s Mocking. 17, 68, 114 Money to be told after ones Father. 125 Maas in
Hebrew, is reprobated, abhorred. 127
N.
New Obedience not the substance of the Gospel. 3 Not New or Novel, that Christ
took our Persons. 9 Neonomians for Faith procuring Pardon. 35 Neonomian for a
Law that allows sin. 50 A Negative not an Affirmative. 113 It Is not for Nothing
to lose Peace for Truth. 120 How God Needs sin, Antisozzo. 136 Nothing but
sinful in us, the Homilies. 146, 147
O.
Objections against Mr. Williams not accounted for. 15 The Ox and Ass of
Christ, and our Works, forbidden. 26 Old Wine of Election better than New. 49
Obedience imperfect what it does. 49 Obedience not sinless Mr. Williams is for.
50 Orthodoxy in the Apostle, is Heterodoxy in the Doctor. 76 We Obeyed in
Christ, says Antisozzo. 107 Christ Odious to God, falsely charged. 126
P.
Poor Presbyterian he calls himself. 3 Christ in our Place, jeered by the
Rebuker. 4 The Punishment born by Christ only, is invented. 5, 8 Pinners-Hall
left by three, and why. 14 Pardon before Faith, says Dr. Twiss. 24 Pemble of
Grace and Faith. 29 Pemble, that Christ made not God placable. 32 Prayer for
Manifestation only of Pardon is denied. 35 Perpetual God's Love is, Pemble. 39
Plate of Gold of High Priests for Pardon. 40 Christ and Believers one Person.
46 Paul the Apostle, why not called an Antinomian. 53 -- his differing with
Barnabas. 97 Our Person taken by Christ, Mr. Calvin. 54 Mr. Pen's facile
Representation, Christ's Sufferings were. 61 How we take Christ's Person. 66
Paul called Apocryphal, how by the Rebuker. 75 (...), Philosophers to deny a
Change. 75 I forgave in the Person of Christ. 75 A Pins head stolen, damning in
it self. 78 The Potters power over the Clay. 80 A Pother about Conditionality.
81 Proper satisfaction denied by the Rebuker. 82 The Parliament against jesting
with Christ, as the Rebuker. 89 Paulting Mr. Williams in the Pillery with
rotten Eggs. 98 Paper to be saved, says the Rebuker, to avoid the great point.
99 Pelagius to be writ against by all. 1 and 110 Peace not to be purchased with
loss of Truth. 120 When Perished we are saved without our Works, Homilies. 147
Poison spit at the Sun don't defile it. 154 The Perfections of God illustrated
by Allegory. 157 Poison on Gold not defile it. 158 Christ by himself purged our
sins. 158
Q.
Quickened by Christ when dead. 26 Christ a Quickening Spirit. 26
R.
The Righteousness of Christ only to be mentioned. 16, 194 Our Representative
being in Christ from Eternity, Clark. 18 Christ Reputed a Criminnl, he calls
Heresy. 24 Reconciliation before Faith, Pemble. 29 The Rebuker saying Christ's
death made God placable. 33 We are Righteous as Christ, How. 44, 57, 62 Raised
in Christ shows he sustained us. 72 Redintegration of the Rebuker to Mr.
Williams, occasioned his Rebuke against Dr. Crisp. 76 A Rigid satisfaction
denied by Mr. A --. 82 Christ a Ransom paid all. 82 So owned in the Homilies.
85 and 150 Rebuke before all, some that offend openly. 118
S.
Sarcasms on Mr. Lob, by Mr. A --. 2 Substance of the Gospel, that Christ came,
etc.. 3 and 6 Socinus, as the Rebuker says, Christ destitute of Righteousness,
if, etc.. 4 Sin Christ was made for us all, over and. 4 Subscribing the
Articles not sufficient. 16 Socinianism called but an Error by Mr. A --. 19
Sinless Sin Christ bare, if he bare not the Fault. 23 Our Sins owned by Christ
to be his, Psalm. 40.. 24 The Spirit in us before Faith, no Heresy. 26 Sin cast
into the Sea, to show God sees it not. 37 Sin lessens not God's Love to
Believers, Pemble. 39 All not of Faith is Sin. 40 Sinning Obedience allowed by
God's Law, Williams. 50 and 78 Sin the smallest is Damning, the Assembly. 50
Satisfaction owned by Williams, and soon spoiled. 51 Very Sin not laid on
Christ, Williams. 51 and 61 How Christ as Sinful as we. 58 Sin Glareing, what
Terror it makes. 61 Christ made our Sinfulness, if made our Sin. 63 Christ as
Surety sustains us, a Surety slighted. 65, 82 The Spirit himself in us, denied
by the Rebuker. 72 Synods never dreamt of this Change, Mr. A --. 72 Stone in
New England against Neonomians. 73 Scampering over Fathers, Councils, etc. by
the Rebuker. 75 Christ could not, cannot Sin. 77 Socinians and Neonomians
compared in allowing Sin. 78 Sins little past by of Course, they say. 78
Stealing a Pins head is Sin and Damning. 78 Scotch Church says, Christ paid
thy Debt. 85 We Sustained in Christ, by doing the Law in him, Homilies. 86 A
Stage Player Christ is, if he bare us, says the Rebukes. 89 We are (...),
Co-body with Christ. 90 A strange Strain of the Rebuker's Wrath. 93 Servant of
the Lord not to strive as Rebuker. 97 Saphiras Equivocation exceeded by
Rebuker. 117 Selling Innocence and Peace for nothing, Rebuker. 120 Satisfaction
once owned by Antisozzo. 125 Scriptures to prove Christ bare our Sin. 142
Salvation by Grace, a Spur to Sanctity. 153 The Sun not defiled by Poison spit
at it, so our Sin did not defile Christ. 154 The Serpent a Type of Christ. 155
The Sacrifices called Sin, as Christ was. 156
T.
Dr. Twiss Forgiveness before Faith at Christ's death. 25 Turn, why dye, called
the Triumph of the Law. 42 (...), how the Rebuker so. 48 and 55 God a Tyrant,
say Arminians.. 80 Tobias Canonical with a Crown. 91 -- he had not a barking
Dog. 91 Translation of Sin to Christ, Calvin. 102 Tears over Kratiste about the
Marriage. 113 The Towering Spirit of the Rebuker. 118 Truth to be sought as
well as Peace. 120
U.
Unintelligible to the Rebuker, for Christ to take our Persons. 8 Union before
Faith called an Heresy. 26 The Ungodly Justified. 27 Unconverted Justified at
Christ's death, Pemble. 30 Very Sins not laid on Christ, says Mr. Williams. 51
and 61 A Vizor Christ wears, if bear us, Rebuker. 89 The Unpardonable Sin
against Dr. Crisp, an Abuse. 93 The Untruth of the Rebuker, to say, no more
subscribed to. 115
W.
Wisdom Justified of her Children.. 2 Mr. Williams for Non-elect to be saved.
33 -- for a Law that admits Sin. 50 -- denies our very Sins on Christ. 51 --
denies and undenies a Change. 139 Works before Faith, Sin. 40 Our best Works
defiled, the Assembly. 41 A Wooden God only, for a Wooden Law to Sin. 50
Vessels of Wrath. 80 The Wish of the Rebuker answered. 85 Works necessary,
says Dr. Crisp. 94 Whaffling Whelps the Rebuker calls his Opposers. 95 Good
Works our Foundation for Salvation, Mr. Williams. 98 Waving the Doctrine of
Justification by the Rebuker. 99 Wrath of God borne by Christ. 102
FINIS.

