An Appeal for Judgment, Unto the Righteous Principle of God in every
Conscience, against the Persecutors of the INNOCENT.
A Woeful Lamentation is taken up for you, who make it your work to persecute
the innocent peaceable People of God, and do devise cursed and wicked snares,
to bring them under the penalty of the late cruel and bloody Edict, in malice
forged against the Righteous, and in greater malice by many of you put in
execution; God Eternal judge between you and us in this matter. I do challenge
you all in the fear of God, one by one (I say, our Persecutors) to make it
appear what wrong is it we have done to the Nation in general, or to any one of
you in particular, that we must be made the mark of your implacable fury, and
that nothing will serve or satiate that bloodthirsty spirit, but an utter
extinction and extermination of us all out of our native soil, where God
Eternal has given every one of us a lot; and as we are Englishmen and a
freeborn People, our Interest is as large and ample, in that lot by God
bestowed on us, as yours is who persecute us; and we have as much right to
breath in England as your very selves, (setting your places aside) seeing it is
given us of God, and enjoyed through his favor, and not of man. Must it be so,
that except we do prostrate that pre^^^^s Life that God has raised in us
through the Son of his Love, at the feet of your perverse wills, that we must
not abide in the Land of our Nativity, but be most cruelly banished from Wives,
Children and Relations? and except we will commit the deadly sin (that is) to
sin against the Light of God in the Conscience, must we be exposed to seek our
sustenance in an unknown Land, and there to spend the remnant of our days,
which are but few? the Will of our God be done, and let his Will be my Life for
ever, says my soul: But let this be unto you known, It is for well-doing, and
not for any evil, that any of you can, or ever could justly charge or accuse us
with; and in God's fear we challenge any of you our Persecutors, to prove our
Meetings seditious, or that we do, or ever did contrive Insurrections therein.
What though you have a President which ye urge, Is it anything to us? we are
clear from henceforth and for ever from that spirit; and as for any false
Charge or Accusation against us concerning our Meetings, as has been said, it
never could nor will be proved, that we were or are seditious, or Contriver of
Insurrections; Therefore God Eternal arise, and judge in the Consciences of all
concerning this thing, and make Decision, holy Father, that our Innocence may
appear to our Adversaries. And our Lives and Practives are well known unto the
People of this Nation of England, and therefore we do make our Appeal to the
Just Principle of thee in them for Judgment, and our Life in which we have
held forth the Testimony of Truth amongst them, is of a longer date and
standing than yesterday, and not a certain Sect, as has been said; for our
gathering is out of Sect and Schism, into that Life that erreth not, and in
which is no rent; And this will God Eternal in due time make known, not only to
the People of this Nation, but unto the whole World. And do not call this your
Cruel work of Persecution, Execution of Justice, as I have heard some; for the
Execution of Justice is a work of another kind, than to come with armed men
amongst a company of innocent men and women, (who are really met together in
the Peace and Fear of God, to worship him in the movings of his Power, Life and
Spirit, which is neither subject to time nor place, because that that Life and
Spirit comprehends both) and most inhumanely to hale them out, and so to lead
them before men appointed to send them to Prison, and then to drive them like
flocks of Sheep through your streets unto your dismal holes, there to remain
during the wills of our Drivers; who, because they would accelerate and hasten
their Cruel Work begun, they even take the shortest way to destroy us, by
cutting short the time ordered in their Cruel Edict, having a liberty allowed
them therein ^or that purpose. O dreadful God! is the long Imprisonment and
extent of time, all the favor that must accrue unto us (if it may be so
called) for the respite we are to have in our Native Land? My very soul bleeds
within me, to see the Cruelty and ^ard-heartedness of this Generation of men;
And all this for our well-doing, in answering the Requirings of that Life God
Infinite has raised in us in our Day and Generation. And known be ^t unto you,
this is not the Execution of Justice, but the Oppression of the Just, which
seeks no revenge against you, neither can do, ^ut leaves it to the Lord who is
a righteous Judge, and will in due ^ime recompense every one according to his
work. And is not Justice perverted, and Truth turned into a Lie amongst many of
you? cast your eyes abroad, and behold, behold, the intolerable Wickedness that
is committed here in and about this City, of all sorts; O what Swearing,
Whoring, Drunkenness, Carding, Dicing, Stage-playing, Puppit-playing, and
Mountebank Shows, with all manner of unclean, obscene, wicked and scameless
Sports and Vanities are practiced, and most of them allowed without control,
and as I have heard say, licenced by Authority. Now here is Justice to be done,
and the Execution of it would be pleasing both to God and good men.

O take pity and compassion upon the young and tender plants of this great
City, who are poisoned daily with these abominable practices abovementioned! O
turn your Sword upon these cursed vanities, which tend to nothing but the ruin
both of body and soul! My Life has been bowed down even unto death, having
felt the weight of these wickednesses committed in and about this City, and
considering with sorrow the state of the Youth and tender Plants of this place,
who are made to drink-in the poison of the Devils Drollery, poured forth of
these execrable Bottles, who manage those cursed practices abovementioned.
Consider, consider, are these Meetings to be tolerated, and to enjoy full
fruition of Liberty, and ours to be suppressed? Are these more congruent with a
righteous and well-disciplin'd Government, than Meetings to worship God Eternal
in his Spirit and in his Fear? And are they more for the Benefit and Profit of
a Nation, than they that wholly are peaceable in all their practices, as
Experience has showed, and could never be otherwise proved? Let God's just
Principle in all your Consciences answer unto these things, and give Judgment:
And what you do, or may be suffered to do unto us, we in the Will of God
forgive you; and know and be assured of this, we have no enmity unto any
particular of you whatsoever, and to such as know not what they do, we can say,
Father forgive them.

R. C.

Printed at London, in the year, 1664.


