GOD'S holy Name (...) AND HIS TRUTH EXALTED BY THE Testimony of his Faithful
Servants who have suffered the Cruel Penalty of BANISHMENT from their Native
Country by the RULERS thereof: AS ALSO An ABSTRACT of their Names, with some of
the Barbarous Dealings and Useages they received and sustained from the hands
of those Instruments that were employed in the Imbarquing of them. R.C.

Does not the Tears run down the Widows Cheeks, and her Cry is against him
that caused them, for from her Cheeks do they go up unto Heaven, and the Lord
which hears them does accept them, and the Lord will not be slack, nor the
Almighty will not tarry long from them, till he has smitten in sunder the
loins of the unmercifull, and avenged himself of the Heathen, till he have
taken away the multitudes of the Cruel, and broken the Scepter of the
Unrighteous, till he give every Man after his works, and reward them after
their devices, till he have judged the Cause of his People, and comforted them
with his mercies, Ecclesiasticus 35. ver. 15. and 18.

They are Abraham's Children who are of Abraham's faith; who forsook his native
Country, Fathers house, and his own Kindred, and followed the Lord he knew not
whither, Gal. 3.7. Genesis 12.

And they are of Cains seed who are found in Cains nature, who slew his Brother
because his own works were evil and his Brother's Righteous, 1 John 3.12.

Unto which is annexed Englands sad estate and condition lamented. (Written by
George Fox the younger, in the beginning of the year 1661.) In which are some
Prophesies that now are fulfilled and fulfilling.

Printed in the Year, 1665.

The Epistle to the Reader.
FRIEND,
THou that reads this ensuing Relation, will find what has been dispensed to
us from the hands of the men of this Generation, and as thy mind is kept cool
out of prejudice, thou will also be able to judge in thy measure concerning our
sufferings, as to ourselves we are well satisfied, and in the will of God do
rest and acquiesce: But to satisfy many who desire to be informed, this
Relation is wrote, and also in order to Record, and the reason why it is so
suddenly brought forth, is, because the Mortality of Mankind is great in this
City, where these things have been done and committed, and eternity presses
sore on this Generation, and a remisness herein might make void the record of
our testimony, which Record will have a place, amongst all the faithful
witnesses of God, for his holy truth (...) every Generation to this day, and
the very end of (...) according the actions of men in their several
Generations, is for the benefit of their Successors, and undoubted the next
Generation must judge the works of their Ancestors, and think it not strange we
receive such hard measure from the hands of the Rulers of this Nation, for the
holy record of Scriptures are fulfilled on this Generation, which says, They
shall hale you before Magistrates, and they shall imprison you; and whosoever
shall kill you shall think he does God good service: And he who spoke forth
these words suffered from the same seed that ministers our sufferings unto us;
which seed is one, even from the beginning to this day, there are but two, the
persecuting seed, and the persecuted seed, and these are known by their fruits,
For, Grapes are not gathered of Thorns, nor Figgs upon Thistles: And our
sufferings have been multiplied very much since the return of this Power, and
heightened even to BANISHMENT, which is more severe then death it self, the
Lord permiting it so to be we are content; though I must tell thee, as we are a
people and a considerable one in England, our Conditions and promises from
BREDA, and since so often repeated, was neither Imprisonment nor Banishment,
but these things with our just cause we leave to the Righteous God to judge.

R. C.

God's holy Name magnified, etc.
PErsecution in the World is no new thing, for such as manifests a holy and
blameless life, in that Generation in which they are brought forth, does
assuredly meet with it, and it has been the practice in every Generation, from
Caine downward, and all in his nature, even to this day, to Persecute God in
his appearance, in his Servants and Saints, as is plentifully seen and made
known in this our day, and Generation, which is the product of this Relation,
and the Rulers and Priests have been, and are they that act these Cruelties
upon God's holy Saints, the Priest with Tongue, the Magistrate with Fist, and
so is Persecution brought forth; and between these two, are, and have been all
the Rapes, Spoils, Injuries, Imprisonments, Deaths, Banishments, and all
manner of cruel exercises inflicted upon the People of the Lord for their
Consciences to him, and in every Generation Persecution has according to the
manifestation of God, been less or more exercised; For this is infallible, the
greater appearance of God in Flesh, the greater Persecution, raised by the
Devil in Flesh, and here is the mystery of the two Seeds showed, and each Seed
bears its Fathers Image, and so they come to be known, and eternal enmity is
placed between them, therefore the holy Witnesses for God in every Generation,
have sustained more or less of Persecution, according as is said, to the
manifestation and appearance of God in them, raised up and held forth in
Testimony unto the World, and as this appearance of God comes to be lived in
and unto, then the World is testified against, that the deeds thereof are evil;
And here first begins Persecution, and those that persevere in faithfulness
unto what God has manifested, they meet with such measure from Rulers and
Priests, as is hereafter declared and we the People of God, called Quakers have
by Gods permission felt the weight of their persecuting hands this many years,
even ever since the Lord has called us forth to testify unto his truth in this
Nation, and our sufferings have both abounded and multiplied in these few years
past: and as sufferings (...) abounded, so has the love of God increased unto
us; we (...) living Witnesses of it, praises, praises unto our God for ever,
and we have a Witness for God in every Persecuter's Conscience in England of
what rank or quality soever, that our sufferings are not neither have been for
evil doing, for if by their Provocations, they could have drawn us forth to
have retaliated unto them in the same spirit the measure unto us, they had
gotten their ends, but O the admired patience that God has endued his People
with, in that his mercy has preserved us from staining our hands, with such
poluted works, and so our sufferings are and have been on the Lord's account,
from the beginning even to this very day, and as to our Imprisonments of sundry
kinds, and the Injury we have sustained thereby is at this time omited, because
a Relation of the useage of my friends and brethren which did befall them from
Newgate to their Ships into which they were drove for Banishment, after their
long Imprisonment, in that Jaques or stinking Cell in which they were held, is
the thing intended at this time.

And the first that entered the List of this Conflict and sore Trial for their
holy Testimonies, are these three Worthyes of the Lord, Edward Brush, Robert
Hayes, and James Harding, who on the 24th of the Month, called March 6 5/4. was
very betimes in the morning without any warning scarce given unto them, hurried
down to Black Friars Stairs by some of the Serviles of Newgate, where they
were put into a Boat, and so rowed down to Graves end, and there they were
forced on Board for Banishment, the former of which was very aged, and his gray
Hairs might have wrought compassion in the hearts of his Persecuters, besides
the testimony of his life amongst whom he lived, for he was well known to some
Aldermen in this place, but the Lord has drawn out his life unto this time,
and God has honored him in his old age, to scale his testimony unto his
truth, by Cruel Banishment, who for his sake only and alone left Wife, Child,
Estate, and what ever was near and deer unto him: The second was Robert Hayes,
as abovesaid, who being taken out of the Prison having received no sustenance,
and his body being very weak, he until that very morning having been in a
Course of purging Physic, and for any thing I know it might not have done
operating with him, was in this Case carried forth upon the Water, and the
morning being exceeding cold, and no refreshment afforded unto him between that
and Graves end, within a short time after he was forced a board, he dyed, and
his body was brought up to London which was interred amongst his Brethren, and
so he sealed his Testimony for God's Truth, with his blood and his name is
added to the number of the slaughtered Sheep of God in this Generation, who
have been slain in England, he was a Man as to his years, and according to
natures course, (had it not as I may say been for that inhumane and barbarous
useage he sustained) that might have lived many years; So deer Edward Brush,
and his companion in Tribulation, James Harding was the first in England that
have tasted the fruit of exile from their native Land in which they were born,
and out of that City in which their Privileges and Franchises are as ample as
the Chief Magistrate himself, (setting his Office aside) but this we know, that
Precious in the sight of God are the death of his Saints.

And thus has God suffered these things to befall these three faithful
servants of his, in whom his Name is magnified, and his truth exalted, Praises,
praises, living praises to him be given for ever: Yet nevertheless, God who
loved them, was not long before he visited this City with a rebuke, and that
they might take notice of it, within a few doors of that faithful Man's house
E. B. a house was shut up (as was said) of the Plague, and indeed it was the
first that I ever heard of in the City; so the president of your wrath, was
attended with an example of judgment, and that from the hand of the Lord; and
an entrance being made into this work, not withstanding the wrath and fury of
the Lord did hang over this City like a Cloud over-burdened with rain, and
ready to pour forth; and having by cruel threats overcome the Shipmasters to
make them the Executioners of their cruel edict or Law, and taking this
advantage by an Embargoe laid upon all Merchants Ships out-bound, except a pass
from under the hand of the Admiral obtained, none might pass forth of the
River; and many Shipmasters having layn long in hopes of an accomplishment of
their intended Voyages, were now frustrate, for a pass they must go, and that
would not be granted, except they would embarquesome Quakers aboard, each of
them to be scattered into the several Islands, into which they were bound, and
though several of the Shipmasters did withstand the thing, using many good
Arguments to avoid the execution of the cruel penalty, urging the Law made,
commanded not them, and that there is a Law in England unrepealed that
prohibites the transporting of any person out of this Nation without his or her
proper consent; and as some of these Shipmasters knows and have been given to
know, the last executive Officer is the Sheriff, and that he is to contract
with any Shipmaster for their Transportation; but I find not in the Law that
the Sheriff has power to compel any man to bargain with him, no more than
any Tradesman has power to compel any Chapman whatever to buy or sell with
him; the Shipmaster is left free in all and every such case, but all these
things must not serve, the servants of the Lord must be banished, and they must
carry them, (law or not law) else they must loose their Voyages, the Rulers
wills must be done, and where a deficiency in Law is, or that it answer not
fully their ends, then high words, and threatening speeches of imprisonment, and
the like, must answer all defects; and so having wrought upon the extremities
of these men, and they having consulted their losses, if they answer not their
wills, and also having respect to their private gain, more then answering a
good Conscience to God, an agreement is made, and so comes the servants of the
Lord, to be banished from their native Country; the great God permitting it so
to be: and having come over the Shipmasters as is said; again they enterprise
the sending of seven more of the servants of the most High into Exile, and upon
the 18. of the 2d. month 1665. was it suffered to be done; (and by the serviles
of Newgate, whose deligence in those things have been long experienced,) their
Names are, Tho. Gibson, John Tysce, John Terry, Edward Maletrat, John Goodwin,
John Hardin, Edward Boycot: and from the Prison in the morning were six of
there faithful Servants of the Lord drove down and led by the Newgate
Instruments unto Black-fryars Stairs, where a Barge was ready to receive them,
which was accordingly done; but Thomas Gibson refusing to yield an active
compliance unto them, they prepared a Coach, and so fetched him out of Prison
into it, and carried him down to Tower-Wharfe, where the Barge waited to
receive him, and so he was put into the Barge amongst his Brethren, who were
from thence carried to Gravesend and forced aboard in order to their
Banishment. And dear Thomas Gibson whose life with the rest, and their
faithfulness in their testimonies unto Gods living truth will be a precious
savor in Generations to come; and when their lives and sufferings with all
their trials, and faithfulness therein comes to be read and compared with the
measure they have met withal, and received from their Persecuters of this
Generation in which they lived, and did the will of God, surely, surely,
praises, praises will be given unto God, by them that are yet unborn, and will
bless God for this day; and so these seven faithful Lambs are gone by the
permission of God into exile, and have for truths sake parted with Wives,
Children, and Estates, to fulfill the Holy will of God who is blessed for ever.

Not many days after the embarquing of these faithful Brethren, the Lord
showed another notable example by cuting off that grand Instrument Judge Hyde
by sudden death; who the Lord knows wrought much, yea very much of our
detriment, both in our imprisonments, our trials, and in expediating our
Banishment: But he is gone to his place, and the fruits of the deeds in his
life, is his food to eternity; and so I shall not particularize his several
carriages to us in our imprisonments and trials; but leave it to others to read
over the lines of his life, which is written with a point of an Adamant: And
about that time the Lord began to pour out his plagues in some of the out parts
of the City, and then Weekly-bills began to declare the Judgments of a just
God, and in a manner, as in his fear I may speak it, as they began to banish in
small numbers, first 3. then 7. and afterward greater numbers, as may by and
by be declared; even so has the Judgments of God traced that malicious spirit,
first in small numbers and so with greater, as any that will make the
observation upon the weekly-bills of Mortality may find it so; just and
righteous O dreadful God are thy judgments, who have judged thus.

And not many weeks passed, but another experiment must be made, by sending
away for Banishment now eight, malice increasing one in number, the Names of
these faithful innocent Lambs are Rob. Allin, Tho. Kent, John Raunce, Tho.
Hodg, Tho. Robins, John Johnson, Tho. Parker, Rich. Poulton; all which were on
the 26. of the 3d. month 1665. by those emesaries of Newgate forced out of
Prison and carried to the old place Black-fryars Stairs, and there was a Barge
prepared for them, into which they were pulled, and so from thence to Gravesend
were carried, where they were by violence put aboard in order to banishment,
and after some days lying in the River they were cleared at the Blockhouse,
which would not be done till the Shipmaster made appear to the Searchers that
he had the Quakers aboard, and so in the will of God, have these all born a
^^^thful testimony unto Gods holy truth, and have set their seals unto it, by
giving up freely both Wives, Children, and their all; and rather then
transgress the way of God, have chosen to receive their lots with their
Brethren into what place soever the Lord shall permit them to be cast, and have
committed the truth of their cause unto a just God, who is now come to plead
their innocence, with their and his adversaries; and he will render vengeance
upon the heads of them, and will smite hip and thigh, the whole host of the
Uncircumcised; and they shall know by his Judgments he is God and not another,
and though these simple sheep when before your Courts of judgment (so called)
might not have liberty to plead the truth of their cause unto you, but with
ironical, scoffing, jeering, and taunting language, have dispensed your wills
unto them, which is reckoned by you good law, but the righteous Judge has
looked down and beheld all these things; and when any one have but spoken a
sentence of Scripture in defense of their just cause, you have retorted unto
them these unsavory, ungodly, unchristianlike sayings, hold your canting
sirrah, hold your canting sirrah; I, even I have been both eye and ear witness
of these things, even to the grief of my very soul, that ever men that should
sit in Court to execute the Laws of this Nation should drop such expressions
from their mouths; and in public. But what shall I say, in an acceptable time
is the Lord arisen to plead with the men of this Generation, when I have heard
such language given by old gray hair'd men, that has sat there to judge, I
have said in my heart, where are we arrived in this day; what, the Scriptures
of truth called canting, a language learned under Hedges by Rogues and
Vagabonds, ah woe is me, is this the reverence you have to the holy record of
Scripture, to call it canting, and in your Courts of Judicature? ah miserable
men, what an example is this to them that comes to hear your wisdoms; and may
not young men by your examples, turn mere heathen and atheists; but the Lord
will awaken you, yea he will awaken you, to the confession of him, and likewise
that Records of truth spoken forth through his Servants by the Spirit of God,
in their day and Generation, who received such measure from the Judges and
Rulers then in being, as we now do from you in this Nation.

But now I return unto my Relation to observe the dealings with my Brethren and
Sisters in the pestiferous Jakes and Prison of Newgate, well, though
notwithstanding the fury of the Lord smoaks, in this City, and his wrath is
come up to the number Thousands, and he is cuting off in all parts, and his
Judgments have even circum^fered and beleagured it, and seeing it is the will
of the Lord it shall be so; what says the envious spirit, I will double and
treble the number of those that are under my hand and will drive them into
exile; and in order thereunto a Shipmaster a fit servile for such an employment
is found, who as it is said of him, will banish his nearest Relations for
moneys; and a contract is drove with him, for no less then 60. innocent men and
women, or thereabouts, to receive them into his Ship, to dispose of them
whetherto he is bound, and there to leave them to starve and perish; O
mercyless Rulers, is this your Retaliation for the return out of your distress,
the Lord if it be his will show you more mercy then you show unto his people;
and a day is ordered for the dispatching of this poor flock away out of their
Country, and so as aforesaid, in a morning with very short warning was these
friends about some 56. or 58. by the old serviles of Newgate taken forth and
carried down to the same place, by 10.8. and sometimes more in a company
through the streets, some drove and some led to the Waterside until they had
got the number spoken into the Barge prepared for them, and so away they were
rowed down to a place called Bugbeys Hole beyond Greenwich, where the Ship
rode, and when they came unto the Ship these Instruments of Newgate did not
find all things so ready to their hands, nor they in the Ship so willing as
themselves were, to do their masters drudgery; the Seamen being some of them
more considerate, refused to lay hands on them except they were willing; and
these poor sheep declared their unwillingness to yield any active compliance
unto them; so a great busle, and hurly burly was made, and many words used,
magistrate like, by some of the Emissaries there, yet for all that, cared not
the Seamen; so there was a cry to hand out the Tekel to hoist them up, and
answer was made as I heard, that if they were Merchants Goods, they would do
so; Answer was given again, they were the Kings Goods: But in the end, the
Newgate servants was feign to fall to work, and with much ado they got four of
this number aboard, and then being tired, the rest were let alone, and after
sometime was returned to Newgate again, where they for sometime was kept
Prisoners. This was done the 20. day of the 5th. Month called July 1665. yet
notwithstanding all this and the return of these innocent persons to their old
Habitation, in which many of our dear Friends have lost their lives through the
mercies of the Rulers of this Generation, which are altogether cruelties; and
these things related, are tokens and marks of them, easy to be read of all
that fear the Lord, and have any bowels of tenderness in them; and when they
were there, safe they were, until the envious spirit got another opportunity,
which with some small industry was purchased, and now seeing, the Emissaries of
Newgate could not effect their work, recourse was had unto the Military power,
and so a company of Redcoats must execute this barbarity, I have known a day
when your very selves O Rulers, have cried out upon Redcoat law; but that is
forgot with you now, it seems you think fit it should be ministered unto us, God
Omnipotent judge between us and you in this matter, and so things being thus
ordered, and the Lord permitting them so to be; a day was appointed, which was
on the 4th. day of the 6th. month called August 1665. O malice, thou Monster,
will nothing satisfy but the slaughter of the Soul, through betraying the life
of God by bowing and falling down to thee, or the death of the body, Lord thy
will be done, and to do thy will, are we freely given up, either to live or to
die, so thou be'st honored Holy Father, thy name magnified, and thy truth
exalted, above all deceit, hypocrisy, and all manner of profaneness: And in
the morning early great was the preparation, and all or most that belonged to
Newgate that could either lay hand of arm or leg was summoned to help to get
this poor flock a Shipboard, and to their work they went, and as usually they
did, so now; some they led, some they drove in numbers according as the drivers
thought best for their ease, and thus they got them to the Waterside, and into
the Barge; and this in the face of the City, in whose streets the bills of
Mortality were the day before handed that signified the cuting off by death
3014. and so as they have increased the numbers for Banishment, the Lord has
increased his Plagues amongst them; and this O thou sinful City, thou will both
observe and consider in time; and those faithful souls were from thence rowed
again to the same Ship to Bugby's-Hole as aforesaid, and many Friends did
accompany them to the Shipside in other Boats, and after the Barge a couple of
men belonging to Newgate, follows in Boats, having Soldiers with them, which I
suppose they purchased at the Tower to perpetrate that wicked work in hand; our
Boats lying near the Ship, an outcry was made by one of them, get you further
from the Ship, or else we will sink you; but Friends regarded not what they
said, but lay still keeping as never the ship as they could. So these two Newgate
Champions entering the Ship with their armed Men commanded by a Sarjeant or
Coporal or some such fellow, it matters not what; his demenour showed himself
to be a Bruit, and having made way in the Ship the Seamen were called, but few
or none would lay hand on them, only two or three Vassals that were hired to
help for that piece of service, did show themselves as they were; so they
placed themselves for the convenience of their work, then the Soldiers
descended into the Barge and began to lay hold on Friends, and draged them
forward, and some they kicked and punch'd, and heaved up many by Legs and Arms,
and some they drew up with Ropes fastened about their middles, like pieces of
Timber, and so tumbled them into the Ship, and thus in an hours time or
thereabout they had finished their work, they served Men and Women all alike,
either lifted them up by violence or hoisted them up by tekell, and those two
above mentioned, standing in the wast of the Ship, gave directions and orders,
and well pleased they were in that dismal sight to see Men drawn up like
Cattle, and scoffingly they were observed to say, hand out the tackle to draw
up the Kings goods, and take in the Kings goods, and this was their game and
pastime, they made over the bodies of these Servants of the Lord, the sight of
which caused exceeding grief in Friends who were Spectators of this Tragedy
lying by the Ship side, O woeful wretches that sport your selves in such
Inhumanities, as was there exercised, for you two above all the rest of Newgate
Instruments, you should not have sported your selves in that manner, for its
known to you that when profession in the Congregated way was in fashion, you
were for none of this work, and when one of you was a Disciple of Parson
Griffith then none of this, but the Hypocrite God will judge and recompense
with his just Plagues as well as the profane, and thus was this great piece of
wicked work, finished by the Instruments abovesaid, and so are these Servants
of the most High exposed to cruel Banishment, having left behind them a good
report for their faithfulness to the Lord, and a good favor is their Testimony
for God's Truth unto all that have any sense of him in them.

The Names of those Friends last Banished both Men and Women, being in number
55. are, VIZ,
Men Friends, Peter Pennington. Henry Tailor. Thomas Hubbert. Roger Roberts.
Edmund Berkley. William Mathews. Digory Marshall. Vincent Gerrard. John Noble.
Nathaniel Harding. William Parker. Thomas Rose. Lawrence Aplin. Francis Tersey.
Thomas Cox. Manasses Howard. John Chaplin. John Clause. William Newman. Robert
Pate. Lawrence Fullove. James Pierce. William Tillet. Christopher Dickeson.
John Fox. Thomas Stoaks. Thomas Clark. Bartholomew Hall. Richard Thomson. James
Kirton. Edward Walker. John Gabb. John Horsey. Matthew Jackson. Edward Lee.
Arthur Baker. William Roberts.
Women Friends, Deborah Harding. Anne Priest. Elizabeth Ivers. Anne Horniblow.
Rose Atkins. Elizabeth Fisher. Anne Mercer. Jane Powell. Mary Middleton. Rachel
Jackson. Christian Ford. Elizabeth Pike. Elizabeth Harding. Rebecka Trump. Anne
Royley. Dorothy Hall. Patience Willson. Margaret Jackson.



Banished in all 72. remains in Prison sentenced for Banishment about 72.

And these are part of those inhumane usuages which the people of the Lord (who
are by violence drove out of their native Country into exile) have sustained
and received from the hands of their Rulers, and those instruments that are
employed in the execution of their Law last made for that purpose, being the
progress of thirteen months or upward, in the execution of it; and it is little
taken notice of by our Persecutors, how many Widows and fatherless Children
they have made by this their cruel work in this time; But now the Lord is
retaliating into their bosoms, and is measureing unto you, as you have
measured unto us, and many widows and fatherless will he make, for our sakes,
yea for our sakes; therefore be not deceived, our innocence is assuredly come
before the Lord, and our cries are heard, and he is recompencing of your works
into your hands that you have wrought these many years; and what will you say,
it is the great God that pleads with you; O London, London, thou may remember
a few years since thou was sporting thy self and making merry, thy Inhabitants
was even distracted with vain joy; Remember thy wasting of Gods good Creatures,
upon thy lust and drunkenness, thy Bonfires, thy Rosteing of good meat in the
street, and basting it with kenel dirt and water; the worst morsel of which,
thousands and ten thousands would be glad of, and many for want of these things
perish now; and remember thy vain shows erected in the high places of thee,
when no less then about 600. of the servants of the Lord were in prison in and
about thee, looking through the Grates of thy Prisons, and even panting for
very air: In that very day the servants of the Lord did bear that burden of
all your ungodliness, under which many walked up and down more like to shadows
then men, even to see what would become of your ways, in which you were
posting and gadding like wild Cattle; what think you, was God served therein,
or the Devil? By this time many thousands in thee are sensible of the
provocations wherewith you provoked the Lord in that day; but in all those
actions the mighty God beheld you, and also his servants who had done no injury
to any of you at all; notwithstanding that all must be cooped up in your
Prisons, till you had offered your wicked heathenish sacrifice unto your lusts
in that day you were told by many of the day that has now overtaken thee, O
London, and thou did not believe it; but however now thou both see it, and
feel it to be true, and now instead of healths which thou vainly drunk to
men in thy Bowls and Cups, thou have sickness from the hand of the Almighty;
and instead of thy mad joy, thou have handed to thee a cup of deep sorrow; and
them thou d^ified O City in that day, and for whom these things were wrought,
has now left thee in the very midst of thy misery. And now consider O
London, is it not better to trust the Lord than man, whose breath is in his
Nostrils; some put their trust in Princes, some in Horses, but it is good to
trust the Lord: and had thou considered this in thy former day, well had it
been with thee; and as for those that did help to promp on thy ungodlyness in
that day, those they were that by their Oaths, execrations, and all abominable
wretched practices, in whoring and drunkenness* and what not; in their Feathers
and strange fashions; have these relinquished thee also, it had been well thou
had never known them, but however this memorial they have left behind them,
even their shameful spewings, yea their shameful spewings in every corner of
thy Streets: And for all this the servants of the Lord undergoes more cruelties
from Thee and thy Rulers then ever; what do ye account we were born and brought
forth as Men and Women to be destroyed; was this the end the Lord gave us life
for, think ye? and do you think it is our portion to spend our days in your
Prisons? what, because the thing has been continued, and is common; therefore,
you look upon it, it is but right it should so be, and so from the Womb unto
the Tomb, this is our portion from your hands.

And thus we have been all along, and are made the very Prey of a company of
Rapine foul, and Fleshcrowes, who teareth our flesh from our bones, and drinks
our bloods in your stinking Jakes and Prisons. But dear God, it is for thy dear
truths sake that we undergo these things from the Men of this Generation. O
glorify, glorify thy self holy Father in all these things that have been
suffered to befall thy Saints and servants in this age, we know holy God it is
because they know not thee, they do these things unto thine, for did they know
thee, they would fear thee, and if they did fear thee, then they would love
thee; and if they did love thee, then would they love thine: Righteous God,
because they know not thee, therefore they know not us; for thou have made
known thy self in us, and so come we to bear thy Heavenly Image; O magnify thy
name great God, and let all confess unto thee, unto thy mercies, unto thy
Judgments unto thy Righteousness; unto thy forbearance and mighty patience,
unto thy loving kindness, unto thy truth, for thou art God most mighty, even
God of Heaven and Earth, and there is none besides thee; in Earth or Heaven,
the Gods of the Earth are not able to stand, in thy judgment. O powerful God
make thy power more and more known amongst the Sons and Daughters of Men, that
they may learn thy fear; that Atheism and unbelief may be rooted up in this
Nation, and that plant of ungodliness O Lord pluck up, by thy mighty power that
it be no more, and for thine holy God, who for thy truth sake are drove into
exile; let thy sweet peace, which is a portion beyond utterance, answer all the
wants they may in their body sustain, and increase thy love in them, so will
they love one another; and Righteous God be with all thine whom thou have
gathered into thee either in bonds or at liberty, for all thine are one flesh
and one bone; in faithfulness let all persevere, thy great name magnify, O God
exalt thy truth above all National inventions, which they frame and constitute
unto thee (O spiritual God) for worship, thou art a Spirit, therefore by art
thou art not worshipped; and though men chooses it, and orderest it for thee,
it is because they know thee not; and imagines thee to be like themselves; Arts
and inventions may please Men, but thou art not pleased with them, thou chusest
thy worship thy self, thou seek thy Worshippers, holy God, out of all
visible things is thy Worship, in the invisible thou art both known and seen,
and all that comes to know thee and to see thee, must come into the invisible,
and when they come there then shall we be known of them as we are known of
thee, and then no more Persecution but Love, which is thy begotten, which is
thy express Image, O mighty God honor thy Self, Glorify thy Self, Magnify thy
Self, and advance and exalt thy deer Truth over all, O thou art worthy of all
praise from thee in thine, Blessed to Eternity.

POSTSCRIPT.
NOtwithstanding the sore Calamity that is by the hand of a most righteous God
inflicted upon this City, and that the last weeks Bill declared 3014. yet for
all this, and in this time they seized our Meeting in Joneses at the Peele, and
took away the most of Men friends, amounting to the number of about 25. and
carried them to be examined before George Monck, called Duke of Albema le, who
after one nights been there their names being taken, but not being brought
before him, was disposed of to Prison, some to the Gate House, and some to
Newgate, where they remain Prisoners for the testimony of Gods holy Truth, and
though they had sent fifty five of the Servants of the Lord into cruel exile
last week, as it were to make an experiment of these actions, and as I have
heard it reported, that some should say, that if the Quakers were sent out of
the Land, it would be the only expedient of stopping the Plague, but behold
what an effect it has wrought, and how the Lord has dealt in this cause, that
this week since this has been done 1016. is increased in the Judgment in this
Bill, for no less then 4030. is cut off which this Weeks Bill declares, and so
such Diviners, if it were so spoken by them, are falce and liars, for they see
a contrary effect, and those that causes these our cruel and unjust
sufferings, may well observe the hand of a retaliating God upon you, and except
they intend to take vengeance upon the most High, I am yet to learn their
intentions in this matter, O poor Mortals that thus striveth against the God of
Heaven, what shall I say, a Lamentation, a Lamentation, yea a bitter
Lamentation is to be taken up for you.

ENGLAND'S sad Estate and Condition lamented in this just Complaint taken up
against the greatest part of her Inhabitants, Because of their great
Abominations, and Treacherous Dealings, both with God and Man; For which cause
the Terrible and Righteous Judgments of the Lord are coming upon them, and the
Land.
Wherein is also contained some PROPHESIES and EXHORTATIONS.
OH ENGLAND, England! The Abominations of the greatest part of thy Inhabitants,
who can declare them! They have reached Heaven, so as they are come up before
the Lord, the Jealous God, and Woe unto that part of thy Inhabitants, who have
sinned out the Day of their Visitation, and have wholly slighted the Day of
God's patience, and long Forbearance, and would have none of his Reproof, but
have altogether rejected the same, and have made a mock at Sin, and have
sported themselves with their own Deceivings and Lusts, and have gone a Whoring
from under the God of their Lives: Wherefore thus says the Lord, the only
God; I will make such become a Hissing and Reproach, and my Anger they shall
not be able to Escape, because of their provoking Abominations, and Treacherous
Dealings both with Me and Man.

Oh England, England! How have, and yet do, a great part of thy Inhabitants
Rush into Idolatry, and all manner of Profaness and grievous Abominations, even
as the Horse and Mighty Rush into the Battle! How do they drink in Iniquity
even as the Ox, or Parched Ground, drinks in Water! Oh! What manner of
Lamentation shall I make for thee, my Native Country! Or, What manner of
Complaint may I take up against a great part of thine Inhabitants, who have
long Sought, and yet seek thy Ruin and Destruction! Verily, their Actions have
Declared them to be like the Inhabitants of Sodom; Yea, their sins have rendered
them to be as ^^d as those of Gomorrah. O they have Vexed the Righteous Soul;
Yea, and they have Grieved the Spirit of the Lord from Day to Day with their
Unjust Conversations. They have multiplied their Transgressions, and heaped up
their Iniquities till they are become as the Sand on the Seashore without
Number. Oh! The Lord has long striven with them; yea, He has also long born
their Iniquities, He would have gathered them to himself out of their
Abominations, Yea, he would often have healed them, but they would not; but they
have stiffned their Necks, and hardened their Hearts against the Lord and his
Counsel day after day, and have chosen their own way and works even to their
own hurt, and would by no means be reclaimed; for when the Lord has reproved
them (by the Light of his Son in their own consciences) and set their sins in
order before their eyes, they have stopped their Ears, and closed their Eyes,
and wilfully Rebelled against the Power of God, and trampled upon his Witness
[the Light in them] as a thing of naught, counting it not worth the taking
Notice of. And when the Lord has raised up Prophets, Children, and Servants,
and sent them out, Commanding them to lift up their Voices like Trumpets, to
show the People their Transgression, and to Preach Repentance and Amendment of
Life: Yea, to warn and exhort them to turn from their Sins to God, and to lay
before them their great abominations, and to Prophecy what should come upon
them, if they would not turn from the evil of their Doings. Oh! how have a
great part of thy Inhabitants Scorned, and Derided these! Yea, how have many of
thine Inhabitants Beaten, Whipped, Stock't, Stoned, and Imprisoned some of these
till Death, for bearing their Testimony for the Lord against a Crooked and
Perverse Generation, who hate such as speak uprightly, and abhor such as
reprove Sin in the Gate, that so it is even thus come to pass in thee, O
England, That he that departs from Iniquity, makes himsef a Prey to this
Generation of Evil doers, whose hearts are set upon their Lusts, Idolatry, and
grievous Abominations! and the Lord has beheld it, and it pleases him,
because there is no true Judgment: for these evil doers are all gone out of the
way; yea there is none of them that regard to do the thing that is Just and
Good, any further than it may be advantageous to their own Corrupt Designs.

Oh England, England! How often has the Lord God smote thy Rulers and Mighty,
and Proud Men! how often has he laid their Honor in the Dust! Yea, How often has
he Overturned and Confounded thy Mighty Men, even thy Men of War, with thy
Princes, Nobles, and Captains of Thousands, Hundreds and Fifties! Oh how often
has he Overturned thy Governments, and Changed thy Governors! But how few of
them have so regarded the Outgoings of the Lord in all these things as they
ought to have done? And how few of them have rightly Weighed and Considered the
Causes for which the Lord has brought or suffered so many Changes in the Land?
Or, have those who saw the causes that provoked the Lord of hosts thus to Act,
labored so to remove them as they ought to do (or might) have done? Nay,
Assuredly they have not; for the Lusts of this World, and the Pride of Life
has blinded the minds of most; and such who have seen what their duty was, the
honor of this World, and that cursed self-interest has stopped and hindered
most of them from doing those things which they saw they ought (and which they
had opportunity also) to have done. Oh! How have the new Governors in almost
every Change of late, cried out of the Tirany and great Oppression of those
whom they did succeed? and, how have most of them Vowed unto God, Declared to,
and Promised the People, That they would Remove the Burdens and Oppressions
that the foregoing Rulers had laid, and continued upon them: But alas! very few
of them, have regarded their Vows, Declarations, and Promises, either to God
or Man; but in Treachery and Deceit have they gone on, Serving themselves and
their own Lusts, and not the Lord nor their Generation faithfully: For,
although many of them have been very large in promises and good words, (whereby
they have long sought to deceive the hearts of the People) yet it is but very
Little that has been done for their true Liberty, because that wicked Spirit,
which seeks to make it self great by the ruin of others, has Ruled, and
does yet Rule, in the hearts of many Rulers; and this is of the Devourer and
Destroyer, who cannot forgive Enemies, but Cries out of Rebellion and Treason,
laboring to exasperate the Spirits of Others, that so occasions may be gotten,
if possible, against them, thereby to bring them under, and keep them in
Bondage.

Oh England, England! Such is thy sad Estate and Condition, that several of
thy Rulers are, and have been, as roaring Lions, even greedy to Devour; And
many of thy Teachers have been, and yet are, like Troops of Robbers, Robbing
and Spoiling of many of thine Inhabitants. Oh! How have most of thy Priests
Temporized, and Daubed with every Power, as they have come up in the many
Changes! How have they increased Envy, Wars, and Destructions, amongst thy
Rulers and People! How have they one time Cried up, and Prayed for the same
Thing, which, at another time, they have Cried down, and Prayed against! Oh!
Who shall ever believe them? Their god is their belly; and who is it that many
of them would not Join unto, if thereby they might be upheld in Pride,
Idleness, and Fullness? How often would they Change again and again? And what
Idolatry is there that many of them would not Run into for their Bellies sake?
Ah poor Nation! Are they not yet striving to kindle a Flame within thy Bowels?
Has not the Lord divided them? and, are they not laboring with all their
might to Divide and Rend thy Inhabitants yet more and more? Yea, surely, and it
is Just with the Lord to suffer it to be so; because of the greatness of their
Abominations, which are daily increased.

Ah poor Land! How art thou overspread with Wasters and spoilers! who like
Caterpillars devour thy Pleasant Fruit. Oh! the Whoredoms and Idolatries, that
are daily committed and acted in thee, Who can Declare them! Oh! thy Chief
City, thy Chief City, that bloody City! Can its Abominations be Paralleled in
the Earth! Surely it has Exceeded Sodom in Wickedness. The Lord is very Angry
with a great part of its Inhabitants, and his Vengeance is nigh to come upon
them. Woe unto you Whoremongers, Drunkards, Gluttons, Swearers, Cursers,
Blasphemers, Cheaters, and Idolaters! Woe unto you, Proud, Wanton, and Profane,
Vain Persons! Woe unto you, Mountebanks, Stage Players, Bear-baiters, Gamesters,
and all manner of Abominable Workers, and you that Build up Towers, Scaffolds,
and Vain Heathenish Representations and such like; and make and garnish Images,
to draw peoples minds after Idolatry, and for your Cursed Gain and Lusts, in
pretense of Honoring your King. Oh! How are people drawn into Gazing and
Wondering after these Abominations! It grieveth the Righteous Soul to behold
such great Wickedness! Oh! You Wicked and Abominable Workers, and Devourers of
the Creation! The Lord God will meet with you in a time when ye are little
aware of Him, He Will Stain your Pride, Vain Glory and Idolatry, and give you your
Portion amongst Devourers (except you speedily Repent) and your Abettors,
Strengthners, and Helpers forward of such Ungodliness (that do it knowingly)
and Delighters therein, The Lord will not acquit you, He Will smite you for these
things, and that right soon. Oh! Ye, Idolatrous people, Do you think, that the
Lord God of Pity and Patience, suffered your King to Hide himself from his
Enemies in an Oak, for that end, that ye might Devour his Creatures in making
an Idol of it? Is this the use you make of that which you say was Gods Mercy
toward you? Is not this the way to turn those things, that might have been
Mercies to you, into Plagues and Judgments? Oh! How do you daily provoke the
Lord against Your selves, and your King? Oh! You wicked Workers, How dare you
make Representations of Destruction and Ruin? How dare you make a Sport of
such things? Verily, your provocations are great, wherewith you provoke the
Just God; And it will be Just with him to bring Ruin, Desolation, and
Destruction upon you and your City; Verily, great is the Judgment that is nigh
you, and your sins draw it on you apace. Do you think that the Lord cast out
Back-sliders, Hypocrites, and Unfaithful men, to set up and establish Idolaters
and open Profane persons? Nay surely: Therefore Tremble ye Wicked Workers, and
Howl ye Profane Idolaters, for the Mighty and Terrible day of the Lord is
near to break out upon you. Thus says the Lord God, I Will Scatter, I Will
Scatter, I Will Split, Divide, and Separate: I Will Break and Dash to Pieces, and
none shall be able to Gather, Bind up, or Join together: For mine Anger is
kindled, and my Jealousy shall burn till I have devoured mine Enemies, says
the Lord.

Therefore ye people of England (that yet live in wickedness) who have not
wholly sinned out the day of your Visitation, To you I now speak; you that feel
the Lord yet striving with you; O Return, return speedily unto the
Manifestation of his Spirit, whereby he strives with you, to show you your
Abominations, and to draw and lead you out of the same; O be not still
Stiff-necked, but hearken to the Word of the Lord which shows you the
thoughts and Intents of your Hearts, and hearken and be obedient to the Call
thereof, that so by its power you may Hasten out of Babylon, both Young and
Old, Rich and Poor, High and Low, Noble or Ignoble, Professor or Profane, who
yet are there; For the Lords Controversy is great with Babylon her Merchants,
and Inhabitants, and he will not much longer spare, but he will suddenly smite,
and none shall be able to hinder his stroke: Yea, yea he will wound and none
shall be able to heal; For the measure of her Iniquities, Idolatries, and
Whoredoms are nigh full, and the Wine of her Fornications, has caused the
Fatts to overflow, and she is come up into remembrance before the Lord, the
Just God, who will Plague her and all her Merchants and Inhabitants according
to their Abominations, whereby they have grievously provoked Him, Therefore,
come out of her, whilst Mercy and Time is offered, lest you perish with her in
her Judgments, which the Lord is Strongly and Swiftly bringing upon her.

Oh England, England! A day of Sorrow and Calamity is comeing upon many of thy
Inhabitants, I have long been sensible of it; even a day of such Breaking,
Confusion and Judgment, as has not been for a long space; For thy People have
wearied out the Lord with their iniquities and grieved his holy Spirit with
their abominations, days without number.

Oh England, England! The Lord has a precious and Holy Seed in thee; Yea, He
has a Remnant, which he has raised by his Power to, and for himself, which
are exceeding precious in his sight; and these a great part of thine
Inhabitants have Shamefully entreated, and grievously oppressed, and
persecuted; And they have patiently born the same, and have labored in the
Life of Innocence, and Spirit of Emanuel, to Inform thy Rulers and People in
the Things that are Just and True, and have shown them the Ways which have,
and do Displease the Lord, and have Exhorted and Warned the Inhabitants, Time
after Time: But notwithstanding their Doctrine, Lives, and Conversations have
manifested their Innocence and Vprightness of Heart before God and Man, yet
have many of thy Rulers, Priests, and People, Oppressed them more and more;
Some Spoiling their Goods, others Imprisoning their Bodies, in filthy Holes and
Dungeons, till Several of them have Sealed their Testimony for the Lord with
their Blood, which cries for Vengeance in the Ears of the Almighty, and the
Lord has heard the Cry thereof, and has looked down and beheld the Actings of
the Sons of men, and he is near to Visit; Yea, the Lord has beheld, and does
behold, the Snares that have been, and are laid for the Innocent, who have no
other Helper but him alone; and therefore they have Committed their Cause unto
him who shall bring it to pass; Yea, he has taken Notice, how several of thy
Rulers have combined together, and endeavored to Force his Babes to Violate
his Royal Law, and to Break his Command (who says, Swear not at all) to Uphold
and Obey theirs, which is Contrary to his; Yea, He has taken notice of the
Cruel Sufferings, and great Temptations of his People who, many of them, are
yet Imprisoned, and both their Bodies and Estates threatened to be destroyed (by
some evil Men) if they will not break the Royal Law and Commandment of Christ,
which he has placed in their hearts to Obey and Do. Oh! The Lord has seen the
Partiality and evil Intents of several of the Judges and Rulers of this Land,
who have had Power to let the Innocent go free, and yet keep many of his
Ministers and Servants (many of which have outward Estates) Prisoners in many
places; although they have no more against them, than against those whom they
have turned forth, which is nothing else but for their Obeying the Command of
Christ in them, (who this day says unto his People, Swear not at all, as he
said to his Disciples formerly) and for meeting together, and Speaking and
Praying in his Name, for the Edifying, Comforting and Building up one another
in their most holy Faith. The Lord has also taken notice, that when some of
the Rulers might Relieve the Innocent, and let the Oppressed go free, they will
not; and then to cover themselves, they will say, They cannot act contrary to
the Law. But when a Ruler will act that which he has no Law for, he can then
plead a Prerogative Royal for that: and thus are the innocent Lambs of Christ
made a Prey upon.

Oh! the Oppressions of his People, and others, are great this day in thee, O
Land; and the Crying of the Fatherless, the Widows and the Needy is come up
before the Lord God of Compassion, who will thoroughly plead the Cause of his
People, and the Poor and Needy of the Land.

Oh England, England! I have often heard and treasured up what the Lord has said
in me, concerning thy Inhabitants; but now must I declare it in the Appointed
Season, Thus has the Lord spoken in me for a long time, concerning thy
Inhabitants, saying, The People are too many, the People are too many; I will
thin them, I will thin them: [Mark] that is, He will make them fewer, for they
cumber the Ground. And the spirit of the Lord has often signified unto me, for a
long time, That an Overflowing Scourge, yea, even an exceeding great and
terrible Judgment is to come upon thee, O Land! and that many in thee shall
fall and be taken away in the Judgment; and the Spirit of the Lord signifies
unto me, that the time draws nigh, and that the Decree of the Lord is so
firm, that though some of the Lords Children and Prophets could appear so, as
to stand in the Gap, yet should not that alter his Decree, only in the
Righteousness of the Lamb they shall be hid and saved from his Wrath, what ever
may be done to any of their Bodies; but his fierce Wrath and Indignation shall
be poured forth upon the Ungodly, and a great Desolation and Destruction shall
there be; for he will overturn and overturn, till he has dis-throned and
thrown down the Man of Sin, and exalted and established the Kingdom of his dear
Son, over all the Kingdoms of the world; and the Kingdom and Dominion, and the
Greatness of the Kingdom under the whole. Heaven shall be given to the Holy
People, the Sints of the Most High, whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom,
and all Dominions shall serve and obey him, who is King of Saints.

Behold, ye Despisers, and Wonder! This is the Work which the Lord will
accomplish by his own Power, though you will in no wise believe it; but you
shall feel, even both Hypocrites and Profane, that the Lord is able to bring
to pass the thing that is in his heart.

And you who now think to set up and establish your Idolatry, and to live in
Profaneness without control; and you who appear so hot against some of these
things, and labor to stop and pull them down (mark) that you might set up and
establish your own Hypocritical Will Worship in another dark dead Form, I will
frustrare you both, says the Lord God, and you shall grind and waste one
against another, as the upper and nether Millstone; And I will pluck out from
you, and preserve a holy Seed, beyond expectation; and I will be avenged on you
for that which you have already bruised, or shall yet bruise [mark] And I will
hurry and hurl you round with a mighty Stream; for the Waters shall roar and
swell: And after I have executed my vengeance upon the Rebellious and
Treacherous Dealers, I will then bring forth the Remnant of my Holy Seed, which
shall be preserved from their Fury, and they shall spread over all, in my Life,
Power, Knowledge and Wisdom, wherein they shall stand in Dominion; Yea, and
they shall rule the Earth in Mercy, Justice, and true Judgment; and they shall
forgive and love their Enemies (as they do at this day) and do the thing that
is just and good unto all, without respect of persons; yea, they shall seek the
good of the whole Creation in (...) true love and self-denial; for the Spirit
of Love, Meekness, Healing and Restoring shall mightily fill their tender
Bowels, and my Blessings shall fill their Dewlling Place, and the Earth, for
their sakes: these things will I accomplish by my own Power, and in my own
time, says the Lord God.

But although these things, touching the holy Remnant, shall certainly be
fulfilled in their Season, Yet before they be fully accomplished, great will be
the Trials of many of the Righteous, and there will be great Judgments executed
in thee, O Land, by Him who oft-times makes a fruitful Land barren, because of
the wickedness of them that dwell therein; and Just will it be with Him to deal
so with thee, because of the great wickedness of the greatest part of thy
Inhabitants, who are departed and separated from the Spirit of Mercy, Love,
Compassion and Healing, and are laboring to Devour, Oppress, and Destroy one
another, and the whole Creation.

Oh England, England! There is also a People in thee who are come to see the
Great Idolatry and Superstition, which many are now striving to revive and set
up in thee; yea, there is a People in thee, which see and believe that the
Worship which is now a setting up, with the Vain Music, Altars, Mass in
English, and the foolish needless Garments of the Priests, and such like Popish
stuff, that these things are Idolatry, Folly and Vanity, and but a mocking of
God; and yet some of these People will run after this Vain Worship, for
self ends, slavish fear, and to keep themselves in esteem with, or amongst
those who plead for it: And others there are in thee, who instead of being
sorrowful for such Abominations and Superstition, or reproving the Practicers
thereof in the solid, seasoned, savoury Life and holy Dread of the Lord God,
they write and speak scoffingly of those things, even to the stirring up one of
another into vain Laughter, and so make a sport of others Idolatry; and this
grieveth the Spirit of the Lord also, and does not convince, but exasperate and
harden those that are zealous for their blind Worship and Superstition.

There are also a great number of brittle, fiery, rash, unsatisfied people in
thee, O Land, who are as unstable as Water, and these rebelling against the
Light, not knowing the way of it, because they abide not in the path thereof,
they are restless, rouling, and raging oft-times like the Sea; One time they
will have a Parliament, and cry out, They shall govern and heal them; and when
they have gotten them, in a short time they grow weary of them: And then
another time, they will cry out for a King, and say, He shall heal them, and
make up their Breaches: But these people are not long of one mind, for they are
much like the Athenians, who spent their time in little else but either to tell
or to hear of some New thing: These People also are like mighty Tides in thy
Channels, O England, which one while run with Violence, driving all unsettled,
light, unfixed things one way, and shortly after run with as much violence the
contrary way: Therefore in a miserable condition are those Rulers whose
strength is in such a People! And until Rulers come to be settled, and fixed in
Him who is the Rock of Ages, and singly to rule in, and for Him, whom the Winds
and the Seas obey, who makes the Waters to stand on heaps and divided them
hither and thither; and alters the natural course of Tides as he pleases (as
he has done thine of late, to show thee the Figure of the People) they can
ne^e safe, neither will the People be stilled long together; but there will be
Swellings, Ragings, Overflowings, sore Breakings and Ruins.

Oh! that the foregoing Rulers would have been persuaded to have Received Him
for their Teacher, who Rules in the Kingdoms of Men, then should they not
only have seen, what the Lord cast out others before them for, but they should
have been taught how to have denied all those things which the Lord was angry
with others for, and they should have received Power to have abstained from the
same; but they would not hear and obey the Lord, nor his Prophets, and
therefore were they cast out also.

And therefore, O! that the Rulers that now are, would be persuaded (whilst
they have their Day) by the Lord and his Servants, to receive the Lord Jesus
Christ, to be their King and Teacher, and then they should not only see for
what cause the Lord cast them out, and others in their Age, but they should be
taught to deny and forsake all those things which God was angry with them, and
others for, and they should receive Power to do those things, which they and
others before them left undone; But alas! How few are there that will Hear,
Regard, and Obey the Prince of Life and his Followers, and therefore is
Desolation coming as a mighty Flood, which none shall be able to stop.

Now all People, in what Sect or Opinion soever, in whom there are any true
Breathings and Desires after the Lord, and the way of his Holiness, Fear not,
neither be dismayed, because of the Rage that you may yet see the Waters of the
Land in, and because of the Confusion and Cruelty of the People; But stand
still in that Life which begets Breathings and Thirstings in you after the
Lord, that you may come to see and feel his Salvation, and that you may be
gathered into that Patience, Meekedness, Contendedness, Rest, Peace, and
Satisfaction, which many of the dear Lambs and Children of my Father are
gathered into, wherein they lie down, and none can make them afraid, though
their Bodies and Estates be oppressed and abused. Oh! Stick not, Stick not in
your Forms without Power, neither Flee the Cross, any longer; but wait in the
True Simplicity, to feel God's hand of Tender Love, which he reaches forth to,
and manifests in you, to lead and guide your minds into his Pure Worship,
which is in the Spirit and in the Truth. Oh People! This is the Worship that he
will set up. He will be LORD and LAWGIVER in the Consciences of his People, and
those that will not be content that EMMANVEL should Reign over them, he will
slay them with the Sword of the Spirit, The Words of his Mouth.

Oh! Hearken, hearken a little, and stand still, that you may hear the voice of
the true Shepherd in your own Hearts, who calls for Truth in the Inward
Parts, and he will discover what lodges Within, and He will show you the Way
wherein you should walk, and he will let you see what the Cross is unto, and He
will teach you when you are nlone in your Beds, or wherever you are; if you
will receive Him who gives you Life and Breath, whose gentle Reproves and
Instructions are the Way of Life.

Therefore you in whom the Breathings and Desires after the Lord are; Consult
not with Flesh and Blood, neither reason against the Cross, but submit to every
Appearance of Gods Power in you, which appears to Crucify the Fleshly Birth
and Nature; which has stood, and does stand in Rebellion and Enmity against
the Pure and Precious Life, and Requirings of the Lamb of God, that so that
Mind which is at Enmity against God, and that Nature in you, which is
disobedient to his Commands in Spirit, may come to be Crucified, that so there
may be a Change inwardly felt and witnessed, by the working of the mighty Power
of Christ in your Inward parts; and then the Desires and Breathings which are
Begotten in you after Righteousness, they will be strengthened, and the
Teachings of the Almighty will be Truly known, and you believing in the Power,
you will receive Power to obey and Practice whatsoever the Lord shall make
known unto you by his Spirit to be his Will and Requirings.

Oh People! Let the Dread of the Lord Seize upon your Spirits, in this the Day
of his Power, wherein he is Trying, Sifting and winnowing the Nations, and wait
to feel that Life arise within you, which bears Testimony against all evil
within and without; that so ye may become more and more acquainted with the
Teachings, Drawings, and Leadings thereof, that thereby you may be drawn and
led out of those things which have kept your Souls in the Death, and hindered
you from enjoying the Pure Peace of God. And this know and consider; that all
that come to witness their Souls raised out of Death, and brought to enjoy the
Peace of God, they must Believe in the Life of the Quickening Spirit, which is
the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, who for Sin Condemns Sin in the Flesh,
and appears in the Inward Parts of man, to work out sin and transgression,
(which has Separated from God) and so to make clean the heart and inside of
male and female.

Oh People! This is the Work of Christ the Son of God, even to make manifest
and destroy the works of the Devil, and so to reconcile man unto God, by the
Virtue of his own Life, which he gave a Ransom for many; and blessed are all
those that believe in the Life of the Son of God, and feel and know it
manifested in their mortal flesh: for they shall witness the Power of it to
make all things new, and so their Souls will come up in the hand of God, and
his Peace will be Received and Enjoyed.

Oh people! Wait to know, and feel this Work of Christ within you, that so you
may be made able to stand in the Judgment, and to Endure the Trial, and that
you may be Hid from the Wrath of the Lamb, which is nigh to come upon the
Rebellious. Oh! Consider this, Those that are his Followers, they come throw
many tribulations, and their overcoming their Enemies is by his Blood, not by a
talk of it, but by the Virtue and power of it sprinkled in their Hearts, which
washes and makes them White, Clean, and without Fault before God. Oh People
my Bowels yearn! my Bowels yearn toward you! whose Desires in any measure, are
after the Lord: O that you would now Return with all your hearts unto Him, and
obey the Voice of his Power in you; then should you be made able to stand, and
endure the fiery Trial which is come and coming. Oh! the Day hastens wherein
all Profession that is not grounded in the Life and Power of the Lord Jesus
Christ (whatever the show of it be) it will be so shaken, that an utter
Blasting and withering shall come upon it; and for that cause the Lord does,
and will yet suffer great Trials to come, both upon the Professors, and
Possessors of his Name; that so his Children [the Possessors] may be manifested
unto all, and discerned from all that are but Professors, though never so fair
and seemingly Covered; For all Coverings but what is of the Power and Spirit it
self, shall be too Narrow; and all that are not Covered with the Spirit and
Power of Emmanuel, their Shame and Nakedness shall appear more and more. This
is the Testimony which the Spirit and Word of Truth gives; therefore, He that
has an ear to hear, let him hear, before the day of his Visitation be wholly
past, and the things belonging to his Peace be hid from his Eyes: For yet a
little while and the Voice shall be, He that is filthy, let him be filthy
still; For the Spirit of the Lord shall not always strive with flesh, but his
Plagues and Indignation shall be poured out upon such as will not be gathered
in the Day of his Patience, long Forbearance, and Free-love; and He or She that
Loves Father, Mother, Husband, Wife, Children, House, or Land, Liberty,
Honor, or any Thing more than the Life of the Lamb, shall be counted not
worthy of him, and plainly manifested so to be: Read this who can; and he that
can receive it, let him: For the Time draws nigh that these Sayings must be
fulfilled.

George Fox the Younger.
Printed the 13. of the Second Month.
The End.
To the King, And both Houses of PARLIAMENT, Thus says the Lord,
MEddle not with my People, because of their Conscience to me, and banish them
not out of the Nation, because of their Conscience; For, if you do, I will send
my Plagues upon you; and you shall know that I am the Lord.

Written in obedience to the Lord By his Servant, Geo. Bishope.
Bristol the 25th of the 9th Month, 1664.

