Christ alone Exalted IN Dr. Crisp's Sermons, Partly confirmed in Answering Mr.
Daniel Williams's Preface to his Gospel Truth stated, by alleging Testimonies
from Scripture and the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the Book of
Homilies established by Law, and other Orthodox Authorities: SHOWING, How he
has wronged as well the Truth, as the said Doctor in the great Point of
Justification by the Neonomian Doctrine.

Hom. of Salvation, fol. 17. Justification is not the Office of Man, but of
God; we be justified freely by Faith without Works, not that this our Faith in
Christ, which is within us, does justify us, that were to count our selves
justified by some Act within our selves. Of Fasting, fol. 82. Good Works go not
before in him, which shall afterward be Justified; but good Works do follow
after, when a Man is first Justified, and are Testimonies of our Justification
(this spoils Neonomianism) on the Sacrament, fol. 200. It follows (for
Communicants) to have a sure and constant Faith, that he (Christ) has made
upon his Cross, a full and sufficient Sacrifice for thee, a Perfect cleansing
of thy sins, (Where is the sin of a Believer now?) Passion, Sermon. 177. for in
this (death of Christ) stands the continual pardon of our daily Offenses; in
this rests our Justification. (If so then, Faith does not procure it, but
only receive and evidence it; and so away flies Neomanism with Arminianism.)
Humbly offered by S. C. an unworthy Son of the said Doctor, Author of a Book
Entitled, Christ made Sin, Reflected on by Mr. Williams.

London, Printed for William Marshall at the Bible in Newgate street: And Henry
Barnard at the Bible in the Poultry, 1693.

Where is to be Sold at the same place, the same Authors Book Entitled, Christ
made Sin.

Errors, besides false Pointings, to be amended.
Folio 2 Line 47. for assume, read affirm. 12 36. for or, read our. 24 40. for
of sin, read if sin. 41. for participation, read propitiation. 26 5. for thus,
read this. 28 24. for as, read of; at the last as. 32 22. for other, read
object. 34 7. for faces, read fails. 38 47. for pampering, read tampering. 40
38. read, But says. 42 33. f. God's Righteousness, r. our sanctification. 43
20. Blot out that. 44 last line, put in is after Holiness. 47 34. for Mercies
read Mines. 47 45. read 1642. 48 20. read, then God believes.

To the Eminent Assertors of the Free Grace of God in Christ, whereby Christ
alone is exalted in the Salvation of Sinners, viz. To the Reverends, Mr. Cole,
Mr. Griffith, Mr. Mather, Mr. Beverly, Mr. Barker, Mr. Mead, Mr. Chauncey, Mr.
Trail, Mr. Woodcock, Mr. Laurence of Stepney, Mr. Brag. Mr. Bearman, Mr. Terry,
Mr. Crusoe, Mr. James of Wapping, Mr. White, Mr. Moor, Mr. Wavel, Mr. Tailor of
Pinners-Hall, Mr. Cross, Mr. Grace, Mr. Nisbet, Mr. Fincher, Mr. Lob, Mr.
Glascock, Mr. Mence, Mr. Ford, Mr. Owen, Mr. Jennings, Mr. Roe, Mr. Wressel,
Mr. Clark, Mr. Goodwin, Mr. Gamon, Mr. Powel. Also to several of the surprised
Subscribers to Mr. Williams late Book, as Dr. Bates, Mr. How, Mr. Alsop, Mr.
Bures, and others. Also to those of the Episcopal Clergy, who preach the
Doctrine of Justification, as it is established by Christ in the Gospel, and by
our Statute Law in the Homilies; as Mr. Meriton of Old Fish-street, and others.
Rejoice thou Heaven (the Church of Christ) and ye holy Apostles and Prophets
(Rev. 18.) (The Evangelical Preachers) that blessed be God, there are many
Seven thousands that have not bowed to the Bayal of Man's Holiness, joining
with Christ to Justification: But Mr. Williams having (in the judgment of many)
in his Gospel Truth stated, warped that way; witn^ss his interpreting the
Righteousness of Christ, in Phil. 3.9. to be a Believers Gospel Holiness. I
hereby appeal to your Consciences, if such a Star of the first Magnitude in the
Firmament of the Scriptures, ought with the silence of the Bystanders to be so
obfuscated.

Though in many respects, I look on my self one of the unworthiest of those
that name the Name of our blessed Lord Jesus in sincerity, yet I cannot but
bear my Testimony against the Preface of the said Book as unsound, according to
my sense of the Truth, after above 50 Years investigating it, and tasting a
sweet Relish in Divine Things; and I humbly apprehend, I have in the ensuing
Collection, made it so appear; which I leave to the Spirit of the Prophets in
the Prophets, to judge and hope you will all agree, to declare, he has much
wronged the said Text.

As for his stigmatizing my dear Father, as a dethroner of Christ, because he
exalted him alone without Works, in the business of our Salvation, I beseech
the Lord, Mr. Williams may see his Mistake, and that God would forgive him, as
I, (and I hope all mine) freely do. This I pass by; But when the Mother of us
all, the Truth as it is in Jesus, is wounded by him, when not of Works, lest
any Man should boast, Ephesians. 2.9. is turned by him into, God promises Li^e to
imperfect Man by Forgiveness, yet insists on some degree of Obedience.

And hence, the use of Faith, Holiness, etc. To these Benefi^s is not from
their Conformity to the Precept, but their Conformity to the Rule of the
Promise. Then on such an invasion, all from 16 to ^0. should be alarmed; then
all hearts and heads that love the Lord Jesus, should be engaged i^ vindicating
his Royalties; that he is Alpha and Omega, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption, all and in all in our Salvation. that no Flesh
should glory.

In particular, I find my self (though the meanest) obliged to bear witness
against this piece, being censured by many for my silence, in regard my Preface
to my Fathers reprinted Sermons, (they say) occasioned this Pudder: What I did
therein, was in the simplicity of my heart, to exalt the Lord Jesus, and
refresh Souls thereby, which I still desire by taking off Mr. William's
Evidence against the said Sermons, by showing his disagreeing from Scripture,
and Orthodox Authority, as well as from my Father.

I hope you will all heartily accept this Service, and upon this occasion, give
me leave to beg, that as the Lord Jesus has sent you to preach the everlasting
Gospel, glad Tidings to sinners through Christ, in which many of you have been
renowned, so that ye abound more and more, That you will determine to know
nothing among your people, but Christ and him Crucified, that he may be
magnified in your Bodies by life and by death, that you may show in every
Sermon, that to you to live is Christ, and not to labor with a Scheme of some
degree of Obedience in the business of our Salvation; and this supposes the
death of Christ, as if his death were only a Sub-intelligitur, business in his
Rectorship.

O that we could be more warm for our Lord Jesus, who poured out his Soul and
warm Blood for us! and, if when warm, you please to remember me, a poor worm,
at the Throne of Grace, as I do ye, I doubt not but I should be highly
recompensed for this labor of love, and should find refreshment under many
rufflings from the Lord, on my Person and Family. Thus beseeching the Lord to
pour out abundance of his Spirit on you all, and the unhappily engaged Mr.
Williams, (whom I truly love and respest,) That the people may be prepared for
the Lords glorious appearance now hastening, To him I recommend you, and
subscribe,

Your Servant, and an unworthy Son of Dr. Crisp, S. C.
Clapham, January 21st. 1692/3.
Christ alone Exalted IN Dr Crisp's Sermons, Partly Confirmed in Answer to Mr.
Williams Preface to his Gospel Truth stated and Vindicated, by Comparing some
of his unfair Accusations of the said Doctor, with the Scripture, and the
Doctrine of the Gospel, Established by Law in the Homilies, etc.
WHEN Peter who seemed to be a Pillar was come to Antioch, I withstood him to
the Face, because he was to be blamed, says the Apostle, Gal. 2.9, 10. And if
an Apostle who seemed a Pillar, might Err in Ceremonies, and be blamed; so may
our seeming Pillars some of them Err in Substance, conjoyning our Gospel
Holiness with Christ's Righteousness, and be blamed. Now I perceiving what I
suppose will appear a great Error in the Preface of Mr. Williams to his
Arraignment of Gospel Truths in Dr. Crisp's Sermons, and supposing none will
mind the Preface, that design to Answer the Book, but pass it over as a Cursory
Discourse: I think it not ungrateful to studious Christians to animadvert on
the brief Systems of Religion, which Mr. Williams has there given the World,
in opposition not so much to Dr. Crisp as to the plain express Scripture, and
the sound sense thereof, held out by the great Orthodox Divines that were
Staunch against A^minianism upon our first coming out of Popery, when Zeal for
Christ alone in Salvation was warm. Wherein I beseech the Lord so to guide my
Thoughts and Pen that I may mind only his Glory in and through our Lord Jesus.
The Meek he will guide in Judgment, which meekness I beg of the Lord; though a
Golden Calf of Man's Gospel Holiness to be set up in the place of Christ's
Righteousness, would provoke a Moses. Yet I hope to retain as well Meekness as
Integrity till I die. It is beyond all doubt, Man, since the Devil deceived him
(that upon eating he should be as God,) does think with himself, he can (though
dead) do something which is proper only to God; that is, he can quicken his own
dead Soul; he can Convert himself, he can be a God to himself; hereupon there
is a great Outcry against any that assert, That our Lord Jesus Christ is all in
all in the Salvation of poor Sinners; and Dr. Crisps Sermons, because fuller
than ordinary of the free Grace of God in Jesus Christ, are singled out to be
battered, and with them the Gospel of our Salvation is run down into terms
utterly Foreign to the Scripture, and because the Doctor adheres and sticks
close to the Scripture terms, of our being dead, dead, dead in sins, and our
sins, our very sins, Christ bare in his Body on the Tree, as the Apostles Peter
and Paul expressly say, he is exclaimed against: And that this great Champion
might appear completely armed in opposing Dr. Crisp, he puts on the great
shield of being solicited to this Work by several worthy Ministers, and that
this may appear true, he has emblazoned his honor in this great Achievement,
by the Hands of several indeed worthy Ministers, who are most of them in my
Experience eminent Servants of our Lord Jesus; however their Zeal for Gospel
Holiness, may have been imposed upon to countenance Mr. Williams making
Christ's Righteousness to be our Gospel Holiness: Though I have a great honor
for all those of them whom I know, yet I suppose they will not think themselves
dishonored to say, I think most of them were imposed upon in getting their
subscribing to what they never thoroughly examined I am sure one of them though
next the first, yet nulli secundus for a sweet Christian Spirit among them said
a few Weeks before Dr, Crisps Sermons were reprinted, to an Eminent Mininister
in a great Company, If Dr. Crisp be an Antinomian, so am I, and I am sure he
said in a Sermon December 12. 1669. We are first made active by Christ, in
order to his bringing us to God, and September 24. 7. 1672. Christ has brought
the Law to its end, it has no more to require be is the abolishing end the Law
is quite out of doors, as to justify, plant a Crab-Tree in the best Soil, it
brings forth crabs till planted in Christ, so that there must be Union to
Christ, by Gods planting us in Christ before any good Fruit. So this Gentleman,
and so Doctor Crisp in his Faith, the Fruit of Union, contrary to Mr. Williams;
and yet this excellent person is by Mr. Williams Art, taught to say with the
rest. We judge our Reverend Brother has in all that is material, fully and
rightly stated the Truths and Errors mentioned as such, and do account he has
in this work, done considerable Service to the Church of Christ; and so will I
say, when by it he has engaged Able Pens to vindicate the truth from
Sophistical Glosses; that he has done considerable service against his will. I
reckon this Preface is the marrow of his Book, and I shall begin with as great
a point as any I know of in the Bible, next to the Deity of the Lord Jesus, and
yet it is that which is the chief Fruit of his Deity, which is his Righteousness
as God-Man made ours by Faith; by Mr. Williams his treating this, he discovers
his whole Soul concerning Justification that great Article, stantis vel
cadentis Ecclesi^^, of the standing and falling of that Church that holds it,
as Luther said, in that a little Leven here leveneth the whole lump. Here Mr.
Williams has made very bold with the expression of the Apostle Paul, in Phil.
3.9. That I may be found in him not having mine own righteousness which is of
the Law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness which
is of God by Faith; here Mr. Williams, instead of extolling this righteousness
of Christ, and the rich Grace of God to impute this to us, he runs Counter to
the stream of the Gospel, and dashes to pieces all the comfort that thousands
have found in this Scripture, as signifying Christ's Righteousness, our
clothing before God, and gives his Romish gloss upon it in these words: I
exclude not this Righteousness (Christ's imputed) when I affirm that the
Righteousness of God Phil. 3.9. Principally intends the Gospel Holiness of a
Person Justified by Christ's Righteousness, which in plain Words is this, When I
Daniel Williams say in the preceding words, his Righteousness imputed is the
cause for which we are justified and saved, when we do answer the Gospel Rule;
now I explain the answering the Gospel Rule, and how we make this Righteousness
of Christ the cause for which we are saved, that is, I do affirm or positively
declare without any suspicion of being accounted a self Justiciary, that the
righteousness of God, which the Apostle accounted all his Righteousness but
dung for, and which he says is the righteousness through the Faith of Christ,
and the righteousness of God by Faith: This I assume; for the honor of Man's
Righteousness to concur with Christ's imputed Righteousness; that this
Expression of the Apostle intends, yea, it principally intends the Gospel
Holiness of a person Justified by Christ's righteousness, that is to say, though
the Apostle expressly says, it is not my own Righteousness, yet I will make the
Apostle mean it is my own Holiness, though the Apostle calls it the righteousness
through the Faith of Christ. I affirm it is the Holiness of the person
justified, and though I do not exclude Christ's Righteousness, (in Words) yet I
affirm it is Gospel Holiness that the Apostle intends. If this be not a plain
contradicting the Apostle, and making the Apostle contradict himself, then
nothing can do so: The Apostle says, It Is not mine own Righteousness; it is
(says Mr. Williams) my Gospel Holiness; this is to say and unsay, it is not,
and yet it is: I pray what great difference between my Righteousness and my
Gospel Holiness, the Apostle would not for a World be sound in his
Righteousness of any sort but in Christ, and yet Mr. Williams says, the
Apostle would be found in his Gospel Holiness. I believe Mr. W. consulted few
Protestant Divines in that affirmation, for here he goes diametrically opposite
to the current stream of them of which hereafter, and against the very direct
words of the Apostle, in which he labored to bring forth his meaning; the Holy
Spirit by the Apostle uses much pains and skill to free the truth from Mr. W.
his interpretation of a sinners or Saints being found in his own righteousness
or holiness, by varying the expressions, thereby explaining the truth of our
righteousness, not having any thing to do in our Justification, or standing at
Gods bar either in our Consciences, or at the great day, but Mr. Williams with
a bold stroke of his Pen, flatly opposes it, the Apostle says, that the
righteousness he would be found in, is that which is through the Faith of
Christ: How can this be Mr. Williams his Gospel Holiness? By Faith, Noah being
warned, etc. became Heir of the righteousness which is by Faith; which shows
us, that Noah had in those dealings of God with him, the very same
righteousness for the Object of his Faith, which our Gospel now proposes to
us, and which our Faith lays hold upon. Which the same Apostle styles the
Righteousness of God, and the Righteousness of Christ, which is by Faith, Phil.
3.9. Which Righteousness for Justification he more setly treats of, in Romans
3.21. But now the Righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, even the
Righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus Christ: He witnessed of that
Righteousness which is by Faith, as it has Christ for its Object; this all
sound Protestants do profess. Goodwin of Elect. fol. 40.
The Faith of Jesus is Faith in the righteousness of Christ, who is the Lord
our Righteousness; and the Apostle, lest he should not be fully understood, he
explains what this (through the Faith of Christ) is, he says plainly, it is the
righteousness of God; and lest we should mistake here, and turn this
righteousness of God, this righteousness through the Faith of Christ, which is
the righteousness of God, to our Gospel Holiness with the Arminians or with
Grotius, and Mr Williams; he explains it farther, and says, it is the
righteousness of God by Faith, as much as to say, it is that Righteousness which
Christ as God, wrought out for us, who is made of God to us righteousness, and
which is made ours by Faith. But though these 4 Bars be laid in the way: 1. Not
my own righteousness.

2. But that through the Faith of Christ.

3. Plainly (not Gospel Holiness) but the righteousness of God.

4. And this Righteousness of God ours by Faith; yet this Gentleman takes a Run
and leaps over them all, with a confidence most bold, dashes out all the
Apostles sense, and says, I affirm it principally intends Gospel Holiness,
than which nothing can be a more shameless imposing on the plain Word of God (I
conceive) and a corrupting of it, which he does by his confident affirmation;
that the righteousness of God, ours by Faith, is a persons own Gospel Holiness,
he may as well affirm that being justified freely by his Grace, through the
Redemption that is in Jesus, is, being justified by our Gospel Holiness.

The Gospel of Salvation by Jesus, would stand on ticklish terms, and soon be
lost, if a few more such bold Attempts as this against the righteousness of
God, ours by Faith, be allowed, but the Gates of Hell shall never be able to
overthrow this Truth, that the righteousness of God there is Christ's
righteousness believed on to Justification, and not our Gospel Holiness. We
must not lose such a glorious Star out of the Firmament of the Scriptures; nay,
I may say it is the Sun, for take this Mr. Williams, and take all the Bible
away; for I would as soon hope to be Justified by the Turkish Alkoran as by my
Gospel Holiness, nay, it must not come in for a share, or have any concurrence
as to causality, for a little Leven, in this case will leven the whole Lump.

O the Cloud of Witnesses that have from this Text of Phil. 3.9. made many
comfortable Conclusions that this righteousness of God, by Faith, is the
imputed righteousness of Christ received by Faith.

O the famous Dr. Tuckny, how would he have shamed that Man that should have
enervated this Text on which he preached many Sermons, lately Printed contrary
to Mr. Williams Exposition.

O the rich streams of Gospel Grace, that flowed from solid Dr. Jacomb. at
Tunbridge in June 1686. In six Sermons on this Text, which I took from his
Lips, all contrary to this puddle of Gospel Holiness. Hundreds of these I pass,
and shall cite a few Passages out of older times, as the Faith of our
Protestant Forefathers, not to be ravished from us by Mr. Williams, though he had
a hundred Vouchers for his serving the Church.

First, our Composers of the Homilies in King Edward the Sixth's time, which is
the Doctrine of the Church of England, Confirmed by many Acts of Parliament;
they quote Bazil a Greek Father, in fol. 16. of the Homily of Salvation on this
very Text, Phil. 3.9. This is (says Bazil) a perfect rejoicing in God when a
Man advances not himself for his own righteousness, but acknowledges himself
to lack true Justice and Righteousness, and to be Justified by the only Faith
in Christ; and Paul does glory in the contempt of his own righteousness, and he
looks for the righteousness of God by Faith, Phil. 3.

Here is not a word of our Gospel Holiness brought in, but a total contempt of
his own righteousness; call it what you will, the righteousness of the Law or
Gospel holiness, if it be his own, it is contemned; and somewhat plainer, is Mr.
Perkins on the same Text in fol. 659. Vol. 1. who says thus; The Apostle Paul
in desiring to be found not in his own righteousness, but in Christ's, desired
nothing else but that he might be accepted of God for Christ's sake, and be
esteemed righteous in his righteousness; and this very Obedience which is in
Christ, and not in us, is the very matter of the Justice of the Gospel, and
this is made ours by Faith; the Gospel requires not the conditions of Merit or
of any work to be done on our parts, in the Case of Justification. Toletus
writing on the Romans 10.3. the not submitting to the righteousness of God, which
is the same righteousness of God by Faith, as is in Phil. 3.9. he has this
expression upon it, and says it is -- Justitiam partam morte Christi quam Deus
Credenti imputat and donat; and Pareus, says it is Justitiam Christi, and
Vatablus on Romans 10.4. concerning Christ's being the end of the Law for
righteousness, says, Vt qui credit in Deum reputetur Justus a Deo. perinde ac
si totam legem impleverit, finis legis per se est ut ex ejus prestatione
Justificentur homines, hunc finem lex obtinuit in solo Christo, qui legi
penitus satisfecit and per Christum in nobis quoque obtinet quibus data ei legi
satisfactio per fidem imputatur, thus Va^ablus: Gomarus gives in his Testimony
very plainly against Gospel holiness, being the righteousness of God, and says
on Romans 1. on the righteousness of God, revealed from faith to faith, in this
Question, Quid sit justitia? non qua Deus Justus est sed effective quod a Deo
data est: and Estius; Qua nos revera in oculis ejus Justos facit: and Tirinus;
Qua nos Deus a Peccatis absolvit: And Zanchy on the Righteousness of God
without the Law, Romans 3.21. says, Quomodo fides Justificat, assert fides
justitiam non effective quasi habitualiter Justos efficiat, nec materialiter
quasi ipsa sit illud quo justi censemur, sed objective, quatenus in Christum,
qui est Justitia nostra dirigitur, and organice, quatenus Justitiam Christi
nobis imputatam (fides) apprehendit. And on this very Text, Phil. 3.9. but the
righteousness which is of God by Faith, Id est, Justitia quae est ex Deo quae
tota penitus and omnibus suis partibus merum est Donum Dei gratuitum, venit
haec Justitia e Caelo unde cadit Super fidem (...) non dicit hic (...) quasi
fides prout opus est nostrum, vel sit pars hujus Justitia, vel illud
promereatur, sed tantum (...). Thus these Worthies on this Text agree with Dr.
Goodwin who says p 40. of Election, which righteousness by Faith to be Christ's
Righteousness, all sound Protestants profess, wherein they are as far from
saying the righteousness of God, by faith, is our Gospel holiness, as that it
is our Gospel unholiness. I suppose it might easily be shown whence Mr.
Williams had this unsound Interpretation of this glorious Text, even from
Grotius, as he from the Mother of Harlots, Rome, who Joins man's works with
Christ's for Justification. But methinks every true Lover of the Lord Jesus, and
honourer of him with his Righteousness made ours, should rise in Arms against
such an Exposition of this Text, and say, Sir, I would rather the Pen though
Steel, should be thrust into the Ball of my right Eye, than thus to pierce
again the side of the Lord Jesus, and let his righteousness run waste, while
it is joined so corruptly with our Holiness. But what need the suffrage of these
Worthies be called in to oppose this exposition, they may as well be called in
to say White is not Black, and black not white, for it is positively against the
express word of God, and such an Interpretation is to make the Word a Nose of
soft Wax, to turn it which way one will; the Spirit of God says expressly, it is
the righteousness of God by Faith, that is, it is the righteousness of him who
is God blessed for ever, and it is ours by Faith. No, says this bold Pen, it is
our Gospel Holiness, that is, it is our conformity to all the Rules of the
Gospel. From such Divinity the Lord Deliver us.

By this preface it may be guessed how he will attack the free Grace of God,
set forth in the Gospel, and held up to the light by Dr. C. ex pede Herculem,
ex ungue Leonem.

This is the first part of the proof of his opposing Dr. C. in order to bring
in our righteousness to concur with Christ's in our Justification, by his
perverting the Text in calling the righteousness of God by Faith our Gospel
Holiness which is near a kin to the Quakers Light within, being their Christ;
so if our Gospel Holiness be the righteousness of God, then it is our Christ,
for Christ is called by Thomas his God, and by the Apostle Paul, he is made of
God our Righteousness, and by Mr. Williams this Christ our righteousness, is
our Gospel Holiness.

So that by this Clew or Thread at the entrance into his Book, we are led into
the Mystery of his laying so great Blame on Dr. C. for renouncing all our
Righteousness in the matter of Justification before God. But to trace him from
the beginning, he enters on the Stage with so much heat against Errors of his
own forming, that he forgets himself, and the first dash in his Preface is a
trip of nonsense, making his beginning to sound as if it were his ending,
saying, the Revival of those Errors, whereas he had named no Errors before; but
Zeal and his Passion puts and begins on these Errors, which has no reference,
and instead of saying the Errors which I have proved against Dr. C. he says,
the revival of these Errors: Well, what will the revival of these Errors (in
the air) do? they must not only exclude that Ministry as Legal, which is most
apt in its Nature, and by Christ's Ordination, to convert Souls, but also
renders Unity amongst Christians a thing impossible: But what if they be found
sound Gospel Truths, what you take for Errors, then the Ministry excluded as
Legal, will be found not very apt in its nature to Convert Souls, and not of
Christ's Ordination so to do: Whether they be Errors or no, will be seen when
Examined; in the mean time, this expression looks like Legal and Ungospel, to
say the Ministry he pretends to has an aptness in its own nature to convert
Souls; and is Foreign to the Apostle's account, he gives of converting Souls,
for the Gospel it self preached by the Apostles themselves, had no aptness in
its Nature to convert Souls, nay, it was so far from that in its own nature,
that it became a savor of Death to the non Elect; the Apostle did not Preach a
deal of trumpery qualifications must be found in Men to prepare them to true
Conversion, but he preached Christ Crucified, to the Jews a stumbling Block, and
to the Greeks Foolishness, but to them which are called both Jews and Greeks,
Christ the Power of God, 1 Cor. 1.25. and in 2 Cor. 2.16. the Apostle says, We
are of God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that
Perish, to the one, the savor of Death to Death. Where is the aptness of the
Gospel in its own nature to convert Souls, when you find it is the occasion of
stumbling, and is a Savor of death, where there does not go forth the same
Almighty Power with it, as raised up Christ, and now though the Apostles
preaching was far from having any thing in its own nature, of aptness to
convert Souls, yet a human Invented way of Preaching the Gospel with threats
and promises, you say is apt, nay it is most apt in its Nature to convert Souls;
what does this tend to but the taking off the effectual Irresistible Grace of
God in calling some by the same word which hardens others; I fear the
conversion that is wrought by the natural aptness of a certain Ministry, is
only a Conversion to a natural Religion, not to that which is from above. Well,
you say your Ministry is not only apt in its nature, but by Christ's Ordination
to convert Souls: If it be by Christ's Ordination, it must have a tendency to
what Christ has ordained it for, but the Ministry of Christ's Ordination is not
to set up any thing in Man to convert him, unless deadness in a Man is a
Qualification to make him live; he says the Dead shall hear the Voice of the
Son of God and live, and you who were dead in sins, has he quickened; you may
tell a dead Man of many Qualifications that be necessary to make him live, but
it is all in vain, till Christ by his Omnipotent Power say the word, and with
the word speaks life: But this aptness of a Ministry in its nature, and then
hooking in Christ's Ordination of it without any Proof, shows we must take
things for granted, because you say it, though the Scripture say just the
contrary, in saying, When thou wast in thy blood, I said to thee, live, Ezekiel.
16. What Threats and Promises were here, what aptness in denouncing the Terrors
of the Law, when even the Promises of the Gospel have not a natural aptness
till Christ speaks the word, and say, Lazarus come forth.

The other side ignorantly set up the Name of Christ and Free Grace. (he says)
'Twould be good Manners first to prove it is done ignorantly, and next it would
help your cause to prove that the Name of Christ, and free Grace, are not of
more value in the Case than your Promises and Threats. O have a care of a fling
at the Name of Christ, for by Faith in his Name, the Apostle made the Cripple
to go.

This is set up against the Government of Christ and the rule of Judgment, D.
W. No, it is set up by the Authority of the Apostle, who desired to know nothing
among the Corinthians but Christ and him Crucified, not a rag of Men's
Righteousness to cover the least speck, would the Apostle know. As for the
Government of Christ, he needs none of your stating.

I believe many Abettors of these mistakes are honestly Zealous for the honor
of Free Grace, M. W. Again, he comes with his these mistakes before he names
any, so positive in his Nonsense through Zeal of Opposition is he, they are
honestly zealous: But if they be in the right, as will appear if the Word of
God be right, then it is to be feared the Opposer will not be honestly a
Dictator, and to calumniate before he prove, is no sign of over much modesty,
nor discretion. If he had said, I suppose the Reader will find Dr. C. guilty of
mistakes by the following Discourse, he might have acquitted himself of
modesty. But presently these Errors and these Mistakes without a tittle of
Proof requires a reproof; he taught his venerable Vouchers, Dr. B. etc.
modestly to say, he has rightly stated the Truths and Errors mentioned, not
these Errors, and these mistakes; they may be rightly stated, and yet come far
short of being sufficiently proved; and whereas they modestly say, they account
he has in this work done considerable service to the Church of Christ. I am of
their mind too, by many considerable Pens being engaged in answering it, and
will say what an excellent Christian told me, I bless God with all my heart
every day I rise for the oppposing Dr. C's. Doctrine at Pinners Hall, for it
has occasioned the light to break forth more gloriously thereby: in
illustrating and confirming what was opposed. I suppose they referred to the
Reverend Mr. Coals Discourses.

They have not light sufficient to see how God has provided for this (honor
of Free Grace) in his Rectoral distribution of benefits by a Gospel Rule, Mr.
W. If he had said they have not confidence sufficient to prescribe God a Rule
as some others have; I had agreed; but for light: Let us to the Law and
Testimony, when we come to the point; but this Rectoral Distribution is the
business, Men have coined an Office for God, they prescribe him a model of
Government; he must distribute Benefits by a Gospel Rule, but this Gospel Rule
is of their own Scheme, whereas the Apostle said to the Jailer reeking in his
sin, going about to kill himself, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be
saved; this Rectoral Distribution must have been by threats and Promises, you
Jailor, what have you to do with the Free Grace of God in Christ, sure you have
heard of Dr. C. Doctrine, that Christ saves the worst Sinner that comes to him
by believing; no, hold a while, the Apostle Paul runs too fast, he has made
abundance of such Antinomians as Dr. C. stay a little, consider, have you
gracious Qualifications? Have you wept and mourned, and given full proof of
your Humiliation, Godly Sorrow, Repentance, and the like? Don't tell us these
are the Fruits of Faith, and follow Faith, but when you have found these, then
come to us for Comfort; show us your Gospel Holiness, and then we can tell you,
Believe in the Lord Jesus, and you shall be saved.

Many of our Ablest Pens were engaged against these Errors, as Mr. Gataker,
etc. The Provincial Synod at London. As for Able Pens, God gives various Light,
and if Paul and Barnabas contended, much likelyer for Mr. Gataker and Dr. C.
but it is easier refuting a dead Man than a living one, for one cannot answer
what the other opposes: Peter and Paul contended, but Free Grace Paul was too
hard for Legal Peter, who complied too far, Gal, 2.11. and so at last will Dr.
Crisp's Doctrine be to those, that as it were bring in somewhat with Christ's
righteousness for Justification. As for the provincial Synod that opposed by
Name Doctor Crisp, I fear much of their Spirit is in those that pretend to
moderation, while they oppose this Doctrine, they were for bloody Bonners
Argument against Dr. C. Fire and Faggot it would have come to. I remember I
went when a Boy to Prison, to see an Eminent Christian whom that Synod had
secured there for promoting the Publishing Doctor Crisp his Works; a rare way
of Rectoral Distribution of Benefits by a Gospel Rule, and were Power in the
hands of those several worthy Ministers that Doctor Williams says, often
solicited him to engage in this Work, I question not but they would at length
prevail with him, as well to imprison Doctor Crisp his Defenders, as to aver
those things to be Errors, that he has not proved so.

We are engaged in a new Opposition, to the grief of such as perceive the
tendency of these Principles. Here Is new Nonsense in the great Champion for
Man's Righteousness to fit him for Christ's; here is a these without naming any;
well, and what are we engaged in? Truly it is to grieve such as consider these
things. To the grief of such as perceive the tendency of these Principles, we
are engaged in a new Opposition (he says) and I am of his mind, he or they
that assisted him, did engage therein to the grief of such as saw the tendency
of the Principles he opposed.

But to take his meaning if it can be hit, it is thus, to their grief we are by
them engaged in a new opposition; but will it not be more to their grief to
find your Opposition is to the Truth, which by your opposing will be more
radiant.

I believe many abettors of these Notions, have grace to preserve their minds
and Practices from their Influence, D. W. Here 's great Concession, first these
Errors, then these mistakes, and now, these Notions, at last I hope it will be
these pure streams of Gospel Grace; I perceive your Eyes begin to dazzle by long
poring on the Truth, the Lord grant a clear sight; you believe the Abettors
have Grace? O blessed be God that gives to the most unworthy.

But they ought to consider that the generality of Mankind have no such
Antidote, D. W. That is, the generality of Mankind have not Grace to preserve
them from the influence of Errors and mistakes: I doubt so too, but methinks
this word, the generality of Mankind not having such an Antidote, savours as if
the generality of Mankind had some Antidote, or, as the Arminian says, all have
still sufficient by nature if they would improve it to preserve them: O how apt
are we to refer somewhat of good to the generality of mankind, whereas in truth
not only the generality have not Antidotes to keep them, but the contrary is
most true, no man whatsoever unconverted has any Antidote to keep himself from
the Poison of any Error ever broached.

I must encounter another Plunder, I see, and pick out the meaning. Who can
wonder at the general abatement of Humble walking, when so many affirm, I sins
are not to be feared, D. W. I have heard of fearing God by every Christian, and
Christ says, I Will tell you whom you shall fear, but I never heard of fearing
sins, or a complain that sins are not feared. The Pagans do fear the Black
Devil they say, lest he should do them hurt, but never any Christian I think
had any such reverence in him toward sin, probably he means, many affirm they
ought not to be afraid to commit sin, if he mean so, he was unhappy in his
expressing himself, and he would do well to cite some of his many that say so;
as for Dr. Crisp I suppose he will not offer at it, though his words look very
uncharitable that way, which the Dr. flatly denies fol. 510. and says, Let me
not be mistaken: I do not say we must not be afraid to sin, but they need not
be afraid of their sins. But as to his meaning that no Believer ought to fear
any hurt can be done him by his sin, as Dr. Crisp his assertion, when he quotes
any thing of Dr. Crisps tending that way. I will prepare for an Answer, in the
mean time. I suppose he will not deny, but God often turns that which seems
most dreadful to be most beneficial, as the Small Pox to Cure a Consumption, so
sin the worst of Evils, to the advancing God's glory and best of goods; but he
wont say Dr. Crisp taught that, therefore we ought to sin that Grace may
abound, an old objection of Satan answered by the Apostle; and Dr. Crisp in his
Sermon 8. Christian Liberty no Licentious Doctrine.

God has no more to lay to the Charge of the wickedest Man if he be Elected,
than he has to lay to the Charge of a Saint in glory, M. Williams in his
Charge. This harsh Expression when compared with the Scriptures, quoted by Dr.
Crisp, will be better reconciled to our Spirits, than that Christ the Holy
Jesus in his most perfect state of most perfect holiness, as God the Father is
Holy, was made sin and a Curse, and yet God blessed for ever, is it more
astonishing, that a Sinner in his blood, in his highest Sins, as Manasseh,
should be looked upon in Christ as chosen in him loved in him from all Eternity
to all Eternity, and looked on by God in Christ's righteousness, should have
nothing to be laid to his Charge; is this more harsh, than for Christ in his
most complete holiness to be looked on by God to be a Curse for us? Dr. Crisp
will be found not to have spoken of sinners as in themselves; but as looked on
in Christ, and then the time of being in blood, was a time of Love. And a
little Charity in D. Williams might have lead, not to make a scarecrow of such
an Expression, but if the Apostles Opposers fetched wrong conclusions from his
Blessed premises of Free Grace, so it will be to the end of the World by self
Justitiaries, but of this in its more proper place. Again,

The Elect are not governed by fear or hope, M. W. charge. No, why should they
be governed by any but their Lord Jesus, who is both their fear and hope. For
the Laws of Christ have no promises nor threats to rule them by, W. This is a
most false Charge, for Dr. Crisp owns they are under the Law to Christ, and
inforces it, and says expressly in fol. 561. Do not mistake me, I have no
thoughts as if Wrath and Vengeance were not to be preached, and made known even
to Believers, yea Beloved, wrath and Vengeance is to be made known to them, and
that as the Deserts of sin, and as the means to keep Men from sin. Now does it
not look like Malice for any to assert so gross an untruth, as to say, so it is
affirmed by those he opposes, meaning D. Crisp. That they are not under
impressions of rewards or punishments as motives to Duty, or preservatives
against sin, W. Can any thing be a clearer Proof of falsehood if not malice
than this? And it may be at least 100 such Expressions as this, to desist from
sin by motives of Rewards, and sometimes of Punishment. But report, and we will
report, and I must own it is mavelous to me, that so many worthy Divines
should take upon trust Mr. Williams Assertions out of Dr. Crisp, and not
compare them with the Book, especially such a liberal charge as his, that
Believers are not under impressions as aforementioned, and then in his next
Paragraph to say, to the best of my knowledge, I have in nothing misrepresented
Dr. Crisps Opinions. Whereas to the best of my Knowledge, he has not only
forged Opinions on him as this last; but has asserted plain falsities against
him, for which I will go but to his first charge in his Book in Fol. 1. where
he says as the Error of Dr. Crisp. that Dr. Crisp says, The Elect are at no
time of their lives under the Wrath of God, nor are they subject to
condemnation, if they should dye before they believe, whereas there is not one
word in the Quotation of Doctor C. that he says, they are not subject to
Condemnation, if the die before they believe. So that that is forged by Mr.
Williams, as the first grand Error, and all the rest will seem like it. Now if
he be false in his first Charge compared with his Quotation; any unbyast person
will believe he is much more so in the following Charges, but thus it pleases
God to suffer prejudice to blind him, that any inquirer into his Book, may
Judge of his Veracity by the first dash of his Pen, and so seeing that
unsincere, may reject the whole, as not worth looking into, but of this more in
its place.

Next let us see how he dresses up a Scheam for Doctor Crisp, wherein if he be
not very wary, he must expect to be tript, for 'twill be found dangerous for
Mr. Williams to represent him but in his own words; this then I take to be his
Charge in general, for he says, Dr. Crisp his Scheme is this, (but I say it is
Mr. Ws. for him) That by Gods mere Electing Decree, all saving blessings are by
Divine Obligation made ours, and nothing more is needful to our title to these
Blessings, that on the Cross all the sins of the Elect were transferred to
Christ, and ceased ever after to be theirs, that at the first moment of
Conception, a Title to all those decreed Blessings is personally applied to the
Elect, and they invested actually therein; hence the Elect have nothing to do
in order to an Interest in any of these Blessings, nor ought they to intend the
least good to themselves, in what they do, sin can do them no harm, because it
is none of theirs, nor can God afflict them for any sin; and all the rest of
his Opinions follow in a Chain to the Dethroning of Christ, enervating his
Laws, and pleadings, obstructing the great Designs of Redemption, opposing the
very scope of the Gospel, and the Ministry of Christ and his Prophets and
Apostles. Here Is the Charge, gratis Dictum, and the Consequences of it: It
cannot be immagined the Rancour that Prejudice will make; the Preaching up of
Christ, and Free Grace through him, is the Dethroning Christ; what could Malice
say worse? Is crying up the King for our Deliverer, from Popery and Tyranny, a
dethroning him? Just so is crying up our Salvation only by Christ, without a
concurrence of our Works, a dethroning him; in considering this Scheme, so far
I take it for granted that Mr. Williams looks on it in the whole and every part
of it to be false Doctrine, by the contrary to which we may draw a Scheme of
Mr. Williams. Thus, that by Gods Decree, no Blessing belongs to us, and that on
the Cross all the sins of the Elect were not transferred to Christ, that at
Conception a Title to Blessings is not applied. But as it is not fair to urge
upon him any thing that he does not plainly assert, so I wave fixing this on
him, and only touch on what may be true and what not in this Scheme.

First, It Is not true that Doctor Crisp says, that by Gods mere Electing
Decree, all saving Blessings are ours by Divine Obligation, and a bare denial
is sufficient, where he brings no Proof, and I ground it upon that word mere,
for Dr. Crisp no where severs the Election of the Father from the Redemption of
the Son, either in Covenant or actual Performance, For God blesses with all
Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly places, according as he has chosen us in him;
and this is more proof for what Mr. Williams advances as an Error, than he has
brought or can bring to make it an Error, to say by God's Decree, all Blessings
are ours, so that this is a frivolous and false Charge; it is frivolous, because
the sum of the Charge is a Truth, and it is false, because Dr. Crisp never
asserted it is by mere Election; but I fear, Mr. Williams to avoid running too
high in the glorifying God for absolute Electing all his Foreordained ones in
Christ to Salvation, and all that occurs to it: He I fear leaves Election as a
thing to depend much on our own wills, whether it shall take place or no, not
but that our Wills must be brought over by Gods making us a willing People, but
still the Election obtains, and God Elected to the means as well as the end,
and will accomplish both.

The next Charge is that Doctor Crisp in the Scheme made for him, holds that,
Nothing more is needful to our Title to these Blessings, but God's mere
Electing Decree; If he means nothing needful as to Evidence of the Title, then
he wrongs the Dr. who in many places makes Faith the grand Evidence under the
Holy Spirit, and a Holy Conversation necessary, but if he means by nothing more
needful to our Title but Gods Decree, taking in the redemption by Christ, which
Dr. Crisp never severs, then I hope Mr. Williams is of the same mind, or he
sets up something with Christ, and I would fain know why an Estate in Heaven
settled in the Counsel of peace from all Eternity, between the Father, Son and
Spirit, on the Children that should be begotten in time by God, and be born of
God, John 1.13. should not be a sufficient Title of an indeseizable Inheritance
to all the Elect as an Estate in Land settled upon Marriage, should be
sufficient for the Heir it is settled upon, without that Heirs doing any thing in
order to make it sure more than when he comes to Age to enter upon it.

The next is, That on the Cross all the sins of the Elect were transferred to
Christ. If this be the grand Error, then the Prophet Esaias must be called to
account for it, with the Apostle Peter, The Lord laid on him the Iniquity of us
all, who in his own Body bare our sins on the Tree. It Is admirable strange the
bold front of humane reasoning to oppose the most plain express Scriptures in
the Bible; the sins of the Apostle and those he wrote to were committed several
years after Christ was crucified, and yet he says Christ bare them on the
Tree, If Men will fight against plain Scripture, and cry, it is dethroning
Christ to urge the truth thereof, then farewell the Gospel. But to expostulate
a little, either our sins were laid on Christ then or never, for Christ suffers
no more, and if they be laid on him now, or when a sinner is converted, then
Christ must come down again, and suffer, or sin could not be expiated, but sure
it is somewhat else Mr. Williams means, as that sin was never laid on Christ,
but that when Christ died, he suffered for this end, that if we live a good
life, repent and believe the Gospel, we shall be saved; but grant that (which
can never be granted, for no man can do one good Act, without true saving Faith
in Christ, a sacrifice for his sins,) what becomes of our sins, if Christ did
not bear them on the Tree, they must lie some where, for they cannot be laid on
Christ now, then they must lie on the Sinner, which would have sent him to Hell
presently, but he purged away sin by the Sacrifice of himself, which he could
not do, if they were not on him when he was on the Cross, when he became that
Sacrifice God forbid that Mr. Williams by his Gospel Truth stated, should call
us to a new Gospel, as he would by making it an Error, to say, that the sins of
the Elect were on Christ upon the Cross.

His next is of smaller moment, but to be taken notice of, viz. It Is one part
of his Scheme of Dr. Crisps Errors, that he holds, that at the first moment of
Conception, a Title to all those decreed Blessings, is personally applied to
the Elect, and they invested actually therein. Sure this is no horrid
Blasphemy, since God says of Jacob and Esau before they had done good or Evil,
being yet unborn, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, and Jeremy being
sanctified in the Womb, Jer. 1.5. It must be before he had done much good, sure
an Heir of Glory is as soon an Heir to it as an Heir of a Kingdom; and if a
young King should be married but one Night and die the next Morning; if that
Kingdom was purely Hereditary, the States of that Kingdom would not suffer the
Widow Queen to Marry again, 'till they see whether she proved with Child or
no, and if she prove with Child, and that Child be born, I would fain know when
that Child began to be an heir, it must be at the first moment of his
Conception, or not at all. But some Men will hardly allow God the Prerogative,
to give Titles to his Heirs as they will allow a Man to do, by a settlement on
Marriage; they will grant that a King may go to Jail, and choose out the worst
Offender there, and save him, but God may not without Faith foreseen choose
Vessels of Glory to himself, and make them Heirs as soon as they have a Being.

Hence the Elect have nothing to do in order to an interest in those Blessings.
Mr. Williams. This Assertion is both right and wrong, as it may be taken, for
if by having nothing to do in order to an interest, if Mr. Williams means that
Dr. Crisp asserts the Elect have nothing to do in order to original right and
Interest by Election of the Father, before the World, then he is in the wrong,
when he charges Dr. C. with an Error in holding with the Apostle, that there
was Grace given in Christ Jesus before the World began, 2 Timothy 1.9. For in that
respect the Elect have no more to do in order to an Interest in those
Blessings, than an Heir to an Estate settled on him before he was born, has to
do to gain him an Interest therein, and accordingly the Apostle is plain in
Ephesians. 1.3. He has blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings, according as he
chose us in him before the foundation of the World, (...), even as he chose us
in Christ, (...), and according to his own grace given to us before the World
began; if he blessed with all blessings, even as he choose us, and if he gave
his own grace to us before the times of Ages, sure then those so chosen, and so
endowed with grace before time have nothing to do to get an original right or
interest in those Blessings, that were then given to, them and afterward
bestowed by God upon them, no more than the Law coming 430 years after the
Promise to Abraham had to do to obtain or evacuate the Promise.

But if Mr. Williams means that Dr. Crisp holds, That the Elect have nothing to
do in order to the applying their Interest in these Blessings, then he is in
the right, and Dr. Crisp wrong, when Mr. Williams proves it on the Dr. But he
does the Dr. wrong in so charging him, for there are whole Sermons of the
Doctors to the contrary, and particularly the 17th. of Vol. 2. Of the assurance
of Faith in P. 486 wherein he says from Acts 13.39. You shall see there how
necessarily it must be received, that Faith gives Interest in the privileges
of Christ. These are the very words in flat contradiction to what Mr. Williams
Charges him with, when he says, Dr. Crisp holds the Elect have nothing to do
in order to an Interest in those Blessings, where this passage of the Dr. may
convince Mr. Williams of a false Accusation and Slander, contrary to the ninth
Command, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor, But says the
Wise man, who can stand before Envy. I hope those eminent Divines that favored
his Book, will desire their Names may not stand to his Preface, lest they be
brought in to savor this false Charge; Dr. Crisp goes on upon that Text, Acts
13, 39. By this man is Preached to you forgiviness of sins, and whosoever
believes on him, he is justified from all things from which he could not be
Justified by the Law of Moses; from which text the Doctor treating not of
original right, or interest in the Blessings, but of the Application or
Evidence hereof, he says farther in fol. 486. thus; out of this Text I argue
thus, If there be Justification where there is Believing, this believing is a
proof of Justification. If therefore thou do believe this is a certain Truth,
thou art Justified it is an undeniable Argument, because that the Apostle does
affix Justification to believing. Here by the way, besides this assertion being
a proof that Mr. Williams has done amiss in saying the Doctors Scheme is that
the Elect have nothing to do etc. which his saying justification is affixt to
believing confutes; this saying also reflects on another very false and gross
charge in the very first page of his Book, where he says, Dr. Crisp holds the
Elect are not subject to Condemnation if they dye before they believe, which as
it is impossible they should, so the Doctor never asserted they could, and this
saying of his that Faith gives Interest in the Privileges of Christ, and
Justification is affixt to believing, shows that it was against the Doctors
Sentiments, to hold that Elect persons could die before they believe, or that
he ever said, If they should so die, there was no Condemnation. But for once, I
would suppose the purpose of God concerning the Elect, to be Created in Christ
Jesus, to good Works, should be frustrate, and the Elect never should come to
actual Faith, and so never come to do a truly good Work. Now I would ask any
sober found Protestant, if he should allow such an imposibility for Argument
sake, as that God's purpose in this last case could be frustrate, which of
these two Assertions he would take for the more false, either, that an Elect
Person chosen in Christ from all Eternity, and given to Christ, and grace given
him in Christ, and accordingly dyed for by Christ (according to the Compact and
Council of peace, and this Elect person dying in unbelief) is saved, that so
the grand contrivance of God, and the precious blood of the Son of God, be not
frustrate: Or this Assertion, that such an Elect person dying in unbelief is
damned, because the word of Truth must be fulfilled, That he that believes not
is condemned; far be it from any Christian to affirm either, but of the two
false positions, I should be apt to think the first is not the worst, because
of the Eternal design of the Father and Son, to save all the Elect given in
Election to Christ.

The next Charge, Nor ought they to intend the least good to themselves in what
they do. This is high, General and Universal, like the Confidence of a Man,
with his drawn Sword against a Thistle; here I could have you, and there I
could have you, though this be not of the Essence of Faith, the not intending
good to our selves in what we do, and he would make the Doctor preach
mavelous self-denial herein, as not intending the least good in our doing,
yet here lies a snare, for doubtless, if he means this to be an Error, then it
may be he means that the Doctor holds that the Elect must do what they do, not
with intent to procure the good of Gods reconciliation to them. If that be the
Doctors Error, it is also of all Protestants, that are Orthodox, if he means
that the Error is that the Doctor holds the Elect are not to do with intent to
get the good of Pleasing, honoring and glorifying God, he mightily wrongs the
Doctor, witness his Sermons on Titus 2.11, 12 Grace teaches to deny
Ungodliness. What good he means, no man can reach without his unfolding, but
the charge must be high and general, though thereby Mr. Williams lays himself
too open for a Friend to take the Advantage he might, and thereby might give
him the unmannerly word of speaking untruth against the Doctor, I will not say
a Lie; will Mr. Williams say the Doctor holds the Elect ought not to intend the
least good to themselves, in what they do; what will he say then to those
expressions of the Doctors in fol. 141. Our Righteousness serves as a real way
to manifest our thankfulness to God. Secondly, There is this usefulness in our
righteousness, namely that we may serve our Generation. That Men may be drawn
on to glorify God, and we must shine before men in a Godly Conversation.
Thirdly, Our Righteousness is useful as it is the Ordinance of God, wherein be
will make good those things which before he has promised. Now how can Mr.
Williams say, the Dr. holds this don't intend the least good, when the Dr.
^^ith here, that by their righteousness they walk in Gods Ordinance wherein he
will make good his Promises; is not Eying the making good of Promises, or
intending some good, but unless we intend the good of our Righteousness or
Gospel-Holiness to be meant by Gods Righteousness, ours by Faith, as Mr.
Williams asserts the Apostle intended on Phil. 3.9. Our doing is by him
accounted the not intending the least good to our selves; what cannot we intend
good to our selves, in Fasting, Praying, Relieving the Necessitous, walking in
all Godliness and Honesty, unless this must come in with Christ's imputed
Righteousness for our Justification?

Next the Doctor holds, says Mr. Williams Sin can do them no harm, because it
is not theirs. If he mean that sin cannot hinder them from Heaven at last, then
he rather wrongs himself by holding it can, than the Dr. for holding it cannot,
for God has cast them all into the depth of the Sea, and says, I will
remember them no more; if so, they cannot do much hurt. If Mr. Williams, means
that the Doctor holds there is no Evil in sin to an Elect Person; then he is a
false Accuser again, for the Dr. acknowledges evil in sin, when he says fol.
4^0. If you would come to see the Evil of sin, and to see it that it may be a
Bridle to restrain you from sin; now in this sense the Dr. owns hurt in sin,
and prescribes a way so to see it, as to be kept from it, and that is, in the
next words, look upon Christ, if you would see the evil in sin; if he mean by
sin can do them no harm, in his accusing the Doctor, that the Dr. holds that
sin cannot do them the harm of making their Services stink in God's Nostrils,
then he falsely accuses the Doctor also, who says in fol. 404 sin is agravated
much in Esaiah 1. When you make many Prayers, I will not hear, because your
hands are full of Blood; here are expressions to aggravate sin, that it makes
all our Prayers and Sacrifices loathsome in his Presence, God hates it in me
and in thee. Now will Mr. Williams have the Confidence to say in general, that
this is the Scheme of Doctor Crisp, that sin can do the Elect no harm, whereas
the Doctor says plainly, that sin makes all our Sacrifices and Prayers
loathsome in Gods Presence; is it no harm to have our Prayers loathed of God?
Sure Mr. Williams would think this a great harm done him by sin, if his
wronging the dead by a false general charge, should fly in his Face, and make
loathsome his Prayers to the Lord, till he repent and obtain the washing of it
from his Conscience, by Faith in the Blood of Christ.

Again, if Mr. Williams mean that Doctor Crisp, in saying sin could do him no
harm, holds it so in general, that in no sense it can hurt him, and that it is
not a sting and terror to the Conscience even of a Believer, while his Faith
is unactive and under a Cloud, he wrongs him, for he says in fol. 512. The
Torments of Hell is the merit of the least sin in the World. I speak not to
Extenuate any sin, such as look upon these sins as uncancelled, So long these
sins may work an horror and trembling in Persons; and Mr. Williams will not say
but this is harm to a poor Souls peace and comfort, and this Dr. Crisp holds,
nay, he says in fol. 513. Before Men come to see the light of the Gospel of
Christ, their sins stare in their Faces, seeming to spit fire at them; and is
this no harm, and this is to the Elect till they believe, so that this is no
good charge of Mr. Williams. But if Mr. Williams mean it is an error of Dr.
Crisp to say, there is no sin the People of God commit, can possibly do them
any hurt, if it be taken in the sense the Doctor expresses calling it real
hurt, in fol. 510. This may be matter of debate, but will doubtless issue on
the Doctors side, or rather on the Apostle Paul's who says, all things work
together for good to them that love God. If so, then the Affliction that the
Lord chastens withal for sin, does not argue that sin brings a real hurt: If
sin could do real hurt to a Believer, such as to take away his Title to Heaven,
or cause him totally to fall from Grace, then Christ did not for ever by one
Sacrifice of himself, save us and wash us from our sins, in his Blood, and
perfect those that are sanctified, but if he did make an end of sin, and
brought in everlasting righteousness, for all that the Father gave him, then he
having purged our sins by himself on the Cross, nailing them there, never to be
able to rise in Condemnation to those that are in Christ; then this stingless
Serpent, sin, will never do real hurt to Believers, as the Doctor says. But if
Mr. Williams mean, that sin does hurt even Believers, because it brings natural
death, the Wages of sin being Death to Believers, yet the sting of that being
taken out by our Lord Jesus, that is so far from real hurt, that it is the
Inlet to Eternal glory; and if that be hurt, the Lord grant Mr. Williams and I
may be so hurt, or rather Blessed with it in our exits.

Several other such hurts come by sin, not from its own Nature, but from Gods
Ordination, as that where sin abounds, grace much more abounds (not that any
should think sin the less dreadful and terrible) and as sin has reigned to
death, so Grace reigns to eternal Life by Jesus Christ our Lord, and yet still
sin is to be avoided as the greatest, horridest evil in the World; but
notwithstanding this, the Apostle encourages poor Souls when they do fall into
sin, not to be afraid of their sins, but to fly for Refuge to the Mercy-Seat,
the hope, sure and steadfast, set before them, saying, if any man sin, we have
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and thus I hope this
grand Cavil is evaporated, and that it appears groundless for any to think Dr.
Crisp had slight thoughts of sin, when he says, it cannot do a Believer any
real hurt, yet he says, the Torments of Hell is the merit of the least sin,
and they will work an horror and trembling till we see them Cancelled.

The next is, Nor can God afflict them for any sin, says Mr. Williams against
the Doctor; This expression is no where quoted, but inferred from the Doctor,
and it is put here contrary to the Doctor's sense, in which he speaks of
Affliction, and seems harsh; Mr. Williams might see that what the Dr. says, is
spoken by way of punishment, that all the Afflictions that God lays on his
People, are in love, and not by way of punishment for their sins, seeing their
sins were laid on the Lord Jesus, and he bare them and all punishment due for
them, and if those that scruple saying, Christ bare the very sins of the Elect,
will yet allow he bare the punishment for them, sure then they must grant that
God does not lay affliction on his People by way of punishment; God says,
indeed you only have I known, therefore will I punish you for your Iniquities,
but this cannot be taken properly for punishment, unless Men will make God
worse than the foolish Servant, who made him a hard Master; viz. an unjust
Oppressor, to punish sins on his Son, and to punish them also on the sinner;
and besides, that affliction which a man bears in this life, be it never so
great, is so far from punishment proper for sin, the least of which deserves,
as Doctor Crisp says, eternal Hell Torments, that it is not so much as a
flea-biting compared with a stab at the Heart, but I take the ground why
persons will call afflictions on God's Children punishments for sin, is on this
double account. First, they would make God an easy, tenderhearted Judge, that
will commute Penance, and for a great Crime, as every sin is, he will take a
small amends as a little temporal Affliction, and next they will be as kind to
our Lord Jesus Christ, and reckon he bears the less if the sinner bear part
with him; but without any mincing, this must be owned that all afflictions on
Gods people are in love; all I love, I rebuke and chasten, and it is for our
profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness, and it is fatherly to deter
from sin. I do not mean that sin has no hand in many Afflictions, for as the
Apostle said of the disorderly Corinthians, for that cause many were sick and
weak: But what the Dr. insisted on, was, that Affliction for sin was not proper
punishment, but pure love to their Souls, though I cannot see but afflictions
are a Fruit or effect of sin in many, yet I may, not from thence conclude, that
those Afflictions are from Wrath in the Father, or for punishmenr proper on the
Child, but the effects of a Fatherly love, for if ye be without Chastisement,
whereof all are partakers, then are ye Bastards, and not Sons, so that this
Exception against the Doctor is a small one, but because it has some seeming
harshness, to say God does not afflict the Elect for sin, therefore it must be
hookt in to fill up the Charge, though the Charge in the Preface be varying and
harsher, then it seems Mr. Williams could lay in his Book, for there is no such
word as nor can God afflict them for any sin.

Mr. Williams having laid the Charge, in the next words he comes with a deadly
thunderclap, conclusion full of Indignation, saying, All the rest of his
Opinions follow in a Chain to the dethroning of Christ, which if true, then say
I, let his memory for ever perish, and his Posterity be blasted, as to this
World. But if this Charge look like sublimated malice, every candid Reader,
will say, Mr. Williams, for charging falsely with High Treason, (a great
admirer and advancer of the Lord Jesus Christ, with dethroning him) deserves
not a stab, no nor an outrageous word from his Posterity, or the lovers of the
Doctor's memory. But the Answer of the Angel to the Devil, The Lord rebuke
thee, Satan, is not this a Brand plucked out of the Fire, Zech. 3.2. How can any
thing but that which looks like Cankered Venom against Free Grace. Charge him
or his Doctrine point blank with no less than Dethroning Christ, when every
Sermon tends chiefly to the Exalting Christ, and Christ alone, under the
Father, in opposition to the grand Idol, or Christ of self Justitiaries setting
up man's righteousness. If the whole stream and almost every Page of his Book,
flows with mighty zeal for Christ, and jealousy of Joining any thing with
Christ in our salvation, for f^ar of robbing Christ of any of the honor and
Glory due to him. If this be dethroning Christ, I wish Mr. Williams would so
dethrone him in every Sermon, and that all that name the dear and blessed name
of Christ, would so dethrone him, Then we should not have the righteousness of
Christ by faith called our Gospel Holiness: I would ask the greatest Enemy that
is to Justification only by the blood of Jesus, who is the dethroner of Christ,
Dr. Crisp, who in all his Sermons is for Christ alone exalted, Crying out none
but Christ, none but Christ, to the ravishing the Hearts of thousands of lovers
of Christ. Or Mr. Williams who sets up a rectoral Government for the Lord, for
saving sinners in a sapiential way, joining our Gospel Holiness with Christ's
imputed Righteousness, nay, in plain terms, boldly affirming that the
righteousness of God by Faith, which the Apostle just before had called the
Righteousness of Christ, Phil. 3.9. That this is a Believers Gospel Holiness.
Mr. Williams cannot have the confidence to say Dr. Crisp was for dethroning the
Christ the Son of the most high, the Christ the eternal Son of God made man But
in truth he was for dethroning Mr. Williams Christ, of Phil. 3, 9. that is,
Man's Gospel Holiness from getting in the Throne of the true Christ, the ever
blessed Son of God, for justification of a sinner, or to have any thing to do
therein, he was for Gospel holiness in Doctrine and practice as much as any
Person living, keeping it in its due place; a Friend of the Bridegroom, but not
a Co-partner with the Bridegroom, and as eminent Mr. Christopher Fowler, said
twenty and twenty times (so in effect, say the Doctors Sremons) I would not for
this Room full of Gold open my mouth against Evangelical holiness, or true
holiness, one grain of it being more worth than all the World, but hold, it
must not sit on the Throne with Christ: It is a good Handmaid to wait on the
Queen, but it is not to lie in Bed with the Queen, or in effect, our Gospel
Holiness must not affront the Lord Jesus Christ, to take his Crown and dignity
from him: Now in any impartial mind, it may easily be judged who is the
Dethroner of Christ. O whether will Passion and Prejudice lead men, and how
will it blind them, when their Conscience cannot but tell them, that they
themselves come short of him in Exalting Christ, they cry out against others
that are of a far more elevated strain in the honoring the Lord Jesus. O you
dethrone Christ, because you do too much magnify him in opposition to Gospel
Holiness, coming in for any share in our salvation.

This is his first link in the Chain dethroning Christ, as much as to say, I Will
lay load enough, but the first stroke shall do his business, the Dr. Opinions
have been to the dethroning Christ, would any one but such as Solomon speaks
of, who casts about Firebrands, Arrows and Death, Prove. 26.18. have uttered
such language without one tittle of proof, without saying I have proved his
Opinions Dethrone Christ, or I am of Opinion his Notions tend to dethrone
Christ; none of this softness is in his Iron strain, but point blank, all his
Opinions follow in a Chain, to the Dethroning Christ, his preaching that Christ
is the only way, is dethroning Christ, his Preaching Man's Righteousness, is
the grand Idol, is dethroning Christ. Any one may guess it is the rubbing that
Sore makes such outcry: O you dethrone Christ, when you unhorse Men from their
own righteousness: But if for every idle word, that men shall speak, they shall
give an Account, can they think they shall not also for every false
uncharitable charge they give, in accusing a grand Asserter of the Alone Rights
of the Lord Jesus in the matter of our Salvation, to be in that very thing, a
Dethroner of the Lord Jesus. What shall be done to thee, thou false Tongue.
Psalm. 120.3. I hope the Lord will incline such Arguers not to adhere to their
own Arguments, but fling down their strong Reasonings, and submit to the alone
righteousness of God for Salvation without our Gospel Holiness sharing in it,
being overcome by the Almighty overpowering sweet drawing of the Spirit, and
cry before it be too late, as Julian did, Vicisti Galilae, thou have overcome
me, O Galilean by thy Blood and Spirit, freely given to me for my righteousness
and Life, to ascribe all the glory to thee, none to my Gospel Holiness, this is
all the harm I wish and pray for the uncharitable censurer of Dr. C. for, for
that he had by his Opinions dethroned Christ, cujus contrarium.

The next is, Enervating his Laws and Pleadings: This flows from the other, if
Christ be dethroned his Laws must be enervated, But if Christ alone is exalted,
his Holy and Pure word is established, as the Dr. often asserts from the
Apostle; do we make void the Law by Faith, nay we establish it by bringing in
Christ fulfilling the Law for us, and writing it in our Hearts, as holy just
and good, teaching us by his Spirit, to deny all ungodliness, as in the Sermons
on that Text. Dr. Crisp shows; it is not the exalting the Blood of Christ, that
Enervates the Laws of God and Christ, but it is the making our Righteousness
which is every jot defiled to stand in the place of the abrogated Moral Law; to
say that in regard we are not able to fulfill the moral Law, God accepts of our
Evangelical Righteousness, that is, our own Gospel Holiness, and so making it
in some sense a Co-partner with Christ's Righteousness, denying it in words, but
establishing it in deed; this is the real enervating Christ's Laws, else how
comes the righteousness of God by Faith, Phil. 3.9. to be called Gospel
Holiness? I am sure the Righteousness of God by Faith justifies a Believer, and
if this Righteousness of God be our Gospel Holiness, then our Gospel Holiness
justifies a Believer, and this they will bring it to at last, or they say
nothing.

Obstructing the great Design of Redemption: A virulent Charge, but unless
obstructing man's Righteousness from eclipsing Christ's Righteousness be the
Crime, nothing of this can be laid to the Drs. Charge, how inconsistent is this
Charge with the great cry against him, that Christ saves the worst of sinners
that come to him, even when in their blood and filth which he freely asserts,
and yet presses not to live in sin, but to glorify God in all holy
Conversation. If by the design of Redemption Mr. williams means that we are
redeemed or created in Christ Jesus, to good Works, and Charges the Dr. to
obstruct that design, what can be more contrary than that in the Doctors
Sermons, when he says, fol. 556. The belief of this, (that Free Grace abounds)
does certainly and effectually teach and produce an hatred of sin, and a love
of holiness, and in fol. 557. If there be any such, (as say, let us sin that
Grace may abound) let me deal plainly with them, for my part I must account
them the greatest Monsters upon the Face of the Earth; the greatest Enemies to
the Church that ever were, and I say of such dishonourers of the Church, and
disturbers of the Consciences of Gods People, that they are Carnal, Sensual,
and Devilish; they are the greatest Enemies to the Free Grace of God, and the
greatest Subverters of the Power and Purity of the Gospel, and the greatest
hinderers of the Course of it under Heaven: No persons in the World do so wound
the sides of Christ as he who does profess the Gospel, and yet live Wickedly,
and if there be any such here, let me tell them their Faith is no better than
the Faith of Devils, for they believe and tremble, and that Christ will have a
heavier reckoning, and account for such when they come to Judgment, than for
any Persons under Heaven besides. Now can Mr. Williams in cold blood say this
Doctrine obstructs the design of Redemption; that this opposes the scope of the
Gospel.

Next he Apoligizes for the Doctor, That he had not entertained these Opinions,
if he had considered that God's Electing Decree is no legal grant, nor a formal
promise to us. I suppose it may be gathered that the Doctor considered God's
electing Decree as much as his Opposer, when the Dr. lays all the stress of
Man's happiness upon the absoluteness and irreversibleness of it, and if others
had as great an honor for the veracity and stedfastness of those Mountains of
Brass, they would not make men's Salvation that are elected so uncertain a thing
as many do.

As for the Decree not being a legal grant, Mr. Williams has erected a new
term of Art, what he means I know not, but if he means it is a grant not good in
Law, or that it is such a grant as no man can plead at the Bar of God, either
in our own Conscience, or at the great day of Judgment, to say, Lord thou have
elected me, therefore I must be saved. This I suppose I may flatly deny, and
say (provided I know my Election, as the Apostle says, 1 These. 1.4. Knowing
Brethren your Election or as Christ bids us rejoice that your Names are written
in the Book of Life, when this comes to be known) it may be pleaded, or else
there would be little ground of joy in it, and it may be pleaded as a grant
good in Law, for the discharge of every one to whom it belongs, not that the
Dr. or any considerate Christian is for Election going alone without
Justification, and Sanctification, no not in Children in the Womb that are
Elected and die there. So that though Election be not a formal promise, yet in
this sense it must be a legal grant, or a grant good in Law: But there may be a
snare in Mr. Williams his electing Decree: If he means God's decreeing to
El^ct, that is one thing, and God's act of Election that is another; it is the
last I insist on, I cannot reach what he means by electing Decree, but God's
act of Election, or God's actual choosing us in Christ, before the Foundation
of the World, carries in it the Virtue of a legal grant, or it is a frustrable
Election which it is abominable to say of Gods act, and yet some men's laying
the stress of all Men's Salvation upon man's Holiness, must reduce Gods election
to.

The Decree includes the means and the end] granted most freely, yea more than
Mr. Williams says, for the Decree not only includes the means and the end, but
the means is as well of the essence of the Decree as the end is, which I
suspect Mr. Williams denies, for he says in the next words, willing the first
in order to the last, that is, God wills the means in order to the end; or God
wills sanctification in order to Salvation. But if by only willing the means,
he does not make it a decreeing the means, he falls short of the truth, and
makes election not infallible, for God is spoken of often in Scripture, of
willing things to be done which are not done, as, How often would I have
gathered you, and you would not; if he means only such a willing the means
which Men may frustrate by not complying with his will, then the Decree of the
end which is eternal salvation that must fail, and so God's Election is made a
conditional one and not absolute; that is, God Elected such and such to eternal
Life, if they would repent and believe, and obey the Gospel, and not that he
Elected them, that they should repent and believe and obey the Gospel, and this
repenting and believing is left to the freedom of man's will, so that God may be
frustrate of his whole decree by their so stating Election; and I thought it
would come to that at last, so that with Mr. Williams, God's Electing Decree is
only to the end Salvation, and he wills the means Sanctification, which will of
God is rejected or obeyed, as man's Free Will resists or complies with the
motives offered to it; and If Mr. Williams thinks the Dr. did not thus consider
God's Election, and therefore was led into false Opinions, he bewrays his own
misapprehension of Election, and does not at all invalidate the Drs. Positions
concerning the Elect. His next words which he asserts concerning Election, seem
to make good my former suspicion that he makes Gods Election depend on man's
will, and for not considering which he blames the Dr. and they are these.

And as it (the Decree) puts nothing in present being, so it bars not God as a
Governor to fix a connection between benefits and Duties by his revealed will.
Here must be a great mistake of this learned and acute Gentleman, in saying
God's Decree puts nothing in present being; what, the Decree puts nothing in
present being? sure the Decree puts somewhat in present being, the Decree puts
the Decree in present being, and is God's eternal unalterable Decree, which the
Father and Son and Spirit delighted in during all eternity past, and will in
all Eternity to come, is this vanished into nothing in present being? I may say
God's Decree is so far from putting nothing into present Being, that it puts
all things into past, present, and future being, for if God be one Eternal act,
and all things past, present, and to come are ever in being in his Eye or
knowledge, so he puts every thing into present being with himself, to be
manifest in their proper Seasons according to his eternal purpose which he
purposed in himself, Ephesians. 1.11. And accordingly the Election of Sons to glory
is in present being when there are such Sons in being.

This putting nothing into being by God's Election, is the way these Men take
to evaporate God's Election into Man's Election; it is not God does absolutely
Elect any Man to salvation (except the man Christ, I hope they grant that) but
man Elects himself to Salvation, and then Election has put somewhat into
present being: But though Mr. Williams say of Election, it puts nothing into
present being, I hope all Orthodox Protestants will say that Election has put
the Elect into an happy state; for Election has obtained, though the rest are
blinded, and nothing can be laid to the charge of God's Elect, and they are
loved with an everlasting love; and is God's love nothing in present being? So
it bars not God as a Governor to fix a connection between Benefits and Duties.
No, but it bars man from framing a Model for God, and from making God's
Righteousness to be Man's Gospel Holiness, and it ba^s man from putting in any
leven into the lump of being Justified freely by his Grace, through the
Redemption that is in Jesus, it bars man from ploughing with an Ox, an Ass, and
from wearing a Linsey Wolsey Garment, and from putting new Wine into old
Bottles, and from thinking a Branch can bring sorth any good Grapes, except it
be first in the Vine the Lord Jesus, there being no gathering Grapes of Thorns,
or Figs of Thistles, or any good work from any Soul, till he is in Christ, and
though there is a blessed Connection of Benefits and Duties, yet no good Duty is
done till the Benefit of being united to Christ be first bestowed by God; God
fixes a Connection, it is true, he makes the Tree good first, and then the Fruit
good, and this was eternally in the Decree, but man must not fix the connection
by making Duties Procurers of Benefits, or making Gospel threats and promises
to have in their own Nature a tendency to Convert Souls, without the Operation
of the Holy Spirit.

Mr. Williams says, If the Doctor had animadverted that Christ's sufferings
were the foundation of our Pardon, but not formally our Pardon: This intimates
that the Dr. says Christ's sufferings were formally our Pardon. I can show how
far our great Reformers went beyond Mr. Williams in asserting the virtue of the
sufferings of Christ in the Pardon of sin, which if Mr. Williams had consulted,
he would not have reflected as he does on the Dr. they say in the Doctrine of
the Church of England, that which is tantamount to a formal pardon in Christ's
Sufferings, they do not amuse the World with Mr. Williams his Rectoral
distribution, that he allows to God in pardoning sinners, upon account of their
being found in their Gospel Holiness, joining Faith and Holiness together, as
they entitle to Gospel Benefits, which Benefits he says, are not from the
conformity of Faith and Holiness, etc. to the Precept, but from their
Conformity to the rule of the Promise, and so plunging poor Souls in his deeps,
and amazing them with his rules and Connexions: But these Homilists give a
certain sound of the Gospel, and say upon the Sermon of the Passion, of Good
Friday fol. 177 Such favor did he purchase by his Death of his heavenly Father
for us, that for the merit thereof, we are now fully in Gods grace again, and
clearly discharged from our sin. These are plain wholesome intelligible Gospel
Truths, such as suit with the Doctors Testimony, they are not Bombasted with,
If we continue to repent and believe to our Death, then our Evangelical
Righteousness shall justify us at the great day from Satan's Charge of
unbelief: But, they speak home against all Arminianism, and say that by the
merit of his death, we are in Gods grace again, nay we are now in God's grace
and that fully, (not we shall be) and we are discharged from sin, nay, we are
clearly discharged from sin, and in the next words they put it home, and say to
the confounding all the mincers of the virtue of the death of Christ as to the
pardon of sin, thus, No tongue surely is able to express the worthiness of this
so precious a death, For in this stands the continual pardon of our daily
Offenses. Had such a passage as this been found in the Notes taken from Doctor
Crisp that there is a continual pardon standing, firm in the death of Christ,
of our present daily Offenses, this would be accounted dethroning Christ by
giving more honor to him, than some distinguishers can allow, or if Reverend
Mr. Cole had said, that in Christ's death stands the Pardon of our daily
offenses, nay, there stands a continual Pardon, and this mentioned without
naming Faith and Repentance, but be our Offenses what they may be, there stands
a continual pardon if we be Christians indeed, say these holy Reformers, this
had been Dangerous Doctrine, as an eminent Divine said of as harmless
expressions of his as these in Pinners Hall: I wish those worthy Gentlemen who
are so exceptious against the freeness of God's Grace in and through Christ,
and must eke it out by our Gospel Holiness, would seriously consider in the
simplicity of the Gospel Spirit of these Homilists, such expressions as these
of theirs, before they pass their hard Censures of crying dethroning Christ,
enervating his Laws, because some who may be clearer than themselves, Preach we
are justified freely by his Grace through the redemption that is in Jesus
without any thing of Man's works cooperating therein or thereto; nothing can be
plainer than these Reformers newly come out of the School Terms of Popish
justification, for renouncing every thing in man to have any concurrence into
our Pardon: But now the simplicity of the Gospel must be lost by some Men's
Distinction of our Pardon by Christ's death, his sufferings were not our formal
Pardon, but the foundation of it.

I believe none of his Publishers of Free Grace, too freely, ever said Christ's
sufferings were the formal Pardon of a sinner, it being perfect Nonsense, but I
hope they may say his sufferings were a real Expiation of the sins of all the
Elect, without offending most of the Subscribers to Mr. Williams his Book, else
how could the Apostle say, by one offering he for ever perfected those that are
sanctified, and he loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood, having
made peace by the Blood of his Cross.

But in regard plain Scriptures will not go down but Christ's Righteousness
must be our Gospel Holiness, I proceed with the Testimony of those blessed
maintainers of the absolute irreversible virtue of the sufferings of Christ,
which sufferings contained in them the daily pardon of our offenses, and yet
these I hope Mr. Williams will not say have laid down Doctrines to the
dethroning Christ, though the same with Dr. Crisp; they say, in the same
Passion Sermon, in fol. 177. In this (Death of Christ) rests our
Justification. How? Sure Archbishop Cranmer, and Bishop Ridley, and you famous
Martyrs, you will be Antinomians by and by, have a care Mr. Williams do not see
this, he will get 49 and 49 and more, if the Press be not in too much haste to
subscribe a Paper to countenance his accusing you for enervating Christ's Laws;
what, our justification rest in Christ's death? what justified in the sight of
God (who calls things that are not as though they were, Romans 4.17. before we
believe? Sure either you are mistaken, or Mr. Williams must retract his black
Titles he has given to this Doctrine; however, Mr. Williams take it, the
Doctrine is good, stands firm, is allowed, nay, commanded by many Acts of
Parliament to be read, and by Queen Elizabeth's Letter, to be read again and
again, by all Parsons, Vicars and Curates, that our justification rests in
the Death of Christ, and if so, having the Apostle Paul on my side, Being
Justified by his blood, Romans 5.9. and the Apostle John, Who washed us from our
sins in his Blood, and our Statute Law, and the Queens Letter to the Bishops,
that our Justification rests in his Death, I will oppose it against all
Gospel Mincers, though 1000 times 49, and will say that on God's part, all the
Elect were justified when Christ died, or rather rose again for our
justification, that is, for the Declaration of it, though on man's part, no man
is personally justified, 'till Christ come, and unite himself to him, and work
Faith in him, which is always accompanied with all other Graces in Faith, the
Seed and Root planted by Christ with himself, in the Soul; the Homilists go on
for the farther ascertaining the benefits that accrue to the Elect in the Death
of Christ, and say, In this (death) we be allowed, how will Mr. Williams and
his Friends take this? In this we be allowed; will they say, in Christ's death
there is only a Foundation for Pardon, or a Foundation for our being allowed? O
it is much more doubtless; it is thus, we now are allowed or accepted in that
death of his, that death had such an efficacy, that we being justified by it,
are allowed or accepted in it; he don't say we are accepted for it, or allowed
for it, but in it, we are allowed in it; God looks on nothing else but that
Death of his Son in which he allows or accepts of those Sheep his Son dyed for;
and that this is the meaning the next words show, they saying, In this is
purchased the everlasting Health of our Souls: Ay, says Mr. Williams, now they
lean on my side, Christ purchased this for them, that is to say, provided they
repent, believe, walk holy; no, it is not with that connection, though God works
all those Graces where Christ's death is imputed. But they say everlasting
Health is purchased, and it is in this death of Christ, there, it is firmly fixed
on that unmovable Rock, without mentioning any previous Qualifications as
terms or conditions to concur to our Title, for the Title is freely given in
the Purchase, and the Qualifications are wrought by the Purchaser, all of
Grace; and as sure as he laid down his life for his Sheep, so surely they shall
come to him, the Father drawing: But without any limitation to any Condition,
it is asserted plainly by above 49 of these holy Reformers, that in this (Death
of Christ) (I say in it, which is more than by it) in this is purchased the
everlasting health of our Souls, and we may not think that Christ will lose his
Purchase, he having paid the Price; Salvation is sure and secure without any
Ifs and Ands, and connexions and distributions, as their next words plainly
say, Yea, there is none other thing, (than the death of Christ) that can be
named under Heaven, to save our Souls, but this only work of Christ's precious
Offering of his Body upon the Altar of the Cross. Here are words without
Sophisticating connexions, saving our Souls is the thing aimed at; now say
they, he has not only purchased it, so will say most Arminians, but nothing
else out the Death of Christ saves us, name what you will, name Repenting,
Believing, Gospel-Holiness, blessed graces, all, but what have they to do with
Salvation? they are found in the Subjects saved, they being the free gift of
God; but as for Salvation, as for the everlasting Health of our Souls, that was
wrought out long before our complying with the Gospel rule, and made firm to
all the Seed, the foundation of God standing sure, this work was over; and so
allowed) by these great men) when Christ died, and so well and effectually
done, that nothing can be named under Heaven to have any thing to do in saving
our Souls but this Death of Christ, though I grant many things tend to the
manifesting of it to us, and making us meet for it, as Faith and Holiness,
being the things that must and will accompany Salvation.

Are you for works, for Conditions? It Is this only work (say they) saves our
souls, Christ's precious offering of his Body upon the Altar of the Cross, then
and upon that Altar the material Cross on which our Lord Jesus hung and died,
upon that the work of saving our Souls was finished, when he cried out, it is
finished; so that here is more than a Foundation for pardon, for here is
Justification, nay more than Justification, here is everlasting Health and
Salvation of our Souls, wrought upon the Cross of Christ 1657 years ago, or
thereabouts; this was good Divinity in our great Grand-Father's days, and in Dr
Crisps Eyes and Lips, that our Justification and Salvation was really, actually
in Christ's Death, as they say, and so confirmed by every Parliament that ever
Confirmed the Book of Common Prayer; but now a poor sinners salvation must be
tortured with our personal holiness, coming in with an as it were, as the
Apostle says, Romans 9.32. that is to say, with our inherent Righteousness,
concurring, complying with conformity to Gospel Rule under threats and
promises, or else we are for the Dethroning Christ, for enervating his Laws,
and the Rabble that know nothing of either Justification or Sanctification,
shall be let loose upon asserters of Free Grace, by Mr. Williams crying out, O
these be men against Gospel Holiness, when their Opposers know in their
Conscience, there is such a strain of Holiness all along in Dr. Crisps Book,
that though it be against the grain, they cannot but own they believe him a
holy Person, and well they may, if they compare his Sermons on Free Grace,
teaching to deny Ungodliness, with his other Sermons on our sins laid upon
Christ, in the last side of which Vol. fol. 444. the Dr. says, For my own part
I abhor nothing in the World so much as this, namely, a licentious undertaking
to continue in any sin, because that such fullness of Grace has abounded; and I
shall recommend to them (if any such be here) the reading of the Epistle of
Jude, where they may see the fearful wrath of God upon such persons as abuse
the Grace of God to sin: O Beloved, let not the love of the Lord God, in Jesus
Christ thus manifested, be so basely requited at your hands, seeing the Lord
has so freely loved you, and given Christ to you, that you might be to the
Praise of the Glory of his Grace in a Godly and Christian Conversation
whereunto you are Ordained, for you are Created in Christ Jesus to good Works,
that you should walk in them: and I beseech you always to remember that you
cannot answer the free love of God toward you, any other way, but by showing it
in a fruitful Conversation in the World, and considering that one end, for
which the Lord did redeem you, was, that you might be a peculiar people to
himself zealous of good Works, Titus 2.24. Thus ends the third Volume. To stop
the mouths of Gainsayers, especially Mr. Williams, who accuses the Dr. to be
for Licentious Doctrine; but because our holiness must not come in to concur to
our Justification, this is to enervate Christ's Laws.

But to our purpose again, The Homily says, as to the respect Christ's
sufferings have to the Pardon of our sins, though his sufferings be not a
formal pardon, as says Mr. Williams, as a piece of nonsense charged upon Dr.
Crisp, yet his Sufferings are, tant-amount to a Pardon in the Account of those
holy compilers of the Homilies, who say in fol. 178. His Passion is the Ransom
and whole amends for our sin. If so, then with submission, I may say this whole
amends for sin, is in the Eye of a just and gracious God tant-amount to a
Pardon, for God cannot but acquit where amends is made, though the Person
acquitted is never the better for it as to his Conscience, till he believe in
the Lord Jesus; no more than a Criminal in Newgate condemned for Treason, is
the more at peace in his mind, when his Friend has got a Pardon for him, in
his Pocket, till he see it or believes it; but will any man in his senses say
this Criminal is not really benefited by the Pardon his Friend got him, till he
see and plead this Pardon, much less may Mr. Williams say, that an Elect person
is not benefited by the Justification by Christ's Resurrection, because it is not
applied to him till believing.

They go on in fol. 185. and say, Christ being perfect God, and the Son of God,
gave his Body to be bruised and broken on the Cross for our sins; this Mr.
Williams will grant, but they go on and say, our Savior Christ has delivered
us from sin, this Mr. Williams must temper with ifs and Connexions; they
proceed, Yet not so that we shall be free from committing sin, but so that it
shall not be imputed to our Condemnation: So they have allowed a benefit to
Believers, before they believe, though Mr. Williams questions it, and affirm
Christ on the Cross delivered from sin, bearing it away, so as it shall not be
imputed to them, and whether this be not more than a bare foundation of our
Pardon, it being a real making amends for sin; a real justification, a real
saving our Souls in these great men's account, and in the Nations account; let
Mr. Williams ponder, and not conclude that Dr. Crisp entertained these Opinions
which dethrone Christ, as he calls it, by not animadverting that Christ's
sufferings were barely a foundation of pardon, and let him muse what his
vilifying this Doctrine of the Church of Englamd will amount to.

To proceed, he says, that the sins of the Elect, They are not forgiven
immediately upon, nor merely by his enduring those sufferings; this is directly
contrary to the Doctrine in the Homily, 177. which says, In this death of
Christ, stands our continual Pardon. I hope he will allow that Christ did put
away sin by the Sacrifice of himself, because God says it without any Trope,
or Ifs or Connexions, Heb. 9.26. Also he will allow that before Christ sat on
the right hand of God, he purged our sins by himself, Heb. 1.3. And that at the
end of seventy Weeks he made an end of sin, and brought in everlasting
righteousness, Dan. 9.24. and bare our sins in his Body, and was the Lamb of
God that took away the sins of the World. John 1.29. If so that sins be
satisfied for, and if put away, and if purged and made an end of and born away,
and took away, then what will remain to be forgiven? even nothing; and yet
still neither the Dr. or any I know of, hold that the Conscience of a sinner is
acquitted hereby, or at all by Christ's death, till Christ be applied by Faith,
with all his Benefits to the Soul; so that though with Mr. Williams our sins be
not forgiven immediately upon Christ's death, as pertaining to the Conscience of
the Elect sinner dyed for, yet by Mr. Williams leave, God is not so hard a
Creditor to keep the Debt upon Record, when he is satisfied for it, and when
it is blotted out by the Blood of Christ, sure he will allow that in the Court
of Heaven the Book is crossed, and no debt appears against the Elect after Christ
made payment; sure this will not be gainsaid but by those who deny Christ's
satisfaction, which many will nibble at, though it is too plain Popery, to say
downright that Christ did not make full satisfaction to God by his Death, for
the sins of all the Elect.

Sins are not forgiven merely by his enduring Sufferings, W. What, is our
Gospel Holiness to help our Faith; Holiness? etc. Yes, for says he, There were
to intervene a Gospel Promise of pardon, the work of the Spirit for a
Conformity to the rule of the Promise, in the person to be pardoned, and a
Judicial act of Pardon by that promise on the Person thus conformed to the Rule
thereof; here is a tedious lesson for a poor terrified Soul to get by heart,
when the Spirit of God has convinced him of his miserable condition by sin,
when he cries to a Gospel Minister, good Sir, for the Lords sake, tell me how I
may get a pardon into my Bosom; I have heard, may he say, God says, there is
forgiveness with him, it is now ready by him, that he may be feared. I have
heard that when the Jailer cried out, What shall I do to be saved, The Apostle
bid him only believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved: I have heard
and read that in Ephesians. 1. and Col. 1. the Apostle says in him we have
Redemption through his Blood, forgiving of sins, so that as soon as I have him
by faith, I have forgiveness, and I am bid to fly for Refuge to the hope that
is set before me, which I take to be Jesus my City of Refuge and not my Gospel
Holiness: Now good Sir, may this poor Soul say, what shall I do under the load
of my sins? may I take the Apostles words, and Christ's call, Come to me, and
you shall find rest for your Souls, as soon as ever you find your selves weary
and heavy laden; or must I stay till I find by a long seven or ten or 38 years
lying at the Pool, searching if I can find Mr. Williams draught agree with me,
that I have attained to a full complete answering the Rule of the Gospel, which
he calls conformity to the rule of the promise? Must I stay till I can
understand Mr. Williams School terms of a Judicial Act of Pardon by that
promise to the Person thus conformed to the Rule; that is to say, must I stay
till I can love my Enemies, they being my Neighbors as well as my self, till I
can turn my left Cheek patiently to him, that smites me on my right, till I
can, having two Coats, give one to him that has none, till I can hate Father,
Mother, sell all and follow Christ, and in every thing conform to Gospel Rule;
in a word, till I am perfect as my Father which is in Heaven is perfect, before
I may dare believe my sins are forgiven? Or may I satisfy my self with Dr.
Crisps quotation, Look to me and be ye saved, as the Serpent was only looked to
for healing? I say if a poor Soul should put this to a Gospel Minister, would
he not answer, the plain short Scripture way is best, hearken to Jesus, saying,
come take the Water of Life freely, this is the work of God, that ye believe in
him the Father has sent. If you have me you have Life, as many as receive me,
that is, believe on my Name, are Sons of God. As for Mr. Williams distinctions,
Connexions, Judicial act of Pardon, he may please the Schools with them, but
there is more nourishing food in one cal^ of Christ, Come to me, come, come,
buy Wine, milk and honey without money, without price, in such a promise well
pressed, than in a thousand of Mr. Williams distinctions.

Next I must attack an odd expression savouring of God's dispensing with the
breach of his righteous Law without satisfaction, which is the back door of
Arminianism, wherein creeps in man's free will, and his good works concurring to
his salvation; the expression which I cannot digest, is this, Mr. W. says, a
continuance in a state of death with a bar to the blessing are not threatened
(in the Gospel) against every degree of sin, as the Covenant of Works did. This
is Mr. Williams sense of the Gospel, and its differing from the Law or Covenant
of Works, viz. the Law condemned for every sin, but there are some degrees of
sin, the Gospel allows, or does not threaten Death for, which I suppose without
wronging him, I may instance thus: The Law condemned a Man for killing his
Brother, and for hating his Brother, and for ill will to his Brother; but the
Gospel has compounded the matter, and made God reconcilable through Faith in
Christ, for a man's murdering his Brother, but God will take no notice of a
man's ill will to his Brother, that degree of sin there is no threatening of
Death for; if this be his sense, I take it to be far wide of the Apostles
sense, when he said the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin, that is to say,
there is as real need of the virtue of the blood of Christ to cleanse from a
vain thought as from murder, though I do not say both are alike heinous, yet
both need the blood of Christ to wash them away, or there is no standing
Justified at God's Bar. Oh we should have a care of letting this poison down,
that any sin can be pardoned but by the blood of Christ cleansing it, for he
that is guilty of one sin is guilty of all; so that to say there is any degree
of sin under the Gospel against which death is not threatened will amount in the
conclusion, to render the blood of Christ not needful to take away that degree
of sin: O sin, sin, how small soever, must not be so treated, for if the grain
of Mustard seed, small faith, but true, will grow to a great Tree, and reach to
Heaven; this grane of Henbane, the smallest degree of sin, if not accounted for
in the Gospel by the blood of Christ, will grow to a vast depth even the
Regions of darkness and Hell.

Upon this dangerous position of Mr. Williams, That a continuance in a state of
death and a bar to the Blessing, are not threatened against every degree of sin,
as the Covenant of works did, Mr. Williams propounds a splendid question, Can
any doubt this to be the grace of the Gospel Promise: O profound grace of the
Gospel promise, it does not bar from blessing, nor continue in a state of
death, for every degree of sin, a Heaven-born Soul, that lives day by day on
the Blood and Flesh of Jesus, and feasts on the infinite love of God in Jesus,
would have thought that an eminent Minister of the Gospel, a Gentleman of great
parts, supported by some of the greatest names in our Israel, would have
thought that when Mr. Williams was rescuing the Lord Jesus (as he intimates)
from the dethroning Principles of Dr. Crisp (as he pleases to call them) and
when he is bringing back the Lord Jesus to his Throne, one would think, I say,
when Mr. Williams is celebrating the glory of the Grace of the Gospel promise,
he should have called for the aid of the holy Spirit, to help him, and have
said somewhat to this purpose: O the height and depth, O the superlative
Excellency of the Love of God in Christ, that he should love us, and wash us
from our sins in his blood, that the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin,
that he has blessed us with all spiritual Blessings in heavenly places in
Christ. Thus our Lord Jesus is to be enthroned, though it comes too near Dr.
Crisp his way of dethroning Christ, no, this is not his Clue or way to raise
Monuments of Glory to our Blessed Lord, but thus he celebrates him by sniping
off a Lap of his Garment as David did Saul's; can any doubt but this (the not
being in a state of Death for every degree of sin) is the grace of the Gospel
promise: If he had said this is a grace of the Gospel, it had been a degree of
modesty in Mr. Williams to the Gospel, though it were not a truth, but to say
it is the Grace, and so the grace that none can doubt of it, this needs a
remark, and the chief that I shall make, is, that I will beg of God, and now
do, that I and Mr. Williams also may have the grace of the Gospel promise in a
more full stream than that a continuance in a state of Death, and a bar to the
blessing, are not threatened against every degree of sin, as the Covenant of
works did; but that we may swim in the Rivers of infinite Love; that God chose
us in Christ before the World, and gave us to the Lord Jesus, that no sin
should pluck us out of his hand, and that by one offering he has for ever
perfected those that are sanctified, so that now there is no more conscience of
sin, because where sin abounds grace does much more abound, and yet still for
every sin and for every degree of sin we may not think our selves freed from
Condemnation for it, by virtue of the Gospel promise relaxing the Covenant of
Works, but I beg that he and I may for our cleansing our Consciences from the
least degree of sin, make use of the Apostles remedy. If any man sin (be it in
any the least degree) we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the
Righteous, who is the propitiation for our sins; ay that is the business, that is
it we must trust to, he is the propitiation for our sins of sin in the least
degree, it must have this participation, or woe unto us; this I implore of God
in the name of Jesus, that I and Mr. Williams may by a daily applying to this
propitiation, get our Consciences free from every degree of sin.

Before I leave this clause, I reflect that the greatest Grammarian may make
blunders, which I note, that Mr. Williams in the next Edition may mend this,
that so the World may not think Mr. Williams allows false Grammar, as this
Clause gives suspicion, or I must go to School again: The false Grammar in this
clause, is in these words, At the Covenant of Works did, which follows these
words, And a continuance in a state of death, with a bar to the blessing, are
not threatened against every degree of sin, as the Covenant of Works did, so
that the sentence in brief by Mr. Williams ordering runs thus, Death and a Bar
are not threatened, as the Covenant of Works did, and if this be sense or
Grammar, it must be by some Outlandish Figure and Rule, I suppose he means
thus, Death and the Bar are not threatened as in the Covenant of Works they
were, and not as the Covenant of works did.

Mr. Williams next makes his Queries to confirm ^is assertion that every degree
of sin is not threatened under the Gospel with Death, and for confirmation of
it, says, Does it (the Gospel) promise Life to all men, however vile and
impenitent they be: I confess this rimes like brains and stairs, he propounds
that every degree of sin does not bar the blessing of the Gospel, and Confirms
it by this, the Gospel don't promise Life to the vilest and impenitent. If it
don't promise life to the vilest and impenitent, does it follow that any degree
of sin can be so small as not to deserve death under the Gospel? A strange
Inference, and stranger Doctrine, as if he had said thus, there are some sins
under the Gospel do not deserve death, because the Gospel does not promise life
to the vilest and most impenitent.

But to leave the Illogicalness of his Argument, I Will consider his Question as
a positive Assertion single and by it self.

The Gospel does not promise Life to all men, however vile and impenitent they
be, says Mr. Williams, and I never heard of any that ever said it did; that
all men of all Nations, since the World began to the end of it, had promise of
Life by the Gospel, and then Mr. Williams rambling Question supposes some such
Universalians there are, but to help and amend the question it may be Mr.
Williams intends thus; Does the Gospel promise Life to all that hear it,
however vile, etc. I answer, none that he opposes ever asserted it, as I see,
they with every good Christian say it promises life to all that truly believe
in the Lord Jesus, nay, it promises life to all the Elect, But the grand
Question is still, if it promise Life to the Elect, however vile and impenitent
they be; this I take to be Mr. Williams Question, now if he mean that the
Gospel do not promise life to those that continue vile and impenitent, to those
that are never effectually called by the grace of God. I am satisfied he must
fight with the Air, for none disputes him in that point, but if he mean that
the Gospel does not promise Life, to the chief of sinners, to the most vile and
most impenitent, which cannot be worse than the chief of sinners, if they be
elected chosen Vessels; if he asserts this he mistakes, but I will not question
his Integrity to the Gospel in this point; I fear there lies somewhat at the
Bottom that wi^^ ^^t bear the standard or touchstone of the word, that is, that
God promises Life and Salvation, upon our repentance and growing from vile to
good; for he does not promise it to the vile and impenitent: If this be his
meaning, that there is no promise of life to an Elect person till he return
from vileness, and till he repent, this is as near Arminianism as four pence is
to a groat, and as far from the scripture as the West is from the East, for
that says in Titus 1.2. In hope of Eternal life, which God that cannot lie
promised before the World began, so that I conclude against Mr. Williams with
the Apostle, that the Gospel promise was before the foundation of the World,
for Life and Salvation to all the Elect according to the Promise of God, though
they be the chief of sinners, however vile and impenitent they are, till the
Gospel comes and turns them from darkness to light, from dumb Idols to serve
the living God, and the Gospel promise when it first touches their Hearts by
the Spirit of God, though it finds them so vile and impenitent it does not
leave them so, but first puts in a new spiritual life and carries it on in
sanctification more and more every day, and in this sense I give my Judgment,
the Gospel promises life to all men that are Elected, that is, all that are by
virtue of their Election effectually called, which promise was before the World
began, this cannot be too much insisted it, because it is for the praise of the
glory of his grace, and has no tendency to lessen the true value of the
blessed graces of Repentance and new obedience which flow from and do give life
to the promise.

His next Question is, or does it, (the Gospel) threaten damnation or a
continuance of it on any true Penitent believing Godly man, because he is
imperfect. This is as wild a question as the former, that was, does the Gospel
save all thus, does it damn all, for what man lives and sins not? So that every
true Penitent is imperfect, and this question needed not be asked, but only to
insinuate, that true Penitence believing and godliness come in equal sharers,
in intituling Men to salvation by Christ; that they go hand in hand to give an
Interest in the promise, only Repentance must take the Right hand and go next
the Wall, though the Apostle say, justified by Faith, we are saved by grace
through Faith, yet Repentance and Godliness will crowd in for a little
boasting, though it rob Christ, whereas true faith gives him the glory of all,
by being the hand that receives all from Christ.

In the next place, we have the yet most dangerous position for establishing
our works in the business of our Salvation, in this long sentence to bring in a
degree of obedience, a little finger we must have in the Pie; or it will not be
well made; he brings it in thus, This change of the Sanction. (that is, of Life
from Gospel Obedience instead of the Law Obedience) supposes the death of
Christ, and his honoring the Law by his perfect Obedience, wherein God has
provided for his own glory, while he promises Life by forgiveness to imperfect
man, and yet he insists on some degree of Obedience, to which of his mere grace
he enableth us. Here Is a long series or train to bring in a degree of
Obedience, first the sanction is changed, this needs pondering; next this
supposes the death of Christ. O fit, what only supposes the death of Christ, is
his death to have no better encomium upon it, one would think that glorious
price and ransom of our redemption, should have been set off with a glorious
title, as thus, this is owing to the infinite love and mercy of God, in the
Unvaluable purchase by the blessed death of Christ. But repenting, believing, a
godly life, that must have the high praises, the Death of our blessed Lord
Jesus must come off with a supposition; this supposes the Death of Christ,
(...) the next place, it supposes the honoring the Law; and is that all, does
it not suppose the satisfying the Law? I find not a word of that, that Christ's
death satisfied the Law: O there is care taken that string must not be harped
upon, it would drown the sweet melody of some degrees of Obedience, and our
repenting, believing, and godliness, which though excellent in their place, yet
are not to eclips the glory of our Lord Jesus in becoming the end of the Law.

I must say it is a mean business to say Christ's death honored the Law, so
Cranmers death honored the Gospel, but Christ's death to all sound Protestants,
was the end of the Law, by his fulfilling our Righteousness; but there must
come in with it some degree of our Obedience, this seems pretty broad
compounding the matter with God for the sin of man, Christ honored the Law by
his Obedience, yet God insists on some degree of our Obedience, this looks like
a linsey woolsey Garment, but it must be laid aside, for it will not prove the
wedding Garment, the Bridegroom will scorn that any of his Guests shall sit
down with the glorious Garment of his righteousness, patcht up with the degrees
of our Obedience. If the King should send a Garment for Mr. Williams to come to
Court in and stand before him, I am confident he would wear that and that only,
and not go about to clap a patch here and a patch there of his own Coat, much
less will he do it to the Lord Jesus on serious thoughts, Wherein God has
provided for his own Glory: But it is but a mean provision, if Christ have only
honored the Law, and not fully satisfied it, and if our Obedience must come in
with his Sons Obedience, can is be thought that our imperfect obedience
provides for God's glory, by joining it with Christ's most perfect Obedience;
God indeed has provided well for his glory in man's Salvation only from his own
free Grace through the Blood of Christ, but Mr. Williams makes but a slender
providing for God's glory, while he leaves room for the flesh to glory in his
presence by his own obedience, is this that no flesh may glory in his sight.
But Mr. Williams takes care to prevent that (he will say) by the last clause,
that God of his men grace enables us to this our Obedience. I answer, not in
the least does this take off from glorying, for though it is Gods grace inables
to Obedience, yet the Obedience is still our work, and the Scripture says
plainly, not of works, lest any boast.

Every breath I breath, is of God's grace, and if God should enable me to speak
for two hours together to the King Lords, and Commons in Parliament, so as to
persuade them to employ none but those that truly fear God in any place of
trust, should I not be apt to applaud my self, though I should still own the
ability and efficacy to persuade them was of God, how much more will any poor
Creature boast if his Obedience has any hand in the salvation of his Soul? O
that we could cry, grace, grace, not to us but to thy name be the praise, and
as for our Obedience, cry all our righteousness is as filthy Rags, and so let
us set the Crown on the head of our Lord Jesus, say continually To the King;
eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory for ever,
for his being all in all, Author and finisher, Alpha and Omega, in our
Salvation.

He promises Life by forgiveness to imperfect Man, This is the next step to
bring in some degree of our obedience, but a false step, if by promising Life,
by forgiveness he excludes Christ's satisfying Gods Justice, as that which leads
to forgiveness, of which there is not a word in this Paragraph, and does God
promise life barely by forgiveness, this is a sorry and nonsensical account of
man's Redemption, and Salvation.

And yet he insists on some degree of Obediences, says Mr. Williams. Here
comes the great master wheel by which our Salvation is secured, Christ's death
is supposed, the Law has honor by Christ's Obedience, life is promised, but
yet God insists in our Obedience, at least on some degree of it. That God
insists on our obedience, and on more than some degree of it, must be owned by
all, for God insists on our being holy as he is holy; God insists on our loving
him with all our heart; God insists that we be blameless and unreproveable in
his sight; this is more than some degree of Obedience, and it is our duty
doubtless to endeavor to be perfect, as our Father which is in Heaven is
perfect. But this has nothing to do in our obtaining Life, and is not such an
Obedience, as Mr. Williams says God insists on: He is more easy in his terms
to poor sinners, than to run it so high; well, what is it God insists on? he in
effect, told us before, it is a true penitent believing Godly Man, this God
insists on* this is his some degree of Obedience, that God insists on, while he
promises Life by forgiveness, and is this the true Interpretation of these
Texts, While^ we were Enemies, we were reconciled, and, he justifies the
Ungodly, but from such glosses I desire to be delivered.

Well, we must be true Penitent; we must have Faith that Christ honored the
Law, and we must be Godly persons, that is, we must walk in all godliness and
honesty, or we be not godly persons, and when that is done then we may come to
God and say, Lord we have done what thou command, we repent, believe, and
are Godly, though we are not perfect, yet we are truly penitent, believing and
Godly, (...) life; if this be nor dividing shares with the Lord Jesus, in the
honor of salvation, what is? No mortal man will say that our perfect Obedience
must come in toward our justification, there being no such thing in the World,
and to say that Christ merited that our imperfect Obedience should be accepted
for perfect, is to say Christ's death was needless, for God might as well have
saved the honor of his Righteousness and justice, when Man had broken his Law,
by an absolute Forgiveness, without Christ's death, as to make his death of no
more value, than to purchase that our lame Obedience should pass for firm,
perfect Obedience? But God is Just in Justifying, God has received full,
complete satisfaction from the Lord Jesus, and now says, Come take the Water
of Life freely, and by a Holy Conversation, glorify me and do good to your
selves and others.

I pass by examining his next cloudy expression, in these words, viz. This
(life on some degree of our Obedience) the Covenant of Redemption secures to
the Elect, tho the grant therein is pleadable only by Christ, as the
Stipulating Party for us, and our personal claim depends on the Gospel Covenant
wherein Christ is Mediator; which is liable enough to Exception, for his saying
Gods grant is not pleadable by us, but only by Christ, whereby Mr. Williams
makes way to bring in the Gospel Covenant of our degree of our Obedience,
before we can claim any thing of Christ as Mediator; this I pass, and If come
to his plain downright opposing the way of Salvation, according as it is
delivered us by the Apostle, by holy Martyrs, by the Homilists, by famous
Divines, besides Dr. Crisp, which follows, in these unscriptural words of Mr.
Williams his Gospel Sanction, says he, determins as certain a Rule as
happiness and misery, as the Law of Works did, though it be not the same (...)
it fixes true repentance and Faith unfeigned to be the terms of Pardon, so
when it promises Heaven to the sincerely holy persevering Believer, it fixes
sincere Holiness and Perseverance in Faith as the terms of Possessing Heaven.
Hence the Use of Faith, holiness, etc. to those benefits is not from their
conformity to the Precept, but their conformity to the rule of the Promise.

This long Paragraph of the Gospel Sanction of Mr. Williams his drawing, I take
to be as clearly opposite to the Apostle Paul, as Arminius was to our Reformed
Orthodox Divines, for Mr. Williams his Faith, Holiness, and the bottomless
boundless, endless, etc. are brought in as the terms of possessing Heaven, and
not only so, for that they might be as fruits of Union to Christ, but they are
so, the terms as they are a Conformity to the Rule of the Promise, even as the
Law of works was to the Rule of the Precept, that is, as the Law of works
required a perfect Obedience in Conformity to the Precept for obtaining Life.
So the Gospel Sanction requires Faith, Holiness, etc. in conformity to the
promise for obtaining Life, which in our ordinary Dialect is, that what perfect
Obedience obtained under the Law, that imperfect Faith and holiness, etc. does
under the Gospel, which in plain terms is, Christ has purchased that our
Faith, Holiness, perseverance in new obedience under the Gospel, should pass
instead of perfect Obedience under the Law, which is as diametrically opposite
to the Apostles, not of Works, lest any boast, as East is to West, and though
Mr. Williams say, these are not Works of the Law, yet they are works and good
works, and such as if brought in for answering the Gospel Sanction, as perfect
works did the Law, is the homest stab to the true Gospel that ever was printed
by any Arminian, for there is not a tittle in all the Gospel that our Faith and
holiness are so, our terms of happiness in conformity to the Rule of the
Promise, as obedience to the Law of works was in conformity to the Rule of the
Precept; the Apostles sanction is quite otherwise, he faith not by works of
righteousness, but by his grace he has saved us, and not of works, lest any
boast, if of works then grace is no more g^^^^ is not Faith a work, holiness is
it not working; perseverance in Obedienc^ (...) it not working? and must these
come in to answer the Promise, as perfect Obedience answered the Law? What
becomes then of Christ's Obedience for us, to answer the Law? it is quite shut
out of doors, and his Satisfaction too, by this Scheme and Sanction, this is so
far from giving Christ the sole honor of being our perfect, complete, alone,
only Savior, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, that it
quite excludes him in every part of Salvation, but only his making way that we
should save our selves, his obtaining by his Life and Death, imputed to us,
that God would be so kind to us, and unjust to himself, that our Faith,
Holiness, etc. should answer the promise as unsinning Obedience should have
answered the Law; this is making God a very cheat to himself, to set up a pure
holy Law, the perfect Copy of his will, and man's breach of it should be made up
by our imperfect, weak faith and holiness; which has no more proportion to the
infinitely holy Law, than a brass Farthing has to a World full of Diamonds,
nor so much; and yet so easy a Merchant this Doctrine would make God, by
making our pretended conformity to the Promise to answer the enjoined perfect
conformity to the Law. But because those of this Opinion cannot for shame bring
it in to stand alone, that our Conformity to the Promise should answer instead
of obedience to the law, therefore they bring in Christ to purchase this
privilege, that is, that Christ purchased that God should cheat his holiness
and righteousness with a sham of Men's invention, whereas the Doctrine of the
Gospel is, that God is just, and the justifier of those that believe in Jesus,
who in our stead fulfilled all righteousness, for us and so became the end of
the Law for righteousness sake.

And that our Faith and Holiness with the unmeasurable, etc. have nothing to do
in our justification or Salvation, as a conformity to the Gospel Promise, even
as perfect obedience had in conformity to the Precept (or Covenant of works) I
shall show farther by the opinion of sound Orthodox Writers, and begin with
that famous Martyr in Scotland, burned Anno 1532. for adhering to salvation by
Jesus Christ without works, in his Treatise set forth by Mr. John Frith an
English Martyr in the same Cause Burned in 1533. he has these Expressions,
viz. No manner of works make us right wise, and no works make us unright wise;
if any evil works make us unrighteous, then the contrary works should make us
righteous, the proof is we believe that a man shall be justified without works,
Romans 3. and we believe in Jesus Christ that we may be justified by the faith of
Christ and not by the deeds of the Law, good works make not a good man, nor
evil works an evil Man, but a good man brings forth good works, and an evil
man evil works, good Fruit makes not the Tree good, nor evil Fruit the Tree
evil, but a good Tree bears good Fruit, and an evil Tree evil fruit: If works
make us neither righteous nor unrighteous, then thou will say it makes no
matter what we do. I answer, if thou do evil it is a sure Argument thou art
evil, and want Faith; if thou do good it is a sure Argument thou art good
and have Faith. Here is no sophistication of Faith, Holiness, Obedience, etc.
answering the Rule of the Gospel promise as perfect Obedience answered the Law,
and moreover he gives the reason why we are so saved by Christ, Because, says
he, Thou made the fault and he suffered the pain, and that for the love he
had for thee before thou wast born; now since he was punished for thee, thou
shall not be punished: Finally he has delivered thee from Condemnation, all
evil, and desires naught of thee (mark that) but that thou will acknowledge
what he has done for thee, and bear it in mind, and help others for his sake,
as he has helped thee for naught: Thou will say, Shall we then do no good
deeds? I say not so, but I say we should do no good works for the intent to get
the Inheritance of Heaven, or the remission of sin. Thus this blessed Martyr
asserted the Gospel, in these truths worth laying down ones life for; but I
hope none will be put to lay down their life for asserting our imperfect
Obedience, answers the Gospel, as Adams perfect Obedience, If he had had it,
would have answered the Law, for any to die upon such a point, would be to be a
Martyr for his own Righteousness, not for asserting Christ's; now comes Mr.
Frith, and gives his Observations as full of Antinomianism as his Author Mr.
Hamilton, or as Dr. Crisp, and just such an Antinomian as the A. Paul was, and
says; Therefore wheresoever any question or doubt arises of Salvation, or our
justifying before God, there the Law and All good Works must be utterly
excluded and stand apart, that grace may appear free, the Promise simple, and
that Faith may stand alone, which faith alone without Law or Works, works to
every Man particularly his Salvation through mere promise and the free grace of
God; this word particularly I add for the particular certifying of every Man's
heart privately, and particularly that believes in Christ, so Faith is the
instrumental Cause by which every Man applies the Body of Christ, particularly
to his own Salvation, so that in the action and office of Justification, both
Law and Works (all good Works above) be here utterly secluded and exempted, as
things having nothing to do in this behalf: The reason is this, for seeing that
all our Redemption universally springs only from the body of the Son of God
Crucified, then is there nothing that can stand us in stead, but that only
wherewith this body of Christ is apprehended, now for so much as neither the
Law nor Works, but Faith only is the thing that apprehends the Body and death
of Christ, therefore Faith only is that matter which Justifies every Soul
before God, through the strength of that Object, which it does apprehend, for
the Object only of our Faith is the body of Christ; like as the brazen Serpent
was the other only of the Israelites looking by the strength of which Object,
through the promise of God immediately proceeded health to the Beholders, so
the Body of Christ being the Object of our Faith, strikes righteousness to our
Souls. Thus far Mr. Frith.

Here Is good, sound, strong, homespun Divinity, that came from the heart of an
early English Martyr in the days of Hen. VIII. It came not from Rome or
Amsterdam, or Poland, and because the Book of our blessed Martyrs is in few
hands, I Will transcribe some more of Mr. Frith's contrariety to our new way of
stating Gospel Truth, hoping it may tend to the establishing Souls, whom the
Sophistry of some Men may amuse with their Connexions of, etc. to Faith and
Holiness in the business of pardon of sin, to which Mr. Frith says, as
follows, In a Christian man's life there is the Law, there is Repentance, there is
Hope, Charity, all which in man's Life and Doctrine are joined, and yet in the
action of justifying there is nothing else in man that has any Part or Place
but only Faith apprehending the Object, which is the body of Christ Jesus for
us Crucified, in whom consists all the worthiness of our Salvation by Faith,
that is, by our apprehending and receiving of him, according as it is written,
John 1. Whosoever received him, he gave them Power to be made the Sons of God
even all such as believed in his Name.

For so much therefore as the Truth of the Scripture in express words has
included our Salvation in Faith only, we are enforced necessarily to Exclude
all other causes and Means in our Justification, and to make this difference
between the Law and Gospel between Faith and Works, affirming with the
Scripture and Word of God, that the Law condemns us, our Works, (of all
sorts) do not avail us, and that Faith in Christ does only justify us, and
this ought diligently to be learned of all Christians, especially in all
conflicts of Conscience between the Law and the Gospel, Faith and Works, Grace
and Merits, Promise and Condition, Gods Free Election and Man's free Will, so
that the light of the Free grace of God in our Salvation, may appear to all
Consciences to the Immortal glory of Gods holy Name, Amen.

Thus said this blessed Servant of the Lord Jesus, and this he sealed with his
Blood, and this was good Doctrine in those days among the Reformed, this was
thought worthy to be inserted in our famous Book of Martyrs, and approved by
the whole Body of Christians in the Nation, and not scandalized as the same
expressions are in Dr. Crisp's Sermons. I would fain know what more stabbing
words can be said against Mr. Williams Thesis or Position, than both Mr.
Hamilton and Mr. Frith have insisted on, No manner of Works make us right wise,
and no works make us unright-wise, and all good Works must be utterly excluded,
and stand apart, that grace may appear free: Now are not Repentance, Holiness,
new Obedience, perseverance, and Mr. Williams his etc. Good works, yet they
must stand apart, and be far from such a Conformity to the Rule of the Promise
in our salvation, as Perfect Obedience was to the Rule of the Precept. O, that
God would teach Men to, lower their high towering Opinions of our Holiness,
concurring to our Salvation, and cry Grace, grace to all, from the Foundation
to the Top-stone, still not of works (though this galls proud Flesh) lest any
boast.

For a farther satisfaction in this great point, let us see what our great Men
presently after the downfall of Popery in this Nation, have said as to our
works in the matter of Salvation. The Homilists say in fol. 27. All good Works
spring from Faith, and cannot be done without Faith; then I argue if they
spring from Faith, and that we are justified by Faith, then good works have no
hand in our Justification, because that is over, in order of nature, before a
good work sprung up, then what have we to do with Mr. Williams Gospel Obedience
conforming to the Promise in order to pardon? The Homilists say farther, from
those words, without me you can do nothing. That what work is done without
Faith is sin, and without Faith all done of us is dead, and Austin says, fol.
31. Whether thou will or no, that work that comes not of Faith is naught: There
is one work in which is all good Works, that is Faith, This is the Work of God
to believe in him; so that Christ called Faith the work of God, and as soon as
a man has Faith, anon he shall flourish in good Works. Thus Holy Austin was
for Faith alone, without the Trumpery of our Obedience with, etc. in order to
pardon. Mr. W. fixes Repentance and Faith with Holiness, etc. to be the Terms
of Pardon. How far this, etc, goes, it may be Mr. Williams may tell us in the
next Edition, or by the Athenian Mercury, but for the consolation of humble
Enquirers into the truth, I Will tell them what our Homilists say of this great
grace of Repentance which Mr. W. puts before Faith, and which he makes one of
the terms of Pardon with his etc. in fol. 258. these Homilists say, We must
return to the Lord, yea to him alone, and never rest till we have taken bold
upon him, but this must be done by Faith, and he himself in his Gospel does cry
out, I am the way, the Truth and the Life, therefore they are greatly deceived,
who preach, Repentance without Christ. (so that with the Homilists it is first
Christ's ours by Faith, then Repentance,) they that think they have done much of
themselves toward Repentance, are so much more the farther from God. This is
not like our new Gospel Truth stated, that a man without saving Faith in Jesus,
may repent of his sins, yet say the Homilists, but it is such a Repentance, as
Judas's, such as puts him farther from God, and in fol. 263. they confirm their
Doctrine of no sound Repentance without Faith in Jesus, the way to it, and say,
We must beware, we in no wise imagine we can repent aright hy our own strength,
for this must be verifyed in all Men, without me, you can do nothing. Mr. W.
will say he owns that Christ enables us to repent, it is true, but does he own a
Man is in Christ, believes in Christ, before he repent, if he do not own that,
then he comes not up to the Text, where Christ speaking of all his to the
Branches, in him, he says upon that (...), without me, or out of me you can do
nothing, you cannot repent or do new Obedience if not a branch in me by Faith.

Again, in fol. 268 they say, They that preach Repentance, without a lively
Faith in our Savior. Jesus Christ, do teach Judas his Repentance: It is
evident, though we be never so earnestly Sorry for our sins acknowledge and
confess them, all these are but means to bring us to utter despair, except we
do steadfastly believe that God our heavenly Father will for his Son Jesus
Christ's sake pardon and forgive us our Offenses. To them I add the Testimony
of as great a Scholar, and as sound a Protestant as Mr. Williams who above 100
years ago gave a better account of Faith and Holiness than Mr. W. does, and
that is Mr. Perkins, no Antinomian who says in fol. 236. The law promises life
to him that performs Obedience perfect, The Gospel promises Salvation to him
that does nothing in the cause of his Salvation, but only Believes in Christ;
yet not for this Faith, or for any work else, but for the merit of Christ. this
is a big word; what, do nothing in the cause of Salvation but believe? no,
nothing, says Mr. Perkins, and before Mr. Williams can confute him, he must
prove Christ's Righteousness ours by Faith, is meant of our Gospel Holiness;
that is, God says it is Christ's Righteousness, but he means quite otherwise,
viz. it is our Gospel Holiness. Mr. Perkins is in good earnest that we are to do
nothing for Salvation but believe and answer several Objections as follow.

Objection 4th. (says Mr. Perkins) To believe is a work, therefore one work is
commanded in the Gospel, and is necessary to Salvation. Answer. The Gospel
considers not Faith as a Virtue or Work, but as a Hand to apprehend Christ, for
Faith does not Cause or effect or procure our Justification and Salvation but
as the Beggars Hand receives them, being wholly wrought and given of God, and
in fol. 247 he says, we must first be Justified before we can do a good work,
and in fol. 287. Paul teaches that works set up as Causes of Salvation with
Christ make void the grace of God: And is not this making them causes of
Salvation with Christ, to say Christ purchased this Grace, that our Sincere
Obedience, Faith, Holiness, Perseverance, should be accepted to answer the rule
of the Gospel Promise for pardon.

Well does Mr. Perkins proceed to reject our Righteousness in the matter of
Salvation, and Says in fol. 955 of vol. 1st. A man's Conscience must in some
sort be settled touching his reconciliation with God, before he can begin to
Repent, wherefore Justification and Sanctification in order of Nature, go
before Repentance, but if we respect time, (then) Grace and Repentance are
together.

This is intelligible Doctrine, and strenuous for the advancement of Christ
alone and the same in effect as Mr. Perkins had asserted, contrary to Mr.
Williams in fol. 84. Saying, From Sanctification Repentance is derived, because
no man can earnestly repent except he denying himself, do hate sin, and embrace
Righteousness, this no man can perform; but such an one as is in the sight of
God regenerate and Justified and endued with true Faith, and regarding the
Order of Nature it follows Faith and Justification. O these are strong
battering Rams against setting up man's Righteousness, and in fol. 468. he gives
account, whence this new Doctrine of repentance having a hand in our Salvation,
comes, viz. from Rome, and says thus -- The Church of Rome has Corrupted the
Ancient Doctrine of Repentance (saying) That a Sinner has in him a Natural
disposition which being stirred up by God's preventing Grace, he may, and can
work together with Gods Spirit in his own Repentance: But indeed all our
Repentance is to be ascribed to Gods grace wholly, Ephesians. 2.4. The Soul of man is
not weak but stark dead in sin, and therefore it can no more prepare it self to
repentance than the body being dead in the Grave can dispose it self to the
last Resurrection.

O these are weighty words, and O that they might prevail in the hand of the
Spirit of God to weaken man's apprehensions of something practicable in and by
himself in order to bring about his Salvation, that so we might all put our
Mouths in the dust, and give glory to God, for of him and through him,
(especially in the matter of our Salvation) and to him be all things to whom be
glory in the Churches for ever; thus much for Mr. W. Sanction of the Gospel,
giving pardon on our Conformity to the Rule of the Promise.

In the next place Mr. W. asserts a profound benefit by Gospel grace, and yet
it carries Poison in it I fear, Hence by Gospel grace there is a great
difference between imperfect Faith and utter Unbelief. The Poison in the head
of this Snake, I fear is, that this imperfect Faith is intended to be the
upshot of Gospel Grace.

A little to descant upon this, I would offer; That if so mean a Lover of the
Lord Jesus as I am, should have been telling the World the benefit of Gospel
Grace, I should have flown a little higher in celebrating the Love of God
therein, than to say by it, imperfect Faith differs greatly from utter
Unbelief; which without Gospel Grace any Child of four Years Old, will grant,
That can tell there is a great difference between a little mess of Milk and
none at all. I should have said, By Gospel Grace there is a great difference
between our Lord Jesus freely given us, and with him all things, even himself,
to be our Wisdom, Righteousness, etc. And being slaves of Satan, sold under
sin, without this gospel grace, I should have invited the World to rejoice in
this Benefit by Gospel Grace, That Christ was made sin for us, that he might be
made righteousness to us, or become the Lord our Righteousness: And that by
Gospel Grace, God com^s to justify the Ungodly, to save Sinners, of whom the
Apostle says, He was chief, and a Pattern of them who should afterward believe
to everlasting life; this is right gospel grace, worthy of the Father, Son, and
Spirit, to give, Purchase, and Communicate. I should scarce have flamm'd the
World off with such a dead Carcass of Divinity, as to say, If you look for the
glorious Privilege and Benefit of Gospel Grace, which the Father, Son, and
Spirit, have been contriving, and rejoicing in from all Eternity, and which the
Eternal Blessed Son of God, took Man's Nature for, and for which he was under
the Curse of God, and died, for which all the Angels and Saints of God for ever
adore him: It was, that this should be published. That there is by the Gospel
Grace a great difference between imperfect Faith and utter Unbelief, or which
is much at one, between an Essentiality and a Nullity, between something and
nothing; there is so great difference as is between Heaven and Hell; and this
difference is eternal, and so would have been without any thing of the Gospel.
I suppose Mr. W. means, though he is unhappy in not expressing it, that by
Gospel Grace, imperfect Faith is accepted for perfect Obedience, that is to
say, if it be joined with sincere Holiness, true Repentance, and Perseverance,
etc. but this is still wide from the mark of Gospel Grace; for the Apostle
says, It brings Salvation, and teaches Godliness.

But Mr. W. will make the World amends, it may be hoped, in the next Benefit by
Gospel Grace, which take as follows: By gospel grace there is a great
difference between sincere Holiness and formal Profaneness or Wickedness; one
would wonder how gospel grace comes to be hookt into this Difference, which all
the World would own to be infinitely different without any grace of God in the
Gospel. Did our Lord Jesus shed his Blood for this Notion to be asserted? which
was as true without any grace of the gospel, as with it; but it may be he means
that by gospel grace there is a Purchase made, that sincere Holiness shall
stand instead of perfect Holiness, which Wickedness could not do: And this he
must mean or nothing, and if he means this, he perfectly overthrows the gospel,
and if he do not mean it, he abuses the World with an Amusement. The next is,
True Love to God and prevailing Enmity. There is by Gospel Grace (he says)
great difference between these. But this is another great mistake, which I am
confident he will he ashamed to own: What has the gospel to do to make this
great difference? By the law is the Knowledge of sin, and the gospel shows
grace; but to say the gospel makes this difference, is to roh God of the
Holiness of his righteous Law. But supposing this Nonsense to be current
Divinity with some, that by gospel Grace there is great difference between God
and the Devil, or Love to God, and prevailing Enmity: What is this to the point
Mr. Williams is laboring to make good, that there is to be a Conformity to the
Rule of the Promise in the person to be pardoned; for proof of which, he says,
There is great difference between Love of God and prevailing Enmity. Would he
have his meaning to be, that love of God is conforming to the Rule of the
Promise, therefore an ingredient to Pardon, which Enmity is not. I answer, Love
of God is as much conforming to the Rule of the Law as of Gospel grace; and so
his Argument faces; had he said, the Law commands us to love God, and the
Gospel promises to write this Law in our hearts, though not as an ingredient
to our Pardon, there might be some Edification by it; but to assert, there is a
difference between these two, which was ever so, is of no more force for his
Argument, than to say, Black and White differ, or I and Doctor C. d^ffer. His
next is like the three former Differences, viz. by Gospel grace there is a
great difference between in perfect spiritual Duties and Rebellious Negle^ts.
Now he has spun a fine Thread; here is the end of his Gospel grace; it has made
this difference; and would not this difference have been, if we had never heard
of the Gospel? What Riches of grace is this in Mr. Williams's gospel! the sum
whereof is, It has made a difference between Faith and Unbelief, Holiness and
Profaneness, Love and Enmity, Duty and Rebellion. O what Encomiums must the
World raise to such a Discoverer of that which Nature, without either Law or
Gospel, teaches every man! But some hidden Treasure must lie under this Rubbish
of Divinity; it is not for nothing, that Gospel grace is dignified with
procuring these four Blessings: therefore Mr. W. must mean that Conformity to
the Rule of the Promise, is in our imperfect Faith, sincere Holiness, love of
God and spiritual Duties; and these are the Conditions on which the gospel
promises pardon; now how correspondent Mr. Williams gospel is to the Prophet
Isaiah's Account, the world may judge from Isaiah 43.25. I even I am he that
blotteth out thy Transgressions, for mine own sake. This is the Rule for
Pardon, in the sense of Doctor Crisp, and of all that love the Lord Jesus, for
obtaining this gospel grace, and for those that differ, I beseech the Lord to
open their Eyes, and subdue their Hearts to the simplicity of the gospel, that
they may lay down their strong Reasonings, which indeed are foolishness not
only with God, but to every Child of seven Years old, that has learnt his
Assemblies Catechism. But now I think on it, Mr. Williams has slur'd that by
his new unsound one; come we next to his Conclusion of his great point of our
Conformity to the Rule, in order to obtain pardon, wherein he says thus, God
in dispensing of gospel promised Blessings, does judicially determine a
conformity to THIS Rule of the Promise. We must observe that decisive word this
Rule, no gospel Blessing, without a Conformity to this Rule, that is, the four
Pillars of his Babel; to build Pardon upon, our imperfect Faith, our sincere
Holiness, our love of God, our spiritual Duties, which include every Precept,
Counsel, and Direction in the Bible; as much as to say, Stand by, blessed
Jesus, I have heard of thy precious Blood, a Ransom; I have heard of thy saving
to the uttermost all that come to God by thee; I have heard of thy passing by,
when poor Sinners lay in their Blood dead in Sins, and saying, Live; I have
heard, thou did say, Publicans and Harlots go into the Kingdom of God before
you Pharisees, that justify your selves, M^^h. 21.3^. But there is risen up in
this last Age, a Generation of strong Reasoners, that say, Our formal Pardon is
not in thy Blood, but we must get it, as it were by the Works of the Law, by
Faith, Holiness, Perseverance, Love, Spiritual Duties; and this Doctrine, O
Jesus, I must adhere to, or I shall be accounted a Dethroner of thee, and an
enervater of thy Laws, though there is not one word either in the Law or
Gospel, that enjoins these as Conditions to obtain Pardon. But thy
Righteousness is by them interpreted to be our gospel Holiness; and upon this
they ground our obtaining Pardon, not by the one work of the Law, Thou shall
love the Lord with all thine heart, but by the many works of the gospel. O that
ever men's Learning and Parts, should be so vitiated as to decry the simplicity
of the Truth, as it is in Jesus! Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be
saved; set up their Scheme of a gospel Promise of Pardon, upon a Conformity to
this prescribed Rule of Duties innumerable, besides Repentance, Faith, Love,
sincere Holiness, Perseverance, Obedience; and when all this is mentioned,
there comes in a boundless, etc. O to the Law, and to the Testimonies, let it is
say, which directs us plainly, Look to me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the
Earth, come unto me, and ye shall find rest for your Souls.

After all this Pudder Mr. Williams comes to himself, and also Doctor Crisp,
and though he had been setting up his Connexions and Conformity in Faith,
Holiness, Obedience, etc. At last he comes to Bellarmins's Tutissimum, to the
Sheet Anchor, To the alone true Gospel way of Salvation, true uniting Faith in
Christ. I was in an Amazement to find, that God extorted this Confession from
him after his long Deviation, That true uniting Faith was the Wedding Garment.
This is like a Minister of the gospel of our Lord Jesus, if he can stay here;
but alas! the next Page throws this good Mist down; however, we will make much
of this; for here he Centers with the choicest Christians, when he says thus,
God upon a View of his guests, he cast out him that had not on the Wedding
Garment, viz. true uniting Faith. Then I, quaere, What Is become of the Long
Bed-Roll of Spiritual Duties, Faith, Love, Repentance, Holiness, Obedience,
etc. If true uniting Faith be the Wedding garment, sure this Wedding garment
was not worn without Pardon of Sins, through the Blood of Christ, washing them
off from this guest; if this were by true uniting Faith, and nothing else, was
looked after by the Master of the Feast, but that his Guests owned him by
wearing him their Righteousness by Faith; then avoid the Scheme of our holy
Performances from having any thing to do in our being admitted to fit with the
King at his round Table.

But what shall we say, unstable as water Reuben was; no sooner has Mr.
Williams writ clear gospel, that nothing but true uniting Faith kept a Man from
being cast out; but the next Clause brings in persevering Holiness, with the
Train of all spiritual Duties, to give admittance to the wise Virgins; so that
one while we are justified by Faith, another while by persevering Holiness. If
you are to go to the Wedding Feast, you are to put on true uniting Faith: If
you are to enter with the Bridegroom to the Marriage, then it is the Spirit of
grace, and persevering Holiness gains you admittance; these are his words, As
by keeping out the foolish Virgins, for not having Oil in their Lamps, viz. the
Spirit of grace, and persevering Holiness; so by admitting the wise Virgins, he
judicially declared, they had a Spirit of grace and persevering Holiness.
Here Is not one word of Faith, or of Christ, or of his Righteousness; for these
poor Virgins to get into the Wedding House by; not one syllable of being
justified by Faith: But according to his sense, they said to Christ, Lord, we
have the Spirit of grace, and persevering Holiness; we have prophesied in thy
Name against too much exalting Free Grace; we have done many wonderful Works;
we have persevered in our Holiness till thy coming. But will Christ give them
admission on this Plea of a Spirit of grace, and holiness, without a word of
Faith in our Lord Jesus? No sure, he will say, I know you not, you would not
know me to be your Righteousness: You come in your gospel Holiness; I know you
not.

This is to make the gospel yea and nay. It Is yea to day, true uniting Faith
gains admittance to day, it is nay to morrow; now persevering Holiness does it.
This is giving an uncertain Sound; whereas the Promises are the same to day,
yesterday, and for ever, and all, yea, and Amen, in Christ Jesus; If true Faith
be the Wedding Garment, our wearing Christ's Righteousness, the same true Faith
is that which receives the Oil into our Vessels, the blood or righteousness of
Jesus, ours by Faith, or the Spirit of Life, which is in Christ Jesus, Rom 8.2.
This Christ dwelling in our Hearts by Faith, Christ dwelling in us by the holy
Spirit, is the true Oil that the Wise Virgins gain admittance by.

His next Clause is, the advancing into our Justification God's terms of
forgiving, adopting, glorifying as Rector, by believing, etc. This, etc. has a
great hand in forgiving, I suppose it wonderful to every Judicious R^ader, that
a Gentleman of great Parts and sense should blend the Gospel thus, as to make
the Gospel Blessings to be dispersed by God, with regard to our being Believers,
etc. that is, to our being Believers, and performing all the Duties prescribed
in the Gospel; he puts it only God has a regard to it, but the plain English
must be, God does so regard our performing this Act of believing, etc. and that
till death, and not only so, but all other Gospel Duties, that if we do not
perform them, God dispenses no gospel Blessing, so that we are still under a
Covenant of Works, but let us see the true lineaments of this new Gospel, which
is in these words of Mr. Williams. Thus, Can any think that Forgiving,
Adopting, Glorifying, or the conveyance of every other promised Benefit, given
on Gods terms are not Judicial acts of God as Rector; if so, does he dispense
these blindly and promiscuously, without any regard to our being Believers,
etc. or no? I suppose Mr. W. will be accounted more hold than becomes him, to
insinuate that God dispenses his Blessings blindly, if he do not bestow them in
his way, upon his terms of our being Believers, etc. O that men were humble,
and in pretending to oppose Dr. Crisp they did not speak indecently of God, by
calling him a blind giver of Benefits, if he give them not according to our
prescriptions of his rectoral Government: God gives freely, God gives before we
have done good or Evil; God shows mercy, because he will show mercy; God saves
the chief of sinners in the Career of sin; God therefore speaks comfortably,
because Israel went after her Lovers, and pardons sin because it is great; his
ways in showing mercy, are past finding out, justifying the Ungodly, and not
calling the Righteous; and yet God dispenses not blindly and promiscuously,
though he do not do it in Mr. W. way of having some regard to our being
Believers, Repenters, Perseverers, etc. Vain man would be wiser than God, when
God says, Not for your sakes do I this, be it known unto you, but for mine
holy Names sake, which ye have profaned among the Heathen. Will Mr. W. be so
bold as to think God dispenses his Blessings blindly, because he does not give
them on those terms he has prescribed; We see Gods terms, here are for his
Names sake which they profaned; profaning Gods Name was all that God had
regard to on their part, it was his own holy name was his only inducement, his
holy, free, gracious Covenant in which his holy name was engaged, not our being
believers, Perseverers in spiritual Duties, etc.

The like ground God looks at and regards in his delivering Israel in Deuteronomy.
7.7. not their being more excellent than other People, but his own love of
them, The Lord did not set his love upon you, and ch^se you, because you were
more than other people, for you were the fewest of all People, but because the
Lord loved you, these are Gods Terms, he loved and chose because he loved: Sure
Mr. Williams will not say God had regard to their holiness in dispensing his
bl^ssings to them, before the gospel shined in its luster through our Lord
Jesus, and must God be charged with blind promiscuous dispensing blessings now
under clear gospel light, if he now show mercy in a sovereign way of grace to
gross sinners, without regard to any good they do, while he suffer the
Righteous in their own Eyes to perish in their own righteousness. O let us not
prescribe rules and terms to God for his bestowing mercy, but thankfully accept
his grace and mercy in our Lord Jesus, freely given, because he will have mercy
on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens. Well, but Mr. W. will
confirm his Position, and that by Scripture too, though strained thus, With
respect to what is above declared, the gospel is called a Law of Faith, a law of
liberty: It is true, the gospel is called in opposition to the Law of works, a
Law of Faith, but I think in the stream of the whole Bible, David could not
find a fitter stone to sling into the Head of this great Goliath, man's
righteousness to join with Christ's than this Scripture; Mr. Williams is setting
up a righteousness of Works or gospel Holiness, for ushering in pardon, and to
prove it, says the gospel is called a Law of Faith, but let us see how it is so
called in Romans 3.26, 27. To declare his righteousness that he might be just,
and the justifier of him which believes in Jesus, where is boasting then? it
is excluded, by what Law, of Works? Nay, but by the law of Faith. Here the
Apostle setly and solemnly treats of excluding works, and of our being
justified by Faith without works of all sorts, and positively asserts, God is
just in justifying the Believer; God could not be just in justifying according
to the Arminian way, for our imperfect holiness, or having any regard to it in
the matter of Justifying, but God is just in justifying a Believer, because the
Believer has a perfect complete righteousness of Christ put upon him to answer
the Law by, and God looking upon him complete in Christ, is just in Justifying
him. The Apostle having laid this ground work to damn all self-righteousness or
works, even Faith as a work in the matter of Justification; he comes and makes
a challenge directly against Mr. Williams's Doctrine, of our sincere holiness
concurring to pardon, and says where is boasting then? Where are all these
great Advancers of man's righteousness, which tends to boasting? and he gives
the stabbing answer, It is excluded: God has not lest the least Crevice for it
to enter by, it is wholly excluded, it is shut out from ever having any thing to
do in our salvation; yet may one say, it is shut out by the Law of Works, the
old Moral Law, do and live; we grant that, but there is a gospel holiness will
let in boasting again; I must repent, believe, be sincerely holy, and persevere
therein all my days, and God has regard to this in my Justification: no, no,
it is wholly shut out, there is to be no boasting, and it is shut out by the law
of Faith, by that Faith I just now mentioned; all you have to do in the point
of Justification is, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and you shall be saved. Do
these Men seek a Law? here is the Law, this is his Commandment, that you believe
in the name of the Lord Jesus, John 3.23. when they said, What shall we do that
we might work the works of God, Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the
work of God, that ye believe in him whom he has sent, so the Apostle here, do
you seek, a Law that excludes from boasting, I Will tell. you the Law, it is the
law of Faith to believe on him that is just, and the justifier of the Ungodly
upon his believing, and yet this Mr. W. brings for confirmation of his sincere
holiness, that God regards in his giving pardon. But thus it pleases God to
confound the wise by quoting a Text in order to adulterate it, when in the
Issue, no Text is more sharp upon him.

A farther Confirmation of his setting up works for concurring to pardon, is in
the next words thus. And it (the gospel) specially insists on that sincerity of
grace and holiness, which the rule of the Promise makes necessary in its
description of the Person, whom it makes partaker of its included Benefit; sure
never was the free grace and love of God to Man so fettered and obscured, by
dark expressions; had any Sophister industriously set himself to vitiate the
true meaning of Gods Love in these words, God so loved the World, that he gave
his only beloved Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life; he could not possibly, I think have done it worse, than
to explain hem in Mr. W. expressions, of the gospel insisting on grace, and
that sincere, and on holiness; and that such as the rule of the Promise makes
necessary, and that rule of the Promise is in its description of the Person to
be benefited by it, which description must needs be the whole word of God, and
when this person has all that holiness that we find the word of God
recommends, then this person by this rule with this holiness, is partaker of an
included benefit. God of his rich mercy pour out his Spirit and grant his
Servants may be enabled to deliver his clear plain Scripture offers of life and
Salvation by Jesus Christ, with clearer Evidence than this, Is this the way of
confuting Dr. C. who asserts Gospel Grace in plain Gospel Terms; That Christ
came to seek and save the lost, that he seeks and finds his lost sheep, and
brings them home upon his Shoulders, that he carries the Lambs in his Arms, and
gently leads those with young, and instead of such Soul-saving encouragements,
to poor sinners, to put them off with our grace and holiness, and not a word of
Gods saving them in Christ, but our coming up to the rule which the promise
makes necessary? And who shall be able to say, when he has done all, that he
comes up to Mr. Williams rule of believing, etc. his Obedience, etc. his
persevering, etc. from such stating of Gospel Truth, O Lord deliver thy People.

Now we come to the Use Mr. Williams makes of his premises of salvation, from
our conformity to Gospel rule of new obedience, etc. which he sums up in few
words, viz. And the main of our Ministry consists in pressing men to Answer the
Rule of the Gospel Promise. But the main of the Apostles was, to know nothing
but Christ and him crucified, and to press men to be found in him, and so Mr.
W. once did when he preached that Christ endured the utmost, God bated him
nothing, the atonement was so complete that God can demand no other from
Christ, or from any Soul this Atonement is applied to. This he deduced from
this Doctrine, The reconciling of sinners to God is effected by the concurring
influence of the Priestly and Kingly Office of Christ. Well then, Christ has
effected this reconciliation; what remains for poor man to do, but accept it
and be thankful, not to come in with his Gospel Holiness, for God to have
regard to in our reconciliation to God. But it seems this stream of Gospel
grace must not run so clear, now in his Book; here must be conformity to Gospel
Rule, before we have any benefit by Christ, which consists in Repentance,
Faith, etc. to all the rest, and now this is pressed, and the main of our
Ministry consists in this, whereas the main of the Apostles, was to beseech Men
to be reconciled to God, because God was in Christ, and when upon the Cross,
reconciling the world to himself, when by one Offering he for ever perfected
the Work, and cried out, it is finished; and then after Union, after engrafting
into Christ; after being in a blessed state of Salvation, secured so as never
to fall away, then the Apostle presses to walk worthy of this Gospel, of this
free Salvation by Jesus Christ.

Mr. Williams proceeds, viz. We call men to be reconciled to God, upon which we
know God will be at peace with them. This I thought it would come to at last,
First, we must come to God and be reconciled to him, and then God will be at
peace with us, which is just contrary to the Apostle, when we were Enemies, we
were reconciled, Romans 5.10. But when Men will be pampering with our holiness,
for God to look to in our acceptance in Christ, they will fall into a Covenant
of Works, and call it Gospel Grace, that our works are accepted, in order to
our Justification and Salvation; we must first be reconciled to God, says Mr.
W. that is, we must first comply with the gospel rule, of not only Faith, but
Holiness, Repentance, and perseverance in new Obedience, and having thus
brought our selves to that reconciled posture, then God will be at peace; is
this fulfilling Christ's commission, Go Preach the gospel to every Creature, he
that believes shall be saved? Is this proclaiming the acceptable year of the
Lord, When thou wast in thy Blood, I said to thee, Live, and for mine own Name
sake, I will remember their sins no more? God waits to be gracious, knocking at
the Door of poor sinners hearts, crying, Open to me, let me come in, I bring my
Supper, I bring my Son, only let him in, only receive him by Faith, God don't
say, my Son and I will be at peace with you after you have washed you and made
your selves clean; but he comes to tell you he loved you and washed you from
your sins in his blood on the Cross, and you that believe in me are the
Persons: I was reconciled to you then, and am come now to offer it to you, and
beseech you to be reconciled to me: Thus with these words of his first love, he
draws poor sinners to be reconciled to him, and do not damp their Comforts by
telling them, I will be at peace, if you be reconciled to me, but revives their
hearts by telling them that the peace is already wrought in God and for
sinners, by Christ at his death, for that he made peace by the Blood of his
Cross and by him reconciled all to himself, Col. 1.20. Christ did not stay till
we were reconciled to him, as Mr. W. seems to intimate, when he calls men to be
reconciled to God, upon which he knows, God will be at peace with them. This I
take to be setting the Cart before the Horse, to invite Men to be reconciled
thereby, to get God to be at peace, whereas the sweet heavenly strain of the
gospel is, Come, for all things are ready, come to Jesus who is already made of
God, to you that come, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption,
who is the Author and finisher of your Faith. O Jesus, thus draw and we will
run after thee, and thus he has drawn thousands by the Prophets, and Apostles
preaching, and his faithful Servants after him, to come to God, and to holy
Obedience in Love, whereas the legal drawing, of walking holily, and then God
will be at peace, keeps poor Souls in perpetual doubts, and works the Soul but
to a Spirit of Bondage.

Next comes the Top-stone of this New system of gospel Truth, which looks as if
it were hewed and squared at Rome, with only a little Varnish at Amsterdam,
viz. These things (Gods promising life by forgiveness, and ye insisting on
some Degree of Obedience) will help thy Conceptions, still remembering that the
merit of Christ are the cause of this gospel Ordination. Can any spiritual
enlightened mind read this, and not blush for Mr. W. and think he is hard put to
it to support his cause, of laying our salvation on our gospel holiness joined
with Christ's righteousness, when he flies to such an Assertion as the Papists
have been forced to forsake, being beaten out of that Trench by our great
Divines: That Christ merited, that we should merit, this they asserted, but
found it would not hold water, therefore Bellarmin flies to his Tutissimum, and
says in his Book de Justif. l. 5. chapter 7. pro. 3. Propter incertitudinem
propriae Justitiae and periculum inanis gloriae, Tutissimum est totam fiduciam
in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate reponere. Because of the uncertainty
of our own righteousness, and the danger of vain glory, it is safest to put all
our trust in the alone mercy and bounty of God. Here the Jesuit flies from the
gospel Ordination that Christ merited, that God should have regard to our
gospel holiness, and our conformity to gospel Rule, for obtaining gospel
promise; this chimed well with him in his long arguments for Justification by
works, but upon his review of his strong reasons, he flies from it and betakes
himself to Gods mere mercy and bounty, which must be in Christ, and so I hope
the great opposer of Dr. Crisp will do.

But in regard this is so broad and wide a gap, to let in the whole body of
self Justiciaries, with their good works to come in for sharing with Christ in
salvation: I must make some opposition to it, both from Scripture and sound
Protestants. The merits of Christ, says Mr. W. are the cause of this
Ordination, that is, that our answering the gospel rule obtains us interest in
the gospel Promise, or which is all one, Do and live; Christ merited that if we
do we shall live, the only difference is the first doing and live, was perfect
Obedience to the Law, and this doing and live of Mr. VV. is sincere obedience
to the gospel in all its commands, counsels, etc. which every true Christian
trembles to think on.

Is this the upshot of Christ's Death, to merit, that our Gospel Obedience
should be the ground of our obtaining Benefit by Christ; then I say again, it
must come to this, that Christ merited that we should merit; for there can be
no benefit to a Sinner, but by merit; Christ did not absolutely merit the
Benefit for us, say they, but merited that we doing so, and so, should obtain
the Benefit; then our, doing so and so, must merit it; for it is injustice of
God to himself, and his Righteous broken Law, to give a Sinner that deserves
Hell any good, unless that good be merited: and this is left to the Sinner, to
obtain by Gospel Obedience, which therefore, must of necessity be from merit.
So that here it must rest, or we make God unjust to himself, and so say, Christ
purchased this, that we should do so, is Nonsense. Mr. Williams can hardly
assoyle himself from this Charge, till he retract this Assertion, That the
merits of Christ are the cause of that Gospel Ordination he had laid down. As
for the Scriptures that oppose this Divinity, those already mentioned are
abundantly more than sufficient to throw down the House built on this Sandy
Foundation, as that God so loved the World, that whosoever believes in him,
should not perish, but have everlasting life. Here is nothing required, but
believing to everlasting life. So the Apostle, Acts 16. Believe in the Lord
Jesus, and thou shall be saved. Here Is complying with no other Gospel Rule for
Salvation, but believing in the Lord Jesus: To which I may add, the whole
Stream of the New Testament, to come and take the Water of Life freely, Rev.
22. They that hunger and thirst after this Righteousness of Christ, they shall
be filled. If God by his grace have begot a true hunger, a true desire after
it, they shall have it, Come to me, if weary, if laden; cast your self on me,
and you shall find rest for your Souls: But the great Scripture is, Not to him
that works, not to him that thinks to obtain gospel Benefits, by complying
with gospel Rule of walking in holy Obedience, to obtain pardon by it, but to
him that believes on him that justifies the Ungodly. This Scripture is enough
to confound the whole Scheme of the new fashioned stating of gospel Truth: The
Apostle states gospel Truth thus, Not to him that works; no Works at all must
come in in the business of our Salvation, as concurring to it: Thus the Apostle
held, says Mr. Williams, This lets in Licentiousness; I have found a better
way of staring gospel Truth, that is, To him that works, to him that complies
with gospel Rule, to him that is godly, not his Faith alone, but his Faith with
sincere Obedience: That is his gospel Holiness, which the Apostle intends, when
he speaks of being found in the Righteousness of God by Faith: this gives right
to gospel Benefits. O what heart touched with love to the Lord Jesus, and poor
Souls, but must ache to see the gospel thus mangled, and the Crown upon our
gospel Obedience, jointly with Christ! If this be not Evacuating, and
Invalidating the complete Mediation and Atonement of the Lord Jesus, then what
can do it? For he will not have any Co-workers with him for Justification and
Salvation: Though by his Spirit he makes all his Regenerate ones Co-workers
with him in the carrying on the Work of Sanctification.

Not to multiply Scriptures in a matter so strenuously contended against by the
Apostle, of our Works, concurring to our Salvation. I shall only add at
present, that great Text, 2 Timothy 1.9. who has saved us, and called us, not
according to our Works: Here Is a perfect Renunciation of Works, even Works of
all sorts, before Faith and after Faith: He don't say, Who saved us not for
our Works, but not according to our Works; our Works have no accordingness
in them to our Salvation; they have no concurrence in that point; they are left
quite out: Here Is no room for Gospel Obedience in complying with Gospel Rule to
obtain life: No, not a word of that; it is so far from being for our Works, that
it is not according to our works, God has no regard to them in saving and
calling. He has saved: How? He saved by calling us: How is that? Did he not
call us to Salvation, upon seeing us comply with the Gospel Rule? No, he saved
us, and called us, not according to our Works. How then? Then, it is in a way
that amazes the Scholastic World, a way that will not go down with the wise
and prudent of this world. It is according to his grace (not our grace)
according (I say) to his own grace given us in Christ, before the world began.
O be amazed and confounded all that would state Gospel Truth any other way than
God has stated it, for the everlasting comfort of all those blessed ones whom
God has showed their Election to, by their effectual Call to come to Christ;
he has saved, it is already done, and that not according to humane stating
Gospel Truth, not according to our Works, that way would leave us always under
Suspicions and Jealousies to our dying day; but according to his ancient
everlasting Love, and that given to us as looked upon in Christ, when chosen in
him before they had done good or evil, before the world began, that the purpose
of God according to Election, might stand: Here the Apostle leaves it, and so
will I, as to Scripture Confutation of his Gospel Ordination; and because Mr.
Williams may not say, This is but one Doctors Opinion, when he says Doctor
Crisp Dethrones Christ, by rejecting holy Works from concurring to Salvation, I
shall spend some pains and time, begging it may be acceptable Service in the
Lord, in showing what several Servants of God of good Name, say to this point:
I begin with Mr. Veale, a Gentleman not in the least inclining to Antinomians,
in his Sermon against Merits, Morn. Lect. fol. 437. He shuts out gracious Works
from having any hand or concurrence in our Salvation, by this expression, viz.
It is much that he (God) does not damn you for your good Works, seeing they
are all defiled, and have something of Sin cleaving to them. What becomes of
our Gospel Holiness now, and sincere Obedience, in the case of Salvation? What,
all good works sin! then they are dung. Well, but has not Christ merited such
a Gospel Ordination, as our answering the Gospel Rule of holy Obedience, though
imperfect, it shall interest us in Gospel Blessings. To this Mr. Veale says,
in fol. 417. It is in vain to say, that Christ has merited for the Saints a
power of meriting; The Papists can never prove that Christ merited any such
Power for Believers. It is really more for his honor to purchase all for them
himself; but Mr. Williams will say, I do not say Christ merited, that we should
merit; no, but he says, Christ merited God should regard our works in
Justification and in our Salvation: What Is that, but coming in as it were by
Works, not with a downright rejecting of Christ, but with a side-wind bringing
in our works. Christ merited that we should do something in our salvation: And
what is that? In plain English, they give us a right to the Gospel Benefits,
which in some sense is worse than downright Popery, in as much as Popery makes
our works meritorious of life, in that Christ has put an infinite value on
them by his merits, and so makes our works so valuable, as to compensate the
Justice of God for our sins, and so still maintain the honor of God's
Righteousness in forgiving sin on a valuable consideration of our works made,
by Christ, meritorious of it: Whereas the middle way found out by some, makes
God so gracious as by virtue of Christ's Mediation God accepts of imperfect
defective gospel Holiness as perfect, for Christ's sake, and thereupon
Forgives: How near this comes to Mr. W's. stating the gospel Ordination, may be
easily be judged. Mr. Veale leaves Mr. Williams to stand by himself as to
Gospel Holiness, giving an Interest in the Blessings, and says it is only an
evidence of Faith, and gives no Title, in fol. 421. Hope of Life (says he) may
be helped on by Obedience and good Works, because they are an Evidence of his
Faith, and so of his Interest in Christ; but there is a vast difference between
a man's taking comfort in his Obedience, as the evidence of his Title to glory,
and Trusting in it, as that which gives him Title.

I come next to Mr. Doelittle, fol. 195. of Morning Lecture, who gives an
account of the Protestants and Papists Doctrine of Justification: First, he
sums up the Apostles Doctrine of Justification, not to him that works, as D^vid
describes the blessedness of the Man to whom the Lord imputes Righteousness,
not imputing their Trespasses to them; for he made him to be sin for us, that
we might be the Righteousness of God: Then he quotes the Protestant Doctrine
thus, We are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ by Faith, and not for our Works.

Those whom God effectually calls he freely justifies, not by infusing
Righteousness into them [mark that against the Gospel Ordination of God's
regarding our Holiness] but by pardoning their Sins, and by accounting and
accepting their Persons as righteous, not for any thing wrought in them, or
done by them, but for Christ's sake alone, imputing the Obedience and
Satisfaction of Christ to them, they receiving and resting on him and his
Righteousness by Faith. I think nothing can be more opposite than this Account
of Protestant Faith (where is not a word of our Holiness to Justification) and
Mr. Williams's, which is made up of Gospel Obedience, Gospel Rule, Gospel
Ordination of sincere Holiness, regarded by God in our Justification. This
Protestant Doctrine he confirms by referring to a cloud of Witnesses against
our new Divinity, viz. The Helvetian Confession, the Bohemian, Gallican,
Augustane, Belgic, Wittemberg, and Basil. Then follows the Popish Trent
Justification: Justification is not only forgiveness of sin, but also
Sanctification of the sinner, whereby a Man of unjust is made just; (and Mr.
Williams like this complying with gospel Rule, gives right to gospel Blessing,)
The Papists, go on and say, the only formal Cause of Justification is the
Righteousness of God, not wherewith be himself is righteou^, but whereby he
makes us righteous. I know Mr. Williams in words denies our Sanctification to
be a part of our Justification, but in the whole scope of his Argument, he
makes our gospel Holiness to be looked upon by God as having a concurrence in
our Justification; and this is his gospel Ordination, and in full conformity to
the Popish Justification by God's Righteousness, whereby we are renewed: His
last clause of the Popish Article about Justification suits extremely with Mr.
Williams's fling at Doctor Crisp, as dethroning Christ for making Christ the
alone cause of our Salvation, without any thing of our works concurring: And
thus says the Council of Trent, If any one shall say, that a Man is justified
by the s^le imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, or in the sole remission
of sin, excluding grace and charity, which is shed abroad in their hearts, by
the holy Spirit, and is inherent in him, or that the grace whereby we are
justified is only the savor of God; let him be accursed. This I take to be
asserted by the Papists, in opposition to the Protestant Doctrine; so that the
Protestant Doctrine was what they accursed, and what Mr. Williams in effect
accurseth, saying the holding it is dethroning Christ: Well then, the Papists
curse those that say, a man is justified by the sole imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, without any grace or charity. What Is become then of Mr.
Williams's gospel Holiness, sincere Obedience, that God looks at in the gospel
Rule, to obtain the gospel Promise; again, they curse those that say, our
Justification is by the alone savor of God (or freely by his grace, Romans
3.25.) What does Mr. Williams less, in falling foul on Doctor Crisp, and all
that wholly exclude every thing of man in the business of Justification, and
say, they enerv^te Christ's government, and open a door to all Licentiousness?
Whereas the contrary is most true, that the grace of God appearing, teaches to
deny all ungodliness. My next Opposer of Mr. W's Gospel Ordination, is a great
maul to Arminianism; that is, the Learned, Pious Mr. Perkins, who says in fol.
576 of Vol. 1. Thus the Papists say, Christ merited that our good Works merit:
And answers, This is a dotage of their devising, for Christ merited pardon for
sin impuation of his Righteousness, and Life eternal. And fol. 104. To say
Christ merited that our works merit this takes away Christ's Intercession, and
I may add to say, our Holiness comes in toward our Justification does the same.
Mr. Perkins comes closer in Vol. 2 fol. 205. It may be objected (says he)
there is a cooperation of works and faith: I answer, That this cooperation is
not in the Act of Justification, nor in the Work of our Salvation, but in the
manifestation of the truth and sincerity of our Faith, and for the declaration
of this, Faith and Works jointly concur. Here then is a pestilent and damnable
Doctrine of the Papists, when they teach Justification by the Works of the Law.
And what is it to teach Justification by the Works of the Gospel, which never
had a Promise of Justification to it, whereas the Works of the Law once had
before Adam's Fall. In Fol. 236. He turns perfect Antimonian, with our
Homilists, if some men may censure him, and says thus, The Gospel promises
Life to him that does nothing in the cause of his Salvation, but only Believes
in Christ. This is dangerous Doctrine in Doctor Crisp, because it spoils Mr.
W's Gospel Ordination of Works and Faith going together in Justification, but
has for this 100 years been good sound Doctrine in Perkins, and the Homilies
too. He proceeds in fol. 237. and says thus, Believing and doing are opposed
in the Article of our Justification. -- In our good Conversation, they agree,
Faith goes before, and doing follows; but in the Work of Justification, they
are as Fire and Water. This is a fatal stroke to the new Gospel Ordination, and
a full concurrence with Dr. Crisp, though Mr. Williams call this a dethroning
Christ.

Mr. Perkins could not expect to be taken for an Oracle, so that by his ipse
Dixit, that every one should receive his Positions, though he grounded them on
plain Scripture, therefore he strengthens his Assertion by the sayings of the
Fathers, with which I farther oppose Mr. W's. Gospel Ordination, and confirm
Dr. C. in fol. 537. Mr. Perkins says, The Fathers do hold Faith only to be
requisite to Justification, even without the Works of Grace. Chrysostom says,
in Hom. 7. in Cap. 3. Romans What is the Law of Faith? (says he) To be saved by
Grace; here he shows the Power of God, in that he not only saved us, and that
without use of any works, exacting only Faith of us. And Theodoret on Ephesians. 2.
We have not believed of our own accord, but came being called, and when we are
come, he does not exact Purity, and Innocence of Life, but has Pardoned our
sins, accepting of Faith only. And Basil Ser. de hum. This it is to glory in
the Lord, when a man is not puffed up with his own righteousness, but
acknowledges himself destitute of all true righteousness, and Justified by
Faith alone in Jesus Christ. They are justified before God, says Ambrose, on
Romans 4. Without any labor, or Toil, by only Faith, no Works of Penitence being
hereto required, but only that they believe. This Cloud of Witnesses, is enough
to cover and wholly extinguish the Gospel Ordination of Mr. Williams, without
any Comment on them.

Mr. Williams next Assertion is a Chip of the same block, thus; His (Christ's)
Righteousness imputed, is the cause for which we are Justified when we do
answer the Gospel Rule. Here Is no mincing the matter, of bringing in our
Sanctification into our Justification, for Mr. Williams tells us plainly what
our answering the Gospel Rule is, viz. Some degrees of Obedience, Repentance,
Love, imperfect Faith, Persevering, etc. Thus while in words he pretends to
separate Sanctification from Justification, yet here he really joins them and
confounds them, making our justification to be by Christ's Righteousness imputed
when we are holy; when we be sanctified, inferring that it is not till then,
and not only so, but that that is the Condition of our justification: Is this
the Apostles justifying the Ungodly, to be justified when we answer Mr.
Williams Gospel Rule? Whereas the Gospel makes no such Rule as he lays down of
our sincere Obedience, concurring to justification, or God's having regard to
our Gospel Holiness, which is Mr. Williams own word: I will not stand to refell
this, but do aver nothing can be clearer to me than this, that by this
expression we are justified when we answer that Gospel Rule which Mr. Williams
laid down, there is a downright mingling our Sanctification with our
justification, which the Apostle strenuously denies; It Is not of Works, only of
Faith, that it might be by grace, not Gods grace in us, working holiness, but
his grace to us in Christ.

The next is that which is the ground work of all Mr* W^^ building (...) that
glorious Text which I so often have harped upon, and which I must again say
somewhat to now in its course, for that I am not able to bear that such an
outwork should treacherously be delivered up, and say that this Text in Phil.
3.9. Is allowed by all sound Protestants, to be meant, as it is said that the
Righteousness of God that the Apostle desired to be found in by Faith is only
the imputed Righteousness of Christ, and not at all concerns our Gospel
Holiness; nay, this Gospel Holiness, thus put in the room of Christ's
Righteousness, is a term Foreign to Scripture Language, and is brought in to
jostle out Gospel Grace. It Is Holiness we are to walk in, but it is Grace we are
to be saved by, which grace is this, that the Rig^^^^^ness of Christ is made
ours; wrought out by Christ for us, and imput^^^ (...) to us without any thing
of that which men call our Gospel Holin^^^ (...) to do therein: Now if the
Church of God will be content to lose (...) ^f Phil. 3.9. and suffer a Disputer
to make this breach in our Bank ag^^^ (...) Popish Sea of Justification by
Gospel Holiness, all the rest of our Banks and ^arriers will soon be run down;
Then they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, shall be filled; must be
interpreted of our Gospel Holiness. If we be hungry for holiness in conformity
to Gospel Rule, our Souls shall be filled with eternal happiness, and then if
we take to us the Breast Plate of Righteousness, that is, a holy walking with
God, that will defend us from all Temptations of the Devil; as for Faith in
Christ, that must come after our own Righteousness by this Doctrine, whereas
the Apostle in that place Ephesians. 6. Brings in that Breast Plate as our chief,
first piece of Armor after Truth, when the Soul is enlightened with the
knowledge of God's love, to give Jesus Christ for us. The first thing he does,
is, he puts on Christ's Righteousness as his Breast Plate: Alas if the Soul
puts on his own Righteousness, the Devil's Darts would soon pierce through it,
but every sensible Soul will say, with Job, Though I were righteous, yet would
I not answer, I would make Supplication to my Judge. I suppose Job had as much
to say for his close holy walking with God as any that now call for Gospel
Holiness, to make us partakers of Christ's purchase, yet he renounces all, and
says farther, for the confounding our new Grotian Divinity, If I wash my self
with Snow Water; (of the best Gospel Holiness that ever mere Man had) and make
my hands never so clean (with close walking with God) yet shall thou plunge me
in the Ditch. (of self Condemnation and eternal misery) and mine own Clothes
(of self righteousness) shall abhor me. O what clear gospel grace had this good
man acquaintance with, when he flies from all the trash of his being clean, to
make way for his justification, and betakes himself to his Days-Man, his
Redeemer, who though he had not actually taken flesh, yet was then living, and
living as his Redeemer, For I know that my Redeemer lives, though he slay me,
I will trust in him: If I justify my self (with my close walking or Gospel
Holiness, in part or in the whole) mine own mouth would condemn me, nay, though
I were perfect yet would I not know my Soul. Here was a right gospel Spirit,
like the Apostle Paul, concerning the Law blameless, yet, my Righteousness is
Dung; so Job, If I be righteous, I will not lift up mine head, Job. 10.15. I
will not glory in my Breast Plate of mine own Righteousness.

Again, if with Mr. Williams the Righteousness of Christ by Faith be our own
gospel Holiness, why may not Esa. 45.24. In him have I Righteousness and
strength, he our gospel Holiness too, and Jer. 23.6. Jehovah our Righteousness
be the same, and then, Have not submitted to the Righteousness of God, Romans
10.3. shall have the same usage, and mainly intend our Gospel Holiness, though
the Apostle brings it in, in opposition to our own righteousness: But blessed
be God, if Mr. W. or an Angel should undermine these Foundations of a sinner's
salvation, yet on this Rock God will build his Church, that Christ was made sin
for us, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. I say in him,
not in our gospel holiness, and if on this foundation any man builds hay and
stubble, (as our gospel holiness compared with Christ's Righteousness) his work
shall be burnt and he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be saved so as by
fire, it being a dangerous thing to mingle our gospel holiness with Christ's
Righteousness. Again, if Christ Righteousness, Phil. 3.9. be our gospel
Holiness, Mr. W. may as well say, by the Righteousness of one the free gift
came upon all Men, to justification of life, Romans 5.18. does principally
intend, not so much the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us as the gospel
holiness of every one of us.

If we give this Inch, he may take an Ell, but we are bid earnestly to contend
for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, of which this is as great a part as
any I know next the Deity of our Lord Jesus; therefore we must not part with it
to let in a sham Model of Schematical Divinity of God's regarding our holiness
as a ground to justify us, we complying with the Gospel Rule of sincere
Obedience to qualify us for Christ's Righteousness to be Imputed to us.

By this unsavory gloss of Mr. W. any Judicious Person may see how unmeet he is
to Arraign, and by his Arguments, to come in Evidence against the Doctrine
delivered by Dr. C. If he would have convinced him, he must do it with stronger
and better Reasons than Human, even with opposite Scriptures, if his Bible have
any such as are repugnant to the plain force of express Scriptures, that the
Dr. insisted on, such as the Lord laid on him the Iniquity of us all, to prove
sin really translated on Christ, and the Children being yet unborn, having done
neither Good nor Evil, he said, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, to
prove that God loves us, and imputes the Righteousness of Christ to his Elect,
without respect of good or Evil done by them: But he having no Scriptures to
overthrow those Maxims, he may not think to do it with plausible Sophistry of
the suitableness of it to God's holiness, to justify none but the Holy, when
the Scripture says expressly, he Justifies the Ungodly, and so I beseech the
Lord to do to him as well as to my self, else woe unto us.

Next comes the exact Copy of Paul a Pharisee, thus; The grace of God is hereby
stated as free as is consistent with his Government, or rather, I may say, as
free as is consistent with Justification, partly by Works, and partly by grace;
I wonder that any man should say, none need the riches of grace more than I, as
he does in the next words, and yet tell the World a little before that Gods
Government, and Rectoral distribution of rewards and punishments, require our
complying with Gospel Rule in some degrees of Obedience, and the Gospel
Sanction fixes sincere holiness and perseverance in Faith, as the terms of
possessing Heaven, and so by bringing in our Gospel Holiness into our
justification, totally make void the grace of God, and then in effect this is
all the grace that I need; that when I have persevered in the Gospel Rule, I
may tell God now I have done what thou requirest; now Heaven is due to me, for
Christ has purchased this Gospel Ordination. O that God would un-horse lofty
Spirits, and make us cry out, (with the poor Publican, smiting on our Breasts,)
Lord be merciful to me a sinner, not Lord be merciful to me a complyer in
Gospel Holiness; if I could hear him say so, it would be with me an Argument
that he thought he needed the Riches of grace, but the Righteous need not
grace, for he came not to call the Righteous, but sinners. Is this the only
grace you will allow God to glory in, that when men have lived sincerely holy
all their days, then they may come to God and say, I demand my Penny I have
labored for; I crave Heaven, for Christ dyed for this end that I should save
my self by my Evangelical righteousness, and this is consistent with thy
Rectoral distribution of Rewards and Punishments, viz. rewards to the holy, and
punishments to the unholy; as for Christ's Righteousness and my justification,
by that, I must name it for fashion sake, but my darling Holiness with
perseverance, are the terms of possessing Heaven? To which our Lord Jesus has
already answered, and so will to every Self-Justitiary, as in Matthew. 21.31.
Verily I say unto you, that the Publicans and the Harlots go into the Kingdom
of God before you. When the holy Pharisee comes with his, God I thank thee I am
not as other Men; I am none of those sinners that trust to be saved, by the
mere grace of God, in the merits of Christ: I am none of St. Paul's Antinomians,
who said, those that are of the Law are accursed: I fast twice a week, I give
Alms, I have sincere Obedience, I have Gospel holiness, I hope I shall escape
well. Then the poor Publican, the poor self-condemned sinner cries, Grace,
grace, unclean, unclean, I am a chief sinner; I fly for refuge to the Hope set
before me, the blood of Christ only, to free me from my sins; sure this Man
will go down justified rather than the other, and such a sort of justification
I beg of God for my Soul, and that Mr. W. that says he needs the riches of
grace, and the more because he brings in gospel holiness to concur with Christ's
Righteousness in Justification: I hope and pray he may seek the Publicans, and
not the Pharisees justification, and leave Gods rectoral distribution to his
own holy determinations in his Word, Come ye blessed, and go ye cursed, as they
were chosen before the foundation of the World, or past by in Gods eternal
Decree, yet still the chosen were chose to Faith and holiness, though not as
those Terms which give a right to Heaven.

Mr. W. goes on thus, Reader note that in this ^ook I speak of the Adult, and
not Infants, and why Infants saved one way and Adult another; if Infants be
sanctified in the Womb, by infusing the new Nature, what is that but the seed
of Faith, and all grace in Christ? and if so, he not they saved as the Adult,
though their grace shine not out; must Infants be saved by the merits of Christ
alone, but not so the Adult, who must have Gospel holiness to Join with Christ's
righteousness, for God to have some regard to in their Salvation? If this be
his meaning then the Garments of Infants must be all of pure fine white Linen,
and of those grown to 15 or 20, it must be Linsey Wolsey, the warp of Linen,
and Woof of the Woollen of gospel holiness, and so Infants may be buried in
Linen and the others in Flannel; this is the rectoral distribution of threats
and promises, not according to Gods way, he that believes shall be saved, and
he that believes not is condemned: But the Adult that is sincerely holy, God
is so just as to save him, and he that thinks to be saved only by Faith in the
Lord Jesus, bringing forth fruits of Holiness, is an Antinomian, dethrones
Christ, enervates his Laws, he must be exposed to scorn.

Mr. W. proceeds, Thou must expect to take up my fall sense by a view of
several Chapters, and not only one, because sundry Chapters refer to the same
points, more or less: We use to say that which is sauce for a Goose is sauce
for a Gander, but it is too common for men to look through red angry Spectacles
on the Authors they oppose, but would have their own writings looked on in green
ones; would it not have been becoming Mr. W. to have dealt with the Dr. as he
thou's his Reader to do by him, to take up his full sense, by a view of several
chapters, then he would not have charged the Dr. with enervating Christ's Laws,
by pleading the free justification of sinners without works: if he had compared
his Sermons on Esa. 53. with those on Titus, of denying ungodliness: Is not our
Lords Rule good here? What you would that Men should do to you, do ye the same
to them. If Mr. W. would have People compare one part of his Book with the
other, it is equal he should have done so by the Dr. which would have taken off
a great part of his Acrimony in making the Dr. a Dethroner of Christ.

His next look's invidious, and is a clear contradiction to his last desire of
comparing one part with another, for he puts a sense by force on the Doctor
thus, and forget not (says Mr. Williams) that though the Dr. often in his Book
speaks of Men as Believers, yet every thing is true of the Elect, viz. They
have as much Title to saving Blessings, only they do not know it; this was his
Judgment. Here by head and shoulders he brings in this as the Drs. judgment of
the Elect, without one Tittle of Proof; forget not this, that whatever the
Doctor says of saving Blessings that Believers have a title to, he means it of
the Elect; this (...)

Well, but what if that be forced on the Dr. as his judgment, that all saving
Blessings belong to the Elect though before believing they do not know it? How
much more is this than what Mr. Williams grants in fol. 39. in saying Christ
merited for all the Elect, that they should certainly partake of the saving
benefits of his Righteousness? Where is the Drs. enervating Christ's Laws, if
this was his judgment? Does not this Correspond with that of the Apostle, Ephesians.
1. He raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places, in
Christ Jesus, does not this evince that all the Elect were raised up with
Christ, and do now sit with him in Heaven, being in his Heart as the twelve
Tribes were upon Arons Breast Plate when he went into the Holy of Holies: Are
they not in the Heart of Christ, and does he not pray for those that God gave
to him? if so, then all saving Blessings belong to them, only the Doctor had
not the happiness to word it to please Mr. W. therefore is quarreled at.

But next, he sweetens all, and having broken the Doctors Head, gives him a
Plaster thus, I have carefully avoided any Reflection on Revere^d Dr. Crisp,
whom I believe a Holy Man: For which respect I return many thanks, and bless
God for fulfilling his word, that when a man's ways please the Lord, he makes
his Enemies at peace with him: But may I not wonder that those that have
uttered so great Invectives, that he was for dethroning Christ, should yet be
convinced from the strain of his writings, that he was a Holy Man. This is
agreeable to what treatment he met with in the Heat of Peoples flocking by
thousands to hear him, which he was much maligned for, yet there was not a man
of all his detractors that ever charged him with the least immorality or
indecency, or neglect of exactest holiness, though there was scarce ever seen a
wrinkle in his Brow, he being cheerful in Conversation, even to admiration; yet
as solemnly devout in the Worship of God on Lords days, and Fast days, as the
greatest legalist, so that his Enemies gave him his due Character for exact
holiness. But now for Mr. W. to say, Dr. C. was holy, and Reverend Dr. C. and
but a few Lines before to say, all the rest of his Opinions follow in a Chain
to the dethroning of Christ, etc. seems strange, but without doubt it is from a
mighty overruling Providence of God, not only out of the mouths of Babes and
Sucklings, the unlearned to perfect praise to his Name, but to still the Enemy
and Avenger, Mat. 11. Ps. 8. Not only do the simple, Celebrate the Praises of
God, for the opening the Rich Mercies of Free Grace by the Dr. but the Learned
that seem to be his Enemies, and come out against him with Vengeance, God does
still them; nay, after high reproach he engages them to acknowledge this
Dethroner of Christ, I believe was a holy Man; this is like Bellarming, propter
incertitudinem, tutissimum est, etc. It Is absolute Sovereign grace in Christ,
nothing in us that saves us when all is done.

Before I leave Mr. W. in this good temper, I hope it may be useful as well for
settling the wavering, as confirming the sound: To quote a passage or two I met
with occasionally, out of unquestionable Authority for Orthodoxy in the Faith,
for a suffrage to Dr. Crisp in what he is opposed by Mr. W. and that is out of
the Reverend Dr. Harris of Hanwell, an eminent member of the famous Assembly of
Divines Anno 1652. I begin with his asserting, That Christ sustained the Person
of a sinner: This is a grand charge against Dr. C. that Christ was a reputed
sinner, but this eminent Dr. H. makes no scruple to Assert it roundly, without
any ambiguity, and says directly in his Sermon, called, Absaloms Funeral, in
fol. 215 Christ he stood in our room, and sustained the Person of a sinner,
though in himself sinless, could not he though he was the Heir and first born,
escape until his Blood was shed, and flesh rent, and Soul poured forth as an
Offering? Then make good that thou art in Christ, and (so) a new Creature, or
else take thy leave of all hope and comfort: I add, if this were not true, that
Christ sustained the Person of a sinner, how could God punish him, or how could
the Apostle say to the seven Churches, He loved us, and washed us from our
sins, in his Blood; sure those us were in Christ when he shed his Blood, and i^
his own Person as head, he sustained them and all other sinners that he shed
his Blood for, else, how were they Crucified with him, and raised with him, and
made sit with him in Heavenly places; now because Reason and Philosophy cannot
fathom this, shall we reject plain Scripture, and say, that the Elect have no
interest in Christ, till they believe, though God say plainly, grace was given
them in Christ before the World was, and they were chosen in him before the
World.

Dr. H. gives his Testimony against the new sort of Divinity, which may look
better from him than Dr. Crisp, and may reconcile to his Doctrine, or rather
Christ's, that nothing must come in of ours to join with Christ for
Justification: and says in fol. 36. from Romans 8.1. No Condemnation to those in
Christ, the Doctrines of later Editions (Arminians) drive mostly at this, to
wrest you from your Estate in Christ, -- hence the superadding of our
Righteousness to Christ's, ad Corroborandum, look to your standing, find all
your Hopes, Joys, Life in him alone, owe to him all Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, Redemption and Salvation. This is far from the New Scheme of
Gospel Ordination of Christ's purchasing that Faith, Holiness, etc. have their
use in Gospel Benefits, from their Conformity to the Rule of the Promise, not
of the Precept; this taking us off from our superadded Righteousness, ad
corroborandum, to strengthen our Title, clearly evinces, that he was not for
Faith and holiness giving a Title; no, Faith can only receive it, and Holiness
Evidence it.

Dr. H. answers for Dr. C. as being charged that if God acts us in beleiving
and, God beleives, and God repents, and says in fol. 64. Not only the power
but the Act too is from God, Phil. 2. He works in us to will and to do, if it
be thus (say the Jesuits and others) then Man shall not be master of his own
Acts, then God shall be said to repent and believe, Man shall do nothing, but
all shall be resolved unto God. Answ. May not Man be said to understand, though
God do powerfully inlighten, so also to hate, love, etc. They (the Jesuits)
yield that God works upon the Understanding, and the Affections, and yet man
understands and affects; and why should not the same be true of the Will?
Secondly, God first works all things in us, and then by us; he prevents and
acts us, and then we work under God. Object. This takes off all endeavor; nay,
this quickens our Care and endeavor, if St. Paul may be heard, Phil 2.13.
Therefore we must work out all, because we depend on God for all, says, the
Apostle, neither does God only work in his People a power of willing, but the
very Act also, and indeed the acting of the will of man is more than giving him
a power only to will.

The Covenant of grace is this, be content to accept of another Obedience, and
to lay hold of the Righteousness of Christ for Justification, (he soars as high
as Dr. C.) and says, there is nothing required of us more than this, to
disclaim our selves, and to make Christ alone our Teacher, our head, and
all-sufficient Savior, (nay in fol. 35. he is clear and says) What can we do
toward the getting of a new Heart? Answ. Man cannot concur to the renewing of
himself as a Cause or an Agent.

If this be good Divinity in Dr. H. and the Assembly of Divines, why should it
be quarreled at in Dr. C. Would it not be more becoming the greatness of Mr.
W's Spirit, to have encountered the Assembly in these particulars, than Dr. C.
yea doubtless: But there was a new Scheme to be erected, and this would more
easily obtain against a single Person, than the established Religion of the
Nation, which in the chiefest points objected against Dr. C. concurs with him;
yea, after all, when Mr. W. finds by the strong Proofs brought against him,
that his Scheme will not take, he betakes himself to the Substance of what he
Objects against the Dr. as in time may be made evident; in the mean time, I
humbly conceive, I have made it appear, that his Preface has not only wronged
the Dr. but the truth which I doubt not but in a great measure he sees.

Thus begging of the Lord, that some glory may rise to his Name by some few
hours investigating the Truth: I conclude as well for Mr. W. and all that
desire the Truth as it is in Jesus, may take place, as for my self, let the
Words of my Mouth, and the Meditation of my Heart, be acceptable in thy sight,
O Lord, Tzuri ve Goeli, my Rock, and my Redeemer.

Amen.
FINIS.

