A Serious EXPOSTULATION With that Party in SCOTLAND, Commonly known by the
Name of WHIGS.

Wherein is modestly and plainly laid open the inconsistency of their Practices;

I. With the Safety of humane Society. II. With the Nature of the Christian
Religion. III. Their two Covenants are historically related, and proved to be
no sufficient Warrant for what they do. IV. Their new Doctrine of a pretended
Forfeiture, is proved to be groundless.
LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXXII.

A serious Expostulation with that Party in Scotland, commonly known by the
name of Whigs.
WITH what horror must one look back upon the deplorable state of this wretched
Kingdom these 45 years, since the unhappy Principles of Subjects taking Arms
against the Lawful Magistrate under pretense of Religion first prevailed among
us! Should I here impartially set down the strange Distractions that tore us in
pieces, the Rivers of Blood that were shed, and the manifold Miseries that we
and our Fathers for many years groaned under, I might seem perhaps to affect
the writing a Tragedy, or the raising transports of passion in my Readers
breast. But, alas! the dismal effects of those Convulsions are still so
visible, that as they will justify all that can be said upon this Subject; so
at the same time they make it needless. When we had fought our selves into
Bondage in the late unnatural War, and had no way left to remove the just
Scourges of Rebellion, besides our prayers and tears, which at length obtained
of God the recovery of our ancient Government, Rights and Properties, it was to
be hoped that the fresh remembrance of what we had felt, would have frighted at
least the present Generation from all thoughts of renewing our Sufferings, and
have kept our Sovereign's Reign as free from Blood, as God was pleased to make
his Restoration. But woeful experience has proved how soon so great a
deliverance was forgotten: before the cicatrice of the late Wound was well
closed, we made haste to open it again. Pentland Hills, and Bothwell-Bridge
will stand for lasting Monuments both of our Ingratitude to God, and of our
Disloyalty to his Vicegerent. Nor do we only adhere to those wicked Principles
which have already cost the Nation so dear, but even outdo them by new and more
dangerous Positions. Our Fathers, without casting off all reverence for the
Government, insisted only upon some pretended Excesses, which they pretended to
redress. But some among us of late, by taking upon them to lay aside Him who
had undoubted right to govern, do strike at the very Root, and endeavor to
destroy the whole ancient Constitution at one blow. They set up for a further
degree of Sanctity and Reformation, which we have unhappily brought into such a
corruption of Morals, as has not been hitherto known among Christians. Are not
Assassinations taught, as well as practiced among us? and those who suffer for
the basest of Murders, are they not cried up for Martyrs? Are not the minds of
many debauched to that strange degree, as to glory in Opinions, and die for
Doctrines, which others cannot hear mentioned without horror? Do not men,
pretending to no ordinary measure of Christianity, every day commit and allow
of actions whereof Heathens would be ashamed? and in one word, Can any thing be
so wickedly contrived by those of the Party, as not to be cloak'd with the
specious title of Zeal for Christ? Hence it is that Atheists and Profane
persons take occasion to scoff at our holy Religion; a reproach is hereby
brought upon the Reformation, which always charged Popery with Rebellion. The
rest of Mankind look upon us as Enemies, and Contemners of the most sacred ties
of Religion and Society. Nor is it to be doubted but if we go on in such brutal
tenets and practices, our Land will again become a field of Blood. For can we
expect that the Government will thus give way to its own Dissolution? or suffer
us to go on in courses so inconsistent with the public safety? When softer
Methods prove ineffectual, will it not be forced to defend it self by
proceeding to the utmost severities? And I dread to think how when the wrath of
God, and of our injured Prince, shall at length pursue us for our unaccountable
obstinacy, we cannot any where expect either refuge or pity.

This terrible prospect of what is most likely to come to pass, has so wrought
upon me in my retirement, that notwithstanding the Circumstances of my present
condition, which secure me as much from any share in my Native Countrey's
danger as my Conscience does from its guilt. I am resolved to discharge the
duty of a sincere Christian and of a faithful Patriot, in laying open my
thoughts upon this occasion. Now that those, for whose sakes this discourse is
undertaken, may both the better understand, and the less partially read it, I
shall endeavor to fit my style to the meanest capacities, and to avoid, as
much as possible, all sharpness of expression, being of my self most inclined
to Lenitives; and having often observed that gentle treatment is most apt to
affect Noble Tempers, I shall therefore beg of my Countrymen that they will be
pleased to lay aside prejudice for a little while, and consider fairly with me
these four things.

I. If such courses be not really inconsistent with the safety of any
Government. II. If they be not contrary to the nature of the Christian
Religion. III. If what is alleged from the obligation lying upon us by the
late Covenants, be a sufficient warrant for what we do. IV. If there be any
ground for the new Doctrine of a pretended Forfeiture, which some among us
insist upon.
First Consideration.
It is necessary in all Civil Constitutions, that the Actions of Particular
Persons be directed toward the Public Good. But most men being apt to steer
their course only by the compass of Interest, the Wisdom of no Government has
hitherto found out a better way to support it self, than by establishing such
an Authority as might see to every man performing his part in relation to the
Public. This last resort of Power, as the very life of the Government, has
still been accounted sacred and inviolable; has had all the advantages of Laws
in its behalf; has every where been armed against the attempts of Malice,
Faction, or Ambition; nor has any thing been wanting that might enable it to
answer the great ends of its Institution, either to administer Justice, secure
Property, or maintain Peace and Order.

In whatever hands this Sovereign Power is lodged, as with us it is undoubtedly
in the King's, there all must be ready to pay an humble deference, not only to
countenance Authority when it promotes our Private Interest, but even when it
seems least favorable to us, to own that it has power to punish as well as
reward, there being no less reason for men's submitting to what Authority thinks
proper to inflict upon their breach of the Laws, than for their laying claim to
Protection, and other benefits, while they observe them. No severity in the
Prince can cancel the obligation that lies upon Subjects, nor put them in
Commission to make violent Resistance, seeing this were a taking upon them to
reject that Judge, and deny that Authority, which the Laws, the Government, and
they Themselves as Members of it, have already owned to be Supreme upon Earth.

Nothing here below can be so perfectly contrived as not to retain some
inconveniences, and I shall grant a probability, or a possibility at least, of
Particular Persons suffering sometimes unjustly, to be an inconvenience which
necessarily accompanies the chief Authority in all Governments. But if there be
no other way to shun it, than by allowing violent resistance to be lawful in
such cases, the remedy will questionless prove much worse than the disease. If
with the many Laws in the Prince's behalf, there were but one to countenance
resisting him, this one would in a short time destroy all the rest, and reduce
his Authority to an empty name. Or if it were declared lawful for Subjects
only to resist in some cases, who must judge when these fall out? The Prince
could hardly be brought to give Sentence against himself, to wound his Power by
releasing men from their Allegiance. And if it were left to the judgment of
Subjects, it is to be feared that the Determination would be highly partial on
their side; the case of lawful Resistance would then turn frequent, Obedience
would be rare, unless supported by Interest, and Subjects would at this rate
only be such to whom and when they pleased.

This Principle of Resistance being once allowed, it necessarily opens a door
to subvert all Authority, and renders the whole design of Government
ineffectual. How could the Public Peace be secured, if there were ways left
for Particular persons lawfully to rebel? Differences could never be decided
but by granting a Sentence from which there is no appeal, backed with a power
of executing without danger of opposition. There could be no order, were it
left to Private men to desert their stations, to turn Judges where they are
Parties, and to call Rulers to an account of their Administration. If we leave
Kingly Government, and look upon the most Popular Constitutions, which are
raised but one step above Anarchy, even there the chief Magistrates are only
accountable to the whole Body for their actions: nor can any part of this Body,
without the concurrence of the rest, meddle with those that have their
Authority from all. Let us suppose Authority in some cases may be mistaken or
biased in its decisions; without doubt we might expect much greater errors and
partiality, were every man left to judge of his own performances. If we think
it inconvenient that the Prince should be enabled by his Power to injure any
Particular Person, much worse would it be to put it in every Particular
Person's power to be unjust to the Prince. To be short, the Supreme Power
falling sometimes into no good hands, does not frustrate the chief ends of
Government; but if discontented spirits may find ways lawfully to make
opposition, nothing can keep it from being dissolved.

It is most plain that Subjects Rights are rather secured than endangered by
the Princes not being accountable for his Actions, and that they would soon
find themselves at a loss by being allowed to resist: for as men are naturally
apt to complain, and are allways partial enough to think themselves most hardly
dealt with; so if they were at liberty to fall upon the Government, in helping
to weaken that they would wound their own Security. The whole Body must feel
the blow which the Head receives. Life may be preserved with the hazard or loss
of several Members, but when the Head is affected, every part languishes, and
with it all dies. The great foundation then of the Subjects Safety being shaken
by violating the Prince's Rights, Interest it self should teach us to be very
tender of them, and never to offer at destroying that which appears perhaps
inconvenient in one respect, but is useful and necessary in many. If it trouble
us to be at the Prince's Mercy, we may remember we are likewise under his
Protection, and so need apprehend none besides. And this I humbly conceive is a
Condition much more desirable, than by renouncing our Allegiance, unhinging the
Government, and getting thus without the reach of an imaginary danger, to draw
upon our selves the violence of every one that has strength or wickedness
enough to hurt us.

And truly our Country is at little beholden to us for resisting Authority, as
we are to our selves; for in shaking off all duty to our Prince, we encourage
others to do the same: this must involve the Government in constant trouble,
and deprive us of the blessed fruits of Peace upon which we cannot set too high
a value. If every one of us be resolved to make good our petty Rights, can we
imagine our Prince will tamely pass from His, which are so great? And at this
rate there is no avoiding a Civil War, with all its fatal Consequences, which
will fall much heavier upon the Public, than any thing that any Particular Man
or Sort of Men can suffer. The Government of the worst of Princes is infinitely
preferable to Anarchy and Confusion, where Guilty and Innocent are equally
obnoxious to Danger; where no Man's Prudence, Virtue, or Merit can give him
Sanctuary. Rome felt it self much more at ease under a Caligula, a Nero, a
Domitian, or a Commodus, than amidst the terrible Alarms of a Civil War. This
in a few Days spilt more of Rome's best Blood, banished more Senators, and
ruined more Families, than any of those Tyrants did in several Years. But if it
went better with the Public, while such Monsters sat at the Helm, who were
themselves governed, and governed others by no better Laws, than what Cruelty,
Avarice, Ambition, and the rest of their unbridled Passions suggested; I am
willing still to believe, That none of us are so much our own, and our
Countrey's Enemies, to prefer Anarchy before the easy Yoke of our Indulgent
Prince, who is Reign has never yet been stained with one Act of his Cruelty;
Whom Envy it self cannot charge as gratifying his Avarice, or Ambition, at the
Expense of his Subjects Fortunes or Lives; but who on the contrary has hitherto
made good, what he has been pleased, both in Public and Private, often to
declare, That he intends to govern according to the established Laws of his
Kingdoms. And truly we must allow it reasonable, that all his Subjects follow
this Royal Pattern, and make the Laws likewise the Sandard of their Actions; or
if they cannot be brought this length, it is fit that at least they learn
patiently to submit, without taxing their Prince of Severity or Injustice, for
requiring them to observe those Rules, by which he himself vouchsafes to be
governed. But if nothing besides our own private Interest will influence us,
even this ought to make all tremble at the very Thoughts of disturbing the
Public Peace, or of setting their Country on Fire, lest they themselves be
burnt up in its Ashes. As no Art can manage this Flame, when it is once
kindled; so it has always been observed, that the unhappy Instruments of such
Tragedies have seldom escaped, or, at best, the issue has proved more grievous,
than any thing that could have befallen them by keeping to a dutiful
Compliance. It must then be confessed, that Men are very ill advised, to draw
inevitable Calamity upon their Country, and to sacrifice the Lives and
Fortunes of so many thousands, where the Injustice is so plain, and the Success
of the Undertaking so doubtful.

And now methinks I hear some alledg, That they only endeavor to maintain
those Natural Rights and Privileges to which every Man has an undoubted Title,
or that they only stand upon self-Defence, which is enjoined them by the Law of
Nature. But however plausible such pretenses may appear at first view, yet when
narrowly looked into, they will not be able to bear them out: for neither the
Defense of Natural Rights, nor the Law of Nature, will allow of any such
monstrous Doctrine. As to things which are undoubtedly Natural Rights, all Men,
who are Members of Societies, and live under any Rules, do every day part with
several of them, and find a real Advantage in so doing, they freely resign some
natural Rights into the hands of the Public, which thereupon ensures to them
the rest. And tho by this means their Natural Liberties are brought under the
Confinement of Laws, and are in some measure abridg'd, yet still their
Condition is much more comfortable, than if they continued single and
independent Persons, neither owing Obedience as Subjects, nor as such receiving
Protection; for in this Case the Pleasure of enjoying all the Privileges of
Nature, with the gilded name of entire Liberty, would be sufficiently allayed
by the constant Terrors and Fears they must then live in. Their own natural
Rights, without any other Support, would little avail them, nor would their
overvalued Freedom fail to determine in Slavery, as soon as they met with any
stronger than themselves. And thus by standing upon all the Privileges of
their Birth, and every thing that Nature had given them, they should be able to
secure nothing.

The greatest Lovers therefore of Freedom, have in all Ages been wise enough to
see an Interest in framing themselves into Bodies under certain Laws, which
limited, but withal secured those Rights of Nature; and the great Dangers from
which this Union freed them, as well as the Advantages that have arisen from
it, made Men agree, to keep nothing back, no not Life it self, when the Public
required it: and this makes it evident, that Self-defence is not enjoined by
the Law of Nature, because this Law is inviolable; and if it absolutely
required the Preservation of Life, no Man could then venture it for his
Country, for his Parents, nor for his Friends, no Criminal could without Sin
submit to the Execution of the Judges Sentence; and not to meddle with Christ's
Death, the Glory of Martyrs would be their Crime, for Violating the Law of
Nature by their Voluntary Sufferings. I own Self-defence to be every Man's
undoubted Birthright, one of our dearest Privileges, which we are not to
forgo unless upon weighty Considerations. But the great Fallacy is here, Men
are apt to confound Natural Rights, and the Law of Nature, which vastly differ.
The Law of Nature contains certain general Truths, the Fruit and genuine
Results of Reflection, the very Impressions which God has immediately graven in
our Souls, which are not to be violated, and which every Man's Reason must
approve. Whereas the Rights of Nature are frequently dispensed with, nor have
we any further Title to them, than the Laws of the Government, whereof we are
Members, allow us. So that the whole Matter being rightly understood, I may
boldly say, The Law of Nature first taught Men to give up their Natural Rights
to the Public, as the wisest Bargain they could make, seeing upon their
committing their Lives, Liberties and Fortunes to its Trust, to be disposed of
at all times as the Public should think fit, there is a sufficient Return made
them by the Public, which in this Case undertakes their Protection against the
whole World.

Second Consideration.
The great Design of the Christian Religion is to reform men inwardly, to calm
the Storm, which Pride, Malice, or Love of Revenge are apt to raise, which it
effects by seasoning the Mind with Humility, Gentleness, and Patience. It was
chiefly intended to remove Men's Thoughts from Temporal to Spiritual Objects,
teaching them in all Conditions to show an entire Resignation to God, grounded
upon a sure Confidence of his Paternal Care and Protection; and when Men are
once arrived at this blessed Temper of Spirit, it will discover it self in the
whole Tenor of their Lives, with Relation both to God and their Neighbor. Far
from repining at the Divine Providence under the harshest Dispensations, they
will then be seen to rejoice in Afflictions; they will cheerfully take up their
Cross, and, notwithstanding all discouragements, will keep on a steady Course
toward Heaven. Nor is it to be imagined that ill Usage from Men will be able
to discompose those, who have put on the strongest Resolutions to be at peace
with the whole World, to forgive Injuries as soon as received, to pray for
their Persecutors, and to return Good for Evil.

Seeing the holy Religion then, which we profess, requires such a peaceable and
gentle Disposition of Mind in the cross Occurrences of this Life, and seems
upon all Occasions to discountenance any thing that savours of Violence,
certainly it will never allow of violent Methods in what immediately regards it
self. And as these are neither suitable to the Nature nor Design of Religion,
so it may be sufficiently secured without them; and he who questions the Truth
of this, does forget that Religion is an inward Principle, fixed in the Soul,
from whence no outward Force is able to remove it. Men may be spoiled of their
Goods, deprived of their Liberties, and suffer constant Persecution for
Righteousness-sake, without hazarding their Religion, which is beyond the Reach
of the strongest and most malicious Enemies. An undeniable Instance of this
Truth we meet with in the Primitive Martyrs, who, tho they were oftentimes mean
and contemptible Persons, yet they held out against the whole Power of the
Roman Empire. So that Religion may properly be termed, A precious Treasure, of
which no man was ever yet robbed, but by his own Fault; and as we may laugh at
any Attempts, which are made against it, so nothing can be more unreasonable,
than to use Violence in keeping what cannot be taken from us. We much
undervalue its Power, if we imagine that there is need of any thing of this
kind to support it. Nor can there be a more certain Sign of the Spirit's being
weak in us, than our not daring to trust it without a Guard. In a word,
Religion has not thoroughly inflamed those Souls, which are not able to offer
Sacrifice to God without borrowing strange Fire.

The Precepts of Christianity do not seem plainer in any one Thing, than in
that unlimited Submission which, as Subjects, we ow to our Prince; and if our
Duty to God may sometimes justify our Refusal to pay an active Obedience, yet
in no Case are private Persons at Liberty to resist, but must bear patiently
the sharpest Trials, until they can ease themselves in a lawful, that is, in a
peaceable way. If the Princes Edicts therefore should appear such as did
infringe our dearest Privileges, and in our Judgment strike even at Religion
it self, we ought still to remember who we are, and what we are concerned for.
We must not presently shake off our Allegiance, and imagine that this gives us
Authority to disturb the Public Peace, or that there is no Rebellion where
Religion is the Cause we fight for. God does not call us to put to our Hand
after this irreverent manner, to support the tottering Ark; and the Sincerity
of our Intentions, or our Zeal for God's Glory and the Gospel, will not excuse
us in any indirect Courses. God is jealous of his own Honor, and can easily
compass his Ends, without requiring such things at our hands. The Means he is
pleased to recommend to us, as fittest for this Purpose, are our humble
Addresses to our Sovereign, whom in Conscience we dare not oppose, our making
known our just Grievances in a dutiful manner, and laying modestly before him
those Considerations, which are most likely to remove his Prejudices, and
dispose him to entertain a better Opinion of Us and our Principles; and when we
have fought with these Arms, which Heaven approves of, we must back our
Petitions with our Prayers to God, that He, who has the hearts of Kings always
in his Hands, will incline our Prince to grant our Requests, and then, if our
Cause be truly good, if it be God's as much as we are willing to believe it is,
then if we do not spoil it in the Management, we need not in the least doubt of
a most comfortable Issue.

But as Things are now ordered, it will be hard to persuade the World that we
are acted by an Evangelical Spirit, where the Practices of many are so
apparently contrary to the Gospel. To have our hands still upon our Swords,
ready to draw as soon as the least Advantage is given us, is a Posture ill
befitting our Profession, and is that which does insensibly destroy, but will
never maintain Religion. What we would have pass for pure Zeal, others look
upon as Rage, and love of Revenge; and condemn our fomenting Tumults and
Insurrections against Authority, as flowing either from a Diffidence of God's
Providence, or from a Distrust of his Promises, or at best from our Impatience
to wait his good time. Look back upon the Contrivances of all Rebellions, and
you must reckon Craft, Ambition, and Hypocrisy have been always among the most
innocent Instruments that are employed in hatching and carrying them on; and
yet these are so far from being Acts of Christianity, that all Men who are
concerned to be thought strict in their Morals, will be ashamed to own them.
What then shall we say to the Falsehood, the Cruelty, the Oppression and
Injustice which are so eminently conspicuous in the History of our late unhappy
Rebellion? Certainly for Men to pretend amidst so gross Enormities, that what
they do is to promote God's Service, and to fight his Battles, is a Sin much
beyond all the rest, and brings so great a Scandal upon our holy Religion, that
we see by woeful Experience, how it has helped to set up that Spirit of Atheism
which now abounds among us.

The Arms with which true Religion delights to defend it self, are of a quite
different Nature, as Justice and Integrity in Men's Dealings, Innocence in their
Lives, Zeal without Hypocrisy in their holy Performances; Willingness rather to
receive the greatest, than to do the least Injury; Enmity against no Person,
much less against the Prince; Constancy in suffering all manner of
Inconveniences, rather than to contract Guilt in removing them; and lastly, a
sincere Abhorrence of offering to stain the Christian Religion, by Shedding any
Man's Blood in its maintenance, while yet they are resolved by God's Grace
patiently to sacrifice their own Lives, rather than renounce it. These and the
like were the innocent Methods which under God proved instrumental in
converting the Heathen World. Christianity, after a new kind of Warfare, became
Victorious by yielding; planted, it is true, it was and grew up in Blood, yet in
such as was not spilt in the open Fields, but upon Scaffolds and in
Amphitheaters, and always without Resistance. No other Arms than Prayers,
Tears, and invincible Patience, made it triumph over the Power of Heathen Rome.
Holy Leagues, Bonds of mutual Defense, Cabals and secret Practices were not
known in those Ages. Private Meetings indeed we read of, which far from
endangering the Peace of the Empire, proved the best Seminaries to instruct Men
in the Principles of Loyalty as well as Religion; Nothing of Sedition was ever
heard or taught in those pure, tho Nocturnal Assemblies. No man thought fit to
meddle with Authority, or arraign the Government there; the time was much
better spent, even in Exercises of Devotion, and in pious Meditations; seldom
was the Emperors Name there mentioned, except in the Prayers that they daily
offered up for his Safety, even when the Church groaned under his Persecution:
and for the Truth of what is here alleged, I dare appeal to the Doctrine and
Practice of Christ, and of the primitive Christians.

If we take an exact view of the great Copy Christ has set us, either in his
Words or in his Actions, in what he taught, or in what he suffered, every Part
does breath that Peace, which, as a Legacy, he did bequeath his Disciples,
(John 14. v. 27.) Those who are gently and peaceably disposed, have no small
Share in the Blessings he pronounced in the beginning of his most Divine
Sermon, (Matthew. 5. v. 7, 9, 10.) and if we urge his own Words to the contrary,
that he came not to send Peace, but a Sword, (Matthew. 10. v. 34.) these show us
rather what he foresaw would be the unhappy Effect, than the real Design of his
Coming, which was chiefly to make Peace betwixt God and Man, and to make Men be
at Peace with one another; in Order to this he commands us not to resist Evil,
(Math. 5. v. 39.) or the evil Person, as the Learned here observe: and if the
Precept be general, the Inference is strongest, with Relation to our Prince,
who if he prove evil, unjust or froward, yet of all Persons is least to be
resisted. I might bring the most Material Passages of the Gospel, in
Confirmation of this necessary Truth. But I shall for brevitie's sake confine
my self to two or three Instances.

When the Inhabitants of a Samaritan Village refused to entertain our Savior,
(Luke 9. v. 54.) two of his Disciples not being able to bear this Affront,
asked leave to command Fire down from Heaven and consume them, as Elias (2 Kin.
1. v. 10, 12.) had done, but we find he answered them with this sharp rebuke,
Ye know not of what Spirit ye are. They did imagine it fit for them to imitate
the Prophet, forgetting that they were now in the School of Christ, and not in
that of Moses. Many things were allowed, but especially to those called
Zealots, by which Character Elias then acted, which could not take place under
this new Dispensation. The Gospel was to be carried on with a Spirit of Lenity
and Meekness, Men were to be charmed and not frighted into a good Opinion of
it. Nor was it at all to be introduced with Violence, or Hazard to their Lives,
seeing the Design of the Son of Man's Coming, was not to destroy Men's Lives,
but to save them, Luke 9. v. 56.

The next Instance shall be that of St. Peter, who when the Soldiers came to
apprehend Christ, (Math. 26. v. 51, 52.) drew his Sword, and smote a Servant of
the High-priest's, and out off his Ear; but instead of receiving Thanks for his
Zeal in his Master's Defense, he was commanded to put up his Sword, with this
Threat, That all they who take the Sword, shall perish by the Sword. Both
Ancient and Modern Writers have urged this as a plain Argument against Subjects
assuming to themselves the Power of the Sword to oppose Magistrates, or those
who act by their Commission, and the Cavil which some make, as if the
Threatening were here directed rather to the Jews than to St. Peter, will with
impartial Persons always pass for a violent wresting the Words from their
genuine Sense. An ancient Father (Theophilact) does expressly say that Christ
here taught his Disciples not to use the Sword, tho by so doing he might seem
to vindicate or defend God himself. Another of the Ancients (Origin) does
conclude from Christ's Command to Peter to put up his Sword, that we must not
draw it unless we will perish by it, and that all those who are not inclined to
Peace, but are Movers of Sedition, shall perish in the War which they occasion.
And to give you the Comment of St. Austin here for all, he says that the Lord
did in these Words sufficiently check St. Peter's Fact, when he said, Put up
again thy Sword, for he that uses the Sword shall perish by the Sword; and he
uses it, who, when no Superior nor Lawful Power does allow, makes use of Arms
against the Blood of another.

It would be too tedious to set down the Words of the most eminent Modern
Divines, who agree that Peter's Action and Christ's Reproof, ought to
discourage all private Persons from rising up against Authority, I shall only
give the Words of one most learned and judicious Commentator (Grotius in 26
Math.) upon this Place, and the rather, because some have falsely challenged his
Testimony from other of his Writings, to weaken this Evangelical Doctrine of
Non-resistance. This Admonition, says he, does not only belong to Peter, but
indeed to all Christians, whom public Authority offers to punish for their
Profession. And it is the Will of God that we should then give Testimony to all
the World of our Christian Patience, and commit our Souls unto him, as unto a
faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 2. v. 9. For what, says he, can be more just, than
for us to lay out our Lives for the Honor of him, from whom we had them. Nor
must the Natural Right of Self-defence be here pleaded, for there is great
Difference, says he, in using this Right against Robbers, or such like
Persons, where we have the Law on our side, or against the Commands of
Authority, which, tho unjust, are to be born with. For, as he afterward
observes, Men being apt to be partial in what immediately concerns themselves,
if once private Persons be allowed to make violent Opposition, when they think
they are injured by the Magistrate, the World will soon be filled with Tumults,
and the Force of Laws and Judicial Procedures will be made void. Reason,
therefore it self obliges us to grant some Power which must not be resisted;
and it is certain, says he, in Matters of Religion the Examples of the
primitive Christians do teach us to suffer patiently any Violence offered us by
those who are in Authority.

Now considering all that might be said in behalf of St. Peter, we shall scarce
meet with such another Act of Hostility, that may seem so excusable. Justice,
Duty, Religion seemed all to countenance what he did. Violence was here offered
to a Person, whom he knew to be most innocent, and in whom no other Fault could
be found, than what Malice falsely suggested; and therefore no wonder, if Peter
thought fit to do what he could, to rescue him. What he did was in Defense of a
Master, and one, who besides the common Ties of Duty and Gratitude, which might
prompt the Disciple, had deserved likewise well of him, by many special Acts of
Love and Tenderness expressed toward him. And lastly, there seemed to be true
Zeal for Religion in this Attempt; for he saw they were going to put the
Messiah to death, purposely to stifle the great Miracles they had seen him
work, to disgrace the heavenly Doctrine which he had taught, and to render the
whole Design of his coming into the World ineffectual. Besides, there were
other Circumstances to plead for him. As they were no Magistrates who came to
seize upon Jesus, so it is probable he understood not by what Authority they
acted; and tho I shall not with some allege, that the Highpriests Commission
under the Roman Government was not sufficient in such Cases, yet it is most
probable, that Peter looked upon those who came, as the Peoples Emissaries, and
their coming to be an Act of their Popular Rage. Lastly, for his Intention in
what he did, it clearly appears, to have been only in Defense of Christ's
Person, without the least Design of giving any further Disturbance to the
Government. And yet notwithstanding all that can be said for him, his Attempt
is censured by him, whom he intended to serve in it. And that is recorded as a
warning for all Christians, to beware of resisting Authority, even when their
Actions aim at nothing but the Defense of Christ and the Gospel.

The last and great Instance is Christ's own Carriage at his Trial, in which he
fully answered the Character given him by the Prophet, (Isa. 53. v. 7.) He
suffered himself to be brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter; as a Sheep before
the Shearer, so he opened not his Mouth. He questioned not the Authority of
Pilate, he summoned not Legions of Angels to come to his Assistance, but meekly
and humbly submitting to a most unjust Sentence, he has proposed himself as a
Pattern to Christians, (1 Pet. 2. v. 21.) For tho it behoved Christ according to
the Scriptures to suffer, yet what was necessary both in respect of God's
Decrees, and for the Benefit of Mankind, must be acknowledged voluntary in
respect of the Sufferer, and ceases not to be imitable. If we will be his
Disciples, we must trace his glorious Footsteps, take up our Cross, and like
faithful Soldiers follow the Captain of our Salvation, when he calls us. What
he requires at our hands is most reasonable, for if we be not able to do great
things for his sake, sure it is in our Power to command our selves from doing
Violence to any, to forbear even acting against our Persecutors; and by this
means we become Sufferers with him; He approves of no other resistance than
what he made himself, and what the Scripture (Heb. 12. v. 4.) mentions of,
resisting to Blood. Christ's Followers are only to fight his Battles in the
noble Army of the Martyrs. And in this, no doubt, we perform a truer Act of
Religion, more acceptable in the Sight of God, more agreeable to Christ's
Doctrine and Practice, than we are able to do by any other Service whatsoever.

After our blessed Savior's Ascensson, the Apostles did carefully observe the
Rules he left them, their Carriage upon all Occasions was humble, peaceable,
and gentle; When they were brought before Magistrates and Governors, they
treated them with respect, but did never call their Authority in question, nor
upbraided them with Cruelty and Injustice, as we too frequently hear done in
our chiefest Judicatures. St. Paul (Acts 23.) having spoken irreverently to the
High Priest, who unjustly commanded him to be smitten, while a Prisoner at the
Bar, before Trial or Sentence, thought it his Duty to make an Apology,
declaring that he knew not the Quality of him before whom he stood, and that
Men were not to speak evil of the Ruler of the People. He stood indeed upon his
Privilege, and appealed from an inferior Magistrate unto Caesar, (Acts 25.)
but in this he owned the higher Powers, which some among us have learned to
reject, he pleaded not any Exemption by virtue of his Apostleship, tho he could
not reasonably expect much Favor, where a Nero was to be his Judge. His
Doctrine of Obedience and Submission is no less remarkable than his Practice;
so that if there were not one Word in the Writings of all the Apostles to this
Purpose, besides what St. Paul has in the first seven Verses of the thirteenth
Chapter to the Romans, we might there be sufficiently instructed in the Duty of
Subjects: his Positions are so plain, and the Arguments, by which he enforces
them, are so convincing, that had he lived in our times, and heard all the
Objections which are raised against the Doctrine of Submission, he could not
have answered them more clearly, nor in fewer Words; and no doubt the Spirit of
God, which did dictate what He, and St. Peter, and St. Jude did write upon this
Subject, had an Eye to the Degeneracy of latter Ages, and designed to lay such
sure Grounds of Christian Obedience, as the Wisdom of the World should never be
able to shake in those, who are resolved to regulate their Lives by the
Scripture.

Nor does it add a little to the Weight of their Testimony, when we consider
the Circumstances under which they then were, had the World in those Days been
governed by Christian Princes, who submitting their Scepters to the Cross, had
gloried in showing themselves nursing Fathers to the Gospel in its Infancy,
their Doctrine might then have seemed suitable to the Temper of those they had
to deal with; nor could they have allowed too much to Princes, who were like to
use their Power for the Establishment of the Christian Religion. Or had their
Princes, tho Heathens, been Nerva's, Antonius's, or Aurelius's, Persons
remarkable for their Justice and Clemency, there would have been no great
Inconvenience in this Doctrine, but their preaching up Submission to such
Monsters as Claudius, or Nero, under whose Cruelties the Roman Empire then
groaned, does clearly demonstrate, that they were not governed by Political
Maxims, nor biased by any Worldly Consideration. But on the contrary, that
they laid down general and inviolable Rules, to be observed at all Times, and
toward all Princes, the froward as well as the gentle; those who did unjustly
persecute them, as well as others that vouchsafed them Protection.

And certainly in this, and in no other Sense, did the Primitive Christians
understand the Apostle's Words, and were therefore of all Subjects the most
dutiful to the very worst of Princes; no Barbarous Usage, no Oppression could
make them swerve from their first Principle of patient Submission; they had
always before their: Eyes the Pattern of their blessed Savior, in every Step
of his Humiliation and Sufferings; nor did they forget what he had taught them,
(John 18. v. 36.) That his Kingdom was not of this World; and that they, being
his Servants, were not therefore to fight; they knew he intended no Prejudice
to the Rights of Princes, in setting up his Monarchy, which is Spiritual and
Eternal. And this puts me in mind of a remarkable Passage in a Fragment of
Egesippus, a most ancient Christian Writer, how Domitian, like another Herod,
being jealous of Christ's return to dethrone him, raised an heavy Persecution
against the Church, giving particular Order, that such as were of the Seed of
David, should be forthwith secured; whereupon some, that were related to Christ
according to the Flesh, being brought before him, and examined first concerning
their own Condition, which they easily made appear to be mean and low; and
afterward concerning the Nature of Christ's Kingdom, they showed so plainly,
that it was not of this World, but commenced properly, when others ended, being
Spiritual and Eternal, that having satisfied the Emperor, and freed him from
any Apprehension of Christ's Design upon his Crown, they themselves were set at
Liberty, and a stop was immediately put to the Persecution.

The Behavior of the Christians, in those golden Ages of the Church, never
gave any just ground of Jealousy to the Roman Emperors, in all the
Vicissitudes of that Empire, in the frequent Rebellions against the Government,
or Conspiracies against the Emperor's Person; the Christians kept constant to
their Allegiance. When by siding with such Usurpers as Cassius, Albinus, Niger,
Parthenius, etc. they might not only have freed themselves from bloody Yokes,
but have also in all probability made sure of large Immunities, they could
never be wrought on to take Arms against the established Authority; they were
persuaded, how ill soever the Emperors might manage their Trust, yet that
their Commission was sealed by God. Nay sometimes the Christians brought upon
themselves Persecution, by refusing to join with Rebels; as in the Reign of
Adrian, when Barochebas and the Jews, not being able upon their Revolt to
engage the Christians in their Party, turned the Edge of their Sword against
the Church, killing most barbarously all the Christians that they met with, and
made them thus Martyrs, for the next best cause after Religion, if it is not to
be called a Part of it.

Now without doubt the many Edicts which Emperors past in Favor of the
Christians, were grounded chiefly upon such Considerations, seeing upon strict
Enquiry they had never found them engaged in any Plots against the State; and
it is particularly observed of Severus, that the Kindness, he showed to the
Christians in the beginning of his Reign, proceeded from a sense of their
dutiful Carriage in difficult Times, both toward himself, and the former
Emperors. In fine, the most inveterate Enemies of their Religion could not
deny them this Testimony, That in the sharpest Persecutions, when they were
only suffered to live, to prolong their Torments, when a simple Death, not
accompanied with those horrid Cruelties, which were then practiced, past for no
small Favor; When the Streets were filled with the Carcasses of Martyrs, and
the Rivers died with the most precious Blood of the Church, they could never be
tempted to rebel. Nor was there truly any thing, in which their Enemies did
more industriously labor, than through Despair to draw them into Rebellion,
that so they might have had the better Excuse to cut them off. It grieved the
Roman Emperors to employ their Axes and not their Swords, and to give their
Executioners so much Work, while their Legions were idle, and spill so much
Blood with so little Reputation: but Christians knew their Duty too well, to
give them any Advantage in this Point; for the Renouncing their Religion, or
their Alledgiance were the only Things, wherein they could never be brought to
gratify their Princes.

It were easy to bring many Instances in Confirmation of what I say, but I
shall only pitch upon that famous History of the Thebean Legion, which tho
commonly known, yet can never be either too much admired, nor too often
repeated: All the Officers and Soldiers of this noble Legion having been
converted to Christianity by Zambdas Bishop of Jerusalem, during their
Winter Quarters in those Parts, were in the heat of the Dioclesian Persecution
sent from the East, to reinforce the Army of Maximianus Herculeus in France,
and understanding upon their Arrival in the Imperial Camp, that a new Military
Oath was to be given them at an Heathen Altar, purposely to pollute them with
Idolatry, the whole Legion did thereupon retire from the rest of the Army: when
Maximianus commanded them back, Mauritius and Ex^perius the Chief Officers
answered in the name of all, that they were ready to return and fight against
his Enemies, but being Christians, they could not offer Sacrifice to the Gods.
This Answer did so enrage the Emperor, that he sentenced every tenth Man of
the Legion to be put to death, which was accordingly done, none offering to
make the least Resistance; and when the same cruel Orders were renewed,
Mauritius had so prepared them by Applauding their former Behavior, that they
all answered, They were Caesar's Soldiers, that they had never brought upon
themselves the imputation of Cowardice, nor deserted their Colors; that they
were ready to obey the Emperor in every Thing, but in offering Sacrifice to
Idols; and that their Bodies he might dispose of as he pleased, only their
Souls they reserved to Christ: then Exuperius confirming them in their generous
Resolution, said, That they did now engage in a new War, and that they must not
think to fight their Way to Heaven with their Swords; Tell the Emperor, says
he, that Despair it self shall not be able to engage us against him, we have
Arms, but we will not resist, because we are willing rather to suffer, than
conquer; preferring much an innocent Death, before a Life stained with Guilt.
And afterward making good their own and their Officers Words, in Imitation of
their blessed Master, they suffered themselves to be led as Sheep to the
Slaughter, and received every one a glorious Crown of Martyrdom.

If we compare the meek and Christian Behavior of these stout Officers and
Soldiers, with that of our greatest Professors, we have reason to bewail the
Age in which we live, as scarce retaining any Tincture of this primitive
Spirit. What excuse can we bring for Men, who pretending to embrace the sacred
Function of the Ministry, and to preach the Gospel of Peace, have thought fit
to appear in Arms, surrounded with Troops in opposition to Christian Authority,
when we find the Officers and Soldiers of a Legion here throw down their Arms,
rather than oppose an Heathen Persecutor? What could Mr. Welsch, or the Captain
of his Guard, have alleged in their own behalf, had they heard Maunitius upon
the Head of his Legion rejoicing at the patient suffering of those, who died in
the first Decimation, and Exhorting them that survived to follow their Example,
and not to dishonor their Profession, with the Guilt of Rebellion? How much
more Christian was the Death of Exuperius, who stripped himself of his Arms, as
soon as the Emperors Commission was produced, than that of Mr. Cameron, who
died with a Sword in his Hand, resisting his Prince? I dare not say that Mr.
Cameron and this noble Officer seemed to act each others part, seeing Exuperius
truly performed his own, and has deserved to be celebrated by all Posterity,
for a Christian Hero. But I hope M. Cameron's greatest Friends will not be
offended with me, if I declare that in my humble Opinion, the Manner of his
Death did give no great Luster to his former Actions; for whatever Reputation
it may be to a Man fighting against Turks and Infidels in Defense of
Christianity, to be said to have sold his Life at a dear Rate, yet in giving
the Character of a faithful Minister of Christ, I cannot think it much for his
Honor to mention that he died, as we know M. Cameron did, boldly fighting in
direct Opposition to Authority.

I am not ignorant how uncharitable some have been, in affirming that the
Submission paid by the ancient Christians, flowed chiefly from their want of
Power, and that they did not oppose their Domitians nor their Dioclesians,
because they were not in a Condition to carry on a Rebellion: but it is a most
malicious as well as a false Suggestion, only to sully the Glory of their
Sufferings, and to deprive many Martyrs of one of the most precious Jewels in
their Crown, by making that Submission forced, which was most voluntary. This
is directly to tax those sincere Christians with Disingenuity, as if they had
pretended Conscience, for what proceeded chiefly from Fear or Weakness; while
indeed the Principles of their Religion made them good Subjects, and taught
them to be more afraid of the Guilt than the Punishment of Rebels. Those that
were known to pray every Day, for a long Life, and a peaceable Reign to their
Emperors, could not be supposed to harbor the least Thoughts of giving them
Disturbance, and had their Inclinations been at all mutinous, by joining with a
disaffected Party, which could never be wanting in so great a Body, it was in
the Christians Power at any time to have shaken the Empire. This we may learn
from Tertullian, who boasts much of their Numbers in his excellent Apology.
Those who by deserting their Country must have depopulated it, might certainly
by fighting have broken the Government. In Cities where there were two
Christians to one Heathen, as in many then in Africa, they needed not have
suffered themselves to be so cruelly butchered, had not their Consciences
disarmed them of all Weapons of Defense against the Emperor. The same we may
gather from St. Cyprian, in that Discourse of his addressed to Demetrianus; where
he fairly lays down the Grounds upon which Christians then walked. But granting
there had been five Heathens to one Christian, yet, as Tertullian observes,
Christians readiness to sacrifice their Lives might have made up their
Disproportion in Number, had not their Religion obliged them rather to die, than
by Drawing their Swords to kill others. And sure if the Christians were
considerable so early, as in Tertullian's and St. Cyprian's time, no Question
in the latter, and of the third, and the beginning of the fourth Century they
wanted not Strength to defend themselves against the Violences then offered
them under Dioclesian and his Colleagues, had their Religion given them leave
to resist.

I cannot finish this Discourse, without observing that many finding violent
Practices in Matters of Religion, utterly condemned by the Examples of Christ,
of his Apostles, and of the primitive Christians, retire to the old Testament,
as more favorable to their Design: but they never consider that, as many
Actions are there rather recorded than commended, and which are not to be
imitated, tho there be no Censure an next to the Relations there delivered; so
several Things were Lawful under that Dispensation, which the Gospel cannot
admit. The Government instituted by Moses was a Theocracy; where, besides the
established Laws, God did by immediate Inspiration give Commission to private
Persons, to turn Magistrates, and to punish offenders, without tying them to
any formal procedure; such was Phineas, (Numb. 25.) and after him the Zealots,
whose Actions were accounted most Heroical among the Jews. Yet when Christ's
Disciples would have assumed this Privilege in Imitation of Elias, they met
with a Check, as I have already observed, from their Master: And if, according
to the Opinion of some learned Men, Peter's Action was of this kind, we have
still a further Testimony of Christ's Discountenancing such Methods, as too
violent for the meek Spirit of the Gospel. And tho the Actions of Phineas, of
Elias, and of other Prophets, while immediately directed by God, were laudable;
yet afterward, when their Zealots were acted by heat of Passion, and private
Resentment, more than by Divine Inspiration, to what Excess of Cruelty and
Injustice did they rise! Fury and Rage under a Cloak of Zeal pretended to an
Authority to commit the worst of Actions. And Josephus informs us, how those,
that went under the Name of Zealots then, were the chief Instruments in the
Ruin of the Jewish Nation, and in the Destruction of Jerusalem.

Now as no Religion nor Government could be safe under this latter Sort of
Zealots; so the former were never designed as Paterns for Christians, who have
settled Rules to walk by; who expect no other Revelations than the Oracles of
God, contained in the holy Scripture; and must therefore condemn those that in
our Days pretend to new Lights, and extraordinary Commissions, to curb
Magistrates and reform Governments, as seduced by a Spirit of Enthusiasm,
savouring more of Antichrist than of the blessed Author of our Religion. But
tho we should allow Men were still at liberty, to imitate those holy Zealots,
the public Peace will not be much endangered by their Example; for by what can
be gathered from most of their Actions, they were rather terrible Neighbors to
notorious Transgressors of the Law, than undutiful Subjects to wicked Princes;
they had only Permission to do Justice upon meaner Offenders, but as for the
Sins of their Kings, these were reserved Cases, of such God himself thought fit
to be the immediate Avenger, or at least to ty Subjects up from meddling with
them, until they had his particular Commission, which was never granted against
their Prince, till God, by the Authority he reserved to himself in that
Government, had first degraded him. In a Word, let us consult the Jewish
Annals, and see, if we can bring any good Authority thence, for rising up in
Arms against Magistrates, upon the account of Religion; or whether any of the
Instances, that are alleged to this Purpose, be first in themselves
justifiable; and next, If they be clear evidences in a Matter of so great
Importance: for where the Question is, If Subjects are to obey or resist, the
Proofs for Resistance ought to be as plain, as those for Obedience, before they
venture to act; and this I presume will hardly be made appear from Scripture.

When Jeroboam placed his Calves in Dan and Bethel, and made Israel sin; we
find the Prophets condemn his Idolatry, and foretell the ruin of his House, (1
Kings 13. v. 14.) but they stirred not up his Subjects to Rebellion against
him. Elias, as a Prophet, took upon him to reprove Ahab; but, as a Zealot, he
gave him no further Disturbance in his Government. Against all the wicked Kings
of Israel and Judah, who were enemies to the pure Religion and Worship, which
God had established, the Prophets boldly denounced the Wrath of God, but seldom
helped to execute it; tho under the harshest Treatment, when they were hid by
fifties in a Cave, they never employed their Popularity to raise Sedition, or
to involve their Country in a Civil War, either in their own Defense, or in
that of their Religion. When from Idolatrous they fell under the Yoke of
Heathen Princes and Strangers; they preached up Duty and Allegiance to such,
being persuaded, that these also derived their Power from God. And tho the
Maccabees in opposing Antiochus are commended, as the Restorers of the ancient
Worship, and of the Liberties of their Country; yet I conceive it may be
proved, that he was an Usurper, and had no just Title to Judea, and that the
Jewish Nation had never, by any Legal Act, owned him for their Prince.

If notwithstanding all that has been said, any among us should still insist
upon some Actions of the Zealots; which give countenance to Resistance, as that
of Elias, in calling down Fire from Heaven, to destroy the King's
Commissionate-Officers. I shall only answer, that they also may be allowed to
resist, when Heaven appears as visibly in their behalf, as it did here in the
Prophet's. The World is uncharitable enough to believe, that our Zealots would
show some Instances of their Severity, had they the same Power with Elias, to
command Fire from Heaven; and that the King's Troops, that have at any time
marched against them, had then died without Mercy, after the same terrible
Manner, that King Ahaziah's did, which were sent against the Prophet. But
hitherto those, that have appeared in Arms against the King, have been so far
from giving any evidence of God's Fighting for them, or authorizing their
Proceedings by Miracles, that he rather has seemed to disown them, by casting a
Damp upon their Spirits, when they stood most in need of some extraordinary
Assistance; I appeal to those, who were at any of those unhappy Engagements
against their Prince, whether they did not find that Heat and Flame, which upon
other Occasions they were able to express, suddenly quenched, when they were
just about to act? have not some of their Teachers upbraided them in the
Psalmist's Words, that like the Children of Ephraim (Psalm. 78. v. 9.) Being
armed, and carrying Bows, they turned back in the Day of Battle? Have not the
Troops, that were sent against them, confessed, they could not much glory in
their Victories, because they were so easily obtained? To be plain, I am
afraid, we are become equally the Object of the World's Contempt, and of its
Hatred; our late Behavior having brought upon us the Imputation of Cowardice
as well as Disloyalty.

Third Consideration.
If the Persons, for whom I undertook this Argument, think fit to read what
has been said upon the first two Points, I hope they will not give over here,
but will vouchsafe to consider with me, in the third place, whether any
Obligation, lying upon us from the late Covenants, be a sufficient Warrant for
what we do. Now the best Method I can propose in this, is to give a brief
Account of the Rise and Progress of both Covenants, with some impartial
Reflections upon them; in which if my Reader will not rest satisfied, he shall
have no occasion at least given him to think me tedious.

Our late Sovereign being fully persuaded that no Church did approach so near
the Primitive Purity in Worship and Discipline, as that of England, was
resolved to make his Native-Countrey share in what he judged so great a
Blessing; and in order to it had a Liturgy, and a Book of Canons, published for
the use of Scotland; where he was unhappily made believe, he should meet with
Approbation from the better sort, and with Compliance from all. But the Peoples
insolent and mutinous Behavior, in affronting and disturbing the Persons who
were ordered to read the Service in the Churches of Edinburgh, did show how ill
they were disposed to receive it. This Popular Tumult the first Sunday, was
soon after backed with Petitions and other Marks of their Dislike, which
obliged the Council to advance slowly, until they gave the Court advice of what
had past. And before the King could come to a Resolution in a Business of so
great Importance, such as were no Friends to the Government, not only ventured
to publish their Dissatisfaction, and to inflame the Kingdom with strange
Jealousies of Popery and Arbitrary Power, but likewise formed themselves into
several Tables (as they called them) of Noblemen, Gentlemen, Ministers, and
Citizens, and by a new Authority took upon them, to sum up all the Grievances
which they intended should be redressed; and tho his Majesty's not urging the
Liturgy upon that Kingdom, when he saw it could not be done in a peaceable way,
might have quieted all their Minds, yet finding their Party strong beyond
Expectation, they were loath to let slip so favorable a Juncture, but boldly
resolved to secure themselves against all Attempts of this kind, by entering
into a National Covenant, in which they pretended only to renew that, which had
been sworn in the Reign of King James.

Those who adhered to the King's interest, could by no means allow of this
manner of proceeding, which appeared equally disingenuous and undutiful. The
discontented Party alleged in their own behalf, the President given them in
the late Reign, which the others thought did no ways favor their Cause, seeing
the Covenant then taken was stamped with Royal Authority, whereas theirs now
seemed directly opposite to it; for there could not be the least Pretense to
the King's consent, which they never so much as desired. It Is true, it was upon
the humble Motion of a general Assembly, that the former King's Council had
ordered the National Covenant to be taken the last time, with a Bond to
maintain the true Religion, and the King's Person. But this instance of the
General Assemblies Motion, which they laid hold on, was so far from justifying,
that it rather condemned their Proceedings; in regard that the General
Assemblies not enjoining the Covenant, till they had first obtained his
Majesty's Consent, made it evident that in the Assemblies Judgment the Oath
could not be renewed without that Authority which first imposed it; Nor could
they expect any Sanctuary from the Acts of Parliament, for it had been declared
by more than one, that all who leagued themselves together, without the
knowledge of their Sovereign, were to be punished as Movers of Sedition, and
Disturbers of the Public Peace.

Besides their want of Authority, they laid themselves open to another most
dangerous Censure, while under color of copying a Covenant and Bond allowed of
in the late Reign, it plainly appeared they had not taken their measures by
that Standard, but had explained many things rather according to their own,
than King James's, Mind, and had also added several new Articles of most
pernicious consequence, both to the King's Person, and the established
Government. The King's Person was endangered, in so far, as by their new Bond
they entered into a mutual Defense of one another, against all Persons
whatsoever, without excepting his Majesty. This the Royal Party said was in
Effect to declare, that if he offered to thwart them, they must then oppose
him, by adhering to their Covenant. Nor were they more favorable to the
established Government, in which they made a wide Breach, by taking upon them
to cancel all the Acts of Parliament, and of General Assemblies, that
authorized the high Commission, the five Articles of Perth, or the sitting of
Bishops in Judicatures. Now by these and several other Instances of this kind,
it seemed strange with what face they could make their Covenant and Bond pass
for the same with the former Kings, seeing it was not to be presumed that the
Father designed to lessen either his own or his Son's Authority; Nor to teach
his Subjects how to combine without being Rebels; nor yet to favor the
extirpating the Articles of Perth, and other Things after his Death, which in
his Life he had so industriously promoted.

Whatever Influence these Pretenses might have upon undiscerning People, or
such, as gave an implicit Credit to whatever their Pastors taught them, the
World abroad had much different Thoughts. Nor could all the Endeavors that
were used to win many of the Reformed Religion in France, to a good Opinion of
such Courses; for they having long inveighed against that wicked Association at
home, called the Holy League, found their Mouths now stopped, when the
Protestants, contrary to the Principles of our Religion, did exactly follow so
ill a Pattern, set them by Papists. Besides, they knew not what to think of
Men, who, setting up for some further degrees in Reformation, thought sit to
communicate their Counsels with Cardinal Richelieu, whom they in France looked
upon as the most dangerous Enemy then alive to the Protestant Interest; and
indeed how that Cardinal's Creature, a bigotish Friar, whom he employed at that
time in Scotland, could go along in their Counsels, and be so much in the
Confidence of Men, that pretended to root out all the Seeds of Popery, is a
Thing yet unaccountable; and the more to alienate Peoples Hearts from the new
Liturgy, they did maliciously give out, that it was forged at Rome, and
approved of by the Pope. Yet the King's Friends might have defied them, to show
so much of Popish Counsel in the framing or introducing that mistaken Book, as
did appear in the Methods they made use of to oppose it.

The King perceiving how successfully they carried on their Designs, and gained
many of his Subjects to their Party, by frighting them with Popery and
Arbitrary Power, dispatched the Marquess of Hamilton into Scotland, in Quality
of Commissioner, with Order, to issue out a Declaration, containing all the
Assurances which could be desired of his Majesty's firmness to the Protestant
Religion, together with his Engagement upon his Royal Word not to enjoin the
Liturgy, nor think of any Innovation, unless in such a fair and legal way, as
none could reasonably except against. Whereupon those of the other Party, being
apprehensive lest this might remove most of the Peoples Prejudices against the
Government, used their utmost Endeavors to hinder the Marquess from publishing
the King's Declaration; and when this could no longer be done, got time enough
to form a most bold Protestation, by which they labored to evade all that was
alleged against them, and to justify their whole Conduct, declaring roundly,
toward the Conclusion, That if his Majesty did not allow of their Proceedings,
they were resolved of themselves to call a General Assembly, which would be
more favorable to them.

The King's Declaration being thus in a great Measure rendered ineffectual, and
their Obstinacy, in adhering to the Covenant, growing still greater, a way was
thought on how Things might be accommodated, without great Prejudice to the
Crown, and the Covenant be rendered tolerable; The Royal Party therefore
proposed, that in the Bond of mutual Defense against all Persons whatsoever,
the Covenanters, who stood so much upon their Loyal Intentions, would vindicate
them to the World, by excepting his Majesty, and declaring, that in their Bond
they never designed any Opposition to his Authority. But this most reasonable
Demand, the Heads of that Party could by no means be brought to grant; and no
wonder, if their rejecting so fair and so easy a Proposal, gave those, who were
Enemies to their Covenant, occasion to complain, that their Practice now began
to discover it self inconsistent with what they at first pretended; for whereas
in the Covenant they declared from their Heart before God and Man, that they
had no intention, nor desire to attempt any Thing, which might turn to the
diminution of the King's Greatness and Authority; it seemed hard now to
reconcile this and other such Expressions, with their Threatening, to assume the
King's undoubted Prerogative, in calling an Assembly, and with their refusing
to give the King the Satisfaction of excepting him in their mutual Bond, even
when by his Commissioner he so earnestly desired it.

There remained yet one expedient for the King to ruin all they had done, and
this was to renew his Father's Covenant; and by this means for ever to defeat
their malicious Suggestions of his Inclinations to Popery, which was there so
plainly renounced, or at least to make the whole World see, how disingenuous
they were, if they offered to oppose that Covenant, which from the Beginning
they pretended to have sworn. His Majesty, accepting of this Motion, was
pleased to give his Commissioner Authority, that at the same time, he
recommended the Covenant, he should absolutely revoke the Liturgy, the Book of
Canons, and the high Commission, forbid the Practice of the five Articles of
Perth, after a general Pardon to such of his Subjects, as having been misled,
were willing to return to their Allegiance; and lastly, that for examining all
their just Grievances, he should declare his Majesty's gracious intentions to
call a General Assembly and a Parliament, where neither Bishops nor others were
to be exempted from Censure, but proceeded against in a due and legal Form
according to their Misdemeanors.

Upon the news of the King's Covenant, which came thus accompanied with so many
and so large Expressions of Kindness, and with such undeniable Marks of his
gracious Inclinations to purchase his Subjects Affections at any rate, some who
before despaired of a good Issue, and others, who began to shake in their
Allegiance, were again confirmed, nothing doubting, but that the Way to heal
the dangerous Breach was now found out, and that the Jealousies of Popery and
Innovation being sufficiently removed, all Parties would henceforth concur in
expressing their Duty to his Majesty. But it proved much otherwise with those,
who were deeply engaged in the Covenant, whom no Indulgence could sweeten, nor
Concession satisfy, with Contempt did they reject the proffer of Pardon,
because accepting thereof might have perhaps argued Guilt, and a tacit
yielding the Point, when they were resolved to insist upon the Merits of their
Cause; the King's Covenant, which had been so dear to the Nation in the former
Reign, and under the shadow of which their new Covenant had first taken Root,
was now cried down as an hellish Contrivance to destroy Religion, and the Power
of Godliness, and all that subscribed it, were declared perjured, tho they had
made their own hitherto pass with the common People for the same; to be short,
all being now at stake, and they like to be ruined by their own Arts, it was
high time to pull off the Mask. Finding then that they could no longer pretend
the late King's Authority, they fled to a greater, protesting their Adherence
to the new Covenant, as immediately sealed from Heaven. Had they been able to
give any Evidence for that Seal, no wonder if they still made good their Party;
but when their prevaricating was already so plain, People were extremely
credulous to rest satisfied in this upon their bare Word. I shall only
adventure to say, it was no Argument of their having the Seal of God, because
they wanted that of his Vicegerent; which was indeed a strong Presumption
against them, and questionless the most zealous Espousers of that Interest,
whatever Assurances they seemed to have of God's approving what they then did,
will be so ingenuous as to own it a Thing of dangerous Consequence, for all
established Governments to give Encouragement to Pretenses of this Nature,
seeing at this rate all, who design to impose upon the World, may easily seign
a Warrant from God, and so set up in Opposition to Authority.

That very Resolution of adhering to their Covenant, which made them fiercely
oppose the King's, and reject his Act of Grace, prompted them to join with his
Motion for a General Assembly, because from thence they were sure to draw some
Advantage; and tho the King might justly have refused to make good his
Proffers, when they had so undutifully rejected the greatest Part of them; yet
being willing to gratify his Subjects in every Thing, the Commissioner had
Order to appoint the Time and Place. No sooner were they sure of an Assembly
(at Glasgow, the 21st of November, 1638.) but Engines were set on work to
dispose Things for the Advancement of the Cause: The Marquess of Hamilton being
to preside there for his Majesty, proposed some Preliminaries to regulate
Elections, and to prevent such Disorders and Disputes, as were like to arise,
if they observed not one and the same Method every where; these the Tables
would not hear of, alleging that nothing of this kind could be done, without
encroaching upon the Liberties of Christ and of his Church. While at the same
Time that the King's Commissioners Preliminaries were rejected, they themselves
durst adventure to agree upon eight Articles or Directions to Presbyteries,
wherein they determined the Members that were to be chosen, the Matters that
were to be handled, and the Manner they were to proceed in the Assembly, in
every one of which all indifferent Persons thought the Tables guilty of a more
open Encroachment upon Christ and the Liberties of his Church, than could be
charged upon the Marquess, for his modest and reasonable Proposals.

Amongst other unwarrantable Methods, none was more remarkable than their
directing Lay Elders from every Parish, to be present at the several
Presbyteries, to vote in the Election of Members for the Assembly; Nor could
these ruling Elders fail to carry the Elections as they pleased, if we
consider, that six Ministers being declared Candidates in every Presbytery,
were obliged to retire, as having no Vote in choosing or rejecting themselves,
and then the remaining Ministers being lessened after this Manner in Number,
were plainly out-voted everywhere by the Elders. Surely this was the first Time
that ever Secular Men had the naming an Ecclesiastical Assembly; nor needed
they have questioned the Success, where the Business was to be managed by no
other than their own Creatures; yet contrary to the Practice of former
Assemblies in Scotland, contrary to the Practice of all Churches and Ages, they
took upon them to go and sit Members themselves in the Assembly, not only to
advise in Matters of Discipline, for which they might perhaps have brought a
President, but also to decide controverted Points in Divinity, for which, to
say no worse, many of them were very ill qualified by their Education. And now
let the whole World judge if it were not an Act of Partiality, not to be
paralelled, for them to cry out upon Bishops and Clergy-men's meddling in
Secular Affairs, and do now raise such an outery against the King's Supremacy,
pretending that it is inconsistent with the Nature of Spiritual Things, to
bring them under the Government of the Secular Power: When they themselves, who
were Secular Persons, did so manifestly invade the most undoubted Prerogative
of the Ministry, heavy Complaints were given in, of the insupportable Yoke of
Prelacy: but in truth that of Secular Men, lording it then over God's
Inheritance, was much more grievous than the former. Nor were the wiser Sort of
Ministers among them insensible of this Usurpation, only they were ashamed to
complain much of the Uneasiness of those Chains, wherewith they had helped to
fetter themselves.

If the brevity, which I propose, would allow me, it might be suitable enough
with my Design, to give a full Account of what past in that memorable Assembly,
and show how they confirmed the Covenant there by the same Methods, by which it
was at first set on foot, and had hitherto been carried on. But it is
sufficient at present to observe, that the certain Prospect of a fatal Issue,
both to King and Government, if not timely prevented, obliged the King's
Commissioner to dissolve the Assembly within a few Days after their Meeting.
And when he expected Compliance, he found them ready with a Protestation to
continue their Sessions, till such Time as they had finished the glorious Work
for which they met; however, their refusing to obey the King's Commands,
signified to them by his Commissioner, was perfectly inconsistent with what the
most eminent among them had said, some days before at the opening the Assembly;
for then they expressed in several Harangues their Sense of the King's Bounty and
Tenderness in bringing them thither: and who can deny but he, who only had
Authority to call them, could also dissolve them at Pleasure? and tho both are
equally Royal Prerogatives, yet undoubtedly our Princes have Reason to set the
highest Value upon their Power of Dissolving, which has been useful to them
upon many Occasions; nor did ever the Crown receive so deep a Wound, as when
our late Sovereign parted with this choice Prerogative, and so lay at the Mercy
of a Parliament, which the Fears of Dissolution could only have bridled, and
kept them within some Compass. But to return to the Assembly: When so great a
Contempt was put upon the King, they went on in a most violent and illegal
Manner, to excommunicate some of the Bishops, and to depose all the rest; many
Acts of Parliament were rescinded, the Determinations of forty Years Assemblies
were declared void; all Persons were enjoined to take the Covenant under pain
of Excommunication; and to give the World a lasting Instance of their Modesty,
they concluded with a Letter to his Majesty, justifying their whole Procedure,
and entreating him, that he would look upon them as good and dutiful Subjects,
and be satisfied with what they had done.

No wonder if Provocations of so high a Nature did beget suitable Resentments
in the King, who after so much abused Indulgence, had no Way left to maintain
his Right but by Arms; nor did the Covenanters decline a Breach, having made
early Preparation for it; so that, before the King came to any Act of
Hostility, they seized upon his Castles, levied Troops, imposed Taxes, and cast
off all manner of Allegiance; and even when his Majesty's Aversion from
shedding his Subjects Blood, made him, upon the Head of a brave and numerous
Army, yield to terms of as great Condescension as Necessity could have
extorted, and send them home gratified in all their Demands, without fighting;
yet new Grievances armed them again; and whereas at first they stopped on the
Borders, now most boldly they march into England, force their Passage at
Newburn, and refuse to return, until the King agreed to come into Scotland,
there to pass all his Concessions into Acts of Parliament.

His Majesty failed not to make good what he promised, and having purchased
their Allegiance at so dear a rate, might justly have challenged their entire
Obedience upon the Principles of Gratitude, as well as Duty; but upon the woeful
Rupture, which soon after followed, betwixt him and his English Parliament, the
Spirit and Temper of our Covenanters did discover it self more than ever. Far
from being satisfied with the great Trouble they had occasioned at home, or
with the Settlement procured to their Hearts Desire, they cherish the two
Houses in their unreasonable Demands about Religion; and, as it is most
ingenuously observed by a late Writer of our Nation, show themselves now as
violent in pressing England's Uniformity with Scotland, as they were formerly
in condemning the Design of bringing Scotland to an Uniformity with England.

It Is not my Task to meddle with the Differences betwixt the King and his
English Parliament, which I leave to the excellent Pens of that Nation; but
sure I am, there was not the least Reason for Scotland's espousing the
Parliaments Quarrel, or for fomenting their Jealousies of a Prince, who had so
lately given us such undoubted Marks of his transcendent Bounty, in yielding to
all that our Covenanters demanded; besides, by the Explication of the Covenant,
we obliged our selves to assist his Majesty in every Cause that concerned his
Honor; and so ought to have been thankful for his Majesty's Condescension, in
suffering us to continue neutral; yet notwithstanding these Obligations, The
Parliament's Interest was so dear to our Commissioners then at London, that
forgetting the Quality of Mediators, in which they first appeared, they sided
openly with the Houses against the King. Nor were our Ministers at home less
partial, our Pulpits did ring with Curses against some, who were for a
Neutrality, as Enemies to the Cause of Christ, and the Reformation of England;
all were invited to join in so meritorious a Work, and at length all Sense of
Duty was so entirely cast off, that the chief Promoters of those Designs
adventured to assume to themselves a most undoubted Prerogative of the Crown,
in summoning a Convention of Estates without the King's Leave.

From a Convention called without Authority, there was no reason to expect any
legal Proceedings, or Compliance to the King, who yet vouchsafed to approve of
their Meeting, upon Condition, they would observe such Limitations, as were
prescribed in his Letter. But the Business of England, and the raising an Army,
being the only Things, which he forbid them to meddle with, were the first
which fell under their Consideration; and Commissioners being sent from the
Parliament of England to treat about an Army, our Convention of Estates,
notwithstanding the King's special Command to the contrary, received them with
open Arms, agreed readily to their Demands, and expressed such an hearty Desire
of a strict Union betwixt the two Kingdoms, that their warm Consultations did
in a few Days hatch the solemn League and Covenant.

It was strange to see a League, which so highly concerned a King, two
Kingdoms, differing much in Laws and Constitutions, and two Churches, differing
no less in Worship and Discipline, so easily and suddenly concluded. It was
first seen, afterward approved, and lastly sworn in the General Assembly, all
within the short Period of three Days. The Ministers made this wonderful
Unanimity pass with the People for an undeniable Testimony of the Divine
Approbation; tho others, who could never be convinced that the former Covenant
received its Seal from Heaven, entertained no better Opinion of this, but did
attribute their Agreement only to the dexterous Management of the Leaders, who
had such a powerful Influence and Authority over the rest, that they seldom
failed in any Thing they proposed.

The whole Negotiation ended without any Debates. Yet there was apparent
juggling on both Hands; for the English Commissioners had a great mind to carry
with them a Scottish Army, but had no liking at all to our Presbytery; and
therefore consenting to a Reformation, according to the Word of God, told one
another that they understood well enough what to make of that at home; the
Scottish on the other Hand designing to get Presbytery established in England,
cast in the Words of Reforming, according to the Practice of the best reformed
Churches, hoping this made sure for theirs, as the most perfect Model that
could any where be found; our Ministers were likewise for abjuring Episcopacy
as simply unlawful; but neither the English Commissioners then in Scotland, nor
the Parliament or Assembly of Divines at Westminster, thought fit afterward to
declare that Institution unlawful: whereupon the Article was conceived to
import only an abolishing of Episcopacy, as it was then in England, without
condemning what the Primitive Church had allowed in all its Purity. To describe
all the subtle Arts which were used, the manifest Elusions and Breaches
wherewith we charged England, and England us, together with the fatal
Consequences of this Covenant in both Nations, would require much pains and
leisure. It will suffice at present to make some brief Reflections, which may
serve to cool our too great Fondness of it.

All that could be alleged against the National Covenant was of force against
this; besides many Material Circumstances to render it yet more inexcusable;
for if we never find Subjects lawfully united among themselves, without the
Prince's leave, much less could the Subjects of one Nation take upon them to
make a League with those of another, contrary to the King's Command, and in
Prejudice of his Authority. Ought we not to have been contented with the
Enjoyment of all we could desire at home, without meddling in the Concerns of
another Nation, who generally did not appear fond of an Alteration, and never
were fitted for our Church Discipline? Was there no more regard due to a
Sovereign, who had deserved so well at our hands, than even to pursue him out
of his native Country; and grudge him that Liberty of Conscience in England,
which he had graciously yielded to us in Scotland? We read of many Nations that
engaged in Wars for the Enlargement of their Sovereign's Empire, or Authority
over Strangers, we alone shall be known to Posterity as guilty of helping
Strangers to shake off the Allegiance due to a Prince born among our selves.
But besides these general Reflections, every one of the six Articles, whereof
this Covenant consisted, lay open to several Exceptions. As

I. It seemed hard, that every ignorant Person in Scotland should be obliged by
Oath to endeavor the Reformation of England, according the Word of God and the
Practice of the best reformed Churches. What knowledge, alas! could Persons of
so mean Capacity or Education be presumed to have of Differences among reformed
Churches, of which they were to judge upon Oath! how could they weigh the
Advantages of Holland above Geneva, of France above Holland, or of Scotland
above France, and accordingly endeavor the Reformation of England? truly it is
to be doubted that more was here required of the meanest and weakest of the
People, than many of our ablest Ministers could well have performed: how could
such Persons examine nice Questions about Church Government according to
Scripture, which have divided the learned World? and yet the Vulgar were to
judge of such, seeing by those Rules they swore to proceed. Nor do I see any
shift, unless we allow them to resign their Judgment by an implicit Faith in
their Teachers, which makes no decent Evasion for a Reformed Church.

The second Article was liable to the same Exceptions with the former: They
swore, To extirpate Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness,
and whatsoever should be found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the Power of
Godliness. This I take to have been a very hard Task for every one to perform,
and more certainly, than ought to be required of any Man, in Things which are
not plain beyond controversy, as all such Points were not then amongst them:
for we find, that one Minister did often inveigh against Opinions, as savouring
of Popery, which another as positively denied, charging the contrary Opinions,
as leading to Schism; and ignorant Persons, who under pain of Perjury were
equally engaged against Schism and Popery, must have found strange Storms,
raised in their Minds, and their tender Consciences dreadfully racked, while
they could not understand, which of the opposite Opinions they might safely
embrace.

Tho the former Part of the third Article concerned Things of a quite different
Nature, yet the Objections are much of the same kind, by that all were engaged
to defend the Rights and Privileges of Parliament: But, alas! who could expect
that common People should be put to determine such, when we hear of Debates
started frequently concerning Privileges, which the Wisdom of our greatest
Senators is scarce able to accommodate, and seldom is it so done, as to answer
all Objections, or satisfy every Member. Suppose a Parliament so divided, that
it comes to a Breach, to what Party must the People then adhere, who are not
able to judge, which of the two really maintains their Privileges, where both
with Confidence pretend it, and back their Pretenses with plausible Reasons.
Nothing could have been more for the Peace of the World, than that a greater
Reverence had been kept up for Vows and Oaths, by not making them too common:
But seeing our Fathers would not be satisfied without engaging Persons of all
Ranks in Oaths, it is to be wished that ordinary People had only been bound to
live peaceably in their Stations; to obey those who by the Laws of the Land
were set over them; not to countenance Division and Faction, nor turn
Statesmen and Censurers of their Superiors: for in these and the like
Engagements there had only been a further Ty laid upon them to perform easy,
plain, and necessary Duties, suitable to their Capacities, without meddling in
Matters beyond their reach. Whereas our late Covenants did unadvisedly raise
such Persons above themselves, enjoined them Things they could not discharge,
and, contrary to all reason, spurred those on to be troublesome, who stood more
in need of a Bridle to check their natural Fierceness, and the ill-grounded
Opinion they had of their own Sufficiency.

By the latter Part of the third Article the Subjects Allegiance to the King
was limited to the Preservation and Defense of the true Religion; as if Princes
Rights, whatever they are, ought not to be maintained without any manner of
Restriction; this was a clear Diminution of the King's just Power and
Greatness, and consequently, inconsistent with what they swore before in the
National Covenant: But how ill they intended from the Beginning to maintain the
King's Power and Greatness, their Positions as well as their Practices do
declare. If we look critically into the History of that Time, we see manifest
Gradations in their Encroachments upon the Royal Authority: At their first
entering into the National Covenant, it was alleged, that the Body of the
Nation, consisting of Church and State, might unite to resist the King. Some
Years after, when the Union betwixt the two Kingdoms was so vehemently carried
on, it was declared lawful to assist our Neighbors in extorting from our
Sovereign the same Terms for them, which of his Royal Bounty he had formerly
vouchsafed to grant us. At last, we advanced a Step higher, and boldly
maintained, That a few Associate Counties might take Arms against the Authority
both of King and Parliament; and that, having Power, they wanted not Right,
upon all Occasions, to curb the Excesses of Government. Now here we may observe
that the extravagant Proceedings of some Western Counties, upon these seditious
Principles, fixed upon them the Name of Whigs; which contemptible Mark of
Distinction was for many Years appropriated to us; till of late that, to the
Grief of all Men, it is become more universal, and has now unluckily crept into
the next Kingdom; and, notwithstanding its infamous Rise, is there too
liberally bestowed upon some, and too much gloried in by others. Thus the
Barbarous Name of Guelphs, which had for a long Time been given to those in
Germany that opposed the Emperor, was at length fatally transplanted from its
native Soil into Italy, a warmer Climate, where it took deeper Root, and
became, for many Ages, the Fomenter of terrible Disorders. But I hope our
Prince's Wisdom will think fit to give an early and effectual Check to this and
all other Names of Faction, which insensibly undermine the Government, alienate
Men's Affections from one another, make wicked Men more desperate, when they see
themselves discovered, especially when by the same Means they are enabled to
discover the Strength and Number of their Party, besides many other unforeseen
Inconveniences, which may help to bring us back into our former dreadful
Confusion.

The fourth Article did, in the Judgment of many, set up a new Inquisition,
sufficient to make all tremble that were disaffected to the Cause; and it is
plain their violent Courses gave too much ground for this Complaint: such as
out of real Conscience toward God, or Sense of Duty toward their Prince,
refused to sign the Covenants, were, after a strange manner, declared Enemies
to God and the King, proceeded against as Traitors, and forced either to
undergo Banishment, or languish in Prison, while their Estates became a Prey to
those, who appeared most zealous in persecuting them. This inevitable Danger
obliged many to disguise themselves into a seeming Compliance, to what in their
Hearts they did detest. And these Methods being then made use of to settle the
Purity of the Gospel among us, no wonder if there were more of Hypocrisy than
of the Power of Godliness in our Profession; or, if God were thereby provoked
to disown us and our Cause, and to leave the Nation for many Years to groan
under an heavy Bondage.

The fifth Article, which was for executing Justice upon all wilful Opposers,
falls under the same Exceptions with the former, and might be illustrated with
too many Instances of Cruelty, which those Times afford us: How were our
Scaffolds died with the Blood of our Nobility and Gentry, who opposed the
Torrent, and stood up for the Royal Interest! How were Prisoners of War most
unhumanely sentenced, and put to Death, and all, that were like to create them
any trouble, destroyed without Mercy! I need not descend to any Particulars,
which are still too well known; and indeed as I am loath to make Strangers
acquainted with them, so I wish there could be a Curtain drawn to hide such
Tragical Pieces from the View of After-Ages.

Their sixth and last Article was a Bond of mutual Defense against all
Opposers, without excepting the King; and this alone might serve to render the
whole void: for if the Oaths of Subjects without the Prince's Consent, in
Things relating to the Public, can never bind, much less then, if they
directly encroach upon his Authority. If a Vow could absolve Subjects from
their Duty, or deprive the Prince of his Right, then we should only be
Subjects, till we vowed the contrary; and thus the World might find a
compendious Way to shake off all Dependence. But as the Vowing the Violation of
any Man's Property, does not give us a Title to do it, but only renders our
Oath unlawful; so where it is in Prejudice of the Prince, every Circumstance
helps to condemn us. When those, who retained any Principles of Loyalty,
insisted upon this, they did fly to their sincere Intentions toward the King:
but nothing can so well explain their Meaning, as their Practices afterward;
which, for the Honor of our Nation, ought either to be buried in eternal
Oblivion, or else so clearly manifested to the World, that the Guilty might
only be infamous to Posterity, while the sounder Part of the Kingdom recovered
to it its native tincture of Honesty and Loyalty.

Having given some short Hints of the manner of entering into both Covenants,
of their Nature and Design, I am persuaded there needs no further Evidence of
their Unlawfulness from the Beginning, or of their many other Nullities, to
prove that they could lay no Obligation upon those very Persons, who subscribed
them; and if not upon them, much less upon us, who are their Children, to stand
to what they then did. Nor do I indeed find any formal Ty upon Posterity
mentioned in either Covenant: for what is alleged from the former, where it is
declared, That they are convinced in their Minds, and confess with their
Mouths, that the present and subsequent Generations in this Land are bound to
keep that National Oath and Subscription inviolable; may prove perhaps that
such was the Opinion of our Fathers, but can never make it obligatory with us,
seeing the granting this were to put it in every Man's Power to entail his
Opinions upon those who come after him: to which none of us, I presume, will be
willing to yield. But allowing matter of fact, and that there had been a
positive Oath made by them in the name of their Posterity: Yet this Oath being
by Authority declared unlawful, and we forbidden to observe it, the Compliance
we ow to those whom God has set over us, cancels all Obligations of this kind,
that our Parents could lay upon us. I shall therefore conclude, that seeing our
Covenants were in so many respects unlawful from the Beginning: and seeing
there was neither any formal Obligation laid upon us by our Parents to obscure
them; nor yet their Authority in this Case allowable, as interfering with the
Laws of the Land, there the least shadow of Reason cannot be brought in behalf
of any that presume now to renew those Covenants, when the contrary is so
plainly enjoined us by our rescissory Act of Parliament; but as such Persons
proceed not upon rational Grounds, so it is in vain to think of reclaiming them
by Force of Arguments; the Government must deal with this frenzy, and in its
Wisdom find out a Cure suitable to so dangerous a Distemper, before the
Infection spreads it self wider.

Fourth Consideration.
I should be glad to make an end here, without mentioning the last Objection;
not that I apprehend any Difficulty in undertaking to answer it, but because I
really blush to publish the pernicious and traitorous Principles, which some
among us have of late taken up, and are not now ashamed to own, That our
Sovereign has forfeited all Right to his Crown; and that his Subjects are
absolved them their Allegiance.

It Is plain that Princes Persons and Authority are more effectually secured by
the Christian Religion, than by all the Contrivances of humane Policy. Fear or
Interest among Heathens were the chief Motives to keep Subjects within the
Bounds of their Duty, and made them submit, because they durst not rebel.
Princes had outward Obedience paid them, which was all they could then either
challenge or expect. But the Doctrine, taught by our blessed Savior and his
Apostles, did fasten their Crowns much surer, gave them a new Title to reign in
their Subjects Hearts, made Subjects dutiful, more out of Conscience than Fear;
and by forbidding Resistance under pain of Damnation, laid a much stronger Ty
upon Men, than the Hazard of Lives and Fortunes, or all other humane Penalties
could ever have done: And, no question, had the Roman Emperors understood how
much they were beholden to Christianity, instead of endeavoring to extirpate
it, they would have protected and encouraged it; for as long as Christians
suffered themselves to be governed by the Maxims which Christ left them,
Princes were truly happy in such Subjects.

Christ did indeed put a Sword into his Ministers Hands, to punish notorious
Sinners, when he gave them Power to excommunicate, or cut Men off from being
Members of the Church, in depriving them of the Benefits and public Exercise
of their Religion: and there being no Exemption granted to any Person, Kings
and Emperors themselves were to fall under this heavy Censure, when their
Offenses deserved it. But tho Ministers had the Courage to shut them sometimes
out of Church, as St. Ambrose did Theodosius the Great, yet they did not
pretend to thrust them off their Thrones, or wrest their Scepters out of their
Hands. They knew that their Authority was only Spiritual, and did not therefore
meddle with those Privileges, which they enjoyed as Princes; but readily
obeyed, in all other Cases, those whom they excluded from their Assemblies; and
thus they kept within the Limits, prescribed by Christ, for near a thousand
Years.

When the Spirit of Christianity was afterward quite spent, and Religion had
put on a new Face, the Riches and Ambition of the Roman Hierarchy made them
stretch their Authority further than Christ designed it; and then did they
begin to declare, that Princes, falling under the Censure of Excommunication,
did forfeit their Crowns and all other their Temporal as well as Spiritual
Privileges. The great Advances Gregory the seventh and his Successors made in
several attempts of this kind, and their Vanity to see themselves on a sudden
raised to an universal Monarchy, made them vigorously pursue such Courses, and
thunder their Sentences of Excommunication and Forfeiture so liberally, that,
upon every slight Occasion, Princes were laid aside, Subjects absolved from
their Allegiance, and Crowns and Scepters freely disposed of, when and to whom
they pleased; so that under Color of maintaining Christ's Prerogative, they
refused to give unto Caesar what was Caesar's, far from paying Tribute, as
Christ had done, Kings were forced to turn their Tributaries; and, by setting
up a new Power in every Kingdom, they made Princes, contrary to the Intention
of Christ and the Gospel, great Losers by the Christian Religion.

Under these heavy Pressures had the Christian World for several Ages groaned,
when God raised up a Spirit of Reformation in our Fathers, who, among the
manifold Corruptions of Rome, observed the ill Treatment Princes had there met
with, and resolved that, in restoring to Christianity its ancient Luster,
Princes should again be possessed of the Prerogatives entailed upon them by the
Gospel. This made the first Reformers inveigh so bitterly against the
Usurpations of that See, and enforce upon Subjects Allegiance and Submission as
Duties, from which none upon Earth could absolve them; and we have Reason to
believe that the Justice, then done to Princes, proved under God an effectual
Means to rescue many Nations from the Roman Yoke. Nor was Duty to Princes only
preached up at first, but it has ever since continued as a fixed Principle in the
best reformed Churches, where, next to the Purity of their Doctrine and
Worship, relating immediately to God, they have all along gloried most in the
Loyalty of their Religion, for laying indispensible Ties of Obedience upon Men
toward his Vicegerent. So that, as it passes with many for a Maxim, that
Papists, acting according to the Principles of their Church, can hardly be good
Subjects, it is most certain that Protestants, who are not conscientiously
dutiful and loyal, swerve from the Principles of the Reformed Religion; and tho
there are, alas! too many Instances of such, both at home and abroad, yet their
corrupt Practices must not stain the Purity of the Doctrine, by which they
stand condemned.

But while I ascribe to the Reformed Religion the Honor of reestablishing
Princes in their Rights, I am sorry any of my Countrymen should renounce their
share in it, by pretending that our Sovereign has forfeited his Crown, and that
we are freed from our Allegiance. These, alas! are Words not hitherto known
amongst Orthodox Protestants, but as they meet with them in impious and
condemned Writers. Let us consult the Confessions of all the Reformed Churches
in the World, and see if any of them teach this Doctrine. Let us send an
impartial Account of our Case, with the Nature of our Monarchy, to all the
Protestant Universities abroad, whether in England, France, Germany, Holland,
Switzerland, or Geneva, and try if we can have the Testimony of any one Society
to confirm us in this Tenet. Let us see if we can meet with one eminent
Protestant Divine, one single Person of Credit and Learning, that will own
himself of this Persuasion. If we look back to the Doctrine or Practice of the
Church in the Primitive Times, we can find nothing there that makes for our
Purpose. Neither Heresy nor Idolatry in those Days did make void Princes Right
to govern. Constantius, an Arrian, and Julian, a Renegade, were owned for
Emperors by those, who detested their Impieties, as much as Jovianus or
Theodosius, who were Orthodox. The more degenerate Ages, and the most corrupt
part of the Church first taught us the Principles, upon which some of us now
go. We must look no higher than Hildebrand, and apply our selves only to
prostitute Canonists and Jesuits for Testimonies and Arguments to prove that
Princes can so easily forfeit their Crowns; for I know there are many
well-meaning Papists, if not whole National Churches, that will utterly reject
this monstrous Doctrine. And truly then it is hard that we, who look upon our
selves as the most thoroughly Reformed, should contemn the Pattern set us by the
Ancients, diffent from all our Brethren, and side with the greatest Enemies of
our Religion in a Point, for which they have been so much exposed.

Now no wonder if we run into strange Absurdities, when the whole Matter is
granted upon false Suppositions: First, we will have the King's Right to
commence only from the Time of his Coronation: then we will have the Coronation
a Compact or Agreement with the People, by which the Prince forfeits his Right,
if he do not duly perform his Part: and lastly, we seem to make the late
Covenant pass for the Coronation Oath: all which are inexcusable Mistakes.
First, our Laws admit of no Interregnum, but date the Beginning of one King's
Reign from the very Instant that another expired, it being an Axiom with us,
and in all other Hereditary Monarchies, that the King never dies. The fatal
Blow, that deprived us of our late Sovereign, put the Crown immediately upon
his Son's Head: From that Minute we were obliged to pay the same Duty to our
present Sovereign, which till then we owed to his Father; and they, who
resisted him before his Coronation, were Rebels as well as these who have done
it since. Whatever therefore a Coronation might have been anciently, it is now
only looked upon in the Nature of an Instalment, upon which our Prince's Title
to reign does no ways depend; else it would be the first Thing they would go
about: whereas it is ordinarily put off till such Time, as it can be performed
with the most Solemnity. In the second place it appears by this, that the
Coronation is no such Compact as destroys the Prince's Title, if he fail in his
part; for where he has his Crown by Inheritance, his Coronation is the Effect
of his Title, but not his Title of his Coronation, which can never make him
lose what it did not give him; nor yet weaken the Right, which he had upon his
Predecessor's Death. As our King ows his Crown to his Birth, and not to any
Suffrage or mutual Agreement with his People; so it is ridiculous to imagine
that his Coronation alters his Right, and makes that conditional, and capable
of being lost, which was before absolute and hereditary. In a word, if the
Reign of our Princes commenced only from the Time of their being crowned, they
would be in uneasy and dangerous Circumstances till that were over: but, on the
other hand, if their Coronation limited their Birthright, or made, their Title
more precarious, they would contrive to have this Solemnity among the last
Performances of their Lives.

Lastly, in the Business of the Covenant there is a double Fallacy; first, in
making it pass for the Coronation Oath; and secondly, in inferring a Forfeiture
of the Crown, where the Coronation Oath is broken. When we complain of the
King's not making good the Covenant, we affirm that he has thereby cancelled
his Right to govern, which yet, according to our own Supposition, is not true,
unless we allow the Covenant to be the Coronation Oath. But this is absurd,
seeing the Covenant is a new Thing, never heard of by his Majesty's Royal
Ancestors, who did all take an Oath at their Instalment; and as his Title to
the Crown differed in nothing from his Father's and his Grandfather's, so ought
his Coronation Oath to have been likewise the same. But if we took upon us to
alter it, or to add the Covenant as a new Clause, no wonder if his Majesty
questioned what we did without Authority, and refused to confirm since, what
was extorted from him during the Rebellion. This is certain, that had our
Representatives in Parliament considered the Covenant, either as a part of his
Majesty's Coronation Oath, or as an Oath lawful in it self, and lawfully
imposed upon the King and his Subjects, they would never have ordered it to be
abjured, nor have declared that there lay no Obligation either upon Prince or
People to observe it. Secondly, a Forfeiture of the Crown does not follow upon
a Breach of the Coronation Oath; because, as I already observed, the King has
his Crown by Inheritance, not by Election; and his Right, being of a more
ancient Date, can never depend upon what followed. The King was obliged to be a
just Prince, and we to be dutiful Subjects, before that pretended Agreement at
his Coronation; and if he should have failed in his part, yet we were bound to
make good ours, even before we swore any Oath of Allegiance. I confess the
King's Oath is a further Confirmation of his Duty, and if he were guilty of any
such Breach, it would much aggravate his Sin; but God, before whose Tribunal he
must stand, can only call him to an Account for it: He is the Minister of God,
acts by his immediate Commission, and he alone can cancel it. To God he
forfeits his Crown, if he should be found to manage it ill; and in this Case we
were patiently to wait till Heaven thought fit to remove him, remembering that
the greatest Injury and Breach of Trust was to God who employed him. But
supposing a Forfeiture, how come the People to claim the Benefit of it, or to
pretend themselves his Heirs? In some extraordinary Cases, such as Frenzy, or
the like, the Safety of the Kingdom may require an extraordinary Remedy, as at
present in Portugal, yet even where the King's insufficiency makes him unable
to govern, Subjects are not freed from their Allegiance; if there remain any
that have Right to govern as Administrators in his Name, their Station is still
the same; no personal Fault nor Defect in the Prince can dissolve the
Government, nor leave People to an entire Liberty of choosing whom they will
obey.

Now after all, we are as little able to prove a Breach upon the King's Part,
as we are able thence to infer a Forfeiture. His Majesty did swear to govern
according to the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; nor can we show where ever he
has broken them. Has he not, in Matters of Difficulty, vouchsafed to recur to
his Great Council? has he not suffered the Laws to have their free course? has
he ever invaded any Man's Property, or denied any Man Justice? has he ever
delighted in Bloodshed, or given us one Instance of his Cruelty? So far has he
been from giving Occasion to these cursed Aspersions of Tyranny and Oppression,
which the Enemies of our Peace do with equal Malice and Falsehood cast upon his
Government, that if, without Breach of Duty, we durst complain of our Prince,
it should be of his too great Indulgence, which has hurt both himself and us:
for it is plain that factious Spirits have adventured to disturb our quiet, out
of hopes of Impunity. But he has arrogated to himself, say some, King Jesus's
Right, in offering to meddle with Spiritual Affairs. After this manner did
Gregory the seventh charge the Emperor Henry the fourth, when he only
maintained the Prerogatives of his Crown. Has he meddled more with Spiritual
Affairs than other Princes have done? Eusebius thought it for the Honor of
Constantine to set down his Words in an Assembly of Bishops, where he called
himself a Bishop appointed by God, to see to the outward Settlement of the
Church: and must it be an Encroachment upon Christ in his Majesty, to do what
was so much commended in that great Emperor? Did his Majesty arrogate to
himself Christ's Right, in rejecting that Form of Government which was brought
in by Rebellion, or in restoring that Order and Decency, which were then
banished? did he arrogate too much to himself, in being zealous to perform his
martyred Fathers Will, or to suppress Schism? In these Things, sure, he acted
rather in the quality of a nursing Father, and discharged no small Part of his
Trust; for what more acceptable Service could he have done to Christ, than to
interpose his Royal Authority, in promoting a blessed Uniformity amongst us?

There remains yet one strange Article against his Majesty, such an one as I Am
confident the World has not hitherto been acquainted with, and that is the
Sentence of Deposition lastly past upon him in a pretended Convention of
Estates, as we learn from the Lanrick Declaration. But seeing we have so lame
an Account of this Business, I hope they will be pleased to tell us, when,
where, and by what Authority that Assembly was called, of whom it consisted,
what Lords Spiritual and Temporal sat there: for without them, in our
Government, there can be no Convention of Estates: who presided there in his
Majesty's Name; it being also necessary that he should have had his
Representative. In the mean Time, before an Answer be returned to these
Enquiries, we are fully satisfied, that as they met without the King's
Authority, and upon a most wicked Design, so their Rebellious Conventicle must
not be called a Convention of Estates: It was a second high Court of Justice,
and another Bradshaw no doubt was their President; this arraigned the King, as
the former did his Father; nor could he have escaped their barbarous Cruelty,
had he been within their Reach. The extravagant Proceedings at Westminster
against our late Royal Martyr, have neither been so much for the Glory of our
Neighbors, nor for our own Interest, as to tempt any among us to follow their
black Example, and act the second Part of a Tragedy, which nothing, in Modern
nor Ancient History, can parallel; and upon which it was hoped Posterity would
have looked back with Horror. But the Members of the late mock-Convention
among us, have, to their eternal Infamy, approved of what was done in the high
Court of Justice, by their attempting to renew it: and when all true
Protestants and good Subjects would be willing to buy off the Guilt and
Ignominy of that atrocious Crime at any rate, these Men would help to transfer
it upon us, or at least would have us engaged in a Villainy of the same kind.
Our own History furnishes us already with too many Instances of Kings either
assassinated, poisoned, or killed in open Rebellion; but never, till of late,
were we known to put off all Sense of Modesty as well as Duty, and, in Contempt
of Divine and Human Laws, to trample upon the Throne, arraign our Sovereign
before us as a Criminal, and, by a sacrilegious Usurpation of God's Right, pass
Sentence of Deposition upon him.

What Apprehensions must the moderate Protestants abroad have of our Zeal, when
they hear of this dreadful Sentence of Deposition, and that of Excommunication
issued out by Cargil, in the Name of the true Presbyterian Kirk of Scotland?
the former forbidding us to obey the King, and the latter to pray for him. With
what Amazement will it strike them, when they see the utmost Extent of these
Sentences, which begin with the King, but bring in the best Part of the
Kingdom, all Officers of the Crown, Privy Counselors, Judges, Magistrates,
Officers of the Army, Guards, and other Soldiers, who are more immediately
marked out for Destruction, as being either Persons in trust, or Adherers to
the Government? Nor are the Orthodox Clergy, men everywhere sacred by their
Profession, to be here exempted; with them they have begun, and showed in the
Person of our late most reverend Metropolitan, what the rest may expect, if the
Malice of that Party be once armed with Power: so that before these Sentences
be executed according to their full extent, we are like to be in the lamentable
Condition of the Egyptians, we shall not have an House without some one or
other dead in it; only in this we differ, the Angel of the Lord destroyed their
Firstborn, whereas we are designed to destroy one another. It is really
strange how Men, that have thus shaken off all the Ties of Religion and Nature,
and own such bloody and desperate Principles, are not sometimes afraid, lest
our Neighbors, when these Things are published abroad, should take the Alarm,
and join with those in danger at home, to cut them off as avowed Enemies to
their Native Prince, their Country, and their Friends, and consequently to all
Mankind: But as they appear yet to be only Persons of mean Quality, and not
very numerous in respect of the rest of the Kingdom, so the Pitch of
extravagance, which they are now arrived at, secures them in a great Measure
from Vengeance, and makes them the Objects of Pity, as Persons distempered with
a violent Phrenzy, and who, for the public Safety, are to be kept in Chains,
rather than destroyed, and treated as brainsick Persons, till they recover. And
truly it may be worth our Governors Time to consider, whether any so proper
Method has been yet thought of for such, as to remove them from Prisons to
Houses of Correction; not to do them the Honor to bring them before
Judicatures to revile the higher Powers, nor to Pillories nor Scaffolds, to
confirm the rest of their Party by their obstinate Sufferings; not to condemn
them to die as Martyrs, but to continue under severe Taskmasters, till Time,
hard Labor, and the seasonable Discourses of discreet Persons, appointed for
this Purpose, may, by God's Blessing, prove the effectual Means to cool their
Heats, remove their Scruples, and restore them again to their right Wits.

FINIS.

