A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WINDSOR, September the 10th. 1682.

By ROBERT CREYGHTON, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

Published by his Majesty's Command.



LONDON, Printed by J. Wallis, for Benj. Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1682.

1 COR. 1. 10. Now I beseech you brethren by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ye all spoke the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you: but
that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment.
WHAT! the great Apostle stoop so low as to beseech! and so passionately too,
by the Name of our Lord and Savior Christ. Be the People never so impatient,
boil and toss and roar like a raging Sea, sure here is Charm enough to strike
the World immediately into a Calm. Beseech! it is tantamount to a Command: he
beseeches by a Name that cannot but prevail, a Name whom Storm and Tempest it
self must Obey. But beseech or command, it is all one: the World is deaf to all
such Charms, to all such Commands. Be joined together in the same and in the
same judgment! and (...) too, united in a beautiful Order and Symmetry of
parts? alas when will this be? Epicurus his Atoms will as soon by cross
interfering motions, weave themselves into a beautiful System of a World, as
men's thoughts, variously cross and running counter, unite in one Discipline,
one Doctrine, one Church. We shall never see Peace, so long as there are rough
uneven tempers in the World, as unfit for Societies, as some rough unhew'n
Stones, or knotty crooked pieces of Timber, unfit for Building. There are
certain tempers naturally sour enough to break through Mountains and Rocks like
Hanibal's vinegar, and to dissolve the firmest Foundations of Government and
Order. And there is especially a Pharisaical Leven sour enough, to put whole
Societies and Kingdoms into a perfect fermentation. We shall never be all
alike, till the different humors of our several constitutions be quite spent,
and we are mouldred away in our Graves to rotten Bones and Skulls; then and not
till then exactly all alike with half noses, hollow-ey'd, and grinning, as
Lucian describes Skulls of Wisemen, Madmen, Fools, Cynicks, Politicians,
Hero's, Beggars, blended together in Charnel Houses. But especially in
Religion, men never yet wanted pretenses to disagree: Cain and Abel, though
Brothers, agree not in the same kinds of Sacrifices. Contention once intruded
into Heaven amongst the Gods, that is Romance; but it is too true, she has more
than once intruded into the Church, a bold and troublesome Guest. What? and
will Religion then, Religion, which is or should be the very Bond and Cement of
Societies, will that also crumble us to pieces? Nay then there is little hope of
Unity in this World. Our Corinthians divide upon pretenses specious enough,
even of honoring some Apollos, others Paul, others Cephas. The least pretense
of dividing will serve the turn, when men are resolved to be quarrelsome:
especially in Cities of great Trade, such as Corinth was, the Metropolis of
Achaia, Rich, Populous, and Proud: where, as they Traffick'd with Foreigners,
Goods for Goods; So they seem to have bartered Religion for Religion too, the
Seller basely prostituting his judgment to the Buyers, either Heresy or
Schism, to set off Goods the better, and to advance Trade.

Our Apostle St. Paul, though by degrees he deals very plainly with these
Corinthians, yet at the beginning of his persuasive to Unity, he deals with
them with all the tenderness immaginable.

But what shall we do now? our modern Shismaticks are grown so stiff and
stubborn, that it is to little purpose to Entreat them. Beg or Command, Weep or
Thunder, it is all one; they are inexorable, they are inflexible. If the Mercy
of God in settling Religion here upon so good grounds, by so legal and
warrantable methods, according to the model of the Primimitive Church; if the
Blood of our Late Dread Sovereign, the Church of Englands Martyr; if this
King's incomparable Clemency can prevail nothing; all the Passion of our Sacred
Orator St. Paul, is utterly cast away.

They have been gently dealt with these many years, and they are but the more
hardened in the Schism. The warm Sunbeams will sometimes but harden that Clay,
which heavier Storms may soften and make pliable to the Government.

But I must remember the Apostles condescension, I must remember his pity, and
his good nature, and with all the moderation I can, endeavor to remove some of
the prejudices they have taken up against this Church. And I must be so far
free with them as to charge them with the following Mistakes, three especially,
the ground of all the rest; A false Notion of Christian Liberty: A false Notion
of Tender Conscience: A false Notion of the Nature and Measures of a Due
Reformation.

First, A false Notion of Christian Liberty. The Church, we apprehend, has a
Liberty infeoffed in Her to determine this way or that in matters of Decency
and Order. If this be the Churches Prerogative, conveyed to her by Scripture,
particularly that of the Apostle, Let all things be done Decently and in Order;
it is certainly my Christian Liberty to Obey, warranted and secured to me
virtually by the same Scripture. When I am satisfied in Conscience that the
Church maintains the Faith, sound in all the Doctrines she professes (which to
say truth are the proper Objects about which Conscience acts) it is my
Privilege to be governed by her in other matters of less moment, which do not
directly and immediately concern Conscience farther then as a general Rule of
Charity obliges me to obey. For as the Apostles leaving out particulars, there
is a general Warrant for the Church to Prescribe; so is it a Warrant to me, who
am a member of an Orthodox, Visible Church-branch of Christ's Holy Catholic
Church, to submit to that which makes it a Visible Church, I mean Government
and Order. So that the Schismatic is so far wide in his Notion of Liberty,
that if I refuse to obey, I in a manner fell away my Christian birthright, and
basely betray my own Liberty. For though we have often heard much talk to little
purpose of Christian Liberty, yet as the Apostle uses the word Liberty, we are
able to understand no morethan this, that Christians under the Gospel are
redeemed from the bondage of the Law. So that I am at perfect Liberty to be
Governed by a Christian Church, the Obligation to the Mosaic Law being
cancelled. Else there would be a Visible Church Government in general Terms,
settled upon the Apostles Successors, without Obedience to that Government,
which is an absurd Chimera.

Now then if the Schismatic tell us, his Conscience will not suffer him to
submit; where then is his Liberty of Conscience? who put those Fetters upon his
Conscience, but himself; what Cyclops made those Fetters? where were they
forged? in what Vulcans Shop? in what Aetna; but in his own zealous overheated
brain? Does the Scripture fetter his Conscience? show where? if it be truly
Conscience he pretends, he is bound to show, either that to obey or not to
obey, is made by some positive Rule of Scripture indifferent, as Marrying, or
not Marrying is; or that the thing he boggles at, is either morally ill, or ill
because forbidden by a Law. Show the Law, or I shall without breach of Charity
tell him, It Is Humor not Conscience. If he would have things of Decency and
Order, left as indifferent as Marrying, or not Marrying; he roves
ex-travegantly wide from the Case. For in the one case the thing is by a Law
indifferent, and so is what it is necessarily, indispensably, and unalterably
indifferent; in the other, it is left to the Churches Prudence to determine:
there the indifferency being the immediate effect of that Law; here, the
Churches determination, the immediate effect of this Law. And therefore the
Apostles General Rule is a warrant to Conscience, to secure it from all
superstitious fear of being defiled when the Church is obeyed, in things not
repugnant to any particular express Rule of Scripture.

Secondly, A false Notion of Tender Conscience. If the Conscience be tender,
it is because there appears at least some ill. But unless some Law or other
convince me that a thing is sinful, in truth I count I am in some danger of
incurring a Sin, if I make that Evil which is not Evil. For who gave me
Authority to call that Evil which God Almighty has not by some Law or other
declared to be so? it is a piece of Pride and Presumption in me to call that
Evil which is not, and I extort from God a part of his Sovereignty in doing so.
There is as black a Woe denounced by the Prophet against him that calls Good,
Evil, as against him that calls Evil, Good. And therefore, whatever the
Schismatic apprehends of Tender Conscience startling at the appearance of
Evil, Conscience is as much in danger of being defiled by calling that Evil
which is not Evil, as by calling that not Evil which is really Evil. Liberty of
Conscience, and tenderness of Conscience, and I fear God, and I am afraid of
Sin, and I confess my weakness, my Conscience will not allow it! These are the
words, sweet as honey, whereby the Ringleaders of our Schismatics do insinuate
their Poison: by so sweet a breath do they convey a holy contagion through a
whole Conventicle presently, as they say pestilential distempers are spread the
farther by sweet perfumes. Tender Conscience! Who can withstand the Charm? And,
Acknowledge my weakness! Who can resist the power of the invincible Argument?
The Tender Conscience it is confessed, naturally moves pity: but then it must be
the Tender Conscience of such, who make it a Case of Conscience to hearken to
Reason: who will withal be tender, least they have a Conscience too tender in
punctilio's that really concern not Conscience immediately. For otherwise,
there is a Tenderness of Conscience which is caused by a certain sour,
fretting, grating humor, that corrodes, that sours like the Leven of the
Pharisee, I mean perfect Ill Nature; which mixed with a few unlucky grains of
intemperate Zeal, frets and galls the very heart of the man, and so he easily
mistakes in truth his Sore for the tenderness of his Conscience. May not their
weakness deserve some Pity too? Yes: Charity may cover my Brother's failings:
but that weakness will not be covered, which resolves to break out into
Rebellion the next opportunity. Truth now, and never till now, do I
passionately and heartily deprecate. None can more wish to be undeceived, than
we to be deceived in what we say of those, whose hands were they as strong as
their heads weak, would quickly satisfy the world what Principles they are of:
then you should see that same weak Conscience all in Armor, strong enough to
manage a Sword against their King, in an Army of Rebels. Some of their late
Scribbling Champions flourishing a little in Print, to give their own Party
satisfaction, not us; after some sine harangues of inconveniency, burdens and
remitting; being by us pressed to come to the main point to tell us downright,
what in our Church is in it self unlawful, and then prove it; not a word: they
are not bound to give Reasons, they are above the low dispensation.

Is this weakness? It Is Pride and inflexible stubborness: To them, Scotus and
Aquinas are Sots, Cardinals veil your Caps: a Conventicle can furnish you with
Doctors more Seraphick, more Irrefragable. The Phanatick that they say went to
Convert the Pope, doubtless outfaced the Old Chair at Rome, with much more
Infallibility than ever pretended to sit there. For most of those that dissent
from us, are Infallibly sure they are in the right: and by the way, it may be
noted, that ever since the Church of England renounced the Popes Infallibility,
they have lest us, and resolve to keep us company no longer. These are the men
whose uncontrollable Conscience is above all Law: or but for one Law; and that
is, that it should be passed into a Law, that their Conscience shall be bound
up by no Law. shall Mahomet go to the Mountain, or the Mountain come to
Mahomet? shall these Men's Conscience come to the Law, or the Law to these Men's
Conscience? a Garment may be as soon sitted to the Moon, as such a system of
Laws framed as shall fit every Man's Conscience. It Pinches here, widen the
Law: now it Pinches as much there, widen that too; till at last the Laws grown
so much too wide, as that the man's Conscience having got noom enough to turn
it self with freedom, wholly shakes off all Law, and that which at first
pretended only to Liberty, shall very fairly end in Licentiousness.

Thirdly, A false Notion of the Nature and Measure of a Due Reformation. There
is such a thing certainly as an obligation lying upon all Churches, in all Ages
since the first Preaching of the Gospel, to maintain a Unity in some measure
with the Primitive Church, and to regulate all our Reformations by the General
Ruled and Laws of the most Ancient Church, if we are in earnest when we profess
We Believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church. Now if the new models of the
pretended Reformers of our Reformation should take place, they would so pare
away from the Church of England, every thing almost that ever the Primitive
Church used, that being reduced to a thing so utterly unlike what the Christian
Church was at first, we should seem totally to have broken the Unity. The not
weighing this, has made us run so headlong from the Church of Rome, that we
scarce own that to be a Reformation, which rejects not almost every thing that
ever was in use in that Church, right or wrong. We retain no not one thing but
what was before that Churches Apostasy, either exactly the same, or very near
it in the most Ancient Church: and to reform otherwise then this, (I crave
leave to say) is to break Charity with the good Primitive Church. These men may
possibly mean well, but they seem only to consider how to go far enough from
Rome, never consider to what we are in Charity bound to reduce our selves, I
mean to that State whence by degrees Rome fell away. In truth our Controversies
with the Romanists move most upon this hinge, that we reject their Novelties,
which against them is one of our best Pleas. So that should we frame against
them Arguments from such Topics as our Schismatics, some of them, would
suggest, we must tamely give up the Cause. For if we maintain not our ground,
if we keep not to the first Ages, and the four first General Councils, if we
secure not as far as may be, our Conformity with the most Ancient Church; we
give them the greatest Advantage immaginable. At our Reformation, had we (I
condemn not other Churches) had we I say, renounced Episcopacy, the Ancient
model of Church Government, that bears date long before Infallibility,
Supremacy, Transubstantiation, etc. were thought of; what would the Romanists
have said? how could we have avoided the just imputation of a most Uncharitable
Separation from the Ancient Church? But now our Reformation may be an Object of
the Romanists Envy, because we did thereby as it were reconcile our selves to
the most Ancient Church: and our return is in truth to upbrayd them with
Schism, and the most honorable way to justisie our departure from them, in
points wherein we and they had so long departed from the Ancient Church: which
we should never be able to effect, were not our constituted as now it is. For
let the model be any other, not known to the Ancient Christians, men of such
Principles may rayl at Popery, but the Arguments they must be forced to use,
will be such, as will be scorned, and make the Roman Catholics but the more
obstinate.

And therefore, if under pretense of flying farther from Rome, we Ruin this
Church of England; we shall have neither Arguments enough left us to defend our
selves against Romes Novelties, nor Loyalty enough left us I am sure, to secure
any Prince in his Throne, Defender of the Faith.

But what do we talk of a Primitive Church? away with this dull Old Way; tell
us Schismatics something Brisk and New: these Sons of the Church of England
can tell us nothing new; they say no more than Old Ignatius and Polycarp,
Ireneus, Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian and Cyprian: they can Fight with
nothing but old rusty Weapons of Antiquity: we have Swords new burnished at
Geneva, and Francford: nay, we have Antiquity too on our side, we have
Donatists and Novatians, and there we gain a point. Yet Old Schismatics were
dull heavy phlegmatic Sots, to ours: They never durst attempt a Schism, but
they would set up a Bishop of their own making, and remain in the state of
their Separation, right Episcopal however, as to the Government of the Church:
never hoping to gain any Proselytes, should they not pretend at least to
Episcopacy. But ours run down Episcopacy, and then cry they have discovered new
wonders to the world, and found out better methods of Church Government, than
their idle Predecessors, Donatists and Novatians, could ever dream of.

Indeed Epiphanius mentions a dear Friend of our Schismatics, one Aerius of
precious memory, who turned Leveller because he could not get a Bishopric.

But I must tell them for his Credit, he had but few Proselytes, and they
hooted at as the Owl, by the more ingenious of his winged Brethren, when he
appears with his Gravity among the Airy Wits.

I am sorry for the sake of some of our Schismatics, who would fain be
nibbling at this Story, that Aerius was not a Leveller out of pure Conscience,
because then the Presbyterian Parity might claim some kindred with Antiquity.

Thus I have briefly discoursed of Liberty, Tender Conscience, Reformation, the
three fairest pretenses of Schism. Now if this one single Text prevail nothing,
if neither our great Apostles Frowns nor Charms, nor his Excommunications, nor
his Embraces, nor his Apostolical Authority, nor the Passion of his Oratorie
prevail with the Schismatic, but he will tear the Church to pieces,
ungratefully rend the very Bowels of that Church that gave him Life, whose
Breasts he sucked; What Expedients for Unity further to propose, I cannot
imagine.

It Is the Temper's Policy too, to Divide that he may Rule, to break the
Churches Ranks and Files, that he may Enter and Conquer with Ease. Our Quarrels
are his Conquests, the Ruins of our Churches are his Trophies, it is only our
Peace that he dreads, Pax vestra bellum est illi, said Tertullian. In all the
Apostles Writings there are not more Cautions against any one thing than
against Schism. For though Schism in it self considered does not directly
destroy any one Article of the Faith, yet by destroying the Churches Unity, it
will in time destroy the Faith: Because it is a false Fantastic Light hovering
in the Air, that will lead thousands after it into Errors, over Bogs and
Precipices: and will have in time so fatal an influence upon the whole Body of
the Catholic Church, as not only to weaken that, by drawing off great numbers
from it; but also put the Schismatics themselves out of a Capacity of being at
least Confirmed in the Truths they have received; and so they will lie open to
all the Temptations immaginable, of being debauched in the very Principles of
their Christian Faith.

For this seems one design at least, of the first Plantations of Churches under
such a model of Episcopacy, as might unite Christians in larger Bodies, and
prevent the breaking of their numbers into little Junto's and Conventicles;
that so they might like great Armies United in Government and Order, both
secure their own Faith by their greater Union, and also make more effectual
Conquests upon the Unconverted Parts of the World, to whom it must needs be one
great motive to come in, when they should see Christians so strongly knit
together, in so large Societies, with so much Charity, Order and Harmony.

Why then do our Schismatics by going off from our Church, from the common
safe Path, (to say no more) expose themselves to so great dangers? did they not
forsake us, we might hope one day by calm reasoning to reform their judgment.

Why do they thus fight with us disengeniously and basely, like Parthians, who
turning their backs, scattered their Arrows from behind them? Why do they thus
scatter their envenomed Arrows, even bitter Words, and never turn their faces,
either to survey our Strength, or stay to hear what we can say for our seIves?

Why do they amuse us with Accusations of Popery, like Atalantas Ball, with
Accusations back upon us, that they might get the start in the Race, and get to
Rome first?

Is it Superstition they dread? but have not they themselves some Tincture of
that too, at least while they (I may venture to say) superstitiously avoid it?
have we not known the time, when they honored their Factious Preachers even to
Superstition? when they honored the double lined Cap, equal to the Triple
Crown; when they paid honors to the handerchef about his Neck, as to the Holy
Rag of some Legend Saint; and took the short Cloak hanging on one fide of the
Pulpit, while the warm Orator was Transported with Zeal, and Enthusiastic
Fire, for the Mantle of Elijah just dropping down from the Fiery Chariot?

Do they depart from us that they may Worship God more in Spirit and in Truth?
But with all their most glorious Zeal, they will never be able to expiate for
their Pride and their Uncharitableness.

The strictest Life of a Shismatick could never in the judgment of sober men,
especially St. Austin, make Apology for the Scandal of being a Schismatic, did
he lead the Life of an Angel.

Do they depart from us, because they cannot join in our Public Prayers, with
Devotion enough?

Shall I be first guilty of Sin, a remisness at my Prayers; and then make my
Sin an Apology for my Schism?

Do they disobey because the thing is indifferent? or because commanded? if the
latter; you see where the Shoe pinches, it is not the Ceremony their Conscience
boggles at, but the imposition of that Ceremony, for (by the way) they abhor
Obedience as bad as Idolatry: then must the methods of Government be reversed,
and the quite contrary must be commanded, to make these Antipodes proselytes:
If the former, the more unpardonable still their disobedience, one of the
greatest trials of our obedience to Government being the indifferency of the
thing commanded: for if we may not obey a Governor in things otherwise
indifferent, and if a Governor may not command what is not forbidden by Gods
Law; there will be nothing left for Gods Vicegerent on Earth to command, and
there will be no such thing in the world as Obedience to a Prince.

Let such men have a care that they place not too much Religion in mere
Notions. For it is possible men of such Factious Principles may talk and think
too of Practical Religion it self in a mere Notional way. For when men can
neither talk nor think of their Christian Duties abstractedly from this or that
mode of Worship that accompanies them, the duties run out into certain
excrescencies bigger than themselves, and such as will in time destroy the life
thereof, while these men would level the Clergy, change the Churches Ornaments
into rudeness and nastiness, and would seem great Patrons of humility, but how,
by bringing us down to the dust; let them ask themselves this question, Whether
it be not some fond conceit of their extraordinary either knowledge or
holiness, or both, that makes them scorn to stoop to the Government.

If they depart from us because they know better things than we; if they cannot
convince us, let them confess their weakness; if they will not convince us, let
them own their ill nature.

If they depart from us because they are holier than we; let them evidence to
the world that they are better Christians, at least by being more Loyal
Subjects than we.

If their Talent be extraordinary above other men's, let them fairly show us
that the first four or five Ages after Christ and his Apostles, were all in an
Error: for they must not think their Malice is levelled at us alone, it wounds
the Primitive Church: it pretends to strike at Popery, but the poisoned Arrows
fly over the Papists heads, over all those Ages between, and wound far beyond,
at the distance of fourteen, fifteen, or sixteen Ages: the Ashes of the Holy
Primitive Martyrs are disturbed, the Noble Constantine's Ghost summoned to
appear before their sour Tribunal, the Acts of the four first General Councils
reseinded, the Fathers Writings all defaced, cancelled and burnt, and they,
good men, condemned to suffer now a second Martyrdom.

If these men have new illuminations, and will make it appear to the world that
the most Ancient Christian Churches, long, long before the date of a corrupted
one at Rome, were all mistaken; let us e'ne blot out of the Churches Records,
four or five hundred years, and let them pass for nothing, and begin
Christianity anew: down with our Universities, set fire to all our Libraries,
with Triumphant Bonfires in Solemnity to welcome into the World these New
Lights.

Must we be thus Angry with the Primitive Church, because we find too much
Loyalty there? if that be the Crime; it is the Primitive Churches unhappiness,
but our honor, that they in us their humble imitators, must at this great
distance of so many Ages, suffer as it were in Effigy.

In short, if they are resolved to quarrel, they may be pleased, as becomes all
good Christians, to divert their Anger upon what far more deserves it, their
own Sins.

If immoderate Zeal must raise in their hearts and heads turbulent exhalations,
and make them Sons of Thunder, ever fall Tempests heaviest at home: strike
here, here is a Mountain, here is a Rock, here is a proud thought, and here is an
unrelenting heart: here lodge undervaluing thoughts of the King and the
Government, here lurks Spiritual Pride under the color of Self-denial, and
Mortification, something of the Publican, more of the Pharisee; and (if they
have Humility to own but common Human Infirmities) Sins of all sorts, whereby
Gods Holy Spirit is grieved, and his Infinite Love abused. Here are Objects
indeed, that call aloud for their just indignation: here if they Employ their
Zeal at home against their own Sins, they will have but little either
inclination or leisure to quarrel with any man, much less with the
Constitutions of an Excellent Well-governed Church.

We and they, all of us hope to attain the same End of our Faith, a Heavenly
Canaan is all our journeys end, We are Brethren, why should we fall out by the
way? Why all this Noise? it will not, it cannot be long, e're we all lie quiet
in our Graves: thence we hope all to pass to such a State, where there will be
nothing but Unity, Uniformity and Harmony: where a full Choir of Saints, in a
Beautiful Church Triumphant, and a Noble Hierarchy of Angels shall sing
Alelujah's and Worship God in the Beauties of Holiness, for Ever and Ever.

Amen.
To thee O Holy, etc. be all etc.
THE END.

