A Plain Pathway OPENED TO THE SIMPLE-HEARTED, FOR THE Answering all Doubts
and Objections which do arise in them against the Light and Truth in the
Inward-Parts;

BY WHICH Many are kept from Obedience, and so from Peace to their PANTING
SOULS.

By Stephen Crisp.

Printed in the Year, 1668

A Plain Pathway Opened, etc.
Friends and People,
I Have had a deep exercise upon my spirit concerning many who are come to feel
something stirring and moving in their hearts (that is good) to bring them into
a serious consideration of their course of life, and the inward state of their
Immortal Souls; and when you have sometimes begun to turn your minds to this
good thing that stirred in you, then have many doubts and objections arisen in
you, lest you should be misled, deceived, or deluded; and lest this thing that
inwardly strives with you should lead you into the Eronious way of the Quakers,
(as the Worlds Teachers calls it) for they speak, and write of, and bear a
constant Tes^imony to something that is in man, that calls upon him to repent,
and to turn to the Lord; and under this very notion that ye have heard evil,
and thought evil of that People; by the same rule you are apt to think evil of
that which works in your own bosom to lead you out of Sin and Iniquity; and so
ye are tempted to slight it, and to get some slighty name for it, to call it
by, which Antichrists Min^sters have many to afford you; as to call it, A
Natural Light; A Common Gift of the Spirit, but not a Saving Gift; Conviction
of a Natural Conscience; A Legal Work; yea, and many calls it, The Devils work
to disturb the Soul of its Peace; and some, A Diabolical Light, etc. and thus
when thou art brought to slight that good Principle (that strives with thee)
under some such name, thou gets ease again, for a little while, and takes
liberty to act against it, and to do and say that which this Principle does in
secret condemn; and then it rises again, and breaks thy peace, and brings
trouble and anguish upon thy Soul? and then up comes many doubts on the one
hand, and doubts on the other hand, and thy poor Soul is beset and encompassed
with doubts, and fears, and jealousies; sometimes thou fears thou withstands
the Truth to thy own destruction* and sometimes fears again its a delusion, and
thou shall be deceived; and besides thou finds many Learned men, and
worldly-wise men, that tell thee, that there is nothing good in thee; and here
thou art in a great strait, and labors under many sorrowful thoughts, and many
doubtful disputations arises in thy mind; the Flesh now strongly warreth
against that which comes to disturb it, and the Spirit strongly warreth against
that which resists and rebels against it, and these two are contrary, and these
contrary things are both in thee, and thou poor Creature must feel the
struggling of them both; and by reason of thy darkness, and doubts, and fears,
thou scarce knows (or at least with certainty) which is right: now, in this
state and condition, how acceptable would a Messenger be, one of a thousand, to
show unto such a one that hwich might deliver his Soul from going down into the
pit, and save his live from the Destroyer; ( Job 33.23.) And truly very many
are in this straightened state in these days; for whose sakes I am drawn into a
deep exercise many times, by day, and by night, and my cry to God is, that his
glorious Power may more and more arise to open these doors that are shut and
folded upon many such, and to bring forth the imprisoned spirits out of the
Prisonhouse, and out of the Bondage of this Spiritual Egypt, where our Lord
was and is crucified Spiritually; and that he may expel the clouds of darkness,
in which the fears, and doubts, and questionings arises; and that he may make
a clear way in a^l such for his Light to break forth out of obscurity, in which
the Answer to those Doubts and Questions does arise.

And by that same spirit that labors with you, am I moved to send this forth
unto you all, as a word of Exhortation and Counsel in the Name and fear of the
Lord God, by which as many as do rightly receive it, and make a true use and
proof of it, shall find help and benefit; and shall know the mouth of the
Questioner stopped, and the Answer of Peace witnessed to their Immortal Souls,
in the Lords due time. And therefore, consider this, That every good and
perfect gift comes from above, from the Father of Lights and Spirits, who
would not the death of a Sinner, but rather that he should turn and live; and
therefore has he out of his infinite love, and tender mercies to the Sons of
Men, prepared a way to draw nigh unto them, even while they are in their Sins,
which he does not but through Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the New Covenant,
whom he has freely given to be a Light unto the dark World; and that he should
Englighten every one that comes into the World, Joh. 1.9. of which number thou
art one, whoever thou art, and art enlightened by Christ, though thou be yet
darkness in thy self, as the Ephesians once were; yet the Light shines in thy
darkness, or else there would not be two contrary Natures and Seeds found
working in thee as there is; and this Light wherewith thou art enlightened is
the the Life of Jesus, Joh. 1.4. which he has given a Ransom for man; and that
was not Natural, as some foolishly imagine: for if it were Natural, it could
not be a Ransom for man out of Sin; for the Sin to be Natural, and that which
reproves it Natural, is contrary to the Apostle, who said, they two that warred
in the Creature were contrary; and called the one Flesh, or Natural; and the
other Spirit, or Spiritual; and Christ Jesus called that which should Reprove
the World of Sin, The Spirit of Truth; and Antichrist and his Ministers calls
it, A Natural insufficient Light, etc. But know this, thou that art enquiring,
that that in thee which does make manifest things to thee that are reproveable,
that is the Light wherewith Christ Jesus has enlightened thee withal, as the
Apostle of Christ said in his Epistle to the Ephesians, chap. 5. v. 13* 14. and
that Principle which leads thee to do or say such things as thou art secretly
reproved for in thine own Conscience, that is the Darkness, and the Enemy of
thy Souls Peace, which, who walks in, does not know whither he goes* for this
does minister a peace and pleasure to thee, and a delight to thy carnal mind
for a season; yet the other, to wit, the Light, the Reprover has power to take
away peace from thee again, and to judge thee, and to make that which was sweet
to thee to become bitter; and the darkness, nor lust nor vanity of thy mind
cannot deliver thee from this stroke.

Now, that thou might be resolved in such a state what to do, consider, thou
that have these struglings in thee about the Light in thy Conscience, whether
it is true or no, or whether thou shall own it or no, and art thinking in thy
self what is best for thee to do; whether to go on stoutly against it, or to
submit to it: I say, consider, if thou rebel against it, thou can never know
whether it would lead thee; as it was said of old, Job 24. They that rebel
against the Light, they know not the Way of it; so that if thou do take that
course to rebel, that will but increase thy ignorance of the Way that the Light
leads in, and makes it more terrible to thee every time it does appear in thee,
till thou come to that state spoken of, Job 24.17. That the dawning of the
Day will be as the shadow of death; for the more thou rebels against it, the
more dark thou will daily grow, and so the less able to resolve thy self in
those doubtful things that fill thy mind; but as darkness increases in thee,
so the power of it will bind thee down, as a Chain, and smother every good
desire in thee; and thus by rebellion against the Light, do some men lose the
very sense and knowledge of it, and grows past feeling, and strangers to it,
though it be in them; for the custom of Sin takes away the sense and the
feeling of the burden of it; but to you I write that are not yet come to this
state of hardness of heart, but are brought daily into a sense of the burden
of Sin; and that are ready to say, if you were but sure that were the Truth and
way of God which shows you your Sin, you would follow it, and love it, and own
it, but are kept off by doubts and questionings: Verily, I say unto you, before
these doubts be resolved you must try this, as, to your sorrow you have tried
the other, before you can be effectually informed; for Arguments will not do
sufficienly in this case; therefore try and prove what this Principle can do
for thee, when thou obeyst it, which ye know has power to condemn you, and
break your Peace when you disobey it: Why should ye always be shut up in
unbelief, and in doubts, and so kept from trying and proving the Light, as well
as ye have proved the Darkness, that so ye might reap the fruit of it to
Salvation, as well as you have done the fruit of the other unto Condemnation?
Oh, dear people, consider, ye cannot obey this Light of Christ Jesus in your
Consciences, but by taking up a daily Cross to your own Wills, Lusts and
Affections, for that is contrary thereunto; and that which leads to obey your
Lusts, leads to disobey the Light; and that which leads to obey the Light, that
crosses the Lusts and vile Affections, which are at enmity with the Light, and
must by it be judged and condemned; and that which leads thee to slight it, and
call it by some slighty name, that is also an Enemy to it, and must be judged by
it; and so, as the Light comes to rule over those things in thee, which are
enemies to it, thou will know that it will lead thee contrary to thy corrupt
nature; and as thou feel the thing so in thy self, thou will come to be
wiser then those Teachers that have called it a Natural light; for that which
is Natural leads according to Nature, but that which is Spiritual, leads
according to the Spirit, which Apostle said was contrary to the Flesh, and
warred against it; and so that objection will, by thy obeying the Light, come
to be answered, far better then words and arguments could have answered it; and
so likewise the sufficiency of the Light thou will come to feel, if thou do
not oppose it, but give up to be guided by it; and wilt know that it is able to
deliver thee when thou art tempted, as weil as to judge thee when thou have
yielded to the Tempter: for thou know already that it is able to condemn thee
when thou sinnest against it; but thou cannot certainly know it sufficient to
give peace, and to justify, till thou obeyest it: So then, the plain Pathway
to the answering thy doubts about the Principle of Truth in the Inward-parts,
is, by obeying of it, and yielding to it; for they that do evil they grow into
hatred against it, and it judges them; as they deny to obey the Light, so the
Light denies to justify them, and so coming justly under the condemnation of
it, by reason of transgression they grow afraid of it: But alas, this does but
prove that it is sent of God, for it does Gods work, which is righteous; For to
justify the Wicked, and to condemn the Righteous, both these are an
abomination to the Lord; and so is it with his Witness in thy own Conscience,
which God has placed there to bear witness for him concerning all thy actions
whether they are good or evil; and thou thy self, whoever thou art, whether
high or low, rich or poor, professor or profane, shall confess unto this, that
this has never condemned thee for that which was good, nor born witness
against thee for that thou wast not guilty of.

And therefore all you that have been hurried and tossed with doubts and
questionings about the Truth, come hearken to the Counsel of God, at this time
once more sounded forth unto you from his Spirit, by a Servant of his without
you, and answered by the measure of his good Spirit within you, which has the
same voice and cry in you, for Obedience to what is made manifest of God in
you; obey the Light, and ye shall see daily more of it, till it break forth as
a morning unto thee, and till it shines unto a perfect day; yea, a day of
gladness and rejoicing to thy poor distressed Soul.

Oh, Arise thou that sits sorrowing, and thou that art crying out in secret,
because of the bonds and fetters that are yet upon thee: Arise, arise, I say in
the Name of the Lord God of Sion, who draws nigh to thee by his quickening
Spirit, and hearken to his voice, who says to the Prisoner, Come forth; and to
the bowed down. Arise; and to the feeble ones, Put on strength, and follow me;
I will confound your Foes, and break the strength of your Enemies, as I have
done for my People, who have forsaken all to follow me, and obey me, so will I
do for you: and if ye in uprightness walk before me, and keep my Conant, as
they have done, no power or strength of the Enemy within or without shall be
too hard for you. And when the Lord does thus arise in your Souls, and stir up
his own pure Witness, and his Arm awakens in you, and his pure Light breaks
forth; oh, what consolation is it to you, and how have many of you seen your
vain doubtings expelled, and a clear convincement has prevailed upon your
spirits concerning the way of God; and at such a time you have begun to resolve
to follow the Lord in his pure Way of Holiness, thus opened unto you in the
Light, though to the loss of all; and though it be to the bearing your part of
the great reproach that lies upon them that loves him more then their lives;
and at such a time there was felt a secret joy in a hidden ground in your
Souls, and the seed of the Kingdom that had been long buried up, began to
spring up in you, in which Seed your Souls felt some touchings of that Heavenly
Life and Joy, which for the time exceeded all things that this World could
afford; and whenever ye come to feel this refreshing dew upon your Souls,
then take heed and wait singly in the sense of it, keep your eye to the joy
that is now set before you in Christ Jesus, the Seed; for if you let your mind;
wander, and your eyes gad abroad, there be objects on every hand to lead you
out from your Souls beloved, and to bring you to defile your hearts, and make
your selves an unfit place of residence for him who is holy and pure, and will
not dwell, nor take delight in a polluted Temple; but will withdraw himself, as
he did from Israel of old, and from their Temple, when it was polluted and
profaned: And besides, when your minds are taken hold of by any of the
corruptable things in this changable World, there will presently kindle a
desiring, longing, and lusting after the enjoyment of those things, though
contrary to the will of God; and then next the Reasoner and Consulter gets up
in thee, and starts a question: May not I enjoy the Lord and this? May not I
keep in the Way of Truth, and yet do this or that thing which my heart
desires? And though it be not perfectly according to the Truth made manifest
in me; yet I will have my will, my lust, my desire satisfied but this one time,
and that is not much, says the Consulter; and this is but a small matter, there
be others that do greater things then this; and such like reasonings enters the
mind, and this grieves and vexes that good and righteous tender Spirit that
moved in thee, and brings a weight and oppression upon the pure in thee, and
that withdraws it self again from thee, in which thy Light did arise unto thee,
and so a night comes upon thee; for where the Serpent can bring any to make a
question of obeying the Truth, he is as ready to frame an Answer, as to beget
the Question; but his answer always comes with a Liberty and persuasion to
disobey, as it did by Eve in the beginning; and when transgression is finished,
then death enters upon thee with its dark power, and manifold sorrows peirceth
thy poor soul; though the fruit was desirable to be eaten, yet now it is eaten,
thou cannot come at li^e, to eat of that too, though thou defirest it; but art
driven out, and kept out with a flaming sword that turns every way against
thee: And here is now a ground laid for doubts and questioning of a higher nature
then before, to arise in thee; for before thou doubted of the Truth it self,
whether it were the Truth, but now having tasted of it, and received a
convincement of it, and yet let forth thy mind from it after other Lovers, and
thy ears after the voice of the Adulteress, and so caused the pure Light to
withdraw from thee, through thy rebellion: now thou desire thou might but see
again what thou have seen, and feel again what thou have felt, but doubts and
fears that thou shall never see, nor feel, nor enjoy the like again: and now
thou wishest, oh, that thou had stood in the cross to thy own will, and that
thou had denied thy self, that thou might not thus have lost the sight and
sense of thy Souls Beloved. And now thou see, by woeful experience, whence
doubts, and fears, and sorrows do arise, even thy joyming with the Enemy, who
brings forth reasons against the obedience to the Light: And therefore now
hearken to that which remains in thee, though darkness and sorrow does
encompass thee; yet there is something remains, which gives thee a sense of thy
state and condition, and makes thee to know thy loss and want, hear the voice
of this, and this will humble thee, and bring thee into true brokenness of
heart, and contriteness of spirit; and as thou comes to know that state, then
thou have something to offer to the Lord of his own preparing, which will be
far more acceptable to him then a multitude of words and performances and
duties, (so called;) and as thou in the true lowliness of mind do come before
the Lord, and offers up this offering, God will hear in Heaven, and will answer
the cry of the poor and needy Soul that cannot be satisfied without his
presence; and he will remember his mercies of old (which never fail) for his
seed sake which is not yet brought forth in thee: And when God does again shine
forth unto thee, and make his Power known, thou must expect it must be in
judgment, because of the transgression thou have gone into, that he may consume
that in thee which led thee into the Sin, from his pure Law, which is Light,
for Zion is redeemed by judgment: And therefore take heed lest thou be offended
at his appearance; take heed that thou limit not the Holy One; but if his
appearance be with more sharpness and bitterness to the carnal part then
before, it is but just it should be so, It is the Lord, let him do what he
will. he sees more cause now then before, by how much more thou have sinned
against his goodness; but bow to his Judgments, Bear his Indignation, (as Micah
said) because thou have sinned against-them, Mic 7.9. And as thou yeeds to his
righteous Judgment, thou will know the coming to the midst of them in which
the mercy is remembered and made manifest; and therefore the hasty and
impatient, that flees the Judgment as soon as it begins a little to appear in
them, they never find the true deliverance, but gets ease another way, which
lasts but for a moment; but they who comes to know a through work wrought in
their Earth, and the Floor thoroughly purged, they come to know the true and
lasting Peace to their Immortal Souls; and although this is not obtained by
ease and liberty to the carnal mind, which must die, yet the end Crowns all
that holds out to it, they are the saved ones, as Christ said, Mark 13.13. and
they find the returning with shaves, as the Prophet said, Psalm. 126.5, 6. They
that sow in Tears shall reap in Joy: They went forth (said he) with weeping,
and bearing precious Seed, but they shall return with joy, and bring their
Sheaves: And as Christ said, They that forsake father and mother, wife and
children, house or lands, yea, or their own lives f^r my sake, shall have an
hundred fold in this time, and in the World to come Life Everlasting: Forsaking
and Self-denial has always been the way to Life, and to true Blessedness, and
is the way unto this day. And therefore all you who have wandered in your own
ways, and have not yet learned to deny your selves of what is contrary to the
Witness of God in your Consciences, but have desires, and that strong ones too,
to keep and hold that still which the Light in you does reprove, and yet have
desires of Life and Peace too; and so are in many doubts and straits about
these things; to you all this is the Counsel of the Lord, and the cry of his
pure Spirit; Come out of the Babylonish confusion of your own thoughts, and
touch not that which is unclean, and the Lord will receive you; and what God by
his pure Spirit has called unclean, let no man presume to call clean, and to
join to it, lest they be found fighting against God, and nourishing, and
keeping that alive which God has appointed to die and be destroyed; ye cannot
serve two Masters, nor partake of the Table of the Lord and the Table of
Devils. Oh, feed not that birth that hungers after evil things, and delights in
them; but what is for famine, let it be famished; and what is for the Sword,
let the two edged Sword that goes out of the mouth of the faithful and true
Witness cut it down, ( Rev. 1.16. and 3.14.) and so thou may see the Giants in
the Land slain before thee by one that is mighty to deliver, and to bring thee
out of this Spiritual Egypt with a high hand: but this thou cannot come to
witness, but by diligent following him, and if thou willingly yields to his
gentle drawings when thou feelst them in thy heart, thou will find them to he
effectual and profitable to thy Soul, and the more thou follows him, the more
thou will feel his goodness break in upon thee for thy encouragement, and the
less thou will doubt of his love and mercy in leading thee still farther, even
unto the end, and unto that Rest which will satisfy thy Soul.

Therefore lay aside all Consultations that are against thy Obedience to the
Gift of God in thy heart, which reproves Sin in thee; and give not way to vain
and needless doubts about it, but as thou findst that thou have been condemned
and judged in thy disobeying of it; now try and prove whether by taking up thy
daily cross, and obeying of it in thy words and actions, and in all things, if
thou do not find the answer of sweet peace and joy; and when thou shall find
it so, then will there be no more room for doubts and questioning against thy
obeying of it; but as any questions or doubts does arise in thee, or shall be
cast in thy way by any without thee, thou will feel the answer of it in thy
self to thy refreshing, and so thou will come to witness the effectual
opperation of it daily in thy Soul to work thy change and translation out of
thy self into it self, and so thou will come not only to know the Light in
thee; for that one may do and perish, ( For this is the Condemnation, that
Light is come, and not loved) but thou will know that thou art in the Light,
and walk there with God, and in the holy Fellowship, where thou feelst the
Lord near thee in his Light, and his Reward is with him: and so coming to walk
and dwell in the Light, thy conversation is now in Heaven, as the Saints of old
was, and thy unity is witnessed with the Father and the Son, as theirs was, who
said, If we walk in the Light as he is in the Light, they had fellowship with
him; and if any said they had fellowship, and walked in Darkness (which all
Sinners do, for Sin is the work of it) such, they said, were Liars: And such as
walks in the Light, as he is in the Light, such comes to know the Blood that
cleanses and washes from the Sin, and from all unrighteousness; and such as
feels this work wrought in them are brought into such a knowledge of the blood
of Christ, that they need not doubt about it, nor have no occasion to raise a
question, where it is, or what it is, nor what the efficacy of it is; for
having the work and witness of the Blood in them, this forthwith resolves all
doubts that would arise; and so likewise those that comes to know the Light in
all things to be their Guide to lead out of Darkness, and Sin, and
Imperfections, and to bring into the Innocent and Blameless Conversation which
becomes Saints, and so come to know their footsteps directed before the Lord,
such have done doubting and questioning about Perfection; for such sees that
which is perfect to be come, and they from the belief which they have of
attaining it, are laboring to conform themselves unto that rule, and
endeavoring after it not as the carnal Professors, (who say they labor after
a Conquest over their Sins, with a belief they shall never attain it while they
live;) but they so run that they may attain, and have the true hope in them,
which they that have, are purifying themselves as he is pure, that is their
hope, as John said, He that has this hope in him, purifieth himself as God is
pure, that so, Even as he was in this present World, so they may be also: and
so here the Substance will come, and will cause the shadow to flee, and will
answer all thy Doubts and Questions far beyond what Arguments can do.

And again, the many doubts and disputations that have arisen about the
Resurrection, as thou come to be faithful in the daily Cross, that does slay
and crucify that nature in thee that has resisted the Truth, and held the
Seed in bondage; as that comes to die, and to be bur^ed down in the true
Baptism into Christ's Death, thou wi^t feel the Pure to spring up in thee, and
thou wi^t be made a partaker of the new Life, and the true Resurrection, which
is Christ, and all that are in him are in the Resurrection, and in the Life;
for he said, I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that believes on me,
th^ugh he were dead. yet shall he live; and this living to God, in the Spirit
of this ^^n, is the first Resurrection, which whomsoever comes to witness, the
second death has no power over them, but they come to know the thing as it is
in Jesus, and their doubts are all answered about that also; for he that knows
a death and Resurrect on after this manner, To be dead to Sin, and to be risen
with Christ Jesus in the new Life, even while they are in this earthly
Tabernancle, before it is d^ssolv^d, such will never question their appearing
at the Judgment Seat of God after it is dissolved, but do believe it with joy
and gladness; and has a fervent hope concerning the Resurrection of the dead,
and have their expectation unto God in that matter, that he will, according to
his Promise, raise them up at the last day, and will give unto every Seed his
own Body, even as pleases him; and the Creature is not careful then about
such foolish questions and doubts, as to enquire what manner of body God will
give them, but leaves it to the Lord in full faith that he will raise them up,
according to the Scriptures: and so here all thy doubts will flee away, and are
answered with that that was before them, as it comes to rule in the Creature,
and Death that is the root and ground of them comes to be swallowed up in the
Victory of the Life.

And so, as thou seels thy part in this Resurrection, all the doubts and fe^rs
of thy own condition will he answered effectually, which cannot otherwise be
answered, but by that good Spirit of God that strives with thee, which, when it
does prevail with thee, and thou becomes subject to it, then it witnesses for
thee; for that there is a state in which there is a danger of falling away, thy
daily experience teaches thee to thy sorrow; and besides, Christ said. Every
Branch in me that bears not fruit must be cut off; and the many examples in
Scripture of them that departed from the Faith, and made shipwreck of it, and
turned with the Dog to the vomit, and the Sow to the mire, does sufficiently
prove it; and if thou do stand, it is by Faith, and thou must take heed, and
so may thou come to the Crown, and Seal, and Assurance, and an Establishment
in the Kingdom, where thou shall no more go forth, but shall have thy Souls
desire answered.

And when thou come to know this state, and to receive this White Stone that
has the Name within, thou will then be without doubt or fear, given up in the
will of God to do and to suffer all things, according to his blessed will: and
here is the true and perfect Rest to thy Soul whoever thou art, that art now
laboring in the Iron Furnace of thy own thoughts and doubts, in the which the
more thou give thy self up thereto, the darker thou art, and the fuller of
doubts; for they will beget and multiply one another; and the more thou reasons
against obeying Gods Witness in thy heart, the less able thou art to obey it,
but the little strength which God gives thee, thou confults it away, and then
when thou would be strong thou becom'st feeble; and when thou would in some
measure obey, thy own consultations stands in the way, and hinders thee; and
the more thou increasest in knowledge in this state, the more thou increasest
thy sorrow and condemnation; so that sometimes thou art ready to wish thou had
never known so much of Truth; and sometimes wishes thou knew more concerning
such a Point, or such a Doctrine, or such a Scripture, or such a Mystery, and
art apt to think, because thou art yet ignorant in some things relating to
Truth, therefore thou art the more excusable if thou be disobedient: but all,
poor soul, consider, the way to know more is to be obedient to a little v^^ch
thou have received, and then that mist and fog of thy own u^f^thfulness will
vanish away from before the eye of thy mind, for it is that which hinders good
things from thee, and make thee go daily with a burden upon thy shoulders,
and a guilt upon thy Conscience, and thou can not, in no case of thy
necessities, come before the Lord with an open face, but art covered still with
thine own iniquities; and in this state thou know neither Sabbath, nor new
Moon, nor Holy Day to the Lord; but all labor, toil and travel, and
wearisomness of spirit, till many even comes to wish an end of their days, and
yet are in great fear that the end will be worse too. Oh, how my Soul pitties
you whose state this is, and I have a great sympathy with your sorrows, and in
bowels of tender love am I drawn forth to reach out a hand to help you, as one
that has obtained mercy to know deliverances, and to witness the way of it,
and have the testimony of God in my heart to witness forth the coming of the
Savior to the poor and needy Souls, to the relieving of them, and comforting
of them; and my Souls desire is, that your bonds might be broken, and your
Souls might escape; but this I say, in the Name of the Lord, to you all, there
is no way for your deliverance but your giving up in single obedience to that
faithful and true Witness of God which stirs and moves in thee against thy
sins; and therefore wait thou to feel thy mind and will subjected thereunto,
that thou may feel thy self to be one of those willing people, in this the
day of Gods Power; and cease from thy reasonnings against thy obeying the
Truth, and from saying thou cannot, thou wants power, and when God gives thee
Grace then thou will obey, for these sayings are in vain; for though it is true
none can obey the Lord but by his Grace and Power given unto them, yet he has
made his Grace, even that which brings Salvation, to appear unto all men, as
in Titus 2.11. and it has appeared unto thee, and in thee to whom I write, and
is a Reprover in thee, and thou must turn to that that smites thee, and then
thou turns to the Grace of God; for its his Grace that strives with thee to
lead thee out of the evil that it reproves in thee, and so out of the World
that lies in the evil, up to God from whence the Grace comes; for whosoever
does give up to the drawings of the good Spirit of God that moves in them, and
in obedience thereto do deny themselves of their own wills, and lusts, and evil
desires, and pleasures, such wants not power, but feels him near them that
works the willingness first, and then the deed according to his pleasure, and
so the glory comes alone to be his; and then thou know the Mystery of the
Cross, and how it is the Power of God, which all that rejects the Cross
complains for want of: And so, so long as thou live in the Cross thou live
in the Power, and thy obeying is easy, and all things are possible to thee
through it; and as long as thou art daily dying to that which is corruptible,
thou feel the more Life, and Joy and pleasure in that which is Everlasting,
and thy desires grow more and more fervent, after a full and perfect enjoyment
of it, in the pure unity of Spirit: And those desires growing strong in thee,
it grows a lighter thing to thee to part with that which hinders, though it be
thy bosom sins, thy Delilahs and Darlings, yet all must go for the love thou
have to Truth; and such only as have this love, and continue in it, are counted
worthy to be Heirs of the Kingdom of God; for so long as any thing be hugged
and loved besides the Lord, if the Lord should manifest his Love to thee, thou
would play the Harlot, and abuse his Mercies, and cleave to thy old Lovers, as
Israel of old did, that was after the Flesh: and therefore, think it not
strange to be brought through manifold trials, that thereby thou may be purged
and prepared as a Bride for the true Husband Christ Jesus; for there is many
that desires acquaintance with him, but are not fitted for him; they must be
washed first, and trimmed first, and must put off the vile Raiment first, and
must come to know the white Linen put on; and while this work is doing, what
need of patience and quietness of Spirit is there; what need of subjection to
the workings of that holy Spirit in all things, that thou may not be setting
limits and bounds to that which must bound and limit thee in all things; nor
say in thine heart, if my trials were but so, or my exercises so or so, I could
then bear them; but rather submit in all things willingly to do and suffer, and
to be tried and exercised, even as it please the Lord to order, or suffer thee
to be tried; and in all his dealings say, with the good man, It is the Lord,
let him do what he will with thee; and whosoever gives up thus to him, though
he slay them, yet shall they live; though he wound them, yet he will heal them
again: Therefore learn patience and stilness of mind, for by taking thought
thou can add no thin^ (...) ^his work: I Remember Israel of old, who were
commanded to stand (...) to see the Salvation of God in their greatest straits,
and they were a figure unto thee; and now in the Light read thy figure, and
wait for the Substance, the true Seed, that it may bring forth peace and rest
to thy Immortal Soul, and may set up righteousness in thy Earth; which is that
I travel after, on the behalf of all distressed and afflicted Souls every
where, to whom I am a Friend and well-wisher, as one knowing their trials,
straits, doubts and besettings; and also, through the rich love of God in Christ
Jesus, do witness the delivering, answering and satisfying-Life made m^nifest
and revealed in its own Eternal Light, which lights every man; and in true
desire that you may all know the same, and in discharge of my duty toward God
and my Generation, have I sent forth this word of Counsel and Exhortation, and
do remain in my Rest with the Lord, being thus far clear of the Blood of all
men, whether they hear or forbear; and though in Bonds for the Gospels sake,
yet the Lords Freeman, waiting in patience and full assurance for Zion's full
Redemption.

^pswich County-Goal this 3d Month, 1668. Known by the name, Stephen Crisp.

THE END.

