A Babylonish Opposer OF TRUTH By the TRUTH REPROVED: AND His Enmity,
Falsehood, and Confusion manifested in ANSWER to an Impertinent Paper sent
abroad by Thomas Crisp.

IN WHICH His False Foundation is discovered, and his Building brought upon his
own Head.

WRITTEN By a Servant of Truth, and Witness against Lying and Liars, STEPHEN
CRISP.

With a POSTSCRIPT by J. Penington, and R. Richardson.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in ^

A Babylonish Opposer of Truth by the Truth Reproved.
THomas Crisp, Thou or some other of thy Party having directed a Printed Paper
to me, called* Babels Builders unmasking themselves; I have read the same, and
well considered the Contents thereof, and do find that not only a great deal of
Enmity but also of Falsehood and Contradiction is contained in it, which when it
is laid before thee in a Spirit of Love and tenderness, from one that seeks and
desires thy Salvation, it may be may have some effect upon thee to the abating
thy foolish rashness, and may bring thee to a better consideration of thy work,
which is that I chiefly desire and aim at: else am not apt to meddle with
things of this nature, having never loved Controversy for Controversy sake:
but am one that satisfies my self in an assurance of Faith in the power of the
living God, believing it will break and confound all that rise up against it as
it hitherto has done.

Now considering the time in which thou have published thy Book against us, it
seems to be the only time the Devil could have taken advantagiously to work in
the minds of people a belief of our being in a hidden Confederacy with Rome,
when many of them of the Romish Religion have by their wicked works rendered
themselves obnoxious to the punishment of Just Law, and to the abhorrence of
all good men, at such a time it is that thou renders us, the people called
Quakers, to be at least half way in Unity with them, having taken such a stride
over to them, as such another may make us meet and embrace, as in page 9. and
that our Judgment, or the Judgment which we take part with is bare faced
Popery, as in page 14. and in diverse other particulars in thy Book: by all
which thou do but show how willingly thou would have us fallen upon as
Papists, or render us suspicious both to Magistrate and the Vulgar, by thy
crooked Insinuations, as dangerous persons to the true Protestant Religion. Oh
Thomas! who has set thee on work herein, and so timed thy Book, is manifested
in the sight of God, to be the Father of Lies, with whom thou will certainly
have thy reward if thou Repent not. And when all is done of this kind that thou
and you can do, yet shall we appear in the sight of God, and in the sight of
the Magistrates, and in the sight of the men of this and after. Generations to
be in our principles and practice, and life too, at a farther distance from
that sort o^ men thou would link us to, than ever your Ranting Libertine Spirit
will lead you; and when you shall see us delivered from the evil you thought to
bring upon us, and see our Testimony shine over the heads of Papists and you
too, and your selves (for want of the Divine Assistance of God's power) crowch
and truckle under, as you do already to the Spirit of this World, then will you
gnaw your Tongues for very pain, and the reward of your Enmity will come upon
your own pates, with a witness. Therefore if there be yet a day, seek Mercy and
forgiveness at the hand of the Lord before he comes to render his Vengeance
upon you for all your hard Speeches, which ungodlily you have Spoken, Written
or Printed against the Lord and his Heritage, a People that fears his Name, and
walks in the Light of his Day everlastingly, upon which your Clouds and Smoke
can no more bring a Night.

In the next place, I take notice of thy deceit and falsehood in this little
Book which is grounded upon a Lie, viz. G. F. G. W. and A. P. have not denied
the matter of the Barbados Paper, they have not given one word of Reproof to
it; nor disowned the principles therein contained, etc. now how notorious false
this is every unbiassed Reader may Judge; First, They declare that this
(meaning the Matter or Doctrine of the Paper) would be the way to bring them
all from the measure of the Spirit in their own particulars. What Thomas, is
this not a word of Reproof? is this not a disowning the Principle? It Is well
said, A Liar had need of a good Memory. Again, all are to give up to the
Uuniversal Spirit of God in their own Particulars; what, is not this a
disowning the Position of the Paper neither! Again, as to Subscriptions to an
outward tie be above such things, etc. we desire you would stop this Paper for
going any farther, etc. What! not a word yet of Reproof or disowning in all
this, but G. F. etc. must bear the reflection of this Position, as if he and
they had been the Authors of it; Has not thy Enmity betrayed thy Reason, and
robbed thee of common Justice and Ingenuity too. Yea, but thou objects, page
11. that they are more afraid of the publication, than ashamed of the matter,
etc. This seems to me a very silly Allegation, for if the Paper were so much
according to G. F's, etc. minds, yea, the very product of what we had labored
for a long time; what should make G. F. or any of us afraid of the publishing
of it? has that ever been our practice, to be afraid to publish the
Conclusions and Agreements of Friends and Brethren, who in the name and power
of God have concluded and agreed upon things that we knew would stand and be
justifiable by God's Witness, though we knew they would meet with opposition
from bad Spirits; What needed G. F. etc. care what bad Spirits or Apostates
would say of the Paper if they got it; but only because we knew there was a
ground given them so to say; we use not to be afraid of what you can say to us
or our Papers, which are wrirten in the true and Divine Authority of the power
of God which is over you all: but let them go abroad freely for you to say your
worst to them, as knowing that barking at neither the Sun nor the Moon can keep
them from shining: so that it must needs appear that it was the dislike that G.
F. etc. had to the Paper that caused them to desire the stopping of it more
than for fear of the use you could make of it; and yet that fear not wholly
excluded neither, knowing that you might justly reflect upon it in some things
which we could not stand by.

But thou seem to be highly offended at the kind and friendly language of G.
F. etc. in their Paper by which thou shows how little savor thou have of the
Spirit of a true Christian or Christian Minister, who is to restore such as are
overtaken in a fault in the Spirit of meekness; what if they said, We know you
mind the best things, the Letter being written to a Body of people, dare thou
say that none of them do mind the best things? Yea, they were that very day
minding how they might keep down such loose Libertines that had for a long time
sought to disturb the peace of their Christian Society; though they might
possibly exceed in the method of proceeding with them by the Arguments or
influence of some few among them. What then, must they all be unfriended and
denied Brotherhood hereupon, and be written to as wicked and ungodly, after
(...) to quote my words though fallaciously, to make a seeming opposition
between us, that I said the Paper was not only ill worded but ill meant; my
words did not reflect at all upon the Subscribers generally, as thou quotes
them; but upon the Contriver or Drawer up of it, who ever it was that I feared
it was not well meant in him or them, and I am still of the same mind, and it is
my desire, and the desire of us all that every Friend may keep in a sense of
the measure of the Spirit of God in their own particulars, that in that they
may feel their Unity one with another, and with one another Testimonies.
According to the ancient Doctrine Preached among us from the beginning, and
those that keeps in this sense feels what flows from the Universal Spirit of
Truth, and receives it in their own measure* from a sensible satisfaction in
themselves, and not from an Implicit Subjection or blind obedience, as thou
enviously intimates we aim to set up; and if it should come to pass, that a
thing should be declared from the motion of the Spirit of God, and that some
particular Friend does not presently have that sensible satisfaction in himself
concerning the matter, what then? do you think that the measure of the Spirit
in himself will stir him up to oppose it, and War against it, surely no; but it
will teach him to wait in quietness upon God who is the opener of the
understanding, and does by his Spirit bring his People to the Unity of the
Faith, but that sort of men, whose Quarrel thou have so much espoused, are a
sort of heady unruly Opposers of themselves, fierce despisers, who malignes the
prosperity of the Truth, and those that labor in it, aspersing both them and
their Labors with Nicknames and reproachful Speeches, and bloody and
murderous Insinuations and Suggestions: And must all this be fathered upon the
Spirit of God! Oh horrible darkness! well may it be said night is upon you, and
blindness is happened to you. Are not you ashamed to plead for the Primitive
Doctrine of Truth as it was practiced amongst us in the beginning, that every
one should keep to the measure of Light and Grace given them of God, when thou
sees before thy eyes, whether J. P. and M. P. are come, and may see if thou will, whether thy self, and many more of your loose Libertine Associates are
coming. What did the measure of the Grace of God in the beginning teach a
Conformity to the World in Ribbons, Lace, Pendants, Bowings, Complements,
Paying Tithes, The 8th Month, 168(...).
and Marrying with the Priests, etc. Thomas Crisp said that he has paid Tithes
lately, and that the Spirit of God did or might allow him to pay Tyther, or
Marry by a Priest; And that by the same Spirit of God another might b^ required
not to pay them, or not to do the same things.

This Thomas Crisp spoke the day and year abovesaid; and consented to be Writ
and Printed; and took a Copy of the abovesaid words with him. Witness J. Field,
Jun.


Did the Spirit of God in the beginning teach such an industrious improving of
failings and weaknesses; such a raking for evil things, such heaping up
Accusations, such rendering of them that fear God obnoxious both to reproach and
sufferings. Nay, nay Thomas, this is the Spirit of the World entered in another
appearance, which had thou and you been faithful to the real Gift and Grace of
God, it had preserved you from it.

Now as concerning that disingenious manner of reflecting, which thou
frequently uses, I hope thou will meet with a sufficient Reproof in thy self
for it, and therefore shall not say much, only to put thee in mind, to see if
thou would be so dealt by: As where thou supposes our meanings, and then
Comments upon thy own suppositions, as that G. F. etc. means by the Universal
Spirit, that Spirit that set up these Orders and Meetings; and I take it to be
meant the Judgment of the ruling Party or Foxonians, etc. And he seems to place
more virtue and power in conforming to his Orders of Women's Meetings, than in
all Faith and Fruits of the Spirit, etc. Have thou here dealt like an ingenious
Adversary (I say not a Friend) nay many that never knew Truth would scorn such
a kind of treating us, but Enmity is blind, I pray God if it be His Will, open
thy eyes to see thy own state, and then thou will know that G. F. etc. have
deserved to be better treated at thy hands.

But one thing I marvel at, and that is, How this Author T. C. should labor so
much to make his Reader believe G. F. etc. their owning the matter of the
Paper, and renders the consequences thereof to be the very Doctrine and
Government that he has labored to set up, upon which he has fixed so many
heinous names as clear Evidence of Apostasy and Ambition, p. 7. This unlimitted
power the Pope's Yoke, a making men slaves and Vassals, p. 9. Arbitrary
unlimitted power, implicit, blind, and unacceptable obedience, p. 10. the
Judgment of the ruling Party or Foxonians among the Quakers, p. 11. and so on
to the (...) page and then he tells his Reader a quite contrary story and
acquits G. F. etc. again of the matter charged, and tells us that G. F. differs
from the subscribers of the Paper. G. F. etc. have born their Testimony against
their subscription, for G. F. etc. says this would make the belief which is in
the Light and the measure of the Spirit in their own particulars, not one with
the Universal Spirit, etc. and then T. C. adds as an Amen to G. F's Position,
Indeed so it does. Could any one that had read this Book have thought the
Author should before he had done have Acquiesced with G. F. etc. and cleared
him of his high charge he had laid; and he who had so endeavored to make Folk
believe that the Answer was but a seeming one, an Answer for fashion sake, for
fear the Paper should be published, not one word of Reproof, no denial in Fact,
but G. F. and they all one in the judgment and sense of the Paper, etc. I say,
who would have thought the same man should tell us that G. F. etc. differs from
the Subscribers, and that in a most Capital point of their Paper, and tells
them their Paper would make the Faith and the measure in which it stands, not
one with the Universal Spirit, etc. It Is well Truth's come, though almost at
last; who is Babels Builder now Thomas? Have not thou played the foolish Woman
that pulled down her House with her own Hands? but as if thou had herein
spoken too much Truth, thou seeks to bury it again with three or four palpable
Lies in the next Page; First, G. F. seemingly disowns the Paper, yet owns it
too. Secondly, The whole scope of their Letter is, that they are only
dissatisfied with the wording of it. Thirdly, That we have nothing against them
we call Opposers, but their not submitting to G. F's orders without Conviction.
Fourthly, That G.F. etc. does not at all contradict the principles in the
Paper, only the subscribing of it, p. 13.

Is not this strange work that thou should set thy name to such notorious
untruths and things wherein thou thy self shows every body how to contradict
thee too. First tell them that G. F. etc. differs from the Subscribers, and
wherein even in such a principle of their Paper as thou differs from them in,
and indeed I too: and then to tell them that G. F. does not at all contradict
the principles, etc.

This is even sad work to see men grope at noon day, that might have enjoyed
the light of the Sun as well as others, if they had kept the love and fear of
God in their heart so I intend not at present to bestow much more pains about
this matter, the foundation upon which it was built, being discovered to be
Enmity and Falsehood, the Structure cannot stand. In the mean time, glad should
I be that thou, or some of you, may sink down into Coolness and remember whence
you are fallen and falling, and what a Spirit is entered you that is refreshed
at any thing; that is a grief to the Innocent People of God, and are fretting
and grieving at that which is our greatest Joy and Comfort, in which many among
you sometime did partake with us, I say, when ye see what Spirit this is that
has prevailed upon you, it will make you wish you had not wandered from the
Flock, nor from the Shepherds Tents, though it may be when it may be too late.
Therefore you that have time, prize it, the Lord's Day is come, and His
Judgments hastens, and he will decide the Controversy.

As for S. E's Paper which thou puts in the end of thy Book, we look upon to be
more a fruit of a general Enmity against us as a People, than any particular
grudge against S. E. for we see how thou Improves it; and at last with a
bold-faced Lie charges us generally with it, saying, These things are Covered,
Excused, or Justified. Who among us have either Covered, Excused, or Justified
S. E's Paper: I never knew any, nor I believe thou neither; but on the
contrary, diverse did Testify against it before it was done, and after it was
done, before it could be outwardly known whether it would be true or no; but he
did give out such a Paper to his own hurt and sorrow, and to the grieving of
many, and it serves thou and you for food and nourishment, and for a Stone to
stumble upon: But alas, what will you gain by it, do you think to make this
Conclusion: S.E. was mistaken, and wrote that as the Word of the Lord that was
his own word became his own burden. Ergo, G.F. and the People called Quakers,
are led by a wrong Spirit, and will and must fall. Do you think this would not
be sorry arguing if turned upon your selves: but I let it pass, and leave it to
your better Considerations; and seeing thou have published E. S's Letter to J.
S. in which the offense lies. Here follows his own Testimony against himself
and it long since, which though I know it will not satisfy those that seeks
occasions of stumbling, yet it may be a help to the simple in heart, and a
warning to all that may be tempted in like manner.

AS I was sitting Waiting upon the Lord, on the 29th Instant, these things rose
in my Heart, That I should acknowledge my Offense to all the Brethren in
London, and thereabouts, and Bristoll; and to all the Brethren North and South,
that have been Witnesses against the Spirit of Separation; and am to let you
know that it does truly Repent me, and sorely grieve me, that you that do bear
a faithful Testimony for God should have any Prophecy thrown at you, which I
spoke to John Story in an angry Spirit. I do therefore acknowledge, as I have
signified in my last Paper, about two years ago, that I have had little Rest
day nor night at times never since I spoke these words to John Story [That it
was the Word of the Lord, that he should Die that year] which were mine own
words: And soon became my Burden, and were spoken in the Dark, and Darkness
was upon my Spirit, and so under a strong Temptation which I was suffered to
fall into, I not standing in the Council of God; for which I bore God's
Indignation. But I soon saw I should have gone to him in a Meek Spirit, to
beseech him to be reconciled to his Brethren. But I do Judge and Condemn that
hasty Spirit, that set time for his Dying. And called it the Word of the Lord.
And do desire this may go as far as where ever it may have a service for Truth.

Barbados the 30. 3 Month, 1681. S. E.


POSTSCRIPT.
THomas Crisp having once before appeared in Print, with a like evil design of
opposing the Testimony of Friends, in the beginning, to the order and practice
now observed among the Faithful, and having therein curtailed a Testimony of my
dear Father Isaac Penington, and published that as Edward Buroughs his Vision,
which is questioned whether he ever wrote, as well as that he confessed he had
never seen or read that Book of my Fathers, out of which he presumed to render
him to the World as inconsistent with Friends now, but taken it from the credit
of another, no less disingenious than himself; I say, he having been thus
gross, it had better become him to have taken shame to himself for his former
headiness, partiality, rash and confused work, than to have put forth another
Pamphlet, reflecting upon such on whom the care of the Churches is laid, as
Babel Builders; especially seeing his unfairness and unworthiness was both
privately represented to him, and he publicly required, to make good; First,
That ever Edward Borough wrote that or any such Paper, as he took upon trust
as his Vision. Or, Secondly, That that cited by him was Edward Buroughs 's
entire Paper. But that he instead thereof should take no notice of these
reasonable demands, as if they were not material, or he not bound to make good
what he had said and declared to the World, but continue in his wicked work of
smiting God's Servants and Messengers, and traducing their Writings, greatly
detects the meanness of the man's Spirit, and the little regard he has to deal
justly and equally with those he opposes. Yet he can have the face to bring up
the names of E. B. and J. P. again, with the same tendency as before, viz. to
render their sense different from their Brethrens present practice, and
particularly their directing to the Light in our own Hearts or Consciences,
inconsistent with the unlimited power, which he says is given to Men and Women
Meetings, as may be seen, p. 9, and 12. of his Book styled, Babels Builders
unmasking themselves, etc. which if by E. B. and J. P. he means Edward
Buroughs and Isaac Penington, let me say, is no less than a manifest
Perversion of their Writings; as well as that I demand of him to prove, how it
can be deducible therefrom, and that the rather for that I my self know, that
my Father has delivered to the contrary both by word and writing, and never
saw or heard any thing contradictory thereto come from him: And I have also a
Manuscript of Edward Buroughs by me, written in the Ninth Year of the
publication of Truth in London; wherein, after he has given account of the
first Preaching of the Gospel in that City, he declares that the Men's M^eting
there was set up in the Name, Power and Wisdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
that he had given them Power and Authority so to do: And afterward speaking of
the Women's Meeting, says, It was in the same manner ordered, in the Authority
of Christ to be continued, for such and such services; and concludes. These
things was I moved of the Lord to write forth, in the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, for the Service of Truth; and in the same Name, Power and Authority,
etc. do I enjoin the free and perfect observation of the things herein
signified.

Now in as much as it is clear, that neither of them did oppose a man's being
guided by the Light, to his concurring in practice, with that good order and
government now Established in the Church of Christ, but acknowledged the
benefit and necessity thereof, (so that as by the Spirit none can call Jesus
accursed, so none that is really led by the Light, can under pretense of being
directed thereto, As the only Guide and Leader, call that accursed, or the
Order and Edicts of Men, which the same Light, Grace and Truth, that convinced
at the beginning, brings forth in the Church, whether immediately or mediately
through Instruments) will not this man then be found a false accuser in the day
of the Lord, that would insinuate the contrary? Let him consider it, and have a
care, lest by his continual smiting against God's Servants, and
mis-representing them, he be at length given up to a Reprobate mind: for is it
not grossly wicked thus elaborately to endeavor to render men otherwise than
they are in God's sight, and take those indirect means to prove it as he did by
my Father, as never to read his Book, and see whether it were so or no, but
only take it upon trust from his Adversary, and upon his sole Authority commit
it to the Press: and then instead of reclaiming it, go on in a like evil work?
Surely, as a man, I would have wiped off such a blemish before I came in Print
again on such an occasion: but with regret let me say it, I have seen too many
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, and their very innocent Image lost,
when prejudice and envy has filled them against the Lord's People, and fallen
short of what is civil, generous and noble among men, and become too much like
the brute Beast that perishes; which indeed is not pleasant to behold, though
a just reward upon such as would lay God's Heritage wast.

This is what I thought my self more immediately conce^ned to observe, having
been already engaged in detecting the (...) unfairness and injuriousness, and
being the person that demanded of him to make good what he had said, relating
to E. B. and my Father J. P. both publicly in Print; (of which I gave him one
into his own hands) and Privately in converse, who am known by the name of

John Penington.

A few Notes on some Principal Passages in Babel Builders; and another Pamphlet
subscribed, Test T. C*
BAbel, etc. Page 7. Their Reasons against such Subscriptions are, lest
Opposers should make ill work with it; not that they are against the substance
in it, etc.

Note, It may be observed how ambiguously he names Reasons, and yet making but
one thing the Reason. Whereas there is great difference betwixt one Reason, the
only Reason, and all the Reason, and all the Reasons; the least Reason, and the
greatest Reason. Because God and his Prophet said, Because thou have made the
Enemies of God to Blaspheme; 2 Samuel 12, 14.
was he not therefore otherwise displeased with what David had done.

Consider how much ado Friends in Barbados had, and opposition; they took this
course. As King James did with the Oath of Allegiance, to distinguish Papists:
and the Scots with the Covenant, to distinguish Malignants, as they called
them; so in this these did, aiming at the best in the general, whatsoever the
Worder or Worders of it might do in the particular, which it is probable S. This
was writ before S. C 's Answer.
C. believed, but not that he believed it was ill meant in the General, by the
whole quarterly Meeting. Which Error in them, through ignorance or shortness
of in-sight, as well as foresight, G. F. etc. taking care to convince them of,
in the first place wisely renders them docible and attentive, by showing them
how they mist their aim, in rather giving the Adversary just advantage against
themselves thereby, than getting thereby the advantage they expected against
their Adversaries. And shows them how: so much against their want of foresight
of the effect, as one reason of it, which T. C. makes all the reasons, Then
having prepared their minds thereby as a Preface, there is an entering into the
Matter it self, and showing their want of present clear in-sight into the
nature of the thing. There follows other reasons, as from the Effects. First,
That it would bring them from their own particular measures. Secondly, It would
cause an Offering of a blind Sacrifice, which could not be received among
themselves. Thirdly, Neither in the wilful Opposers of them. Fourthly, A plain
Affirmation and inference therefrom, viz. therefore all are to give up to that
in their own particulars. Fifthly, The effect of that, viz. Unity and
Fellowship, which is a receiving strength. For all things, (even in nature)
desire Union, to gain strength thereby; which is contrary to giving up and
weakening by subscription, and tying below, a blind Offering, as is said. But
the Unity and bond of the Spirit is above that; a natural bond (in the Divine
Nature) and clear and voluntary joining for mutual joy and comfort. So that
Sixthly, Here is a clear distinction of the two Writings, viz. that above, and
that below; one Earthly, the other Heavenly. Seventhly, Proved by the Saints
Testimony in the Gospel, who were led by one Spirit, to see their names written
in Heaven. Eighthly, From the absurdity and contradiction appearing in the
action, as arguing a contrariety of things of the same kind and nature of the
particular to the general in the same Spirit. Ninthly, The impossibility of
Union of that of a contrary kind and nature in those that are erred from the
same Spirit. Tenthly, From the general rule and Apostles Testimony and line,
the new creature in the particular to keep to that to have Unity. Eleventhly,
From the Offense, in not answering the measure in the convinced. And Lastly, in
the Opposers of it, and errers from it, who would make a bad use of it, as this
Opposer does: who passing by all the other reasons, makes this only their
Reasons. Thereby making it an occasion to publish it contrary to promise, if it
was disowned; which is as clearly done in these Twelve Reasons as Spiritual
things can be expressed, which is by words borrowed from sensible things, as to
the outward ear: which with the other two these deaf Adders stop. And like
perfidious persecuting Papists make what use they can of Confessions, thereby
to deliver up to the Secular Powers, to execute their own Spiritual revenge and
malice, here intimating to them, page 7. That we, like Papists, hold that our
Meetings cannot Err. For ^^ereby is pointed his first Horn in his Dilemma, or
Horned Argument. But he rather confides in his other sharper pointed Horn, to
Goar us as Papists, in making us one with them, in condemning and persecuting
conscientious Dissenters and crying blind obedience; and endeavors to make
blind men believe, that our reasons against it are but one. And so 12 reasons
but one reason, which they are very blind indeed that cannot discern. And the
destroying beast rages, and shakes his head, because the Apostles did not lay
waste and unchurch the Churches of Asia, Galatia and Corinth, etc. Because they
had a few things against them; as G. F. etc. had one thing against a Church in
Barbado's, in not taking a right course for their not suffering bad Spirits,
But nevertheless calls them Brethren, 1 Cor. 15.29. with Chap. 1.2. and 2 Cor.
3.2, 3.
as the Apostles did, and Saints Sanctified; who a little mitigated even the
offense of the Jews that delivered Christ to death, saying they did it through
ignorance, Acts 3.17. And these are not in this commended nor magnified, as he
says p. 7. Unless he will make that mittigating, Act. 3.17. a magnifying. And
herein he, his Owners and Abetters act not only as Persecutors and Papists, but
as Atheists, Enemies of God, and Ranters; as if they should say, God and his
Prophets (as in the Scripture before, 2 Samuel 12.14. as also in Amos 3.2.) did
not dislike the greatest wickedness and mischief (as Hypocrisy, Idolatry,
Murder, Adultery, etc.) in it self, Gualter on Amos.
or in its own nature: But only because the Profession of Religion would be
evil spoken of thereby (because the Prophets gave that reason) and not that he
hated all their Iniquities, as he testifies elsewhere many times. Deuteronomy. 16.^2.
Isa. 5.14. Mal. 2.16.
As now we hear profane Scoffers at Religion mocking; as if all our Disowning,
detesting and grieving at Miscarriages of some among us, is only because it is
known to such as them; and all were done only in Hypocrisy, that relates to
Religion; so do these in this, And show themselves to be for Recording and
publishing Miscarriages, but not Condemnations of them and Repentance, unless
to pervert them, as appears here by this of Barbados in the beginning, and that
of S. E. in the end, and would Entitle Churches to them, whether they will or
no, and particulars too; as here he goes about to persuade Honest people (as he
calls them) of other Titles, as to Religion, to whom he seems to appeal, as
appears b^ ^is Preface. And p. 9. possesses them with strange apprehensions of
the Pope's Yoke so uneasy for England; yet denis he ever read the Pope gained
it in Temporals, to make it seem worse than Popery, and himself a sure finder,
who never found that England groaned under the Pope in Temporals,; does he not
see it, nor feel it neither, can he pay Tithes so freely? How light and easy
he makes the Pope's Yoke seem; to make that, he make ours seem heavy: Grievous
Imposer! And how could the Pope's yoke wherein he gained not, Book of Mart.
Senseless Gainsayer! Did he not gain King John's Crown interdicting the whole
Land, which was Proverbially called, The Popes White Ass, bearing all he laid
on it. But whose Ox or Ass has been taken away by any of our Meetings, that he
finds to make such Exclamation? Who have been wronged or defrauded by them,
more than by Samuel the Servant of God, 1 Samuel 12.3. 2 Cor. 7.2. 1 Cor. 6.2.
by whose hands yet his Righteous Law was administered; or by the Apostles, who
yet said Saints may judge the lest things, as well as the greater; and yet not
thereby making them chargeable with acquitting Persecutors in their violence,
as this man does our Women's Meetings, as without Precept, President, or Law
(which, he says, the Papists had.) And again, where can he charge them with
taking any thing Violently from any against Law? Blood or Goods? or incited the
Magistracy to do it, as the Papists, and he and his, by the tendency of such
publication at this time especially have done? But if he mean: (for he writes
Ambiguously and Confusedly, as his Precedent has done) that there is no Precept,
President, nor Law for Women's Meetings, but against them. I would ask him if
those Prophecies imply not all, and Scriptures in the Margin, Zach. 12.12. Joel
2.26. Acts 16.13.
when well considered, and the Deaconnesses among the Primitive Christians, and
where are those against them, viz. Precept, Precedent, and Law against our
Women's Meetings. And seeing he compares the effect of their Authority to the
sufferings of Protestants by the bloody Papists. He may find in the Works of
William Tindall, that eminent Protestant Martyr, and Translator of the Bible in
several places, what authority he yields them, which I shall in short direct
him to, as in his Answer to Sir Thomas Moore, Title [ Elders.] And against the
Popish Prelates, etc. where he shows Paul's Prohibition to Women, not to be
Universal. And farther says, That they may Bind and Loose, Baptize, Administer
the Sacrament, nay Teach, Rule, that Histories say, since the publishing the
Gospel, they have Preached, etc. And he may find in the Book of Martyrs Contin.
that a Women's Meeting was Persecuted by Papists. At Vienna, in France. Judge.
4.4. 2 Chr. 34.22 2 Kin. 22.14 2 Samuel 20.18
And he may find in the Scriptures, that God by a Woman has Counseled,
Persuaded, Taught, and Judged a High Priest, Captain, King, and Nation; for as
Tindall Notes, They have Wisdom as well as Men, and because they have it in
particular, have they it not therefore congregated? will he Argue so? to
oppose, G. F. etc. saying the Spirit of God in the Particular and in the
General are not contrary: Or will he argue, that because the man of sin has
sat in the Temple of God, therefore the Spirit of God must not: nor Rule in and
Govern his People and Church? lest he be like his Enemy? And from the
Supposition, deny the Position; We deny the false Judgment and Violence of that
pretended Vicar of Christ, but not therefore the true Judgment of the Spirit of
God in his Church, which the Protestants call the Vicar of Christ (in
opposition to the Pope) to whom in truth, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
not in pretense, they with us, and the Primitive Christians, exhort and are
exhorted to submit, in the Particular and in the General both as one, and not
opposite, as this man would make it, as he himself is to others, and to himself
also, in his Babylonish confusion; Hab. 1.3.
being one of those that raise up Strife and Contention. And how should it be
otherwise, but that (as it is said, Proverbially, Conveniet nulli, etc.) he that
disagrees with himself, cannot agree with others? For in his Test he
confesses, That God by his Spirit in the Heart does, Page 14.
or may, forbid Tithe; and that may be required of one which may not be
required of another; Yet calls them [YOUR OWN ORDERS AND TRADITIONS] which,
says he, I fear you take more care for the strict observation of, than the
Truth in the Heart; and calls them Civil Rites, yet supposes one may really,
for Conscience sake, refuse to observe them. He should have said Legal Rites,
or Rites of the Levitical Law, which is abolished. Does he make all to be Civil
Rites, and to be observed, which the Civil Law Commands. In Cod. Theodos. and
Justin.
Then many Superstitious and severe Rites of Will Worship and persecution, are
to be observed, which I suppose he will not yet own. And then if the Civil Law
should command all the six hundred Jewish Rites, which the Rabbis reckon,
whereof Tithe is one, they ought all to be observed as well as Tithe. And is
Marrying with a Priest a Civil Rite too? and not the Liturgy, and Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church? Do not Priests claim the right of it by the Liturgy
and Trent Council. How will he produce the effect without the Cause? and was
not Superstition the Cause of bringing in Tithes again in the Apostasy? Does he
find any Civil Rite of them in the Apostles days? Will not this Liberty lead
at last, Page 14.
if followed, as into the confused Language there opposed to ours, and into
Hills, Holes, and Gills, in hard times, so also into Bell-houses and Cells, as
well as Cellars? And will it not be said then as much as now, That may be
required of one, which is not of another; and the same Spirit of God may allow
it in one, and require the contrary in another, setting the Spirit of God in
opposition to it self? Gross Ranterism, and Author of Confusion. Do ye then
confess your selves as Jews and weaker Brethren, and of tender Consciences that
cannot so soon and easily part with your ancient Worship and Services, once
commanded or allowed you by the Law of God? Or do you eat Herbs, fearing lest
Flesh may be offered to Idols? If Tithe be a Civil Rite with you, you pay them
neither as a holy Religious Divine Rite; nor to avoid feeding on an old
Idolatrous Rite. Where is your Precedent, that not Tything is such a Rite: A
Rite (if you will call it so) that the Apostles and Primitive Christians
observed, as is by all confessed. And who are you Precedents to pay Tithe, to
avoid that old Rite. A Rite or Ceremony, signifies an old manner (not purely
Negative, somewhat Positive) or some outward circumstance wherewith things are
accompanied or done. Do Tithes accompany Civil things, or Religious? Do not
even all Impropriators hold them with condition to maintain a Priest? See my
Book against Tithes, p. 16, 69, 70, 71. J. Seldom 's Hist. of Tithes, p. 293,
398, 402.
A great Antiquary and Lawyer by his search observes, that there is no other
Original thereof in the Monuments of England; and he calls them a Sacred
Revenue (as do the Scriptures, Numb. 18.31, 32.) But instead of fear of old
Idol Sacrifice, it is to be feared you pay them, lest old Idol Sacrificers
Sacrifice you. A Professors Book was written about nine or ten years ago to
retire and hide themselves, because the Lord by his Spirit in his People called
to it. You join with that Spirit, we with that which stands in the Testimony.
Are these like to be one, calling to contrary things, in the same time and
state of things, Isa. 22.12.
Weeping and Piping; Fasting and Feasting? And in differing state of particular
persons, there may be said to be a winking at and forbearance more properly
than a calling to or allowing (as in time and state of ignorance, infirmity,
etc.) And are you strong Oaks, Ogs, Romans 14.22. Luke 11.48. See W.R. 2 part p.
43.
Hills and Bulls of Bashan (or Confusion) such feeble Weaklings in your own
eyes? (Nay, by an allowance you must mean at least an approbation.) And thou
that payest Tithe, carpest at our proper plain Speech, Marrys by a Priest, Art
thou in thine own sight one of those weak scabby Sheep (or a Tower,
Strong-hold, or Ensample to a Flock) mentioned in that spurious, Apocryphal
Parroting Pamphlet, as it may be called till better proved, which thou set
out by thy authority Test T. C. (can say that by thy own knowledge) under
the name of E.B. as the Monks in the Apostasy did theirs, under the names of
those they call Fathers. John 10.4. Phil. 3.16, 17. 1 Pet. 5.3.
Do not thou draw back, not draw on, by thy Doctrine and Example? And what
pleasure then will the chief Shepherd have in thee, who leads his Sheep. And
Paul bids follow him, as he Christ; and Peter to be Ensamples to the Flock.

R. Richardson.

AND seeing thou appearest as an Advocate to defend the Cause of J. W. J. S. W.
R. etc. Hear what they say against thee in the Case of Tithes in W. R's Book,
Fourth Part, p. 39. viz. As to Tithes, we can in Truth say, 'twas never so much
as in our Hearts to strengthen any in the payment thereof, nor yet to weaken
the Faith of any, having a Testimony in our Hearts, that Tithes, as at this day
paid, are Antichristian. Who are now in the Babylonish Confusion? Is it not
among your selves? You would do well, before you appear against us in Print, to
be reconciled among your selves. And does not J. S. and J. W. deny Friends
Marrying by the Priests; and thou say, The Spirit of God does or may allow
it, which appears to be thy Principle by thy practice? art thou not in
Confusion thy self?

The END.
ERRATA.
Page 13. line 9. for two read too,


