AN ANSWER To a late BOOK, Entitled, a Discourse Concerning the Inventions of
Men in the Worship of GOD. By William Lord Bishop of Derry.

WHEREIN The Author's Arguments against the Manner of Public Worship,
performed by Protestant Dissenters, are Examined, and by plain Scripture and
Reason, Confuted; his Mistakes as to matters of Fact, Detected: And some
Important Truths concerning the Spirit of Prayer, and External Adoration, etc.
Vindicated.

By ROBERT CRAGHEAD Minister of the Gospel.

Job 17.9. The righteous also shall hold on his way, and he that has clean
hands shall be stronger, and stronger.

Jer. 15.19. Let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them.

Jer. 30.2. I will give them one heart, and one way.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1694.

TO the Right Worshipful the MAJOR, the ALDERMEN, and BVRGESSES, of the City
of LONDON DERRY, and of the Presbyterian persuasion.
THese Animadversions on the Bishop's Book, are Dedicated to your Service, the
Author and his Labors being yours by Right; Though this piece of Service be
extorted, having no apprehension of appearing in this manner, had it not been
the vindication of Truth, the undeceiving of strangers, and your uneasiness to
find our manner of Worship exposed, vilified, and represented to the World as
pure humane Invention, and therefore nothing but Will Worship; and yet worse,
being made as black as Heathens, denying due Adoration to God, and casting his
Word out of our Assemblies: a rare notion that all the polite Masters of most
exuberant Invention, had never the brow to brand our persuasion with, before
this Author appeared, who will be singular.

And since we are now set out to the world as worse than the most degenerated
and barbarous people that ever called themselves Christians, and thereby a
Clothing of wild Beasts forced on us, as on many primitive Christians to inrage
their Devourers; its presumed none can offend, if by a just Vindication we
strip our selves of this covering, that the World may see we are no Savages.

However this may appear impar congressus, as not standing on even ground with
the Bishop; yet Truth being on our side, and he the first Aggressor, there is no
fear but the God of Truth will thoroughly plead his own Cause: Therefore lest by
the Author's bare naming of many Scriptures, whether pertinent to this purpose
or not, any should be seduced, or vainly think his Book cannot be answered by
any of us, who are arraigned and provoked, or that we are haters of Light, and
unwilling our deeds should be made manifest, whether wrought in God or not, or
that we are ashamed of our manner of Worship, or that we have not the
confidence to convince gainsayers, and so suffer Truth to be betrayed by
unreasonable silence, and lest that strangers, or our succeeding Posterity
should be impressed with Calumnies for Truths; tho* I be the very weakest of my
Brethren, yet being in some special manner concerned in this place, and a Book
sent me by the Author, am willing to try the strength of his Arguments,
trusting that God will appear to make the issue and result of this Debate
conducive to the further strengthening and establishment of many fearers of God,
who desire to live and die in the Old Good Paths, and therein to find rest to
their Souls.

Yet I do freely declare to you my Worthy and Beloved Friends, that the
constraint of putting such a Book into your hands, on so mean a subject,
ministers to me some melancholy reflections; for if ever any of my poor
Labors had been worth your notice, after I had finished my course, it would
been more comfortable to me, if the subject had engaged a Discourse, of things
more profitable and spiritual than mere Jejune forms: knowing the people of
London* derry, being as a Firebrand plucked out of the fire, stand in need of
more suitable entertainment, how to make due returns of gratitude for so signal
deliverance, than to be treated with a Dispute of Forms, so remote from the
power of Godliness, and the present due sense of Works of Wonder, done for this
people, which we are apt sinfully to forget, tho peremptorly required to take
heed, lest we forget the things which our eyes have seen, lest they depart from
our heart, all the days of our life, but to teach them to our sons, and sons
sons.

God has much to require of Derry, more than other places in point of
Gratitude; August. epist. ad Marcell* speaking of gratitude, piously says,
what better thing can we bear in our mind? express with our lips? record with
our Pen? hear more joyfully? consider with greater pleasure? or what better
fruit can we bear than gratitude?

It cannot therefore be unseasonable, to put you in mind of these things, though
ye know them; or to improve this occasion for the help of others hereafter, to
retain a due impression and regard to the great Works of God, there being no
people in these Kingdoms, whoever had more special and immediate appearing of
Sovereign Dominion, Wisdom, and Mercy, than this City, if it be considered

That after vast numbers of people were frighted into it as a place of refuge,
not knowing of one another, nor what they should do when within these Walls,
having no Ruler but God alone, as of different persuasions, so of different
sentiments, many consulting a Surrender on Terms as most rational, some few
resolved against it (of which I was an Eye Witness) many secret enemies within,
corresponding with those without; a potent Army under good Conduct, closs about
the City; Streets, Lanes and Walls, often as in Fire, with multitude of Bombs,
and many killed in Houses* provisions failing, and Soldiers almost starved, yet
sallying out, waxed valiant in Fight; when their Enemies strong and full, found
not their hands, but fainted in the day of Battle; when not only men's bodies
were faint and sick with Famine, but hope of relief being deferred, made their
hearts sick also; yet when weakest, were animated to that heroic resolve, to
put a period to their own miseries, and perpetuat their loyalty by fighting to
death, when they could stay no longer within these Walls, rather than yield: I
know of one fainting man, who said, within these three days we must either
surrender or be dead men by famine; but was smartly taken up by others,
replying, he was not worthy to live who spoke it, and while there was Dog or
Cat in Derry, yet remaining, there should be no surrender; and further told
him, you shall eat that Hat on your Head ere we yield. At this time the City
was all over Deaths and Corpse, and rare to see a Mourner for the nearest
Relation, when buried, many fainting on the Streets for want of the Fruits of
the Earth; the City then appearing for no other use but to be a common
Sepulcher to them all: nothing remained, but hope against hope, only by the
good Providence of God, there were many Godly praying persons in the place,
both Citizens and Strangers, who were acquainted with calling on God, long
before they came into this distress, these prayed without ceasing; and the
hearer of Prayer, did graciously so far condescend unto some of them, that
during the whole Siege, and in greatest extremities, were comforted by the hope
of deliverance in Gods due time, and some of them being Ministers, of what
persuasion, I shall not so much as name, that all may join together in due
praises, not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory, for
thy mercy and for thy truths sake: for when humane strength was gone, then did
the God of mercy appear, and his own Arm brought Salvation, sending food to the
fainting remnant, through the Fire of their Enemies on every side, they gnashing
their Teeth and melting away: and thus by Divine Power and Mercy, the place of
Deaths, was made a beginning of Reviving, and Life to the whole Nation.

Who, at this day out of their graves have it to say, they came out of their
graves as the remnant of Derry; when this people were as if their bones had
been scattered at the graves mouth; who could have answered that question but
God? can these dry bones live? who but he alone could put flesh, sinews and
skin upon them, and breath Life into the dead, making them to stand up as an
Army so terrible, that their besiegers were frighted from their Walls, hastening
far away, when nothing pursued them but the Terror of God?

Shall he remember us in our low estate, and we forget him? shall he to whom
it is a humbling of himself to behold the things that are in Heaven and earth,
look down and send from above, drawing us out of these depths, and we not so
much as look up to the hand doing it?

Has God appointed Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks, when there was no
strength to defend our walls of Stone and Clay? shall it be said of this City
thou have forgotten the God of thy Salvation, and have not been mindful of the
Rock of thy strength?

Has God frustrated and rejected the confident expectations of our enemies?
has he given them wine of astonishment to drink, and taken the cup of
trembling out of our hand? has he amuzed and confounded them with his works of
wonder for Derry? insomuch that some of the besiegers being surprised that the
gates were not opened unto them, and afterward finding that the flower of their
Army fell before these walls: said, God does fight for Derry, but blasphemously
added, God was not just in so doing, this I can instruct by some of deserved
reputation, to whom it was spoken, and yet alive.

Oh! that men would Praise the Lord for his Goodness, and for his Wonderful
Works; and not be as these who Sung his Praise, but soon forgot his Works: For
Preventing of this Forgeting, Chrysostom. on Math* Homil. 25. Says, that great
Mercies and Deliverances should not only be Carefully committed to the Memory,
but actual Praises Rendered to God for them every day; and the same Author on
Tit. Hom. 1. If Says he, we receive a Benefit from a Friend, or if we but know
he has spoken a Seasonable Word for us, with what Warmth of Love do we
Remember him. How much greater love should we have to God, who has delivered
us from the greatest dangers.

It is great Mercy to be helped of God to understand the Depth of our Mercies,
for some are Preserved who were not ready to Die, and if by the Furnace we have
been in, our Dross be not Purged away, and we become not a Refined People meet
for the Master's Use, we have reason yet to fear a Furnace more hot, where God
in his Justice may Melt and leave us. Let us therefore fear him and his
Goodness, let us Live to him, who made us Live in the Jaws of Death; let us
take Pleasure to speak of his Mighty Acts, and testify our Gratitude by an
Holy, Just and Exemplary Conversation, provocking one another unto Love and
good Works, walking by the same Rule, minding the same Thing, as men of one
heart and one way.

Our Gracious God has not only Delivered, but put severals of you in Places of
greatest Trust, and Honor in this City; and as by the Grace of God ye have
happily begun, so go on in the strength of the Lord God, by your Authority and
Example, to promove the Power of Godliness, and the public Good of the City,
Ministering Justice to all of all Persuasions Impartially (which I know to be
your Principle) and to maintain by all Laudable Means, Peace, Love and Concord
in the Place; that so all the Inhabitants may find you a Blessing from God, and
that the whole City now raised from it is Ruins and Desolations, may Flourish
in all Godliness, Righteousness and Felicity; is the Prayer of

Much Honored, Your Servant in the Gospel. ROB. CRAGHEAD.
London. derry. April 18 1694.
The BOOK now under Consideration, Is Entitled, A DISCOURSE Concerning the
Inventions of Men in the Worship of GOD; But after Perusal appears, A
Discourse for the Inventions of Men in the Worship of GOD.
THE whole Scope being a Tenacious Defense of such Inventions and Commandments
of Men in the Worship of God, as he has no where prescribed in his Word, nor
are warrantable by the general Rules of Scripture, and such Acts of Worship
maintained, as are forbidden by the Word of God; and these only accused as
guilty, whose conscientious abstaining from such Inventions, has occasioned
their sufferings for many years.

By this Araignment, the Author has cast himself into some Labyrinths, out of
which the Egress, may not be so easy as the Ingress, nor so pleasing to his
Friends, as if he had employed his Pen some other way, since by his Discourse,
Dissenters are necessarily engaged, to discover the firm Foundation of their
Principles, and practice in the Worship of God: and the infirmness of all the
Author's Arguments said against them: Whereby some by a more explicit
knowledge, may be fully fixed and determined, to the Communion whereof they are
now Members.

INTRODUCTION.
THE Author begins his work with a Scripture so awful, and apposite, that it
would have been a singular help to his memory, if the same had been written on
top of every Page, before his Book had been filled up, the words are;

Mark 7. 7. In vain do they worship me, Teaching for Doctrines the Commandments
of men, this obliges every man who has a concern for his Soul, to examine the
Worship he offers to God, whether it be such as God has instituted, etc.

Ans. All this is good and necessary, wanting nothing but due observation, for
all of us should testify the veneration we owe to so important warning from
the Mouth of Christ. Let us come then to a fair Trial, who are most guilty of
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men, and what he offers according
to reason shall be admitted, whether it breath a Spirit of meekness or not,
which is rather desirable than discernable in his Book.

The Author comes more closs to his Work, Page 3, and there places two sound
Positions, first in these words,

That it belongs only to God to give Rules how he will be worshipped. The 2d,
That the Holy Scriptures contain the Revelations of God's will concerning his
Worship.

Ans. I can desire no more of the Author, but that the Superstructure be fitted
to these Foundations, they are so sure, that God willing I shall stand by them,
to the end of this Discourse: But if he who asserteth them be found going off,
or building Hay or Stuble upon them, let him not take it ill if I help his
memory as occasion offers.

3ly. His Inference from these two, viz. That from these two we may reasonably
infer, that it concerns us to keep as close as we can, to those directions
which God has afforded us in his word, without adding to, omiting, or altering
any thing he has there laid down, for since God has vouchafed us a certain
direction for his worship in the holy Scriptures; It Is to be supposed, that all
ways of worship are displeasing to him, that are not either expressly
contained, or warranted by Examples of holy men mentioned therein.

Ans. This also is found; provided always that what is said of the examples of
holy-men be duly cautioned, for all the examples of holy-men mentioned in
Scripture are not obligatory.

Some of them being ^ad even in the matters of God; as Peter's dissembling for
fear of the Jews, here was a hurteful example of an holy man, for Barnabas was
carried away with this dissimulation. Some of them affected Preheminency,
disputing who should be greatest: these are no warrands for us to do the like;
seeing we are to follow them, but as they were followers of Christ: again, some
of their practices were by extraordinary gifts, wherein they are above our
Imitation: Some of them were by special direction hic and nunc, for avoiding
offense, as Paul's circumcising Timothy, such was his purifying of himself in
the Temple, according to the Ceremonial law: these practices were not patterns
for other holymen, though contemporary with themselves, nor do the practices of
any men oblidge others, without either some antecedent or concomitant evidence,
that it is the revealed will of God, such practices should be followed;
otherways men should be Idols to us, making them Fathers of our Religion, in
which respect we are to call no man Father.

Page 3d. The Author distinguishes worship into either inward or outward.

Ans. The subject in hand requires more distinctions of worship; as into civil
and Religious; for many worshipped Christ on earth, with civil worship, only as
a great Prophet and fame in the world, intending no Divine Adoration: next
Ceremonial worship should have also been distinguished from Evangelical; for by
Levitical worship, Sacrifices, the observation of feasts, diverse washings were
required, which by the coming of Christ are abrogated; these being carnal
Ordinances, and some better things provided for us: our Savior principally
requiring such worship, as is in Spirit and Truth, not excluding external
Adoration as it is required.

Page 4. We have a Description of inward and outward Worship; The inward
Worship of God, consists in the inward Homage and Subjection of our minds to
him; the outward consists of such acts and duties, as serve to express this
inward subjection of our Souls, or that promote, increase, or contribute
toward it.

Ans. I pass the Description of the inward, but the Description of the outward
Worship is unsound, and of dangerous consequence, and had been easily helped,
if the Author had said it consists of such Acts and Duties, as God has
appointed for his Worship; but according to his Assertion there is an open Gap,
made for all the Humane Inventions that the fertile imagination of man can
devise, providing he but think they will serve to promote, or contribute to
inward Homage; thus the Papists have brought in most of all their Idolatry, and
Superstitions; and others may do the like, if they but apprehend what they do,
may promote inward Worship. Here my Author goes off his Foundation, that the
Scriptures contain the Revelations of God's Will, how He will be Worshipped;
and if I were of the Author's Judgment, declared by this Description, I would
never have put Pen to Paper against the Inventions of Men in the Worship of
God; for it is vain to open a wide Door for them, and then forbid men to come in.

Page 4. We must remember that it is in these outward Acts, that we are more
immediately concerned as public Worshippers.

Ans. I do not take the Authors meaning to be so bad as his words, in what is
here asserted, supposing the sense of his Words to be, that men disputing of
Worship, they are more immediately concerned in outward Worship than inward; for
certainly as acting Worship we are most concerned in the inward Adoration of
the Soul; as Christ has taught, that the Father seeks such to worship, as
worship him in Spirit and Truth.

The last thing in the Introduction is the Distribution of Worship into its
parts.

Praises, Prayers, Hearing, Bodily Worship, and Celebration of the Holy
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of CHRIST.

Ans. This Enumeration is not sufficient; for why, the Sacrament of Baptism is
omitted, no reason is given, but the Author intending to Treat on no other
Heads, but such as he has named, I shall pass it, though other substantial
parts of Worship are also left out.

CHAP. I. Of Praises.
PAge 6. The Author does forthwith fall upon the offering up of Praises to God
by the use of Psalms, and for its Authority quoteth 2 Chronicles. 29. 30. Hezekiah
the King, and the Princes, commanded the Levites to sing praises to the Lord,
with the words of David and Asaph, and they sang with gladness; and Ephesians. 5.
19. and Col. 3. 16.

Ans. To all this we agree, knowing it our duty to praise God by singing the
Psalms of David.

But Page 7. Though the Scriptures recommend to us singing of Psalms, yet in
some cases they allow us to say them:

Ans. 1. Who doubts but we may Read or Say Psalms, either in public or
private: But, 2ly, This saying Psalms, is not to turn out singing of Psalms,
which is the ordinance of God: I often read of singing, but no where in
Scripture of saying Psalms: what induces the Author to make so great a trouble
to himself and his Reader, I understand not; only I know Papists have a way of
Singing, and muttering Psalms, and Songs in their Worship.

But I find our Author resolved to prosecute this Saying instead of Singing;
for,

Page 8. It Is certain the Word of God recommends to us Psalms and Hyms in
prose, etc. and as to the Hebrew Psalms it is evident they are Poetical, but the
Poetry of them consists rather in the style, and manner of expression, than in
any certain measures or Verses. And afterward, we cannot find that the Church
in our Savior, or the Apostles time, did sing any thing in Verse, but we are
sure they sung Hymns in Prose So that we have no certain Scriptural Warrant for
the use of Verse or Meter.

Ans. The Author has raised a Dust, which himself cannot blow away again, and
all for saying in place of singing, in a most unnatural, harsh, rustic manner;
whereas we are all provided with a more decent, melodious manner of singing the
Praises of God.

But he says, God has recommended to us Psalms and Hymns in Prose.

Ans. God recommendeth to us the singing the Psalms of David, which at God's
direction were in Meter, and therefore should be Translated into Meter; that
they should be fit for singing in our Language, as they were sung by the people
of God in the Hebrew, that being their Language.

The Author confesses the Hebrew Psalms were Poetical, but not Verses or Meter.

Ans. This is a contradiction, and as much as if he had said, they were Poetry
and not Poetry; for Poetry is an Art of making Verses, by its Definition:
Therefore to say that Poetry is in the loftiness of the style, and manner of
expression, is without color; if Poetry want its numbers, pauses, and
measures; which are called its feet, it falls, and is no more Poetry,
therefore the Hebrew Word properly signifies a Psalm, (...) Cantus poetica
art concinnatus ab amputare praecidere, wherein pains is taken to have it
fitted for Melody, by cutting off what will not serve the due measures of
Verse. 2. The frequent directing the Psalms to the chief Musicians, for public
Worship, is an undeniable Evidence that the Hebrew Psalms were sung Musically;
The Melody of their singing was so pleasant, that strangers required to hear
their Songs, not for the Matter, but for the Music, and were it necessary,
many Testimonies might be adduced for confirmation of this, that the Hebrews
did sing their Psalms in Meter, Gomarus in prefat, ad lyram Davidis, Quoteth
Hieron: in prefat ad librum Job: and Philo Jud: and many others for it.

But the Author cannot find in the Primitive times they sung in Verse.

Ans. Because they did sing Psalms, therefore they sang Verses, the Hebrew
Psalms being formed by the direction of God in Verses to their hand.

But says he, we are sure they sang in Prose.

Ans. But his saying so cannot make his reader sure, one argument would do
better than if he should say twenty times he is sure, yet upon his own
invisible assurance, he affirms that we have no certain Scriptural warrant
for the use of Verse.

Ans. Our Scripture warrant for singing Meter is plain, because first the
Psalms of David in Hebrew are Meter. 2ly. We are commanded to sing these
Psalms. 3ly. Finding them in Meter they must be translated into Meter, that we
may sing them with understanding in our own language, and melodiously as the
nature of that Duty requires.

Page 9. He forms an objection, that I think neither worth his forming, nor
my answering, viz. That some may fancy Verse was not in use in these countries,
and therefore they sang in Prose; to this he answers, that Poetry was then at
the highest perfection.

Ans. The Author begs the question, as if it were granted they sang all in
Prose, which we deny; but 2ly. If Poesy and Music was so much in fashion they
had been the more to blame, if they rejected a decent, and practiced an
indecent, and unnatural way of singing; And the next is no better, viz;

If the Holy Ghost had thought Verse necessary, he would have inspired some
holy-men to translate the Psalms into Verse.

Ans. There is no need of extraordinary inspiration when the light of Nature,
and it is improvement by industry, can reach the end; therefore this argument is
not Cogent; and his next objection is worse, viz.

That the Prophets of the heathen wrote their Prophesies in Verse to their
gods: We know not but this may be a reason, why the Holy Ghost thought fit that
such as were inspired by him should decline that way.

Ans. He says we know not, and may be, but are these arguments? to what
purpose should any man answer may be? Yet 2ly. his may be is too far,
especially considering that God had already directed the Psalms of David to be
Musical; and next, because this is an unwarrantable encroachment upon the
reasons and thoughts of the Majesty of God.

The Author comes next to responses in the Praises of God Page 10th. As the
Scriptures prescribe, as the use of Psalms in the Praises of God, so they
encourage us to offer these Praises by way of responses or answering, for this
we have the best example can be desired, even the blessed Angels and glorified
Saints, so Jsa. 6. 3. And one cried to another, Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord
of Hosts.

Ans. The Author mounteth too high in seeking a Seraphick pattern, for though
they be glorious Spirits, yet the argument after examination will be found but
a glorious flourish; and for this particular Scripture quoted, I shall make it
appear there are no responses in it; first in the Original he to him though the
translation wordeth it another; yet there is no more in the Text but (...) hic
ad illum. one cries, but no other answers; therefore there is no response,
2ly. Responses amongst men require some difference in the matter; but all that
is cried is one thing in the Text, no variation of a word. 3ly. Responses
require speaking Successivly, one after another, but there is no such thing in
this Text, this then prejudgeth the reader, to name a Text for probation of
that which nothing in it can prove, and so impose on inconsiderat People, as if
all were made good by Scripture* 4ly. Though there were alternal Praises by
Seraphims, yet Seraphick Praises are no pattern to us, for Stated worship on
earth, as God willing, shall further appear in answering to the Next.

Page 10th. And the Church triumphant through the whole relation is (I think)
constantly represented praising God after this manner so Rev. 7. 9. the
multitude that represent the people, cried with a loud voice, Verse 10th.
Salvation to our God which sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb: And then
the Angels and elders, who represent the Clergy perform their part, Verse 12th.
saying, Amen: blessing and Glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and
power, and might be unto our God. They are represented the same way, answering
one another, Chap. 19. 1. I heard agreat voice of much people in Heaven,
saying, Alleluia, this they repeat, Verse 3. etc. The reader may peruse the
place it self.

Ans. 1. The Author supposes without any Proof, that these Scriptures speak of
the Church Triumphant; but judicious commentators, and many of them judge, that
both these Scriptures relate to the Militant Church; in the 7th Chap. They are
Praising for the begun deliverance from Antichrist: Though the expressions of
their praises be in Heavenly terms, such as the Prophet Isaiah frequently uses
of the Gospel Church, as Isa. 35. 10, 25, 8, 51. 11. etc. Because these praises
shall be perfectly accomplished in Heaven; and it is observable, that in the two
last Verses of that 7th. Chap. There are six future tenses that these things
shall be, whereupon the English Annot. commenting on the 17th verse. of that
Chap. (he shall feed them) expound them thus, he shall provide for their Souls,
until he bring them to full Happiness, so the Dutch Annot. give the same sense,
so Marlorat quoting many Protestant Divines, so Mede, and Durhame.

As for Rev. 19. That the state of the Militant Church is understood there, the
Text it self makes it undeniable; for after the overthrow of the seat of the
beast, other enemies are found gathering together with the beast, and making up
Armies to fight against the Church, as is clear from verse 19th of that Chap.
Therefore this cannot be the Church Triumphant: the Author has an easy custom
of quoting many Texts without explication, or pondering, whether such Texts be
real proofs of what he asserteth, or not.

2ly. There being such grounds to judge that these two Chapters quoted by the
Author, speak of the Church Militant, then let it be considered, when or where
could that multitude meet together of all Nations, whom no man could number for
stated Worship, is this imaginable? Next, seeing they could not meet for stated
Worship, then there can be no Pattern drawn by it for our Worship* and

3ly, Not being stated joint Worship, it is impossible there could be Responses
by Nations at so vast a distance.

If the Author will have it so, that the Triumphant Church is meant in these
places, though Armies be found gathering against Christ and his Church, though
it were so (which cannot be granted) yet the Heavenly Host of Angels and
glorified Spirits, whatever be their manner of Worship and Adoration, it can be
no Pattern to us; because

First, There is no Temple there, Rev: 21. 22. I saw no Temple there, that is,
such a Temple as is on Earth; though there be another kind of Temple there,
called God's Temple, that glorious Habitation above, but no Temple for such
Worship as we must have, and there being no Temple, therefore no pattern for us.

2ly, It has pleased God to give us a complete Pattern for his Worship
already, so that we need not say, Who shall go up to Heaven for it.

3ly, The Scriptures contain the Revelations of God*s Will concerning his
Worship; but the Scriptures do no where reveal this, that the Worship of Angels
is to be imitated by us; Do you know how to place your selves about the Throne?
Have you Crowns to cast down before the Divine Majesty? Have you Palms in your
hands and white Robes? Men have need of sobriety in drawing Arguments from
Symbolical, or Enigmatick Theology.

4ly, The Laws for their Worship is not only unknown to us, but they are not
Laws to us; and therefore it is but presumption to make them Laws to our selves.

5ly, Where Responses are used amongst men, the answerers are restricted and
limited to such a Form of Words, and must wait for one another, their Clergy
must begin; Who can imagine that the multitude does lead Angels, Clergy and
all? as here the Author makes up the Choir; yea, Christ himself one of the
number, as the Author places him, Verse. 5. of Chap, 7 For it is Christ that
speaks out of the Throne; and this of it self does make the urging of
Responses from these Scriptures the more dangerous.

6ly, All then that could be made of these Scriptures is, That blessed Harmony
amongst all the glorious Inhabitants, in Praising God, each directing Praise to
the same Divine Majesty, one part not depending uppn what another shall speak,
as is the manner of Responses amongst Men.

7ly, Neither our Savior, nor his Apostles, did ever institute nor practice
any such manner of Worship by Responses, though the Apostle Paul was caught up
to the Third Heavens, yet he brings us no News out of Heaven, for this new
manner of Worship; if he saw it, yet it was not expedient or lawful to acquaint
us with it. I grant it is storied of one Ignatius, a Popish Bishop (not the good
old Ignatius) that in a Dream he saw the Angels Worshipping by Responses, and
this being published, the Novelty pleased the vain humors of many; and so
Responses came in fashion.

Object: But this manner of Worship is recorded, and are not all Scriptures for
our instruction?

Ans. All Scriptures are for our instruction I grant, but for our imitation I
deny* many things are written, whereby we should be instructed, that we cannot,
and should not imitat: Some Angels pour out Vials on the Earth, some on the
Fountains, and Rivers; But is this an Example for you to perform the like?
Others cast down their Crowns before the Throne, but sure you cannot imitat
this, you will not cast down your Crowns till you get them: It Is far wiser work
to be laboring for a firm Hope, that they shall at length be put on our Heads.

Page 11. I make no question but this is taken by allusion from the manner of
the Churches praising God on Earth.

Ans. 1. But his Reader may still question it, for all the Author says,
saying and proving differ much. 2. Consider this is again begging the Question,
as if it were evinced already, that Worship by Responses, is the instituted
manner of Worship on Earth, which we still deny, seeing no Probation. 3ly, Can
it be warrantably asserted, that Angels must be beholden to us for Instruction,
how to Adore God in Heaven? 4ly, The Author thus runs himself into a vicious
circular Argumentation; the Angels learn of us, and we learn of them, and so
round.

Ibid: And there is nothing in it, but what is agreeable to the Command of
Teaching, and Admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs,
which supposes every one to have a share in them, either by turns, or bearing a
part.

Ans. 1. The place quotted is Coll. 3. 16. I question not but the Author knows
the Original Words of that Text, where it is found the words one another is
(...) your selves, and so it is Translated, Ephesians. 5. 19. Speaking to your
selves, taking Instruction to your selves by Psalms: What can this make for
Responses. It Is said in the same Scripture, Let the word of Christ dwellrichly
in you, and singing with grace in your hearts: But who is the answerer? 2ly.
That therefore it is done by turns, or bearing a part, is said, but no
appearance of proof. 3ly, The Author supposes this singing to be public, but
grant it were, yet he who sings is to receive instruction to his own Soul by
the Psalm he sings, and bears his part when he sings jointly with others;
and by this good example teach one another; but the Author goes on.

It was common for one to sing, and the rest to hearken for their instruction.

Ans. 1. That but one sang in public Worship, cannot be instructed, but the
contrary, that they sung joint Praises to God, otherways it had been no public
Worship. 2. If but one sung, and the rest hearkened, where then was the
Response? with what color can this be made an Argument? but his next Argument
will be stronger if he can; therefore,

Page 11. 1 Cor. 14. 31. For ye all prophecy one by one, that all may learn
and be comforted; Prophesying here, as we may find from the 26 Verse of this
Chapter, includes Psalms as well as Doctrines, Tongues, Revelations, and
Interpretations, and the praising God one by one, or by turns, amounts to
praising him by way of Responses.

Ans. 1. There are no Responses here directly or indirectly, the plain scope of
the place is to establish due order in Church Assemblies for preventing
confusion, and for Prophesying one by one, is no more but successively to
deliver their Prophesies, not to affect Precedence in uttering their Gifts, or
disturb one another, and so cause confusion in the Assembly: To call this
Responses is a mere violenting of Scripture. Consider 2ly, He who had a
Prophecy, had it entire by himself, no other concerned in it, until it was
uttered; the rest were to hear, but to bear no part in his work; and he who was
to Prophecy next, was to deliver what God gave him, without any relation unto,
or dependence on what was spoken before, no intermixing of their Discourses,
where then does Responses appear? which require some co-herence of matter: But,
says the Author,

Herein they acted according to the settled Order of the Churches, verse. 33. As
in all the Churches of the Saints.

Ans. Can any man have the confidence to say, that this proves Responses were
in all the Churches of the Saints? Whereas without evident wresting of
Scripture, there is nothing of the nature of Responses found in that Text. 2ly,
This is not fair Treating of Scripture, to rent a parcel of it from the rest,
which would clear the whole: Therefore, I will lay before the Reader, that
which the Author has not set down, Verse. 33. For God is not the Author of
Confusion, but of peace, as in all Churches of the Saints. This Verse being
considered, clears the whole scope; That for preventing confusion, they
should not speak together, but each of them after another, entirely what God
the Author of the Gift had given them: Yet the Author goes away triumphing,
that here is an unquestionable Precedent for Responses; I doubt if that man be
on the Earth, that will see this to be a precedent for his purpose, except they
have the Author's Eyes.

Page 12. This way of praising God by answering one another, is the most
ancient we find in Scripture, for thus Miriam praised God, Exodus 15. 21. And
Miriam answered them, sing ye to the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously,
etc.

Ans: There are no Responses here, because first, there is not one word spoken
in this Text, but what the Prophetess Miriam her self speaks, for the women
who are with her, are playing and dancing but not speaking, therefore no
Response is made by any.

Object: 1. But seeing Miriam answered, it is therefore to be supposed, that some
spoke before her.

Ans: This will not hold, not only because the Text mentions no words of any
other; but because the Word Translated here answered, is (...) and this word is
commonly used where there is no previous words leading to any answer, as our
best Hebrew Lexicons Translate the Word, to speak or begin to speak; So also
our Savior did frequently in the Gospel, begin a Discourse thus, He answered,
where there was neither Matter nor Words relative to what he spoke, as Mat. 11.
25. etc.

Object. 2. What Miriam says, may relate to what the men sung in the beginning
of that Chap:

Ans. Responses require distinct matter, but here the matter is the same, so
that Miriam is only repeating that which was sung by Moses and the men,
repetitions and responses are quite different; It Is to be observed also, that
Miriam and the Women were in a distinct body by themselves, not amongst the men
when this song was Solemnly sung by them, for it is said, verse 20th. The women
went out after Miriam, and then the song was repeated by the Prophetess; the
Text giving no account of words by any other: So that Miriam can do no service
to the Author, therefore help is yet sought from another.

I reckon the songs, with which the women of Israel received Saul, 1. Sam. 18.
7. To be religious, and there it is expressly said that they answered one
another, and Chap. 2i. ii. Did they not sing one to another, but whether these
songs were religious or not, etc.

Ans. The words one another, is not in the original of any of these Texts, for
1 Samuel i8. 7. These words one another are set down by our translation, in a
different Character, to let all know that they are not in the Original, look on
the Text it self in Hebrew, and you will find it so: and I Sam. 2i ii. wants
these words also, all that is said by the servants of Achish, is not this David
the King of the Land, did they not sing (...) huic to him, so Arias Montanus
translateth it. But. 2ly. The Author has good reason to raise a doubt, whether
these were religious songs or not; the whole being but a civil Congratulatory
Salutation after a Victory.

Page i2. But our Author affirms it for certain, that the composure of some
Psalms discover they were to be sung in parts, as Psa. 24. etc.

Ans. The Author's certainy, gives no certainty to his Reader, But, 2ly.
Suppose some Psalms be formed in Parts it will not follow, that these Psalms
are to be sung by responses: for there is a Composure of Verses, called Versus
Amabaeus, wherein there are diverse parts (...) upon one another, but not sung
by one another, wherein diverse persons and Actions are represented, who never
have occasion to meet together for alternat singing by responses: and thus we
see how authority for responses fails the Author wherever he seek it, but at
last.

Page i3. He says, It Is obvious, that natural necessity will teach any
considering man this way of alternat singing, because if the Psalms are long as
some are, no one man's voice can hold out to the end.

Ans. What constrains you to sing so much at once? Why do you make such a
rule to your selves without any command of God? ye put Fetters on your selves,
and then there must be another invention to ease you by responses; and causing
another to do a part of your work, dividing that in Parcells, the whole of
which is the entire work of every Joint worshiper: the Author having no more to
say for responses, comes to show us authority for Instruments in the Worship
of God.

Page 13. The Holy Scriptures recommend to us the use of Instruments in the
Praises of God, Psa. 150. Praise him with Timbrel, Praise him with stringed
Instruments and Organs, etc.

Ans. I still find the Author for quoting the Scriptures he never explaineth,
even when there is need; for it is apparent he has no great confidence, this
Scripture Psa. 150. can evince the use of Instruments in the Gospel Worship,
saying, the Scripture recommends to us, and Page 16th. Our Church permits
the use, and, Page 17th. This is not Imposed on any Congregation, these
concessions not only show the weakness of the cause, but should soon end this
debate, for why should you keep up the use of that to the offense of others,
which you have no light to impose, or require?

But, 2ly. If this Scripture be your authority for Organs, then why not high
sounding Cymballs, Trumpets, and Dances, in worship as well as Organs? The
authority by this Scripture is alike for all these.

3ly. If the Gospel Church should use such Instruments, then why should poor
country Parishes want them?

4ly. We have neither direction nor practice of them, in the whole New
Testament, the use of Instruments in the worship of God of Old, was a part of
The Ceremonial law, and therefore expired with it.

Object. The use of Instruments was by the light of nature before the
Ceremonial Law, and therefore could not expire with it.

Ans. 1. The dictates of Nature, can make no man know that the sound of any
innanimate creature, can be acceptable service to God, if you abstract from his
positive institutions; yea, without institution it were presumption to offer
such manner of service unto God; Nature, I grant will dictate that our voice
and tongues, which God has given us as a glory to glorify himself, should be
made use of in his Praises: Nature also may prompt a man to use Instruments for
his own recreation, and may prove sometimes an useful diversion in time of
disquiet of mind, but it is beyond the reach of nature to know, that such noise
and sounds shall be pleasing to God, except when God reveals and appoints
it.

2. Miriam using an Instrument in the Praising of God was as a Prophetess,
therefore it is said, Miriam the Prophetess took a Timbrel, etc. And not by the
dictates of Nature, but as a Prophetess, which dissolveth the strength of the
Authors argument: It Is the more observable that this practice of the Prophetess
was not made a pattern, nor Instruments used in the Worship of God ordinarily
before the Ceremonial Law.

The Author instanceth the Praises of the blessed in Heaven, Rev. 5. 8. and 14.
2. He says no more of these Scriptures, let the reader judge as he will.

Ans. Neither the Author, nor any Christian, will think there are material
Harps made use of in Heaven; and seeing they cannot be Material, therefore they
can be no pattern for material Instruments in the Worship of God on earth, you
know no more what these Harps are, than what these golden vials are, found with
them as well as Harps, but further.

Page 13. It Is observable that the word we render, sing Jam. 5. i3. Originally
implies singing with an Instrument, and if they had not approved the Jewish way
of singing, they would not have made use of a word importing it.

Ans. The Apostles make use of the word Sacrifice often in the New Testament,
and yet are far from approving of Sacrifices now after the Jewish manner, 2ly.
The Reader may observe the same word (...) made use of Ephesians. 5. 19. Where no
Artificial Instruments can be made use of, in speaking Psalms to a man's own
heart: And the same word in the same place for singing in the heart: Now what
Instruments a man can get into his heart, let any seek for them who will, I Will
not make experiment (...).

No more is necessary in this Section, but to let the Reader know that the
Ancients of great Note in the Church of God. have testified against Instruments
in the worship of God; As Justin Martyr quest. 107. Retained only vocal
singing, declaring that the use of Instruments belonged to the Infant State of
the Church; and August, on Psalm. 33. Says, let no man betake himself to
Theatrical Organs.

It Is known also, that the use of them was brought into Christian Assemblyes in
a most corrupt State of the Church, by Pope Vitalianus, Anno. 683. Platina.

SECT. 2.
AS for the manner of singing Praises by the Author, and those of his
Communion; We are not so much concerned as to vindicate our own Practice.

Page 15. He says, they are directed to praise God every day in a certain
number of Psalms, of his own appointment out of the Old Testament, and then in
such Hymns as are recorded in the New.

Ans. As for singing the Psalms of David to the Praise of God, we know it is our
duty both in Publict and Private.

And it is to be observed, 2ly. These Psalms he acknowledges are appointed, but
the Hymns are only recorded in the New Testament, but all Hymns recorded are
not appointed to be sung by others, as the Psalms of David: therefore he has
Cautiously expressed this, the one is appointed, the other but recorded.

Page 15. Our Church has thought fit to require us with every Psalm and Hymn,
to intermix glory to the Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, etc.

Ans. These words are good in themselves, but to intermix them with the words
of Gods immediate dictating, is mere Invention of men, and done only by the
commandment of men; for it is making that a part of worship which God has not
Instituted.

2ly. Let it be observed how this does contradict what the Author himself laid
down, as a foundation to his whole work: for Page 3. It Is said without adding,
and here our Church has thought fit this be intermixed.

3ly. And whereas the Author says, this ought not to be taxed as any real
addition, but a necessary expedient to turn the Jewish Psalms into Christian
Hymns.

Ans. I know he would not have it Taxed as an addition, it is all one, as if he
had said we have added, but you must not Tax it. 2ly. The reason he gives is
frivolous, not only because there cannot be a reason, for making that worship,
which God has not made worship: but to make Jewish Psalms as he calls them,
to be Christian Hymns has no color, Christ's Authority has made the Psalms
of David Christian and fit for the Gospel Church, without such an Invention as
this: Therefore though we deny Socinianism, yet we do Tax it, for an addition in
the worship of God.

As for singing or saying in Prose, there needs no more than what is replied
already.

Page 16. He says, the people are to bear their part to sing or say by way of
Responses.

Ans. The people no doubt, are to bear their part in singing the Praises of
God, and ye do not well to hinder them by Responses; for the whole that is to
be sung Publicly is the part of each worshiper, and none of them should be
interrupted by the answering of another, but all to sing Jointly with one
accord.

There is no more in this Section that requires answer. The Author concludes
joyfully, that their Praises are agreeable to holy Scriptures; and yet just now
he told us of no other warrant for some part of their Worship, But our Church
has thought sit to require, if that be as good as Holy Scripture, let the
Reader judge? for at this rate they may bring any thing to be Worship, if they
but think it fit.

SECT. 3.
PAge 18. We are desired to compare our practice in our Assemblies with our
Bibles.

Ans. What* so great need of our Bibles for public Worship? seeing if the
Church think fit, we me may Worship without Bible authority? 2ly, It Is at our
Bibles we would be; but the Author is driving us to that manner of Worship that
we cannot find in our Bibles, I leave it to any judicious, un-byassed Reader,
if any Scripture Proof be for singing Prose, singing by Responses, or for the
use of Instruments in the Gospel Church. What he says Page 18. of our
Directory to sing Psalms, and Read Line by Line, is that which we both practice
and avow: And 2ly, To Sing so many Verses* as public Edification, and
opportunity require.

Page 18. The Author desires to observe, that he does not condemn the singing
of Psalms in Meter as unlawful.

Ans. If not unlawful, Why then so many Arguments (such as they are) against
it? 2ly, How can the Author say its* not unlawful? seeing in the very next page
he says it appears purely of Humane Invention: and the following page again,
the singing of Psalms in meter, is not the Scripture way of using them. And
page 24 It Is purely and immediately the invention of men: Is it so? even as to
acts of Worship, and yet not unlawful? Then it follows, according to our
Author, that some pure immediate Inventions of men, are not unlawful in the
Worship of God; to what purpose should he emit a Book, pretended against the
inventions of men in the Worship of God; and yet that which himself calls
purely and immediately the invention of men, is not unlawful, by the Author's
own words?

Page 20. And I question, whether all of them were ever yet sung through, in
one meeting place, perhaps not in all the meetings of the Kingdom.

Ans. Is this the Spirit of meekness, we heard of a little ago, if he would not
have his Reader believe it, why does he write and publish it? and if he would
have the World to believe it, then they shall believe that which is not Truth?
for I know Meeting Houses not far from him, where the Book of Psalms is sung
every Lords Day in order, some portion of them, I say, every Lords Day, from
the beginning to the end of that Book, tho some others use their liberty in
singing such Psalms as are most agreeable to the Doctrine then Preached.

As to what he says of the Dr. Manton's calling the Debate of singing Prose or
Meter a vain Cavil: It had been good for our Author he had been of the same
mind, I will take no further notice of this.

Page 21. The Author complains heavily of the Translation of Psalms into
Meter, saying, We have a Command to Translate the Psalms, but none to turn them
into Meter: and again in the same page, he says, it seems to give Humane wit
too great a liberty of treating the Word of God as men please.

Ans. The Psalms are Translated into Meter, because God gave them to his Church
in meter, sufficient has been said of this already, and I will not repeat.

2ly, What the Author says of the danger of Translating into Meter, does
militate against all Translations; for often many words must of necessity be
used for Translating so concise a Language as the Hebrew; and yet no wrong done
to the Text: Let the Author also remember what himself has said, page 14. That
if there be any mistake through humane frailty, not contrary to Faith, this
ought to be no exception against the use of the Translation, the same serves
also for Translating into meter, they cannot cease to be the words of God,
because they are Translated into meter, for the reasons already adduced.

3ly, The Author appears under some Grievance, as to the Translation of
Hebrew Psalms into meter; some of them, as he says, hardly doing justice to
the sense of the Text. If he be concerned in any such Version of Psalms, he
would do well to endeavor a rectification; for it has been said by judicious
persons of his own persuasion, there is need for it.

4ly, And if the Author will lay aside prejudice, and be so humble as to accept
of Relief from his Grievance, I would recommend unto him a Version of the
Psalms into Meter, practiced by us, exact to the Hebrew Text, and so exact,
that the Author may spend time worse, than peruse and compare it with the
Hebrew, wherein he shall not find varying from the Original, nor unintelligible
nauseating Expressions.

5ly, The Author is so disgusted with the Psalms in Meter, that he says, Page
21. We ought to use them as Humane Composures only, and not as Gods Word, and
so they are used by our people in our Assemblies, not as any main substantial
part of the Worship of God; but rather as a voluntary entertainment of
Devotion, and a refreshment to the people, between the parts of the Service,
etc.

Ans. This is odd confusion concerning Worship, as ever I heard, for by the
Author's words, singing praises to God in meter, is Worship, and yet it is not
Worship; I prove both from what he says: First, he acknowledges it to be
Worship, but it is not a main substantial part of Worship, then its Worship, but
not main Worship* was ever such lame Worship heard of before? Yet 2ly, Its not
Worship, but a voluntary entertainment and refreshment; that is, its a
voluntar Service, but not posted as commanded Worship.

2ly, Will the Author say that a necessary Translation of the Original into
words, intelligible by us, and in meter, according to the Original, does divest
it from the dignity, of being still the Word of God? he may as well say our
Bible is not the Word of God, because its not Hebrew and Greek, but only
English.

3ly, If the Author be satisfied that singing Psalms in meter is not Worship,
then why does he obtrude it on God on any account, for he says, page 22. That
this singing in Meter is at present in use, both with you and us: why does he
not bring forth his strong reasons to convince the Church of England that they
are all in Error, and himself only in the Right?

4. Shall men's recreations and diversions, he made stated worship to God? and
why should the poor people be imposed on? for they take it for due worship as
commanded of God.

Page 23. There is nothing but what is already answered, only two unjust
Imputations.

1. That for as much as appears, we have laid aside the Psalms in Prose.

Ans: Can the Author keep a good Conscience in Transmitting this to strangers,
and following Generations? Let the Reader therefore (if a stranger, for no
other will give it credit) know that we read frequently the Psalms in Prose,
from the beginning to the end, in our public Lectures, that we often choose
our Texts in the Book of Psalms, and most frequently quote them in Preaching,
for clearing and confirmation of our Doctrine, we are ready to give many
thousands of unexceptionable Witnesses to attest it; how then does it appear
that we have altogether laid aside the Psalms in Prose.

The next assault is, that we sing but a few Verses of a Psalm, Page 23.

Ans. The Author has brought no light how many should be sung, and they are
never like to be the more, for what he has said, seeing he neither has nor can
warrantably prescribe the quantity.

Yet, 2ly. For the undeceiving of Strangers, let the Reader know that commonly
we sing the Praises of God with the words of David four times each Lords day in
Public; and at each time commonly much more for quantity than the Author
names.

3. That for ordinary we sing these Psalms in our Families daily, and orderly
from the beginning to the end of that Book; We wish we could say as much of
those of another persuasion, and that they were taught by word and example so
to do; For in dwellings of the righteous should be heard the voice of melody
and Praise, and now being thus provoked I am free to assert, and that not at
random, that there are more of the Psalms of David sung in one of our
Congregations every day, than in the Authors whole Diocese (as his) in a week,
Churches and altogether: and it is no wonder, when I remember the words of the
Author, Page 180. In his epistle to the conforming laity of the Diocese of
Derry, wherein he says, and therefore I would advise you to make use of the
words, with which our Church has furnished you in your houses, as well as in
the Church, etc. and at more Solemn times, I conceive our Litany is as full and
proper a service as any master of a Family can desire to offer to God. Here is
no advice to use the word of God as immediately dictated by him, either in
reading or singing of Psalms.

4ly. But singing is not all our praising in Public, finding it our duty
Solemnly to give thanks to God for the great Salvation by Christ: which in our
Public worship is commonly practiced.

There is no more in this Head but what is answered already, nothing being
ommitted, that has the color of an argument, the Author concludes this
chapter persuading himself his arguments will prevail: let him please himself
with his own thoughts; only I must say, that since I begun to Examine what is
said, I have not found one argument that he can rationally expect will prevail
with any judicious reader, so that the Author by all his Elaborat discourses
hitherto, has instead of promotting his cause, done considerable disservice to
his friends in urging.

1 Saying, in place of singing Praises in public, 2ly. Responses in singing,
3ly The use of Instruments in Gospel worship, 4ly. Intermixing these words,
Glory to the Father, etc. With the immediate words of God, all which he has
exposed as naked and destitute of Divine Institution: and therefore will be
judged by the indifferent Reader, the meet Inventions of men in the worship of
God, the Author bringing no Scripture Proofs for them.

CHAP. 2. Of Prayer.
SECT. 1.
ANd if we consider what rules, directions and examples the Scriptures afford
us for the performance of this duty, we shall find, that they direct us to
offer up our Prayers in a Set and prepared form of words.

Ans. It Is necessary I premit a few things, before the particular parts under
this Head be considered: And next draw together some Concessions of the Author,
whereby he cutteth the Nerves of all his own arguments.

As to the form of Prayer observe.

First, thar some are by Divine Institution, some only by humane Authority; all
Divine forms we own and honor, but humane forms require Examination.

2ly. Forms of Divine Institution were either occasional, according to the
present Exigencies of the Church, or permanent as the pattern of the Lords
Prayer: Occasional forms of words, must be considered, whether apposite to our
State and Circumstances; as for the Lords Prayer, we judge all Ages bound to it
as a pattern, since it was prescribed.

3ly. Forms of Prayer must be considered, first as to the matter and substance,
next as to the precise words wherewith the matter is clothed, the Scriptures
warranting this distinction Mat. 6. 9. after this manner pra^ye. Numb. 6. 23.
On this wise shall ye bless the children of Israel; as to Humane forms some
Churches have been so low by the Paucity of able Ministers, that Humane
Composures were for that time expedient; as in the beginnings of Reformation,
when Priests could perform little more than read; but that is no warrant for
the continuation of such forms, when God has provided qualified Ministers for
Ministerial duties, and far less can it be a warrant for Imposing such Humane
Composures on all Ministers of the Gospel, as terms of Communion.

Next observe some Concessions of the Author, on this Head of forms.

Page 26. Having mentioned many Forms as prescribed, has these words.

Though other words might be joined with them, when there was occasion to enlarge
or vary the Form.

A 2d. Concession is Page 29. In these words from whence it appears that God
approves the use of one set constant Form of words, as long as the occasion of
repeating them is the same.

A 3d. Concession is Page. 49.

And therefore the Spirit of Prayer is the grace, the heart, the disposition,
and ability to pray, and whether it be with, or without a Form, such a man's
prayers are acceptable to God.

A 4th. Concession is Page 54.

But in as much as God has not expressly forbidden all extemporary prayers I
would not be understood by this, to condemn all such as unlawful.

A 5th. Concession is Page 51.

And to pray with this grace, is to pray in and with the Spirit, whether we use
words or no, and if we do use them, whether we reduce them into a Form first,
or pour them forth as they present themselves to our minds.

A 6. Concession is Page

When a man has not time allowed him, to reduce his desires into Form before he
offers them, he may depend on the assistance of God's Spirit.

These ample Concessions appear to me as a retreat, and full yielding the
cause, nor can I possibly free them from a contradiction to the Author's Scop
in this Chap. So that for particular answers, I have no more to do but write
what the Author himself has said, and so he is answered.

But the Author judges it fit to consider the several parts of Prayer
distinctly by themselves, such as Confession, Supplication, Intercession, etc.

Ans. What other design the Author may have for branching out of Prayer into so
many parts, and then quoting Scriptures for Forms to each part, I know not, but
if he has taken all this pains for us, it is so much labor in vain; Because
all that these Scriptures a mount to is, that God has often prescribed words;
none of us deny, who take it for an unjust Imputation, that we are against all
Forms: We are always for a Form of sound words, we are for the Lords Prayer as
a perfect pattern; we are for the Forms prescribed in the Administration of
Sacraments and for an orderly decent Form in dispensing all Gospel Ordinances,
that all be performed decently, and in due order, without confusion by
intermixtures and intercessions (as is the manner of some others,) and observe
a Scriptural Form of blessing or prayer with the Apostles words before our
public Assemblies be dismissed.

Page 26. The Author engages his probations from Scripture; all which I might
rationally dismiss with this one answer, that they prove nothing which we deny.

But least some weak or biased Reader should think Scriptures too hot to be
touched by us, they shall be particularly considered.

Deuteronomy. 26. 3. 5. And thou shall go unto the Priest that shall be in those days,
and say unto him. etc. And again thou shall speak, and say before the Lord thy
God, A Syrian ready to perish was my Father, and he went down into Egypt, etc.

Ans. The occasion of repeating these words is not the same now as then; fo
these who were appointed to speak these words, were to bring their first fruits
in a Basket, and go to that place which the Lord should choose, and then speak
these words; we have neither the Priest to go to, nor the place; therefore this
Form binds not us, as the Author acknowledges, Page 29.

1 Kings 8. 47. Saying, We have sinned and have done perverslie, we have
committed wickedness: and Da^ 9. 5. We have sinned and committed iniquity, and
have done wickedlie, and have rebelled; this, the Author says, is the same
form of words.

Ans: The Reader will see the very words are not retained, in these Scriptures:
how are they then the same form of words? seeing words are all the Debate; why
does he quote Scriptures that has not the same words.

2ly, The Author in the same page, says, other words might be joined with
them or varied.

To what purpose then is there a Dispute for the precise words of a Form, seeing
they may be enlarged or varyed?

Psalm: 51. also is urged as another Form wherein David confesses his sin.

Ans: This is one of the Psalms God has prescribed us to sing, and therefore
we sing it; but use it not as a form of Prayer, or Confession; therefore 2ly,
Consider, no man should make Murder, and Adultery, a part of his confession to
God in Prayer, except he be guilty of these sins: The Author brings it in
unadvertently, as a pattern of Confession, binding others to the same words in
their Prayers, whether they be guilty of these sins or not: yet we sing this
Psalm as a prescribed part of Worship safely, having instruction thereby.

Psalm. 78. Comes next as a general Confession of the whole people.

Ans: And what then? for we should, and often do confess our sins together to
God. 2ly, But that it should be only in these words, mentioned in that Psalm,
the Author himself does not urge; for says he, in the same Page 27. Confession
should be made to him in that manner, Deuteronomy: 26. 13. 15. Then thou shall say
before the Lord thy God, Look down from thy holy habitation, etc. and Hos: 14.
2. Take with you words.

Ans: The Author answers himself, if there be occasion, the words may be
enlarged, or varied, the same answer serves, the instance he gives from Psalm.
90.

Numb: 6. 23. On this wise shall ye bless the Children of Israel.

Ans: This Text answers it self on this wise, that is after this manner, and
so may be varied, which the Author allows.

Joel 1. 14. Gather the Elders, etc. and say unto the Lord, alas for the day:
and Joel 2. 17. Let the priests, etc. and say, Spare thy people, O Lord.

Ans: The occasion of repeating these words, is not found with us, and so the
Author dismisseth it as not obligatory.

Numb: 10. 35. Moses when the Ark set forward, said, Rise up, Lord, and let
thine enemies be scattered.

Ans: The last answer serves this also, for we have not now a moving Ark
amongst us; and therefore no occasion for repeating that form of words; as the
Author in that same page acknowledges.

Page 30. The Psalms have many prayers in them, and few of them but what are
most excellent forms of prayer, such as 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11.

Ans: The Psams of David are formallie Psalms, not prayers, whatever Prayers be
in them: why then should the Author impose another than the usual name the Holy
Ghost has given them.

2. The Author here seems to bring in the Psalms as their Liturgies for
Prayers; otherways why does he name them as the constant Liturgy performed in
their Temple, as if they had no other Prayers but Psalms, which is against
himself, Page 30. where he says, They had some certain forms of Prayers.

Page 30. The Author comes to New Testament Examples and Prescriptions.

I think it is certain, That our Savior and his Apostles prayed by a form, for
they joined in the Worship of the Temple, and of the Synagogues.

Ans: He thinks it certain, I think it not certain, and what benenefit shall
the Reader have by either of these? Probation is better than I think, and for
the reason he gives, That Christ and his Apostle, were frequently in the
Temple.

Ans: Tho Christ was frequently in the Temple and Synagogues; that therefore he
joined in their Traditional, Corrupted Worship, can never be instructed; for he
preached against their manner of Worship, as vain, and that he would then join
with a vain Worship, is worse than Gratis dictum, tho he did every where regard
the pure Worship of God.

2ly, It Is ignominious to the Son of God, to say that he used forms of Prayer;
since all forms have been prescribed for the help of weak sinners: This
fondness for forms, I see, rusheth men into dangerous precipices; for it is not
safe to cast such an imputation on him, who is the Wisdom of the Father; and if
the Author shall say, that though Christ needed not forms Himself; yet he might
use them for example to others to use Forms.

Ans: This also is said without Book; for it can be no where proved by any part
of Scripture, that ever Christ Prayed by any form, though he taught them to
Pray by prescribing them a Prayer; but did not Teach them to use forms by his
using them, nor bind them to the words of any form.

Page 31. The Author comes at last to put the matter out of debate.

Our Savior has put this matter out of all dispute with impartial men, by
prescribing a form to his Disciples, when they desired him to teach them to
pray.

Let the Reader observe a few things, before I come to particular Answer.

1. That the Lords Prayer being a Form and Pattern from Christ's own Mouth, we
judge our selves obliged to a great veneration thereof.

2. This Pattern being a sum of all we are to pray for, we judge no Prayers
warrantable, but such as are agreeable unto it.

3. We are still to pray this Prayer, albeit we use not its precise words.

4. That this same Prayer may be warrantably prayed in its express words
verbatim, is acknowledged, and that none should be offended when it is so used,
providing it be used with reverence, and duly placed in the Worship of God.

5. The Authority is so great, and the Institution so plain, that if we be not
warranted by the same Authority to use these, or other words in Prayer; then we
should be indispensibly obliged to use these very words precisely.

6. But if the same Authority allow us to use other words, though still the
same Prayer, then the obligation to the same words only cease; and none
should be offended when other words according to the same pattern, are made use
of in Prayer.

Remember also to observe the Author's Concessions already mentioned, as to all
forms of Prayer.

And another Concession in the general, Page 153. which will contribute to
clear the Subject in hand.

Yet in a controverted place of Scripture concerning the meaning of a Command
of Christ, relating to some positive duty, I take the constant practice of the
Church from the Apostles downward, to be a good means of determining the sense
of it.

The Author had done well to make the Reader understand more distinctly what he
is disputing for; if this be his Thesis, that no words in Prayer are lawful,
but the words of the Lords Prayer, let him speak it out, and hold by it; for he
often gives his Reader ground to think so by his Arguments, particularly Page
33. and 35.

These things being premised, I shall now, God willing, give particular answers.

Page 31. The Author says, For we find his way of Teaching them, was not by
directing them to wait for the impulses of the Spirit, and immediate
Inspiration: and afterward, but prescribing them a form of words, and commanded
them to use it, Luke 11. 2. And he said unto them, When you pray, say, Our
Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Ans. The Author's terming the assistance of the Spirit of Grace, waiting for
impulses and immediate inspiration, is unsavory at best; for if he mean the way
of Quakers, who will not pray, before they be previously moved by impulses, it
is not candid in him to throw this imputation on others, who disown that manner
of waiting: But

2ly, We are obliged to pray and wait for the assistance of the Spirit of Grace
and Supplications, Christ having promised to give the Holy Ghost to them who
ask him, Commanding expressly to wait for his promised Spirit, Acts 1. what ever
extraordinary Gifts were then to be given, yet the Spirit of Prayer was
included, as was found by experience afterward; so that exposing of this
waiting without due caution, is dangerous, especially in an age when profane
Atheists are ridiculing all the gracious Operations of the Spirit of Grace as
Enthusiasm, and so to have us back to Heathenism.

3. Tho we are not now to wait for extraordinary and immediate Inspiration; yet
we are to wait for the ordinary assistance of the Spirit of Grace and
Supplications, promised to all Believers.

The Author quoteth Luke 11. 2. but not Matthew. 6. 9. which says, after this
manner therefore pray ye.

It was not fair to cover this Scripture, which gives occasion to remember
another of our Authors Imputations, page 95. where he charge us with a design
of concealing Scripture. (how unjust the world knows) however, the keeping up
of the parallel Scripture, to Luke 11. is a concealing of Scripture in the very
season when it should be published: did not the same mouth which uttered these
words, say, utter also these words, Pray after this manner, are they not of
equal Authority? and equally necessary for the Reader to understand?

2. No man will say this variation in the very entry of the Institution, was
fortuitous or unnecessary; but for some peculiar instruction to the followers
of Christ, that they might understand how to improve this pattern of Prayer.

3. Therefore we owe as great veneration to the words of Christ, Matthew. 6. 9,
as to his words, Luke 11. 2.

4. Christ himself in the Institution makes a considerable alteration of the
words, which plainly evinceth that it was not so much mere words, as matter and
substance that Christ taught his Disciples.

5. That the difference as to words is Conspicuously great, let them be
particularly considered.

1 Math. Has, After this manner, Luke has, say.

2 Matthew. Has, Give us this day our daily bread. Luke has, day by day.

3 Matthew. Forgive us our Debts. Luke Forgive us our sins.

4. Matthew. As we forgive our Debtors. Luke For we also forgive every one that
is indebted to us.

5. Matthew. Has a large conclusion, For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power,
and the glory for ever Amen. Luke Has no conclusion, nor so much as, Amen.

6. The difference then being so great in wording of this Institution, it must
some way be instructive to us, none daring Impudently, or profanely to say, it
flowed from a negligent omission: That then which natively appears is, that
it was never Christ's design to limit us to bare words: Why is it delivered to
us in different words? But to show we may use different words, and keep by the
matter.

7. Whichsoever of the Evangelists a man shall follow in this Prayer, he shall
be constrained to use different words from the other Evangelist, and yet both
are the Institution of Christ; Therefore by Christ's Institution, different
words are warrantable in praying this Prayer, seeing the Institution it self is
in different words.

8. If it had been Christ's mind that only these precise words, should be used
in Prayer, then the Apostles would have used these words of Prayer, for as the
Apostle says, we have the mind of Christ; but we do not find that the Apostles
in their Prayers, ever made use of these very words, it cannot be said they
prayed none, for we have their Prayers recorded; It cannot be said that they
forgot, or were negligent of their Masters command, for great grace was upon
them all; it cannot therefore be said that they were left of God, to their
inventions in prayer, for God did shine upon them, and helped them to pray with
great success, and immediately after their praying, they were filled with the
Holy Ghost, Act. 4. 30. Yet in all these Prayers we find not the Form of the
Lords Prayer used by any of them as to it is words, though none should doubt their
keeping by the matter.

Now let the Author say plainly whether the Apostles sinned in not using that
Form of words? or if they did shake off the badge of their profession, by
omitting to use these words? For the Author calls this Form of prayer the
badge of our profession: If he say they got extraordinary help for Prayer, I
would soon answer, that the more bountieful their Master was to them, they
should have been the more tenacious of any thing concerned his honor, as a
Badge of their profession.

Add to all this our Authors Concession abovementioned, that the practice of
the Apostles, is the best way to know the meaning of a positive command; let
him now make application, for the constant manner of the Apostles praying was
by using other words.

Object. But the Apostles might pray this Form in words, though it be not
recorded to us.

Ans. De non existentibus and non apparentibus idemest judicium, that which
appears not, is to us, as if it did not Exist.

Page 32. He says, that which the Disciples desired of Christ, was not to
teach them absolutely, or in general to pray, but as John taught his Disciples,
that is to give them a Form of prayer.

Ans. All this is gratis dictum, without any proof, for first to say, that the
Disciples were so self-conceited, that they needed no Instruction from Christ
as to the matter of Prayer, but only a Form of words is unwarrantablly asserted.

2ly. That John gave his Disciples a Form of words is but the Authors
conjecture, for he might give them direction as to the matter of Prayer,
without restricting them precisely to words, as Christ himself did teach his
Disciples, not limiting them to words.

Page 33. Saying, the substance of it in other words will not answer the intent
of this command.

Ans. I have proved the contrary already, that when the substance of that
prayer is observed, the Institution is observed, though the words differ.

Ibid. We are sure the substance of the prayer is put by Christ in the most
apposite words, etc.

Ans. I am sure of the same, that there are no words better; but, I we lay not
aside these words, for we use these words, and are both constrained, and
allowed to enlarge upon these words, according to our various necessities, and
the vast treasure of matter comprehended in each petition of the Lord's Prayer:
It Is neither contempt no^ neglect of these very words, but rather that each of
these most excellent words, is as a Store for many necessary words of our own.

For the Author to call all other words Invention by way of contempt is
groundless, if he mean all other words are unwarrantable Invention, then let
him speak out plainly; and if he stand to this, then he charge the Apostles
with unwarrantable Invention in the Worship of God: then he charge the Church
of England with the same guilt, for she allows frequently other words in
Prayer; then he contradicts some of his own words mentioned already, saying,
that he does not condemn extemporary Prayers as unlawful, yea, his own words in
the next foregoing Page 33. where he says, whatever other prayers we offer to
God this ought not to be omitted, where the Reader may observe by the way, that
the Author by these words other prayers, goes farther from the Lords Prayer
than we allow, for we disown other prayers than the Lords Prayer; though we use
other words, we are oblidged still to pray the same prayer, not other prayers.

Page 34 When we take the liberty to word our own prayers we may forget some
things.

Ans. No doubt but we often forget, and so stronger Christians than we know not
sometimes, what to ask as they ought.

But, 2ly. Do not you also sometimes forget, has a Form made you perfect? Is
the repeating of these words a remembering all that is contained in the
Petitions of the Lords Prayer* and when you have remembered a part, may you not
forget what is most necessary for you to insist upon? was not the great Apostle
sensible of this, when he knew not what to ask? No doubt he knew the Lords
Prayer as well as you, it he had been of your mind he would not have been so
pinched, since the Form of words would Cure all.

3. This trusting to words savoureth too much of the opus operatum that Papists
lean to, judging the efficacy of prayer to be only in the words, and therefore
regard not what their minds be exercised with, and in the very time of their
prayers can Salute, or speak to one another, providing they get the Task of so
many words said out at length.

Page 34. He objecteth again, they who lay aside the words of the Lords Prayer,
are in danger to lay aside some of the substance of it also, particularly the
substance of that Petition, forgive us our trespasses as we forgive, etc. And
some says he publicly dispute against the Form for this very reason.

Ans. Whether men use the words or not, they are ready to forget as all should
acknowledge.

2. That which is said of some men's omitting that Petition, forgive us as we
forgive, etc Does not appear a forgeting, as it is represented by the Author,
but a Stated quarrel with the prayer it self, this we abhor as a presumptuous
challenging of the Author of that Form, and therefore disown, and Declare
against all Disputes which Reflect, or accuse any of Christ's Institutions, or
any part of them. Yet,

3. Since Forgiveness is to be sought on these Terms as we forgive others, ^t
concerns all narrowly to search their Conscience, whether from their hearts
they forgive others as they would be forgiven of God: for if this be not
endeavored, men do but pro^ane that Prayer; men should also examine their
Actions, lest by these, Malice be discovered, and so their professing to
forgive others, be found a deceiving of themselves, and Hypocrisy in the sight
of God: If I should be found Persecuting others with all the power I could, and
would not endure their Neighborhood, though sober and peaceable men, I would be
obliged to Charge my self with Malice against them, and therefore had not
forgiven them; and so could not but profane that prayer, if I did not repent
and amend.

Page 35. This prayer being given us as a Badge of our profession, a Summary of
our duty as Christians, and a Form of sound words, it is no more lawful to alter
it than lay it aside, and it would be the same presumption and hazard to
substitute other words, in stead of Christ's; and therefore the words must no
more be altered than the words of our Creed.

Ans. 1. That the Lords Prayer is given as a Badge of our profession, is spoken
without Book, it is given as a rule to direct us in Prayer; but to be a Badge of
our profession is a groundless conjecture: for Baptism and Summaries of our
Christian Religion, are Badges of our profession.

2. And since the Author understands still the Form of words, the Apostles
confute him, for they kept the true Badge of their profession, and yet used not
these very words in Prayer.

He says, this Form of prayer is a Summary of our Duty as Christians.

Ans. Where then is the Decalogue? which in many Ages has been called a
Summary of our duty; but the Lords Prayer only a Summary Petendorum of things
to be sought of God, as the decalogue of faciendorum, and the belief of
credendorum: why does the Author confound these things, which has been
judiciously distinguished in all Ages since we were Christians?

He says, it is no more lawful to alter it than to lay it aside.

Ans. We do not alter it, by enlarging upon it, the prayer remains the same,
after all our enlargments, and we return to it again and again as our fixed
Rule; but if he call that an altering the prayer to use other words, he
contradicts himself as is proved already.

Page 36. The Author's arguments drawing to an end, he gives a gentle touch to
the different words in the Institution by way of objection, but passes that
which is most material, as is observed already.

Next he appears for peoples joining of voices and Responses in prayer.

As we have the command of God, and the example of his Saints for offering up
our Prayers to him, in a set and prepared form of words, so we have the like
example for joining voices upon occasion.

Ans: 1. The Author engages this part of his work with a modest blush, passing
from the word command, and betaking himself to example, and that but upon
occasion, and yet more diminutively afterward on some occasions: adding also
that generally it is sufficient that the people join in their hearts with the
words of public prayer.

2. If no more be necessary, but the people joining in their hearts, why is
more urged? Shall we still be troubled with unnecessary Impositions? can the
Author call this an Institution of Christ? seeing Worship is sufficiently
performed without it? and not being the Institution of Christ, what name can
himself give it but the invention of Man.

3. When these occasions offer, who knows, and who determines these
occasions, whether God or men? let the Author once clear this, that we may know
what occasions he understands.

But he proves that the people joined their voices by Judge. 21. 2. And the
people came to the house of God, and lift up their voices and wept sore.

Ans. He does no more but repeat this Scripture, and so leaves it, and so shall
I; for this Text says nothing to the manner of Worship in that Assembly,
neither who did speak and order it, nor how many spoke, so that any inference
from it can be nothing to his purpose*

Acts 4. 24. They lift up their voice to God with one accord, and said, Lord,
Thou art God, etc.

Ans: The Author says, the Apostles and their Disciples lift up their voice:
On what account the Disciples of Christ are termed the Disciples of the
Apostles, I understand not, the Author has no warrant for this, being all
Christ's Disciples.

2. That they lift up their voice with one accord, is no more, but to join in
their hearts with him that speaks, as if they had been of one heart; for if
all had spoken at once, whether inspired or not, confusion had apparently
ensued, which the Apostle is against, 1 Cor. 14. 33.

Acts 16 25. Paul and Silas prayed and sung praises unto God.

Ans: This is near trifling with holy Scriptures, there being nothing in this
Text, but that they prayed* and praised together, in joint private Worship, and
what then? cannot two do this, and not speak both at once?

So Rev. 6. 10. They cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, etc.

Ans. This is yet further off his purpose, for who on Earth knows the manner
how unbodied Spirits speak to God, having neither voices, nor tongues as we
have? I weary to waste time upon such Allegations.

What remains of this Section, is for Responses in Prayer, which has no
better warrant than Responses in singing, fully answered already.

Psalm. 106. 48. Let all the people say, Amen.

Ans. Let the Author remember his own words, Page 36. Generally its sufficient
the people join in their hearts, etc.

2ly, It Is to be observed, that the Lords Prayer, according to the Institution,
Luke 11. has not the word Amen added, which the Institution recorded by Matthew.
has, so that comparing these two, its evident, that a liberty is allowed us,
as to the use of that word; yet this liberty allows no man to condemn the use
thereof, seeing the Institution by one of the Evangelists has that word
expressly.

3ly, As the people join in the whole Prayer with the Minister, so also when he
utters Amen.

Page 39. We have a strange manner of Responses from 2 Chronicles. 5. 13. The
Priests and Levites praising God, and saying, For he is good, for his mercy
endures for ever* then Solomon performed another part of the service, Chap. 6.
3. He blessed first the people. Secondly, He blessed and thanked God. And
lastly, Offered that Divine Prayer of Dedication; then follow the
Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices, Chap. 7. And then last of all, follows the
peoples part, Chap. 7. 3. They bowed themselves with their faces to the ground,
etc.

Ans: Let the Reader observe, that all these quotations are for proof of
Responses, and yet there is not one Response amongst them all; For

1. The Levites singing praises to God, can be no Response to men, nor any
color for it in the Text.

2. Solomon's solemn Prayer to God, can be no Response to men, nor the least
color for it in the Text.

3. The Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices can be no Response, to whom could
Sacrifices Respond, I must here stop my Pen, to prevent irritation, tho some
would be ready to expose the Author, by this Response, and all of them here
mentioned.

4. The peoples bowings and Worshipping God, can be no Response to men, for they
are found Worshipping only God upon the extraordinary appearing of his Glory.

I need say no more of this, it speaks for it self; But

Page 40. Answering to prayers is no legal abolished Ceremony, this is manifest
from 1 Cor. 14. 16 Else when thou shall bless with the Spirit, how shall he
that occupies the room of the unlearned, say Amen, at the giving of thanks.

Ans: 1. Let it be observed again, that the Author is seeking for Responses
from this Text in Prayer, but the Text speaks of giving Thanks and Praising,
and the following Verse also: if it be said, Prayer and Praises are one; this
cannot be, for Praises and Prayer are made two distinct parts of Worship.

2. The scope of this Scripture, considering the Context, is against speaking
in public with an unknown Tongue, and not minding the edification of hearers,
and therefore Says he the Idiot or unlearned not knowing what is Said, cannot
Join with it, by giving his amen, he cannot consent to it as Praise and
worship to God, understanding nothing of it.

3. The Inference the Author draws from this, is not native, but forced, when
he says, which shows that even the unlearned had a part assigned them in the
Christian Assemblies, for it cannot be thought that a part of Worship was
assigned to such as did not understand the Worship; and it is of such that this
Text speaks, who understood not what they heard.

4. The Author cannot prove that it was ordinary in all Christian Assemblies,
to use this word* Amen, in conclusion of their Worship, for we find it not used
in the Apostles public Prayers recorded.

Let the Reader take this which I now write as an answer to the Authors
Argument, but not pleading for the disuse of that word, Amen, either in public
or private Worship.

SECT. 2.
HEre we have a superlative Commendation of the Author's Prayers, as being in
nothing Redundant, and in nothing deficient; So that in a word, by what he
says, they are perfect.

Page 41. There is not one thing we ask of God in them, which he has not
particularly directed us to ask, or any thing for which we ought to pray, that
is omitted.

Ans: I purpose not to be much concerned at present with the way of other
peoples praying, but to vindicat our own way from in just aspersions cast upon
it; yet the Author having engaged us by such provocations, he may possibly
understand our thoughts better of his way also, before this work be finished.

2. If his manner of praying be so perfect as is given out, that nothing is
wanting, then I would understand a reason, why there are so many new formed
Prayers upon Days of Fasting or Thanksgiving? if all be complete already, what
need is there for these frequent new Forms?

3. When these new Forms are used, what does the people previously understand
of them, more than if they were all extemporary Prayers? they see them not
before they must join with them in public, this may suffice for an answer to
what is said.

Page 41. Their Prayers are altogether uncertain, and depend on the present
thoughts of the speaker.

Ans: 1. If all extemporary Prayer depend only on the thoughts of the speaker,
without any divine assistance, this is a plain exclusion of the Spirit of
prayer, which the Author in heat for forms falls into inadvertently, and
militateth against all manner of extemporary Prayer, which yet himself
acknowledges not unlawful.

2. If the Author say, they are uncertain to the hearers, I answer, let the
Author say plainly, whether this uncertainty be a sufficient Argument, that
there should be no extemporary Prayers in the public Worship of God or not;
for if the argument says any thing, it is this, because extemporary Prayers
are uncertain, therefore they should not be used, where others are to join with
them; if the Author would say, either the one or the other, and stand by it, I
would know where to find him; but sometimes I find him saying, as page 54. That
he does not condemn extemporary Prayers as unlawful, and there may be some men
able to express themselves significantly and decently ex tempore; and at other
times using Arguments against all such Prayers, as if none of them were lawful;
Who can Divine what he would be at? for he will neither have nor want these
Prayers.

3. If the Author tenaciously urge this argument of uncertainty, that being
uncertain, the people cannot join with them; and seeing the people cannot join
with them, therefore they ought not to be in the public Worship of God: I
answer still, this argument is against all extemporary Prayer in public; and
then 1. This is a condemning the Church of England, who deprive not the Church
of God of this benefit. 2. It contradicts the Authors own frequent
Concessions. 3. And is against the manner of praying in the Apostles time, when
the Apostles prayed publicly, the people were obliged to join in their hearts,
and so they did with one accord; yet they knew not what would be uttered before
they heard it: so your people know not your new Forms of Prayer, before they be
uttered in public; and when any of your Ministers pray ex tempore, the people
know nothing of it before these words be spoken, which they are presently to
join with.

4. If what a man hears in Prayer be not Orthodox, he is not obliged to join
with it.

What he has more in this Section, is answered already, only again and again
he tells the World that all he asserteth is warranted by Scriptures:
Whereunto I answer, (as he often gives occasion) that the Scriptures quoted by
him, are no way apposite to his purpose: for which I crave no better than a
judicious Reader, who will be at the pains, to review the Scriptures quoted,
and the answers given.

Last of all, he says, Our first Reformers had not retained Forms of Prayer,
had they not found such in Scripture.

Ans: This retaining, mentioned by the Author, is significant, it appears
then that these Forms were in use before the Reformation, by whom were they
used? We can know of none that used these Forms before the Reformation, but
Papists; and if the Author direct us to the Mass Book for the Original of these
Forms, which he says was retained by our first Reformers, he deserves no
reward from his Brethren, for probably many of the vulgar were ignorant of the
rise and beginning of so many Forms of Prayer, before the Author gave this hint.

SECT. 3.
WE are desired to examine whether our way has a solid foundation in God's
word.

Ans: We have done so, and find it according to God's Word, without violenting
and wresting of Scriptures, as others, who force out of them, a Rule for their
own Inventions.

Here the Author says, and here I find that some of your Writers are of
opinion, that the Spirit of prayer is given to all the Children of God in some
measure, for enabling their Hearts co conceive, and their Tongues to express
convenient desires to God, and that therefore Forms of Prayer are of no
necessary use, etc.

2. Others of you go further and affirm, that all Forms of Prayer are unlawful
to Christians, etc.

3. That the Ministers is the mouth of the Congregation, and that he only is to
speak publicly to God in the behalf of the people, and that they are not to
join their voices, but their hearts only with him.

And Page 44, begins with the first of these.

And first for that Position of your Directory, that the Spirit of Prayer is
given to all the Children of God in some measure, for enabling their hearts to
conceive, and their tongues to express convenient desires to God; I entreat you
to consider what promise or foundation, it has in Scripture, I profess to you
seriously, that upon the strictest enquiry I could make, I never could find any
such promise made to all the children of God, in the Old or New Testaments

Ans: The Author Prefaceth this part of the discourse, with a promise to
endeavor the representing of our way, with all fairness and impartiality, but
in the very entry this is forgot; for he gives not the words of the assembly
truly as they are set down by them, therefore the Reader shall have them in the
words of the Compilers.

Position, 9. So many as can conceive prayer, ought to make use of that gift of
God: albeit those who are rude and weak may begin at a set Form of prayer, but
so as they be not sluggish in stirring up in themselves (according to their
daily necessity* the Spirit of prayer, which is given to all the children of
God in some measure. To which effect, they ought to be the more fervent, and
frequent in secret prayer to God, for enabling their hearts to conceive, and
their tongues to express convenient desires to God for their Family.

These are the express words of the directory, let the reader compare the words
of the Author, with the words of the Direction, and he will find them very
unfairly represented, for they Say men ought to pray, for enabling of their
hearts to conceive and their tongues to express, convenient desires to God; but
the Author, represents them, Saying this is the position of the Directory,
that the spirit of prayer is given to all the Children, of God in some measure
for enabling their hearts to conceive, and their tongues to express, there is
Vast Difference between praying that enabling, may be given, and that it is
already given.

Yet I shall freely espouse all that the Reverend Assembly has Said, and hope
to make it appear by plain Scripture, that the Spirit of God is concerned in
the matter, manner, and the words of believers Prayers also, for the proof
thereof consider.

Gal. 4. 6. And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his son
into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.

By which Scripture these three things are evident, 1. That the Spirit of
prayer is given to the Children of God. 2. that the same is given to all the
Children of God. 3. That the Spirit of God is concerned in their words of
prayer.

For the first, the Children of God, being called sons, the Spirit of Christ
the eternal Son of God, is Sent forth into their hearts, whereby they cry,
Abba, Father; this crying Abba, Father, is prayer, which none can deny, and is
bestowed upon the adopted Sons or Children of God.

For the second, that all the Children of God receive this Spirit of prayer, is
also manifest, seeing this assistance of the Spirit is given, because they are
Children (...); therefore to all the Children, every child of God being in a
state of adoption, this help is appropriated unto him, as resulting necessarly
from his adopted State, tho the measure of his assistance be according to the
gift of Christ, yet the meanest of them are not deprived thereof, all of them
having the spirit of adoption, which is confirmed by Rom, 8. 15 But ye have
received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. So then all of
the Children of God have the Spirit of Adoption, and this Spirit of Adoption
enclineth and enableth all who have it to cry unto God.

For the 3d. That this Same assistance of the Spirit, is concerned in the words
of their Prayers, I prove from the same Scripture, because it is by the help of
the Spirit they cry Abba, father, here are words in Prayer prompted by the
Spirit of God: and if any should say that these words are but few. I answer,
they are Sufficient to evince that the Spirit of God is concerned in the very
words his Children shall speak to him in Prayer, and So our most Judicious
Commentators expound these words, that the Spirit of God concerns himself
with the very words of believers Prayers.

Here then the Reader may see all that is asserted by the Assembly, evident by
plain Scripture; and moreover a great encouragement for all the Children of
God to expect assistance to the very words of their Prayers, when God calls
them to speak in Prayer, and all this without dependence on the Words of a Form.

And let the Reader observe, that our Author appears of the same mind, by
what he asserteth Page. 5, 4. In these words there may be some men tho not very
many, able to express themselves Significantly and Decently ex tempore, and
there are some occasions that require it even in public* and on these
occasions when a man has not time allowed him to reduce his desires into form
before he offers them, he may depend on the assistance of God's Spirit.

From which words I infer, that then there must needs be some promise of the
assistance of Gods Spirit for Prayer in public, without a form; for no man can
warrantably depend for that which is not promissed by God, but we may hopefully
depend on the assistance of Gods Spirit for Praying in public, without a form.

Therefore the assistance of Gods Spirit for praying publicly without a form
is promised.

Object. If the Author, or any other Say, that this dependence, for the
assistance of the Spirit in public prayer, without a form, is but allowed at
Some extraordinary times.

Ans. We are at no time warranted to depend for that which is not promised, for
we cannot depend in faith, where there is no promise; and yet the Author says,
we may depend for it, take notice of Deuteronomy. 15. 6. The Lord thy God blesses
thee, as he promised thee, Its by promise we have a Savior, and with him all
Spiritual blessings Acts. 13, 23. Of this man's seed has God according to his
promise, raised unto Israel a Savior Jesus, there is no hope but by the
Covenants of promise. Ephesians. 2, 12. So David, found in his heart, to Pray for
the establishment of his house, because God had revealed and promised it, 2 Samuel 7, 27, 28.

Hereby also we may See where the presumption, he mentions is to be placed,
for the mantainers of this Scripturall Doctrine, have faithfully performed
their duty in making it known to the world; neither is the assistance of Prayer
by an extrordinary gift, but common to all the Children of God, as has been
evinced; and for further Confirmation of the Same assertion Condsider, Romans 8.
26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us
with groanings which cannot be uttered. Verse. 27. And he that searches the
hearts knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he makes intercession
for the Saints accoding to the Will of God.

In which Scripture these 4 things are clear. 1. That the best of Saints on
earth some times know not what to ask of God. 2ly. That the Spirit helps
their infirmities. 3ly. That this help of the Spirit is so efficacious and
prevalent, these Prayers are the mind of the Spirit, and called his
intercession. 4ly. That these prayers by this assistance, are according to God,
or the will of God.

For the first of these they know not what to ask, observe, its not said, they
know not how, or in what Spiritual or acceptable manner, but what to ask.

2. The forms of Prayer prescribed by God, were then extant, known and regarded
by the Saints; yet they knew not what to ask.

3. This ignorance what to ask, could not be as to general petitions, for the
Lords Prayer expresses all the general Petitions which we are to pray for.

4. Neither the Apostle nor any other Saints should ask any thing of God, but
what was comprehended in these general Petitions.

5 Therefore their ignorance what to ask must be, what particular mercies to
ask hic et nunc according to their various necessities.

6. Tho they did know their various emergent, particular necessary mercies,
were virtually contained in the form of the Lords Prayer, yet they thought it
not sufficient only to repeat the words thereof, but found it their duty to
have an explicit Distinct conception, of these particular mercies, their
present exigencies required.

7. The apostle and other Saints found themselves at a loss, without Divine
Assistance to discern what particular Mercies were most necessary and
Seasonable, for them to Pray for, and thereupon acknowledge, they know not what
to ask.

The second thing to be observed in this text is, the Supply of this defect by
the Spirit of God, enabling them what to ask as they ought, because he helps
their infirmities, whatever other help they had by the Spirit, as to their
trials. 2ly. Yet this helping of their infirmities, is also relative to their
Praying, as is evident by the particle (...), for we know not what we should
Pray, so that this help is a cure to their ignorance* a levamen or support, as
the word bears curing this infirmity, but the Spirit helps.

3. This help is given to all the Children of God or Saints, as this text
names them, the Apostle including himself with the rest, to restrict this help
to some eminent Set of believers were mere violence to the text, and full scope
of the place; for this help belongs to them who are Saved by hope Verse. 24.
And afterward Verse. 28. To such as love God, and are the called according to
his purpose.

4. When the Spirit helps, what they shall Pray, this is a distinct help from
the manner of Praying Spiritually with the heart, grace, desire, fervencie, for
this Praying with grace in the heart is expressed, by these words, with groans
that cannot be uttered: so that the help of the Spirit, is not only to Pray
with grace in the heart, but as to the matter of Prayer also.

5. Seeing the Spirit of God gives help to his Children as to what they shall
ask, then there is no warrant or reason to restrict this help to mental Prayer
only; but that he helps them to Pray, which way soever God calls them to
Pray, he who gives what to ask, gives also to speak it, when he requires
speaking and that the Spirit of God is concerned in the very words of the
prayers of his Children has been made out already from Gal, 4, 6. Hose. 2. 23.
And they shall say, Thou art my God Jer. 3. 19 Thou shall call me, my Father.
etc Isa. 12. 1. And in that day thou shall say, O Lord, I will praise thee:
though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away^ and thou
comfortedst me.

This is not prescribing them a form but what the Spirit of God shall prompt
them to speak to him, we speak words which the holy ghost teaches. 1 Cor. 2,
13.

The third thing in the words is that the Prayers of believers, by this
Assistance is called the Intercession of the Spirit, which should be carefully
understood, because its Christ who is our intercessor, yet the Spirit of Christ
given to all who are in him, being the Spirit of Grace and supplications, is so
much interested in the Prayers of his People, both as to matter and manner that
its called his intercession, albeit Payer be formally the act of the believer,

2. Seeing the Spirit of God is so deeply concerned in the Prayers of believers,
that their Prayers by his help is said to be the mind of the Spirit, and the
Prayer being dignified, with the name of the Spirits intercession; then it must
follow that the believer is enabled in all the necessary parts of Prayer as God
calls him.

Object. But many pretenders to the Spirit of Prayer do profane Prayer, and
utter such words as the Spirit of God, will never espouse.

Ans. That many pretend to the Spirit of Prayer who are Sensual not having the
Spirit, who will deny? we undertake no defense of such persons, but regret it
as no Small part of the worlds Sin, and misery.

2. But because there are such profaners of the holy Spirit, it does not
follow, that we may neglect and despise that most necessary assistance, seeing
God has so clearly and fully promised the Spirit of Prayer, to all his
children, and we commanded to pray in the Holy Ghost.

3 Men who speak in Prayer before others, should be warrantably assured that
God requires it of them, for if God do not call to speak in Prayer, they
cannot safely expect his assistance therein, all the Children of God are not
called to speak in Prayer publicly, their hearts may be enabled to conceive
prayer in secret, who could not do so in public, God not requiring it of them:
it were presumption to attempt that which God calls them not unto.

4 If any man use expressions in prayer contrary to the revealed will of God,
and the analogy of faith, or such as are not agreeable to the nature of
prayer, or scurrilous impertinencies, such as inevitably renders the Prayer
contemptible; such a man is so far from Praying by the Spirit of God, that
where it can be hindered, he should not be suffered so to profane that holy duty.

5 As God distributeth Spiritual gifts to his children according to the
service he has for them, so they are dispensed according to the measure of the
gift of Christ, tho all the Children of God have some measure, yet not all
alike measure, therefore some may abound more both in the gift, and grace of
prayer, than others who are also sincere.

6. Many have no expressions in Prayer, but such as are Orthodox, and
pertinent, to the nature of Prayer: yet if they be but plain without the words
of man's wisdom, especially if they be spiritual, savouring of the power of the
Spirit of Grace; carnal men are ready to call such Prayers flat, mean, and
indecent, for no other reason, but that a natural man discerns not the things
of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned.

But I must go forward, lest this little piece of Work prove biger, than I
designed, therefore shall not now insist upon that other great and gracious
Promise.

Zech: 12. 10. And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and supplications. All Christ's
Children and Family being Typified by the House of David, the Spirit of Grace
for their Sanctification, and of Supplications to enable them to pray, is here
promised.

The Author could not find out one such Promise, now he has more, much good may
they do him, and much of that Spirit of Grace and Supplications be upon us all;
and this we will by Gods grace persuade our People to depend upon, as a rich
and precious Promise of God to all the Children of God; and therefore not by
extraordinary Inspiration, as the Author gives out.

Page 45. He says, Neither is there any command in Scripture, requiring us to
worship or pray to God in a conceived extemporary, or unpremeditated Prayer, or
so much as an example in a settled ordinary Congregation where it was practiced.

Ans: If all conceived Prayer be destitute of the Command of God, then all
Extemporary Prayer must necessarly be Will Worship, and therefore unlawful: Why
then did the Author say, page 54. That extemporary prayer was not unlawful; for
my heart I cannot get his words cemented; for to say, its not unlawful in
worship, and yet no Command of God for it, cannot be reconciled. Yet

2. This which the Author says, That there is no command of God for such
prayers, is no less than to charge all in the Christian World as guilty of
Will Worship, when ever they use extemporary prayers.

3. Is there no Command to pray without a Form? Job is commanded to pray for
his Friends, let the Author show by what form he was to pray, or what form was
extant for such an unparalleled Case, Jer. 29. 7. The Prophet requires the
people carried Captives to Babylon, that they should pray for the peace of the
City, where they were Captives; where is the form by which they shall pray?
They are commanded to pray, but we find no form prescribed them: plenty of such
instances might be given, where men are commanded to pray, but no color of any
form of words.

4. As for examples, where extemporary prayers were used in Congregations: he
cannot but know that all the Records we have of public prayers in the New
Testament, are all without a form of words; this therefore is inadvertently
urged by the Author, because it plainly crosses his design.

Page 46. We have a new Argument for forms; which is but lost labor, Disputing
against no opponent: when he says, whosoever prays to God with faith,
sincerity, fervency, love, etc. he prays acceptably to God, and that one
praying by a form may have all these qualifications.

Ans: All this being conceded, what gains the Author? except he would make it
appear, that no man has these qualifications, who prays without the words of
a form, which can never be proved; and the more the Author essay it, he rusheth
still the deeper in contradicting his own words, whereof he has been often
minded; he expressly says, page 49. The Spirit of Prayer is the Grace, the
heart, the disposition and ability to pray; and whether it be with, or without
a form, such a man's prayers are acceptable to God.

2. Since then that Prayers by the help of the Spirit are acceptable to God
without a form; Why does the Author make it his entire concern to Dispute
against such Prayers as he acknowledges, are acceptable unto God?

3. He does not find us asserting, That all Prayers by a form, are unacceptable
to God; but as our Larger Catechism, so we say, That the Lords Prayer may be
used as a Prayer, and hereby that venerable Assembly of Divines has left it, as
their Master Christ left it, when his people pray, either to say the words, or
to pray after this manner.

Page 47. The Author says, That we sing forms of Prayer, The Dissenters make
no scruple to turn these Forms of Prayer into Meter, and then sing them Line by
Line after the Minister and quoteth the beginning of the fifth Psalm.

Ans: We sing the words of the Psalms, because we are required to sing them,
whether they be materially Praises or Prayers, they are formally Psalms, by the
Institution of God, and so we use them: so that this argument is of no weight.

2. As for our manner of singing, one line being read after another, we allow
it as an expedient for Edification, that these who sing, may thereby have the
more time to consider what they sing, in the praises of God.

3. Its strange inadvertency to find the Author so frequently accusing that
manner of singing, which he confesses is used by themselves, how the Church of
England will be satisfied with such Reflections, and exposing their own manner
of Worship, I leave to themselves.

But these extemporary Prayers are most unhappy things in the Author's Eye; For

Page 48. Extemporary or conceived prayers may want these qualifications of
prayer, as I believe will not be denied, and may be performed without
reverence, or decency of expression, and the Scriptures observe, that a man may
make long prayers, and yet have a mind disposed to devour widows houses.

Ans: 1. That conceived Prays may want Spiritual qualifications, is not
doubted, and so may Prayers by a Form; these may be's say nothing, men may be
mockers of Prayer, both without, and by a form: But what follows, shall men
therefore neither pray by a Form, nor without a Form?

2. For that Observation, that a man may make long prayers, and yet devour
widows houses?

I Ans: 1. That the Question under Debate, is not about long or short prayers,
and how it dropeth in here, I know not, for its impertinent to the Subject in
hand: But 2. That such who make long prayers, may devour Widows Houses by
injustice, breach of Covenants, and oppression, I doubt not, for many poor
Souls find it so at this day, and do now complain of it.

Page 49. 1 Cor. 14. 15. I will pray with the Spirit, I will pray with the
understanding, I will sing with the spirit, I will sing with the understanding
also. And page 50. Its unreasonable to interpret singing with the Spirit in one
sense, and praying with the spirit in a contrary.

Ans: The scope of that Scripture will show the Authors mistake* because the
singing and praying mentioned in that Scripture, are by immediate inspiration,
as is acknowledged by all; and therefore neither their singing nor praying
could be by any set form; but as the Spirit of God did inspire it; only for the
profit of others, the Apostle instructs to sing and pray with understanding:
This understanding in this place, being passively taken, that is, so as others
might understand what they spoke, by their extraordinary Gifts: its evident
then they followed no set form of words, either in singing or praising, for
they spoke in an unknown Tongue, by immediate Inspiration.

The Author then has no help for Forms from this Scripture, neither is there
occasion for contrary Interpretations, neither the singing nor praying here
being by forms.

Page 50. We find the most spiritual persons addressing themselves to God in
forms, our Savior himself on the Cross, when in his agony, he repeated these
words, Psalm. 22. etc.

Ans: 1. Here is the most flourishing, but yet the worst argument for Forms
that the Author hitherto has brought to the field; because Forms of Prayer are
for the use of these who need forms; but its indignity done to the Son of God,
to put his Name in the Role of Creatures, standing in need of a Form.

2. Christ using the words of that Psalm, was, because they were a Prediction
of himself, spoken by David in the person of Christ, saying also in the same
Psalm, they pierced my Hands and my Feet.

3. If it should be said that Christ used the words of that Psalm, not for any
need of a Form to himself, but to teach others to make use of Forms. I answer,
This cannot be, because our Savior would not teach any other man to use these
words in a Form, which did properly and only belong to himself, for no man was
to use these words as they there predicted, but he who did bear upon him the
wrath of the Almighty, for the sins of the Elect.

4. There is great difference between Predictions, what Christ would speak on
Earth, and setting forms, directing him how or what to speak; the Scriptures
concerning Christ behoved to be fulfilled by him, but not as forms.

Page 51. He quoteth Romans 8. 26. which he touches but sparingly, and no
wonder, for its too hot to touch close, being a special friend to that he
calls extemporarie prayers; yet some liberal gleanings fall from his hands,
when he is in view of that Scripture.

And to pray with this grace, is to pray in and with the Spirit, whether we use
words or no; and if we do use them, whether we reduce them into a form first,
on pour them forth as they present themselves to our mind.

Ans. here is another full Concession that Prayers dictated by the Spirit may
be poured forth, even as they are presented to our mind, without a form, if the
Author will but allow me to glean in his own field, I am sure to get a sheaf
made to stand upright, when his own sheaves are bowing.

Page. 52. After the Author has said, its certain that God did furnish some,
with words for extemporary prayer, he appears afraid, that its too big an
handful for the gleaner; therefore adds.

But then its manifest that this was an extraordinary gift of God, and a part
of prophecy, and we may not Depend on the holy Ghost for this gift.

Ans. It is made to appear already that the Spirit of Prayer is given in some
measure to all the Children of God, and that therefore they have it without any
extraordinary Gift.

2ly. By the Authors own words in the next foregoing page upon Romans 8. 26. Its
acknowledged they have it without an extrordinary gift because the help of the
Spirit mentioned in that text belongs to all believers, whither endowed with
extrordinary gifts or not; when he says they may, pour out the words as
presented to their mind by the Spirit.

Page. 52. David's Psalms were first reduced into form.

Ans. All that can be said is, that these inspired Psalms, were put into the
hands of chief musicians, and all that our Author says, that David first
penned, and then delivered them; what then? Could they be delivered for public
use before they were penned?

And that which he says of 1 Cor. 14. 26. Is no better.

And its probable the prophets. 1 Cor. 14, 26. Did the same; for they are
supposed every one to have a Psalm, a Doctrine etc.

Ans. To call these extraordinary inspired Psalms, Doctrines, etc. Forms, is
without all show of Reason.

2ly. The Apostle found these Psalms, Doctrines, etc. very unready, as being
yet in an unknown tongue, and not fitted to the peoples understanding, so that
the Author can get nothing gathered here for forms, but he is to be excused;
for the field is bare and can Spare nothing to him.

Page: 53. But further that place Eccl: 5, 1. Seems to me to afford a strong
argument against such Prayers. When thou go to the house of God be not rash
with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter anything before God etc.

Ans. 1. And yet a strong argument against Such Prayers as he has said, are
acceptable to God. Should not the Author stand in awe to write against what is
acceptable to God?

2. As for rashness in speaking before God, we are all concerned obediently to
advert unto this Direction: and let the reader observe that a form in Prayer
may be observed as to words, when there is neither reverence to God, nor
Understanding of what men speak, and so all they speak be found rash on the
speakers part, so also men may be guilty of the same rashness when they pray
without a form; if they set not before their eyes, the rules God has given to
direct us in Prayer, and depend not on the promised help of the Spirit of grace
and Supplications: But.

Page 54. I appeal to you whether it would not be looked on as rashness, for an
ordinary person to speak to a prince, or Solemn assembly concerning a matter of
great moment, in words unpremeditated and unformed etc.

Ans. This again is another argument against all extemporary Prayer, it
wearieth me to write so often the Author's inconsistancies, for if this
argument speak any thing, its against all conceived Prayer, and that every man
Since the creation of the world Sinned, whoever spoke to God without a
premeditated form, Godly Nehemiah, and many others are now condemned, he when
delivering the cup to the King being sore afraid prayed forthwith unto the
Lord, without time for premeditation, yet the church of God had public
benefit by this Prayer, tho he was sore afraid of the King; yet he could be
free with his God, as knowing his necessity could admit of no delay, being
constrained to answer the King immediately, and yet would not answer before he
sent up his desire to God: if we were all better acquainted with frequent
Praying, making our requests known to God in every thing, we would not have so
much noise of the words of Forms.

In the same Page we have his ample Concession.

But in as much as God has not expressly forbidden all extemporary prayers, I
would not be understood by this to condemn all such as unlawful: there may be
some men (though not very many) able to express themselves significantly, and
decently, ex tempore, and there are some occasions that require it even in
public.

Ans. Here is suficient ground to confute all the arguments the Author has
hitherto brought against Extemporary prayers, which I leave to the discerning
of the judicious Reader. But he adds,

And on these occasions, when a man has not time allowed him to reduce his
desires into Form, before he offers them, he may depend on the assistance of
God's spirit.

Ans. And needs he not depend on the assistance of God's Spirit after he has
reduced his desires into a Form, if the form be once attained. It will do for
it self, but has not a man as much need of the Spirit of God to help him by a
Form as without it, shall we say that the words of a Form will do the whole
work.

From this Page to the end of this Chap. I find little argumentative, and
therefore shall soon dispatch what remains.

Page 55. and 56. He has two conjectures concerning other men's prayers, the
one concerning Ministers praying in public, that some of them compose forms of
prayer, and then pray according to these forms.

Ans. I know no way he has this, if it be not by some personal experience.

The next is Page 56. Where the Author says, that good men who make conscience
of secret prayer to God, do by degrees fall into a Form.

Ans. I give this the same answer I gave the other conjecture, and persuade my
self that as the Author wordeth it, it is the very way of a decayed Soul; for
if men shall observe their daily recent mercies, and how badly improved, and if
even the remarkable sins of every day be noticed as they ought, if men be
desiring to grow in Grace, if men observe the temptations whereby their Souls
are hurt, the binding up of such by the words of a Form, would be a very
bondage.

I must also say that the Scope of this discourse, I will not say of the
Author, but that the intentio operis is against the very power of Godliness;
And to reduce us all to bare Form of words, not only in public, and in our
Families, but in secret also; and so to be praeterea nihil nothing but Forms,
as Papists are at this day: And therefore it concerns us all to take notice
of the warning given us 2 Timothy 3. 5. That in the last days perilous times shall
come, wherein amongst other evils it is said, some shall have a Form of
Godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away.

For all the Author has said, that extemporary prayers are not unlawful, and
that they are acceptable to God, if there be Grace in the heart: Yet no stone
is unturned against them, but all assaults hitherto want success, therefore
once more.

Page 56. Let me observe that the use of extemporary conceived prayers, even in
cases of necessity, is founded on a general rule of Scripture only, which
commands us to ask of God what we lack; And a little after, general commands
ought only to take place in such cases, where God has not laid down a
particular rule.

Ans. 1. This position does again cut off all liberty for conceived prayer in
public or private, for though there be a general command to ask what we need, yet
now there being a particular rule for a Form, the general command is thereby
Exhausted, and so by the Author there is no room left for any manner of prayer,
but the Form.

2: If a particular subsequent command evacuate the general, then it follows
that when God requires us to call upon him in the day of trouble, that we
should not call upon God at any other time, but in the day of trouble, this
being a particular command, under the general command of calling upon God;
which particular command does evacuate the general; for it takes no more place
as the Author says. So is a man call upon God in the time of health and
prosperity, he has no command for it, and so is but will worship, the
inference is genuine, and let the Author see to its Solution.

Page 57. The Author speaks to a second supposed exception of dissenters
against Forms.

I come now to speak to the second, that all Forms of prayer are unlawful to
Christians, and that it is a sin to join in a worship where they are used, or
so much as to be present at it.

Ans. Who they are that makes this objection I know not, but for us, we
utterly disown it, and so dismiss it.

Page 59. There neither is, nor has been, any established Church these 1500.
Years, but has maintained their lawfulness, and used them in the service of
God, that is Forms of prayer.

Ans. 1: The Author wrongeth his Reader in confounding, but never
distinguishes Divine Forms from Humane Composures.

2: We use Divine Forms in public Administrations, and therefore are not
divided from other reformed Churches on that Head, as was instanced in all our
public Administrations.

3. No other reformed Churches make Humane Forms and Composures Terms of
Communion; that if men do not assent, and consent, and subscribe, they shall be
forced into a separation.

4. If by Forms of prayer the Author understands Humane Composures and
public Liturgies, I deny they took place in the Church of God for many
Centuries after Christ.

Justin Martyr Apolog. 2d. Says that their ministers prayed according to their
ability, this could not be to read prayers, for reading is no great Trial of a
Minister's abilities

So Tertullian apolog. 39. Says their prayers were sine monitore, without a
monitor, because they prayed from their heart.

Dr. Burnet in his History asserteth, that public Liturgies came not under
public consideration for 400. Years after Christ, and several Centuries after,
before Gregory's composure was established.

I find no further in the following Pages of any new Argument requiring notice,
till we come to

Page 63. And I dare appeal to your selves, whether some very Immoral persons,
guilty of gross and Scandalous Crimes, have not been eminent for this gift of
prayer, and whether such persons are not apt to flatter themselves that they
are the Children of God, and endued wih his Spirit notwithstanding all their
wickedness: and it is Impossible either to convince these persons of their
mistake, or to comfort poor Ignorant people dejected only for want of this
gift, whilst they are possessed with this opinion of the unlawfulness of Forms.

Ans. 1. Some by Nature and its improvement by multiplied Acts, acquire an
habit of speaking more orderly, and decently than others.

2. Such persons being Educated Christians, by profession, and having occasion
often to hear, speak, read and converse, in religious things, may speak of the
matters of God, whether to God or men, much more pertinently and fluently than
others: and have no more but a natural gift themselves remaining immoral and
wicked.

3. And being pinched by affliction may pour out prayers, with great natural
fervor, or in expectation of the applause of men may speak in prayer, to the
Admiration of others; and yet all this but natural acquisition, and no special
gift of the Spirit of Christ.

3. Besides these improvements of nature, our Savior Christ having received
gifts for men, and bestowing them on whom he will, for the good of his Church;
thereby many have been endued with common gifts of the Spirit of Christ,
whereby others are edified, but not themselves, they being still destitute of
the special Sanctifying Grace of the Spirit, and such as Christ will say unto
at the last, depart I know you not: though their partaking of these common gifts,
was the occasion of their concluding themselves in a State of favor with God,
mistaking those common gifts for such as are special, and Sanctifying: such
persons never being converted to God, and truly Sanctified, may
notwithstanding of all their common gifts, be lewd and Scandalous in their
practice.

5. Whatever judgment we may pass upon our selves, yet we are not so much
concerned to judge by what gifts other men do pray, or if they have the grace
of prayer together with the gift, is not our part to search: though it be certain
that where the conversation is ordinarily ungodly and vicious, whatever gift a
man has, yet he wants the Grace of prayer.

6: When such immoral persons are endued with a common gift of the Spirit,
enabling them to speak pertinently in prayer; sure it is not that gift, which
makes them Immoral and Scandalous, nor is the Gift of Christ to be despised on
that account: for common gifts sanctify no man, tho such as God has honored
with them are the more guilty, for profaning of his mercies, and their
ingratitude to God.

7. Only Believers in Christ Jesus, who are sanctified by the Spirit of Grace,
partake of the grace of Prayer; and as the Giver of this Grace pleases to
employ any of them in his service, for the good of others, so he bestows the
gift also, in what measure he pleases.

As for persons who are dejected for want of a Gift of Prayer, they have need
of sound and skilful advice; for the mere want of such Elocution as others
have, should not discourage them, tho all should covet the best Gifts: But

2. If persons have no Inclination, nor help by the Spirit of God to pray unto
him, there is just cause for fear, but not despair; I say just cause for fear
and grief of heart, because all the Children of God have the Spirit of Prayer
in some measure; yet no cause for despairing, because Christ has promised the
Holy Ghost to them who ask him.

3. To direct such persons only to the words of a Form, will never prove a cure
to their Souls: For if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, they are none of
his; therefore such persons should be exhorted to cry unto God for the Spirit
of grace and supplications.

Page 63. The Author once more urges the use of forms in Prayer.

A great part of the world cannot do it without a form, Children and ignorant
persons are at a loss for words.

Ans: As for young and very ignorant people, we allow them the use of forms,
until God enable them more; but withal exhort them to further progress, lest if
they should still rest upon forms, they should be satisfied with a form of
Godliness only: But

Page 64. He says, As for Children and ignorant people of our persuasion, he
is well assured, many of them never bow their knees to God.

Ans: This is not the first of the Author's mistakes, that we have seen, for we
have occasion to know what they do in the service of God, better than he; and I
am well assured of the contrary of that he asserts; he affirms, not knowing
what they do, and I affirm upon knowledge, that commonly our Children, so soon
as capable, are helped with some easy and short forms, and that many of them
daily bow their knees to their Maker, and are chastised if it be neglected.

The Author comes often over this, our Teaching the unlawfulness of forms,
which is imposing upon his Reader, for none of us Teach any such Doctrine.

Page 65. There remains yet the third Opinion of Dissenters, which they advance
against us in this matter of Prayer, to be examined, that the Minister is the
mouth of the Congregation, and that the people have nothing to do, but to join
with him in their hearts, an opinion far from any authority of Scripture, which
expressly requires us, Rom: 15. 6. with one mind and one mouth to glorify God.

Ans: It Is not long since we saw this under the Author's hand, Page 36. That
generally there is no more necessary, but that the people join in their
hearts, except it be on some occasions; and when these occasions appear, we
will consider his Opinion.

2: In all Gospel public Worship recorded in the New Testament; we find no
more either required or practiced, but the peoples joining in their hearts.

3: What is said Rom 15: 6: is performed in our way of Worship, using one
mouth, and not many.

But the Conclusion must stand, whether the Premises, will or not; that the
Authors way of Worship is agreeable to the Commandments of God; let the Reader
judge by the Answers, if every one of his Probations has not failed him: I do
ingeniously declare, That I have not so much as found difficulty in any of his
Arguments, wherewith he charge us as guilty of the Inventions of men in the
Worship of God; but I question if ever amongst Protestants, a Book was
published, wherein more of the inventions of men has appeared, or a wider Door
opened for all manner of humane Inventions, than by the Discourse now under
consideration.

CHAP. 3. Of Hearing.
SECT. 1.
PAge 68. one great design of our Christian Assemblies is hearing; and that
which is to be heard is the word of God: First, then God has positively
commanded us to read his word, in our public Assemblies, so Deuteronomy. 31. 10. In
the feast of Tabernacles when all Israel is come to appear before the Lord thy
God, in the place where the Lord shall choose, thou shall read this Law before
all Israel in their hearing. so Josh. 8. 35.

Neither was this confined to their solemn Assemblies at Jerusalem: it was
likewise a constant part of their sabbath service in their synagogues, as we
may learn from Acts 13. 14.

Ans. 1. That the word of God should be read in our public Assemblies, we are
agreed, for Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word.

2. To read the whole Law of God at once in our Assemblies, is not practicable.

3. Some conjecture what was read in the synagogues; but though it were sure can
be no rule to us.

Page 69. This reading of the Law, was the great, and most effectual means God
provided, for preserving the knowledge of himself amongst his People, and the
best reformation began, and was carried on by restoring this ordinance: thus
it is observed of Josiah 2. Chr. 34. 29. The like is observed of Ezra. Nehem. 8.
3.

Page 70. From the practice of the synagogue in reading the Law and the
Prophets the like order was brought into the Christian Church: and hence it is
that Timothy is commanded 1 Timothy 4. 13. to give attendance to reading etc. And
the inspired writings of the Apostles were read in the Christian Assemblies,
according to Col. 4. 16. When this epistle is read, cause that it be also read
in the Church of the Laodiceans, etc.

And because what the Author says Page 7^. Is most coherent with that which is
here, let the Reader observe, and where this ordinance is observed, they are
sure of the word of Life, and it is impossible they should be ignorant of their
duty.

Ans. 1: The reading of the word of God is certainly his ordinance, and that
both in public and private, and the people of God may warrantably expect a
blessing by it.

2ly: But that the mere reading was the most effectual mean, will not be so
easily granted, for God did see it necessary to provid Prophets of old, to
explain the Laws of God to his people, to exhort, reprove, threaten* and
comfort them, as the Law of God required* not only to predict and prophecy (as
it is taken strictly) what was to come upon them: but to interpret, and press
obedience to the Law of God: and accordingly the Levites not only read the Law,
but gave the sense, and made the people understand the reading, not only the
sense of hard words, but as it is Neh: 8: 7: made them understand the Law.

3ly. It cannot be the bare reading of the Law, for David had the reading of
the Law plentifully, both in public, and in private, yet he found not that of
it self sufficient for understanding of the Law, and did know that except he
understood the Law; the reading of it would not be the most effectual mean, and
therefore prays unto God Ps: 119: 18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold
wondrous things out of thy Law, so verse 73, Give me understanding that I may
learn thy Commandments. And often, teach me thy Law.

4. It is not impossible, but that people may be ignorant of their duty, even
when they have occasion to hear the Law duly read, for First, our Savior
matthew. 22. 29. says, ye err, not knowing the Scriptures; he says not,
because ye read not, or hear not the Scriptures read to you, for these who are
rebuked for not knowing the Scriptures, wanted not the public reading of them.

2ly. Many who heard the word, yet brought forth no fruit by it, because they
did not understand it, Mat. 3. 9. And these who did profit, were such as
understood it verse 23.

3ly. Christ's own disciples are reproved for not yet understanding who had
occasion, both before, and after they were his Disciples, to hear the Law read:
therefore our Savior, who was not of that mind, that the reading was the most
effectual mean, he in compassion used a more effectual mean, Luke 24. 45. Then
opened he their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures;
Christ knew it was more than possible for them to be ignorant of their duty; by
only reading, or hearing the Scriptures read.

4ly. Do not some who have the reading of Scripture, yet being unlearned, and
unstable, wrest them unto their own destruction? Is it impossible that these
people be ignorant of their duty? 2 Pet. 3. 16.

5ly. Are not some under judicial Plagues, that though they hear, they cannot
understand, Isai. 6. 9. And quoted by the Apostles, Acts 28. 26. Saying, Go
unto this people, and say, Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; is
it impossible for these to be ignorant of their duty, to whom it is impossible
to understand it? until God remove his judgments: I need say no more, the
Reader will see the Authors assertion was inconsiderat.

6ly. Timothy I yield, is commanded to give attendance to reading, and no doubt
to reading in public, as the edification of his hearers required; but that the
reading mentioned in the Text is, only public reading cannot be instructed,
for he was to be diligent in reading privately also, in order to his further
accomplishment for Ministerial work.

Page 71. We have a new and rare opinion broached; I shall give you his own
words. This public reading the Law, was of so great reputation, that it is
Termed, Preaching it, as we may see from Acts 15. 21. For Moses of old time,
has in every City them that Preach him, being read in the synagogues every
sabbath day; the word Preaching has a peculiar sense in the New Testament, and
signifies properly to declare, or proclaim the Word of God, as a Herald or
Crier proclaims the laws or orders of a King.

Hence, only those that proclaimed the Gospel, to such as had not heard it
before, or read the Old Testament to the people, are said to preach: preaching
is distinguished, from teaching and exhortation, and it is observable, that in
the whole New Testament, though reading Scriptures is called preaching, yet
interpreting them applying them, or exhorting the people from them in a
Christian Auditory, is never called by that name.

Ans: If these New Dictates be received, they have an evident tendency to
deprive men of the great mean of their Salvation, which is preaching; for it
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, 1 Cor. 1. 21. to save them that
believe. But by the Author, none of us can be saved now by preaching, except it
be by hearing of the Law read, we cannot have other preaching; for we in these
Nations have heard the Gospel already preached, and we can have preaching no
more but at the first. What cruel Divinity is this to the souls of men? the
case is plain, for God saves by preaching; and the Author says we have now no
preaching, nor shall ever have hereafter, because its long now since it was
first preached to us; and all we can expect is, the reading of the Law, but no
preaching.

2ly, But having found some assertions of the Author unwarrantable already, I
shall God willing, try the strength of this also. and make it appear, that
preaching properly is found; where its neither the reading the Law, nor the
first publishing of the Gospel to a people.

And shall begin there where himself has laid aside the word preaching, Acts
20. 7. Paul is said to preach to the Disciples, whereas, says he, the original
word is (...) which signifies to Discourse or Dispute; but the Original words
which properly signify preaching, are (...), by which the Author concludes,
that place is answered: but let the Reader look a little further, and he will
find the word he missed in Verse 25* and now I know that ye all among whom I
have gone preaching the Kingdom of God, the word there is (...) where its to be
observed, that the Apostle calls all his public Teaching among them
preaching: So that here we have one place where the Gospel is preached to these
who heard it before, by the proper word which the Author seeks after; for he
had been three years amongst them* which was more than once, as a Herald
publishing a Proclamation, and so be gone: Neither could this preaching be only
a reading of the Law; for the Apostle preached the Kingdom of God, and faith
toward Jesus Christ, verse 21.

2ly, The Apostle had preached so frequently amongst them, that they were now a
formed Organical Church, with their Officers, Presbyters, whom verse 28. He
calls Overseers or Bishops, and to them the charge of the flock was
committed, no man will say, that all this was done by once Preaching to them.

3ly, That preaching properly was to continue in the Church of God, where it
was neither reading the Law only, nor the first publishing of the Gospel, I
prove from 2 Timothy 4. 2. Preach the word, be instant in season, out of season,
reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering, and dostrine; by which
Scripture, these two things are clear: 1. That the Evangelist Timothy was
appointed to preach the Gospel, and that was more than to read the Law. 2. That
he was to continue preaching, which was more than once, as a Herald to publish
the Gospel, and so have done. For the first, That he was appointed to preach,
is the plain word of the Text. And it is again (...), and that it was not to
read the Law only, is evident, for in the next verse he is required to do the
work of an Evangelist, which was to preach the Gospel. 2. He was to improve the
Gift God had given him by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery; this Gift was more sure; than to be a good reader, he had learned
that when young. 3. He was rightly to divide the word, this was more than
reading, his preaching then was more than to read the Law; for 1 Timothy 4* 1^.
These things command and teach, viz. That Christ was the Savior, as the words
immediately preceding show.

The next thing to be made out is, That Timothy was to continue preaching, so
the Text says, be instant, stand to it, as the word bears, in season, out of
season; therefore preaching was to be his ordinary work, while he was in the
Ministry; and supposing, but not granting, that Timothy was to be fixed Bishop
at Ephesus, as is asserted by these of the Prelatick persuasion: then I demand
of the Author, if Timothy was never to preach the Gospel but once at Ephesus?
to be a fixed Bishop, and yet preach but once, is strange! If the Author say,
That after his first preaching, he migh interpret, exhort, etc. Answer, But the
Text says, preach; And why should any presume to alter, or give it a lesser
name than the Holy Ghost has given it? 2. It should be observed here also,
that after the Apostle has said, preach; then he brancheth out its several
parts, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all longsuffering and doctrine: All which
are parts of Preaching, being performed by a Minister in his public
Administrations. This Text then does plainly yield us preaching, where it was
neither reading of the Law, nor the first publishing of the Gospel.

I might add many other Scriptures which overturn the Authors assertions, as
Acts 5. 42. And daily in the Temple, and in every house, they ceased not to
teach, and preach Jesus Christ, this was neither reading the Law, nor once
preaching, seeing it was daily.

Acts 28. 30. And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, preaching
the Kingdom of God, this was neither reading the Law, nor once publishing the
Gospel; for it cannot be thought, that the first publishing would take two
whole years, in one place; the Author had done well to let the world know, how
long time the first publishing did require? but he has needlessly run himself
into this Thicket.

Acts 3. 20. And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto
you; and yet the Apostle Peter was at this time preaching unto them himself, as
is evident from the 2 verse of the next Chap: The priests and Captain of the
Temple came upon them, being grieved that they taught the people, and preached
through Jesus the resurrection from the dead. Here then is preaching to such as
heard before. I need waste no more time on this, though I could instance Philip
his preaching to the Samaritans, where Christ had preached before: And let the
Reader observe, that the Scriptures I have quoted for preaching, are these very
words in the Original, which the Author required. I might also here observe the
Authors words at the beginning of this next Section, the words are [The
practice of our Church in reading and preaching the word] these of his Church
had the Gospel preached to them long before now, and yet both reading and
preaching remains with them by his own words; How comes he to have preaching
now? seeing its neither reading of the Law (for they have reading besides) nor
is it the first publishing of the Gospel, for his people heard the Gospel,
before he was a preacher to them: if in this case preaching properly be not
found in the New Testament, Then whence has he his preaching? how unhappy a
thing it is to espouse a bad Cause! He may now see that no success attends
his labor, and let never man have better success, in attempting to deprive the
Churches of God, of continued Gospel preaching; I say, preaching properly,
according to the Scriptures.

Psalm. 71. Tho reading the Scriptures is called preaching, yet interpreting
them, applying them, or exhorting the people from them in a Christian Auditory,
is never called preaching.

Ans: 1. Ministerial Gospel Teaching is Preaching, Acts 5. 42. They ceased not
to Teach and Preach Jesus Christ; Here the Apostles Teaching and Preaching are
one.

2ly, Ministerial Exhortation is Preaching, as is clear, Luke 3. 18. And many
other things in his Exhortation Preached he unto the people, here such
Exhortation is Preaching.

3ly, Ministerial Reproof, etc. is Preaching; as appears 2 Timothy 4. 2. where
reproof, rebuke, exhortation, and doctrine, are parts of Preaching; for the
Apostle there calls them Preaching.

And for the word (...), which the Author lays so great burden upon; besides
that, the Author knows words are commonly Transferred, from that which they
did at first most properly signify, to express things more remote, especially
its Translation not being heterogeneous, but of the same general Nature, as is
this of proclaiming as a Herald; for so is the publishing of the glad Tidings
of Salvation: But 2. Let the Author take the word as strictly as he will, he
who is an Herald by Office, is at his Masters command, to proclaim and publish
as often as his Prince requires, be it in season or out of season: so must the
Ambassadors of Christ publish the Gospel of Peace as often, as the Master
requires, while they continue in Office, having the unsearchable Riches of
Christ to preach; wherein they are to continue from age to age, until Believers
be presented perfect, Col: 1. 28. Whom we preach, warning every man, and
teaching every man, in all wisdom; that we may present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus, Ephesians: 4. 11. is to the same purpose.

Page 73. We find in holy Scripture, that the public reading of the Word of
God was with great solemnity, it is observed Neh: 8. 5. when Ezra opened the
Book, all the People stood up, etc.

Ans: 1: How this can be pertinently brought in here, I see not, the Author
has another Chapter for Bodily Worship, but

2. When God speaks unto us by his own immediate Dictates, and we attending
thereupon as a part of our Worship, no doubt but we ought to render External
Signs of Reverence, but the Author will give occasion for more of this in the
next Chapter.

Page 75. The Author doubts whether after reading the Word of God, there was
any Comment, or Enlargement: he grants sometimes it was. 2. But it does not
appear, that this was constantly done: on the contrary its rather probable it
was not, for had there been a constant provision for such enlargment, there had
been no occasion, for the ruler of the Synagogue, Acts 13. 15. To send to Paul
and Barnabas, after the reading the Law and Prophets that message we find
there, men and brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say
on. St. Paul supposes him that teaches, and him whose office it was to exhort,
distinct from him that ruled, and him that ministered, Rom: 12. And it does not
appear that every Church was furnished with all these Officers.

Ans. 1. To what purpose all this is brought forth, I cannot perceive, except
to prove that in public Assemblies for worship, there was no preaching or
expounding but only reading.

2ly. but the Levites expounding what was read, is one proof there was more
then reading. 2ly. Our Saviors practice, is another instance, Luke 4. 16.
Where he is found reading a Text Isa. 61. 1. The spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, etc. I hope the
Author will allow Christ's following discourse, the name of preaching, seeing he
was anointed to preach the Gospel. 3. All the recorded Sermons of the Apostles
were properly preaching, whether there was any public reading preceded their
Sermons or not, making it always their work to preach Christ, rather than to
read to the people,

3ly. The rulers of the synagogue Acts 13. 15. Sending to the Apostles, to
speak a word of exhortation after the reading of the Law, does not prove, that
such exhortation was not in use, but rather the contrary, that because it was
used, the Rulers gave notice that the opportune time for exhortation, was then
after the reading of the Law: and it is observable, that upon this invitation,
the Apostle had a large successful Sermon, which we may well call preaching,
for verse 32. The Apostle himself says, we declare unto you glad tidings, etc.

Page 76. Lastly we find, that they had a summary of the principal doctrines of
the Gospel, which they delivered to the people, and by which, they ordered
their own discourses, and judged of what was delivered by others, thus St. Paul
to Timothy 2 Timothy 1. 13. Hold fast the Form of sound words, which thou have
heard of me; Chap. 2. 2. The same commit thou to faithful men who shall be able
to teach others; perhaps this may be that proportion of Faith, according to
which the Prophets are exhorted to prophecy, Romans 12. 6. I think it is not
doubted, but this Form of sound words contained the main foundamentals of
Christianity; and Paul tells us what those were, Heb. 6. 12. Therefore leaving
the principals of the Doctrine of Christ, etc.

Ans. 1. What that Form of sound words was, the Author cannot tell: and
therefore says, Perhaps this may be that proportion of Faith, etc And so
leaves it as dark as he found it.

2ly. The Author appears to understand this of some written Form otherwise it
makes not for his purpose, and that it was delivered to the people as a Form,
but this is said without proof: Timothy was to hold them fast in Faith.

3ly. The Form of sound words is as our best Commentators, expound them, the
Gospel preached by the Apostles, and that the same to be committed to faithful
men able to teach others; and these six Heads or foundamentals were this Form,
is mere conjecture; therefore the Author says modestly, in all probability it
was, so the naming of principles does not prove all are there.

SECT. 2.
Page 77. These are the rules, and examples the Scriptures propose, let us
compare the practice of our Church with them; and surely no copy can come
nearer the Original: for first, our Ministeres are expressly oblidged in their
ordination, diligently to read all the Canonical Scriptures of the Old and New
Testaments; unto the people assembled in the Church, where they shall be
appointed to serve.

Ans. If none can come nearer the rules of Scripture, then they are at the
utmost point of perfection attainable in this life! The Author has now
surmounted the Apostle Paul, who acknowledged he did but know in part, and
prophecy in part; then all the prophesies and promises for greater Purity,
and that the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light
of the Sun shall be seven fold, as the light of seven days; in the day that the
Lord binds up the breach of his people. I say all such promises are fully
accomplished, and no more to be expected by such as worship after this manner.

2ly. Why then says the Author, Page 159. Though we are yet too far short of the
Primitive practice and institution; can none come nearer Scripture rules and
Institution, and yet yourselves too far short of the Institution? Let any who
can, reconcile these.

3ly. This imports no less than a limiting of God, what does blind mortals
know of what is to come; and what the power of God can yet bring his Churches
unto? had he said no Copy has come nearer the Original, he had said too far;
himself confessing they are far short of Primitive practice, but to say none
can come nearer is intolerable, 4ly. The reason the Author gives for this, is
because they read much Scripture: but if another Church should read more
Scripture, which can be, then which of the Copies is nearest the Original? It
cannot be your Copy, for others read more, nor can it be these who read more,
for according to the Author, none can come nearer the rule than you, and yet
the reason he gives for this, is much reading only.

5ly. If the quantity, or how much reading, be the reason why men come nearest
the rule, then God has prescribed by some rule, how much we should read at
once, or in one day, but God has no where prescribed to us such a rule:
Therefore men's reading much cannot be the reason why they are nearest the rule;
if there be any such rule, make it appear, and if there be no rule prescribing
how much, with what color can it be said, you come nearest the rule; for it is
yet under debate, but that less reading, and expounding what is read to
edification, will be found nearer the rule, than much reading where no help is
given for peoples understanding the Scriptures.

6ly. These come not nearest the rule who read too much, and more than God has
given direction to read, as any part of his Service or Worship, but you know
who read Apocrypha in God's public Service, which he has given no rule for,
therefore such come not nearest the rule.

7ly. These cannot be said to come nearest the rule who read too little, or may
be never that which God has prescribed to be read, but you know who lay aside
a considerable part of the Scriptures from their public Service and Worship;
and then those who do so, are not nearest the rule. If it be said that no
Scriptures are left out, but such as are less proper and profitable for
ordinary Assemblies; yet the word of God says, all Scripture is given by
inspiration, and is profitable for Doctrine, reproof, etc.

Again, if it be said that Ministers, are allowed to read all the Scriptures in
public: and yet if men be tasked every Lords day and Holy day, they must hold
by their Task.

Page 78 For the more Solemnity of these readings, our Church joins with each
of them, Praises, Thanksgivings, or Confessiones, according to what we find
practiced in the Holy Scriptures.

Ans. If what they join to these readings be not Instituted of God, then let
the Author conscientiously mind his second position Page 3. That the Holy
Scriptures contain the Revelations of God's Will, concerning his Worship, and
beware of adding, or joining what is not prescribed by these Scriptures.

Page 79 It Is ordered in our Church, that the Ministers shall explain some part
of the Holy Scriptures every Lords day; and exhort their Congregations in a
Sermon.

Ans. If there be no more Scripture explained but the Text before a Sermon,
your hearers are at a great loss, though you should read twenty Chapters every
Lords day, and explain nothing but a Text.

SECT. 3.
Page 82. The Author charge dissenters, with the neglect of teaching the
principles of Religion, saying, That though a man frequent your meetings all his
life, yet he has no security, or hardly possibility of Learning from your
public teachings, all the great mysteries of his Religion, or the necessary
principles of his Faith -- And hence it happens, that hardly any one man in his
life, ever goes through the necessary articles of Faith: or of practice in his
public Sermons, and for the truth of this, I appeal to your selves.

Ans. The Reader, who is a stranger to us, may readily think how can this be
false, being asserted by a person of such Note, and with such confidence!
appealing also to our selves for it is truth, and seeing he has appealed to our
selves, I declare upon certain knowledge that what he has asserted, is a most
unjust imputation, for which he has cause to ask forgiveness of God, and I do
appeal to many thousand now living, who are ordinarily witnessess to the
contrary, and many of the Authors own persuasion know the contrair: with what
peace of conscience can any man thus impose upon strangers! And impress future
generations, with that which is so far from truth! it being publicly known,
that we ordinarily, and orderly, go through all the Heads of our Christian Faith
in our public Sermons.

Page 82. You have no Summary of principles enjoined either to be read, or
taught in your public Assemblies t^ a^ Catechism you have but neither your
directory nor practice make it any part of your Lords-days-Service: and
besides, your Catechism is such that it no ways answers the design of a Form
of sound words: I have already showed that such a Form, should contain only the
first and necessary principles of the Oracles of God, in such words and
methods, as may make it easily apprehended, and retained by the weak and
unlearned, which make up the bulk of the people; but your Catechism is full of
hard words, School Terms, and abstruse notions: no wise necessary to be known
by the generality of Christians, etc.

Ans. Our Catechism is above the Authors censure; and men of as great Authority
and abilities as he, of his own persuasion have still spoken of that Book with
regard; and recommended it to others as sound, and profitable: he does but
lessen himself by his Reflections against that Composure; let the Reader judge,
what mean arguments he has against it, only he shows what Spirit he is of.

2ly. Whereas it is not enjoined as any part of our Lords-days-Service:

Ans. Though our Catechism be a sound and full Summary of Christian principles,
yet we know it to be but a humane Composure; and therefore make it no part of
our worship, if by Service he understands worship, as he frequently uses
these words Service, and worship Promiscuously: we must have Institution for
what we offer to God in his Service, yet these principles are frequently
explained on the Lords day, and that not only occasionally but in order
according to the method of our Catechism.

3ly. But the Author has showed, that such a Catechism should contain only etc.

Ans. The Author has said, but not showed to his Reader, that it should be as
he says, except all he says, must be taken for demonstration.

4. But our Catechism is full of hard words.

Ans: Its good the Author has no worse to say, otherways we should hear of it.
2. But why does he not give instances of these hard words? Some who have read
our Catechism, say, They find not such a hard word in it all as god father and
god-mother, nor such words, as God the Son has redeemed me and all mankind. 3.
It was necessary our Catechism should have words significant and expressive of
the matter, and if any of these words be less obvious to the capacity of young
or ignorant people, we are at pains to explain such words.

5ly, But our Catechism is too long.

Ans: And what if the Catechism of some others be too short? give instances of
what is redundant or superfluous; we would think our Catechism very defective,
if it wanted the Doctrine of the Creation, and of Man's Fall from God, the
Attributes of God, the Natures of Christ and his Offices, the nature of
Justifying Faith, and Sanctification, etc.

Page 83. Besides all this, it is so long and intricat, even the shorter, that
not one Child in ten, ever gets it by heart: nor one in five hundred retains
it, as I have found by experience.

Ans: I would gladly be acted by the Spirit of meekness, but the Author's words
are so provocking even in matters of Fact, that its hard to discover the Truth
without irritation: and yet if I conceal the Truth, I shall suffer strangers to
be imposed upon to their hurt: let the Reader therefore consider, that we who
have better occasion to understand the knowledge of younger and older, of our
own Communion than the Author: we know him to be in a mistake, and the mistake
so gross, that I can upon knowledge affirm, that few Children amongst us of
competent age, want the Shorter Catechism by heart; especially where Ministers
are to examine them: some, yea many of them can give the Answers to many
Questions of the Larger Catechism.

2ly, Nor one in five hundred retains it.

Ans: Has the Author examined five hundred of our Communion? for he says, he
has found it by experience; but it may be justly questioned, if ever the
Author was so officious, or these of our Communion so obsequious, as to give
him occasion for examining one hundred of them. 2. Albeit I am not obliged to
gratify the humor of such as slander us, yet for undeceiving of strangers, I
do engage to find within the Parish of Derry, some hundreds of persons come to
age, able to give account of all our Shorter Catechism, from the beginning to
the end.

Page 83. Lastly, after all it is imperfect of some of the principles of the
Apostles Catechism, being quit left out of it, I mean, laying on of hands, Heb:
6 2.

Ans: By what authority the Author calls that Scripture the Apostles
Catechism, I understand not: there are principles and foundations named there,
but that therefore it was the Apostles Catechism cannot be instructed: and that
a form of sound words should have no more, or other words than these, cannot be
made appear; and that which you call the Apostles Creed, differs far from
these words. 2. The Rite of laying on of hands, was no foundation, but the
Doctrine signified by it; therefore its said in the Text, The Doctrine of
Baptism, and of laying on of hands; and tho the Rite be not named, yet the
doctrine is contained in our Catechism, and the Rite it self mentioned in its
due place of the Ordination of Ministers. 3. Whatever this Foundation be, yet
its not to be found in some other Catechisms, which you prefer to ours, since
your own wants it, condemn not others.

Page 83. But the most sad and deplorable defect of your performance of this
Duty, is your casting out the reading of the Word of God from most of your
public Assemblies, directly contrary to Gods Institution, and Ordinance, for
the Instruction of his Church, insomuch that setting aside a verse or two for a
text or quotation at the discretion of the Teacher, the voice of God is never
publicly heard amongst Them: this is a matter of Fact, and undeniable; and in
all the Meetings of the North of Jreland in a whole Year, perhaps there is not
so much Scripture read as in one day, in our Church, by the strictest enquiry I
could make.

Ans. If this Libel were made out, I admire he should ever call any of us his
Brethren and Christians! but hold to his old Opinion, that Presbiterians belong
not to the Catholic Church. The remembrance of this makes the Author's
aspersions the more easy, but I would willingly know from the Author's mature
thoughts, what answer himself thinks should be given to such Words, would he
have us to belie our selves, and take with it; or will he take it patiently if
we say it is false? for he may as warrantably say that we have no Assemblies, as
that we have cast the Word of God out of them.

2. In this also we appeal to thousands, who for many years have been ear
witnesses to the contrary.

3. Its ordinary for Ministers of our Communion to Lecture on the Lords day
before they preach, and many of them to my certain knowledge, read either a
whole Chapter, or a Psalm; some others if a Chapter be long, or have textual
difficulties, will divide a Chapter, as they think fit for public Edification.

We commonly every Lord's Day sing the Words of God three or four times, and
ordinarily twice the number of verses, that the Author names at each time.

Besides our text, we quote and explain many Scriptures in our Sermons, and for
this we are condemned by some of another Persuasion, who I can instruct have
said, you may know men have little matter to Preach, when they quote many
Scriptures; and on that very account have disrelished our preaching: Tho many
Scriptures, especially when they are explained, are the very sinews of
Preaching, and one of the Proper means for convincing the Consciences of
hearers, as the Apostles Sermons do testify, which we find every where
fortified with Scriptures, tho they had the immediate assistance of God's
Spirit. I say not much at this time of other men's Sermons, how often they are
destitute of Scripture evidence, and the loss that hearers thereby sustain.

But now let the candid Reader judge, having laid before him the many ways, we
read and improve Scriptures in our public Assemblies; and that by the mercy of
God, we have now many Meeting Houses in the North of Ireland; and compare this
with what the Author has said, That in all the Meetings of the North of
Ireland in a whole year, perhaps there is not so much Scripture read as in one
day in our Church, I am peswaded that every thinking, and ingenuous person, of
the Author's own persuasion, will be surprised at these words! Nay I can
warrantably say, that often in one of our meeting Houses, on the Lords day;
there is as much Scripture first read by it self in a Lecture, then singing
with the words of David in Psalms, then many quotations with explanation, that
altogether will, I say frequently amount to as much as the four Chapters
mentioned by the Author: And how his four Chapters will hold up, with above
forty meeting Houses more; let any man of common sense judge.

But the Author alleges our practice is contrary to Gods Institution, because
as he says, we make use but of a verse or two for a Text.

Ans. If we did cast the word of God out of our Assemblies, as he says, then
our practice were contrary to the Institution, no doubt.

But seeing the Author mentions Institution, and thereupon immediately charge
us, with reading too little in public, and thereby guilty of neglecting the
Institution: this gives me occasion again to require the Author's showing of
that Institution, how much to read at once, or on one day: I shall never
dispute more against him, or any man on that Head; if this Institution can be
made appear, where shall we find it?

Shall this Institution for how much reading, be gathered from that which Moses
requires, Deuteronomy. 31: 10. Which the Author quoteth? but this was requird to be
done, at their Feasts of Tabernacles, one of the Jews extraordinary
Solemnities, 2ly* If the whole Law was then read is this the Institution to
read the whole Law at once? I believe the Author will make less reading serve
him for one day: so then he finds not our Institution from this Scripture.

Is it from Joshua's practice? but Joshua's reading the whole Law together,
will be found too great measure also.

Shall we have this Institution from Ezra's practice, at that extraordinary
time, Neh. 8. 3. Where Ezra read from morning until midday, but this will be
thought an extraordinary time the people not having seen the Law for a long
time before, and therefore not a rule for ordinary Assemblies.

2ly. When the Law was then read, expounding attended the reading, and
therefore is was not the mere pure reading only, which the Author seeks after.

3ly. If any should suppose their reading so long, to be a precedent or rule
for others to read as long, and so begin and practice it: yet according to the
Author, no Copy can come so near the Original as his way, who appoints four
Chapters: so the Institution for how much reading cannot be had here.

But may we have it from the practice of reading in the Synagogues? no, for if
we had an account how much they read, many would question if their practice,
could found an Institution to us.

Where then shall we find this Institution? may we not warrantably, when we are
looking every where for it; take into consideration Christ's practice in
reading? Luke 4. Who, so far as is recorded to us, read but a few verses of a
Chap. and then closed the Book.

Shall we consider the practice of his Apostles? but there we shall find much
Preaching but little or no reading, performed by themselves in public
Assemblies.

Let not the reader mistake, as if I were pleading either for little or no
reading in public Assemblies, but am only in pursuit of that Institution
mentioned by the Author, whereupon he foundeth his challenge, that we read too
little Scripture: though it was his work to have discovered this Institution,
before he had charged others with guilt for breach of it.

Seeing then that it does not appear, either by express Scripture or necessary
consequence, that there is any particular Institution of God, oblidging
Ministers to read so much or so little at one time in public Assemblies; then
no men have power to prescribe where God has not prescribed; having no
Commission for it: and seeing they have no power to prescribe, then they have no
power to judge, and condemn for not following their dictates.

Yet God has not left us destitute of general rules; whereby our practice may
be safely determined 1 Cor. 14 26. Let all things be done to edifying: this
direction is given by the Apostle, for the due ordering of the several parts of
the worship of God, when they came together in their Assemblies; that they
should have this general rule before all their eyes, viz. The edification of
the hearers, some of them thought the time of their worship should be spent in
one part of religious work, and some in another; but the Apostle requires to
let all center in this of public Edification.

This general rule was given to such as were called of God, and fitted to
Officiate, and speak in Christian Assemblies, the greatest, or most eminent of
them, had no Authority but for edification 2 Cor. 10. 8. The authority given
the Apostle Paul was for no more.

Seeing then that the Ministers of Christ are to do all in his Service for
edification: then this is to be their great Study; that by Christ's direction,
they may manage all the parts of his Worship, in such Season and Order, as may
be fittest for the edification of his people: and to make this the more
evident; it should be considered, that Christ has appointed his Ministers to
feed his flock; and as Stewards of the Mysteries of God, to give his people
their portion in due Season, as those who must give an account to their Master;
therefore to these Stewards it belongs, by their Masters direction to
distribute the portion, and proportion, of food fit for them: and consequently
the time to be spent in reading, Preaching, and Praying* in public Assemblies.

Page 84. The Author solaceth himself, that by their reading much, one may know
where to find the Worship of God in its purity.

One would think this alone were sufficient, to show the people where the
worship of God is in it is purity, and to prove our Assemblies to be the true
Church of God; against all that come in competition with us.

Ans. Let him not who puteth on his Armor, boast as he that puteth it off: for
to make much reading of Scripture a proof, of the purity of a Church, is a
false sign: for the Church of the Jews had much reading of Scriptures; (the
Author has quoted them already for much reading;) yet even then they were in a
most corrupt State, specially by their own Traditions, which they added to the
Word of God. For which cause, our Savior says their worship was vain: let all
concerned take notice of this, who still keep a door open, for the inventions
of men, in the worship of God.

2ly. If this new opinion of the Author would pass through the world as an
Oracle; that every Church who read much Scriptures is a pure Church, then how
easy were it for the most degenerate, Aposttate Church in the world, for
retriving the reputation of Purity; to appoint much Scripture to be read, I
doubt not, but upon condition, that all the reformed Churches, would esteem the
Apostate Church of Rome, a pure Church; and consequently return to her again,
she would soon appoint Scriptures to be read in abundance, for by the Author's
argument, this of reading much would prove her pure, what ever abominations,
she were sunk in otherwise.

What the Author has further Page 86. is all answered, except reviling: saying
twice, we are self condemned. I will not revile again, nor desire the Reader to
do it, yet by what is already conserted, if he be judicious, he will know who
are self condemned.

Page 86. The Author comes to answer six pretenses, against reading of
Scriptures in public, which are all but wasting his own, and his Readers time:
pretenses he may call them; but who are the pretenders, I know not; for they
are not of our Communion, who either give, or pretend such reasons, and
therefore may rationally dismiss them whole Sale, as nothing concerned in them.

Whether these reasons be Excogitat, or heard by the Ear, he best knows.

However, any thing occurring in them new, and not answered already, shall be
considered; as occasion requires.

The first reason is, that the people are oblidged to read the Scriptures at
home, and being thus acquainted with them; the reading of them is not necessary
in their public meetings.

Ans. 1. In short we have, and give no reason against reading Scriptures in
public* therefore his answer is superfluous as to us. Yet,

2. Private reading of Scriptures, is an ordinance of God, as sure as public
reading.

3. Private reading of Scriptures has been signally blessed of God; as to the
Bereans who daily searched the Scriptures, that they might understand what they
heard in public, and know whether it were the truth of God or not: this their
private diligence was so blessed of God, that there is a remark put upon it by
the Holy Ghost; Acts 17. 11. therefore many of them believed.

Page 88. It is therefore a great temptation to the people to be negligent, and
a great want of care in a Church, to leave so material a thing, as the reading
of the word of God, to private diligence.

Ans. It Is great want of care in a Church, when people are not exhorted to read
Scriptures in private: and to tell them, as the Author does, Page 180 of his
Book that some parcels of the Book of Common Prayer, is as full and proper a
service, as any Master of a Family can desire to offer to God: and no
exhortation to read any portion of the Scriptures, as immediately Dictated by
him.

But 2ly, This is no pretense of ours against public reading, the Author
misseth his mark.

He adds, That many of the common people of our persuasion, are ignorant of
the very History of the Bible.

Ans: The Lord in mercy, grant the people both of your persuasion, and ours,
more true knowledge; but some times there is a beam in a man's own eye, when he
challenges a mote in another.

For the 2d pretense, Page 89. That copies of the Bible are now common and
easy to be had, and most Families, have some in them that can read.

Ans: We have great reason to give thanks to God that it is so, and the greater
fault it is to neglect reading of Scriptures in Families, seeing God has dealt
so bountifully with us.

Page 90. And to rely upon peoples procuring, and reading copies of the Bible
privately, is to leave Gods way, and presumptuously depend on that, which has no
promise annexed to it.

Ans: If private reading of the Scriptures have no promise annexed to it; then
what profit is it for any man to read the Scripture? if no blessing be
promised, his labor is lost: if I had not read this expression in the Author's
Book, it would been hard believing any report, that such dangerous,
unwarrantable words, could have dropped from his Pen.

2ly, God has commanded private reading of the Scriptures, as expressly, as he
has commanded public reading: whereby it becomes the Ordinance of God, no
less than public reading, let the Reader observe what God speaks, Deuteronomy. 6.
from verse 6. and downward, The Laws of God were to be written, on the very
posts of their houses, that they might read them frequently.

3ly, Seeing then this private reading of the Word of God is his Ordinance, no
less than public reading; by what warrant can the Author say, there is no
promise annexed to it: But besides this,

4ly, I will prove from the Word of God that promises are annexed, to the
People of God's private Diligence, in reading the Scriptures, Let the Reader
observe Deuteronomy, 6. verse 3, where we have these words, Hear therefore, O Israel,
and observe to do it, that it may be well with thee, and that ye may increase
mightily, as the Lord God of thy fathers has promised thee, in the Land that
flows with milk and honey. Here is a comprehensive promise, containing many
blessings; That it may be well with thee: and next, the qualifications of the
persons to whom this Promise belongs, follows verse 5. Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thine heart. Verse 6. and these words which I command
thee this day, shall be in thine heart: and verse 7. And thou shall teach them
diligently unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine
house. And verse 9 Thou shall write them upon the posts of thine house, and one
thy gates. By which Scripture its evident, that such as diligently make use of
the Word of God in their Houses, have the promise of God, that it shall be well
with them. Let the Author find out a more express promise, made to public
reading, than is here to private reading, then its no presumption to depend on
this promise, annexed to private reading.

Ibid: There are still many families even amongst Protestants, that can neither
compass a Bible, or get any to read it.

Ans: Blessed be God, that even poor people among us, will pinch themselves,
rather than want a Bible, and such as are so very poor that they cannot procure
one, it were charity in the Author, who is able, to provide some Bibles for
such indigent persons; As for these who cannot read, where God gives a heart
for it, they take help of their Neighbors who can read.

2. The Author injuriously supposes them, to be deprived of all public
reading of the Word of God, which I have proved already to be an unjust
imputation; ibid: (and there are at this day too many of all parties, that
neither read themselves, nor hear one Chapter read, in a whole year, except at
Church

Ans: And no great wonder, if they never be exhorted to private reading in their
Families, and withal told that there is no promise annexed to private reading;
which is not only comfortless and discouraging Doctrine, if they have no
promise of God to be bettered by their reading, but pernicious to the souls of
men.

Page 92. The Author says That the word of God cannot be presumed to have the
same efficacy when read privately, as it has when read in the Assemblies of
Christians: since he has given us a peculiar promise to be present in such
Assemblies.

Ans: The promise of this peculiar presence, is Matthew. 18. 20. Where two or
three are met together in my name, etc. The presence promised in this
Scripture, belongs not only to public Assemblies, but even to two or three
meeting in Christ's Name for his Worship; then a private Family, if they were but
two, if they meet together for his Worship, agreeing together to ask of God,
according to the Command of God, these few Christians thus met together, have
the promise of Christ's presence, no less secured unto them, than if the
Assembly were greater, Christ's own words, prove this to be undeniable.

Page 92. The third pretense alleged is, that reading takes up too much time,
and is a hinderance to the more profitable Duty, of what you commonly call
preaching.

Ans: Its tedious to be always put to declare, that not one of these pretenses
are ours.

The Author may debate against himself if he will; yet

Page 93. The Author gives a new Concession, which is in my opinion too ample,
and more than we desire, or resolve to practice, when he says, Suppose that
upon some extraordinary occasion it may be lawful to omit reading of Gods Word
in our Assemblies, that we may have the more time to manage a Discourse for the
instruction, of the people.

Ans: If there be time to manage a Discourse, I do not think it lawful
altogether, to omit reading of the Word of God, in a public Christian
Assembly, conveened for the Worship of God; for we are to expect the Assembly
sanctified by the Word and Prayer, to pass from much reading, to no reading, is
too great haste.

Page 94. His fourth pretense is, That the Scriptures are hard to be
understood, or applied, and therefore only so much of them ought to be read at
a time, as the Minister may apply to his Auditory.

Ans. Albeit this pretense or Objection, has more to say for it self than the
rest.

Yet we pretend to no manner of Reason against public reading; seeing its both
our principle and practice; therefore its not candide to represent us to the
World, as enemies to it, and disputing against our common practice.

2ly, To Explain Scripture to the people, we judge necessary, and the very way
of God fitted for Edification: practiced by our Savior himself, the Levites,
the Prophets, and the Apostles, and to represent us as Expounding, or applying
only a Verse, is not fair, that being your own way, not ours, to explain but a
verse or two on the Lords Day; it being common with us to expound ten times
more Scripture every Lords Day than you do, conceiving it a very mean discharge
of a Ministers duty only to read, and so have done, and never found to be the
way of Christ, or any of his Apostles, whose work in public was always to
Expound, and apply Scripture; and therefore our way in public Gospel
administrations, is more agreeable to Christ and his Apostles way than yours.

Page 94. Its the opinion of the Reformed Churches, that the Scriptures are
plain in all things necessary to Salvation.

Ans: And yet its the general opinion of the Reformed Churches, that Scripture
should be Expounded to the people.

2ly, Though God in his mercy has made the Essentials of Christianity plain;
yet nevertheless the Apostle made it his care, to make known the whole counsel
of God; we are obliged to make full proof of our Ministry, in helping the
people to know their whole duty to God, revealed in the Scripture.

3ly, If this argument of the author has any strength, it militateth against
all Ministerial Instructions; and that no more is necessary, but read the
Foundamentals of the Christian Religion to the people, and so have done.

4ly, Do not some wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction? and whose duty
is it so much as Ministers, to prevent this danger by explaining these things
that are hard to be understood?

But the Author still appears out of Charity, with this Explaining, and
applying; for

Ibid: The holy Scriptures when heard with humility, and attention, apply
themselves better than any man can do.

Ans: If it were as the Author says, then there is little use for a Ministry
in the World, and at most a reading ministry might do all; let them but read
well, and the Scriptures will apply themselves: the Christian World then is but
cheated, to be at so vast a charge, for maintaining Ministers only to read.

2ly, To say that Scriptures apply themselves without any adventitous help, or
assistance, is not sound, the Author should leave place at least for the help
of the Spirit of God; without which, Scripture will never apply themselves.

3ly, The Author here disputes against the very Examples, that Christ* and his
Apostles has given us, in applying of Scriptures: not being of his mind, that
the Scriptures would apply themselves.

4ly, If the Scriptures apply themselves, How was it then that the Disciples of
Christ (who cannot be said to want humility, and attention, and had often heard
the Scripture) yet continued, so slow either to understand, or believe the
Scriptures? they could never find the Scriptures applying themselves, until
Christ opened the eyes of their understanding.

Page 95. It ought therefore to be our first care to read them to the people
often, and solemnly; that they may be acquainted with the whole body of them;
and then one word of Application may do more good than many Sermons.

Ans: Besides all the Scriptures that we solemnly read, and make use of in our
public Assemblies, wherein we are not behind with our neighbors; I say
besides, its our care to exhort our people to diligence in reading Scriptures
in private, for the increase of Scripture knowledge; the performance whereof,
they find to be blessed of God, according to his promise. Wishing our
Neighbors were more exhorted to the same duty; this serves also to refel the
Calumny insinuated in the Authors following words; saying, That our not reading
looks like a design on the people, and is agreeable to the artifices of
Romish Priests.

This Suggestion is irrational, to say that Ministers are on a design of
concealing Scriptures, who exhort, beseech, and obtest the people to diligence
in reading them, in so much that its censurable amongst us, if there be a
known, and common neglecter of this duty, I wish these words, Psalm: 15. 3. be
daily considered.

What the Author Pages 96, 97 and 98 delivers, requires no answer,
containing no new Argument: and for calling the Scriptures a dead letter, we
abhor it, tho the Author makes it the fifth pretense against reading.

Page 99. The pretense is, That a Child may read the Scriptures, and so perform
this Duty.

Ans: Neither do we make this a pretense against public reading; for tho it be
true upon the matter, that a Child may read; yet we know that reading the Word
of God in public Christian Assemblies, belongs to the Ministers of the
Gospel, and accordingly we practice, and employ no Children for that Work.

Page 100. The Author gives instance of an advice in our Directory, To read
over all the Canonical Books of Scripture in order.

Ans: Let the Reader observe, that there is no Apocripha to be read by this
Advice.

2ly, That they directed no Canonical Scripture to be lest out of public
Gospel administrations, so that they were on no design to conceal Scriptures
from the people.

3ly, I know where this of reading the Scriptures in order, was not only
designed, but begun by some of our number, and considerable progress made: but
Persecution driving them from public work; and the people of our persuasion
under great sufferings, their Ministers were constrained to select such
Scriptures, as were most apposit for instructing, exhorting, and comforting an
afflicted people.

All that I find further to the end of this Chapter, bears no argument, but
are mere groundless Invectives: and I shall only say, that if I found my self
so keen for much public reading, and inclined to discourage private reading of
the Word of God, I could not but suspect my self to be acted by a Pharisaical
Spirit.

CHAP. 4. Of Bodily Worship.
SECT. 1.
I Find a great Defect in all the Authors Discourse, by his not stating the
question, betwixt Dissenters and him, upon any of the Heads he Treats, which
method requires to be first done; that so the Reader might know distinctly,
what is maintained by the Author, and what is denied by Dissenters; but he
abruptly ingageth in Probations, before his Reader can know what it is that
must be proved: whereby its impossible for him rationally or convincingly to
place a Censure; as for instance, in this same Chapter he begins off hand
with his Proofs of Bodily Worship; which Dissenters deny not; and so goes on,
imposing on his Reader, as if we were all stated Enemies to Bodily Adoration:
which is an injust Imputation.

2ly, The Authors stating of Bodily Worship as bodily without internal
Adoration, as one of the distinct grand parts of Worship by its self, is not
safe; because Bodily Worship separated from internal adoration, can be no
acceptable Worship to God: which is the rather to be adverted, because in the
following Discourse, it will appear, that the Author will have it Worship, yea
accepted Worship; where not only there was a privation and want, of inward
homage, but a fixed hatred of the Object externally worshipped.

Before I proceed to examine the Authors Arguments, it will not be amiss to
take notice of his Concession on this Head, Page 133. saying, But that in
whatsoever place, or whatever time, in whatsoever posture, we offer up our
Spirits and hearts to God, we are accepted of him. This must be whether we pray
sitting, lying, standing, or kneeling, etc. This breaks the bones of all his
arguments: seeing praying with grace in the heart will be acceptable to God in
any posture.

All the Author has on this first Section until Page 106. are probations for
bodily worship, or external Adoration, and the Scriptures quoted, we accept
without dispute, knowing we should glorify God in body, and Spirit, according
to his command.

But here he begins a retreat from his concession, as too ample: and to say
truth, it was too large, being so ill cautioned, his words now are; It being a
contempt of God, and contrary to his Commands, to pray to him for instance
without some posture of adoration, when we can do it.

Ans. This is an unwarrantable censure, besides it is being contradictory to his
Concession, for Elijah, so far as we can understand by his circumstances, might
have choosed another posture, when he sat, and spoke to God, 1 Kings 19. 6.
whom we cannot charge with contempt of God, being a Prophet so zealous for his
glory.

When our Savior gave the miracle of feeding so many thousands, with a few
loaves, Matthew. 14. 19. he commanded the people to sit down on the grass; and
looking up to Heaven, he blessed, and brake, etc. Here was sitting at most
Divine and Solemn worship, and yet no contempt on the peoples part, for they
were Commanded to sit down.

Godly men who are acquainted with continual resorting into God, and making
their requests known to him in every thing, praying always: may often in a
day, yea, possibly in one hour direct their prayers unto God. The Artificer in
his Shop, the Merchant in a public Exchange, the Soldier at his Post: may
find it necessary to send from their hearts many ejaculatory prayers in the
posture they are in, without contempt of God, though they could alter their
posture, knowing they might have more than one of these short usual prayers,
before they could get the posture of their bodies altered, and fitted for
external adoration: so that the Author should have better cautioned his
censures.

Page 107. 108. Are only proofs that bodily worship is due, and therefore no
answer necessary, seeing we are as much for it as the Author, in the season God
requires it: but in this last Page he gives instance of bodily worship from
devils, our Savior looked on this bodily worship to be so indispensably his
due, that he accepted of it from the very Devils; Mark 3. 11. And unclean
spirits when they saw him, fell down before him, and cried, thou art the son of
God.

Ans. The Author is proving the duty of bodily worship; and how Devils who are
spirits can perform bodily worship, I know not, seeing they have no bodies, but
what they assume or possess; It Is certainly the duty of Angels, good and bad,
to Adore the Son of God; but an example from their manner of worship, to bodily
worship is not rational; when we seek examples, of that which is to be
performed bodily, we must seek it from such as have bodies; and Devils
possessing bodies, are but miserable examples; and to say, the worship of
Devils was accepted by Christ, is a piece of new Divinity; for accepting a
performance, imports approbation; approbation of an Act, imports it is
conformity to the Rule God has prescribed; how then, any actions of Devils can
be accepted, approved, and conformed to the rule given by God, whatever that
rule was, let the Author make out? Christ came to destroy their works; this
should the rather be observed, because of what the Author says, Page 110th.
But bending, or bowing of the body, is that, which is properly in Scripture
called worship, as signifying immediately, and naturally, the bending and
submission of our Souls, and nothing else. How the external worshipping of
Devils, will naturally signify the submission of the minds in Devils who hate
Christ and his Dominion; let the Author see to it; I shall have occasion for
farther Reflection on this hereafter; and so pass it now; and that our Savior
accepted their service is against the Text; for he rejected it, not liking such
preachers; withal it is most probable these Devils designed a public affront to
our Savior, in giving him a testimony, as his friends, that so Christ's
malicious enemies, might have their blasphemy fortified, that he did cast out
Devils by the prince of Devils, as follows in the same Chap. verse 22. by the
prince, etc.

Page 110. If we look into the Scriptures, we shall not find praying, praising,
etc. Termed worship; they are indeed, duties which we ought to perform to the
honor of God: but not immediate direct Acts of worship, properly so called; and
in a few lines after, praises, immediately signify the sense we have of Gods
Excellencies.

Ans. Why then did the Author, in his distribution of worship into its parts,
set down praises in the front, as the primary worship, if it be not a direct
Act of worship?

2ly. Praise is more then a sense of Gods Excellencies, having Emanant Acts
toward God the object; and is not only a Religious impression.

3ly. With the Author's good leave, the Scriptures speak very properly, and
there we find praising and glorifying God allowed the name of worship, Psalm.
86. 9. All Nations whom thou have made, shall come and worship before thee, O
Lord, and shall glorify thy Name; Praise is the most direct and immediate
glorifying of God, and the most proper Act of Adoration Psalm. 66. 4. All the
Earth shall worship thee, and shall sing unto thee: they shall sing to thy Name.

Ibid. But bending, or bowing the body, is that which is properly in Scripture
called worship, See this before,

Ans. The Author's terming of bodily bowing, as the most proper worship, is
contrary to the Doctrine of Christ. Joh. 4. 23. But the hour comes, and now
is, when the true worshippers; shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth.
for the Father seeks such to worship him; Here Christ prefers worship in
Spirit and Truth, to all other worship ( Name and thing) as the most proper and
principal worship, without which, bodily worship is often performed.

And that bowing of the body, does naturally signify the submission of the
mind, besides, what is said, let the Reader observe Mark 15: 19. And they smote
him on the Head, with a reed, and did spit upon him, and bowing their knees
worshipped Him. Here was bodily worshipping, but no submission of mind, how then
does bowing of the head naturally signify it; these profane Soldiers, were
smiting, and spitting on Christ; and yet bowing their knees, to him; natural
signs, are not fallacious, but this is.

Ibid. In the Old Testament, the words rendered worship, signifies properly,
and Originaly, to bow down, or prostrate the body.

Ans. What then? do we deny bodily Adoration, does the Author consider, that he
disputes against no opponent? it all this be Lybelled against dissenters.

2ly. The Author says again and again, that bowing of the head, is properly
worshipping; If these Original words, signifying bowing of the head do always
signify worship; then let him resolve me of the reason, why we have, so often
bowing of the head, expressed by one word in the Original, and worshipping by
another word in the same place; if this bowing be properly worship, why is it
said they bowed and worshipped, for according to the Author in all these places
it must be thus, they worshipped, and they worshipped, for instance Genesis 24. 26.
And the man bowed down his head and worshipped the Lord, there is one word here
for bowing, and another sor worshipping, in the Original (...) is to bow (...)
to adore; So Psalm. 95. 5. There is one word for bowing, and another for
Adoring, and Genesis 24. 52. quoted by the Author, where there is but one word,
yet its that which commonly signifies Adoration, incurvare adorandi causa,
Buxtorf: and it is express in the Text, it was to the Lord, the object
specifying the Act: for otherwise a man may bow the head, intending no manner
of worship to any object; therefore bowing the head of it self, cannot
immediately and naturally signify worship, or submission of the Soul, as is
asserted by the Author, Page 111. so the word (...) properly signifies a bodily
action, which is translated worship.

Ans. Yet our Savior himself Transferreth this word, to signify Spiritual
worship, Joh. 4. 23. which may be performed without any bodily Action.

SECT. 2.
FIrst, then when we come into the public Assemblies, we believe our selves to
come into Christ's presence; because he has promised* Matthew. 18. 20. Where two
or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. And
therefore in obedience to the Commands of God in Scripture, it is our custom to
lift up our hearts to him in prayer, and bow our bodies before him.

Ans: Here the ground of the Quarrel, that we bow not when we enter the Church,
yielding some religious sign of Reverence; or rather that we do not religiously
bow to the Church, as shall be made appear; the foundation that he lays for
this invention, is Matthew. 18. 21. Christ's promised presence, let us therefore
consider the Text; wherein first we have the promise it self, I will be in the
midst of them, that is to protect, favor, and assist them, without any
extraordinary appearing of his Glory, which is not here promised, thus he may
so appear also, if he will, and when he will, and after what manner he will. 2.
This Promise is made to such as are gathered in his name, that is at his
command, for his service, and worship, with dependence upon him. 3. They must
be gathered, the promise is not to the place, but to the assembly. 4. The
promise is made to the very fewest that can meet together, on the foresaid
account.

Observe, That external Adoration is due two ways; 1. When we approach God in
immediate acts of Worship, as Prayer, and Praises. 2. When it pleases God in an
extraordinary manner to appear in his Glory, the due season then, for external
signs of inward homage and reverence is, when we perform these immediate acts of
Worship in our Assemblies; or if God shall please, to give glorious signs of
his extraordinary presence, as he did to Moses, when the Bush was burning but
not consumed; or as the Lord appeared, after Solomon had made an end of
Praying, when the fire came down from Heaven, and the Glory of the Lord filled
the house; then all the Children of Israel, beholding the fire and glory of the
Lord, bowed themselves and worshipped, whenever the Lord does thus appear,
external adoration is due.

But it cannot be said, that the Lords ordinary presence, with his people,
requires this bodily reverence; for there is a peculiar presence of Christ
promised to the Ministers of the Gospel, who bear his Commission; Lo I am with
you to the end of the world; yet this does not oblige them always, ad semper,
to external acts of adoration, otherways they should be always in these acts,
he being always with them; So there is a peculiar promise, that Christ will
make his abode with Believers, Joh. 14. 23. And we will make our abode with
him, this is also a peculiar promise of his presence, for its appropriated unto
sound believers, who love him, and keep his words, yet this does not oblige
unto a constant bodily worship.

Observe also, That this promise is made to the Assembly gathered together, but
not to the place where they assemble: How is it then, that religious reverence
is paid to the House, Church, or Fabric, before the assembly be gathered; for
if there were but one in the Church, he who comes in, must perform some
religious external reverence; yea, if there be none in the House, he who comes
first in, must do the like, otherwise he is a Transgressour, and guilty of
profane contempt; yea, if a man enter that House, upon any other occasion, when
no public Worship is to be performed, yet he must do the like, which does
undenyably prove, that its not Christ's presence, but the house that is honored,
with this religious reverence, which will yet further appear, if it be
considered, that if a few persons meet together to ask any thing of God, and
for his Worship, the promised presence of Christ is there, no less than in the
public Church; yet religious reverence is not testified by any external sign,
in that private place, as in the other; therefore this religious honor is not
rendered to Christ as present in the assemblies of his people, but to the Altar
or Fabric of the House, and this being religious Worship, let the Author
consider, how this practice can be reconciled to the second Command.

Page 116. Uncovering the Head is a common work of respect, and then follows
a digression concerning covering the Head, which is not material to the purpose
in hand; But Page 117. However being an honor paid to men, there is no reason
why it should not be paid to God.

Ans: Custom having prevailed among us, to make uncovering the Head a sign of
Deference, and conferring honor on others, is therefore practiced by us, in
acts of religious Worship, as Prayer, Praises, and hearing the immediate Words
of God read, as a part of his Worship, but this is no argument to uncover the
Head to any Creature, when thereby religious reverence and worship is designed;
but at length, other pillars failing, as not able to bear up the honor
conferred on Churches, the Author has recourse to his rich Magazine, where
there is no want.

And it is one of the Articles of our Church, that the Church has power to
order Rites, and Ceremonies; that is, to determine, what particular things
comes under the Apostles general word of Decency.

Ans: Here its to be observed, that the Author is defending religious bowing,
when they enter the Church, which is worship, and for proof of its lawfulness,
fairly makes this his Argument, Our Church has power to order Rites and
Ceremonies; it follows then, that by this power the church may appoint new
worship; the inference is native, seeing according to the author, its therefore
lawful to bow the head religiously, because the church has this power: I
desire he would review his first preliminarie position, that it belongs to God
only, to give rites, how he will be worshipped; how can these two stand, it
belongs to God only, and yet the church has the power to institute new
worship.

If the Church has such power, it were a most necessary service, and justice
to the World, to discover and make once that commission appear, whereby the
Church is invested with this power, and if no man can make it appear, why is
such a power assumed? That the Church has power to order external
circumstances, necessarly belonging to the Worship of God, and determinable by
the prudent use of natures light, and the general rules of Scripture is readily
yielded; but what is this to a power of prescribing worship, which God has not
prescribed? as to bow the head religiously unto, or before any creature as
sharer in the worship; here the Author overstretcheth the article.

Page 118. We stand at our praisings, thanksgivings, etc. at our confessions of
sin, and at our prayers, we present our selves before God on our knees.

Ans: That there ought to be signs of religious reverence in all acts of
immediate commanded worship, we are agreed, but there appears no reason, why
the Author should make such a difference, between confession of sin and
prayers, for confession of sin and thanksgivings, are performed in prayer; and
for confessions of Faith; I demand, by what rule they are made any part of
worship? except as they may be comprehended under the heads of Prayer, or
Praises.

As for kneeling in the time of Prayer, which I know is most noticed, let the
reader understand, that we are far from offending at the kneeling of others in
public assemblies, but standing is also a warrantable praying posture, which
is our practice, and in numerous Congregations (such as by the Lords Mercy we
have) convenience for kneeling cannot be had, without forcing many of the
Congregation to such a distance, as they could not hear the Prayers, which in
their hearts they should offer up to God.

Ibid: The Author asserteth another sort of kneeling, than kneeling in prayer,
viz. a kneeling before the Elements of Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper. We
celebrat the Holy Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, in a worshipping
posture, I know that many except against this.

Ans: Many do except against it, and of all the Arguments you have mustered,
not one of them passes muster, and no wonder others make exception, seeing your
self makes the first exception, before ever you bring them to the field, as by
your appended marginal Not appears, saying, the Authors intention is not to
assert, that the Scriptures require kneeling at the Lords Supper; I see a bad
cause will sometimes make the courage of a Champion to faint.

If the Scripture require not kneelling at the Lords Supper, with what
confidence can any man require it, why are we charged as deficient seeing the
Scripture does not require? To what purpose did the Author write these words in
his Preliminaries? That the holy Scriptures contain the revelations of Gods
will concerning his worship; and yet by the Author, the Holy Scriptures contain
not this kneeling, as any Revelation of his will; it follows undenyably,
therefore kneeling at the Lords Table, is no Revelation of Gods will, if this
conclusion be displeasing, blame the Authors two propositions, and his marginal
Note, that can admit of no other conclusion: and thus he yields the Cause,
leaving kneeling before the Elements of Bread and Wine, deprived of any
Revelation of Gods will; let him advise us now, what name we shall give it; the
Authors own words constrains me to place it among the mere unwarrantable
Inventions of men.

But the Author will not yet let it pass, therefore adds in his marginal
Note; but to show that it is not contrary to the institution of Christ, or
practice of the Apostles, who compare our receiving it, with the Jews partaking
of their Altar, to which they approached with adoration.

Ans: We shall have the Author answering himself in this also, by his first
Position, Page 3d That it belongs only to God to give Rules, how he will be
worshipped: For if it belong to God only, then there is no place left for man's
prescribing of Worship, whether the worship prescribed be contrary or not
contrary, yet its an encroachment on Gods peculiar Prerogative, to prescribe
his own worship.

2ly, We find the Lord charging guilt on this account, because he did not
command, Jer. 7. 31. They have built the high places of Tophet, etc. which I
commanded them not, neither came it into my heart; Their wicked practices of
burning their Sons, and their Daughters in the fire, was contrary to Gods Law;
yet the way that God takes to express their guilt, is because God had not
commanded it: So Jer. 14. 14, and 19. 5. and 23. 32. which the Reader may
peruse, and shall find in all these places, the displeasure of God discovered,
because they acted without his command: so that the Author's endeavors to make
it appear, that kneeling at the Lords Table, is not contrary to the Institution
of Christ, will not deliver it from the reflection of being a mere invention of
man.

However the Author essayeth what the Scriptures will do for him.

First, The altar was of Old the Lords Table, from whence his attendants were
fed Mal. 1. 7, Ye offer polluted bread upon mine Altar.

Ans. We have now no altar but Christ, and no sacrifices but Spiritual,
therefore the Altar for sacrifice is no pattern to us under the Gospel.

2ly. The Altar of Old was for offerings to God, the Lords Table is God's
offering meat to us, I hope the Author is not of that mind that we offer up
Christ again, as a sacrifice in the Sacrament, so that there is nothing here
for the kneeling required. But I might add.

3ly. That any Reader may be surprised, to find the Author quoting Scripture
for this kneeling, seeing, he will not assert, that the Scriptures requires
kneeling at the Lords Supper; 2 On this account the Israelites came to the
Altar, and worshipped before it, as being Gods Table, for which he quoteth 2 Chronicles. 6. 12. And he stood before the Altar of the Lord, The Author writes no
more of this Verse, but passes to the next, where he finds kneeling, I shall
therefore set down the whole two Verses as they are Dictated by God; and he
stood before the Altar of the Lord in the presence of all the Congregation of
Israel, and spread forth his hands, Verse 13. for Solomon made a brazen
Scaffold of five cubits long, and five cubits broad, and three cubits high, and
had set it, in the midst of the Court; and upon it he stood, and kneeled down
upon his knees, before all the Congregation of Israel, and spread forth his
hands toward Heaven. The Reader may now observe, that Solomon stood before the
Altar, but it is not said that he kneeled down before the Altar, 2. That the
Scaffold whereon he stood; was in the midst of the Court, and therefore not so
framed, as to be nearest unto the Altar; 3. That he spread forth his hands to
Heaven, and therefore, directed no worship toward the Altar, but to the God of
Heaven; It Is said he kneeled before all the Congregation of Israel; Yet he did
not worship them, and no more is said, 1 King. 8. 54. The Altat was before him,
when he was kneeling, but he kneeled not to the Altar; therefore his worship
being neither directed to Altar nor Congregation, though before them both; but
worshipping the God of Heaven, and earth, he kneeled and spread forth his hands
to God, in that praying posture, of kneeling; for the spreading of his hands
and kneeling was to one, and the same object.

Another Scripture quoted by the Author is 2 King. 18. 22. Ye shall worship
before this Altar in Jerusalem.

Ans. The Author should have been so just to his Reader, as let him know who
spoke these words, for they are not the words of God; neither Hezekiah himself,
nor any inspired man of God ever uttered them, and yet Page 127. It Is
reiterated with confidence; as God commanded them to do, 2 King. 18. 22. shall
the words of an ignorant blaspheming Athiest, be called the commands of God?
who (as our commentators well observe) knew not what he said; can the Author
have a quiet Conscience, to allow the world to take this for the command of
God? which has no authority, but the rambling invective of a cheating Railer,
I need say no more of this, it speaks too much of it self.

3ly. The Communion Table, is called the Lords Table 1 Cor, 10. 21.

Ans. Quid sequitur? The Author quoteth this Scripture, and says not one word
more of it, but leaves his Reader to guess and so shall I too, but that which
is in the Text, makes against the Author, the Lords Table being no Altar for
Sacrifices to God.

4ly Page 119. The Israelites partaking of the Altar, is proposed as an Example
for our partaking of the Lords Table 1 Cor. 10. 16. The Cup of blessing, which
we bless is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? Verse 18. Behold* Israel
after the flesh, are not they which eat of the Sacrifices, partakers of the
Altar.

Ans. All being yielded that is found in these Verses, no gain to the Author
emergeth; such as Sacrificed, did partake of the Altar, what then? we have no
word of authority, to Eat at the Lords Table; because Sacrificers of Old did
partake of the Sacrifices, we have Christ's Command to eat at his Table, but 2.
It had been necessary to consider the Scop and sense of the Text, for the
Apostle is warning the people of God, to ^ee from Idolatry Verse 14. Wherefore
dearly beloved flee from Idolatry, and not to partake of Sacrifices; offered to
idols, for these who eat, and partake of these Sacrifices offered to Idols, do
declare their regard to that Altar, and profession unto which these Sacrifices
belong, therefore these who eat of these Sacrifices, are said to partake of
that Altar: and the Apostle fully clearing the sense of his own words, adds
Verse 20. The things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils,
and not to God; and then Verse. 21. Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and
the cup of Devils: ye cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the Table
of Devils; the sense then is plain, as the Israelites of Old eating of the
sacrifices, commanded of God, did thereby declare their adherence to the True
God, and his Altar; so these who eat of the sacrifices offered to Idols and
Devils, do in so far abandon the profession of Christianity, and betake
themselves to an idolatrous Altar, and profession: let the Author cast up our
Commentators, and he will see, what is now said, besides that the Text of it
self, makes it plain. And again I say, however it be taken, there is nothing in
it for the Author's purpose of worshipping before the Altar: so that I am
surprised, to see it adduced for that end.

5. In allusion to this religious Eating with bodily worship, it is prophesied
of our Savior Psalm. 22 29. all they that be fat upon earth, and Verse 26 The
meek shall eat and worship, since then Scripture sets forth to us religious
Eating, at the Lords Table, with worship, and the Holy Communion, is such an
Eating at his Table; it follows that the Scripture warrands our worshipping,
when we eat.

Ans. This is a prophecy of the conversion of Heathens, as appears Verse 27.
all the ends of the world shall remember, and turn unto the Lord, and all the
kindreds of the Nations shall worship before thee. Let the Reader remark, that
the worship is to be performed to God; neither before Altar nor Table, but they
shall worship, before thee; the eating here spoken of; is partaking of Christ's
benefits, and being turned to the Lord, they shall worship him; but that it
shall be either before Altar or Table, is manifest adding to the Text, so this
argument fails also, though the Author says, that the Scripture sets forth to
us, a religious eating at the Lords Table with worship, for which he has
brought no proof nor never will.

Page 120. We are commanded in Scripture to receive the holy Eucharist, in
remembrance of Christ's Death etc. the same Scriptures command us to worship our
Savior, Psalm. 45. 11. for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him.

Ans. We are commanded to worship Christ, therefore, we are oblidged, to
worship him as represented, by the Elements of bread and wine, where is the
consequence? worshipping of Christ is not the dispute, but to worship him,
before these consecrated signs of his body and blood set before us, designedly
to worship Christ by them; there are many ways of worshipping Christ, though not
by such representations.

This consideration prevailed with the protestant Church of Poland, to oblidge
all their members to receive kneeling or standing.

Ans. We will give them all due deference, that is as far as they are followers
of Christ, and the Apostles sought no more, and that Synod shall get no more.

Page 122. We are commanded to do what Christ did, and he Instituted, and his
Disciples received it in a Table posture, and therefore so ought we.

This is the Author's objection against himself.

He answers, that we are not required, nor is it convenient, to imitate all
that Christ did;

Ans. How is it then? that our Author Page 107. Says, our Savior
undoubtedly, is the best example we can propose to our selves for the worship
of God, and we ought, to imitate, what he did and approved.

What has made his example so bad in the Sacrament, seeing he says, it is
undoubtedly the best. There is nothing to obstruct our imitation in this, though
some of Christ's practices are unimitable by us, and it were not only
inconvenient, as the Author Terms it, but blasphemous, to attempt an
Imitation; but no such thing appears, by his sitting at a Table, and feasting
his Friends; therefore there being no reason against the Imitation, his example
is a most safe rule for us: considering.

2ly. That this our Saviors sitting, at Table, was not accidental or
fortuitous, but of choice by him, who is the wisdom of the Father.

3ly. And that this posture of sitting, was in it self most suitable to a
comfortable communion and Feast; seeing Christ has determined* to dignifie them
with a Feast of Love, in his own presence before his departure.

But our Author must needs have a better posture than by Christ's example.

Page 123. The Apostle Paul, having occasion to mention what he had received of
the Lord, mentions only our Saviors taking bread, giving thanks, etc. Without
the circumstances of the number of receivers, his posture, etc.

Ans. It Is not safe to Excogitata difference between the master, and his
faithful servant, in Spiritual Institutions, as if the master were for sitting,
and the servant for another posture: but

2ly. Try if you can make it appear, that ever the apostle Paul, did prescribe
or practice another posture at the Lords Table, than sitting.

3ly. The Evangelists, having so fully asserted this posture of sitting, there
was no need, nor occasion for the Apostles mentioning of it; and all these
records of the Evangelists, were by the command of Christ, and inspired by his
Spirit; this is new, and dangerous Divinity, that though Christ caused record a
practice, for the Instruction of his followers, yet if an Apostle record not
the same thing without need, what Christ has inspired his penmen to write
formerly, shall be of no value.

Page 124. It Is certain our Savior did not sit but lay at Table.

Ans. The Author says it is certain he did ly, but gives no reason, whereby
his Reader may be certain also: I have better authority to assert his sitting,
than he has for lying; not only all our Translations have it sitting, (whose
authority and understanding the Original, will be thought as good as some other
men's) but our best Greek Lexicons, and Arias Montan: translate the word (...)
discumbere accumbere to sit not to ly, all that can be said is, that the Jews
used to lean on the Table with their left Elbow, which cannot be called lying*
and however, it was their table posture, which suffices us.

Aquinas gives account of a common Verse long before his time.

Rex sedet in caena, turba cinctus duo dena.

Page 124. We have this further to say for our practice, that our Savior was
not at a common Supper, when he instituted this Sacrament; but at the passover.

Ans. It Is hard to Divine for what end, the Author brings this in, for I can
perceive no color of an argument: only to acquit us, that Christ was not at a
common Supper, but it is yet sub judice not determined, whether there was any
common supper that night, besides, both the passover and the Lords Supper* Many
able Divines affirming there was, and many denying; and so it is safest to
leave it altiori indagationi, neither does the purpose in hand depend on it is
determination; as for Luke 22. 20. The Author doubtless, knows that the
matter of that Verse, is not placed as both the other Evangelists, Matthew, and
Mark have it; nor does he infer any thing from it argumentative.

Page 125. But 4ly. The full answer to the argument is, that it goes on a false
supposition, that our Savior instituted this Sacrament, in the common posture
of eating, which no wise appears in Scripture neither can it be inferred from
any thing said, or intimated by the Evangelists or St. Paul, but rather the
contrary.

Ans. How full or sound it is, will soon appear if we consider, First, that the
Evangelist Matthew remarketh their sitting down, Matthew. 26. 20. Now when the
even was come, he sat down, with the twelve, and Verse 16. as they were eating,
Jesus took bread, and blessed it, etc. so mark 14. 18. and as they sat, and did
eat, Jesus said, verily I say unto you, one of you which eats with me, shall
betray me: and Verse 22. and as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed and
brake it, so Luke 22. 14. and when the hour was come, he sat down, and the
twelve apostles with him, and Verse 19. and he took bread, and gave thanks, and
brake it, so Joh. 13. 12. after he had washed their feet, and had taken his
garments and was set down again, after this the apostles are sitting with him
at Table, Verse 23. Now there was leaning on Jesus bosom, on of his disciples,
etc.

Here it is to be observed, that all the four Evangelists make mention of their
sitting at Table with Christ, and that it is expressly said by two of them, as
they did eat, he took bread, and blessed it; all which makes it most evident,
that they were in a sitting posture at Table, when this Sacrament was
instituted, and celebrated.

But the Author objecteth, how could they be eating, when Christ was blessing.

Ans. The plain words of the Text cannot be questioned, without a profane
contempt of Scripture, it is not warrantable then to toss It as a disputable
problem, whether he took bread as they did, eat, or not: for they are the words
of the Holy Ghost.

2ly, Nor is it to be conceived, that they continued eating, while he was
blessing, this would been altogether unaccountable.

3ly. Though not eating, yet they continued sitting in a Table posture, for we
must not add to the Text, and say they arose.

4ly. How much time interveen'd between his taking the bread, and blessing, who
can tell? the ensuing Action being so solemn, no doubt Christ would take care,
to have his disciples minds in some due composure for it.

5ly. That which the Author cannot digest, is that the Apostles should be
sitting, when Christ was blessing; but there is no cause why this should be so
surprising, if some other of our Saviors ptactices be duly pondered: as Mat.
14. 19. when there is a great miracle to be wrought, Christ commands the
multitude to sit down and then blesses, and he commanded the multitude to sit
down on the grass, and took the five loaves, and the two fishes, and looking up
to Heaven, he blessed, and brake, and this not once, but again Mat. 15. 35. And
he Commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground, and he took the seven
loaves, and the fishes, and gave thanks and brake, etc. In both these
scriptures there is most solemn worship, and yet the people commanded to sit
down; it were worse than trifling, to say they might rise again when Christ
gave thanks, seeing he commanded them to sit down: therefore the Author's
anxitie for this is groundless, and no use for such shifts, as in probability
it was done in a thanksgiving and praying posture. And as in the next Page 126.
And so he might rise to bless, and distribute the Holy Sacrament; These may
be's are not convincing, but the plain words of so many Texts for sitting, are
most cogent and irrefragable.

Page 126. Lastly we find the Apostle, severly reproving the Corinthians, for
their irreverence in receiving this Sacrament, etc.

Ans. They are severly reproved it is granted, but not for sitting at the Lords
Supper; and except the reproofs reach this the Author can find no argument from
that Scripture: what a torment is it to be managing a bad cause? I need not say
a man has need of clear eyes, that can see an argument in that Scripture, but
he must put out his own eyes, and implicitly believe Dictates in place of
arguments.

And what Reader will not be surprised at the reading of his following
discourse, wherewith he concluds this Section.

Upon the whole, I think we do nothing in this, or any other sacred action, as
to bodily Worship, but what is warranded and grounded on the holy Scriptures,
and particularly, as to what we do at the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Ans: All is even as firmly warranded as the judicious Reader will observe, by
the Authors Arguments, men are readily persuaded as they affect, but there is
no danger of the Readers being argumented unto kneeling at the Lords Table, by
any thing that yet has occurred.

SECT. 3.
PAge 127. And first, as to your principles I need not tell you, that you do
not allow Bodily Adoration, to be any part of Gods Worship.

Ans. That we do not allow Bodily Adoration, is a known injurious imputation.
Has not the Author himself, from his infancy, seen his Friends bowing their
knees daily to God? Does he not know of thousands about him at this day, who do
the like? Is not this bodily Adoration? does he not know, that in our public
Worship our people commonly stand in time of Prayer, and are exhorted so to do;
and except in case of bodily infirmity, ordinarily practice it, as also signs of
external reverence always in our songs of praises to God, and when we hear the
Word of God read to us, as part of his Worship, all are uncovered? With what
truth then can it be asserted, we do not allow of bodily worship?

Page 128. Your Directory does not only leave it out, but excludes it, by
requiring all to enter the Assembly, and to take their seats, and places,
without adoration or bowing.

Ans: Tho the words of the Directory be not fairly represented, yet as the
Author quoteth them, I will espouse them, and let the Author try his strength
in answering my Arguments against religious bowing to any place or fabric on
Earth.

Ibid: The Scriptures say, O come, let us worship, let us bow down, let us
kneel before the Lord our Maker.

Ans: Who denies this? the Author can instance none of our persuasion, who
does not practice kneeling before God; if some Physical impediments do not
obstruct it.

2ly, The Command, Let us worship, and bow, is not when we come first to the
Walls of a House, but when we engage in acts of Worship, then either to kneel
or stand, as convenience will allow, but this has been cleared already, and I
am not fond of repeating; and therefore must pass over much of what remains
of this Chapter, as being generally answered already.

Page 129. You sit generally at your public Prayers.

This also has been confuted already, and all that is said Page 130. For the
time of Thanksgiving before Receving, being solemn Prayer, our people generally
stand, excepting such as are set down at Table, who continue sitting, as at the
first giving of Thanks by our Savior, they did sit. But the Author in this
Page 130, engages himself, in another useless labor of Collecting pretenses
against Bodily Worship, and exposing of Dissenters, as formers of these
pretenses, which we solemnly detest, as contrary to our common practice, such
Discourse might have been directed to Atheists, and Quakers, but to impress
strangers so invidiously, against all protestant Dissenters, as enemies to the
Adoration of God, by any visible sign, is most injurious.

2ly, In all the following Discourse to the end of this Chapter, the Reader is
egregiously imposed on, the Author making no distinction between the Bodily
Worship commanded of God, and the Bodily Worship commanded only by men; and so
condemns all, as despisers of the Glory of God, who will not bow down to
Houses or Altars, and would have his Reader take it for granted, that its our
principle, to be against all external Adoration of God, for no other reason,
but because we observe the second Command, better than some of our Neighbors,
rendering that homage to Creatures, which is only due to God, wherein we cannot,
and by the grace of God will not comply with them.

Pages 130, 131, 132, 133, 134; Have nothing but a Confutation of pretenses
from Joh: 4. 24. God is a Spirit, and they that Worship him, must worship him
in Spirit, and truth.

Ans: Christ by this Scripture, does recommend and prefer Spiritual Worship, to
that which is only bodily, God being a Spirit, and all bodily worship separat
from this is naught; the external part is easy, and separable from the
internal, and of it self, is but bodily exercise, that profits little;
nevertheless we constantly assert it our duty to glorify God in Body and in
Spirit, as he requires us; and therefore are far from understanding that
Scripture, to be exclusive of external Adoration.

Page 135. The second pretense alleged against bodily adoration, is that God
has no value for it.

Ans: If ever the Author heard any such Objection against external homage from
any of our persuasion, it would be justice, and we would take it for kindness,
if he would discover them; and if no such person can be found amongst us, it
will be necessary to mind the Words of God, Psalm. 15. 3. It suffices us that
God has commanded external worship; but we will yield Gods Prerogative to no
man in prescribing it.

Page 173. The Author speaking of outward performances, says, But you are
taught, that in no cases, they may be lawfully practiced.

Ans: Who are these Teachers, Teaching that outward Performances, may in no
cases be practiced? The Book being now in my hand, I see on the head of the
Page, how Bodily Worship is practiced by Dissenters. And is it the deliberat
thoughts of the Author, that Dissenting Teachers, Teach this? Do we teach, that
in no cases, the people may read, or hear the Word of God read, which is an
outward performance? Do we teach that they should not be Baptized, or partake
of the Lords Supper? Do we teach, that in no case they should bow their knees
to God their Maker? all these, and many more, are outward performances, this
needs no confutation, repeating the words will be sufficient to any reader,
tho of mean sense.

The Author adds in the same Page, you are taught rather to stay at home, and
not to worship God at all publicly, than to conform in their outward gestures
and circumstances.

Ans: There are some bodily jestures that render a man guilty by breach of the
second Command, as bodily bowing is a gesture of the body, but being performed
religiously, to any Creature, is forbidden by the express Command of God, and
therefore should not be enrolled with Circumstances, nor is it to be practiced
by Christians any where; but God willing, more of this afterward.

In the same Page 137, You are advised rather to abstain all your lives from
the Lords Supper, than receive it kneeling.

Ans: Blessed be God, who has given most of us opportunity of receiving, ever
since we were capable, without kneeling, even when persecuted by the rigid
imposers of kneeling, who yet dare not assert, that the Scriptures require it.

2ly, But that the Reader may understand, that its neither ignorance,
obstinacy, nor affected separation, that causes the fixedness of our practice,
in sitting at the Lords Table, which we cannot resile from, and being obliged
to render a reason, to such as ask; know therefore, first, That the blessed
example of Christ and his Apostles, of choice, using this posture of sitting,
is our Scriptural Precedent, and no reason can be given why the example should
not be imitated; the Apostles were sinful men as others; yet all the four
Evangelists are divinely inspired, and therefore commanded to publish their
being set down with Christ at his holy Table.

3ly, No other Scripture, either expressly, or by due consequence, prescribes
or allows any other posture, when we receive at the Lords Table, than sitting.

4ly, Our Savior and his Apostles (as they followed him) are proposed as our
examples in all things imitable, and this practice is imitable; yea Christ
himself makes this his Argument, Do as I have given you example, Joh: 13. 14.
15. v. Lest any should say, we are not Apostles, and must not presume to sit at
Table as they did; But Christ requires a regard to the Example he gives.

5ly, The Disciples being fet down at Table with Christ, are not raised again
by him, when the Lords Supper is celebrated, (which he would have done, if
sitting, when they received, had been a profanation of that Ordinance) but when
the Supper is over, they are found still sitting, and then, and not until then,
they are commanded to arise, Joh. 14. 31.

6ly, If this example be not followed in receiving, as our pattern, then we
shall follow either devices excogitated by our selves, or follow the Dictates
and Commandments of others, neither of which are safe and warrantable, Christ
having proposed his imitable practice for our example, and the worship
performed by our own invention, or the Commandments of Men, is already declared
vain.

7ly. When we once give way, losing our ground by neglecting Christ's example,
we wander vainly after our own imaginations, not knowing where to fix; and if
at length we should pitch upon the most humble like way of receiving, imagining
a humble way cannot be displeasing to God, which prevails with many
inadvertent, (tho sober) persons. The very thought of this, that they cannot be
too humble, and that kneeling in receiving, is an expression of this humility,
that humility is pleasing to God, and rendereth glory to him; this taking root
enclineth many to think, and tenaciously to hold by it, that tho Christ gave
example for sitting at his Table, yet this devised humble way, will expiat any
guilt by neglect of his example; because they intend to give him glory by
kneeling: This is the very best that I imagine, can be made of the practice of
many well meaning people as to their kneeling in receiving. But that which
should be observed with care, is that once leaving Christ's way, the very best
and purest like Inventions of our own, obtruded on God as Worship, will not be
accepted, seeing by them, we shall never be able to make answer, when we are
charged, Who has required this at your hands, we may call it humility, but he
will call it a presumptuous voluntary humility; we may call it Worship, but he
will call it Will Worship, there being no Command of God for it.

8ly, This religious kneeling is Adoration, and therefore due only to God.

9ly, We are instructed by the second Command, that God will not be adored or
worshipped by Images, representations, or the likeness of any thing in Heaven
or Earth, we must not bow down before them.

10ly, The signs of Christ's Body and Blood are set before the receiver, in a
religious state, as representing Christ, and these who kneel must do it
directly before these Signs, as memorials of Christ, if they should go aside
and kneel, praying to God, yet they shall not receive, until they come and
kneel before these Signs; and hereby the Signs have Co-adoration with Christ,
partaking of the same Worship, seeing the signs are designedly set before the
Receiver in the act of Adoration, which is forbidden by the second Command,
neither can the intention of the Worshipper, prevent it, seeing the Worship is
directed first to the signs, as representing Christ.

11ly, Tho the Arguments given, be sufficient to vindicat our practice in
sitting at the Lords Table; yet we know also, that kneeling in the Sacrament is
but a novelty in the Church of God, not being in practice, before the
thirteenth Century, when Pope Innocent the 3d brought in Transubstantiation,
which engages the Papists to this worship, because of Christ's supposed bodily
presence, but this you do not pretend.

Page 138. Your directory does not require or allow the people so much, as to
signify their assent, by adding an Amen to Prayer or Thanksgiving: but on the
contrary, you ridicule those that practice it.

Ans: Our people signify their assent by much more, than the word Amen, by
attentive hearing the Word, and being uncovered, when the Word of God is read,
by joining with the Minister in Prayer, and standing up* by singing of Psalms
jointly together, etc.

Let the Authors Concession, Page 36. be remembered, where he says, Generally
it is sufficient that the people join in their hearts with the words of public
prayer.

2ly, We commonly use the word Amen, in conclusion of our Prayers, wherein the
people join in their hearts with the Minister, as well as in the rest of the
Prayer.

Yet 3ly, under the New Testament, its to be observed, that the prayers of the
Apostles recorded, are not found to be concluded with Amen: But that which
should make all men sober in their Censures on this account, is that the Lords
Prayer according to the Evangelist Luke concludes not with Amen, I am no ways
against the use of it, and for ridiculing others, for using that word, I never
heard, or knew any such thing, they cannot be of our communion, who will deride
a Ministers concluding prayers with Amen; for we use it ordinarily both in
public and private.

Page 140. The third pretense; Some allege for their omitting, this part of
Gods Worship, that they do not condemn bodily adoration, but to stand up, and
kneel in the Congregation, is so troublesome to them, etc.

Ans: This also is answered before, its not unwillingness to expend, but as I
said already, all in the Congregation could not conveniently hear the prayer,
wherewith they are to join, if convenience were prepared for every ones
kneeling; and I have observed some in this congregation, who were near,
kneeling in the time of public prayer, having convenience for it; but there is
none with us to ridicule them for that practice, tho the Author says, Page
143, That he could never learn; that any one kneeled in our Meetings; but I
have learned it, and seen it, having better occasion to know it than the
Author, and he may by this time perceive, it had been very advisable, that in
matters of Fact, his assertions had been such, as might have faced the Sun.

As for Paul and his company kneeling on the shore, Act: 20.

Ans. The Reader by this time will understand our principle as to kneeling in
worship, and all who know our way, know it to be our daily practice, heartily
wishing there were as many knees bowed to God in families of our neighbors, as
there are bowed in the Church.

CHAP. 5. Of the Lords Supper.
SECT. 1.
WHat the Holy Scriptures prescribe concerning the frequency of celebrating it.

Page 145. I shall confine my self to one point, and that is the frequency of
it, as a public act of Worship.

As to the frequency of Celebrating the Lords Supper, I find many people of
opinion, that the Scriptures have determined nothing in it, and that therefore
it is left entirely to the discretion of Ministers, how often they will
Celebrat it.

Ans: The Author writes, Page 147. That himself is of the same mind, our
Savior has confined us to no place or prefixed time, for the celebration of his
Supper: The Scriptures constrain the Author to this Concession; but being
granted, it will break all the bones of his Arguments; for seeing Christ has
not prescribed the frequency, Then who may presume to do it? Shall not their
prescriptions be found the Commandments of men? I do not say but the
circumstance of time must be appointed, when this Ordinance shall be put in
practice, for it must be done in some time, and that time must be determined;
for the Lords Supper requires preparation before receiving, and therefore a
competent allowance of time must be granted before the Celebration: but seeing
our Savior has not prefixed the times, nor told us how often we shall
celebrat; therefore men cannot make general Rules, obliging all Christians to
such or such prefixed times, whether opportunities offer or not.

Because Christ has given his Churchs liberty as to the precise times; but
particular Churches must consider and consult the public edification of the
people, and accordingly such times must be appointed by these whom the Lord
has entrusted with the feeding of his flock, and giving them their meat in due
season.

Page 146, On this account every one is left to judge for himself, when he will
be a partaker of it, as he thinks it most fit for his comfort and edification,
which makes the celebration and receiving it so Arbitrary a thing, that many
never receive it at all: and the Universal neglect of it is, become one of the
crying sins of these Kingdoms; and a great objection against the Reformation.

Ans. A judgment of discretion must be allowed all men whom God has endued
with Reason: and must not be driven to Act brutally without discretion; but
especially Christians are required to Act in receiving of the Lords Supper,
with the greatest discretion, and deliberation, being under that severe
warning, he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation
to himself; and is guilty of the Body and blood of the Lord. A Christian thus
warned, must be persuaded in his own mind, and dare not trust his preparation
to the discretion of others, knowing he must give an account to God for himself.

2ly. That seldom communicating is a crying sin.

Ans, Where contempt of the Sacrament is the cause of not receiving, no doubt
but the sin is very crying; but where there is no contempt, or wilful neglect
of that Ordinance, but longing for some competent measure of preparation, or
opportunity for re-receiving, without a strain to their Conscience, which are
the reasons why many seldom Communicate: In these cases their seldom receiving
will not be found so crying a sin, as many other sins less noticed; profaned
Communions wheresoever common and horrid Swearers, God* dammees, Adulterers,
Drunkards, are admitted to be receivers, the sin is more crying.

It is also a more crying sin, to thrust from the Lords Table, such as God has
prepared, by imposing such Terms of Communion, as these who would partake, know
to be sinful: these are more crying sins, wheresoever they are found; besides
blasphemies, Idolatry, contempt of Sabbaths, Murders, oppression, breach of
covenants and promises etc. These and the like are far more crying sins, than
seldom receiving at the Lords Table, where no contempt can be charged,

Page 147, The Lords Supper is substituted in the place of the Passover, which
was commanded by the Law, to be celebrated once in the year.

Ans. This occasioneth no dispute, for it is plain truth; yet, that the passover
was but once a year, meriteth consideration, and so much the more, because the
Paschal Lamb Typified Christ, who is called our passover, and the Lamb of God
who takes away the sin of the World; and though I do not observe this, thereby
to plead that the celebration of the Lords Supper should be no more frequent
than the Passover; yet it may be conducive for softning the rigide censures of
some against others, who cannot celebrat this Sacrament oftener, than once a
year, though they willingly would.

Page 147. Since our Savior has taken off the confinement as to time and
place, it follows, that they who celebrate it seldomer than the Jews did their
passover, must needs have less regard to the memory of Christ's death, and the
deliverance wrought by it, than the Jews had to their deliverance out of
Egypt; there being no other imaginable reason, that can tempt them to neglect
purifying of themselves, etc.

Ans. This reflection is more severe than well proved, for even those who have
some measure of regard to the memory of Christ's death, may have such
impediments invincibly crossing their desires, that sometimes they cannot
celebrate so often as once a year, which may be the affliction of some
ministers, but not their sinful neglect, nor oblivion of Christ's death. but.

2ly. It Is rare to celebrate it more seldom than once a year in any
congregation of our Communion, where the congregations are brought to any
tolerable Settlement. I grant the time was, that the people of our persuasion
both Ministers and others, were so pursued by Bishop's Courts, because of their
meeting together; and adhering to their sound principles, that some were
imprisoned, many Excommunicated, and their Families broken, other hunted as
Patridges on the mountains: and especially if they were found celebrating the
Lords Supper; if these be the times that the Author charge us with the guilt
of seldom celebrating, it is not fair, for he knows as well as I, who were to
blame; and I know, where the Righteous God places the guilt.

Page 148. And there can be no better way of determining when we are oblidged
to do it, than by observing when God in his goodness gives us opportunity, for
either we are oblidged to do it, or else we may choose whether ever we will do
it or not.

Ans. I am well satisfied with this proposals of opportunity, providing that
all consider and a be consider at a, that every thing be considered to make it
an opportunity indeed; and a seasonable occasion for this celebration. But,

First, There may be a seasonable opportunity for the Ministers part, when it
is not an opportunity for the people.

There may be an opportunity for the Minister and some of the people, when it is
not so with others of the people; and renting of Societies must be guarded
against.

There may be a fit Season both for Minister and people, and yet all of them be
obstructed by external lets.

Yet 2ly. The Author's calling this the opportunity, whenever they meet
together, as Page 149. I say this cannot generally hold, for Christians may
have occasion to meet together even for worship; when there is no opportunity
for celebrating the Lords Supper, as when God requires them to meet together
for prayer and fasting, and the day spent in such humbling exercises as are
then suitable. But.

Page 149. The very design of our public meetings on the Lords Day, and not on
the Jewish Sabbath, is to remember and to keep up in our minds, a sense of what
Christ did, and suffered for us till he come again.

Ans. That the Lords day is designed for a memorial of Christ's Resurrection all
acknowledge; but that it is instituted for a memorial of his Sufferings and
Death, is new and unwarrantable; if this had dropped from a Dissenters pen, we
had heard it again on both sides of our head.

Page 150. It seems then probable from the very institution of this Sacrament,
that our Savior designed it should be a part of Gods Service in all the solemn
Assemblies of Christians, as the passover was in the yearly Assemblies of the
Jews.

Ans. The parallel made by the Author, between the Jewish Assemblies and
Christian Assemblies runeth not even: and to make it straight it must run thus;
our Savior designed our Sacrament should be a part of Gods Service, in all the
solemn Assemblies of Christians, as the passover was in all the Solemn
Assemblies of the Jews; the parallel holds not otherwise, and then it
follows that the passover was a part of Gods Service in all the Solemn
Assemblies of the Jews, which could not be, since the passover was but once a
year.

2ly. If then the passover service, as to the time when, were designed as a
pattern for the time, when our Sacrament should be celebrated; then it will
follow, that our celebrating should be but once a year; so that whatsoever was
designed by Christ, it is evident, our Author's design is at a great loss, by
what he now says.

Page 150. And the same is further manifest in the second place, from the
examples of the Apostles, and of the Churches of God in the New Testament; they
cannot be supposed but to have understood what Christ meant by these words, Do
this in remembrance of me: and if it appears that they did make this feast, a
constant part of their ordinary worship, we may safely conclude that Christ
meant it should be so also: and here it is observable, that we do not find any
Solemn Stated meeting of Christians for worship in the whole New Testament
without it. At first the disciples had their meetings every day, and then they
likewise daily received this Sacrament, Acts 2 46. and they continued daily
with one accord in the Temple, and in breaking of bread from House to house:
Their meeting together was on purpose and with express design to celebrate this
Feast, 1 Cor. 10. 20. When ye come together, therefore into one place, this is
not to eat the Lords Supper, and downward Page 151: Then surely the Apostles
saying, that when you come together into one place, this is not to eat the
Lords Supper, etc. Gives us ground to conclude that in his opinion, eating the
Lords Supper ought to be one constant end of our coming together, Page 152.
When the meeting of Christians came to be fixed to the first day of the week,
or the Lords day, the breaking of bread was likewise brought to the same day,
so Acts 20. 7. And upon the first day of the week, when the disciples came
together to break bread, Paul preached unto them.

Ans. By all this the Author is laboring, to get the time of celebrating the
Lords Supper fixed, which he has said, Christ did not prefix.

2ly. He passes now from his first overtur, that opportunity was the time when
this celebration should be: for a Stated time is now his pursuit:

3ly. As to this Stated time, he has two of them in hand; the one is every
day, the other is the Lords Day.

4ly. His arguments for every days celebration, are Acts the 11. 46. They
continued daily, etc. And 1 Cor. 10. 20. When ye come together, etc.

5ly. The Apostles understood what Christ meant by these words, Do this, etc.
And if they made this Feast a constant part of their ordinary worship, we may
conclude Christ meant it should be so.

6ly. No Solemn Stated meetings of Christians without this Sacrament.

His arguments for the first day of the weeks being the time of celebration,
are Act^ 20. 7. From which he says, two things may be observed: 1st. that the
first day of the week was the Disciples time of public worship. 2d. That the
breaking of bread, or Celebrating the Holy Eucharist, was a part of that
worship; the Scripture is as plain for the one as the other.

1st. Now let the Reader observe, that the Author having given up all claim to
Scripture precept, for the time of celebrating the Lords Supper; he searches
for it in Examples.

2ly. He brings Examples of different times from the Apostles practice.

3ly. He comes close up to a Divine Institution, for both these differing
times: because for every days partaking, he says the Apostles knew what Christ
meant, and if they made it a constant part of their worship, Christ says; he
meant it so also.

And for the other, viz. The first day of the week he says: the Scripture is
as plain for the Sacrament that day, as for observing the day it self.

4ly. There being here two Apostolic practices of equal authority, which of
them is preceptive or oblidging to us.

If the Author say the latter of the two, then how will he answer himself,
saying that the Disciples did meet every day: 2* that at every meeting they did
celebrate, 3. And being a constant part of their ordinary worship: we may
safely conclude, that Christ meant it should be so, by the Authors arguments

Then the daily celebration, appears to have the greatest authority of the
two: what then shall be done next, for fixing of the time? No doubt he had best
leave it, as Christ himself did, not confining us to a prefixed time; and it is
evident, that we cannot have the times when, determined by Apostolic
practices, because in their own time, the times of celebration were not one.

It will appear also, by a more particular consideration of the places quoted,
Acts 2: 46. Is expounded by judicious commentators, to be only the Disciples
ordinary food, expressed by breaking of bread from House to house, and as the
remainder of that Verse shows, they did eat their meat with gladness, and
singleness of heart; The breaking of bread does not always signify the Lords
Supper, Luke 24. 30. is ordinary food. But the 42. Verse of the 2d. of the Acts
is the place where the Sacramental breaking is more clear, and they continued
steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread,
and in Prayer: but then it is not daily, and 1 Cor. 11. 20. Says no more but
that sometimes yea frequently they did meet for the celebration of the Lords
Supper; but that they did never meet for worship on any other account, but to
celebrat the Lords Supper is dangerous; for the Gospel was to be preached
fully, Christ commanded to teach all things whatsoever he had commanded them,
Matthew. 28. and Acts 10. 42. He commanded us to preach to the people the
Doctrine of Salvation; and Christ's gracious Transaction with sinners, according
to the Covenant of Grace, was greater work: and therefore more insisted upon by
the Apostles, than only the Sacramental Seal of the Covenant; Therefore to say
that their ordinary public Assemblies for worship was on purpose, as the
Author says Page 150, And one main design of their coming together Page 151,
cannot be allowed* for what is the Seal without the Doctrine and Covenant,
whereunto it is a Seal?

Observe also, that though they came together at sometimes purposely for
celebration of the Lords Supper, as 1 Cor. 11, 20. and Acts 20. 7. Yet this
will not prove, that all their meetings in Assemblies were on this account.

The Apostle Paul, being by Gods merciful providence present with the people;
it was very expedient then to celebrate, that they might be instructed by him
in the right manner of celebration, now leaving them.

Let the Reader also remember that by the Author, the celebration of the Lords
Supper was brought unto, and fixed on the first day of the week, Acts. 20. 7.
And yet still he pursues their celebrating at every meeting, which was oftener
than the first day of the week, how he will reconcile and cement both, I leave
to himself: for it is past my reach to reconcil these? The Primitive Christians
did celebrate at every meeting 2. They did meet every day, and 3. nevertheless
it was fixed to the Lords day, 4. And our Savior designed it should be a part
of Gods Service, in all the Solemn Assemblies of Christians; which are on other
days than the Lords day.

Let it be observed also, that if they did meet daily for this purpose to
celebrate, then why is there any such peculiar remark, on meeting on the Lords
day for that purpose, if all their meetings had been to celebrate.

There is reason from that Scripture Acts 20. 7. To conclude that there were
ordinary Christian Assemblies on the first day of the week, which were
established by Christ himself, before Paul was a Preacher, for a religious
memorial of his Resurrection, and deliverance from all his Sufferings, and on
that day they did celebrate the Lords Supper: But I could never see a Cogent
argument from that Scripture, proving the celebrating every Lords day, because,
on that Lords day they did celebrate, for there were most blessed Meetings on
the Lords day when Christ himself was with his Disciples, after his
Resurrection; And yet neither mention nor probability of celebrating his
Supper, as John 20. 19. On the first day of the week Jesus was with his
disciples, where there was a competent number as at the first Institution; yet
nothing of this celebration, so Verse 26. after eight days, again his Disciples
were within, and Thomas with them: then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and
stood in the midst: yet nothing of this celebration; so that we have neither
prescription by Christ, nor practice to give us example for celebrating every
Lords day, which is the more to be remarked, that some of these times he did
meet with them, the Disciples were at meat, when Christ came in among them: as
Mark 16. 14. And yet nothing of this Sacramental meat; therefore the
celebration was not every Lords day. If any object, that this celebration could
not be where Christ was visibly present because he had said, he would Drink no
more of the fruit of the Vine until, etc. Ans. Yet the Disciples might have
celebrated by themselves, but no mention of it is made. But,

Page 150. Our Author says, that we do not find any Solemn Stated meeting of
Christians for worship, in the whole New Testament without it.

Ans: 1. Still the Author pursues Celebrating at every meeting for worship
under the New Testament, But how does this agree with what the Author says,
that by Act: 20. 7. The celebration was fixed to the Lords day? for Christians
had meetings for public worship after that time, and by the Author, at all
these meetings they did celebrate; now after the celebration was fixed to the
Lords Day; How could they celebrat at other times of meeting, which were not on
the Lords Day? for then it follows, that either fixing it to every Lords Day
fails, or else that their celebrating at every meeting fails, the reason is
clear, for if they did celebrat at every meeting, some whereof were not on the
Lords Day, then the celebration was not fixed to the Lords day; If the Author
say by fixing it to the Lords Day, they were obliged to celebrat no other day;
Then why does our Author celebrat on other days than the Lords Day?

In few words I do seriously demand of the Author, a solution to this question,
Whether by Act: 20. verse: 7. or any other Scripture or Scriptural example,
there be divine institution for celebrating the Lords Supper every Lords Day,
yea or not? if he affirm; then the divine institution must be by Christ, that
we should celebrat every Lords Day; if the times when we should celebrat be
appointed by Christ, then why does the Author say, that our Savior has
confined us to no time; if he say the Apostles practice amount not to an
institution by Christ, then their practice in this is not a rule for us.

Its past all dispute, that the Apostles and primitive Christians did
frequently celebrate the Lords Supper, and by the extraordinary Gifts and
Graces poured out upon them, great grace being upon them all, they were
ordinarily in a readiness, and prepared for that holy Ordinance, which we in
after Generations know little of; and therefore are not in case for such
frequency as they were.

And whoever urge frequency of receiving on any terms, should consider these
two things, first, that the Scripture mentioning often: yet does not mention
how often. 2. That upon pain of Damnation, if we Eat and Drink unworthily.
Every Christian should have due time to prepare and examine himself, and not to
proceed to receiving otherwise (command frequency who will) lest he profane it.
And tho I have insisted longer on this Debate than I intended; yet I will not
omit the Authors general challenge.

That we do not find any solemn stated meeting of Christians for worship in the
whole New Testament without it, that is, without celebration of the Lords
Supper.

Ans: By this challenge its evident, that its the Authors assertion, every such
assembly had it, and the proof is incumbent to him who alleges that at every
time of the meetings of such assemblies, they did celebrat the Lords Supper;
but he will find hard work to prove, that all of them at every time of meeting
for Worship had it: and let the Reader remark his words, under the whole New
Testament.

I shall instance several meetings for Worship, where nothing of this
celebration appears.

First, There were many most solemn Assemblies of Christ's followers, when
Christ himself preached to them, these were no Old Testament Assemblies, and
tho a mixed multitude attended, yet there were many sincere Believers among
them, and while Christ publicly preached, it was stated worship; and to be
sure, these did not celebrat the Lords Supper, for it was not as yet
instituted, yet there was solemn Worship.

Act: 1. 13. The Apostles were together with the Women, continuing in prayer
and supplication, which was public Worship; and yet no mention of this
Ordinance. So Act. 12. 12. Many are gathered together Praying, which is
worship, and yet nothing appearing of this celebration: So 1 Cor: 5. 4. The
Church is gathered together, but nothing of this found with them: Besides those
blessed meetings of Christ with his Apostles after his Resurrection, where the
Disciples did meet, but not celebrat.

Page 153. When first some who had been present at the prayers and preaching of
the Church, began to go away without receiving, the Church decreed whosoever
was guilty of it should be excommunicated.

Ans: Many errors and heresies sprung up, even in the Apostles times, and did
increase afterward; and if some such persons did despise the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, and thereupon deserted, its no wonder some severity was used
toward them: but to excommunicat for simple not receiving, without
consideration and examining the Reasons, why they did not partake, was never in
any age the duty of wise, faithful and compassionat Pastors.

All that is in this Section is now answered, only Popish Massers every Lords
Day are alleged to be most agreeable to the rule, and that the Priest has
them solitary, is the fault of the people, which I leave to the Reader, the
Author having never hitherto instructed the rule of frequency.

SECT. 2.
PAge 155. Let us in the second place compare the rules and practices of our
Church with this Pattern, I will not pretend that they come fully up to it.

Ans: Why then did the Author say, That no copy can come nearer the Original;
and now he will not pretend they are come fully up to i^: he cannot rationally
expect he can come more fully up to it, seeing no Copy can come nearer the
Original.

Page 157 Its ordered that in Cathedral and Collegiat Churches and Colleges,
where there are many priests and Deacons, they shall all receive the Communion
every Sunday at the least, and that every Parishoner shall Communicate three
times in the year, whereof Easter to be one; and surely such as cannot fit
themselves so often, must in their own opinion be out of a state of Grace, and
deserve to be excommunicated by the Church.

Ans: If Cathedral Churches, etc. communicate every Lords Day, this frequency is
either by Christ's direction, or without his direction; if by his direction,
then why should poor Country Souls be deprived of the benefit of receiving
every Lords Day, more than the Cathedral Church? Christ himself is no respecter
of persons in such cases; surely the mean and poor in the world have as good a
Title to Christ's benefits, as the rich and great: if Christ has not directed
this frequency, as the Author confesses, he has confined us to no time; Then
whose invention is it, that in Cathedrals, etc. it must needs be every Lords
Day, though all the Country Parishes want it?

2ly, If Cathedrals, etc. obtain this privilege, because many Ministers are
ready to attend the service, then it appears that convenience should be
considered for the celebration, and where all these conveniences offer, the
celebration may be more frequent than where they are wanting: But the Author
said not long ago, Page 148. that there was no other reason imaginable for
non-frequency, but the deadness of men's hearts; now he finds other reasons
are imaginable, and why should he not be charitable to such as find not
convenience for so frequent receiving as others?

For his calling Ministers under the Gospel, Priests, is unsavory and
unwarrantable, seeing the ancient Priesthood is taken down by the coming of
Christ; and the Sacrifices we have now to offer, are only Spiritual; so that
Church Officers under the New Testament, are no otherwise Priests, than all
true Believers who are made Kings and Priests to God: I think less of Papists
retaining that name, because they profanely make a sacrifice of Christ in the
Mass.

Page 157. That every Parishoner shall communicate at least three times in the
year, whereof Easter to be one: and surely such as cannot fit themselves, so
often must in their own opinion be out of a state of Grace, and deserve to be
excommunicated by the Church.

Ans: If these words last recited were asserted and maintained by any of our
Dissenting Ministers, I must freely speak my thoughts that he deserved
Deposition from the Ministry, as unfit to have the charge of Souls, who would
rule them with such rigor, as to excommunicate them purely for their weakness:
Let the Reader take notice of Ezekiel. 34. 4. The diseased have ye not
strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound
up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven
away, neither have ^e sought that which was lost, but with force and with
cruelty have ye ruled them: And verse 10. Thus says the Lord God, behold, I am
against the shepherds. and I will require my flock at their hands, and cause
them to cease from feeding the flock, etc.

The Authors designation of a person deserving excommunication, cannot but
surprise any thinking Reader, who has any sens^ of Religion; for

First, He says such as cannot fit themselves. 2. They must in their own
opinion be out of a state of Grace, and therefore deserve excommunication.

For the first, such as cannot, if he had said such as will not fit themselves
deserve censure, would have been suitable to the care of a faithful and
compassionat Pastor: but to punish because they cannot is merciless; for albeit
they cannot fit themselves for receiving, yet they may be diligent in the use
of means, and longing for fitness, and for a time remain under fears and
doubts, so that they dare not receive, least they eat and drink damnation to
themselves; they are not able as yet to eat in Faith, and they find by the Word
of God, that whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin, and that every man should be
persuaded in his own mind.

Should such persons be excommunicated, who are so far from contempt of that
holy Sacrament, that all their fear is, lest they profane it, by receiving
unprepared? God requires the man to take time to examine himself before he eat
of that Bread, which he must attend, waiting for some competent preparation, it
grieveth him that he is not in due readiness to obey Christ's gracious command,
Do this in remembrance of me; labors for it, resolves that so soon as ever
he can eat in Faith, he will embrace the first opportunity of receiving: only
at present he cannot, shall he be therefore rigorously driven to partake right
or wrong, whether he can do it in faith, or not?

The Reader may yet further consider, that the preparation of the heart in man
is of the Lord, and therefore not in men's power to prepare themselves when they
will; therefore Gods assistance for preparation must be waited for: if the
Minister urge on peril of excommunication, he must and shall receive, the man
fears a worse excommunication, to be cast out into utter darkness, wanting a
wedding garment, and dare not eat and drink damnation to pleasure his Minister*
or to avoid temporary excommunication; specially clave errante, as certainly in
this circumstantiat case, the excommunication were invalid, and a minister so
abusing the Ordinance of Excommunication, would merit it more himself than the
man guilty of no contempt, and only labors to partake acceptably.

For the 2d. That such must needs think themselves out of a state of Grace.

Ans: And what if they did think so? this their present opinion of themselves
does not deprive them of a state of grace; they may be deprived of assurance;
and yet not deprived of grace: after a man is by the mercy of God stated in
grace, and in Christ Jesus, for whom there is no condemnation: yet it is a
distinct act of the spirit of God, to make known the things that are freely
given of God; a man may be in a state of salvation, and yet constrained some
times to cry to God for restoring the joy of his salvation; a godly Job was
sometimes of opinion, that God was holding himself his enemy; yet he was no
enemy, but this he spoke when God hid his face from him, Job: 1324. should such
a man as Job been excommunicated, because he had so bad opinion of himself? no
sure, for though God cause grief, yet he will have compassion according to the
multitude of his mercies, and make his people praise him, that though he was
angry, yet his anger is turned away, and he comfort them.

But suppose a man were not in a state of grace, should he be therefore
excommunicated? seeing to be in a state of grace, is to be reconciled to God by
the Blood of Christ, and sanctified by his Spirit; and all such are members of
the invisible Church: now shall men be cast out of the visible Church, because
they are not of the invisible? What Laws of God can be found to warrant this
practice? This is a dangerous invention indeed, to throw people out of the
means of Grace, because they are not yet in a state of grace: for the Gospel
Kingdom of Christ on Earth comprehends the good and bad, the Tares amongst
the Wheat in one Field, till the Harvest, and then they shall be severed.

I can observe no more in this Section, that gives occasion for any further
answer.

SECT. 3.
PAge 159. And here first I must observe to you, that you have no fixed or set
times for the administration of this Sacrament; on the contrary, your Directory
orders that the time how often this is to be celebrated, may be considered and
determined by the Ministers and other Church governors of each Congregation,
as they shall find most convenient for the comfort and edification of the
people committed to their charge.

Ans: 1. The Author has said, that Christ has prefixed no time.

2. He tells us that the Apostles varyed the time, sometimes daily, and
afterward on the Lords Day. 3. He says they vary the times themselves, for
some of their Churches have it more seldom and some more frequently; Why then
is it so great a crime in us to want fixed times, why did himself say, Page
148. That there can be no better way of determining when, than by observing
when God gives opportunity?

2ly, This opportune season for public edification, we are willing to attend;
but then prefixed times, especially long before celebration, may prove no
opportunity, many things may, and often do emerge, making it not convenient for
the public good, to observe these prefixed times: and that Ministers, and
other Church Governors should determine the time, as the edification of each
Congregation requires, is convenient and necessary. But

Ibid. says the Author, By which rule the Lords Supper is excluded from being
any ordinary constant part of Gods service.

Ans: The Author cannot prove that this celebration ought to be a constant part
of Gods service, the many Scriptures I have already quoted testify the
contrary, I perceive the Author prefers the Popish way of constant
consecration every Lords Day, to his own way and ours; for he says, Page 160.
And truly in this point you seem more unexcusable than the Papists themselves;
for the Papists order the Elements to be consecrated every Lords Day, and
distributed to those that desire it; but your Teachers neither offer it to the
people, nor invite them to it; nay so far are they from it, that they do not so
much as afford an opportunity to those that desire to be constant receivers.

And he has said already, Page 159. That they themselves are too far short of
the primitive practice and institution, but the Popish Priests follow it in
consecrating every Lords Day.

Ans: As for the Authors preferring the manner of Popish Priests to our way, is
no surprisal to us, seeing he was pleased to yield them ample room in the
Communion of the Catholic Church, when he thrust us out at one blow.

2ly, He says the popish Priests distribute the Elements in the plural number,
to those that desire it. If it be so, its a new thing we heard not of, that
they distribute the Cup to those that desire it; for they say plainly, tho
Christ distributed the Cup, yet they see it not fit: However we must be worse
than Papists, do what they will, yea worse than the most degenerated or
barbarous people that ever called themselves Christians. This is the Authors
spirit of meekness, that he said would give no just offense.

Page 161. They rarely press their people to communicate.

Ans: We do press them to communicate, but much more to examine themselves that
they may be prepared for it.

Ibid: They have few Sermons or Discourses to that purpose.

Ans. This is a matter of Fact also, and hard to answer without irritation: I
love not to be using words of evil manners, only I cannot but say, it is not a
truth; as many hundreds of witnesses can Testify.

Ibid, No body can certainly tell, what frequently, many, often or convenient
signify: And therefore where only these words are used in a Rule, it is little
better than to have no Rule at all, as appears in this very case,

Ans. The Scripture uses these words as often, and is this little betten then
no Rule at all? This must be dangerous treating of the word of God, 2. These
same words as often though they be few, yet are much better than no Rule at all,
and have been very useful to the whole Church of God* and encouraged many Souls
to endeavor frequency of receiving, because the word of God mentions often,
though no not how often.

Ibid. I appeal to you, whether it is not yet reckoned a great thing among many
of you, if once in a year or two, a Communion be celebrated in one of your
meetings; nay among some of you, it is often ommited for several years together,
and in some places for ten, or more.

Ans. This is also matter of Fact and a great mistake, for we account it no
great thing to have it every year, and some of us have it oftener, and some of
our Communion have it much oftener than once or twice a year, as God gives them
opportunity; and all of us would be glad of convenience for having it more
frequently: But let the Reader understand, that we judge it not warrantable, to
admit persons to the Lords Table, because they have in their memory, and can
say over the belief, the Lords prayer, and Ten Commandments, which a Child, or
an Athiest may have in readiness to repeat* But Stewards of the Mysteries of
God, who must not cast Pearls before Swine, though they judge not of men's hearts,
leaving that to God, whose Prerogative it is; yet must have some satisfying
account, of a competent measure of knowledge in partakers, and must take care
to know they are able, to discern the Lords Body, as likewise, that they have
some knowledge of the Covenant of Grace, the Sacrament being a Seal thereof,
and besides their knowledge, which this is but a taste of, lest Ministers be
partakers of other men's sins, by profaning the Holy Sacrament, they must also
take care, that such be not admitted, whose practice does contradict their
profession of Christianity.

As also, sometimes Ministers must take time, to support the weak, dejected by
their own fears and doubts, and to encourage them as occasion serves, to
approach the Lords Table; so, also to have any Animosities, or contentions
composed and healed, that may be found amongst the people before they receive.
And if at any time so extraordinary a thing fall out, that some Congregations
be deprived of that Sacrament many years, as this is altogether extaordinary,
so there will be found some extraordinary reason for it; but I know not of one
instance in the North of Ireland, where any Congregation of our Communion,
wanted that Ordinance for Ten years: I love not confident unwarrantable
assertions, but I say if any such thing be, it will be found that these
Congregations, have either wanted Ministers of our Communion, or somewhat
altogether extraordinary is the cause, and no Church or Society should be
judged by extraordinaries.

Page 162. A man may live comfortably amongst you, to the Age of 30. or 40.
Years and never receive, and I could not compute that one in ten going to your
meetings, ever receive through the whole course of their lives.

Ans. Blessed be God, we can make it appear that not one of ten come to Age of
our Communion, but have received already with us, which our Examination Rules
can instruct; and hundreds of witnesses testify.

2ly. No man of our Communion come to the Age of 30. or 40. Years but is
particularly noticed if he do not receive, but where Scandalous Immoralities
are found, if he were 50. or 60. Years of Age, such will not be admitted with
us: heartily wishing our Neighbors to take the like care.

To the Dissenting Ministers of Derry-
PAge 170, But as to you my brethren, that disown my Communion and authority; I
have reason to fear that what I shall offer to you may receive some prejudices,
from my station and Character, yet reason is reason from whomsoever it
proceeds; and I only desire that you would weigh seriously, what I have here
offered in defense of the service of our Church: and therefore, lest you should
be in the wrong, it will be the safest way to be modest in censuring.

Ans. For disowning your Communion and authority, reasons shall appear; which
would have sleept, if you had suffered them

As for prejudices from your station, though we cannot believe all implicitly
because of your Character, yet reason shall be treated, with reason so far as
we are Masters of it.

Your first demand is, that we seriously weigh what is offered in defense.

Ans. Defense implies some opposition or injury offered, but how does this
appear? what disturbance were we giving? who have been the first aggressors? We
were silent, and would have so continued, had you not emitted so virulent a
discourse, against our manner of worship, which men of understanding who know
the times, judge very unseasonable; and however, Ministers of the Gospel of
peace above all other men, should most pursue Peace. Your book then not being
defensive, but offensive, arraigning us for a self condemned people, you have
extorted this vindication: Lest by silence the world think as you say, that we
are self condemned: for who can be blamed for condemning the self condemned?
but that you may know how obsequious I have been to your commands, in weighing
what is offered. I do now return the Result: that having brought all your
arguments to the balance, they are found light; declaring withal, if they had
prependerat on your side, I should soon have been Truth's captive.

We are desired to be modest in censuring, and to beware of scurrulous
Reflections.

Ans. What were our censures? give instances of the censures and censurers, for
it is not fair to insinuat the guilt of scurrulous reflections never instructed:
but if we be docile, the Art of censuring is now taught us: who contented our
selves as occasion required to instruct our people, and justify by the word of
God our manner of worship, without reflecting on others; I can produce many
witnesses, who have heard me often publicly declare, that I intended no
reflection against those of another persuasion; though I was oblidged to discover
Scriptural grounds, for our own persuasion, and now suffer so much freedom as
to understand: your own Book has occasioned more of this Nature in Pulpits,
than probably would been published in this Age, by any of us; so that if our
people be better confirmed in their own way, by more distinct and explicit
knowledge of what they profess and practice, they are partly indebted to such
as have ministered the occasion.

Page 171. There is another thing, that in justice I think I may request of
you, which is, that in your worship and practice, you will not make the
difference between us, seem greater than realy it is; to abstain from a thing
confessed to be lawful in the Service of God, mere* ly because observed by us,
is surely very far from a spirit of meekness and moderation; and therefore I
may hope that you will not Indulge your people in such affected distances, etc.

Ans. The Author's diputing against reflections, and yet with the same breath
Reflecteth, in alleging we abstain from that which we confess Lawful, because
observed by the^, God knows we affect not, but are grieved for these
distances; wishing we could with a safe Conscience, join with our neighbors in
the worship of God: But that we abstain from that we confess lawful cannot be
instructed: have any of us said, that your ceremonies are either lawful or
indifferent? When was that confessed, and to whom? And that we abstain merely,
because they are observed by you, is still judging of men's hearts, and it may
still be observed, that when men presume on Gods prerogative, they run on
mistakes, calling good evil, and evil good, for if your observing were our only
rule for abstaining, then we would not read the Scriptures, we would not offer
praises to God: for you observe these things. Who are the censurers now? and to
prevent this unwarrantable prying into men's thoughts: I shall discover some of
our real sentiments, and then judge as God directs.

I do freely acknowledge, that this Stated separation (especially where the
reasons of it are not known) is a lamentable scandale to the protestant
profession, which we should be so far from affecting, that all good men are
concerned to endeavor, making up of the breach by all laudable means; because
these intestine divisions, not only hardneth our common enemy, and encourages
them to Act, and hope for an entire dissolution of the protestant interest at
last; but they also discipate our own strength, causes decays in the power of
Godliness, and our merciful God provoked, to take his Kingdom from among us.

2ly. When men are duly concerned, with the woe of these divisions, then they
will be sollicitous, to discover their fountain culpable cause.

3ly. The only sure way to find out the culpable cause, is diligently and
humbly to search the word of God, what he requires of us as to worship; and
willing to offer the Trial of all our way to that touchstone; though it be so,
that the most erroneous pretend to Scripture; and the Devil pretended
scripture, yet we must not reject them; though he profaned scriptures, yet our
Savior still made use of them, and silenced him by them: no doubt, but Satan
and his instruments have it for their grand design, to bring the Scriptures
into contempt; by misapplying and wresting of them: but whether shall we go? If
not to Gods Law and Testimony, which he has appointed a lamp to our feet, our
Blessed Redeemer being ready to open the Scriptures, to such as attend, and
depend upon him.

4ly. When either particular persons or Societies have diligently searched the
Scriptures, abstracting from all former prejudices by education, or custom and
observe clearly what manner of worship God has prescribed; then these persons
or Societies, are oblidged to practice and adhere to that manner of worship, on
peril of their Souls; lest if they should offer that which is not commanded of
God, they be found offering strange fire unto him; and so be consumed in their
iniquity.

5ly. No persons or Societies on earth are warranded, to devise and impose,
Acts of worship, which God has not commanded: and if they do impose them,
should not expect compliance, since they Act above their Sphere, and God must
be obeyed rather than men.

6ly. Every rational creature, must be allowed the exercise of that judgment of
discretion, wherewithal his maker has endued him, and every Christian must be
persuaded in his own mind, that his manner of worship is conformed to the Laws
of his Lord and Redeemer: If it be objected, that this liberty to every
Christian introduces anarchy, and utter confusion. I answer, that to compel
men to Act as brutes, and prostrate their very Souls and consciences to the
lusts of men; is no mean of Gods appointment for maintaining of Order; God
needs no finful means for governing the World, but this is a sinful mean to
command men to Act either against clear light, or doubtingly, for whatsoever is
not of Faith, is ^in.

7ly. To impose any thing in the worship of God as necessary, which the
imposers call indifferent, is unaccountable: for it can be no sin in them to
forbear imposing, what themselves account indifferent: but must be a sin in
such as comply, and Act that which they know is not indifferent, but unlawful.

8ly. As every Christian is oblidged to endeavor the quiet of his own
Conscience, that it be not defiled, or wounded, by Acting worship which God
has not required, since we are always to exercise our selves, to have a
Conscience void of offense toward God; so on the other hand, we are to
exercise our selves, to have a Conscience void of offense toward men;
endeavoring Unity and peace, in the Church of God: not making causless Rents
and Divisions, not indulging groundless scruples: Laboring to have no less
clear grounds for our forbearing or non-complyance with the manner of worship
observed by others, than we have for Acting in our own manner; when this is
neglected, men sin which way soever ignorantly: for a good Conscience must have
this for a ground of comfort, as far as in them is, as far as it is possible
without sin, they have followed peace and unity: Rents in the Church of God are
of so afflicting and important consideration, that nothing but danger of sin,
should make any separation.

9ly. Albeit this separation from Orthodox Protestants, even in part, as to our
separat Assemblies, be onerous to us (judge otherwise who will) yet obedience
to God, and preservation of a good Conscience must preponderat all other
considerations: therefore when such Terms for our Communion with them are
imposed as we cannot comply with, without evident danger of sin, and violenting
our Consciences; then it is not our sin to withdraw, being driven into separate
Assemblies.

10th. We being thus constrained to separate, and worship God in the manner we
judge most acceptable to him, and find prescribed by himself: it is our
comfort, that we have a Gospel Ministry, according to the Institution of Christ
among our selves, and Gospel Ordinances as delivered, and prescribed by him:
unto which our people conscientiously adhere.

11th. We find also the Ministerial charge of feeding the Church of God
committed to Presbyters Acts 20. Verse 28. Where they are also called Overseers
or Bishops, the word of God never made difference between those Presbyters and
Bishops, though men without warrant of Scripture, has made a difference of their
own devising; for in this Scripture we find Parity of Ministerial power,
committed to them all without exception, to feed and Oversee the flock; which
is a full Commission to guide and govern, as well as to teach* neither is this
Commission by any Scripture, either repealed, or retrenched by prescribing
imparity among Gospel Ministers, nor can a few, or many of these Ministers,
instruct a Commission or power, to deprive any of them, of that which Christ
has conferred on them all.

12th. It is also Gods great mercy to us, and no small encouragement to our
peoples steadfast adhering to the Communion, whereof they are members, that no
Scandalous Ministers are permitted to Officiate with us, such as common
Swearers, profaners of Sabbaths, Adulterers, Drunkards, gaming and dancing
until Lords Day morning, mockers of Piety, aspersing all the gracious
operations of the Spirit of Grace, as mere Enthusiasm calling conversion and
Regeneration mere cant and Melancholy* fancies, advancing man's free will, as
above Gods previous concourse and predetermination, maintaining universal
Redemption, and the utter Apostasy of Saints, etc. nor are such permitted with
us, who are negligent of their charge, making less then half a day in a
fourthnight, all the time they get for instruction; or when they do instruct,
to tell the people they need not trouble themselves with Predestination or
Adoption, but live a good life with their neighbors, and so be saved: no such
Ministers are of our Communion; and we pity the Souls that are under such
conduct, wheresoever they are; for the blind are leading the blind, and both
ready to fall into the Ditch* Ministers are peculiarly oblidged to be, 1 Timothy
4. 12. An example of believers, in word, in conversation, in Charity, in
Spirit, in Faith, in Purity.

We have also by the tender mercies of our God, Gospel Ordinances Administered
in our public Assemblies, according to Scriptural Primitive simplicity, not
willingly omitting, adding, or depraving, any part thereof: nor has the Author
by all his elaborate discourse, instructed any Deviation from Scripture
institution, in our public Administrations, though no doubt we are guilty, as to
the manner and spiritual performances.

Having then a Ministry and Gospel Ordinances according to Christ's institution,
and our Ministers gifted by him, with some measure of competent Qualifications
for all Ministerial work, diligent in their work, and of Godly conversation; we
judge our selves safest as to our Consciences, where we are; and tho our
desires were never so ardent for Peace and Unity in the Church, yet what is now
said, and much more to this purpose said by others, together with these two
Scriptures, Matthew. 20. verses 25, 26, 27. and Luke 22. verses 24, 25, 26, and
27. Notwithstanding of all the Glosses put on them, by men affecting
preheminency; yet to us they are so plain and awful, that we dare not, we
cannot, and by Gods grace will not countenance any thing that is there
forbidden by Christ.

Since the Author does so particularly desire, that our people be not indulged
in such affected distances; good manners requires that either the demand be
granted, or some reason why it cannot; as for affecting distances we disown it,
wishing that God would open their eyes who make the distance; for we look upon
our selves as ridiculed, First to barricado our way, and then invite us to come
in.

And if the Author be pleased to consider, I will serve him with some necessary
informations concerning his Book. That he has missed the Art of making
Proselytes, for many upon perusal of the Book, are determined to a greater
aversation, and distance than ever before; and no wonder, considering

First, That they can expect no Gospel preaching in communion with the Author,
affirming, that all preaching is either reading of the Scriptures, or
publishing of the Gospel to such as never heard it before: our people heard the
Gospel long ago; and therefore can expect nothing but reading; so that they
must adhere to that communion, where they know to find Gospel Preaching; the
great mean of Salvation: for Faith comes by hearing, and how can they hear
without a preacher? Could this be a Lodestone to draw men by telling they need
expect no preaching?

2ly, We are told in hyperbolicks for much reading, that the Scriptures apply
themselves: but many find it otherwise, requiring adventious help; our Savior
and his Apostles explained and applied Scriptures: and our people find it
necessary for their Souls, being sensible that they are ready to err, not
knowing the Scriptures, yea to wrest them to their own destruction, as others
have done before them.

3ly, They find by the Book, ground to fear dangerous Doctrine concerning
Prayer, observing how frequently conceived prayers are exposed as mere
invention, which they know to be allowed by Christ, practiced by his Apostles;
and generally all the godly whose prayers are recorded in Scripture, and
themselves by experience finding the gracious promised help of the spirit of
Grace and Supplications, assisting them in Prayer, softning their hearts, and
bringing them into Communion with God, without the words of any Form.

4ly, By the Book they are discouraged to read the Scriptures in private, seeing
its alleged there is no promise to such reading, they know not but they might
hear as they read; and have no mind to be tempted to negligence in reading the
Scriptures, knowing that God has both promised a blessing to such reading of
his Word, and actually blessed their* own Souls in performing that Duty; yea
the greatest Lights of all the ancient Fathers have left it on record, that
private reading the Scriptures was the very mean God blessed for their
conversion to Christianity.

5ly, That assertion, that such as cannot fit themselves for receiving at the
Lords Table thrice a year, must needs think themselves out of a state of Grace,
and so deserve to be excommunicated, Is such a Thunder Bolt as has frighted
many into a greater distance than ever: lest themselves should be so served,
and that only for their weakness, because they cannot fit themselves; many are
ready to look upon it as having too direct a tendency to desperation, if poor
Souls should be cast out of the Church, for their weakness; for some well
meaning people might be tempted to think, they were cast out of Gods favor,
because cast out of the Church.

6ly, Many Readers find in the Book, Scriptures quoted for that which they do
not prove, and sometime that called the Command of God, which he never
commanded, this also frighteth from hearing lest they hear as they read.

7ly, We are told that the mode of entering Churches, is with some bodily
Worship; but this being religious Worship, we must know what is its Object: for
the second Command discharges our worshipping of God by Images, or the
likeness of any thing: but this worship as has been proved in its due place,
is first directed to the Fabric of an House.

8ly, We are told by the Book, that we must kneel in the act of receiving Bread
and Wine at the Lords Supper; but the second Command stands in our way here
also, discharging religious Worship designedly before any Creatures, this also
I have proved in its proper place, I shall forbear, though I might add more
instances, whereby its evident we are bolted out from that joining in Worship
and Sacraments, which is required of us.

There is no more in this Epistle, but what is particularly answered already in
the proper places: but

Page 175. Complaint is made that many Children die un-baptized, for want of
Ministers of our own Communion.

Ans: The Parents of these Children have much more ground of complaint against
those who deprive them of that benefit, by appointing two Sacraments of
Baptism; whereas Christ did institute but one, the sign of the Cross being
used, a humane Sacrament: who can blame conscientious Parents, rather to suffer
to their grief; than countenance such an encroachment on Christ's prerogative,
and so partake of other men's sins.

Ibid: We have a warning against our Brethren of the Congregational-way, and
page 177 Now we think in justice to your own cause, as well as to us, ye ought
to warn your people against these Books, that maintain principles contrary to
us both.

Ans. Overtures of this nature are unseasonable, since God in his great mercy
is hearing the Prayers, and granting the long hoped for desires of his people,
in healing the breaches between them and us, which we take as a token for good,
from the hand of our God, wishing that none may envy so great a benefit to the
Church of God.

Page 178. The last thing required is, to beat down vices and immoralities.

Ans: This is the duty of all Christians in their several stations, but
especially the Ministers of the Gospel, who are obliged to rebuke with all
authority, and themselves to be so blameless, that they may not be ashamed to
reprove others, not more guilty than themselves.

2ly, Conf^^^nce also should be made, that the greatest severity be exerted
against the greatest offenses, it being an inaccountable abuse of discipline
when its severest lashes are on the most conscientious.

3ly, ^ough we have no cause to pretend to that piety of convers^^^^ which is
commanded, and which we should be daily breathing after, perfecting holiness in
the fear of God, yet its observeable, that the most vicious are the greatest
haters of our assemblies, the profligat, debauches, God-dammes, the Blood and
Wounds, where they go we know not, but they never come near us.

To the Dissenting Laity of the Diocese of Derry.
PAge 181. I beseech you in the spirit of meekness (as one that is appointed by
the providence of God, and the care of a Christian Magistracy to watch over
your souls) that you will seriously consider, and lay to heart what I have here
tendered to you.

Ans: As for the Authors Title to the charge of Souls in this Diocese,
whatsoever he has by Christian Magistracy, I dispute not; but what is said to
be by the Providence of God shall be considered.

A Title by mere Providence is very bare and insufficient for an Officer in the
House of God, who should be instructed with a commission from Christ, for
watching over Souls, Providence not being our Bible, where only such
commissions are registered.

2ly, It Is said he is the one that is appointed to watch, then he is the one
Pastor of the whole Diocese; sure so vast a district must be at a great loss to
have but one Pastor, and his Clergy under great grievance and discouragement,
since none of them can speak to the people where they officiat with Ministerial
authority, as their Pastors, though some of them may be found knowing and
moderat men, of as good qualifications for Pastoral Charge, as some of their
betters.

3ly, If it be said that the sole Pastor of the Diocese does communicate, and
devolve on the Inferior Clergy, some parts of his Pastoral power, I then
demand where we shall find in any Gospel record, such a set of ordained
Ministers of the Gospel, that are half Pastors, having some parts, but not
entire Ministerial power, for feeding and overseeing their flock?

4ly, I desire therefore in few words, to know whether any of the Clergy under
the Author, be Pastors yea are not? If they be Pastors according to Christ's
institution, then the Author is not the sole Pastor in the Diocese, if they are
not Pastors, then the Diocese should be inavoidably miserable, having but one
Pastor, who is incapable of watching over so many souls.

Let the Reader observe, and remember that Scriptural Pastors appointed to feed
their flocks, Act. 20. 28. are also required to oversee them, this feeding and
overseeing, is the highest Ministerial power over the flock, that any Officer
in the House of God can claim by right, and whoever pastorally feeds, by
tenor of the same commission is to oversee, which feeding and overseeing is to
guide, govern, and rule by the Laws of Christ; and therefore every Pastor has
this power by his Commission, without being beholden to any other, who has no
other commission from Christ than themselves: besides that Ministerial ruling
is plainly ly declared to be the Right of Presbyters, and therefore cannot
without Sacrilege be appropriated, or reserved by one, to the prejudice of
others 1 Timothy 5. 17.

Next, The Laity, (as the Author terms them) are desired to consider and lay
to heart what he tendereth to them, for he cannot prevail with them to come and
receive instruction from his mouth.

Ans: No doubt they do consider what is said, but some of them say, the more
they consider, the less they lay to heart; and to say truth, if readers take
pains to consider well what they read, there is no danger of becoming Proselytes.

2ly, It Is complained that the people will not come to hear instruction from
the Authors mouth.

Ans: Is there none to give instruction in the Diocese, if they come not to
receive it from the Authors mouth? are there not other Teachers of his own
communion in the Diocese? but this confirms what is abovesaid, that he is the
one appointed.

2ly, Can all the Dissenters of the Diocese of Derry come to hear and be
instructed by his own mouth? the whole body of the people being Dissenters,
where could be the hearing place? where the voice to reach so many thousands?

3ly, Since this is the Authors regret, that all the people come not to hear
him, his best relief is to take charge of no more than can hear him, and then
he is not only eased of his complaint and grief; but besides, shall be more
conformed to Scripture Rules; feeding a flock personally wherever he is made
Overseer, for any man to engage in a Charge which he shall never be able to
discharge is in accountable, and his delegation to others under him, that which
he calls his own charge and work, has no color of warrant from any
Scripture, or Reason.

Page 182. In this Treatise I have not led you into long Reasonings, or the
intricacies of humane Learning, but I have referred you to your Bibles.

Ans: It was no doubt discretion to take care the Laity should not be
confounded with too sublime speculations; yet the Seraphick Patterns are too
sublime for either Clergy or Laity.

2ly, Our people are referred to their Bibles, the Author could not advise them
better, especially when they are well Expounded; and the advice is to be the
more regarded, since the Authors own people, are recommend but to the Book of
Common Prayer, as their best Family Devotion.

Ibid: I would desire you to observe, that it ever has been, and in all
probability ever will be the humor of the World, to be more fond of their own
inventions, than of what God commands.

Ans: The Author says well, for Inventions being men's own Brats, are dear to
their Parents, were they never so deformed.

2ly, He says, in probabillty, this will be ever the humor of the World; if
it be still the humor of the World, Why but it may be the Authors humor also?
for he is yet in the World, as others.

And if he say of himself and his, though they be in the World, yet they are
not of the World, and that only a rabble of reprobat Dissenters are the men of
this World; if this be the Authors sense of us, he is but consistent with
himself in what he elsewhere published, that such as we are belong not to the
Catholic Church, and so are the men of this world in the worst sense, being
without Christ, having no hope, and without God in the world; I could never
learn of any other, but a Pope that has excommunicated so many famous
Churches, sound in the Faith: Neither is this ignominy done to the Churches of
God, ever yet publicly retracted, as it ought to be, though detected,
published, and solidly Confuted by Mr. Boyse.

Those whom the Author now writes to, have found it to their smart, who are
most fond of Inventions, they cannot be bewildred where to find them, many of
them being excommunicated, fined, and confined, for no other cause, but
non-complyance with unwarrantable inventions in the worship of God.

Page 183, and 184. The Author accuses the Laity for bringing in extemporary
prayers, saying* It Is plain you have brought them into practice, against the
opinion of the Church governors; and of the first Reformers, who all did
settle Liturgies in the Churches which they Reformed; this Knox did in
Scotland, Luther for Germany, Calvin for Geneva and the French Church.

Ans: Was it the Laity taught their Teachers to pray conceived prayers? No
sure, for the Spirit of God teaches all the Children of God such prayers, when
the Author pleases, let him answer the Scripture proofs I have brought for it;
we find Abraham, the Patriarchs, Job, Moses, the Prophets, our Savior himself,
and his Apostles, all using conceived prayers without a form; so that the best
Church Guides has taught the people such prayers, and not the people them.

2ly, Our first Reformers from Popery allowed some forms, and did well in so
doing, when few qualified persons, either for preaching or praying could be
found, so Homilies were appointed in place of preaching, because the poor
ignorant Priests could neither preach nor pray.

3ly, Our first Reformers did then pray conceived prayers themselves, and
limited no Ministers by forms of humane composure, whom God gifted for
extemporary prayers, and all these Churches to this day, use conceived prayers
in their public Assemblies.

Page 184. And let me tell you that it is no hard matter to give a reason, why
the generality of people are better pleased with such extemporary prayers, than
with forms; for can any wonder that a prayer which people never heard before,
and is adapted to the fancies and humors of a party, with all the advantages
which novelty gives, should gratify carnal and itching ears, more than the
fixed and settled prayers of a Church! whereas there is a pleasure and a kind of
sensual delight in the novelty of the other prayers, and the Tone wherewith
they are sometimes delivered, makes the hearers imaginarily devout.

Ans: Here is judging, and censuring to the highest degree, and that very
judging which is forbidden of God, for men to judge of men's hearts, which is
Gods prerogative: For first, he says extemporary prayers are adapted to the
fancies and humors of people, that is when Ministers pray conceived prayers,
they fit these prayers for fancies, as if they prayed to God, that peoples
fancies might be humoured, which were an atheistical profanation of prayer; by
what authority does the Author judge the secret designs of the hearts of
Ministers?

2ly, Have all those who hear and join with conceived prayers, nothing but
fancies and humors for their Religion; and love conceived prayers, because
thereby their fancies are pleased? then all who heard and joined with the
Apostles prayers, which they never heard before, and obtained many blessings by
these prayers, they were all deluded, for only their fancies were pleased, this
is the very stuff we have from the worst of men in this age, decrying all the
operations of the Spirit of Grace, as mere fancy; Does all Ministers in the
Church of England? who use extemporary prayer, adapt them all to fancies and
humors? are all the prayers of the Reformed Churches adapted to fancies? if
our Author know of no better conceived prayers, we need not admire that he is
such an admirer of Forms; or is it only we in the North of Ireland, or in this
Diocese, who adapt our prayers to fancies? Can the Author think of answering to
God for such uncharitable judging? We are thankful to God who assisteth us to
pray against peoples fancies and humors, but never for them: Is this the
spirit of meekness? Is this the way ^o unite us? Is this the way to make us
live more easily together? Is this to be modest in censuring?

3ly, Has the Author this by Revelation, that peoples delight in prayer is
sensual and no^ spiritual? if he have it not by revelation, how comes he to
know the internal delight of men's souls? whoever has run higher on Gods
Prerogative, of judging the secrets of men's hearts?

If the Author will suffer faithful plain dealing, I would tender my humble
Advice, that he would judge more sparingly, lest if such persons obtain real
spiritual and Holy delight in prayer, (as in charity I hope some of them do) he
be found tampering with a most dangerous Tool, that may give a wound to his
Conscience hereafter, not easily healed; had the Author judged only of men's
External Actions, I should have said little: but to judge of men's secret
designs and delights, is inaccountable.

4ly. We are told the tone wherewith conceived prayers are delivered, makes the
hearers imaginarily devote.

Ans. It Is probable the Author may understand this better than we do, for we
are no such Admirers of tones in prayer as I hear some are, having never either
ejected, nor rejected a Minister for want of this great gift of toning of
Prayers, but think it safest that every man use that natural way of speaking
which God his Maker has allowed him; and to urge no man apishly to counterfit
other men's voices, which is never found to frame well with any man, and just
with God it should be so; when men are either so simple as to be forced from
their natural way of speaking, or so Hypocritical as for applauses to be other
men's Apes: My humble opinion is, that all Ministers should be sure in their own
Consciences they are free of vain affectation of tones, or vain words in their
public Administrations: Next that such as hear and join in worship, be not so
much concerned with the manner of men's speaking, as with the matter that is
spoken, and therefore cannot give my Amen to our Author's assertion elsewhere,
Page 165. The distinct affectionat manner of pronouncing and reading, etc. is
absolutely necessary to give life and efficacy to it for the spirit of Christ
is only absolutely necessar to give life and efficacy: Paul's speech was
complained of as contemptible, yet life and efficacy by the blessing of God
attended his speech.

Page 186. It Is manifest that extemporary prayers would be much more easy to
most of us, and less burdensome than the service we use.

Ans. If this be received it must be on the Author's testimony, for otherwise
it is improbable: but if he would try conceived prayers a year or two in
public, and then give his opinion that they are easiest, his testimony then
might go a great way.

I know no way such prayers can be easiest, but when men have such assistance
of the Spirit of prayer as rendereth them comfortable, and therefore easy to
him that prays; and if the Author have experience of this, it is pity he
should ever pray by a book, for reading in the time of praying, must needs be a
great diversion to a Soul immediately directing desires unto God, reading being
a distinct Act of it self, having nothing of the nature of prayer in it, nor
any way to promote it, but rather at least an avocation from the work of
prayer, for prayer of it self is sufficient work for the best of men, though they
be no hindered by another unseasonable work of reading, and keeping men's eyes on
a book, which should rather be lifted up to Heaven after our Saviors example.

TO All My well beloved Friends of the Presbyterian Congregation at
Londonderry.
FInding you with other Dissenters in this Diocese, Arraigned and condemned as
the greatest Criminals for innovations, in the worship of God, as men of
itching Ears, whose Devotion is imaginary and fancies, whose religious delights
in the most Solemn worship is but sensual; I could not but be concerned for
your Vindication knowing that he who condemns gives sentence without
Commission, and therefore null and void: as does appear in my answers, to the
epistle directed to the Dissenting Laity of the Diocese of Derry; whereby I was
oblidged to stand up for you, as injuriously exposed to the contempt of all who
read your Character: but be not troubled, it being a small matter to be judged
by man, with whom in a little time, you will be on even ground before God the
judge of all, who judges righteously; therefore let it be your great care, how
you will stand in that Day, and who will stand up for you* for you shall soon
have done with men high and low, but can never have done with God and his
Power; either for your eternal solace, or eternal punishment: in belief and
contemplation of that great Day, when I hope to meet with many of you in
Comfort, I shall now give my serious advice, being wearied of these empty
debates: and being more concerned to speak, labor, or write for your being
fixed, than others can be for your disquiet, your blessed Right to the glory
that shall be revealed. 2ly. Your holy practice as the way to that glory, 3ly.
your peace and comfort for help to run, and not weary until you come to
possession: is (or at lest should be) my great desire and concern.

And first in order to your established Interest and right to a blessed
Eternity, labor to be clearly and rationally satisfied, that the religion you
profess is of God; such as you may without any fear of terror, adventur Soul
and eternity upon, that you are not beating the Air, or running in vain; think
it not sufficient that you were so educated, or that many good and wise men
declare it to be the safest and best, or that you have long professed it, but
see with your own eyes, give it heart and time, when no mortal eye can be
witness; as you have a value for these immortal substances that are yet
breathing in your bodies, for the retaining whereof you have no price to give,
and for the annihilation whereof you have no price to give, but must endure an
eternity whether we will or not; what can we think of, but is a very trifle,
when this eternity and what concerns it, is considered.

The necessity therefore, of establishment in that religion which the eternal
God has appointed, as the way to lead us to a blessed Eternity is great, if we
consider

First the innat Atheism of our depraved natures, whereby there is not only a
privation of that primaeve knowledge God honored man with, but many perverse
and erroneous apprehensions of God, of happiness in him, and the way to it,
Atheistical doubts concerning God, Christ, Heaven and Eternity.

These seeds of Atheism not only lurk undiscerned by many, but often make
horrid eruptions, shaking, yea overturning all the religion some have professed
for many years: because they have made it no part of their religion to be fixed
in it; then they are ready to cry out, is there a God? is there a Christ? is
there an Eternity? can there be a Resurrection? is there a Heaven or Hell? Yet
some are tormented with the fears of that, the very being whereof they doubt;
orhers again forsaken of God, speak blasphemously of the God of Heaven, avow
Atheism, and tempt others to it* while people are not established and their
house never built on the rock, they are obnoxious to the worst of these Wo's,
nor has religion power upon their Souls, not knowing whether it be true or
false, many living as unconcerned with the religion they profess as if they had
none, being uncertain but all may prove otherwise in the end: and this
uncertainty is an argument in reserve, that the Devil improveth against
seriousnes in religion, labor therefore to have your feet fixed on the rock
that cannot sink under you, that so your goings may be established, knowing in
whom ye have believed.

And that you may be established, believe the Scriptures to be the very word of
God; the Scripture of Truth that cannot be broken, trust fully the testimony
and Veracity of God; for if you fluctuate and waver in this, every wind of
temptation will be ready to sh^ke you at the very Root, and build what you
will, all will be overturned, if this foundation be not firmly laid, that all
Scripture is by Divine inspiration* And because I had known many poor Souls
oppressed with temptations to doubt of all that is w^itten* their hope and
comfort burned up and almost consumed with such fiery darts, before they would
utter them to any, and some such at this day fainting under such suggestions,
as they are ashamed to make known to their dearest Friends; for the
establishment and help of such to believe the Scripture of Truth.

First, observe, what you have by nature of the Image of God yet remaining,
what awful indelible impressions you have of a God over you, which you cannot
shake fully off: it is written on your heart that there is a God, that he is
infinitely great and Omnipotent, that he is just, Holy, wise and good: now that
which you yet find written on your heart, you find the same in the written word
of God; whether would you go? What can you betake your selves to, but to the
Testimony of God, written both in your hearts and in the word of God revealed
to us? If you should reject the Scriptures, you reject also the witness of God
in your Souls, this meditation God, has made very conducive, for quieting and
fixing some Souls.

Consider also, that what the word of God publishes of the depravation of our
nature, you find even as it is written, natural enmity against God, which
inclines us if we could, to hide our selves from him as Adam, to say, depart
from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: we are informed by the
word of God, that the heart is deceitful above all things; that every
imagination of the thoughts of our heart are only evil continually; that we
rebel and are disobedient to God; that we are slow of heart to believe, and
bent to backsliding, etc. All these things and many more, we find by nature and
woeful experience.

What is predicted and promised in the word of God, concerning the salvation of
sinners by a Redeemer, his death, Resurrection, conquest and Kingdom, etc. Are
exactly found as the written word of God has revealed them; what God has
promised of pouring out his Spirit in the latter days is found as it is written;
the power of God still appearing in converting sinners, making many new
creatures, and all things new with them: making them love what they hated, and
hate what they loved, making a warfare against sin daily, where sin was
committed with greediness, etc. This Sanctifying grace of the Spirit is a
continued witness, multitudes of miracles both under Old and New Testaments
were wrought for confirmation of Gods Holy Word and promise, which without
violence to our very reason cannot be denied, either to be wrought, or the
finger of God, being wrought: these are blessed helps which our merciful God
has provided for confirming unstable Souls, and to secure us that the
Scriptures are the word of God our maker and judge; and above all, to depend on
the Spirit of Christ, which leads into all Truth.

When God in his mercy has determined and fixed your judgments, that the
Scriptures are Gods word and Truth, so as you can with confidence adventure
Soul and Eternity, according to the doctrine there delivered; then make choice
of the Truth, receive it in love and gratitude, blessing God for so great a
benefit, that many millions of Souls are deprived of, be diligent in reading of
it, laboring and praying to understand it, make Gods Testimonies the men of
your counsel, let it dwell richly in you, seek the law of God written in your
hearts, sell not the Truth at any rate, be not ashamed of any of his words,
lest he be ashamed of you, let no flatteries or threats of men, make you wander
from the commandments of your God.

Search out especially for the great Salvation recorded in the word of God, and
published by a Gospel Ministry: search until you find the sent Savior of the
world, accept of him, subject and devout your selves to him, join and give your
own selves to the Lord, do this personally, distinctly and deliberatly, and
leave it no longer as a duty you hope will be done, but while it is called to
day, allow it heart and time, as the most enriching work you ever were or shall
be about under the Sun: blessing God that he allows and requires to subscribe
our selves the Lords, and to take hold of his Covenant, and when you are about
it, beg that he will accept of you graciously, for if you be sincere in that
work, you cannot but Admire and Adore the riches of that love, aecepting such
worms into so glorious a Bond and Union, such a Bond as will keep you when you
cannot keep your selves, a Bond as oblidgeth us to be the Lords, and not our
own, how strengthening and comfortable is it, when a man can say, I am thine
Lord, save me; my soul has said unto the Lord, thou art my Lord. when the
Author and finisher of Faith, has graciously given you to believe, then you
may humbly beseech God, to give his Seal to so great a Transaction, in whom
also after that ye believed, ye were Sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise; ye
may warrantably beg of God, that he would give of his spirit, whereby ye may
know the things that are freely given to you of God, and thereby know ye are of
these, whom God has set a part for himself and that the Lord himself, in what
manner he pleases, would say unto your soul that he is your salvation.

The Lord having not only in mercy established your judgments, but given you
good hope through grace, then you are to hold fast what ye have received, and
be as a fountain sealed, not losing what ye have wrought, or God has wrought
for you: but improving it for the glory of the giver, and your own stability:
not harkening to suggestions and temptations that have a tendency to raze the
foundation already well laid, as if it were to lay again; whereby some are
rendered miserable in their religion, being as a City without walls, and their
hearts as the high way, that any destroyer has access to: we are to leave the
principles of the doctrine of Christ fixed and unmovable, not to return on
them as still disputable by every new temptation, but to bolt all such
temptations out of doors on the first view, as sent to obstruct our progress
and going on to perfection, as we are commanded.

2ly. As for practice, remember the words of our blessed Redeemer, Whosoever
hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him to a wise man,
who built his house upon a Rock, without a Godly practice our most splendd
Buildings are but on the Sand, which causes inevitable ruin at last: we are
to Glorify our heavenly Father by bearing much fruit, all we have from God
must return to the glory of the Giver, for all things are for himself. You have
God to walk before as still under his Eye, and willing he see all you do,
content he search you, though you know the Heavens are not clean in his sight,
and far less polluted clay; yet satisfied he know your heart toward him, that
he has made you hate what he hates, and love to do these thing that are
pleasing in his sight, you are Commanded also to walk with him, as near unto
him, yea to walk in him, and so to be Supplied for walking before him, and with
him: O the happiness and dignity to be found in this walk! if a Prince would
permite you to walk with him but half an hour, how would you be surprised with
Joy! what hope would it raise of future Favor? how ready would you be to
Publish it? but this walk (wherein I cannot so much as mention a Comparison) ye
may have for ordinary, which cannot but be the Wonder of all who attain it.
Will God in very deed dwell with men on the Earth? But few admire it because
few attain it.

By your Practice and Holy Conversation, you must Glorify him before men, let
your light shine, that others seeing your good works, may Glorify your Father
which is in Heaven: and yet take care you do not your works to be seen of men
for vain glory to your selves: Happy is the man who forms his Conversation
for Convincing and Edifying of others, and yet willing himself never to be seen
or notticed, this is the man formed for God to show forth his Praise, yea,
blessed is the man who does or ever did any thing inteerly for Gods glory; it
is worth the labors of our whole lifetime to have the Comfort of it, when we
must go the way of all the Earth: and miserable is the man, who breathing out
his Soul into another World amongst other Imbodied Souls, has this to go with,
here is a Soul that never did good but hurt to other Souls, helped none to
Heaven, but many to Hell: Let these few things be your care in all commpany to
do no hurt, to receive no hurt, to do good, and receive what good ye can learn
of others

Walk within your House with a Perfect heart, give good Example to your
Families, that neither Child nor Servant may die or remove from you, without
some help to their Souls, that all of them may have it to say, your Company was
their Blessing: Command your Household to seek and serve the Lord, let them all
have the Benefit and Example of Familie-worship, showing forth the Loving
kindness of the Lord in the morning, and his Faithfulness every night; see that
Pride hinder none of you to Pray in your Families, as thinking ye are not so
Gifted as others, though your Talents be few, yet by improving they grow: Let
none of your Families be as the Families of Heathens, who call not on God; be
not Instruments of hardening your Children or Servants against Familie-worship,
when ye are gone; be not Snares to their Souls, by giving them occasion to say
they never saw family Prayer practiced, nor the word of God read, nor his
Praises Sung. See that secret Prayer be not neglected by any, older or younger
who are capable in the Family; the neglect whereof, of it self will prove a
person to be ungodly, for every Godly one will pray, and every Child of God
has an inclination, and some measure of help to Pray, by the Promised spirit
of Grace and Supplications; if you have not a Disposition to Pray, you have not
the Spirit of Adoption. Remember the Sabbath be kept Holy in your Families,
waste not that Holy time in idleness, come and bring all you can with you, to
Worship God in the public Assembly: Find not your own pleasures, nor speak
your own words on the Lords day; it is a great Discovery of a Conscientious
Christian, who though tempted by others, yet dars not profane the Sabbath by
worldly Discourse, weary not of Sabbaths, but account them a delight, and a
merciful gift of God for the good of our Souls: it has been the Comfort of
growing Christians to think on the Sabbaths drawing near, knowing they might
then warrnatably lay aside all Earthly cares and thoughts, and so inteerly
Converse with their God: some of you have your daily bread to labor for
through the week, whereby ye are sometimes scanted for time to your Souls,
therefore loss none of your Holy time; but when you are not at public worship,
be often at Prayer, though the Sabbath must not be your only praying day, read
much Scripture, and what profitable Books ye can purchase, not books of
Controversy, being unsuitable for a Sabbath of Holy soul rest, but such Books
as do most press the Power of Godliness, and Heavenliness of mind, helps, to
prepare you for an eternal rest; and in a special manner, be requested not to
neglect Meditation, ye have much time on Sabbaths, besides what is spent in
public worship; and as you have much time, so have you much necessary Holy
work: and it will be your Advantage, to fix on some Method for the seasonable
managing of every Duty, and among other duties, take some portion of the time
for Meditation by it self, when you are alone: to mind the great works of God,
specially the great love of God, manifested in the work of Redemption,
particularly to Meditate on the Blessed Redeemer and his Resurrection from the
Dead; and whether your selves do partake of the Power of his Resurrection, if
you be risen with Christ from your Death in sin: For we have the Lords day in
Memory of his Resurrection, and therefore the Meditation of it is Benefits, is a
most proper Lords days work, and most sweet to such as can say, he has
begotten us again into a Lively hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the Dead; being Children of God, and Children of the Resurrection. It is
profitable also every Lords day after puklick worship to Meditate what has
been the Voice of God to us that day in particular, that there may be suitable
returns in our Practice. I shall add only one word to you who are Masters of
Families; that you make Conscience of calling your Children, and Servants to an
Account of what they Hear in public, and of their proficiency in knowledge, of
the Principles of Christianity.

I must now Contract what I would say further; though your true Comfort and
Peace be much desired: that you may Rejoice and work Righteousness, finding all
the Paths of Wisdom, Pleasantness and Peace: the Joy of the Lord is your
strength, and the peace of God shall keep your hearts and minds: when men are
loading you with Reproaches, God will plead the Cause of your Reproach, and
give Joy that no Stranger shall intermeddle with. And that ye may be enabled,
not only to Suffer, but to take pleasure in Reproaches for Christ's sake,
possessing your Souls in Patience, and Rejoicing in hope of the glory of God.

Labor 1. To have your Calling and Election made sure; blessing God for such a
Command, and that many poor sinners on Earth have been made to know their
Interest in a Building of God eternal in the Heavens, that God had wrought them
for the self same thing, and given unto them the Earnest of the Spirit, see
that ye be wrought, and made meet for that Inheritance, for as Christ prepares
the Mansions, so he prepares the Inhabitants: this requires Diligence, and
let it not be wanting.

If God in his mercy give you the earnest of this Inheritance, then grieve not
the Holy Spirit, whereby ye are Sealed unto the day of Redemption. Beware of
all sinning against Light, and Wounding your Conscience; for the Spirit bears
witness with our Spirit that we are the Children of God, that is with our
Consciences, therefore be most tender of your Consciences that they be not
defiled, and so Rendered incapable of witnessing for your Comfort.

Endeavor to so grow in Grace and Spiritualness of mind that you may
understand what it is to Delight in God, blessing him also for this, that there
is such a Command in the word of God, that ever any sinner on Earth is allowed
so great a Dignity and Comfort; but since it is allowed and required seek by
all means the Experience of it; that what ever be your Lot in the World, you
may declare your Lines are fallen out in pleasant Places, and ye have a goodly
Heritage; and in all your Trials or Distresses may go unto God with humble
confidence as your exceeding Joy, great is the Woe of that man who is miserable
in this Life, and God a Terror to him also: a Christian therefore should not
cease his endeavors, until every thought of God be a Pleasure, knowing him to
be his own God and Father in Christ, this will make you think no way so
Pleasant as going to God, this will make frequent Praying no Burden, this will
make continual Resorting unto God, in some respect easy, as constrained to it
by Love, this will raise you above your worldly Griefs, and above the Censures
or Revilings of men; here you find a Retiring, and hiding Place from the
Tempests and Storms, which overturn others: do not ye then Depend upon
Creatures for your Comfort, let every man prove his own Work, and then shall he
have Rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another: do not so much Idolize
men, either good or bad; as to have your Comforts Ebbing or Flowing as they
Frown or Smill: it being below a Christian indeed, the Sourse of whose Comforts
is he alone, who says, I, even I, am he that Comfort you, who art thou that
thou should be afraid of a man that shall Die, and of the son of man, which
shall be made as grass.

FINIS.

