AN EPISTLE APOLOGETICAL OF S. C. To a Person of Honor: Touching his
VINDICATION OF Dr. STILLINGFLEET.

Nec verecundi discunt, nec iracundi docent.
R. Joses. Permissu Superiorum, An. Dom. MDCLXXIV.

AN EPISTLE APOLOGETICAL OF S. C. TO A Person of Honor.
Noble Sir,
AS soon as advice out of England came to me of the honor done me by an unknown
Person of Honor, in publicly declaring so inconsiderable a person fit to
receive wounds from the Sword of so noble an Antagonist, I obtained from the
Charity of a Friend to have your Book sent me by the Letter-Post: But partly to
abate the charges, and likewise to disguise the shape of a Book, it was folded
up in loose sheets, with all the Margins close pared to the very quick, that it
might pass safely, as some Merchants Accounts.

2. At the first notice of the Ti^le, I expected that the principal argument of
it would be Reprehensions: yet I wondered Sir, how you should have found matter
to fill a Book with Reprehensions. After the reading a few pages, I found my
expectation fully satisfied. But withal, I perceived you had confounded S. C.
with Mr. Cressy, as if you were sure they had been one and the same person. I
might take leave to divide their causes, since I have no reason (having been
discovered by your self) to be answerable for whatsoever can be laid to the
charge of every Individuum vagum, whose true or supposed names, begin with the
two letters, S. C. Yet this shall not hinder the joining this particular S. C.
with my self in this Apology, as one guilty, or innocent person.

3. In the first place therefore, I assure you, Noble Sir, that since you have
so highly honored me, as to declare your self my friend, and a friend (till of
late) constantly the same, during the prodigious changes of the last fifty
years, I am prepared to receive whatsoever Reprehensions come from such a
Person, not only with patience, but gratulation: considering, that in case they
be just, it will be a happiness to receive my punishment, and confusion in this
world: and if not well grounded, you have given me an opportunity to justify
my self, and thereby to obtain a return to your favor.

4. Now in perusing your Animadversions, I find not only my manner of treating
with Dr. Stillingfleet severely condemned, but (more than the Title of your
Book required) a terrible Censure fix^d on many of my actions, and on
whatsoever writings I have hitherto published: and this Censure threatening not
only great danger to my self, but also to my Friends and Superiors: yea
moreover, my secret thoughts and intentions (by a strange Telescope it seems,
discovered) have been exposed to the worlds eye, and aggravated by an El^quence
befitting the greatest Orator of our Nati^n.

5. Forasmuch as concerns Dr. Stillingfleet, he will certainly never be able to
avoid the odious Character, and brand of ingratitude, if he do not show himself
in an extraordinary measure, sensible of the signal obligations he has to your
tenderness toward him, since to pleasure him, though in a sort a stranger to
you, or of a very fresh, and feeble acquaintance, the reputation of an ancient
Friend has been exposed to public obloquy. Not any b^rren thanks, nor a Book
written in your commendations will suffice to acquit him of such ^n obligation.
If he have therefore any spark of generosity, o^ but of good nature in him, he
will employ all his credit, and int^r^st t^ fix you in the public favor, both
of the Court and Kingdom. And what cannot his credit and r^commendation effect,
since the whole Nation (not its Representative only) is eternally obnoxious to
him for his discovery of new, and never before suspected crimes in Roman
Catholics, for the expiation of which not all the former Laws, how terrible
soever, will be sufficient?

6. But alas, Sir, I fear your self have obstructed a passage for it. For,
either you are not rightly informed of the present temper of our Nation, or out
of the generous frankness of your nature, you cannot persuade your self to
comply with it; and therefore, even in this very Book, published under the
Patronage of Dr. Stillingfleet himself, you speak your own sincere charitable
thoughts of Roman Catholics, as if, according to your judgment and desire,
some indulgence and relaxation of former severity might justly be extended to
them: yea, that, if even Catholic Priests themselves could agree to offer a
sufficient Profession of Loyalty, their erroneous, Doctrines touching
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, etc. could not justly render them Criminals to
the State. And moreover, not content with this, Page 43, 44.
you are pleased particularly to adorn with some commendations, the Order of
the Benedictins, for their duty, and respects showed to his Majesty, neither
have you any suspicion of disloyalty in any of them, except only in my self,
for having left out in the second Edition of my Exomologesis a reasonably
sufficient Form of Profession of Fidelity.

7. Honored Sir, to write thus concerning his Majesty's Catholic Subjects, or
to express any Charity or compassion toward them, becomes truly a Person of
Honor, and it will, I doubt not, in a good measure conciliate the favor of
Almighty God to you, and be a powerful expedient to put you in a good way
toward your heavenly Country (for Charity will cover a multitude of sins.) But
I fear it will much prejudice you in any wordly pretensions. For how wide,
think you, will the mouths of the populace and of Sectary Demagogues be opened
against you? This Person of Honor, will they say, does not much approve of our
burning the Pope in Effigy, and in all his Pontificals; neither will he be
much pleased with our Witty Dialogue between the Pope and the Devil, etc.
Perhaps he is a Statesman, and will not think sit so public an affront, and
despightful contempt should be showed to one, who though a Bishop, is a great
Temporal Prince, and when he is treated with by any State divided from him in
regard of Belief, or Ecclesiastical Subjection (as lately by the Moscovite)
addresses are made with all due respect: whereas such rude inhumanity none but
our late English Zealots esteem a virtue and Character of their thrice Reformed
Christianity.

. 1. Of the sharpness of my style against Dr. Stilfleet.
8. BUT leaving this general excursion, I will hereafter Honored Sir,
endeavor to give you the best satisfaction I can, in order to the several
special Points of accusation charged on m^. Among which, I ought in reason to
begin, as your self has done, with that which was the occasion of the writing,
and publishing your Animadversions on my Book, viz. My much condemned sharpness
of style against Dr. Stillingfleet, and his Book.

9. Sir, that Controversies among Christians, especially about matters which
regard Religion, ought by no means to prejudice Charity, we all acknowledge.
Yet withal, that sharpness of stile^ and even bitter Invectives, both against
Persons, Tenants, and Practices, may in some cases, be made use of, without
prejudice to Charity; yea, that Charity it self o^t requires them, we must
likewise acknowledge: especially when those who are enemies to Truth, or Piety,
are high in popular esteem for zeal, and learning (as the Pharisees were among
the Jews) and thereby give credit, and authority to errors, and suggestions of
cruelty. Otherwise we must condemn Moses and the Prophets under the Old Law,
and S. John Baptist, the Apostles, and several among the Holy Fathers of God's
Church under the New: yea, we must not except our Blessed Savior (who is
Charity it self) from our Censure, whose sharp reprehensions, neither the High
Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, nor King Herod himself, no not his own beloved
Apostle escaped.

10. Therefore before we can give an equal judgment whether, and how far
reprehensions deserve to be reprehended, we ought impartially to consider the
motives and grounds of them. And to this trial I most willingly submit my self
before all indifferent judges, and particularly the genuine learned Protestant
Clergy of the English Church, insomuch as if they shall determine, that in my
late (to me unusual) manner of treating with Dr. Stillingfleet, I have offended
against Christian Charity, or purposely intended to fix any dishonorable brand
on the English Protestant Church, and the Doctrine, or Discipline of it,
established by Law, I will be ready, without any reply, to suffer whatsoever
censure, or punishment they shall think fit to inflict on me.

11. And noble Sir, if now after Sentence pronounced by you against me, it may
be permitted me to petition for a Revision of Judgment, (I do not know the
proper Law Term) I do confidently persuade my self that you will, in your own
thoughts, a little qualify the rigor of your sentence, and not look on me as
a person, who for one fault against a Doctor, almost ^ str^nger to you, has
deserved not only to be deprived of the happiness of fifty y^ars continued
favor, but moreover, to be expos^d to the world, as a virulent Calumniator of
the English Church; and to his Sacred Majesty's Indignation, as a defamer of
one of his Royal Ancestors (King Henry the Eighth) and to the Honorable
Parliament, and Tribunals of the Kingdoms Justice, as a delinquent, beyond all
others, deserving the utmost severity of the Law; and lastly to the ha^^ed of
all persons of Honor, or V^rtue, as a most ungrateful, infamous detracter from
the fame, and reputation of the most obliging, generous friend, that ever was,
my most dear Lord, and Benefactor, Lucius Viscount Falkland.

12. Now, honored Sir, my hope is, it will not increase your anger, if I
endeavor to clear my self, the best I can, of these dangerous imputations.
Yea, moreover, I am willing to comfort my self in a persuasion, if I had had
the happiness of a fit opportunity to have evidently demonstrated to you, that
had you not been wronged by a malicious Informer, you would have spared most of
these criminal accusations against me, and have been a little more tender of my
reputation, and of the safety of my life. My humble suit to you therefore is,
that at least you would be pleased your self to read this short Apology, which
I am forced to publish, since your concealing your self disenables me to
present it to you in writing.

. 2. The first Motive of the Sharpness against Dr. Stillingfleet, was his
unusual, odious way of managing Controversy.
13. BUT I must apply my self first to what concerns Dr. Stillingfleet, which
occasioned your adding other far more criminal accusations^ and of greater
danger against me. And truly Sir, I am sorry, that, being in conscience
obliged, once for all, to endeavor to clear my self in this point also, I
cannot possibly do it without danger of renewing the Doct^rs personal
resentments, and yours also, against me (in case what I shall say touching the
Motives inducing me to write in a style which would have been unpardonable in a
Book of Controversy, wherein only Catholic Doctrines were to be defended)
shall give you no satisfaction. But you will be pleased to consider, that now I
only declare what I then thought when that Book against the Doctor was written,
not what I now at present think. And I leave it to the judgment of all men who
are able to read his Book and this Epistle, whether there was not exceeding
great probability, and more then sufficient grounds to induce me to suspect him
of a design therein in a high degree contrary to Christian Charity, and even to
huma^ity. However in some way of comp^nsation, this advantage against me I will
freely yi^ld him, That in case any more such quarr^lsom matter, from who^e pen
soever shall come ou^ against me, I will not defend my self, except I be
commanded by such as have right to dispose of my Pen, or unl^ss by false
accusation I be arraigned at the Bar of Iu^tice, and perhaps not then neither
in all Points.

14. Whereas you say, Hon^ured Sir, that my fault was therefore inexcus^ble,
because I had not any provocation t^ write in such a manner, against a person
of so dove-like a mildness; with the softness, Page 18.
gentleness, and civility of whose language you say, you have been exceedingly
delighted, etc. I beseech you be pleased to consider, that no personal
provocation, or contemptuous reflections, were cast by the Doctor on me, but
only in regard of my Book called Sancta Sophia. And I do assure you, that
though perhaps the reading of them might at first have a little warmed my
blood, especially such incivility coming from a person with whom I never had
any commerce at all, and whose name I had never mentioned: yet I should never
have judged fit, that a resentment of a few phrases of disparagement should be
the argument of a Book to be publish^d to the world. 2 Cor. 4^ 6.
We, as Christians, must expect to go to heaven per infami^m, and bonam famam.
B^ pleased therefore to believe, that it was not my self that I considered when
I wrote my Book: but the wrong done to the Catholic Church, in his Answer to
another particular Adversary, and the ruin of all English Catholics, which
seemed not to me only, but generally to all Catholics of my acquaintance, yea,
and to many Protestants also, to have been the principal Design of his Book.
That therefore for which very many, besides my self, thought Dr. Stilling^fleet
exceedingly blameworthy, was his unusual, unseemly way of managing the
Controversy against the Catholic Church, N^xt his cruel timing of it.

15. First then consider, I beseech you, Sir, impartially, the Doctor's
b^haviour in the former regard; and judge whether he did not renounce all
moderation, and charity, in charging, in a most tragical manner, the Catholic
Church upon three or four accounts, with most horribble, worse then heathenish
Idolatry: as also his employing the utmost of his invention, all his Logic,
and Rhetoric, to render us upon that account odious, and fit to be
exterminated^ but especially his doing this in quality of an authorized English
Protestant, as if he had been commissionated by my Lords the Bishops to defend
the substantial Doctrine of the Church of England after so cruel a manner, and
to justify, that her discession from the Roman Church was of absolute
necessity, by reason of the manifold horrible Idolatries taught, and practiced
in her: which I am confident will never be averred by Protestants.

16. For what the judgment of the Church of England is in this matter, we may
irrefragably collect from the Censures Synodically given by her in all those
points of Roman Doctrine on which the Doctor grounds his charge of Idolatry
against Catholics, to wit, The worship of God by Images, The formal Invocation
of Saints, and the Adoration (forsooth) of Bread in the Eucharist.

17. Now as touching the two first of these pretended grounds, I beseech you
Sir, to consider how the Church of England in her established Doctrine has
expressed her sense in the 22. A^t. 22.
Article: These are the words. The Romish Doctrine concerning Purgatory,
Pardons, Worshipping, and Adoration as well of Images, as of Relics; and also
Invocation of Saints, is a fond thing vainly invented, and grounded on no
warranty of Scr^pture, but rather repugnant to the Word of God.

18. And this observation your self has (as becom^s an unpassionate English
Prot^stant) made; where speaking of Purgatory, you ingenuously profess, Page
167.
That if you thought your Prayers, or any thing else you could do could be
helpful to the souls of your friends, or your enemies, you would pour them out
with all your heart, and should not fear any reprehension from the Church of
England, which has declared no judgment in the point, except it be
comprehended in the Article of Purgatory: and then the censure is no more then
that it is a fond thing, which in that case you would be content to undergo.
This you declare, and upon the same grounds since in the same Article no worse
a Title and Character is given to other Romish Doctrines, as Pardons,
Worshipping of Images, and Relics, and also Invocation of Saints: Therefore
certainly you cannot approve the Doctors attributing Idolatry to such Doctrines
or Practices.

19. In the next place be pleased to observe what the Church of England
declares touching that which Dr. Stillingfl^et (for an odious purpose) terms
The Adoration of Bread in the Eucharist, Art. 28.
in her 28th. Article: Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of
Bread and Wine) in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by holy writ, but
is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture; overthrows the nature of a
Sacrament, and has given occasi^n to many superstitions. The Body of Christ is
given, taken, and eaten in the Supper, only after an heavenly and spiritual
manner: And the means whereby the Body of christ is received, and eaten in the
Supper, is Faith. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was not by Christ's
ordinance reserved, car- ried about, lifted up or worshipped.

20. You here see, honored Sir, the Censure (far unlike the Doctors) which the
Church of England has given of the D^ctrines of the Roman Church touching the
Holy Eucharist, (which Censure you likewise (as before) will not think fit to
exceed^ she terms them, respectively, fond, vainly invented, such as cannot be
proved by Scripture, but are rather repugnant to the same: She does not so much
as style any of them Superstitious, but only giving occasion to many
Superstitions. Thus far, and no farther, does she condemn them: and I suppose
so many grave, learned, and wise Prelates as joined in the compiling these
Articles, and many more who afterward in several Synods reviewed, and without
any considerable change, confirmed them, were as quick sighted to discover
faults, and as able to proportionate a Censure of them, as Dr. Stillingfleet,
who with all his skill is but a Neophyte in the English Church: Therefore it is
evident, that it was not by the Church of England's warranty, and also that it
was not the dictamen of calm reason, but an uncharitable passion against his
neighbors, and brethren, who never had offended him, that incited him so
cruelly to expose them to the public hatred, and to the utmost effects of that
hatred.

21. Perhaps he will say, that he is warranted to charge the Roman Catholic
Church with Idolatry by the example of several other grave, and learned
Protestants, members of the English Church: though I believe he will scarce
grant that any before him has prosecuted that charge with such a killing
Rhetoric, or in a time so seasonable for mischief.

22. All this indeed he may truly say: And among his Patterns he may, if he
please, reckon some, more than Members, even Fathers, Teachers, and Governors
of the English Church. I mean, Bishops, and Archbishops, who have done the
like, or in some respect worse: for some of them, not content to accuse the
Catholic Church of Idolatry, have written volumes to make the simple believe,
that the Chief, Universal Pastor of the Catholic Church is ( God bless us) the
very Antichrist.

23. This he may say; But withal, the most sober, learned, and judicious of the
Church of England will tell him, that the uncharitable, Calvinistical spirit,
by which those Bishops and Archbishops were agitated, did so b^ind them, that
they did not see, or perhaps did not care, what ruin they brought on their own
Order, Character, and Church by such their intemperate writing, and pr^aching;
which to Catholics seemed only noisome words, but to the Church of England
proved swords piercing into its very bowel. For if the Roman Church both taught
and practiced horrible Idolatry, and if the Pope were indeed Antichrist, then
the Hierarchy of England is ipso facto^ null, or worse; then the late
rebellious Parliament had just reason to destroy them root and branch, as
persons who pretended a Mission, and exercised a jurisdiction publicly
acknowledged by themselves to have been received from abominable Idolaters;
yea, even from Antichrist himself. And certain it is that those few
Presbyterian Bishops, and Doctors gave both courage, and weapons to the busy
factious, (then called Puritan) party, to wound the Church of England more
mortally, than without such helps, they possibly could have done.

24. Methinks therefore, honored Sir, my resentment of Dr. Stillingfleet's
manner of proceeding in this point was not so criminal, that it should so
highly incense you as to excite you to a vindication of his honor, with so
much trouble to your self, and so much danger to us: since I can withal truly
protest, tht (although you are pleased to style me a Reviler of the Cburch of
England) it was a regard to her that h^d some influence on me to sharpen my
style: And this the rather you may believe, because, as an English Catholic,
it concerns us, both as to our quiet, and safety, to lie at the mercy of a
Church orderly established, and which acknowledges so merciful a King for Head,
rather than to be exposed to the fury of Calvinism.

25. Moreover, Dr. Stillingfleet has seemed not to content himself, by
aggravating in an unusual manner, the atrocity of Roman Doctrines, to render us
fit objects of popular rage, and cruelty: But by the fecundity of his
invention, is the first, and only Author, who has represented the universal
Body of Catholics as a crowd of crack-brain'd Fanati^ks, composed of seduce^s
and seduced, a ^icked Clergy, abusing the foolish credulous Laity, by
ridiculous L^g^^^s, ^^lse Miracles, lying Visions, and Revelations. By this
means Catholics being represented both as impious Idolaters, and either
cheating Impostors, or silly sheep, may seem worthy to be treated as our
Savior was between Pilate and Herod.

26. It is worthy your consideration to observe on what occasion or provocation
the Doctor entered into this new way of combating the Catholic Church. His
Adversary chanced unhappily, though innocently, to let drop out of his pen one
line or two which has undone us all. This he did after he had declared how King
Henry the Eighth, having in anger to the Pope, given free license to all his
Subjects to read the Bible in English, but very shortly after finding how
strangely Sects thereupon multiplied in his Kingdom, judged it necessary, by a
pub^ick Law, to recall that leave: Thereupon he added these words, Whether the
judgment of King Henry ought not to have been followed in after times, let the
dire effects of so many new Sects, and Fanaticisms, as have risen in England
from the reading of the Scripture, bear witness.

27. This is all he says. Permit me therefore, honorable Sir, with all due
respect, to say that it is a great mistake where you say, That the first
occasion was given the Doctor, by charging the Church of England with
Fanaticism: For his Adversary does not lay any imputation to the Church of
England: He does not pretend that English Protestants have received any the
least tincture of Fanaticism from the contagion of any Sects lately risen in
England. But the very naming of Fanaticism and England in the same line was
provocation enough for the Doctor (who seems with an impatient longing to have
watched for such an advantageous opportunity) to empty his voluminous store of
Collections heaped, not only out of some foolish, obscure Legends, for which
Cath^licks, who scorn them as much as himself, must yet be derided, but
likewise out of Histories written by (...) Saints and Fathers of God's Church
^cknowledged as such by the whole Church of God, both East^rn and Western, for
now ^^ve a thousand ^^ars: in which, if his wi^ serves him to d^s^race a
Miracle or Revelati^^, by ^escanting ironica^ly on some circumstance in the
Narration, he thinks it sufficient to make the Author pass for a Fanati^k, and
the whole Church also, for not forbidding all her Children to esteem it
credible.

28. But, Sir, I beseech you to consider, that in case Dr. Sti^lingfleet by
jesting at a Miracle, or saying, I do not, how credibly soever averred, believe
it, could persuade us also to be of his opinion, that, for example, what S.
Gregory w^ites concerning S. Benedict^ upon the credit of four Witnesses, were
not fit to be believed, little prejudice will arrive to the Catholic Cause, or
advantage to yours, till the Doctor can rationally assure men, that all is
false whatsoever all other holy Fathers, and particularly S. Augustine testifies
concerning a world of Miracles, many of which he had seen with his own eyes,
and others he had received by the Testimony o^ many Witnesses living in the
place where such Miracles were done, evidently prove, that the Veneration which
Catholics allow to the Relics of Saints is acceptable to God. The like may be
said of other Relatitions made by S. Gregory, and delivered upon his own
knowledge^ or lastly, what three or four Religious, and learned Abbots write
concerning S. Bernard, personally known to them. Vie S. Bernard, lib. 3. c. 7.
A certain Heretic, named Henry, having infected a great part of the Southern
parts of France: Zeal for the integrity of the Catholic Faith obliged S.
Bernard to travel thither for applying a remedy; to which Journey Alberick
Bishop of Ostia, the Pope's Legate, also solicited him. He was received there
as an Angel of God, and the concourse of people to see him, and demand his
Benediction, was so excessively great, that he could scarce pass through the
Highways. He preached and confuted the Heresies at Toulouse, and in several
other Cities. Particularly in a place called Sarl^t: After he had preached,
there were offered to him a certain number of loaves of Bread, to the end, that
according to his custom, he might bless (...). Thereupon he lifting up his
hand, and making the Sign of the Cross, blessed them, and withal said to the
People, You shall hereby pe^^eive that we preach the Truth to you^ and that
Heretics seduce you, if the Sick among you eating the Bread which I have
blessed, immediately rec^ver health. This proposition of the holy Abbot struck
fear into the mind of Godfrey Bishop of Chartres, there present; who ther^upon
said, They shall indeed receive health, but upon condition they eat the Bread
with a firm Faith. No (said S. Bernard, having a perfect confidence in God) I
do not say so; but I say absolutely, wh^soever shall eat, shall be restored to
health, that by this Miracle they may know assuredly, that we have preached the
word of God according to truth. And in effect such a world of Sick Persons were
perfectly cured, that the fame of it being spread abroad through the Province,
such an insupportable concourse of people assembled every where to see the holy
man, that to avoid the danger of being stifled, he was forced in his return to
divert secretly out of the know^ ways. Now this story having been written by a
Venerable Abbot, when the memory of the action was fresh in men's minds, if it
was a forgery, ought to be esteemed the most impudently ridiculous that ever
was, since the innumerable pretended witnesses of it, the Cities in which he
preached, the Bishop of ^b^rtres said to be present, etc. would certainly have
confounded the Author. Yet we do not find the least contradiction ever to have
been made against it. I have made choice of this particular Miracle, because it
produced many thoughts and scruples in Mr. Chillingworth's mind, and mine own
also: Though probably the D^ctor will despise the consequence of it, especially
when Saint Bernard himself shall inform him that the particular Heresies of the
foresaid Henry were a contemning the Churches Prayers and Sacrifices for the
Dead, Bern. Ep. 240. ad Com. Tholosan. and Se^m. 65. in Cant.
Invocation of Saints, Excommunications of Bishops, Pilgrimages of Devotion,
Observation of the Churches Feasts, Consecration of Chrism and Holy Oils, and
generally all the Ceremonies and Customs of the Church.

29. I beseech you, Sir, therefore, be not angry with well meaning Catholics,
if sometimes they bewail their Country, miserably disunited by a swarm of
Sects, which you also call Fanatical, without the least thought of disparaging
thereby the Church of England: or however, do not express your anger by
comparing S. Benedict, S. Gregory, or S. Teresa, etc. with such a Brood; as if
any Christian could be persuaded that these had been the stains of the
Catholic Church. Pardon my boldn^ss, Sir^ I beseech you, if I say (and it is
truly without diminishing my cordial respect, that I say) it seems to me that a
Person of Honor is injurious to himself in seeking to disparage the
reputation, which for so many ages those eminent Saints (who even by their
birth were Persons of Honor too) have had among all Christians. Indeed if
Catholics had built their Faith upon their Doctrines, Actions, Visions, o^
Miracles, their Adversaries might have reason to enquire into the
authentickness of them: But it grieves my heart to see Dr. Stillingfleet not
only imitated by you, but out done in his unbeseeming comical style. He only
exercised his wit in descanting on the Miracles related concerning S. Benedict:
But you Sir, spare neither S. Benedict's Person, Page 28.
Actions, Rule, nor Children. You believe him indeed to have been a devout
person in a dark time, according to his Talent of understanding (which you
suppose was very weak: Page 39.
) But ^ithal, that (...) may have been deluded by the effects o^ a distemperd
fancy, as many well meaning men h^^e been. And having found an exception
against one passage in his Rule, Page 42.
where he says, That an Abbot sustains the Person of Christ, as having received
his Sirn^me, mention^d b^ S. Paul, namely, Abba, Pater: Hence you p^^asantly
conclude, that S. Benedict thereby proves that our Savior was an Abbot up in
^arth. And withal, from thence you think fi^ to add, Is the reading of this
Rule now like (...) advance the honor of S. Benedict? Or is it possible for
any man that does read it to believe the poor man (how good soever his meaning
might be) qualified to give Rules which can improve knowledge and Devotion?
Which Rules whoever reads will himself be more in danger to be stirred t^
another passion, than Choler, (that is, scorn and laughter.)

30. First, as to your Objection (which perhaps you rather intended for a jest)
I will answer in good earnest, that I cannot imagine how you could possibly
argue the least defect, incongruity, or want of prudence in that passage
extracted by you out of S. Benedict's Rule. I am assured you will not deny but
that all lawful Superiors are God's Substitutes, for there is no such Power
but from God. I suppose likewise that the Universal Church can constitute
lawful Superiors, and from the Church do Abbots derive their Authority. Being
therefore lawful Superiors, and this also in order to the direction of souls,
the most proper Title that can be given them is that of Father, Tertul. l. de
Cont. c. 2.
which is (Appellatio and pietatis, and potestatis) A name importing both a
tender Care and a just Authority. So is God, and Christ, a Father, both in
heaven, and in earth, that is, in the Greek or Latin tongue Pater, in the
Hebrew, Ab^ and in the Syriack (spoken by our Savior) Abba, which word
therefore the Holy Ghost has thought good should remain in Scripture unchanged
in all Languages, as several others, Amen, Hosanna, Alleluia, etc. Was it not
th^n an exceedingly useful, and necessary admonition which S. Benedict gave to
Religious Su^^riours, that they, from their Title of Abba given them by God,
the Supreme Abba, should govern as Fathers, and not tyrannize as Lords? Good
Kings likewise are Abba's, so called by God with regard to the Church, and so
styled often by their Subjects, Patres Patriae.

31. It seems, Sir, this second Chapter of S. Benedict's Rule did so disgust
you, that you had not the patience to proceed further: Give me therefore leave
against this, or any other Objections that can be made, to set in an opposite
Scale the Characters given by a sufficient number of persons considerable for
their condition and judgment, who had read it through, and well considered it,
and let indifferent Readers judge on whether side the greater weight lies. In
the first place it is worthy to be considered, that wheresoever in the Canons
of Synods presently after S. Benedict's time, and for several ages after, the
word (Regula) Rule, is found standing alone, it is always understood of S.
Benedict's Rule. In the next place, omitting the Testimonies of very many
Saints and learned persons, who being Benedictins may be esteemed partial, as
S. Peter Damian, S. Bernard, etc. of such I will only produce S. Gregory, Greg.
Dial. l. 2. cap. 36.
whose Character of this Rule is, That it is above all others excellent for the
Discretion of it, and clearness in the expression. Moreover, the same glorious
Pope in a Synod at Rome, Baron. A. D. 595.
confirmed it; the tenor of which Con^^rmati^n extant in the Monastery of
Su^lac is this, I Gregory, Prelate of the Holy Roman Church have written the
Life of Blessed S. Benedict, I have also read the Rule which the Saint wrote
with his own hand: I commended and confirmed it in a Holy Synod. I commanded
likewise through several parts of Italy, and wheresoever the I a^in tongue is
spoken, that wh^soever shall come to the grace of C^nvers^o^, should m^st
diligently observe it, even to the end of the world. I have also confirmed
twelve Monasteries f^unded by the same Saint. And moreover, the same holy
Father sti^es S. Benedict, Greg. in l. 1. Reg. l. 4. c. 4.
a most excellent M^ster of the m^st strict life, and a learned Disciple of
(God) the Supreme Verity.

32. In the next place, several Syn^ds of Bishops have highly commended the
same Rule, and strict^y enjoined the observation of it, as the Synod ^f
Ra^isbon, Syn. Rat. Syn. Du. 2 Cap. 8.
of Duzy, etc. The expression of this latter Synod, I perceive will little
please you, where it says, S. Benedict, blessed both by Grace and Name, being
inspired by the H^ly Ghost, has in his Rule delivered documents consonant to
the Holy Scriptures, and to the Sermons of the Holy Fathers. To these I will
only add one Clergyman more, Baron. ad An Do. 1089.
Bonizo Bish^p of Sutrium, and a blessed Martyr, who styles S. Benedict, the
Apostle of Monks, who shone like the morning Star.

33. But perhaps now the Testimonies of Lay persons, if considerable for their
wisdom and quality, that is, if Pers^ns of Honor and Au^hority, will find with
you, Honored Sir, more esteem. And in the first place I must recall a passage
taken notice of by you: For it was not indeed a great and wise King who made
choice of S. B^nedict' s Rule by which to manage his Kingdom, but it was at
least a great and wise Duke even C^smo de Medicis, Great Du^e of Tuscany, who
being asked by a friend, why he had almost always S. Benedict's Rule in his
hand, Tho. G^^l. in l. di^^^ Religiosu.
answered, It was, because from the prudent prescriptions ^f that holy Father,
he collected Instructions very proper for the government of his people
committed to his charge. The same Great Duke also instituted an Order of
Knights under the same Rule. Besides this Great Duke, not only a Great King,
but a greater Potentate, an Emperor will be ready to testify their Veneration
of S. Benedict: Helg^ld^ ap. (...), ad A. D. 1029.
For Hugh Capet King of France inculcating to his Son the like Veneration, made
no scruple to style S. Benedict, a Father and Guide to all men, an Intercess^ur
with God for the common salvation of Christians, a haven of tranquillity, a
sanctuary of security to men after death. C^andia. in vitae S. A^gi^.
And lastly, Ludovicus Pius, Emperor of Germany, and Son to Charles the Great,
names S. Benedict, a blessed man of God, replenished with the Holy Ghost.

34. Noble Sir, if these suffice not to preponderate the censure given by you,
many more might be added, as namely, no fewer than above fifty wise and learned
men, of all Nations almost of Christendom, who have thought their labors well
spent in writing Commentaries on S. Benedict's Rule. I will for the affinity of
the subject adjoyn a Vindication of Mr. Cressy, who you say, Sir, if he had not
been in love with his own mistakes, Page 29.202.
could not have said, that Englands Christianity was established by the
Disciples of S. Benedict: which supposed mistake you several times repeat.

35. To this permit me I beseech you, Honored Sir, to say with all due respect
to you, that the mistake is apparently your own: for you understand me, as if I
had said Christianity had not been planted in our Island before the coming
thither of S. Benedicts Disciples. Which I could not say, without forgetting
that my self had, in no fewer than the first nine Books of my Church History,
precisely related the beginning, and progress of the Conversi^n of the ancient
Britains. But that which I said, was, That England, or the Country and Nation
of the English Saxons, who drove the Christian Britains out of our part of the
Island, was indeed converted by the Disciples of S. Benedict. And this truly I
must stand to, and for a sufficient proof I will oppose to angry Mr. Broughton,
alleged by you^ the Authentic Testimonies of far more skilful Anti^uaries, I
dare say, even in your opinion, who in a Writing signed with their hands, and
expressly in opposition to Mr. Broughton, Vid. Apo. Benedict. p. 202.
testify, That whereas he affirmed that the first Converters of the Saxons in
England were not Benedictins, but Equitians: They having spent much time in
searching the Antiquities of our Nations, do affirm, they could find only two
sorts of Monks in the Ancient Saxon Churches: The first, such as followed the
Egyptian form of Monachism before S. Austin's arrival: and the other
Benedictins, Companions of S. Austin. And as for Equitians, no such name was
extant in any ancient Record. Moreover, that whereas they could exactly
discover the original, and entrance of all other Religi^us Ord^rs, and could
name the very years, they could not do so of the Benedictins, which firmly
argues, that S. Augustine and his Associates were Benedictins: And that this
doubtless was the reason of the deep root that Order took in the Kingd^m: which
Order also flourished here in the same Age of S. Augustin' s arrival, as they
are assured by invincible Testimonies. This Declaration was signed and given by
these four knowing and uninteressed persons, Sir Rob^rt Cotton, Sir Henry
Spelman, Mr. John Seldom, and Mr. William Camden.

36. And thus I w^ll tak^ my last farewell, and leave of S. Benedict, wi^h a
firm resolution (le^ Dr. Stillingfleet say what he please of him, or any other
Catholic Saint) never to defen^ him more in a Treatise of Controversy, unless
the said D^ctor will undertake to demonstrate, That it is a sufficient cause
for any one to desert the Communion of the Catholic Churh because S. Benedict,
S. Teresa, etc. are venerated in it. And the like leave I take of Sancta
Sophia, and the Prayer of Contemplation, except upon the same terms. My desire
is, he should know, that we are very well content with our Fanatics, and
Fanaticism. And I hope he will not be angry with me for this short Prayer, I
beseech Almighty God that it may be his holy will, and pleasure, that England
may change her Fanatics into such as ^urs. Amen.

37. One Prayer more I will add, That it would please God to give to the
Doctor, and all the Doctors friends, a holy ambition to aspire to the practice
of Contemplative Prayer, though by him so much despised. It would, among other
good effects, save him much labor in writing Controversies, and it would
likewise exceedingly be^ter his style, It is too much to be put to the trouble
twice to make an Apology for praying to God in the perfectest manner that any
one on earth ever prayed. Yet not wholly to neglect that passage wherein you
thought good to second the Doctor in his Objection against Mr. Cressy his
Sancta Sophia. I refer you, and most humbly beseech you to allow one hour or
two in perusing a little Treatise of an unknown Author, named, The Roman
Churches Devotion Vindicated, whose answer I believe will satisfy your
objection against that Book, therefore so contemned by him, because collected
by Mr. Cressy out of the writings of a Holy person, who by most happy
experience felt what he wrote, and which the Doctor in great humility, says, he
does not understand: which is no wonder to any one who defers any thing to the
judgment of the greatest Doctors of Gods Church, S. Augustine, and S. Gregory,
to whom we may add S. Bernard, who all affirm constantly, that the secret
operations of God in a soul purified from all inordinate affections cannot be
understood without experience, nor easily expressed when understood by such as
God has blessed with experience of them. I might add to the same purpose the
testimony of a Doctor whose authority I am sure Dr. Stillinfleet dares not
except against, I mean the Great Doctor of the Gentiles, 1. Cor. 2.14.
who expressly affirms, that the sensual man neither does, nor can p^ssibly
understand them, because they are spiritually discerned, and therefore no
wonder if they be esteemed foolishness by him, who has never experienced them.

38. And now truly, Honored Sir, I beseeth you to let the Doctor, without
envy, enjoy his peculiar endowment, and Privilege of (as some think a graceful
Art of deriding Saints, and Saintly exercises. It appears by all the serious
passages of your Book that God has given you a far nobler masculine way of
Eloquence: Whereas the truth is, in this new-fashioned sacred Burlesque you
have as yet received do considerable Talent. And besides this, the Doctor may
perhaps be displeased with you, and tell you that he has no need of your
assistance, and that you wrong him in attempting to share in the glory due to
him alone, and which will make him shine to posterity.

39. Thus far I have given you, Sir, an account of the first ground upon which
I judged it no offense to Christian Charity, not to flatter Dr. Stillingfleet
in censuring his Book. His unusual, confident, and insulting manner of
accusing, and rendering all Catholics guilty of the most heinous crime that
Christians are capable of committing, which is most horrible Idolatry, and
which renders them indeed no Christians: and after he had thus declared us fit
objects of public detestation, to expose us to public scorn also, as Members
of a Church guided by false lights, and Fanatical Enthusiasms: This is a way of
disputing against the Catholic Church hitherto unpractised, and therefore an
unpractised way of answering seemed to me requisite.

40. You may remember, Sir, the proceedings of the ancient Factionists against
the Church of England called Puritans. Their Zealots did you no considerable
mischief by arguments from reason, or authority contained in their Books, their
Lectures, or Exercises. But as soon as they found out the art to instill into
the minds of the baser sort of their f^llowers a Contempt of the Conforming
Clergy, and rendered your solemn Church Service, your Organs, Music, your
Copes, Surplices, Canonical Habits, etc. a spectacle of derision, and sport to
them; this sport was quickly turned into sad earnest. It was scarce sa^e for a
Clergyman, decently habited to appear in the streets of London, and not long
after they were not safe in their private Country houses. Now if the authority
of Laws and Governors could not protect against the rude fury of the people,
the Professors and Teachers of the Religion by Law established in the Kingdom:
What were we to expect, being exposed to the public view of mankind, as we
have been by the Doctor, in so odious, so deformed, and also ridiculous a dress?

. 3. Of the season cruelly chosen by Dr. Stillingfleet for publishing his
Books: a second motive of sharpness.
41. YET, noble Sir, this bitter Cup prepared for us might have been rec^ived,
and also perhaps drunk by us without extreme danger, had it not been presented
us in so unlucky a season. We had by his Sacred Majesty's gracious Indulgence
enjoyed, several years a moderate repose. A storm indeed, now, and then, began
to rise against us, yet through God's merciful providence they were assuaged.
But of late a furious Tempest, we know not from what Coast, began to threaten
an unavoidable Shipwreck to us, and this just at a time when we thought we had
reason to believe our selves secure in the haven. This now, i^ seems, was the
season long expected, and almost despaired of by Dr. Stillingfleet, wherein he
might empty his Quiver, full of fiery darts against his peaceable fellow
Subjects. And therefore not to lose the opportunity, it has generally been
observed, that the Books written by him against Roman Catholics Printed, and
Reprinted, were still reserved till a new Session was to begin: l^^t
otherwise, in the time of a Prorogation, they might have had small effect.

42. Not Catholics only, but many English Protestants, both of the Clergy and
Laity, conceived great indignation at such cruelty, proceeding from a Preacher
of the Gospel. Which indignation was much increased, because they interpreted
his violence against Catholics to have been an effect of great disrespect, and
ingratitude to his Majesty, against whose Indulgence to his faithful Subjects
the D^ctor seemed tacitly to nourish discontent in the Kingdom, and this after
himself, and his friends not long before had received an incomparable benefit
by the like gracious Indulgence.

43. Now, Honored Sir, in such circumstances as these, it being necessary some
Answer should be published to his Book, and Mr. Cressy being personally glanced
at in an uncivil manner, and for his sake the most excellent instructions for
Holiness of life, and Purity of Prayer that were ever published in the English
Tongue, disgracefully traduced, was it so great a crime in me to tell the world
(which truly I still believe to be a Truth) that scarce any Book has been
written against the Catholic Church, wherein there was less force for
disproving of any of her established Doctrines, or more force for the procuring
the ruin of those innocent persons among us who profess those Doctrines? If a
sense of the deplorable condition which I easily foresaw ready to befall the
generality of Roman Catholics, and upon which, not I alone judged his Books to
have a considerable influence, drew from my pen a few sharp phrases, and
reproofs without the least harm or danger to him: Can you with equity, merely
out of regard to the Doctor's person, and vain r^putation, think fit to revenge
his quarrel against me, by aggravating in a too tragical style all the faults
of which you either by knowledge, suspicion, or report judged me to be guilty:
of which some there are which, in case your accusation be (as probably it will
be) a Conviction, expose more besides my self to the utmost danger of the Law,
as Traitors, and the rest, to the highest displeasure and resentments of my
Lords the Bishops, and other our worthy friends among the English Clergy; yea,
even of his Majesty himself, which I thought I never had, and I am sure I never
intended to incur. This surely was a way of reparation for the Doctors honor,
as you suppose, violated by me, beyond what, I b^lieve, himself expected or
desired, since I am confident, whatsoever wrong he may think I have done him,
it never entered so deeply into his mind, as to deprive him of one half hours
sleep, or to urge him to wish my death.

44. Well, Noble Sir, if I was indeed faulty, I am sorry for it. And yet in
case the Doctor was to blame in his manner of stating the Controversies, and
especially in his unhappy timing of them, I believed that I could not in a
b^tter manner exercise Christian Charity to him^ then by endeavoring to
discover to him plainly, and without a complemental Civility, his Transgression
against Charity: which transgression notwithstanding, if I should judge to
amount to so high a degree, as to b^li^ve that he either did design, or now
takes pleasure in the present ruin of Catholics, I should my self also be a
Transgressor against Charity.

45. But now, Sir, as I take the boldness to declare the reasons why I think I
did not deserve so heavy a Censure for treating with Dr. Stillingfleet in a
style different from that which becomes those who seriously debate
Controversies in Religion: So neither will I so far justify my self as to
pretend that my Book ought to be exempt altogether from a just r^prehension,
for the too free scope which the Author gave to his (though not unreasonably
grounded) indignation, Yea, moreover in one regard I do sincerely acknowledge a
blameworthy faultiness in my self: which consists in taking upon me a liberty
to judge rashly of his thoughts and secret intentions. Whereas therefore, from
a consideration of his Principles much different from the grounds on which
former English Protestant proceeded, I represented Dr. Stillingfleet a having a
design of undermining the Authority of the English Prelacy, and as continuing a
secret correspondence with the Sects, declared enemies to the Hierarchy, among
whom he had had his Education, and against whom therefore since his
relinquishing them he had never employed his Pen: These and other the like
reflections on him to his disadvantage, I do sincerely, as a good Consci^nce
obliges me, revoke, since they are built only on suspicions, not sufficient to
warrant me to be a Judge of his Intentions. And this satisfaction I hope will
deserve to be esteemed cordial, and becoming a Christian, because it is thus
publicly made by me being at too great a distance to apprehend any danger from
his resentment: whereas the sharp language I then used toward him, when I was
obnoxious to the effects of his Choler. To conclude this present argument, I
desire you, Honored Sir, to reflect on that well known saying better becoming
the Wise Laelius, than a Comical Poet^ Terent.
Omnes quibus res sunt minus secundae magis sunt, nescio quo mod^ suspiciosi,
Ad Contumeliam om^i^ accipiunt magis, Propter suam impotentiam, se semper
credunt negligi.

. 4. A Religious Profession pretended to be inconsistent with my Fidelity to
His Majesty.
46. AFter you had so generously laid an eternal Obligation on Dr.
Stillingfleet, by so public a condemnation of me for my incivilities toward
him; you proceed to a charge against me of a far higher nature, Page 84.85.
accusing (I should say, arraigning) me, for having renounced my Subjection to
the King by being a Benedictin, and consequently choosing other Superiors to my
self, with Obedience to wh^m my Obedience to the King, you say, is
inconsistent; so that I am so obnoxious to the Laws, that I cannot securely
live one day, or set my foot in England, etc.

47. Sir, if by my professing my self a Benedictin, and moreover, that I am
obliged by Vow to obey my Superiors, all which I cannot deny, your inference
be concluding, that I am a Traitor to His Majesty, God have mercy on my Soul. I
do not pretend to have any skill in our Statute Laws: notwithstanding, I never
yet heard any one say, that the mere being of a Religious Order was declared
Treason in England: for upon that account a Benedictin Lay brother would be as
obnoxious to the Title, and punishment of a Traitor, as a Priest. Besides this,
the French Benedictins, of whose Fidelity to their King you have a good
opinion, m^ke the same Profession of Obedience to their Superi^urs, without the
least jealousy conceived by that State. But however the matter stands as to
the D^claration of Law, I ^e^e protest in the presence of God, that if I had
any suspicion that my Vow of Obedience to Regular Superi^urs did in any degree
prejudice my Obligation of Fidelity to the King, either by Nature, or Religion;
n^y, if I were not certain of the contrary, the next Line here to be added,
should be a renunciation of the Title of a Benedictin, and a r^vocation of the
Vow of Regular Obedience.

48. I will add further, if I had not been assured, that by the Profession of
being a Member of the Roman Catholic Church, I should continue as dutiful and
obedient a Subject to His Majesty as ever I had been, I had never before my
Conversion so much as enquired into the Truth of other Cath^lick Doctrines.

49. Nay yet farther, Sir, (since I am fallen almost unawares into the humor
of protesting, though no Protestant) I will be yet more bold to protest
sincerely, That if I were not entirely satisfied, yea assured, that no^ the
least Obligation of acknowledging any Temporal Authority in the Pope over this
Kingdom was imposed on English Catholic Priests, Secular or Regular, by virtue
of their receiving Ordination in, and from the Church of Rome: and likewise,
that the spiritual Jurisdiction exercised by them in virtue of such Ordination,
did in no measure prejudice or abridge the Civil Authority justly inherent in
Monarchs, of what Religion soever: I should esteem them very unfit, and
dangerous Directors of the Souls of His Majesty's Subjects, and deservedly
obnoxious to the utmost penalty of the Laws here enacted against them.

50. Now what greater assurance can any one have of this, than from a
Consideration, First, That in all Catholic Kingdoms and States, where the
Supreme Magistrates are jealous enough of their Temporal Rights such
Ordinations are not only p^rmitted, but allowed, and enjoined. And Secondly,
That all the same Acts of Spiritual Jurisdiction exercised by Catholic
Priests, are also exercised by P^otestant Ministers over His Majesty's
Subjects: For these also by virtue of their Ordination do lawfully, and validly
(as they absolutely persuade themselves) administer Sacraments, absolve
Penitent Sinners, and I direct Souls in the way to Heaven, etc. Which
Functions, you will not surely say, to be conferred on them by the King, but
only that the King permits them to receive them from the Bishop, who only can
communicate to others the Spiritual Faculties which himself has received from
His Superior the Archbishop.

51. Truly, Sir, the innocence of Catholic Priests, in this matter, is to me
so evident, that I believe not any of them but durst commit themselves to the
judgment of Dr. Stillingfleet himself: but upon this condition, that, by the
great interest you now certainly have in him, you could obtain from him a
sincere resolution of these few Proposals, (which I am sure he is able to
give:) viz.

1. Whether among the several Sects with whom he received his Education and
Learning, the respective Ministers do not exercise all the foresaid Spiritual
Faculties and Jurisdictions? 2. Since it is certain that such Faculties have
been conferred on them neither by the King nor Bishop, but, on the contrary,
are absolutely forbidden by all our Laws, both Ecclesiastical, and Temporal,
Whether he esteems the said Ministers to deserve therefore the name and
punishment of Traitors? 3. With what confidence they can take the Oath of the
Kings Supremacy in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil. 4. Whether he
can demonstrate (and if he can, he is earnestly desired that he would do it)
that the difference in these regards between Catholic Priests and Dissenting
Ministers is so great, that the former deserve only the name of Traitors? 5.
This if he affirm, he ought also to demonstrate, that it is incomparably more
dangerous to the King, that Spiritual Functions should be received (and this
not immediately) from one Person a thousand miles distant, than from God knows
how many in the Bowels of the Kingdom.
52 If you will still oppose to poor Cath^licks alone the Laws of the Kingd^m,
which allow these Acts of Spiritual Iurisdicti^n in Pr^testant Ministers, and
scarce punish them in Presbyterians, but make them Tre^s^n only in Catholic
Priests. To this terrible Objection, what Answer can be given but either a
silent patience, or the same which the Apostles gave when convened before the
Sanedrim? Act. 4.1^
And truly, Honored Sir, if I were so happy as to see such a person as your
self sitting in a high Place of Judicature, and were also a Priest, arraigned
before you for receiving, and exercising such a Jurisdiction, I should not be
much apprehensive of a black Sentence from a Judge in his own disposition
compassionate, and who by many years experience has seen how far the Catholic
Clergies Jurisdiction reaches, and how little jealousy it gives to other great
Kings exceedingly tender of their Royal Authority. And in case I were
condemned, I should say within my self, The Judge, who has, according to the
Laws, condemned me for a supposed Crime, called of late Treason in England, and
no where else in the World, being forced to pronounce the sentence of Death
against me upon the verdict of a dozen silly, ignorant Mechanics, or Peasants;
yet I verily believe he knows, or might know very well, that the same sentence
was as justly (that is, very unjustly) pronounced by Nero, Domitian,
Dioclecian, etc. Roman Emperors, against the Apostles, and their Successors,
S. Ignatius, S. Policarp, S. Cyprian, etc. For all these, and hundreds more
such, assumed, and exercised a far greater Spiritual Jurisdiction, in their
judgment, doubtless, without any wrong to Princes: For they administered
Sacraments, congregated Churches, pr^ached, and converted, yea empowered others
to preach, and convert thousands to a Religion expressly contrary to, and by
many Sanguinary Laws condemned in all the Countries where they traveled: yet
^e esteems them glorious Martyrs, and me an infamous Traitor. Deo gratias.

. 5. Reviling Reproaches of the Church, and Clergy of England, objected against
me.
53. ANother heavy Charge against me, often repeated with great Indignation by
you, Noble Sir, is, as you term it, Page. 85.
My defying the Laws of the Kingd^m, traducing the Government, treating the
Bishops^ and the Reverend Clergy, and the Christian Religion that is
est^blished there by Law, and all the Prof^ssors of it, with those scoffs, and
derision and contempt, as if they we^e Turks and Pagans, etc. Further, by
pretending to pr^ve, that the very nature and essence of the English Church it
self and its Religion is pure putid Fanaticism. Page 1^
In a word, I am accused of a constant reviling and malice toward the Church
in which I received my Baptism. Page 21^
Now the guilt of this crime you extend to all the Books published by me. The
least faulty, in your opinion, was my first, styled, Exomologesis; but that
also in a second Edition, was enlarged, you say, Page 77^
with additions ^specially of reproaches against the Church of England, and
virulent Expressions against the Clergy of that Church.

54. Sir, I should despair of being able to make any tolerable Apology for my
self against this heinous imputation, but that I hope you will think it just
that I should divide my Plea, which regards my last Book against Doctor
Stillingfleet, from all the rest. Now an account of the necessity of making
such a Separation, and the reasonableness of it, I will not long defer.

55. First then, touching my Exomologesis, (take whether Impression of it you
please) excepting one most highly honored Friend, (whose Name I must take
leave to conceal) you are the only person who has condemned me for my acrimony
in it, yet without selecting any det^rminate guilty passage in it. I had many
other Friends of the Protestant Clergy, whose friendship and kindness to me
never received the least abatement upon that account, on the contrary, they
comparing my style with that of several other Catholic Controvertists,
expressed their satisfaction in my moderation. I will only name two very
knowing, and in a singular manner intimate Friends^ the first is, Doctor
Earls, lately Lord Bishop of Salisbury, all the tender effects of whose
friendship^ I may add, of his bounty also, I enjoyed till God took him away; a
person certainly of the sweetest, most obliging nature that lived in our A^e.

56. The second, whom I may securely name, because he is also dead, (for out of
due respect to some worthy Prelates alive I must ^^me them only in my Prayers)
is Doctor Hammond: To whom I being at Paris, caused my Exomologesis, as soon as
printed, to be sent, and presented. He in a short kind Letter gave me thanks,
and without the least exception against the style, gave this judgment of it,
That an (...) (that was his expression) did privily run through the whole
contexture of the Book. He did not further interpret wherein that fallacy
conf^ted: But added, We are Friends, and I do not purpose to be your
Antagonist. Alas, how happy had we been, if Catholic Religion, since it must
be opposed, had been combated only by such Antagonists as he was? Ind^ed it
would cause not only wonder, but indignation in any ingenuous man, to see such
a person as Doctor Hammond treated with scorn, contempt, and virulence.

57. One clause more there was in Doctor Hammond's Letter, which I judge
expedient to add, partly in gratitude to his memory, and also upon occasion of
your telling the world, that it was not devotion, but necessity, and a want of
subsistence which drove me first out of the Church of England, and then into a
Monastery. He, at the end of his Letter, kindly invited me into England,
assuring me I should be provided of a convenient place to dwell in, and a
sufficient subsistence to live comfortably; and withal, that not any one should
molest me about my Religion and Conscience. I had reason to believe that this
invitation was an effect of a cordial friendship, and I was also informed that
he was well enabled to make good his promise, as having the disposal of great
Charities, and being the most zealous Promoter of Almsgiving that lived in
England since the Change of Religion. Yet rendering such thanks as gratitude
required of me, I told him that I could not accept of so very kind an offer,
being engaged almost by vow to leave all pretensions to the world, and to
embrace poverty for my portion. Now besides such a Friend as this, I had many
more, several near His Majesty; among whom, one especially there was of the
highest rank, to whom formerly, upon the Rebellion in Ireland, I being
destitute of a present subsistence, must acknowledge all gratitude due, for by
his care alone I was provided of a condition both honorable and comfortable.
So that if I had lost all other Friends, I had reason to assure my self he
would have freely contributed, rather than extremity of want should have forced
me to quit the world. Moreover, at the same time I received great Testimonies
of favor from Her late Gracious Majesty the Queen Mother of happy memory, an
indifferent Recommendation from whom to the Court of France, could not fail to
have procured me a convenient subsistence. But truly I never solicited her, or
any other, for such Liberality: True it is, that merely of her own accord she
was pleased at my leaving Paris, to assign me an hundred Crowns, to furnish me
in my journey toward a Monastery. But this by the way.

58. Whereas, Page 77.
Sir, you affirm, that in the second Edition of my Ex^mologesis there are many
Additions, especially of reproaches against the Church of England, etc. And
moreover, that to a person expostulating with me, Why I left out the
Protestation of Obedience, and a Discourse touching Purgatory; I should answer
wi^h passionate Protestations, that I never knew of the one or the other till I
saw the second Impression: That my Superiors were offended with the first, etc.

59. Sir, unless you do believe, or would have the world believe, that I have
made sh^p wrack of all common honesty and veracity, you will have some regard
to the account I shall now give, with relation to this Accusation. In the year
1652. I received at Doway a Letter from a Friend in England, signifying, that
the Impression of that Book being spent, he was willing, if I thought good, to
reprint it at his own cost. This Offer I was not unwilling to accept, and
thereupon prepared and sent him about a Sheet full of Additions and
Alterations. But I protest, as in the presence of God, that I cannot remember
that one line of reproach against the Church of England was added by me: which
if I had done in such a time when savage Beasts had left that Church desolate,
would have been an act of most barbarous inhumanity, for which I should never
have forgiven my self: If therefore any such Additions be to be found, I do
with a clear Conscience disclaim them. But truly, Sir, I think there are none
such; for I have employed Friends to examine, and compare the two Impressions,
and they could not show me any. True it is, they have found several passages
wherein my style has been much sharpened, but those passages only regard
Presbyterians, and other Sects, which insulted on a Church which they thought
they had destroyed, and the Revenues of which they had sacrilegiously divided
among themselves. If this was a fault, at least it was not committed against
the Church of England.

60. In the next place, as touching two Omissions very considerable objected
against me, and an Expostulation of a Protestant Friend about them; and also
about my pretended Addition of virulent Express^^ns against the Clergy of
England: I remember such an Expostulation, and never having had the patience to
read twice over mine own Writings, much less to compare the Editions, I might
believe that he had certain grounds to obj^ct both these matters to me, and
therefore in my answer to him I might protest against having any hand in such
alterations: But that I imputed them to my Superiors Commands, or that they
had ordered the Impression of the Book without communicating it to me: this I
do utterly protest against, and I take God to witness that my Superiors never
required any Alterations to be made, nor interested themselves in the
Impression, but left the whole business to my self alone.

61. The two Omissions are objected by you in these terms: In the second
Impression the Protestati^n of Duty and Obedience, which was in the first, was
totally left out, it being not thought a fit Obligation for the Catholics to
enter into. Truly, Honored Sir, this is a terrible Inference, even in case
there had been such an Omission. And yet it would have pleased me if it had
proceeded only from such a Pen as is that of the Author of the Seasonable
Discourse: who, as I am now informed, seeking poison wheresoever he can hope to
find it, has transcribed this passage into a later Book, called, The Difference
between the Church and Court of Rome; and moreover, as became him, has made an
Addition of one falsity more, saying, that Mr. Cressy having in the first
Edition of his Exomologesis made a Protestation of his Duty and Obedience to
the Churches Authority, corrected it in the second. Who can hinder such Pens
from sprinkling their Ven^m where they please? But the comfort is, no man sure
will take him for A Person of Honor. You add, the Discourse made of Purgatory
was likewise left out, because I had mistaken the Tenent of my new Church in
that particular. Truly, Sir, I was extremely surprised at the reading this
passage: and never having read or compared the two Impressions, I did not doubt
of mine own guilt, yet not of mine own, but of him who had taken the care of
the Press, for I was assured I had never ordained such Omissions. But as soon
as I had recourse to the Books, my surprise, but on a quite different ground,
was renewed, and a great joy I had also in p^rceiving that your severe
Accusations of me were not grounded on any discoveries made by your self, (for
it is manifest that you never yet read my last Edition) but upon a false,
malicious Information given to you by some one, w^o was desirous to inc^ns^ you
against me, and knew there was no way thereto more effectual than by painting
me as a virulent enemy of the English Protestant Clergy and ^ ^^no^ncer also o^
my Fidelity to H^^ (...). I confess I wondered if any person of your condition
should have had the patience to read, and, with attention, compare any thing
written by so worthless a P^n (...) mine. But since it is not your self that I
must now contradict, but a malicious Informer, who has wronged both your self
and me, give me leave to say to that Informer, that there is not a word of
truth in what he lays to my charge, for neither the Profession of Duty and
Obedience, nor the Discourse of Purgatory have been omitted in the second
Impression, no, nor one line, word or syllable changed by me in either, as your
own eyes may inform you in the Pages 44^ and 442. of the second Impr^ssion, and
76^ and 612. of the first. Only whereas there was a tedious insinuating Preface
before the Profession of Duty, intended, by way of Supplication to have been
presented to the Parliament, he who took care of the Impression thought ^it to
leave it out, and indeed that he had reason not to swell the Book with such
unconc^rning stuff, your self, if you read it, will easily be of the same mind.
There being therefore no omission of the Professiion of Obedience, a reason
cannot be given of that which is not. Yet a reason has been given (not by your
self certainly, but) by your false Informer, and a reason of a very dangerous
consequence, not to my self only, but my Superiors also, as if we repented,
and revoked a Testimony of our Fidelity as not a fit Obligation for Catholics
to enter into. But now, Honored Sir, after all, I will take the boldness
freely to tell you, that I am heartily sorry, that that Form of Profession of
Duty had not been quite left out, Vid. Sect. 111.
and I believe I shall, before I conclude this Apology, give you a sufficient
reason for it, but quite different from that mentioned by you.

62. Yet I do not pretend so wholly to justify my self, as not to acknowledge
that there may have unwarily flowed from my Pen some few Phrases and
Expressions distasteful to the English Clergy, even to such as in an especial
manner honored me with their friendship. Among which there are two particular
pass^ges which have given great offense to a worthy Prelate, whose savor and
kindness^ I had from my younger years enjoyed in Oxford. That which he esteemed
both most false and injurious, was my saying, That the Presbyterians had
constrained the whole Kingdom to forswear the Religion in which they had been
bred. But truly, under favor, I do not understand wherein this Expression was
either false, or injurious to Loyal Protestants. For certain it is, that at the
time to which that Speech had relation, the King's Enemies were de facto,
Masters of the Kingdom, and that all the Authority and Power both at
Westminster and in the Field were employed, most unjustly, to constrain all men
to swear to the Scottish Covenant: In which they so far prevailed, that the
whole face of the Kingdom, both as to Doctrine and Discipline, was entirely
changed, and become Presbyterian. And this was all that I did, or could mean by
that expression, the truth whereof was too too manifest. To whom therefore any
injury was done by me in that passage, I cannot yet imagine. For though it was
too true that the whole Kingdom, as to the public profession and practice, had
forsworn the former established Religion, yet it does not hence follow,
(neither had I the least thought of inferring such a cons^quence) that all,
yea, or that any considerable number of English Protestants had subscribed and
sworn to the Covenant, (no more than that Roman Catholics had done so:) On the
contrary, I knew that both the English Clergy and Protestant Gentry had
generally suffered the loss of their Churches and Estates for refusing to take
the Covenant, and to acknowledge the Usurpers Authority^ Neither had I the
least thought that ^he foresaid public Change introduced by Violence and
Tyranny had diminished the Right which the Protestant Religion had to be justly
esteemed the Religion of the Kingdom, no more than the Usurpers invading the
Regal Throne, could any way prejudice His Majesty's Title thereto.

63. But a second passage there is offensive to the said Venerable Prelate,
which I do acknowledge more difficult to be de^en^ed or excused. It is my
saying, That several of the wisest and learned of the Clergy had been content
to buy their security with a v^luntary degrading of themselves from their
Offices and Titles. Now in some degree to qualify a resentment which the
English Clergy may not unreasonably conceive from this passage, that which I
have to represent is, That when I wrote the Book I was in a Foreign Country, so
that whatsoever I could write touching our own Affairs, I must have received
from Information by Letters, or Friends: And by such Information I wrote this
particular passage. It Is true, before I left this Kingdom, the unworthy
miscarriage of that ungrateful, perfidious Prelate, D. Williams, Archbishop of
York, was publicly known and abominated. And too credulous I was of some few
Examples of something alike, though far less heinous a nature, which were
written or brought out of England to the place where I then resided, which I
afterward found to have been groundless, but (till now) too late for me thus
publicly to disavow.

64. Before I quit this trouble some Book, (my Exomologesis) I conceive my self
obliged to do right to a learned Doctor of the Church of England, (Dr.
Tillotson) who in a Book written against another Catholic Ad^e^sa^y, takes
occasion, quasi aliud agens, to produce a passage in my Exomologesis, changed
in the second Impression, and, as he affirms, changed with great disingenuity.
A Copy of his Book I have not at present, and therefore I cannot cite his
words: but to my best remembrance they regarded a saying of mine in the 40.
Chapter of my Exomologesis, of the first Impression, wherein I had called the
word (Infallible,) a word to me unfortunate, and I had also said that Mr.
Chillingworth comba^ed with that word with too much success. Whereas in the
second Impression that same passage (which by a new division of the parts of
the Book f^ll to be in the 20. Chapter of the second Section) was so changed,
as to impute the said success and unfortunateness, not with regard to
Catholics, but himself only and has followers, who to their great harm took
advantage unnecessarily of the utmost importance of the said word, beyond what
his Adversary would have required. And as for Catholic Controvertists^ I
endeavored to excuse their employing that word to signify thereby alone the
unappealable Authority of the Cath^lick Church. I c^nnot with any confidence
affirm, that I have given an exact account of the particular proofs alleged by
Doctor Tillotson^ to justify his impu^ing to me a very mis-becoming
disingeruity in the alteration mad^. Neither is it needful, the fault being
manifest. But I am willing that my Pen should here publicly acknowledge the
justice of that imputation; and I will not give cause a second time to have the
same disingenuity laid to my charge: for I will very simply and ingenuously
relate the occasion and motive of the said disingenuous change; which was this:
A certain ancient V^n^rable Religious Father, who for School-Learning and skill
in the Canon Law was the most eminent person in all these Provinces, knowing my
intention to r^print my Exomologesis, and being^ I conceive, not well pleased
that a dis-reputation should be cast on that sort of Learning in which he
excelled, earnestly suggested to me a qualification of the said passage in my
Book, and withal assured me, that the Censure I had given of an expression or
Term for so many ag^s in general use among Catholic Controvertists, and
Schoolmen, would every where giv^ great offense: And therefore, though he would
by no means counsel me to prejudice Truth, yet that it was not always necessary
to discover every thing that is true. Therefore his advice was, that in the new
Impression I should retrench so much in that Chapter, as reflected with
disadvantage on those Catholic Writers who made use of the word,
Infallibility. Thus he advised me, and thus out Reverence to the person I
comply^d with his desire: For which I cannot (as I said before) blame Dr.
Tillotson, for charging me with disingenuity.

65. The next Book, which I justly pretend to be guiltless of the crime of
revi^ing the Church of England, is a short Treatise, named an Appendix, in
which are cleared c^rtain mis-constructions of my Exomologists^ published by I.
P. Author of the Preface before my Lord Falkland^s Discourse of Infallibility:
which is annexed at the end of the second Impression of my Exomologesis. The
said Author I. P. I never had the happiness to know, but I wish, if Catholic
Religion must be opposed, it may always find such ^d^ersaries, that is, persons
endowed with very considerable parts of learning, and acuteness, enabling them,
with as much advantage as their cause will afford, to maintain it, and in
maintaining it, not to wander into unnecessary excursions, and to use a style,
though not void of sharpness, yet such a sharpness as will not be ungrateful,
even to their opponents, much less expose them, and all their party, to utmost
danger. Now in my Answer to this unknown Author, I think I have not, I am sure
I intended not to give just offense to him, or any other English Protestant.

66. Yet this is the only Treatise against which a most Noble Friend, besides a
general reprehension, instanced in a special passage which he thought fit to be
sharply censured: and this passage was my naming it, The late Church of
England. Now, surely, Sir, none who know me can judge me so utterly void of
Humanity or Reason, as to think that I meant this expression in a sense of
insulting or of contentment, in seeing a Church, of which all the Friends I
then had were members, (as I then verily thought) destroyed by cruel Sectaries,
the little finger of whose Governors would be heavier to poor Catholics, than
the loins of the former State.

67. I must therefore acknowledge that at the time of writing that short
Treatise, I did (and who almost did not?) despair of ever seeing a restoration
of the Church of England, to its former splendor, though many were not out of
all hope, considering an impossibility of a constant union among those Sects,
that his Majesty might happily return. I well remember that in France,
attending a certain Noble Person of very high Condition, and special trust near
his Majesty, I once, in discoursing asked him this Question, Whether he th^ught
not, that it was in his power to have hindered the restoring of the English
Hierarchy? to which, after considering a while, he answered, He thought it was^
Whereto I replied, Alas, my Lord, how dare you adventure your soul for all
eternity, in a Church which your self could have destroyed? Thereupon he entered
into a Discourse touching the nature of a Church, of which he concluded I had a
wrong Notion.

68. But as for his first Answer, I believe there was scarce any one who then
doubted but that a small power would be of force enough to hinder the reviving
of the Church of England: yea, most men thought that even his Majesty with all
his interest, and endeavors, could not have been able to have effected it,
considering that all Sects, though in other regards disunited, yet unanimously
conspired to the destruction of Episcopacy. Therefore it argued more than
heroical magnanimity, and zeal also in his Majesty's attempting, and executing
such a design, from which such an incredible number of then not quite-unarmed
Opponents could not deter him, though also thereby he obstructed the flowing
into his Exchequer whole Rivers of rich spoils belonging to the Clergy. And
truly, in both these r^gards it ought to be acknowledged by all English
Protestants, that the said Noble Person, being then the most inward Counselor
to his Majesty, showed himself of proof both against fear^ and avarice; since
no doubt, a considerable advantage might have fallen to his share likewise in
those spoils. These things therefore considered, I humbly conceive, that the
forementioned phrase (The late Church of England) spoken at such a time, did
not merit an extraordinary Censure: considering also, that as a particular
Church, and of such a peculiar fabric, it cannot appropriate to it self an
Indefectibility, or challenge share in the Promise of Christ, that the gates of
Hell shall not prevail against it.

69. The next Book was the Answer to Dr. Pierce his Sermon. In which I never
heard any thing challenged as disrespectful to the English Clergy, excepting
one line, for which my worthy Friend Dr. Earls, then Dean of Westminster, gave
me a friendly chiding, though to say the truth, it was in his Wifes quarrel,
who was much offended with it, and I confess, with some reason. And besides
this, there was one passage in it, at which I my self have been much
displeased: which is the very first leaf in the Book: To which also doubtless I
had regard when in conversing with the Protestant Expostulator
beforementioned, I complained of injuries done me, being absent in the printng
of my Books. For having left the said Answer with a friend in London, who
undertook the care of the Impression, certain Friends of his thinking I had
begun the Answer too abruptly, they willing to be in ali^no libro ingeniosi,
framed an entrance into the Book, full of taunting, and contempt against the
Author of the Sermon. And having sent me enclosed in a Letter the first sheet,
I was moved with such indignation and shame at the reading of it, that I
protested, unless that entrance were taken away, I would in a printed paper
publicly disavow the work. For, besides my natural abhorring of uncivil
language, especially in Controversies about Religion, I judged that a Writer
did himself wrong, who first having contemned, and undervalued a Book, yet
thought it necessary to be seriously answered. Upon my resentment of this
injury done me, the Authors of that Preface abolished the first leaf, but
wanting matter to fill up the void space, they qualified much the former
uncivil language, leaving it as it now appears. I took the greater care not to
give too much offense no the learned Preacher, because I had been informed by
some of his inward Friends, that it was with great unwillingness, and out of
necessary obedience to one who had right to command him, that, in a time when a
persecution was renewed against Catholics, he took such a subject for his
Sermon at Court. And indeed his unwillingness to pursue such a quarrel, gives
testimony hereto, though it is well known, that he is not inferior to Dr.
Stillingfleet, either in learning, language, or any abilities to manage a
Controversy to the best advantage. And I assure you^ Sir, it is a great
comfort, and satisfaction to poor Catholics, that since they must be
persecuted, their Persecutors have not been any English Protestants of the
ancient stamp but a new adopted race, who it seems cannot forget that
Catholics have declared themselves Enemies to the Masters, under whom our new
Convertists have been bred.

70. One Book yet remains, and but one, which I am concerned at least to
excuse, i^ not to justifi^ to be free from this crime of reproaching, or
reviling the English Church. (For I suppose my S^ncta Sophia, and likewise my
Reflections on the two Oaths, are out of all suspicion at least of this fault.)
That Book is a short Answer to a short Pamphlet, published by Mr. Edward
Bagshaw, a too well known troublesome Sectary, in which he undertook to give a
deaths-blow to the Infallibity of the Catholic Church. But the weapons used by
him were so blunt, and the arm which wielded them so weak, that the stroke was
not at all felt. The only Motive therefore inducing me to publish an Answer to
so unskilful a Controvertist, was to discover his ignorant mistaking of the
Point controverted, and especially his malice against Catholics, which
therefore deserved to be apprehended by us, because to the disgrace of the
Church of England, he writes in a sti^e as if he would make the world believe
that he had a Commission from the Protestant Clergy, to be their common
Advocate, and in their names to vent his own impotent malice: for throughout
the whole Book he sh^ws himself exceeding zealous to defend, forsooth, the
Protestant Church of England, and not his own miserable Sect, against the
Papists. Now who could restrain indignation, hearing such an one crying out
aloud, We apples swim? This short Treatise of mine therefore, at least, I
believe, will escape your Censure?

71. These are the Books, Honored Sir, which I judged reasonable, and
requisite to be ranged in a rank divided from that which was written against
Dr. Stillingfleet. In all which a Controversy in several Points being debated
against the Doctrines of the Church of England, I could not, without showing my
self a Prevaricatour, abstain from imputing Errors to Protestants, and showing
the ^ll consequences of such errors, but it was never my intention to give any
scope to unseemly passions, against persons, from none of whom I had received
any injuries, but on the contrary, from many of the most considerable among
them, not a few signal obligations. If now and then an unwary phrase has dropped
from my pen (and I am sure there are not many such) I shall be far from
justifying them, but on the contrary, I here publicly revoke them. And for the
future I dare challenge even Dr. Stillingfleet himself to try his skill upon
me, whether by any contempt either of my Person, or Writings, he can force me
to answer in a language which shall need such another Apology. Some worthy
friends ^old me, that there was at this time, a necessity I should endeavor to
excuse my self from acknowledging the justice of all your severe sentences
against me, considering, that others also were wounded by them. But certainly
one Apology against personal imputations will be sufficient; and God willing, I
shall spend my declining days more to the profit of my soul, by silence, and
patiently suffering injuries, though silence should be interpreted a confusion
of guilt^ then by composing, with great loss of precious time, and publishing
Books, regarding the qualities of persons, which Books are scarce ever half so
long-lived as a yearly Almanac, and which serve only to increase the
uncharitableness, and injustice of this present age, in which men will be sure
to censure all Books, and Persons, and are indifferent whether they condemn the
Plaintiff or Defendant, or both.

. 6. There was no intention of Reviling the Church of England in my Book
against D. Stillingfleet.
72. NOW I come to the fatal Book against Dr. Stillingfleet, touching
Fanaticism, which forced you, Sir, to open a passage to all your indignation
against me, for my reviling reproaches against the Church, and Clergy of
England. I fear now that no excuse of so great a crime will be admitted by you,
and that to pretend to justify my self would be taken for an affront. Yet,
Sir, truth is bold, and I dare pretend not only to justify my intention, and
manner of writing in such a style, but my hope also that the said Book would
deserve to be favorably accepted by the English Clergy.

73. Now the ground of my justification is a firm persuasion that the present
Church of England is the very same that it was when both of us received our
Baptism in it, by which Baptism we became Members (under favor not of the
Church of England, but) of that Holy Catholic, and Apostolic Church, of the
belief of which our Godfathers, and Godmothers made a public Profession for
us.

74. This persuasion therefore remaining still the same, I do confidently
affirm (and I protest my intention to have been) that not any of those sharp
phrases and Invectives, ought with any justice to be interpreted as meant
against the Church of England, or the the Doctrines and Discipline of it
established by Law, but only against Dr. Stillingfleet's Church, which he
desires indeed should pass for the Church of England, but which really is
removed from it at a greater distance and opposition, than is the Church of
Geneva. And to demonstrute this, it will be sufficient to take a prospect first
of the fabric of Dr. Stillingfleet's English Church, framed by himself upon
Mr. Chillingworth's Authority: and next of the Church of England established by
Law, as she represents her self in her Articles of Religion, and Ecclesiastical
Constitutions.

75. First then Dr. Stillingfleet has made his Church perfectly visible
throughout, even from its very foundations, or Principles, of which the two
most considerable, and which involve all the rest, are the thirteenth, and the
fifteenth: Pr^ncip. 13.
The words are these: Such a particular way of Revelation being made choice of
by God (for the means of making known his w^ll in order to the happiness of
mankind) as writing, we may justly say, that it is repugnant to the nature of
the Design, and the Wisd^m, and Goodness of God, to give infallible assurance
to pers^ns in writing his will for the benefit of mankind, if those Writings
may not be understood by all persons who sincerely endeavor to know the
meaning of them in all such things, as are necessary for their salvation. And
consequently. Princip. 15.
There can be no necessity supposed of any infallible Society of men, either to
attest^ or explain those Writings among Christians.

76. Is such a Church as this, Honored Sir, securely grounded? Can you think
it a crime in an^ rational man to call this Church fanatical? But why do I talk
of a Church? In all the Doctors Principles there is no mention of any Church at
all, as a Teacher or Interpreter^ not the least regard had to such needless
persons as Teachers, or Governors, Bishops, or Presbyters: All are sheep
without shepherds, or shepherds without sheep. There is nothing to be found (I
mean for his sort of Protestants) but a Book, which all must read, though they
cannot read, and in it find the way to heaven; a thing so easy in the Doctor's
opinion, that even the blindest man cannot miss it, so he will consult that
Book. But I must recall my word: The Doctor indeed does mention a Church, or
Society, and that an infallible one: but it is only mentioned to be rejected.
Now certainly if he rereject that Church which, if any Church can have any
obliging Authority, may challenge the greatest on earth, he will much more
reject any inferior Authority or Church. Yet since he will take it ill if we
do not call an Assembly of his (...), a Church: please to consider, that in
this Church every man, the most ignorant and stupid, must by his own light,
know, first, that God has left his whole will touching his salvation in
Writing. 2. That this Writing comprehends thirty eight Books given by God to
the Jews, and twenty to Christians. 3. All these Books this ignorant man must
(by his own light still) know to be both safely conveyed, and truly translated,
though he be not able to read either the Original, or Translation. 4. He must
out of all these Books be sure not to miss in collecting all the Texts
containing Doctrines necessary to his salvation. 5. And likewise he must be
assured by his own light that he conceives the true sense of all these Texts,
though he know that there are great quarrels among learned, and pious men about
the sense of those Texts. 6. For he must be obliged to believe, that there is
not on earth any, either Person or Society, infallible, to which he can be
bound in Conscience to submit his judgment, or commit the care of his Soul. 7.
Lastly, He must have so firm a memory, as to be able to reject Roman Doctrines
because not contained in Scripture. This is Dr. Stillingfleet's Church of
England, and so firm is the Rock upon which it is ground.

77. Now whether that Church of England, wherein we were Christened, and when we
were Christened, relied upon such a Foundation as this, may quickly be
discovered by reading only her Twentieth Article, which begins thus, Art. 20,
The Church (of England surely) has power to decree Rites, or Ceremonies, and
Authority in Controversies of Faith. By the Church here she must needs mean the
Governors, or Pastors, and authorized Teachers of the Church of England, for
none else meddle in prescribing Ceremonies, or determining Controversies of
Faith. And these, says she, have Authority, [that is, no doubt, in her
meaning, not an usurped, but] lawful Authority. And if so, then she intends
that all her Subjects and Disciples should esteem themselves obliged in
Conscience to submit to her Decisions both about Ceremonies and Controversies.
This submission if any of her Subjects interpret to be only external, or to
imply no more than not openly refusing Ceremonies, or opposing Decisions, she
will not be contented with it. This appears plainly in her Constitutions,
Established, and Published by Regal Authority, under the Great Seal of England:
For, from the second Constitution to the tenth, Constit. 2, 3, etc.
all Impugners of the King's Supremacy, or that affirm that the Church of
England is not a true, and Apostolical Church: Likewise all Impugners of her
Articles of Religion: of her Ceremonies: of her Government by Bishops: of the
Form of Ordinations: Moreover, all Authors of Schisms: and Maintainers of
Schismatics: all these are denounced Excommunicated ipso facto: from which
Excommunication they cannot be absolved and restored, till after they have
repented, and publicly revoked such their wicked Errors: that is, they must
acknowledge themselves to have been in an Error, a wicked Error, of which
they must repent, and publicly revoke it.

78. This Authority therefore challenged by the Church of England Established
by Law^ is manifestly an Authority over the Souls, the Judgment, and Belief of
her Subjects: which Authority Dr. Stillingfleet's Church of England does
expressly renounce. Therefore his is a mere imaginary Church, which has no
subsistence but only in the fancies of a new brood of men, which appeared not
in England till Mr. Chillingworth's Book came forth. And of such a Church Mr.
Chilingworth stood in need, because he thought he could, with more ease to
himself, defend Dr. Potter against his Adversary F. Knott, by depriving the
Church of England of her Authority, and laying new Principles of a Church, the
same which Dr. Stillingfleet has borrowed, and artificially spread out, and
which are greedily embraced by our Young Divines, because they reduce the main
Dispute between Catholics and Protestants to an exercise of wit and fancy,
about Adjectives and Participles ending in bilis and dus, and ease them of the
same tedious labor of rea^ing and citing Fathers and Councils, which former
learned Controvertists, Bishops and Doctors, thought necessary to undergo.

79. Now the reason why the Church of England assumes an Authority obliging her
Subjects to a submission of judgment, as well as to external Conformity, (which
other Sects. cannot without a shameless impudence pretend to, and yet do most
tyrannically usurp) seems to me to this: Because she does not look upon her
self to be a new-erected Church but as remaining still a Member of the
Catholic Church, governed by Pastors endowed with Authority received thence,
and continuing in a Lineal Succession from St. Peter: And, as supposed a true
Member of the Catholic church, her Clergy National or Provincial, to have
right, according to frequent practice in the Ancient Church, to call Synods,
and therein reform Discipline, and extirpate such Doctrines as they judge
erroneous, how far spread soever they may be: yet in doing this, with the
peaceable Spirit of St. Cyprian, [as to other Churches] Neminem judicantes, aut
a jure Communionis aliquem, si diversum senserit, amoventes; whereby they
conclude themselves free from the guilt of Schism. Neither yet do they assume
to themselves an absolute Infallibility in their Ordinances, and Decisions, but
(as your self, Sir, have intimated in your second Question at the end of your
Book) assuring themselves that as long as they remain true Members of the
Catholic Church, they have this kind or degree of Infallibility, that they
cannot fall into Errors excluding Salvation: and thereupon they judge they may
oblige their Subjects to a submission of judgment, and excommunicate
Dissenters; since no danger can follow in case it should happen to be an error
to the belief whereof they submit; especially considering their constant
Profession, that they will all conform to the Determinations of a true, free,
and legal General Council.

80. Such a Notion I conceive all English Protestants had of the Church of
England, and her Authority, till Mr. Chillingworth published his Book. Upon
such grounds, I am sure, our late worthy and learned Friend Dr. Steward,
thought he could sufficiently justify the Church of England against the Roman
Catholic Church her imputing Heresy or Schism to Protestants. And on the same
grounds did the most learned among Protestant Bishops proceed in their
Controversies: for can you think, Sir, that Bishop Andrews, Bilson, Montague,
Laud, Morton, etc. ever entertained a thought, that all Christians whatsoever
may with their own Light, both find all points of necessary belief in the
Scriptures, and also comprehend the true sense of them? and that not a Soul in
England was obliged to believe a word of the Doctrine established?

81. Dr. Stillingfleet's Church of England therefore seems to me so far from
being that Church which has been Established by Law, that it is the most
irrational Church that ever was. The Church of Geneva, or Holland, or other
Calvinists, though grounded on this most presumptuous Principle, That they
judge of Scripture, and its sense, only by an internal infallible Light of
God's Spirit, yet that being once supposed, they proceed rationally thereon,
when they oblige all their Subjects to submit their judgments to the Teachings
of those respective Churches, or to their Synods of Gap^ Dort^ etc. Whereas Dr.
Stillingfleet exempting all persons from an Obligation of yielding an internal
Assent to any Decisions made by Superiors, dissolves the very nature of a
Church, and deposes all Superiors.

82. But in opposition to this, you say, Sir, Page 197 Ob.
That it is a proof that Dr. Stillingfleet' s Principles are not destructive to
the Authority of the Church of England, because the Presbyterians, Anabaptists,
or Independents, those enemies of hers, who have been so vigilant and
industrious, so many years, to make her totter, have not made use of the said
Principles, nor so much as taken notice of them. Hereto I answer, Sol.
They have not made use of them against Dr. Stillingfleet's Church of England,
because they are not Fools. For though they may seem to have a great advantage
against him, by saying (besides their acknowledgement of the evidence of
Scripture in necessaries) That it would be madness in them to leave God's
Spirit, their own infallible Interpreter of Scripture, in other points also,
for his fallible common Reason, which is not able to give assurance even in
natural things, as whether the Earth move, or stand still, by which means they
being now Spiritual Christians, would become [(...)] animal Men. And moreover,
that they interpreting Scripture by the Spirit, may force men to submit their
judgments to them: Whereas it would be ridiculous to submit to a Church which
allows every one to judge of the sense of Scripture by their corrupt private
reason. These sure are notable Advantages on a Spiritual Churches side. Yet on
the other side they foresee, that, by such opposition, they shall sadly expose
th^mselves to his deriding Rhetoric. For his Reason will make their Spirit
miserably ridiculous: He will bid them to make proof to him that they interpret
Scripture by the Spirit, and to show when, and which way the Spirit left
English Pro^estants to agitate them: and also by what marks they know, that all
of their own faction have the Spirit, and they alone, though other Sects
dissenting and opp^sing them, do ground their opposi^ion on the same Spirit.
Now it being impossible for any of them by the h^lp of their Spirit to answer a
word of since to his Reason, they will lamentably remain at his mercy:
Therefore they will not meddle with him. And moreover, they foresee that the
Church ^f England will not account her self touched in this Dispute: For she
will renounce both private Reason and private Spirit, and tell them that they
must receive the sense of Scripture from her. Therefore very wise^y they will
pursue their old way against her, and tell her, that she has received her
Authirity from Idolaters, yea from the Pope, whom her own Bishops call
Antichrist: And God forbid that they should submit to such an Authority: And
for her Excommunications, they account them no better than bruta fulmina, on
condition that their Purses may not be touched.

83. Having therefore, in my own persuasion, invincible Reasons to make this
judgment of Dr. Stillingfleet's Church of England; and moreover, not having
ever heard, and being confident that I never shall hear, that any one English
Bishop did, or will so far betray themselves as to allow the grounds on which
Mr. Chillingworth, and after him, the Doctor proceeded, can you, Sir, think it
just to render me the Object of the general hatred of English Protestants, by
transferring (as you have done) on the Church of England all the sharp and
scornful Invectives which I have made against Dr. Stillingfleet's Church? It is
not, I assure you, the Church of England that I taxed for want of Miracles,
which are not indeed at all necessary, in case she be, as she professes, a true
Member of the Catholic Church. But it is Dr. Stillingfleet's Church from which
Miracles are to be required, since it is a new-fashioned Church, the like
whereof was never seen before the last Age. And it is only Dr. Stillingfleet's
Church, to which I upbraided the ex^^usion of a Religious Pr^fession, which was
nev^r condemned by the Church of England. And the like I affirm with regard to
all other p^ssages in my Book, which have rais^d such indignation in you
against me: Which indignation, I hop^, you will have the goodness to qualify,
when you shall read this my Defense, to which I add also once more, that if
there be any phrase in any Book written by me, which may probably be esteemed a
reproachful reviling of the Church or Clergy of England, I do here revoke, and
ask pardon for it.

. 7. C^ncerning my Lord Falkland, and detraction from his memory imputed to me.
84. I Will here in the next place, in regard of the affinity of the Subject,
annex that special Head among your manifold Accusations against me, which
concern the Vindication of the Honor and Esteem of my Noble dear Lord
Falkland, aspersed, say you, most ungratefully, and falsely by me with the
Character of a Socinian. Truly, Sir, it was not without some contentment to me,
to see any one interesting himself in clearing the Reputation of that Noble
Person, the greatest Ornament to our N^tion that the last Age produced, and
which certainly could never with justice be blasted by any English Pen or
Tongue.

85. I was, I confess, extremely astonished to find my self called to the Bar
upon that account; and to see that the ground of my Indictment should be a
double Narration in my Answer to Doctor Stilling^leet, ho^ I presented D'aille
his Book [ du vray usage des Peres] to my Lord Falkland^ which he gave to Mr.
^hillingworth, and shortly after sent to me, being then in Ireland, a Letter of
Thanks, especially in Mr. Chillingworth's behalf, because the said Book had
saved him a tedious labor of reading most of the Greek and Latin Fathers to
whose Doctrines he had engaged himself to conform his belief. And further, in
pursuance of my Narration, I added, how Mr. Chillingw^rth (thanks to D'aille)
being now become a Protestant, and having an intention to defend Dr. Potter
against his Adversary F. Kn^tt, was induced, by occasion of a Socinian's Book
which he had met withal, to proceed in the Controversy against Cath^licks,
upon far different grounds from those which had been made use of by former
learned Protestant Bishops and Doctors: For in stead of appealing to Antiquity,
Councils, or Fathers, for the sense of Scripture, he resolved to appeal to the
Scripture alone, and this interpreted by each ones own Reason and Judgment,
since in all necessary Points it is so plain, as he pretends, that none can
mistake the sense of it, or be obliged to submit his Reason to any external
Authority interpreting it; and Error in places difficult, will easily find
pardon.

86. This is the sense of the double Narrative on which you ground your
Accusation; you are willing also to question the truth of the Narration, and to
make me pass for a wicked person guilty of forgery. All I can say hereto is, to
protest here in the presence of God, that I have not willingly failed in any
one material circumstance of this short story: and since I am sure that it is
true, it exceeds the bounds of Omnip^tence to cause that which has been, not to
have been. Only as to the determining the precise year, I dare not engage my
credit upon an ill memory.

87. Now, Sir, by what Logic do you from this Narration infer, that I aspersed
my Lord Falkland with the Character of a Socinian, since he is not so much as
^^med in the second Narrative wh^r^ the word Socinian is found? Truly I pro^^^^
on my Conscience, I was so far from that, that I had not a thought of imputing
Socinianism to Mr. Chillingworth himself: neit^^r had I any just ground from
what I there related.

88. For Mr. Chillingworth having been disheartened by D'aile from appealing to
the Holy Fathers of the Church, and being too ingenuous, or rather out of fear
of God, not daring to pretend to Divine Il^uminations against his Conscience,
and which he could not justify, gladly made use of the grounds which he found
first in a Socinian's Book, who in stead of a private Divine Spirit,
substituted common Reason, as the only proper Judge of the sense of Scripture:
And upon these grounds pr^cisely has he proceeded through his whole Book. But,
Sir, is this sufficient to make poor Mr. Chillingworth pass for a very
Socinian? Do^s the making private Reason judge of the true sense of Scripture,
in^^r^ that neither Christ, nor the Holy Gh^^t are God? that the pains of Hell
are not eternal? tha^ separated Souls have no being, or at least no perception?
etc. God ^orbid: for t^en how many innocent persons would be guilty of
Blasphemies unawares to themselves? Then not only Mr. Chillingworth, but Dr.
Stillingfleet, and besides them, God knows how many more in London, and in the
Universities of England, would be Socinians.

89. But as touching my Lord Falkland, I was so far from entertaining a
suspicion, and much more from propagating that suspicion to others, that I
believe there are in England scarce three persons besides my self, that are so
enabled to give a Demonstration of the contrary, which was a solemn
protestation made by himself to the greatest Prelate of England, of his
aversion from those blasphemous ^lo^^sies which had been most unjustly, by I
know not whom, laid to his charge. It could not possibly therefore be, that my
having found cr^dit with two or three persons of the Church of England, Page ^^^
should have induced them to asperse his Lordship with so foul a stain. But
upon whose credit soever they framed such a scandal, so nice a Lover of
Veracity and Sincerity that most excellent Lord was, that his serious
renouncing of such an imputation, ought to be esteemed by all Persons of Honor
or Honesty a more than sufficient eviction of his innocence. And now, though I
could not without much inward trouble read my self published a Calumniator of
the Noblest Friend and Benefactor that ever I enjoyed, yet having an inward
witness of mine own innocence, and an assurance also that no proofs could be
made to appear, suff^cient to justify such an imputation, I took no small
pleasure in seeing your most generous Zeal in vindicating his Honor.

90. I beseech you therefore, Honored Sir, let me no longer remain in your
thoughts as a Detractor of that N^ble Lord, who, I perceive, was in a
particular manner dear to ^^ur self also, and whose Memory ought to b^ precious
to every one who has any est^em of Virtue, Heroical Fidelity to His Master and
King, incomparable Learning, and all admirable Endowments. I assure you I was
so far from the least intention to bl^^ his Memory, that I should judge my self
justly liable to be condemned as defective in the Duti^s of Friendship, and
Resp^ct to so Noble a Friend, if in case God had ever placed me in a condition
capable of doing any considerable good to others, I had contented my self with
expressing my affection to him by a few elegant Phrases, and windy Elogies,
having means and opportunity to raise his Family out of that narrow condition,
in which that most Noble Lord, who had been no skilful Projector of profit to
himself, had left it.

91. But having been incapable of this, I yet thank God, that the poor and
contemptible condition in which I am, do^s not hinder me from being in a
capacity of showing my Gratitude in a way, I hope, for more advantageous to
that admirable Person himself, than by ^^^ry Commendations. For though you,
Sir, condemn, as uncharitable, that Position o^ Catholics, That no Salvation
is t^ be had out of the Communion of the Catholic Church: Yet since all
Catholics grant that this is not necessarily to be understood of an Actual,
External Communion, but that many Christians of virtuous devout Lives, and
having had a constant preparation of mind to prefer Truth, whenever
effectually discovered to them, before all Temporal Advantages, they dying in
this disposition, though not externally joined to the Church, will be esteemed
by our merciful Lord as true Members of his Mystical Body the Church. And since
it is most certain, that all the Alms Prayers and Sacrifices offered to God by
and in the Universal Church, are intended by her to be beneficial to all Souls
departed, as far as they are capable, and according as God shall apply them.
And lastly, since I am assured that my Lord Falkland l^^ding a virtuous Life,
despised all wor^^ly things in comparison of necessary Divine Truth^ and i^
being apparent by his Discourse of Infallibility, that he had framed a judgment
touching the Catholic Church out of certain Catholic Writers, who ^epresented
it too disadvantageously to him, and not with such Qualifications as the Church
her self has done: Upon these Considerations who can forbid me to desire, and
even hope, that his Soul, though not by name recommended, may receive benefit
and comfort, when at the Altar, and elsewhere, all Catholics join in praying
thus, Omnium fidelium defunctorum animae per misericordiam Dei requies^ant in
Pace, Amen?

. 8. Concerning King H^nry the Eighth.
92. ANother Crime^ it seems, of no ordinary heinousness, was my stiling King
Henry the Eighth a Tyrant, Page 41, 240.
for with this I am charged once and again. You cannot, Sir, I am sure,
believe, that I used that word in the same notion (...) do when ^hey call
Cr^mwel a Tyrant, which imports a Merciless Usurper. Truly I meant no more
thereby than what generally Protestant Historiographers and others write of
him, that he was an unjust and Merciless King. I am sure Sir Wal^er ^a^leigh in
the Preface to his (...) Henry was Father of his own most Gr^cious an^
Munificent Mistress, yet is bold to say, That if all the Pictures and Pa^terns
of a Merciless Prince were (...) in the World, they might all again be (...)
the life out of that King's S^ory. (...) of my ^e^^ioning King Henry (...)
epistle to the English Car(...), was his cru^l dealing (...), retired, devout
Predec^^^^^^ (...) whom he caused to be executed as Traitors, merely because
they dur^t not, simply upon his will, without any previous instruction, debate,
or consultation with his Clergy in a National Synod, renounce an Article of
their Religion, for many Ages never questioned in England, or any other
Catholic Kingdom. This seemed to me an Act in a high degree both unjust, and
cruel: and no less cruel, and unjust I dare say does another Act of his appear
to Dr. Stillingfleet's Church, I mean not only his beheading, but leaving a
perpe^ual foul stain on the memory of his second-first Wife, the now exalted
virtuous Lady Anne Bulen, Mother of Queen Elizabeth.

93. But as touching the so highly displeasing term, Tyrant, I do so much, and
indeed ^o entirely defer to your Honorable judgment, that though I am unable
to give a reason for it, yet I am now persuaded that I ought not to have named
that word. For no doubt such persons of high condition, lik^ your self, are
ex^ct^y skil^ul in what terms w^ ought to speak to, and of, Great Princes I
wish therefore I could b^^t it out, and if God afford the ^ife and opportunity
to and my Church History after the Conqrest (of which as yet the affairs of
little more than two hundred and forty years are dispatched, and which will
have its conclusion in the death of the same King) I will (...) heed of that
unseemly word (Tyrant:) and moreover, I will consult with knowing persons how
after the most tender manner, I ought to relate the actions of some of our
Kings, which I must not always conceal, and I cannot with a good conscience but
condemn.

. 9. Of Archbishop CRANMER.
Page 79, 80.
9^. FOrasmuch as concerns Archbishop Cranmer, whose memory (you say) will ^e
p^eserved, as of a most worthy Prelate and glorious Martyr, notwithstanding the
foul imputations cast by Mr. Cr^ssy upon him [to wit, Treason.] For which Crime
(you also affirm) that unhappy and ill advised Queen Mary rather desired to
have hanged him, than to have him burnt for his Religion. But the Law would not
extend to serve her turn that way; If it would, no man would have blamed her
for having prosecuted him with the utmost rigor.

95. Honored Sir, the Crime of Treason, I confess is foul; but the imputation
of so ^oul a crime is not foul, unless it be groundless or false. Now I humbly
conceive, how false soever that imputation can be proved to be, you have no
reason to suspect me to be the inventer of it, and therefore not answerable for
it. And so much confidence I have in your justice, being a person of Honor,
that you will absolve m^ now that I shall produce Vouchers of that imputation,
men of unquestioned credit, even with your self. In the first place therefore
Fox your voluminous Martyrologist expressly says, Fox, p. School.
This is certain, that the Archbishop was shortly after cast into the Tower,
and within a while condemned of Treason. Again, He appeared before the Lords in
the Star Chamber, where b^ing accused of Treas^n, and sediti^us Papers, they
sent him to the Tower. The same Fox moreover produces the Letters which Cranmer
among others wrote to Queen Mary, P. 1282.
commanding her to acknowledge J^ne Gray to be lawful Queen, P. 1279.
and to desist from challenging the Crown. In the next place Hollinshead
affirms, Hollinsh. an. 1553
that he was arraigned of Treason, not only for giving counsel to disherit
Queen Mary, but likewise because he had sent Horse and Men to aid the Duke of
Northumberland [then in manifest Rebellion] against Queen Mary. My third
Voucher is Bishop G^dwin, Godw. in vit. Mar. Reg.
who writes thus, At first it was thought fit to proceed against Cranmer by
Law, as guilty of Treason, because he had subscribed to the Decree touching the
promoting Jane Gray to be Queen. Theref^re on the twelfth of November, after he
had been some time detained in the Tower, they accused him of Treason, together
with the said Jane and some others. And they were all condemned as guilty of
that crime. To these I might adjoyn other witnesses to the same effect, as
Stow, Speed, Martin, etc. Only indeed I must confess, his kind fr^endly
Successo^r Parker tells us, Park. in vit. Mar. Reg.
in contradiction to his Iuries and Judges, that he was evinced ^f Tre^son, in
a form of Justice, without Truth. But you may be pleased to be now one of his
Judges, and deter^ine, Whether a man convicted of dispers^ng sediti^us Papers,
of pr^m^ti^g an usurping Queen, of commanding the law^ul h^ir of the Crown to
desist from her Claim, and of sending Horse and Foot to the General ^f ^
Rebellious Army, be not legally guilty of Tre^s^n, and cons^q^ently, whether
the Law would not have extended to serve Queen Ma^i^s turn to hang your m^st
worthy Prelate and gl^ri^us Martyr for that Crime.

95. And whereas you reprehend me for saying, that the final judgment both
touching Ecclesiastical Government, and Doctrine was ^eferred by the same
Archbishop to a King, of about nine years of a^e, since I cannot but kn^w that
in all K^ngd^me ^^redi^ary the King is not less King for being but (...) years
of age and that all sentences and judgments are as much r^ferred to him then,
as when he is at f^^^ age. This (...) clause I acknowledge: but that which I
(...) on as a most in^amous act in Cranmer, was that he, an ancient Archbishop
of Canterbury, in his old age should show such a slavish, ^o^did disposition,
as to expect ins^ruct^^^s, and a ^^rections in his belief from a S^^ular
Auth^rity. even a Child, and again, that having all his life mad^ Prof^ssion of
Cath^lick Religion, he should in the end b^ (...) r^^diness ^o submit himself,
an^ his Church to a Sacrilegious Protector, whilst, against the express will of
K. Hen. who had entrusted him, with others, in the care of his Sons Education,
he shamefully abusing the lovely inn^cent Prince, did in his Name, and a^ by
his Authority utterly abolish the Religion of the Kingdom, professed by all his
Ancestors, and entirely change the ^^ame of the Church, both in Doctrine, and
Discipline. W^ether by the Laws of the Kingd^m^ the Protector had just power,
during the nonage of a King, to act in such a manner the part of [an (...)] a
Destroyer, I am not able to de^^rmine. You, honored Sir, I believe can easi^y
do it: but withal, you cannot de^y, that your glorious Martyr Archbish^p
Cranmer, forasmuch as concern^d his Faith, made himself a Disciple, to be
Ca^ec^is'd in the Principles of his Religi^n by a Child of nine years of Age,
who by virtue o^ his Fathers lat^ly assumed Title, was become the Head of a
Body, which had no resemblance with the ^orm^r, ^ither in Belief or Government.
And that it was the Chi^d hims^l^ in person whom the grave Archbishop desired,
and thought suffi^i^ntly en^bled, to be his Catechiser, we have his o^n
acknowledgment in a Letter writ^en to ^h^^k the young King's Tutor, which
Lett^r is deservedly for his honor recorded by Fox, in which we read this
passage, Fox, p. 1179.
Ah Mr. Che^k, you may rejoice all the days of your life, that you have such a
Disciple, who has more knowledge in Divinity in his little finger, then we all
have in our whole body. The Protector indeed was the great Apostle of the
Kingdom, but his Mission he must have receiv^d from his Pupil, both to preach a
new Faith, and to consummate former Sacrilege: In the mean time the humble
Archbishop remained in expectation what he was to believe, and in an
uncertainty whether his Ordination we^e valid, or not. I will end t^is matter
with the Character of Cranmer, given by Duditius an emin^nt Protestant, Dudit.
in vit. Pol.
Cranm^r^ says he, seems to have been b^rn and framed for dissimulation, which
quality he made use of in all things through his whole life.

. 10. Of the Reordination imputed to Catholics.
Page 250
96. THis word, Ordination, puts me in mind of a dangerous Question, which you
thought fit to propose, How Mr. Cressy, and the rest who have received Orders
in the Church of England, can justify or excuse their being Re-ordained after
they change their Religion, since so many Councils have declared against it,
and no one for it; and since the succession of Bishops is as plainly manifest
in one Church, as in the other. And what difference can there be assigned, why
such as the Greek Church who come to them, are not Re-ordained, but th^se of
the Church of England are compelled to be?

87. Noble Sir, for any thing that appears in your Animadversions, you may be
one of the honorable Judges, and perhaps possessed of the highest Office of
Iudi^^ture, and therefore I humbly take leave in answering this Question to
leave out Mr. Cressy's name, since he is loath to write, and publish any thing
that may pass absolutely for an evidence under his own hand, against his own
life in case he be suspected to be concerned in this matter, as you say
absolutely he is. Indefinitely speaking therefore, and without a dangerous
refl^ction on any one: those of the English Clergy returning to the Catholic
Church are not permitted to exercise the Sacerdotal Office, without being ^as
you style it, Re-ordained) but in Catholic language, simply Ordained, and of
this several reasons are given: I will only name one: but such an one against
which I cannot imagine a possible Reply: and that is a consideration how the
Form of Ordination, and Consecration was purposely, and studiously changed by
the Church of England to show that she renounced that Function which by the
Catholic Church, yea, by the Greekish and all ancient Churches, was esteemed
formally essential to Priesthood, which is, Conf^cere^ and offerre Corpus
Domini. She will have Priests, but she will have no Sacrifice, which two, I
believe^ have never been divided by any Christian Church before the last A^e.
So that though the present new Form considered simply in it self, did not
invalidate Ordination (for the Greek Church also Ordains in a Form different
from the Roman) yet the declaring such to have been the Motive, and ground of
the change most certainly does. Art. 31.
And that this was the Motive seems to me evidently collected from the 31.
Article of the Church of England: The words are these, The Offering of Christ
once made^ is that perfect Redemption, Propi^iation, and Satisfaction for all
the sins of the whole world, both original and actual^ and there is none other
satisfaction for sin, but that alone. Wherefore the Sacrifices of Masses, in
the which it was commonly said that the Priests did offer Christ for the quick
and the dead, to have remission of pain or guilt were blasphemous fables, and
dangerous deceits. Hence it is plain that the Church of England renounces that
Function which the Catholic Church esteems essential to Priesthood, and
consequently in England, Priesthood seems to be a new quite different Order,
and far from being the same which is con^erred in, and by the Roman Church.
Therefore I conceive Sir, you had no^ much cause to wonder or blame Catholic
Churches for not admitting such persons to exercise the Functions of
Priesthood, since neither their Ordainers, nor they themselves, ever had, nor
intended to have such Functions or Faculties conferred on them, but on the
contrary esteemed them in a high measure injurious to our Savior's Priesthood.

. 11. Of several speculative P^ints of Controverted Doctrines. Of a
State-Religion. And of Professions of Loyalty.
^8. TH^se, Noble Sir, are the several Crimes laid to my charge, I mean such as
personally regard my self alone: And th^se are my respective Answers There may
possibly be some more besides these in your Animadversions, which have escaped
my Observation: though I think there are none so considerable, as would much
oblige me to lengthen this Apology: a work, God willing, which shall be the
last of this nature. There is another great Crime far more heinous than all
th^se, of which not my self alone, but many others better than my self are
eith^r accused by you, or rendered shrewdly susp^cted: which is, a want, or
perhaps a disability of giving satisfaction to the State of our Fidelity to his
Majesty. This is in several places repeated by you, and most accurately
descanted on among your nine Questions near the conclusion of your Book. Page
245.


99. This is indeed a subject of great concern, and therefore deserves a more
serious application, it being also the last ground of reprehension; with an
Answer whereto my purpose is to conclude this Apology. For, honored Sir, I
beseech you not to take it ill, or interpret it a neglect, that I am silent
with regard to several passages in your Animadversions, since the whole design
of this Apology is the endeavoring to qualify the Indignation which you have
conceived against me; and I doubt, imprinted in the minds of too many besides.
Whereas therefore you have inserted Reflections, and Censures on several
speculative Points of Catholic Doctrine, I may justly be dispensed with for
interesting my self in such a subject: especially considering, that I do not
find that you have a purpose to make Controversy your serious employment. It
any professed Protestant Controvertist shall borrow from you any arguments
against Catholic Tenants, which he knew no^ before, as truly, Doctor
Stillingfleet may, from your Discourse touching the nature of a Church, which
is far less irrational, than his own, he may then begin to speak de tribus
Capellis.

100. The sum of what you write, Sir, on this subject seems to me to be this.
Page 243
1. You lay a certain new ground of your Discourse, which is, that besides
Christian Religion considered according to its essentials (which are
exceedingly few, and which are absolutely unchangeable) there ought to be
acknowledged another Christian State-Religion containing other Doctrines not
essential, both regarding belief and discipline, which may be altered,
approved, or rejected by a National Church though never so far spread, or never
so long continued. 2. In consequence hereunto, you require me to explain what
is the full intent of that spiritual Power which we acknowledge in the Pope
over England, and whether it be more than is granted by the Sovereign Power,
Page 9.
and Municipal Laws of the Kingdom. 3. And from hence, you, being persuaded
that it is more, do wish that all English Catholics (who you think, have a
Religion different from that in other Catholic States) would give an evidence,
and security of and for their Fidelity to his Majesty, by disclaiming all kind
of subjection to another (Spiritual) Sovereign, as their fellow Subjects do,
yea, as has been done lately, even by Catholic Subjects in France.

101. These, noble Sir, are the Proposals (at least as many of them as concern
me at present) which you have thought fit to make, to the end to oblige me, by
my resolution of them to discover whether the suspicions you seem to have of
the defect in Loyalty, not of my self only, but of my Superiors, and Brethren
also, be not justly grounded. I am willing to give you herein the best
satisfact^on I am able. And truly Sir, were it not for the first Proposal, I
should heartily wish, that, as I do not at all doubt but that you are indeed a
Person of Honor, I could also be assured that you were of Great Authority in
Public Counsels, for then I might hope that God would make an instrument of
his great goodness to us, such a Person who has generously, in such
circumstances as we are at the present, declared his judgment, that in case we
could justify our Loyalty, we should not for our dissenting otherways from the
Religion of the State, be the only persons excluded from his Majesty's gracious
Indulgence, and the rights of Freeborn Subjects.

102. In order now to the satisfaction I desire to give you, Sir, I will in the
first place consider the first proposal, which I conceive you intended for a
foundation on which you build a persuasion that we ought to renounce an
acknowledgment of any authority at all, though purely spiritual, assumed by the
Pope over his Majesty's Subjects.

103. Hereto therefore I say, that as to the distinction you have framed
between a Religion of State and Christianity considered according to its
essentials which last only you seem to affirm to be unalterable, it being a
distinction never before heard of by me, and now also not perfectly understood.
I know not w^ll what Answer to make. In discoursing on this subject you seem to
make your State-Religion to regard external discipline, Ceremonies,
Solemnities, etc. And for such matters it will be easily granted, that the
Sovereign Temporal Prince may if need be, interpose himself in the ordering of
them for the convenience of his people, in case this may be done without
endangering a Schism from the Body of Christianity. But you extend your
State-Religion yet farther, so as to contain Doctrines also, such as are not
essential to a Christian Profession, which you say may be altered by the Prince
with Advice of his National Clergy, and errors removed how long soever
continued, and how largely soever dispersed. This may also pass, upon
condition, first, that neither the Prince, nor his Clergy take upon them to
judge those Doctrines to be errors, which the Universal or Patriarchal Church,
of which they are subordinate members, does teach, and has Synodically
established: And next, that they will submit their decisions to a future
judgment of the Universal, or Patriarchal Church. For otherwise all Unity, all
Authority Ecclesiastical, and all Order in Gods Church will be utterly
dissolved.

104. And whereas you demand of Catholics, that they explain what is the full
extent of that Spiritual Power which they acknowledge in the Pope over England,
etc. you must permit me to say, that to give an account exactly of all the
several Acts of Spiritual Jurisdiction belonging to the Pope over all within
his Patriarchate, would require perhaps several months study. But I suppose the
intent of this demand may more easily be satisfied, by saying in the first
place, That since even the greatest Princes are not Spiritual Pastors^ but
subject, as to their souls, to the Jurisdiction of their lawful Pastors; an
exemption from which would not be a privilege, but a misery: And again, since
the Pope considered but even as a Patriarch, has of right belonging to him a
Spiritual Jurisdiction, and power to inflict Spiritual Censures on all persons
subject to him, even Princes also, according to their demerits: we therefore,
conceiving it an unquestionable Truth, that England is comprehended within the
Western Patriarchate, must also affirm, that the Pope's Spiritual Jurisdiction
extends to us also. But then in the next place, we also confidently affirm,
that by Virtue of this Spiritual Jurisdiction inherent in the Pope, the
Temporal Rights, and Power of the King (or even of the meanest of his Subjects)
are not at all abridged, or prejudiced. This assertion, Sir, you cannot but
know has always been maintain in France, the Pope not contradicting it. Hence
it follows, that it is agreeable to Catholic Religion: And why English
Catholics should be suspected not to be as tender of the just Rights, and
precious Lives also of their Sovereign, as the Catholic Subjects of any other
Kingdom, and why they should be thought to be willing to acknowledge any
Temporal power, Direct, or Indirect, to be inherent in the Pope, over the King
or Kingdom; to which not any Catholic Gentleman or Nobleman would submit, I
cannot imagine. And truly, Honored Sir, I do extremely wonder upon what
grounds you should suspect any Catholics disposed to betray the Rights, and
Honor of our Sovereign, or our Ecclesiastics unwilling to touch upon this
Point concerning the Popes Temporal Power, Page 12.
which you say, is the Hinge upon which all other Controversies between
Protestants, and English Catholics do so entirely hang and depend that if that
only were taken off, all the rest would quickly fall to the ground.

105. Noble Sir, if ever you read this Apology, you will find that it is
published permissu Superiorum, and therefore what I shall now write on this
special subject you may please to consider, not as the inconsiderable opinion
of one particular person only. I do now therefore assure you, that there is not
any one Point of Controversy upon which we more earnestly desire to be
summoned to give an account before equal Judges, than this. But withal, permit
me, I beseech you, to say, that though in many regards none could be more fit
to sit on that Tribunal than your self, yet one Principle you seem to have
imbibed, which would undo us all. For you will not be content with our
justifying our selves to be Loyal Subjects, unless we will be Herodians also:
you will not be content that we should give to Caesar the things which belong
to Caesar, unless we give him those things which belong to God too. We do
willingly acknowledge, that all Christian Kings (not of England only) have in
some sense a kind of Spiritual Authority^ that they ought to be Nursing Fathers
to God's Church; that God expects from them that they should promote true
Christian Doctrine, both touching Faith and Manners; that they should employ
their Kingly Power when occasion is, to oblige even Ecclesiastical persons to
perform their Duties, yea, even Bishops also to govern Christ^s flock according
to the Orders prescribed them; and all their Subjects to live in all Christian
Piety, and Virtue. We sincerely acknowledge all this, and that in executing
this they are God's Substitutes: But we dare not acknowledge them to be the
Successors of Christ's Apostles. We receive Christian Doctrines, and the
Orthodox sense of Scripture, not from Princes, but from such Pastors and
Teachers only as God has appointed by a Lineal Succession to continue in his
Church to the end of the World, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the Body of Christ: that we be not children tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by the slight of men, etc. These
divinely authorized Teachers and Pastors, by the assistance of God's Spirit
promised to them, do preserve the Church one Body, consisting of several
distinct Members united in the same Catholic and Apostolic Faith and Charity:
which Faith is unalterable, both as to the Foundation, and Superstructure. We
do not understand your State-Religion. We never till now heard of such a
Position as this, That all Churches, in case they preserve entire only the
Fundamental Articles of the Creed, though the Supreme Power respectively in
them took liberty to change any other Doctrines, were sufficiently Orthodox.
And I confess when I had read such a Discourse in your Animadversions, touching
a State-Religion, I then exceedingly wondered at the Approbation.

107. But, Sir, does this concern only Roman Catholics in England? Are they
the only persons obnoxious to a suspicion of Disloyalty, and to all the most
horrible punishments threatened in our Laws against Traitors, because they dare
not profess the State-Religion? You seem to be perfectly acquainted with the
State of France, and you are well satisfied with the Profession of Fidelity
made by the Hugonots. But have they any reverence for the State-Religion there?
Do not they freely justify their own Religion against it, even that Religion,
the Profession whereof they extorted by shedding the blood of many Myriads of
their Kings faithful Subjects? Yet notwithstanding all this, they are now in
your opinion very faithful Subjects too; and no man thinks of obliging them to
the State Religion. Doubtless also you know England better than France. How
many thousand Dissenters are there from the State Religion, besides Roman
Catholics? yet the terrible Laws are made only against Roman Catholics. From
Roman Catholics only, care is taken of exacting Oaths both of Fidelity and
Supremacy as being esteemed the only dangerous Subjects in the Kingdom, and
this for the Treasonable Actions or scarce one score of persons, abhorred by
all the rest. For the discovery and prevention of such personal Treasons,
Thanksgivings must solemnly every year be paid to God, and Devotion at such
times is expressed by renewing malice against innocent persons. Whereas a
delivery of the whole Kingdom and Church from almost an Universal Rebellion,
designing the extinction of Monarchy, and Prelacy both, yea, and executing the
Murder of the lawful Sovereign, is not esteemed a motive for a public
Engagement to pay thanks to God, or to preserve in men's minds a memory of his
wonderful Blessing to the Nation: neither it seems is there at all a necessity
of requiring from any a Retraction of the Principles of Rebellion, or a promise
that it shall never be renewed. Noble Sir, I beseech you not to interpret this
to be spoken out of a malignant envy against any, or a desire that others
should share in our sufferings. Perhaps there is a necessity, considering the
Constitution of the present Age, that some party should remain for ever in a
state of suffering: And this being so, it is certainly agreeable to Prudence,
that those should suffer whose Religion teaches them to suffer, and who have
been so long enured thereto, who most certainly will meekly suffer, without
resisting, and who do sincerely profess, that according to their persuasion, it
is absolutely unlawful to defend their Religion, persecuted by Sovereign
Magistrates, by any other way but suffering. Notwithstanding it is probable
that these Statesmen may find small cause to boast, who have thought fit to
continue the last Ages policy, when for the gaining of a present advantage, or
preventing an inconsiderable incommodity, it was judged expedient to have
always in a readiness this mean of giving contentment to the Vulgar, by
complying with their clamours, Christian^s ad Le^nes. For they might have done
well to have some apprehensions least those Lions, after they had devoured
their destined prey, might perhaps next, with more security, and a fi^rcer
appetite, turn upon their Masters.

108. It is now at length time to say something to your Principal Proposal, in
which I am most nearly concerned, which is your wish that English Catholicks'
would give an evidence, and security of, and for their Fidelity to His Majesty,
etc. that so they may show themselves as good Subject's as those of France, who
by occasion of a seditious Book, have, you say, Sir, in a Declaration of the
Sorbon concerning the King's Independency, thus certified their resolution, in
the year 1663. (Qu^d Subd^ri fidem, etc.) That Sub^ects do so entirely owe
Faith and Obedience to their most Christian King, Page 246
that upon no pretext whatsoever they can be dispensed therefrom. For this you
commend the French: Page 9.
But as for English Catholics, they, in your judgment, do depend on the Pope
so entirely, that they have a Religion quite different from that which is
professed, and established in any other Cath^lick Country in Europe.

109. Honored Sir, it cannot indeed be denied, but that English Catholics (I
mean, Ecclesiastics) have a peculiar dependence on the Sea of Rome, more than
Catholics generally have in other Countries: For without in Authority thence
derived, they cannot come into England to sacrifice their lives for the
Spiritual assistance which Charity requires from them to their Brethren here.
But, Sir, it such a dependence be a crime, to whom (...) to be imputed? It is
c^rtain they themselves would much rather live under such Or^inary Superiors
as govern in all Catholic Countries. But this will not be allowed them, to
their great gri^f. It cannot therefore be helped, but they must either r^nounce
Ch^istian Charity, and suffer their poor Countrymen to starve for want of
Spiritual Nourishment, or apply themselves to (...), who alone, as the case now
stands, can give them a Mission and Authority to die for Faith and Charity.

110. But, Sir, I cannot conceive how such a special dependence as this should
move you to think that we are of a Religion quite different from that of other
Catholics abroad. For whatsoever Jurisdiction our Priests do exercise, it is
the very same which, in case there were any Catholic Bishops in England, would
have been conferred by them: No other Commission have they, no particular
engagement to the Pope at all.

111. I might therefore, if I would, contrive a Form of Profession of Loyalty,
and such a one as I am confident could not with reason be excepted against. I
might do this if I would: but truly I desire to be excused, for I will not do
it. First, because, as to your self, there is no need: For, Honored Sir, you
have done it your self for us all, and for the whole Kingdom. You are satisfied
with the Declaration of the King of France his Independency, lately made by the
Sorbon, importing, That Subjects owe to their King such Fidelity and Obedience,
as that upon no pretense whatsoever they can be dispensed therefrom. You, Sir,
judge this to be a sufficient engagement; and truly so it is: And can you
suspect any English Catholic unwilling to subscribe to such a Declaration, if
legally tendered to him? I would to God you could as easily persuade all the
rest of the Kings Subjects to do the like, and with as much sincerity. But by
this your easiness to be satisfied in a matter of this nature, me thinks I
perceive, that, to my grief, you, Honored Sir, are not a Counselor of State,
nor a Leading Member in the Great Council of the Kingdom: For such Grandees
have not usually had any liking to Professions of Allegiance easy to be
understood, sufficient to give reasonable satisfaction, and which generally
Catholics will accept. A second reason why I will not take upon me (neither
would I advise any other Catholic) to frame a Form of such a Profession, is
because it may probably do much harm, and without question will do no good.

112. Sect. 61. supra.
And this puts me in mind of a Promise I made before to give you a Reason
(quite different from that mentioned by your self) why I wished that he, who
took care of the second Impression of my Exomologesis, had quite left out that
form of Profession of Allegiance, (as by misinformation you, Sir, said he
had.) Now my reason is, because I find by experience that not the least good,
but on the contrary very great inconveniences have been caused by the said Form
so published. You certainly have heard, Honored Sir, of the Irish
Remonstrance, which one particular officious person proposed, and a
Subscription whereto he procured, by Public Authority, to be imposed on all
Catholics in that Kingdom. It as but too well known what Commotions,
Dissentions, and scandalous Invectives on both sides this has occassioned; and
moreover, what dangers to the party which opposed him. Yet doubtless many who
had no considerable Objections to make against any clause in the said Form, yet
refused to subscribe to it, out of indignation, that one person should, without
Commission from them, take upon him to force them to cloth their Conc^p^ions
in his Expressions. Others probably there were who did not approve some of his
Phrases: (though in general they were willing enough, in an ordinary way, to
give as good testimony of their Fidelity as himself:) they perhaps thought them
unnecessarily rude, undutiful, and dis-respective to the Supreme Pastor: and
that alone will be sufficient to cause a public Condemnation of the whole
Profession: by occasion of which Condemnation, many tender conscienced
Catholics cannot avoid the being involved in terrible dangers from the Supreme
Magistrate requiring such a Subscription. All these perniciou^ Consequences
have attended the foresaid Irish Remonstrance: And in the end, please to take
notice that this Irish Remonstrance is the very same Form of Profession,
without the least alteration, which is to be found in both the Impressions of
my Exomologesis. Have I not therefore just reason to wish it had never seen the
Light? and likewise to resolve never, upon mine own judgment, to frame any
other Form of the like nature?

113. But it is very strange, Sir, that you should suspect that in England we
should have a Religion different from that of Catholics abroad, because we do
not agree upon a sufficient Form of Profession of Loyalty, since you must needs
know that very few, if any at all, would refuse Subscription to that Form
prescribed by the State; in case that unlucky word (Heretical) were blotted
out. Now, would your Conscience, Sir, permit you to condemn as Traitors all
such as are willing sincerely to take that Oath, on condition they might be
permitted in repeating it to skip over that single word, a word of no manner of
importance to the substance of the Oath? or it they might change (Heretical)
into (Contrary to the Word of God) which I verily believe was the sense
intended by King James: for so learned a Prince could not by the word
(Heretical) intend what Catholics in the Schools mean by that word, since he
knew that the Church in a General Council had never had occasion to publish a
Decision upon that subject. But whatever since was intended by King James, it
is but too certain that other Politicians contrived that word on purpose that
the Oath might be refused, as appeared when Secretary Cecill, having been
informed that fourteen Catholic Priests meeting in Fleetstreet, had given
their judgment, that the Oath, as it lay, might lawfully be taken, in great
choler told some other Privy Counselors, that they might think of contriving
a New Oath of Allegiance, since the Papists were resolved to take that which
was already made. Now it may reasonably be judged that it was on such grounds
as these that the forementioned Fourteen Priests made no scruple to determine
the lawfulness of taking the Oath as it lies, (whose judgment very many others
also at that time followed) understanding the word Heretical in the sense of
those who compiled the said Oath; since common Reason teaches, That all Oaths,
Professions and Promises, are to be understood in the sense of those who frame
and require them, and not of those upon whom they are imposed.

114. It were madness therefore in us to expect that any Oath contrived by our
selves how stringent, and how comprehensive soever, would be admitted,
especially in these times. And truly, Sir, it is a very sad case, that upon
such a pretense we should be supposed more than all Catholic Subjects in other
Nations, to be wanting in Fidelity, and to have renounced the Duty taught us by
our Catholic Ancestors, who were so far from acknowledging any Supremacy of
the Pope in Temporals, and much less any Authority in him to depose Princes,
that even in those times when Churchmen had the greatest Power in this
Kingdom, Statutes were made with the joint Votes of the Clergy, Stat 25. and
27. Edw. 3. Stat. 16. Rich. 2.
upon occasion of some Usurpations of the the Roman Court, in which the Penalty
was no less than a Praemunire against any one who without the Kings License
should make any Appeals to Rome, or submit to a Legates Jurisdiction, or upon
the Pope's Summons go out of the Kingdom, or receive any Mandats or Briefs from
Rome, or purchase Bulls for Presentiments to Churches. And, which is most
considerable, the ground of their rejecting Papal Usurpations, is thus
expressed: Ibid.
For that the Crown of England is free, and has been free from Earthly
Subjection at all times, being immediately subject to God in all things
touching the Regalities of the same, and not subject to the Pope. Moreover, one
following additional Clause deserves to be considered in the same Statute, Ibid.
viz. To this all the Bishops present, and all the Procurators of those who
were absent, unanimously assented, protesting also against the Popes
translating some Bishops, etc. This Act also was confirmed with the
Protestation of the Lords, and all the Liege Commons, Ibid.
That they would stand with the King and His ^rown, and His Regalities in the
cases aforesaid, and in all other Cases attempted against Him, His Crown and
Regality in all points to live and to die.

115. Now after all this, though I am obstinately resolved never to take on me
to frame a Form of Profession of Loyalty, nor, without a public Command, to
concur with others to the framing one; yet since you are pleased, Honored Sir,
so earnestly to demand one, and being also firmly persuaded, that it is from a
charitable and compassionate intention toward us, that you demand it, I cannot
refuse so far to comply with your curiosi^y, as to show you a Form, not made in
or for England; yet such an one as perhaps you will judge very easily
applicable to our purpose, and ratified by v^ry great Authority. And this I
conceive will be more proper, and fit for your view, because therein you will
see what judgment a whole great Catholic Kingdom has of the Popes pretended
Temporal Authority, and how little prejudice comes to a Sovereign Monarch's
Right by admitting the Spiritual Jurisdiction of the Supreme Pastor. But before
I set down the said Form, give me leave to relate a short Story regarding it.

116. You may doubtless remember, Noble Sir, that not many years since, the
Catholics being put in hope that the Poenal Laws against them would probably
be Repealed, were advised, by some worthy Friends, to prepare a clear and
candid Form of Profession of Fidelity: in the framing of which notwithstanding,
(for the causes before mentioned) they found great difficulty. Whilst
Consul^ation was had about this master, it happened that in a Conv^rsation with
my Lord Aubigny, I told him I believed I could propose a F^rm against which no
r^^sonable exception could be made on any side; and accordingly I brought one
to him, with which he was very well satisfied. I left him in a resolution to
present the said Form ^o a P^r^on of Highest Eminence, and Power in Public
Councils. A few days after, I ^ound that he had not ex^cuted that resolut^on,
and truly I remained sati^fied that there was a just reason for it. For the
s^id Eminent Person, though H^ was really desirous that favor should be
extend^d to Cath^licks so far as that the Sa^guinary Laws against them should
be abrogated: But in continuance of the ancient P^li^y He thought fit that
several other Paenal Laws should be only suspended; to the end that upon
certain occasions they might now and then be executed; and this not upon the
account of their Re^i^ion, but a suspicion of their want of Fidelity to Hi^
Majesty: Which Fidelity was ^o b^ supposed inconsistent with the Spiritual
Jurisdiction which they acknowledged in the Pope. Now in this said Form there
were three great faults, very prejudicial to such a design: (...) first, no
reasonable exception could be made against it, as insufficient. Again, it was
confidently believed that the Pope could never be induced to condemn it. And,
thirdly, it could not be doubted, but that generally Catholics would readily
subscribe to it. These things considered, it was thought fit, that the said
Form should not be presented to the foresaid Great Person, lest in stead of
satisfying, it should have incensed Him, and rendered Him our Enemy. After this
Preface, I will now subjoin the said Form of Profession of Fidelity.

117. A certain scandalous and seditious Book being published Anno Domini 1626.
the Faculty of Paris having appointed certain learned Doctors to peruse it,
they collected out of it these following Propositions.

1. That the Pope may punish Kings and Princes with Temporal Punishment: That
he may depose them, and deprive them of their Kingdoms and States for the Crime
of Heresy, and free their Subjects from their Obedience: And that this has
been always the custom of the Church. 2. That he may do the same for other
sins: if it be expedient: if Princes are negligent: if they be incapable or
unprofitable. 3. That the Pope has Power over all things Spiritual, and over
all things Temporal: And that he has such Power by Divine Right. 4. That we
ought to believe that a Power has been given to the Church, and to her
Sovereign Pastor, to punish with Temporal Punishment [Princes] who sin against
Divine and Humane Laws: particularly i^ their Crime be Heresy. 5. That the
Apostles were indeed de facto subject to Secular Powers, but not de jure: And
as soon as the Pontifical Majesty became established, all Princes became
subject thereto. 6. That those words of Jesus Christ to his Apostles,
Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, etc. are to be
understood, not of a Spiritual Power only, but also of a Temporal.
118. Now the Censure given by the Faculty touching the Doctrine contained in
these Propositions, is, That it is new, false, erroneous, and contrary to the
Word of God: That it renders the Sovereign Pontifical Dignity odious, and opens
a way to Schism: That it derogates from the Sovereign Authority of Kings, which
d^pends on God alone: That it hinders the Conversion of Infidel, and Heretical
Princes: That it troubles the Public Peace, and overthrows Kingdoms, States,
and Republic: In a word, that it withdraws Subjects from the Obedience which
they owe to their Sov^r^igns, and induc^s them to Factio^s, Rebellions, and
Seditions, and to attempt on the Lives of their Princes. Moreover, the like
Censure was given by eight other Vnivers^ties in France.

119. B^ pleased now, H^noured Sir, to judge in case a Subscription to this
Censure were required from Catholics, and performed by them, whether that
would not be a testimony of their Fidelity far more full and satisfactory than
can be given by taking the Oath of Allegiance? The enormous Power which some
Canonists and flattering Scho^l-men bestow on the Pope, is far more distinctly
declared, and the renouncing of it in its whole Latitude more express and
emphatical, here is likewise among the Brands given to such detestable
Doctrines, not forgotten a term equivalent to what, I am confident, you mean by
[ Heretical] which is [ contrary to the Word of God:] yet such a
Supererogation, I doubt, would not be accepted. And moreover, it is more than
probable that scarce any Catholic in England would have a scruple to submit
his own private judgment (in case it were di^^erent) to a Decision made by the
Flow^r of all the Learning of France, to which may be added also, the Sages of
the Law there, for the Parliament of Paris at the same time published a like
Condemnation of the same Positions.

120. Now in case that two or three serupulous Catholics, suspecting that the
English Catholic Clergy have not been as yet sufficiently instructed in the
Fundamental Morality of Christianity, should endeavor to procure a Bull from
Rome to Citechize them, it would certainly be in vain, for the Pope is too
charitable, and too wise to be tempted to condemn that in England, which he has
for the space of almost fifty years permitted in France, without the least
pub^ick testimony of his disapprobation.

121. To put an end to this very important subject, give me leave to beseech
you, hon^ured Sir, to take this matter somewhat to heart: or rather^ since it
is a Case of Conscience fitter to be stated by your now acquired friend Dr.
Stillingfleet to recommend it to him, who being acknowledged by you to be so
every way an accomplish^d Divine, can best resolve it, yea, I think is bound to
do it. For certain it is, that his Book, whatever his int^ntion was, has
contributed much to the present Calamities of Catholics, and to more then a
renewing all the terrible Laws against them. And permit me likewise to add,
that your Book, Sir, will prob^bly give a superpondium thereto, since you
expressly charge our Priests with non-fidelity to his Majesty, upon the point of
Ordination.

122. These things considered, I being now absolutely persuaded, that you
cannot possibly judge those to be Traitors who are ready to take the Oath of
Allegiance, if they might omit the word (Heretical:) and with that, the Oath
also mentioned in the 114. Paragraph commended by you; yea, moreover to
subscribe to this Censure of the Faculty of Paris: thereto also adding this
consideration, that the Bishops abroad, who confer Orders, would have refused
them to any whom they believed so ill principled as to think such Oaths, and
such a Subscription unlawful: being farther persuaded, that Dr. Stillingfleet
must, in despite of his own reason^ be of the same judgment: let me humbly beg
of you, for your own better security, to propose this Case to him, Whether
Christian Charity does not require from you, to let the world know, that (upon
condition what is here said will be averred generally by English Catholics)
you do not now think, that by receiving Orders bey^nd Sea, English Priests
become justly punishable as Traitors, or Catholics suspected as wanting in
Fidelity to his Majesty.

123. I might likewise propose a like case to him concerning himself, were it
not that instead of an Answer, I should provoke him to invent some new jest
upon S. Benedict, Sancta Sophia, or poor M^ther Iuliana. But, Honored Sir,
you, who doubtless have now a special interest in him may do a friendly part to
desire him to consider (since it is most certain that Catholics are able and
ready to give far better security of their Fidelity to his Majesty, and their
peaceable Conversation, than any of his ancient Friends of what S^ct soever)
what in this case the Office of a Preacher of the Gospel of peace requires from
him.

124. H^ cannot but acknowledge, that upon a supposition that Ordination abroad
does not in the least measure render English Priests defective in their duties
to the Civil Magistrate: It will follow, that whatsoever punishment is
inflicted on them upon such an account, is not inflicted according to the Rule
of Justice, and by consequence that whatsoever blood shall be shed, the guilt
of it before God will be imputed to the whole Kingdom, since it is shed by
virtue of the who^e Kingdoms votes, and consent given long since, upon motives
long since ceased. Such a supposition now being made, ought not he to employ
his best skill, learning, and eloquence in his Sermons, or Writings for the
freeing the whole Kingdom from such guilt?

125. He being therefore obliged to Preach frequently at Court, would it not
well suit with his Profession to -- but I must not meddle with the Court, Amos
7.13.
or the King's Chapel: a Prophet forbids me. Probably he will have occasion to
Preach before the Honorable Court of Parliament: ought not he in such an
occasion -- but it is dangerous likewise to ask questions in such a case: let
Preaching therefore alone: At least he may be put in mind that, I think, within
his Parish there are residing some of the Honorable Judges of the Law, of whom
there are scarce any who have not a great esteem of him. There can surely be
then no danger, i^ ^n discharge of a good conscience, he should, in private
discourse, desire them to inform themselves exactly of the state of Eng^ish
Catho^ick Priests, since it is much to be feared, that the vulgar opinion
concerning them is not well grounded; as he may evidently demonstrate by what
has been here declared. If they reply, There is no remedy; Iu^^, 19.7.
we have a Law, and by our Law they must die, as Traitors. May it not be
answered, Dan. 6.12.
The Medes and Persians also had an unchangeable Law, that every one who should
ask a petition of any God or Man, within a certain time, except of the King,
should be cast into the Den of Lions. The penalty of which Law, in despite of
the merciful King's Interc^ssion, was executed on Daniel, Which execution I am
consident is condemned as an Act of great Ty^anny, and injustice by our
Honorable Judges themselves. Yet Daniel without any Trans^ression of that Law,
or the least danger to himself, might have performed as effectually his duty to
God, if he would have contented himself with praying interiourly: this he might
have done all day long if he had pleased: for the Law could not judge thoughts.
But he scorned to omit, out of fear, his usual practice of praying openly
(perhaps with his Family) three times every day. But the case of Priests is
much diff^rent: for being called by God, and consecrated to that office, they
must, notwithstanding any humane Law, or any punishment threatened, daily, and
hourly expose themselves for the spiritual good of souls committed to their
charge.

126. But after all that can be alleged in defense of Priests, it is certain
that Judges cannot dispense with the Laws, if they have tender Consciences,
they may prefer a care of them before gain: but they are not Masters of the
Laws. However the charitable Doctor may suggest to them, that though they
cannot spare Delinquents legally convicted, yet Charity requires, that in
matters wherein men's lives, and the Judges souls are deeply concerned,
probabilities, and suspicions should not be esteemed legal convictions. The
ignorant Jury thinks a person sufficiently conv^ct^d, in case a witness depose,
that he has in Confession received Absolution from him; or that he has been
present at his Mass: yet neither of these are a legal Conviction: for the
Church of England prescribes Orders for Confession, and a Form of Priestly
Abs^lution: and again, every year in France, and Spain, a thousand times
persons not yet ordained may be seen habited like Priests at the Altar, with
all prescribed Ceremonies, practicing the reciting those words, and performing
those actions and Ceremonies which the bystanders can judge to be no other but
the celebrating Mass: yet in reality there is no such thing done, no
consecration at all made, nor any thing performed but what may be as well done
by any Lay-person of either Sex. It is not saying Mass, or hearing Confessions
therefore that the Law condemns, and against which it denounces death, but only
the receiving Priestly Orders beyond the Seas from an Authority derived from
the Church of Rome^ This thing alone in England is declared Treason, and by
consequence no truly legal Conviction can be, without the deposition of
Witnesses who can testify the time, place, and Bishop, when, where, and from
whom the accused Person received Holy Orders.

127. Honored Sir, you will have the goodness to pardon so prolix an assertion
of the innocence of our Catholic Priests, and consequently of all committed to
their care, since your self obliged me to it, having in your Animadversions so
often, and largely expressed your opinion that they could not clear themselv^s
from a just suspicion of Disloyalty, to which they are more obnoxious than any
Catholics in other Countries. Whereas it is most certain, that not any of his
Majesty's Subjects, nor any Catholics abroad, can (if by Authority required)
give more unanswerable proo^s of their Fidelity, and very few in our Nation ^if
any) equal. Whence it follows, that whatsoever we suffer, it is purely for our
Religion, and the Catholic Faith that we suffer.

. 12. Humble Thanks for good Counsel.
128. I will conclude this Apology with humble thanks, Page 237 238.
Noble Sir, for the double ^dvice you think fit to give me toward the l^^ter
end of your Animadversions; and I do also promise conformity to them, to the
u^most of my skill and power. The first Advice has reference to my self purely:
The second to the Cause. First, therefore you counsel me, having once been a
Son ^f the Church of England, and obli^ed t^ her for my Education, etc. but n^w
out of Conscience separated from her external Communion, at least to live
fairly, and civilly toward her, and to all^w some beauty to have been in the
Church which detained me so long: and much more in writing on controverted
Points to abstain from revilings, etc.

129. Sir, Obedience to this Advice is very easy to me, who never intended to
be guilty of such ingratitude, and dising^nuous an humor as reviling the
Church of England, and I extremely wondered when I read it in your
Animadversions with such atrocity imputed to me. But by the way, I beseech you
once more, not to confound Dr. Stillingfleet's Church with the Church of
England, est^blish^d by Law. F^r the ^uture, though Age, and a sharp Infirmi^y
which summons me to prepare an Account of all my Actions to the Supreme Judge,
ought, and will suggest to my thoughts meditations of another subject, more
seasonable than Controversy: yet in c^se God, by my Superiors, shall engage
me in renewing Disputes for defense of his Catholic Truth and church, I here
oblige my self to be so wary in the managing of them, that the most jealously
tender Protestant shall not have cause to be dissatisfied: and the like caution
I shall observe (if it be possible) in s^parating the Cause of your Church from
that of other Sects, who will needs, in despite of you, invade the Title of
Protestants of the Church of England.

130. Your second Advice, Sir, is, that I should contract the Controversy,
into what concerns the Church of England soly, that is, to what is contained in
the Articles and Policy thereof, without making sallies against Presbyterians,
Independents, etc.

131. Truly nothing is more reasonable than this Advice: yet, withal, nothing
more difficult than a conformity thereto: because it does not depend on me; and
therefore I dare not promise obedience thereto. The only Book wherein the
occasion and argument of it permitted me to oppose the Church of England was my
Exomologesis, and therein I am sure nothing was treated but what was peculiarly
essential to your Church. As for other Books wherein I was only a Defender, I
was at the mercy of my Adversary, who, if he wandered into Exotic opinions, I
could not help it, I was to be upon my guard, as well against transverse, as
direct blows.

132. This were, Sir, an Advice very fit to have been given to Dr.
Stillingfleet: and truly it would be very convenient, if it would please you to
make use, even now at last, of the Interest and Power you deserve to have with
him, to counsel him to deal so with the Catholic Church as you would have us
to do with the English. He has scope sufficient allowed him, for he may attaque
not the Council of Trent only, but all other Councils both General and
Provincial received by Catholics. And in case he think it unreasonable that
all the pains taken by himself, or his friends, in collecting recreative matter
for the Consolation of his Parishi^ners, or of Country Gentlewomen should be
lost: If he have more stories to make sport withal, concerning Saints,
Classical or Heteroclites, (as no doubt he may find enough for a Book in folio)
or if he can furnish the Press with examples of some particular persons guilty
of Superstitious usage of Images; or of exotic Opinions touching Indulgences,
Confession, Purgatory, etc. it is pity such costly materials should be cast
away: Let the World see them, in God's Name, (if he have the Conscience to
pretend so) but let it not be in a Book of Controversy: unless in relating
such fopperies he will also, as becomes a person who would be esteemed
ingenuous, declare that the Catholic Church approves not such ridiculous
stories, or exotic Opinions, and that she expressly condemns superstitious
practices about Images, and sordidly gainful usages of Indulgences. Now, Sir,
when English Protestants, and particularly Dr. Stillingfleet, writing not only
in quality of an English Protestant, but of the Champion of the Church of
England, assaults the Catholic Church with such Engines, what would you advise
Catholic Answerers to do? Must we say nothing but what concerns directly the
Articles or Constitutions of the Church of England? Truly that were the best
course, which also I purpose (if it be possible^) to take: and withal to
neglect whatsoever he pretends to confute, as the Doctrines of Catholics,
unless they can be showed to be the Decisions of the Council of Trent, or other
received Councils. To conclude this matter, You, Honored Sir, profess to
acknowledge the Doctor a Legitimate Champion of the English Church, and that
you are exceedingly delighted with the softness, gentleness, and civility of
his Language, Let this, I beseech you, Sir, invite you to read over once more
his Book, which being done, I shall be exceedingly mistaken, if being demanded
seriously in private by an intimate Friend your Judgment, you will not confess,
that what he writes in defense of the necessary Doctrine of the Church of
England, and in opposition to the necessary Doctrine of the Catholic Church,
will scarce suffice to fill up the void Pages of art Almanac.

132. Give me leave to insert here a forgotten passage of yours, and a
Consideration upon it: Page 148
You say, Sir, That the Council of Trent is not yet received in France, and in
many other Catholic Countries. Under favor, Honored Sir, you will, I
suppose, grant, that the late famous and learned Archbishop of Paris, Peter de
Marca, Pet. de Marca, lib. 2. c. 17. S. 6.
was better informed in the Ecclesiastical State of France, than your self a
Stranger: Now in his Volume de Concordia Sacerdotii and Imperii, he writes
expressly, The Definitions of Faith of the Council of Trent were admitted by a
Public Edict made concerning the same matter in the year 1579. But the Decrees
which regard Discipline are not received in France, because they are not
ratified by the Law of the Prince: Although the chief Heads, which do not
infringe the received Customs and ancient Rights of the Gallican Church, are
comprehended in Regal Constitutions, several times published concerning that
matter. Which thing, how grateful and acceptable it was to Pope Clement the
Eighth, is testified by the late King Henry the Great, in his Rescript of the
year 1606. Besides de Marca, a late learned Writer Cabassutius, Cabassut.
Notitia Council. in fine.
an Oratorian, declares out of the Records, of the French Clergy, that in their
General Assembly at Paris in the year 1615. the Canons of Doctrine of the
Council of Trent were unanimously received by the whole Clergy. And long before
that, even from the rising of the said Council, each particular Bishop had
received it in their respective Diocesan Synods. Thus, Sir, you see a
sufficient reception of the Faith delivered by the Council of Trent in France,
both by Authority Episcopal and Regal.

133. Thus, Sir, God be thanked, I am come to an end of an Apology, perhaps as
ungrateful to my self, as it can be to you: For were it not that many others,
better than my self, were concerned in the Accusations, I should have been
contented to have spared so much pains for declining the Worlds ill opinion of
me: Non enim a vobis judicabor, aut ab humano die. And now all is done, I do
not expect, nor so much as desire, to be esteemed by your self, Honored Sir,
or by any others, altogether innocent. Though my Reason tells me, that the
imputing such horrible Crimes to the whole Church of God, (not the Western
only) and our Accusers taking so unhappy a time, did deserve some resentment:
yet I am willing enough it should be believed, that such a resentment has been
expressed with a p^ssion not too carefully moderated, and too long continued.
But such is the nature of disquieting Passions, though Reason may put them
first in motion, unless the same Reason be continually watchful over them,
their motion natural^y will become more and more violent and impetuous.

134. Another proof of this I beg leave with all due respect, Noble Sir, to
borrow from your self. Your tender respect to the Church, of which you are a
Member, suggested to you, that the boldness I had taken to give a homely and
disrespectful Character to Dr. Stilling fleet's Church, was directed in my
intention against the Church of England. This raised in your mind an
Indignation against me, which you thought sit to make known to the World. Page
5, 6.
In the beginning you assure your Readers, that whatever other faults they may
find in your Animadversions, yet they shall not find the same, of which you
complain: For you will give no body ill words, nor provoke them by contemning
their persons, etc. And accordingly at the first you are even too calm, for in
stead of Reprehensions, you heap on me far greater Commendations than I
deserve, or dare acknowledge, for my Good Nature, Civility, Good Manners,
Learning, Natural Parts, etc. till I wrote that unhappy Book against Doctor
Stillingfleet; And thereupon you promise to treat me with that candor that
becomes an old, near fifty years continued, Friend. But, alas, this promise is
quickly forgotten: For my Invectives against Doctor Stillingfleet, are only
gentle, harmless stroakings, if compared with the keen Darts and Stings which
through the rest of your whole Book are aimed against me; and which in case
they reach home, God have mercy on my Soul. For not content with the subject
mentioned in your Title Page, which is the censuring of my Book against the
Doctor, you renew almost all the same, and some more dangerous Accusations
against whatsoever I had formerly wr^tten, in which you discover (what I could
never see, and I am sure never intended) a Criminal Disrespect to His MAJESTY,
yea, strong suspicion of an intention to revoke my professed Fidelity to Him:
likewise you (or some for you) find more reviling Reproaches, and those renewed
against the Church of England, and the Protestant Clergy, and God knows how
much mischief more, all which joined together, (especially against a Person,
who, as you are pleased to say, but surely cannot legally prove, has been
Re-ordained in the Roman Church) will be more than sufficient to render me a
Victim of Public Justice, unpitied by all. Now truly, Sir, if all this will
not satisfy Doctor Stillingfleet's utmost revenge against his petulant
Adversary, certainly he has a Heart harder than the Nether Millstone.

135. Yet after all this, I believe sincerely, Honored Sir, that with, and in
the midst of all this sharpness, you have not quite forgotten your Fifty Years
Kindness, which you are pleased to call Friendship; that you gave a freer scope
to your Indignation to the end to force me either to clear my self, or by
begging pardon to be restored in some measure to your favor: And that you will
be well pleased, if in this Defense I shall have alleged any thing that may
qualify my supposed faults. As you truly judge that it was Zeal of the Honor
of the Catholic Church, a Church not only contemned, but horribly defamed by
Doctor Stillingfleet, which urged me to an unusual way of Vindication of her; I
have the same reason to judge that the like Motive produced a like effect in
you, which therefore I cannot wholly condemn: And how happy should I think my
self, if God would be graciously pleased to transfer your Zeal to the same
Object with mine?

I will conclude with an humble Request, That you would be pleased to depose
one Opinion which you seem to have entertained, which is, Page 240
That, because Catholics have been taught from the beginning, That Salvation
is only to be had in the true Catholic Church, therefore they cannot have a
Cordial Friendship to those who are not in the same Communion: On the contrary,
I do confidently assure you, That though there be one special sort of Alliance,
called by the Apostle Philadelphia, a love of Brethren, peculiar to good
Catholics among themselves: yet true Christian Charity, the Noblest kind of
Friendship, ought to be extended to all, which Charity is likewise warmed, with
a Zealous Tenderness of Compassion, toward Virtuous Protestants, our
particular Friends, considering the present danger we suppose them to be in;
and such Compassion impells us, if we have any Piety, to frequent and servent
Prayers for their Eternal Happiness.

All which effects by Gods Grace, shall never be wanting in me toward such an
Honorable (though as yet to me undiscovered) Person, who has for so many years
honored so worthless a Creature with the Title of Friend.

God Almighty have you always in His Holy Protection. So I beg leave to
subscribe my self,

Honored Sir, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant in our Lord, S. C.
From my Cell the 21 of March, Anno Dom. 1674, being the Anniversary day of St.
Benedict.

