The Two BOOKS OF John Crellius FRANCUS, Touching ONE GOD THE FATHER.

Wherein many things also concerning the Nature of the Son of God, and the Holy
Spirit are discoursed of.

Translated out of the Latin into English.

Printed in Kosmoburg, at the Sign of the Sunbeams, in the Year of our Lord,
MDCLXV.

John Crellius Minister of the Racovian Church, To the Christian Reader,
GREETING.
WE set forth not long since, Christian Reader, a Book touching God and his
Attributes, which we prefixed before the Books of John Volkelius touching the
true Religion: When we discoursed therein touching the Unity of God, it seemed
requisite to the full explication of that Unity, that we should show the most
high God to be One, not in Essence only, but also in Person, and to be no
other then the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and indeed we began to
demonstrate this with diverse Arguments, and to guard those Arguments against
such Exceptions as were either common, or somewhat more specious and plausible.
But since the Work did, as we there said, grow under our hand, we thought that
this Treatise was to be parted from the rest of the Work: For not only the
plenty of Arguments, which did of their own accord offer themselves to us out
of the Scripture, increased the bulk of our Writing; but also our desire not
willingly to omit any of those things which might seem to men to be of some
moment for the over-throwing of out Arguments.

For since, for this Opinion chiefly, touching One God the Father, though
grounded upon many most clear Testimonies of the Scripture, we are exposed to
the most bitter hatred and Persecution of all men, I thought it very expedient
to show what great injury was done unto us in this behalf; yea, how injurious
the Christian World was to it self, in so obstinately rejecting this part of
the Divine Truth; especially since there is so various and notable use of this
Doctrine in Divinity, and in the whole Christian Religion, as by the help of
God we will show in the end of these Books. Now I thought this Book to be the
more necessary, in that I saw our Men, whilst they were daily opposed by the
Adversaries, for the most part with an hostile Mind and Pen, were chiefly
busied in answering their Reasons, inserting their own Arguments commonly in
brief, and in a scattered manner here and there; inasmuch as they acted the
parts of Respondents rather than Opponents. For though certain Eminent Men in
our Church did sometimes begin to take upon them the Office of Opponents in
this Controversy; yet being diverted by other labor of Writing, they were
sorced to lay this out of their hands: Wherefore they left to us nothing but
the beginning of that Work which they undertook to this end, and which we
certain years ago did publish. Certainly it was a thing exceedingly to be
desired, that such men, far better furnished with Wit, and with Knowledge of
Divine Things, than we are, had rather finished this Work, than left it to Us
to be perfected: But inasmuch as that has not been done by them, we ought not
to suffer that it should never be accomplished. Now we might the more boldly
attempt this labor, in that the evident Truth of the Opinion, and the
multitude of most solid Arguments arising of their own accord out of the holy
Scriptures, did ease the meanness of our Wit; and in that we saw how the
Opinion it self had for so many years together been opposed by so many and so
acute Adversaries, with all sorts of Arms and Engines, to no purpose: wherefore
we took Courage from the Goodness of the Cause. Truly we hope in God and
Christ, that they who are studious of knowing the Truth, when they shall have
weighed our Arguments, will see the Truth of that Opinion that we hold; yea,
that they also whose minds are so beset and besieged with pre-conceived
Opinions, that they will at no hand give place to the Truth, will
notwithstanding perceive (if they will have but the patience to read our
Writing) that we were not moved with slight Reasons from that Opinion which
has for so many Ages been received in the Christian World; and if they have
any Equity and Humanity left in them, will cease to pursue us with so great an
hatred for so doing: For though we, relying on the Divine Help, are ready to
suffer any thing for the Truths sake; yet would it be the part of others, not
only to abstain from all bitterness of Hatred, but also to be touched with
compassion toward them whom they thought to be fallen indeed into a great
Error, but yet were driven thereinto with no slight grounds: For it is not the
part of a Christian, yea, not of a Man, when he thinks any one fallen into
some Error of Judgment, though in a weighty matter, not only to forbear in a
courteous way to raise him up out of the same, but also with a bitter spirit to
plunge him further thereinto. But let them do what they please, we in the mean
time trust in God that they shall never be able to make us repent of the
Opinion which we profess. Howbeit, Christian Reader, we beseech thee by the
love both of the Truth, and of thy own Salvation, that thou would diligently
consider the things which we write, and examine them by the Rule of Gods Word:
We crave nothing which the Apostle has not already required of thee, whilst he
commands to try all things, and hold fast that which is good. To despise and
slight those things, is altogether inconsistent with Piety: For though we
should omit other things, which are to be mentioned in their place; consider
that the Glory of God is herein concerned, the least part whereof, is greater
than the greatest of humane Affairs; whereon notwithstanding, see how much
pains all, and thou perhaps thy self do bestow. The ignorance of these
things is excusable in another, because he has perhaps wanted an opportunity
to be acquainted with them, and so is not guilty of contempt; but thou can
have no excuse for thy self before that Judge, who, that thou may no longer
be ignorant, offers thee an occasion of better information; thereby causing
that thou can not be ignorant of those things without contempt: The Divine
Truth suffers not it Self to be despised Scot-free. Thou know that of our
Savior, Luke 12.48.
To whom much is given, of him much shall be required; and with whom they have
deposited much, the more shall be expected of him. The Lord will require more
of thee than of others, because he affords thee a more ample occasion of
knowing the Truth, than to many others: Beware lest that most Righteous Judge
find thee an Unrighteous Judge in this Cause; who, when thou hear our
Adversaries every where opposing us, for the most part with Railing, rather
than Reason, do notwithstanding refuse to hear us, who defend our Selves and
our Opinion in a modest manner. But if thou farther dare to condemn our
Cause, holding that we are not only excluded out of Heaven, but ought also to
be banished out of all Countries; think with thy self, that to condemn Men
before their Cause is heard, is to condemn them as innocent. Neither will it be
enough for thee to refer the labor of examining unto others, so as to follow
their Judgment without thine own; Think that thou thy self must answer for thy
self: Thou, thou, I say, according to thy Understanding and Opportunity,
ought to try all things, and hold fast that which is good: For, shall thou
commit all things unto others? take heed, and that very diligently, lest thou
commit thy self and thy Salvation unto men either negligent, or puffed up with
an Opinion of Learning and Knowledge, or wholly addicted to humane Authority
and pre-conceived Opinion, or otherwise obstinate, and not knowing how to
yield; or loving their own quiet and security, rather than their own or others
Salvation; or cowardly, and not daring to utter their Opinion: In short, lest
blindly following blind Guides, thou fall with them into the Ditch. Think not
they are Godly, and Lovers of the Truth, whom I follow: For to omit that this
Opinion concerning others is oftentimes confuted by their manners and Actions,
there are many hiding holes of Vices, and private Closets in the Breasts of Men,
into which none but God and Christ can penetrate; so that we are in greater
danger of mistaking in our Judgment concerning other men's Piety, when we go
this way to work, than if the question only is concerning an Opinion,
concerning which we dare not pass Sentence. Neither can thou say, These
things are too subtle for my Understanding: For, if thou considerest the
Opinion it self, whereof we here dispute, what is more plain and simple than
it? for, what does it contain above that which is called the Apostles Creed,
which Children are acquainted with? namely, that that One God is no other than
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. If you look upon the Arguments which we
have drawn out of the Scriptures, they are of themselves plain and easy; so
that the Adversaries can no other way decline their force, than by turning away
from the simplicity of the Word, and endeavoring to draw us away from the
same: Yea, those Arguments which we have fetched from Reason, if you except a
few which we have added for the sake of Learned Men, are so clear, that one
must rather offer violence to his Reason and Understanding, that he may not
admit the force of them, than use any great intention of Mind to understand
them. But perhaps, if any thing occur in the defense of the Arguments fetched
out of the Scripture, which may to a Man unskilled in the Art of Disputing,
seem somewhat subtle, he may pass it by: for the other things which may
easily be understood by every one, we are confident will be sufficient for him
to pass sentence concerning this Cause: Though we have so tempered this whole
kind of Writing, that all things may be understood by a man indifferently
versed in Learning; even those which in the second Book we have culled out of
Philosophy, and the received Opinion of the Schools. Neither indeed is it to be
imputed to us, if now and then we speak something which the ruder sort may
call subtle, but to the Adversaries; who, as we have said, do draw us away
from the simplicity both of the Words and meaning of the Spirit of God, which
Reason does dictate to the unlearned themselves, and by the subtilties of
distinctions endeavor to elude the most plain Arguments which we produce for
our Opinion: Wherefore we friendly admonish and beseech all them to whom this
Writing of ours shall come, that they would diligently weigh and examine our
Words by the Balance of the Divine Oracles, and offer no violence to their
conscience, when they have found the Truth, and so either by resisting it, or
perpetually burying it in silence, increase their own and others servitude; but
use diligence to draw Others, partly to the truer Opinion partly to more
moderate Counsels, and as much as in them lies, cause that all may dare to
erect their Mind to a free Inquiry touching sacred Matters, and to lift up
their Eyes to the Light thereof: And that so through the whole World, Men may
with Piety of Mind, Mouth, and Life, praise that One God the Father, of whom
are all things; and that One Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things: To Him
be Glory and Power for ever and ever.

AMEN.
The Scope AND DISTRIBUTION OF THE WORK.
THe scope of this our Work is to show, That the most High God is no other
besides the Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Now we will divide the
whole Work into two Books: In the first we will confirm our Opinion with
Scripture-Testimonies, and Arguments drawn thence; In the latter we will make
use of other sufficient Reasons to prove the same, and refute the contrary;
Though even there we will now and then recall the Reader to the Scriptures. But
in the former part of the Work, we will so proceed, as that we will first
directly prove, That only the Father of Jesus Christ is the most high God; and
that partly by those Testimonies of the sacred. Scripture which make open
mention of the Father; Partly by those wherein the Name of the Father is not
indeed expressed, yet is he truly spoken of. Then will we demonstrate the same
indirectly, as they say; when we shall show out of the same holy Scripture,
That neither Christ, whom otherwise we confess to be by the Gift of the Father
a God over all, to be blessed for evermore, is the most High God; nor the Holy
Spirit, whom we will prove to be the Virtue and Efficacy of the most High God.
Book 1. Sect. 3. Chap. 5. For so it will remain that the Father only is the
most High God; since no other else can be imagined.

Touching ONE GOD The Father. from Joh. 17.3.
THE FIRST BOOK.
SECT. I.
Wherein is directly proved that only the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is
the most High God; and first out of those Testimonies of the Sacred Scriptures
which speak expressly of the Father.

CHAP. I.
The first Argument from the words of Christ, John 17.3. This is Life eternal,
that they might know thee (Father) the Only true God, and whom thou have sent,
Jesus Christ.

THe first Testimony therefore, and Argument of our Opinion, shall be that of
Christ himself, speaking to his Father in these words, This is Life eternal,
etc. Here none doubts that by the Name of the true God, is understood the
most high God. Wherefore since Christ so describes the Father, as to call him
the Only true God, it is understood that only the Father of Christ is the
most High God.

The Defense of the Argument.
The first Answer to the Argument and the Refutation.
MAny there are, who forced by the evidence of the Words, grant all that which
we say, but not to the same purpose: For they say, that the Father is not
therefore called the only true God, to excl^de the Son and holy Spirit from the
same Godhead; but only to exclude Idols, or the false Gods of the Heathen. For
that here the TRUE God is opposed to false ones. And indeed it is true, that
only the Father is therefore called the true God, to exclude them from true
Godhead, who were then falsely esteemed and worshipped for gods: but
nevertheless, it is done by Christ in such a manner, as is of larger extent,
and excludes not only them, but all others also, besides the Father, from the
most high Godhead.

Wherefore it is given us to understand, that if the most high Godhead is
attributed to any one besides the Father of Jesus Christ, it is done
erroneously. Now as for that which we assert, both the force of the words, and
the occasion or cause intimated by the Adversaries themselves does require. For
as to the first, such is the force of the word, ONLY, as that it excludes all
others from the communion of the predicate, besides him to whom it is applied.
But he to whom the word ONLY, if you consider the sense (for we will afterward
speak of the construction of the words) is applied, is the Father of Jesus
Christ, as they themselves confess; with whom we have now to do. And the
Predicate is, THE TRUE GOD, or the Most High God: Wherefore the word ONLY does
from the communion of the Predicate, exclude all besides the Father, and
consequently Christ and the holy Spirit. As to the latter; either therefore the
gods of the Heathen, are by these words of Christ understood to be excluded
from true Godhead, because it is apparent that they are different from the
Father, whom Christ calls the only true God; or because it is already
apparent that they are false gods. Not for the latter cause, for otherwise they
would be judged already excluded from true Godhead, before they were understood
to be excluded by virtue of the words of Christ, nor would there be need to
make use of these words to that purpose. If for the former cause, it is
necessary that all, who are apparently different from the Father of Jesus
Christ, should be excluded from that true or most high Godhead; for otherwise
the Argument which should from these words be drawn to exclude the Idols of the
Heathen from the true Godhead, would be invalid. For it would be thus, if it
should by way of Syllogism be proposed: some different from the Father of Jesus
Christ, are not the true God. The Idols of the Heathen are different from the
Father of Jesus Christ; therefore are not the true god. The Major would be
particular in the first figure, which makes the consequence invalid. Wherefore
although the false Opinion of the Heathen touching their Idols, gave occasion
to Christ, to call his Father the only true God, yet did he so shape his words,
that others also might be excluded from that true Godhead? and not only they,
to whom supreme Godhead was then falsely attributed, but such also to whom the
same might in time to come be likewise falsely attributed. For, that we may add
this also, who doubts that Peter (for example) Paul, Gabriel, Michael, are by
virtue of these words of Christ, strongly excluded from the most high Godhead?
But there was then none, that held them to be most high Gods; nor consequently
did Christ specially intend, to exclude them from the Deity. Wherefore the
force of the words and meaning is of a larger extent than the occasion of them,
and is rightly drawn forth to others likewise, besides the Idols of the
Gentiles. Neither may any one here say, that therefore not only the Idols of
the Gentiles, but also those Men and Angels, are by virtue of these words,
excluded from the most high Godhead, because they are not of the same essence
or substance, but that the Son and holy Spirit are not excluded, because they
are of the same Essence with the Father; Since it is agreeable, if any thing be
attributed to the Father only, that those persons should not be excluded from
the communion thereof, which have the same numerical substance: For besides,
that this is indeed nothing else than to take that for granted which is most in
controversy; when Christ called his Father the only true God, he meant no less
the only Person of the Father, then the Essence or Substance, and consequently
no less excluded them from that true and most high Godhead, who were different
Persons from the Father, then who were different Substances. For Christ uses a
popular kind of speaking, and applies himself to the capacity of his
Disciples. For therefore he with a clear voice uttered Prayers to the Father in
their presence, that he might both instruct and comfort them no less with this
supplication to the Father, then he had formerly by speaking to them. But among
the people, yea among all, THE FATHER ONLY does no less denote the only person
of the Father, then the Substance; and consequently does no less exclude all
different persons from the Father, than Substances. Besides, when the Vulgar
think of a Person different from the Father, they also presently think of a
Substance different from him. Where they conceive one Substance, they cannot
think of a different Person. Certainly concerning Moods, Subsistences,
Suppositalities and Personalities, which existing in the same numerical
Substance, do constitute Persons really distinct, even at this day the vulgar
sort of Christians do not think: so unlikely is it, that heretofore among the
Jews, even Fishermen did know them.

Wherefore if Christ fitting himself to the capacity of the Vulgar, would have
all different Substances from the Father, be excluded from the most high
Godhead, he would also have all different Persons from the Father excluded from
the same. Whence we are given to understand that in these words, the contrary
to what is urged in this exception, is rather taken for granted, namely, that
he who is distinguished in Person from the Father, as Christ is, is also
distinguished from him in Substance; and consequently, by virtue of these words
of Christ, are excluded from that true and most high Godhead.

And this is so much the more to be believed touching Christ, in that the
Disciples, who were then present, did not only see him to be a true man, but
also heard him distinguished from the Father, as a Messenger from the Sender;
and also that he poured out prayers unto the same, and begged glory of him.
Again, if none by virtue of these words of Christ, is excluded from the true
Godhead, although he manifestly differ in person from the Father, unless it be
also apparent that he is different from him in Essence, it will follow, that he
cannot be confuted by these words, who shall say, that Gabriel (for example)
Peter, Paul, or finally Jupiter, Neptune, or the other gods of the Heathen, are
the true God, differing indeed from the Father in Persons, but yet of the same
Essence with him; namely, in such a manner, as they commonly think of Christ,
or the holy Spirit.

But who sees not that such Persons, whether true or feigned, are by virtue of
these words of Christ, most efficaciously excluded from the Deity, so that one
confess them to be DIVERSE from the Father.

But they say, that we our selves contend, that if any thing be attributed to
God only, it is not presently denied to them, who depend on him, or are
subordinate to him, in the number of whom we rank Christ. Wherefore although
the FATHER ONLY be called the true God, yet is not Christ presently denied to
be a true God. As neither when God only is said to be Romans 16.27. 1 Timothy 1.17.
Jude 25
wise, or 1 Timothy 6.15.
potent, or to have Ibid. ver. 16.
Immortality, are they excluded from these attributes, who have received them
from God? But this Objection, if the thing be rightly understood, is so far
from overthrowing our Opinion and Argumentation from the words of Christ, that
it does confirm it. For neither do we hold, that Christ is by virtue of these
words wholly excluded from true Godhead; namely, if true Godhead be more largely
taken, so as to comprehend that Godhead also, which does indeed, and not only,
in the false opinion of men, depend on the most high Godhead. Chap. 13. Chap.
8, and 9.
For we have shown in our Book of God and his Attributes, that the name GOD, is
in its own Nature common, and agrees to all them, who have so^e sublime
Empire, or eminent Power; as to Princes and Magistrates on the Earth; in the
Heavens, to Angels; and above all these, to Christ, the Head of all Angels, and
King of all kings; but by way of Excellency to that Supreme and Independent
Monarch, and attributed to him as proper. Wherefore our meaning only is, that
Christ, by virtue of the words in contest, is excluded from that true Deity, by
way of excellency so called; that is, from Supreme and Independent Deity. For
by these words, first, all besides the Father are held to be excluded from
Supreme Godhead; and consequently, from Deity taken more largely, all such who
have not received it from the Father; to whom alone supreme and independent
Divinity is said to agree. For he is accounted as Independent, who does not
depend on him, on whom only he can truly depend. Whence all the Idols of the
Gentiles, are by virtue of these words, or rather, of the sense therein
comprehended, simply excluded from true Godhead; since they were so far from
truly depending on the Father, as that they were not believed to depend. But
Christ is not excluded therefrom, because his dependence on the Father, in
respect of his Divine Empire over all things, and Worship suitable to such an
Empire, has by most evident proofs been demonstrated.

Now what we speak touching this place, does likewise come to pass in others,
wherein such Attributes are attributed to God only; which nevertheless are
communicated to others besides him. For in them likewise, all besides God are
excluded from the Communion of those Attributes taken by way of excellency, and
strictly. For God is said to be only wise, powerful, having Immortality, not
because he alone is simply wise, powerful, immortal, but because he is only
such of himself. And therefore all others besides God, are by virtue of such
words, excluded from independent and underived Wisdom, Power and Immortality;
and then at length simply and universally excluded from those Attributes, when
it is apparent that they have not received them from God, to whom they first
agree, and consequently do not herein indeed depend on him. A seigned
Dependency, is by right accounted for nothing. Whence it is understood, what
our meaning is, when we say, That if any thing is in the Scripture attributed
to God only, it is not presently denied to them, who are dependent on God, and
subordinate to him: For we mean not that such Attributes are in no wise denied
unto them; (for they are denied unto them being taken by way of Excellency) but
that they are not presently denied simply and universally, or in a larger
signification.

But perhaps they with whom we now have to do, will object and say, that they
do in some sort hold the same: For that the Father only is called the true or
most high God, because he is the Fountain of Divinity, and consequently in
regard thereof has a Prerogative above the Son and holy Spirit, inasmuch as
They have the Divine Essence from Him, but He from no other. For which reason
they expressly call the Father God of himself, thereby opposing him to the Son
and holy Spirit. But they who answer thus, either contradict themselves, or say
nothing; and obtrude upon us bare words instead of things: for if the Father
has a true Prerogative or Excellency above the Son and holy Spirit, so that
for it the Name of GOD may be attributed to the Father alone, but taken away
from the Son and holy Spirit; it cannot be that the Son and holy Spirit should
be the supreme and most high God: for nothing in any wise more worthy, nothing
more excellent than the most high God, can possibly be imagined: And they
themselves, in Athanasius's Creed, contend that in the Trinity nothing is
before or after, nothing greater or less: But if the Father is the Fountain of
Divinity, in respect of the Son and holy Spirit, how will there be the same
Numerical Divinity of the Father, Son, and holy Spirit? for the Father would be
the Fountain of his own Divinity, or Divine Essence, before and after himself:
How, if the Father be the Fountain of the other Persons, shall not the Son and
holy Spirit depend on the Father? How shall not each be an Effect of the
Father? and finally, How shall the Son and holy Spirit be the supreme and most
high God? for He is dependent on none, is the Effect of none. But if they will
not acknowledge these things, what else do they, then obtrude upon us empty
words instead of things, and so say nothing? and upon what ground, I pray, dare
they to this purpose wrest the words of the Scripture, which are most plain,
and exposed to the capacity of the rudest understanding? for how can an
ignorant man (that I may not now speak any thing of the Learned) conceive in
his mind that the Father only is the most high God, when in the mean time he is
commanded to believe that also the Son and holy Spirit is the same most high
God? How can he imagine a Prerogative of any one above one who is the most high
God? How the Prerogative of him above one who is the same Numerical God with
himself? How him to be the Fountain of other Persons, on whom they do not
depend as Effects on a Cause? Certainly this is not to teach an ignorant man,
but quite to take away his Understanding, and to cause that he who comprehended
something, does now comprehend nothing at all: Which will also happen to
learned Men, if they will endeaver to consider things, and rather conceive them
in their mind, then to cozen themselves and others with a mere sound of words.
By this also it may easily be understood, how we ought to answer them who say
that the Name of GOD is by an attribution or an appropriation, as they speak,
both here and elsewhere ascribed to the Father, and that, as we now suppose, to
him only: for either they grant that the Name of GOD is by reason of the
Prerogative which the Father has above the Son and holy Spirit, attributed to
him only as proper, and so tacitly taken away from the Son and holy Spirit; or
without any regard to that Prerogative: If the first, how they may be refuted,
we have already spoken; if the latter, they shall be able to show by no
sufficient Example, out of either sacred or profane Writers, or out of the
vulgar Custom of speaking, that an Attribute equally common to Many, may be
rightly ascribed to but One of them, in such a manner as that it may be said to
agree to him ONLY. Wherefore no regard is to be had to such an attribution in
these words of Christ.

The second answer to the Argument.
But now let us refute other things which are wont to be alleged by way of
answer to this first Testimony of our Opinion. There are therefore some who
deny that the words of Christ before cited, contain this Opinion, which is
admitted by others, namely, That the Father Only is the true God; for they
explain the Words in another, and that a twofold way: Some say that the word
ONLY does not belong to the Subject of Christ's words, which if we consider the
sense is the Father, but to the Predicate, namely, The TRUE GOD, for that
Christ does say, That THE FATHER IS THE ONLY TRUE GOD, and not THE FATHER ONLY
IS THE TRUE GOD: Which first proposition does not hinder, but that the Son
also, or the holy Spirit may be called the True God, yea, the Only True God:
Inasmuch as these Propositions are not repugnant one to the other, the Father
is the only true God, and the Son or the holy Spirit is the true God, or the
only true God. But The third Answer to the Argument.
others contend that these words are so to be ordered and construed, that the
sense may be, THIS IS LIFE ETERNAL, THAT THEY KNOW THEE, AND WHOM THOU HAVE
SENT JESUS CHRIST, TO BE THE ONLY TRVE GOD: So that these words are so far from
excluding Christ from supreme Deity, that they rather are to be thought
expressly to attribute the same unto him; Which Answers, what weight they carry
with them, let us fee.

As to the first therefore, they are exceedingly mistaken: The confutation of
the second Answer.
for the Adjective ONLY, as often as it is employed to exclude other Subjects
from the communion of the Predicate, belongs to the Subject, not the Predicate.
Now that in this place the word Only is employed to exclude other Subjects,
namely, Idols, from the communion the Predicate, which is the True God, all the
Adversaries contend; wherefore it belongs not to the Predicate, but to the
Subject, which, if we consider the sense, is none but the Father. And that you
may more plainly perceive the thing, see whether by our or their opinion, the
Idols or gods of the Gentiles are strongly excluded from true Deity: If you
follow our Opinion, the business is dispatched* for, if Only the Father of
Christ be the true God, certainly Idols cannot so be, since they are not the
Father of Christ. But if you follow their Opinion, the business is not yet
dispatched: for they hold, that notwithstanding that Proposition, THE FATHER IS
THE ONLY TRVE GOD, the same Predicate may also be applied to other Subjects:
for that it may nevertheless be said THE SON IS THE TRUE GOD, yea, THE ONLY
TRUE GOD, in like manner also the Holy Spirit. And therefore these words of
Christ would not by themselves hinder, but that the same Predicate might also
be attributed to infinite other Subjects: so that it would not be apparent from
these words of Christ, that Idols are not the true God, but that were wholly to
be understood from elsewhere.

Perhaps some one will say, That the Subject, to which the word ONLY is
immediately adjoined, is the name of GOD, not the FAther; and the Predicate
from the Communion whereof other Subjects are excluded, is the word TRUE. For
that the sense is, that the Father is that God, who only is true. But this
shift likewise is vain, and that for two Reasons; First, Because the word TRUE
is not here such a Predicate, as here signifies any thing by it self, and
denotes some peculiar Attribute of any thing, but only together with it,
whereto it is adjoined. For neither does TRUE in this place signify the same
with Trusty, or truth speaking; but when it is opposed to a thing that is
false, or falsely so called, it signifies nothing but the reality of the thing
to which it is annexed. And therefore it is predicated of nothing by it self,
but together with it to which it is annexed which in this place, is God. So
that, being taken together with that word, it signifies him, who in truth and
very deed, and not only in the opinion of men, is God. Thus we say that Christ
is a true Man, is the true Messiah, and so forth. For it is all one as if you
should say, that he is truly and in very deed a Man, and the Messiah; not
falsely, nor only in the Opinion of Men. Wherefore these words, THE TRUE GOD,
are not so to be parted, as that the one may again constitute a Subject, the
other a Predicate, and the word ONLY thought to be applied to that of GOD, that
the Predicate of TRUE may be removed from all other Subjects besides God; but
the words TRUE GOD, do jointly constitute one Predicate; and the word ONLY must
be thought to be annexed unto the Subject thereof, namely, the Father; that all
other Subjects beside the Father, may be excluded from the Communion of this
Predicate, namely, The True God. And indeed the design of Christ was not simply
to exclude Idols, or the Gods of the Heathen from truth, but to show that they
are to be excluded from true Godhead, or not to be accounted true Gods. But if
you say, the word GOD is again to be repeated, that the sense may be, That the
Father is that God who only is the true God; what else will you do, than make
Christ to speak that by circuity of words, which any one would simply utter,
and so without necessity double both the Subject and the Predicate, referring
the Subject again to the Predicate; as if any one should take this speech
directed to Christ, THAT THEY MAY KNOW THEE THE ONLY TRUE CHRIST OR MESSIAH,
and rather express it thus, THAT THEY MAY KNOW THEE TO BE THAT CHRIST WHICH
ONLY IS THE TRUE CHRIST; then simply to say, THAT THEY MAY KNOW THEE WHO ONLY
ART THE TRUE CHRIST OR MESSIAH. For, that we may also add the other Reason,
although the words were so to be taken, as if it were said that the Father is
that God who only is the true God; yet would it be all one as if it were said,
That the Father only is the true God: As if I should say, Christ is that Man
who Only was born of a Virgin, or Christ is that Man who Only is the true
M^ssias; it is all one as if I should say, Christ Only is the Man born of a
Virgin, Christ Only is the true Messiah. Thus also, Elias is that Prophet who
Only was carried toward Heaven in a fiery Chariot; it is all one as if I
should say, Elias Only is that Prophet who was carried toward Heaven in a
fiery Chariot: Likewise Gabriel is that Angel who Only declared to the Virgin
Mary the Conception of Christ, it is all one as if you should say, Gabriel
Only is that Angel which declared to the Virgin Mary the Conception of Christ.
Neither shall they bring any instance to the contrary, either our of the
Scripture or other approved Authors, or out of the common and vulgar use of
speaking. Certain it is, that as often as any one is said to be that, to which
only some other thing is attributed, it is all one as if it should be said
that both did jointly agree to that first subject only.

Neither do they quit themselves handsomely, who feign Examples of this sort;
as namely, That a certain Church (we for instance sake, will take the ancient
Church of Antioch) is that Church which only is a true Church, although there
be other true Churches extant together with it: for they say, that we must
speak thus, The Church of Antioch is a Church that only is true; namely,
because it is of the number of those Churches which only are true Churches.
Thus another would say, Peter is a living Creature which only is rational,
because he is one of those living Creatures which only are rational. But those
Examples are without Example: for it should be proved by some sufficient
Example, either sacred or profane, that one may rightly speak in that manner:
Out of the Scripture they shall not produce an Example, neither do the Vulgar
speak so: But Christ speaks after the Vulgar fashion. Now that they do not
speak rightly, who make use of such Examples, is hence evident: because when we
say, that any Church only is a true Church, if so be we hold that there are
many true Churches by the name of that Church which only is true, we do not
understand any particular Church taken separately, but the whole kind or rather
species of that Church: for it cannot be said of any particular Church taken
separately, that it only is a true Church: otherwise it would be rightly said,
that the Church of Antioch only was a true Church, which they themselves will
not admit, who feign such Examples: But that does agree as proper to that whole
species or kind of Churches, namely, which professes the saving Doctrine of
Christ, and is rightly said to accord to that only.

Now this which we say, is also hence apparent, in that when we will attribute
to any Church Only the name of a true Church, we cannot add to that Church
the word every, which would signify that the same might be affirmed of all
Churches separately: for it is not agreeable to say, Every Church professing
the saving Doctrine of Christ is only a true Church; but only simply, A
Church professing the saving Doctrine of Christ, only is a true Church: But
when we call the Church of Antioch a Church, we so take the name of the Church,
as that it denotes a particular Church, and one considered separately; or a
Church taken distributively, not collectively: For one cannot separately
predicate the whole kind, or species taken collectively, of any Individuum.
Wherefore one cannot likewise say, That the Church of Antioch is that Church
which only is true. In the same manner it is not rightly said, That Peter is
that living Creature that only is rational; for Peter is not that whole kind
or species of a living Creature, to which only it agrees to be rational: and
so in the rest.

Hitherto therefore it remains unshaken, that in the words of Christ this
meaning is contained, That the Father only is the true God. We say this sense
is contained in these words: for that we may add this likewise, which will
give great light both to the words of Christ, and to our Opinion: These words,
The only true God, are put by apposition to the preceding word, Thee,
designing the Father; as if it were said, Who only art the True God: And
therefore the article set before the word only in the Greek, shows that the
same thing is again described, as it is elsewhere wont to come to pass in
appositions. You have a place very like to this, 1 Timothy 6.16. where, when Paul
had said, Which (namely, the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ) in his times he
will show, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord
of lords; he adds, Who only has Immortality: Where every one sees that
these words agree with the former by apposition, and that the article in the
Greek serves to join this new description of God with those going before, and
that the word Only is referred to the subject; Wherefore let none imagine that
we think that the word only, if we consider the grammatical construction, is
to be connected with the precedent word Thee: for both the article set before
the word only does hinder, and by this means we must understand the Verb TO BE:
For it would be all one as if Christ had said, Thee only to be the true God;
which though it is by it self true, will yet presently after appear to be
disagreeable unto the sense of this place.

For now it is time to examine and confute their Opinion likewise, who so take
these words, as if Christ had said, This is life eternal that they know thee
(Father) and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, to be the only true God.
First, we say, that this Explication cannot therefore consist, because it
refers the word Only to the Predicate; namely, The true God, which we before
showed was to be referred to the Subject. But if any one will so take the word,
as if it were said, Thee, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ only, to be the
true God; First, the placing of the word Only does hinder it; for when the word
Only is referred to many subjects at once, it is wont either to be set after
all, as we even now did, or to be set before all. Which latter happens in
those words of Paul, which are alone brought by some to illustrate their
Explication of this place, and are extant, 1 Cor. 9.6. for thus it is there to
be read out of the Greek, Or have only I and Barnabas no power to forbear
working? But in this place of ours, not alone the word only, but together the
whole Predicate, namely, The true God, is interposed between these two
Subjects, to which it is thought to be referred; that is to say, between the
word Thee, and Jesus Christ, whom the Father has sent. To omit, that the
Article set before the word only, does not suffer, that it should be in that
manner joined either with the word Thee, or with the words Jesus Christ; as all
who are not ignorant of the Greek Tongue will confess.

Again, By this means notwithstanding, the Opinion of the Adversaries touching
the Deity of the holy Spirit, will be overthrown: for if the Father and Christ
only be the true God, the holy Spirit cannot also he. The same will also
follow, although you so take the words, as if Christ had said, That they know
thee (Father) and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, to be that God who only is
the true God. For we have before shown, that this is all one as if it had been
said, Thee and Jesus Christ only to be the true God; there is, I say, no
difference in this behalf, whether the word Only be presently added to the
first Subject, or to that Subject which is part of the Predicate. Besides, it
is false, That Eternal Life, or the Way to attain Eternal Life, does herein
consist, that men know the Father and Christ to be the only true God: Properly
taken it cannot consist; otherwise it would be both necessary, requisite, and
also sufficient to acknowledge the Father and Christ for the only true God. But
by this account, all, who comprehend that Opinion in their minds, should attain
Eternal Life, when nevertheless they may withal stick in those vices,
concerning which the Scripture openly pronounces, that they who do such
things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

You will say therefore, that it is to be taken improperly, that this knowledge
may comprehend in it self faith in Christ, working by love and all kind of
virtues; namely, by a Metonimy or Transnomination joined with a Synecdoche;
whereby under the name of the cause, the effect is also comprehended. After
which manner Eternal Life seems in the Scripture to be ascribed to that Faith
whereby men believe, That Joh. 20.31.
Jesus is the Christ the Son of God. But neither can this consist, for even so
nevertheless, it would be signified, that this Knowledge is necessary for all
unto eternal Life, and a certain ground of faith working by Love: But that this
is false, does hence appear, in that not only Christ himself, who was sent by
God to declare unto men the way of Salvation, and implant in them Saving-Faith,
did nenever openly deliver, or inculcato to men this Doctrine; yea, neither his
Apostles, the most clear Preachers both of his Divinity and Doctrine. For as to
Christ, he did not only of his own accord not teach and inculcate, that he
together with the Father, is the only true God, but also when a commodious
occasion was afforded him to pronounce that concerning himself, did yet abstain
from so doing, speaking in such a manner of himself, as that he openly
differenced himself from God, taken by way of excellency, and showed that
himself wholly depended on him; as appears from the 10th chapter of this very
Gospel, verse 33, etc. concerning which words we have elsewhere In the Book of
God and his Attributes chap. 13.
spoken; and shall Lib. 1. Sect. 2. Chap. 31.
hereafter speak in its place: But the Apostles when they speak of the Dignity
of Christ, the Knowledge whereof is the ground of that Faith and Piety, whereby
we are saved, do mention no higher things, than that Jesus is the Christ, or
the Son of God; both which they put for the same; and that is very frequent in
this Writer.

Concerning which thing likewise, we shall have occasion to speak of Sect 2.
Chap. 31.
hereafter.

Moreover, the sacred Writers, and John by name, when they speak of that
Knowledge wherein Religion, or the Way to eternal Life consists, intend not
such a Knowledge whereby some attribute, essential to God or Christ, is known
to be in him such as this knowledge would be, that the Father and Christ is the
only true God: but they mean the knowledge of God simply; whereof we suppose
Christ here speaks, Joh. 8.19, 55. and 14, 7. and 16.3. and 17.25. Joh. 1.2,
3, 4. and 13.14. and 3.1. and 4.7. and 5.20. compared with Ephesians. 1.17. and
Col. 1.9. Joh. 6 6, 9. compared with v. 12, 24, 25 and 17.25.
understanding the knowledge of God chiefly in respect of his will, and of the
things any way thereunto belonging; and also the knowledge of Christ in respect
of his office, which wholly pertains to discover, confirm, execute, and
perfect the Divine Will. I pass by the manner of speaking such, as neither John
nor any Writer of the new Covenant uses, when he speaks of the knowledge of
some whole complex or proposition; for the Sacred Writers would express this
since, which they with whom we now dispute, would have to be comprehended in
those words of Christ, in this manner, That they know, that thou art the only
true God, etc. as they, who are more diligently versed in the reading of the
Scripture, will observe: Thus for example sake, we read in the same John, Chap.
6.69
Who have known that thou art the Christ the Son of God. Chap. 7.26.
The Rulers have known that this is the Christ.

I forbear to urge (what we will elsewhere demonstrate) that neither the
prayers which Christ here pours out to the Father, nor his sending from the
Father, whereof in these very words he makes mention, do admit, that Christ
should be accounted the true and supreme God, together with the Father. I will
only here speak, what has in some measure been observed by certain very
learned Adversaries, namely, that it is not agreeable to this place, that
Christ should pronounce concerning himself, that he together with the Father is
the only true God; partly because he prays to the Father, and so speaks
most modestly of himself; partly because he considers and describes himself
as the Fathers Ambassador. For praying to the Father, he is not to be thought
to have equalized himself to the Father, and to have pronounced that of
himself, then which the Father has nothing greater, but as it became one that
is very modest, and a supplicant, to have set himself below him. Furthermore,
in that he here considers and describes himself as the Fathers Ambassador,
he is not to be thought to have attributed unto himself the supreme Majesty and
Glory of the Father that sent him, which herein consists that he is the only
true God. Besides, both the order and the meetness of the speech, does require
that the first description should be proper to the Father, to whom it is
immediately joined, as the latter is peculiar to Christ, and not Christ be
described both in a peculiar manner; and again, in such an one, as is common to
him with the Father, and that in those words, which, if you respect the order,
seem no less properly to be attributed to the Father, than the latter to
Christ. And the first of these three Reasons was in some measure touched by a
most accute and learned popish John Maldonat on this place
Interpreter. For amongst other causes, for which Christ in this place called
not himself, but the Father, the only true God, he alleges this also, that
Christ would, as it became a Son, speak honorably of his Father, but very
modestly of himself; (wherefore says he) he called not himself God, but the
Father. Upon the same account, I suppose, neither would he name himself; for he
said, not that they may know thee and me, but that they may know thee, and whom
thou have sent, Jesus Christ, speaking of himself in the third Person, which
argues greater modesty than to name himself, when he treats of honorable
things, such as this was. But if Christ is to be thought to have here regarded
Modesty in so small a matter, how much more in not saying, that he together
with the Father, is that only true and most high God? although Christ would not
only have regard to modesty, but to the very thing it self; for he would join
himself to the Father, and the knowledge of himself to that of the Father, in
such a manner, as that he might withal show what difference there was between
them: for he would signify that the Father is to be known as the supreme
Monarch and Prince of all things, and that his will is to be regarded by its
self; but that he himself was to be looked upon as his Ambassador, who
declares his will, and demonstrateth it by most certain proofs, being
afterward in the name of God, to execute and complete the same; for such
descriptions of Persons in the Scripture, are not wont to be idle, but fitted
to illustrate the thing that is treated of. But enough of this.

He that likes plain Interpretations of the Scripture, cannot choose but reject
this which we oppose, and embrace ours, unless he will prefer his pre-conceived
opinion concerning that thing, before any proof whatsoever.

CHAP. II.
The second Argument taken out of the words of Paul, 1 Cor. 8.6. To us there is
One God the Father, of whom are all things.

THe second testimony of our Opinion touching One God the Father, from 1 Cor.
8.6.
shall be that notable place of Paul, where he explaineth to us, who is that
One God, whilst he speaks in this manner, To us there is One God, the Father,
of whom are all things, and we to him, or, for him. What could be more clearly
spoken to show, that that One God is no other besides the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ? For Paul, explaining who that One God is, simply says, That he
is the Father; not the Father, Son and holy Spirit. But it could no way come to
pass, that Paul being about to explain, who that one God is, should mention the
Father only, omitting the other persons, if that one God were not only the
Father, but also the Son and holy Spirit, since those two Persons besides the
Father, were as necessary to declare who that one God is, as the Father
himself; so that they could not here by him be omitted or concealed.

The Defense of the Argument.
THese things though they be so plain and clear, that at the first sight they
gained belief, yet has the love of defending men's Opinions, prompted them
somewhat to answer thereunto.

Paul does not say, that that one God is only the Father, but simply is the
Father; by which means the other Persons are not excluded: and that they may
not seem to speak this without ground, they allege the words immediately
following, where Paul affirms, That there is one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
are all things, and we by him. But (say they) none will say that that one Lord
is Christ only; otherwise the Father would not be that one Lord, which every
one may see to be most absurd, inasmuch as that one God cannot choose but be
that one Lord.

Father being used in divine things, is ambiguous; for it is one while taken
essentially, signifying indistinctly the Godhead or whole Trinity; another
while hypostatically, that is personally, denoting the first Person of the
Trinity (as they speak) even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and that in
this place it is taken in the first signification, not in the second, as our
Opinion requires.

The Confutation of the first Answer.
But as to the first Adversaries, we have already shown, that the force of these
words of Paul is such, as if it were said, that that one God is no other
besides the Father: For the Apostle would here explain who that one God is. But
does he rightly explain a thing, who omitteth not only as much, but more also
then he expresses, when in the mean time that which he omitteth, is necessary
to explain the thing, and instead of three Persons, mentions but one; as the
Apostle by this account would do? Who, I pray you, of our Adversaries, when he
is to explain who that one God is, does so handle the matter, as that he makes
mention of the Father only, and says, that there is one God, namely, the
Father of Jesus Christ? which of them does not or would not rather say thus,
there is one God, namely, the Father, Son and holy Spirit? for indeed, he ought
so to speak, if he will speak agreeable to his Opinion: But had the Apostle
been of the same Opinion with the Adversaries, he should rather have spoken so,
to avoid the giving of occasion to this Opinion of ours; which (as they
imagine) is an error so grievous and pestilent, namely, that that one God
should be accounted one no less in Person than in Essence, and believed to be
no other than the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; especially since the
distinction of a Person from its Essence was not then commonly known, or to
speak more rightly was not yet invented: and besides, it might justly be
doubted of the Son and holy Spirit, whether they were the most high God, partly
because it was confessed amongst all, that both do proceed from the Father,
partly because the Apostles did most frequently distinguish both from God
simply so called, by calling the one the Son of God, the other the Spirit of
God: Wherefore that most faithful Teacher, who was most studious of men's
salvation, ought not to speak so dangerously, and give to the faithful an
occasion of so great and pernicious an Error, as they are pleased to style it.
From whence also it appears, that that is nothing which some here answer;
namely, that Paul said by an Attribution or Appropriation, as they call it,
that that one God is the Father; for by this course he had not at all
instructed the vulgar sort of Christians, but had rather, as we have already
said, entangled them with most grievous error; for of that Attribution which
is here held, the Vulgar does not understand the reason, since many of the very
Learned themselves have not so much as heard of it: So that it was not worth
the while, to use this figure to the detriment of the thing it self. In
explaining of things, all faithful Teachers study clearness; and that the more,
the greater the things are, and the greater the danger is that may accrue from
obscurity.

But who was more faithful than the Apostle? What was greater than the things
treated of? What Error, especially if we believe our Adversaries, more
grievous? What Danger more prejuditial? Besides, what kind of Attribution or
Appropriation is this? is it such a one, that a word of a stricter
signification, namely, The Father, should be a larger word, and actually
comprehending in it many persons, namely, God, be joined by apposition, or
simply predicated of it? But by what instance will they show, that this may
rightly be done? Indeed the name of an Individual is sometimes wont to he
adjoined to the name of the Species; as the name of Jesus Christ to the word
Man: but then the name of the Species does not actually comprehend many
Individuals, but only denotes some one Individual comprehended under it. But
if they say that the Appropriation lies herein, namely, that the word God,
which otherwise is common to many persons in number, that is, to the Father,
Son and holy Spirit, is here taken as proper to one, to wit, the Father. First,
they take that for granted, which is not only controverted, but also false, and
ought to be accounted contrary to these very words of Paul; namely, that the
name God, when it is put for the most high God, is common to many persons in
number; so that it may univocally, or essentially be predicated of each: in
which manner they hold that the Father is God, and the Son God, and the holy
Spirit God. For since the most high God is but one in number, and is so here by
Paul said to be, he cannot in that manner be predicated of many distinct in
number; for one in number cannot be univocally predicated of many differing in
number, since that it is proper only to the Species and the Genus, or rather to
that which is one in Genus or Species.

Again, by this means, that aforesaid Answer to our Argument, namely, that the
Apostle says not, that that one God is the Father only, falls to the ground;
for if the word God, is in this place taken as proper to the Father, certainly
it is agreeable to his mind to say, that that one God is the Father only: for
if he were not the Father only, but also the Son and holy Spirit, then the word
God would not be taken as proper to the Father, but as common to the three
Persons. Wherefore at the beginning, they ought not to deny th^^ Paul says
that which we affirm, namely, That that one God is the Father Only; or
reciprocally, That the Father only is that one God; but only to dispute with us
concerning the sense of this very assertion. Furthermore, if the word God is
here used as proper to the Father, it is either taken by way of excellency, and
signifies that Person which is the fountain of the others: or without any
regard to that excellency, is simply put for the Father. If the first be said,
we have already shown in the foregoing Chapter, that they who so speak, do
either contradict themselves, and hold the Father only to be indeed the most
high God, or say nothing to the purpose. If the latter, the Apostle had not
spoken to the thing in hand; for the question was not, whether there be one
Father, but whether there be one God; as is manifest from the preceding words
of the Apostle, though even on the first account the Apostle had not spoken to
the matter; for the question was not, whether there were but one, that was the
fountain of other persons, endued with supreme Deity; but simply, whether there
were one or more, who indeed had supreme Deity, and consequently were
originally and by themselves capable of Divine Worship.

Hitherto we have explained and defended one reason chiefly whereby their
answer is confuted, who denied it to be the meaning of Paul's words, That that
one God is the Father only.

Another reason is, that if you will say, that that one God is not the Father
only, but also other Persons; namely, the Son and holy Spirit, you must of
necessity fall into one of these two absurdities; either to say, that the
Father is not that one God, nor likewise the Son, nor the holy Spirit; or that
every one of these Persons is both the Father, and Son, and holy Spirit: for
when you assert, that the Apostle says not, that that one God is the Father
only, but only that that one God is the Father, either you hold that the
expression of the Apostle is not proper, but by a Synecdoche, one Person of the
Trinity is put for the whole Trinity; whereas the proper expression would be
this, That one God is the Father, Son and holy Spirit, or the whole Trinity; or
else you suppose this expression, That one God is the Father, to be proper; but
yet not such, but that we may notwithstanding properly say, that one God is the
Son, that one God is the holy Spirit. If you hold the first, either every
Person of the Trinity is the whole Trinity, or is not that one God: For thus we
may argue, That one God is the whole Trinity, or the Father Son and holy Spirit
jointly. But the Father is that one God; therefore the Father is the whole
Trinity. There is the like reasoning concerning the Son and holy Spirit. But if
you acknowledge the conclusion to be absurd, you must deny the Minor; which is
partly confirmed out of the Scripture, partly out of your Opinion. For thus we
may reason; That one God is the whole Trinity. The Father is not the whole
Trinity: Therefore the Father is not that one God. In like manner may we
discourse concerning the Son and holy Spirit. If you hold the latter, we will
thus reason; That one God is the Father; That one God is the Son and holy
Spirit; Therefore the Son and holy Spirit are the Father; and contrariwise.

Now we add not in the conclusion the particle, Some one, because the terms are
singular. But if you will not admit the conclusion as being absurd, you must
again deny the Minor: For thus we will dispute; That one God is the Father. The
Son and holy Spirit are not the Father; Therefore the Son and holy Spirit are
not that one God. In like manner we may also conclude thus concerning the
Father, That one God is the Son, or holy Spirit. The Father is not the Son, nor
the holy Spirit; Therefore the Father is not that one God.

The third Reason may be fetched from the following words; For if that one God
were not only the Father, but also some other, certainly Christ would be he.
But Christ is here manifestly distinguished from that one God; and so is
demonstrated not to be that one God, whilst it is added, And One Lord Jesus
Christ: by whom are all things: and we by him.

But whereas they say, that these very words intimate, that when that one God
is called the Father, the Son or holy Spirit is not excluded from the same
Godhead; because neither here, where that one Lord is called Jesus Christ, the
Father is excluded from the same Lordship; they are therein exceedingly
mistaken, inasmuch as the word Lord does in this place denote him who is
somewayes inferior to the most high God, and subordinate to him in dominion,
although he be next to him; that is, signifies him: by whom the most high God
governs all things any way belonging to the Salvation of Men. But in this
manner that one God is not Lord, since he cannot in any sort be inferior and
subordinate to himself: wherefore he is rightly excluded by the following words
from such a Lordship. And what we have spoken, is proved by a twofold Reason
drawn from this very place. For first, That one Lord, is either the same with
that one God, or some way inferior to him. The same he is not, otherwise there
will be no ground of distinction, nor would there be any cause, why that one
God should be said to be the Father, and that one Lord, Jesus Christ; for no
less that one Lord, than that one God, should be said to be the Father; for
what reason there was, why that one God should be said to be the Father, the
same would there also be, for which that one Lord should be said to be the
Father: It remains therefore, that it signifies him, who is some way
inferior to that one God. Again, The same is proved by the descriptions which
are added to both; that is, both to the Father and to Christ; and by which they
are distinguished one from another; for, as we hinted in the former Chapter,
the Descriptions that are added to things or Persons in the Scripture, are not
wont to be either idle, or foreign to the thing which is treated of, but
fitted to illustrate or prove the same. In this place, if these descriptions
make any thing to the purpose, namely, that the Father is he, of whom are all
things, and we to him, and Christ he, by whom are all things, and we by him,
they show that the Father is that one God, and Christ that one Lord; as if the
Apostle had said, To us there is one God, namely, the Father, in as much as all
things are of him, and we consequently to him; and there is also to us one
Lord, namely, Jesus Christ, in as much as all things are by him, and we
consequently by him; for it is necessary that he should be that one God, of
whom are all things; that is, who is the first and highest efficient cause of
all those things which pertain to us Christians (for that he has a peculiar
regard to Christians, the word We several time repeated does intimate) and
consequently to whom, as the ultimate Scope we ought to look, and to confer all
worship and honor: For he is to be accounted by us the most high God, who is
the first and highest Cause, as of other things, so of those, namely, which
belong to us and our Salvation. He also is to be accounted One, who is the
highest Cause, not only of some things, but of all; for if he were not one,
some would proceed from him, others from another, as the prime Author and
highest Cause; and consequently, the glory of those things ought by us to be
referred partly to him, partly to the other. Now that we have one Lord, even
Christ, is thence evident, because all things are by him; that is, because he
is the middle cause of all those things which belong to us and our salvation,
and in that all things are governed and dispensed by him from that first Cause
of all things. Where also it follows, that we by him ought likewise to
worship God; that is, that he is the middle scope and end of the honor, which
ought by us to be exhibited unto God: for because all things are by him, it is
apparent not only that he is Lord, but also that one Lord; for if there were
many, some things would be administered by him, others by another, and so we
ought to worship God partly by him, partly by another. Now who sees not that
these things are very suitable to the words and scope of the Apostle? Neither
can any one here object, that it is also said sometimes concerning the most
high God, that all things are by him; for it is certain it signifies not, that
some other who is the supreme Cause, does effect those things by the most high
God. But it is frequently said of Christ in the Scripture, that some other,
namely, God or the Father, who cannot choose but be the supreme Cause, does do
something by him, which properly belongs to a second cause. Concerning which
thing, we will hereafter treat more largely in its Sect. 2. Chap. 19.
place.

But that in these words of Paul it is not upon the same account said, that all
things are done by Christ, as it is elsewhere said of God, is very evident;
because in this place those expressions, Of whom are all things, and by whom
are all things; and also those, We to him, and we by him, are opposed the one
to the other, and put to distinguish diverse persons. Wherefore neither is that
which is applied to the Father, common to Christ; nor that which is applied to
Christ, so taken, as that it may he common to the Father. But this will come to
pass no other way, than if the words annexed to the Father, signify that he is
the prime efficient cause of all things, and the ultimate end of us and our
Religion: and those things which are annexed unto Christ, signify that which
the propriety of the words requires; namely, that he is the middle efficient
Cause of all things, and the intermediate end of our Religion. From whence it
is how understood, that that one God signifies him, who is the prime efficient
Cause of all things, and the ultimate end; and that that one Lord signifies
him, who is the middle efficient Cause of all things, and likewise the
intermediate end of the Worship that is to be performed to God from us; and
consequently, that the one is superior and greater, the other some ways
inferior and less. And indeed the greatest part of Interpreters of Scripture,
seem to acknowledge this signification of that Lorship which is peculiarly
attributed to Christ; for as often as they read that Christ is made Lord, or
Authority and a Kingdom given unto him, or that he shall at length deliver the
Kingdom to God the Father, they usually say, that it is there spoken of that
Lordship or Kingdom over the Church, which is peculiarly granted unto him, as
mediator, by the Father. Since therefore such a Lordship agrees to Christ
only, why may he not in regard thereof, be called that One Lord, especially in
this place; where, as we have seen, that one Lord is openly distinguished from
that one God; and without making mention of any other, is said to be Jesus
Christ, and Christ himself is looked upon as he, by whom are all things, and by
whom God is to be worshipped of us; which is proper to a Mediator, as they
commonly take the word; where finally there is a plain relation to us
Christians and the Church. Wherefore it is evident enough, that the Father is
not that one Lord which is here spoken of, nor does the same Lordship which is
attributed to Christ agree to him. Which being so, what they say concerning
that one Lord, is so far from overthrowing our opinion which we hold is
contained in the former words, speaking of that one God, that it much confirms
it; for if when Paul says, that there is one Lord Jesus Christ, his purpose
was to signify, that that Lord is no other but Jesus Christ; in like manner
also when he says; That we have one God, even the Father, his purpose was to
signify that that God was no other but the Father, for there is the same force
and reason of the words; neither has the one less force to exclude others than
the other,

Before we go hence, we must briefly explain, how that one Lord is
distinguished from that one God, when notwithstanding the name of Lord
altogether seems here to be taken by way of excellency, for otherwise there
would be many Lords; as Paul himself in the precedent words, ver. 5. did
declare. But the name of Lord taken by way of excellency, seems to signify
no other than the most high God; and that independent Monarch. We answer, that
the name of Lord, when it is put as proper to Christ, is taken by way of
excellency, but only in respect of other Lords, who are so far forth of the
same kind with him, as they have received their Lordship from the most high
God, and consequently depend on him: For that Christ is of the same rank, the
Scriptures most manifestly testify; and we, hereafter producing most clear
Sect. 2. Chap. 10.
testimonies thereof, will demonstrate. Wherefore whatsoever that Excellency
be, which is contained in the word Lord when it is put for Christ, or
attributed to him only, yet is it not of so large extent, nor so sublime, as to
comprehend an absolute supreme and independent Lordship, such as is proper to
the most high God? and consequently neither does the name of Lord in that sense
agree to the most high God, but is distinguished from him. Thus namely, Is it
come to pass, that since the name of God does in its own nature signify
something more excellent and noble, than the bare name of Lord, that the name
God taken by way of excellency, should denote him, who has an Empire
altogether independent, and is the prime efficient of all things: But the name
of Lord distinguished from him, who is called God by way of excellency, should
by a certain preheminency design him, who amongst the Lords dependent on God,
holds the first rank, and is far sublimer than all the rest. Concerning which
thing we could say more, but that we must hasten to somewhat else.

The Refutation of the second Answer.
For now we must examine the other Answer to our Argument drawn from this place
of Paul; which is, that Father in this place is not taken for the Father of
Jesus Christ, but comprizeth the whole Trinity: Which answer, that it should
come into any ones head, is a wonder: certainly it is altogether inexcusable
unto them, who boast that they teach nothing but the mere word of God, and are
wont to object to us that following reason, We depart from the Word of God, and
wrest the Scripture; for what is it to speak besides the Scripture, and to
depart from the plain and obvious meaning thereof, if this be not? for by what
instance will they ever prove that the word Father, spoken of God, does
signify three Persons of Divinity? The places are obvious to any one, wherein
the word Father either absolutely taken, or manifestly related to us (which
they hold is here tacitly done) denotes the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And indeed the same is the Father both of Christ and us; as Christ himself
teaches in Chap. 20. ver. 17.
John, and many other things demonstrate. Since therefore this signification of
the word Father, is notorious to all, and most usual in the Scripture, but that
other can by no sufficient instance be demonstrated; what came into their
heads, that leaving that, they should embrace this, or rather devise it, and
that in such a place, where Paul intended clearly to explain who that One God
is, and consequently to use the known signification of the word? indeed they
allege places where they think God is for the Creation called Father; but
here, they say, respect is had to Creation, since all things are said to be of
him. But this latter is taken without proof; for the word All is wont to be
referred to the subject matter, and to be restrained thereunto. But here it is
spoken of us; that is, Christians, and consequently of things peculiarly
belonging unto Christians.

Again, They do not prove, that the Father, who is so called for Creation, is
any other than the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Certainly we see how in
that which is called The Apostles Creed, the same is called the Father
Almighty, and the Creator of Heaven and Earth, and Jesus Christ said to be his
Son; yea, they themselves, though they make creation, and the other actions,
which are performed out of God, common to the whole Trinity, do yet affirm,
that creation is peculiarly attributed to the Father, redemption to the Son,
sanctification to the holy Spirit. Wherefore although God should in this place
be called Father for Creation, yet would there be no cause why we should
imagine any other besides the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ to be understood:
but there would rather be great cause why we should think that he is peculiarly
to be meant.

Though furthermore, there is either no place at all, or scarce any in the
whole Scripture, wherein, for the first Creation only, concerning what they
speak, God is called either simply Father, or our Father, but for other
fatherly benefits of his toward men, who call him their Father, and for a
certain Creation, not common to all men, but peculiar to his People. Certainly
in the new Testament, it may be justly denied, that God is any where, for the
first Creation only, either simply called Father, or our Father in particular;
for wheresoever the causes of that appellation are alleged, others are
alleged besides the first Creation. Finally, they shall no where show, that
Christ is simply called Father, but only once in Chap. 9. ver. 6.
Isaiah, Father of the Age, and that, as the Greek and Latin translation
adds, to come. Besides, it is one thing for the name of Father to be some
where predicated of one; another when the name of Father is applied to signify
a certain subject which is the Father; that he should in particular be
understood, or be comprehended with others. As for the holy Spirit, they do so
slightly prove that he is the Father, that I am even sorry to mention what they
allege. The chiefest and almost only proof is, that we are regenerated by him,
and that Christ says Joh. 3.6.
Whatsoever is born of the Spirit is Spirit. But by this means, they ought to
make Water likewise the Father, since Christ a little before, joined it with
the Ver. 5.
Spirit in this business, saying, that we ought to be born again of it and the
Spirit, Unless, says he, a man be born again of Water and the Spirit (the
vulgar translation adds holy) he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Now by
Water, they are wont to understand, the elementary water which is used in
baptism, and whatsoever you understand by it, it is not a person. Thus also
they ought to make Gods, Word the Father, because. 1 Epis. 1.23.
Peter writes, That we are born again not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, by the Word of God which lives and abides for ever. The same
reason would also be of force in generation properly so called. Wherefore as
often as it is written, that Christ, for example sake, was born of the Seed of
David, the Seed of David would be accounted the Father of Christ; So in the
rest. But if they cannot prove that the holy Spirit is the Father, or may
rightly be so called, how much less will they be able to prove, that he is any
where designed by, or comprehended under the name of Father, when the Father is
used to design a certain subject, as here it is done?

But furthermore, although such a signification of this word were somewhere
found, yet would it here have no place where the Father is manifestly
distinguished from Christ, and that by a certain mark; for the Father
essentially taken, as they speak, does in their opinion also include Christ:
But he is here in such a manner, as we have before discussed, opposed to the
Father, and contra distinguished from him as they speak. Finally, there lies a
contradiction in this opinion of theirs: for either the Father, of whom they
understand these words, is a Person, or is not: If he is a Person, why do they
oppose him to the Father, taken personally? why do they not suffer him to be
the Father of Christ; for either he is one Person, or more: if one, what other
can be here understood besides the Father of Christ? If more, he must not be
called Father, but Fathers.

But if he be not a Person, he is not the Father; for every father, though
figuratively so called, if he be endued with understanding, is a Person; for a
father is so called for some action, and chiefly for generation, either
properly or figuratively so called. But such actions agree to none but
Suppositums; that is, prime Substances complete; as we will explain in its Lib.
2. Sect. 1. Chap. 4.
place. But every Suppositum, being endued with understanding, by the consent
of all, is a Person. It is therefore necessary, that this Father, whereof Paul
speaks, should be a Person, and but one But the Father taken for one Person
in Divinity, by the confession of the very Adversaries, is none but the Father
of Christ. So that their endeavor is vain, who to dull the edge of this and
the like places, have devised this new signification of the word.

CHAP. III.
The third Argument from the place of Paul, Ephesians. 4.6. There is One God and
Father of all.

from Ephesians. 4.6.
TO that place of Paul to the Corinthians, which we have hitherto urged, to
prove that none but the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, is the most high God,
this passage of the same Apostle to the Ephesians, is not unlike; for here that
God, which is said to be One, and the Father, does signify one and the same
Subject, and consequently the one is of no larger extent than the other;
neither is any other that One God, besides the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now we suppose that it is not here necessary to show in many words, that it is
very familiar to the Scripture, when it speaks of the same thing, and
designeth it by diverse names, to connect those names together by the copulative
Particle, and as in this place we see the word God, and that of Father joined
together.

This has been noted by the Interpreters of the Scripture, both in sundry
other places, and also in those by name wherein these two words, namely, God
and the Father are joined together. As when the same Apostle says, that 1 Cor.
15.24.
Christ shall at length deliver up the Kingdom to God even the Father; or when
he thus speaks together with Peter, 2 Cor. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.3.
Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; or when he says,
Romans 15 6. 2 Cor. 11.31. Gal. 1.4. Ephesians 5.20. Phil. 4 20. Col. 1.3. and 2.2.
In Greek 3.17. 1 These. 1.3.
That we may unanimously with one mouth, glorify God even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ. That I may now omit sundry other passages which are extant
in the same Apostle; for it sufficiently appears, that in those places, the
same subject is described by diverse names, and that it is all one as if it had
been said, God who is the Father, or God, that is, the Father, or some such way.

Now that in this place to the Ephesians, one and the same is understood by the
name of God and Father, first is apparent, in that the Apostle speaks jointly
concerning the Unity of the one and the other, and not distinctly, as in all
the other things whereof he made mention. Paul had said (intending afterward
to demonstrate the thing) that Christians ought, being knit together with the
bond of peace, to maintain spiritual Union, and adds to that purpose, that
there is One Body, and One Spirit, as they were also called in one hope of
their Calling: One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism, One God and Father of all. Why
did he not likewise say, as in the rest, There is one God, one Father of all,
if he did understand one by the name of God, another by the name of the Father?
The same is also evident, in that he here distinguishes that One God both from
that One Lord, and that One Spirit, and that in such a manner, as not only to
design them by diverse appellations, and to include them in diverse members of
the sentence, but also to interpose other things between them, that it might
the more clearly appear, that they are different the one from the other.

But we saw in the foregoing Chapter, that Christ is by name understood by that
one Lord, what other then should be understood, by that One God, distinguished
both from that One Spirit, and also from that One Lord, or Christ, but the
Father of Christ? especially since the very name of the Father is by the
Apostle himself expressly added. For lest you should understand the whole
Trinity by the name of that God, who is called One, the foresaid Reason does
forbid; namely, in that two Persons of the Trinity were already mentioned, and
distinguished from that one God.

Again, How absurd would such a speech be, There is one Trinity of all, and
Father? for to omit that a Trinit, ya^ the Adversaries hold, is not one God,
but three, as shall elsewhere be Lib. 2. Sect. 1. Chap. 1.
shown, and is of it self manifest to every one, if he will not for love of his
prejudicate Opinion, offer violence to his understanding; what need is there,
after the whole Trinity, to add the Father by name, as if he had not been
comprehended therein? But would he have added something for Explication sake,
he ought to have expressed three Persons, not one: for neither does he who
makes mention of one Person, explain a Trinity of Persons.

The Defense of the Argument.
BUt there are not wanting some, who in this place also do by the Name of the
Father, understand the whole Trinity, or the Godhead indistinctly taken. Which
how absurdly they do, though it may be understood by the Defense of the
foregoing Argument, yet is it here also to be shown; chiefly because the
principal Patrons of that Opinion have proceeded so far, as to say, that by One
Spirit, One Lord, One God, and Father, the very same is here understood, there
being no distinction in the thing it self, but only in the words. How bold and
absurd that Explication of Paul's words is, would be hard to utter. But so was
it necessary for them to do, who were resolved to hold their Position, and to
defend any thing which the Opinion that they had once set down, did require.

We forbear to urge, that three persons, every one whereof is a Spirit, Lord,
God, Father, cannot possibly be one Spirit, Lord, God, Father, as they take it
for granted.

Our demand only is, By what Example they extend the name of the Spirit or the
Father to the three Persons? As for the name of the Father, we spoke of it in
the forgoing Chapter: from whence let those things be fetched, that are
pertinent to this matter.

You shall find that the name of the Spirit, one while put simply, another
while with an additament, is in infinite places taken for the holy Spirit, but
no where for the Father or Christ. Indeed the word Spirit is Joh. 4.24.
once in the Scripture predicated of the Father 1 Cor. 15.45. 2 Cor. 3.17.
twice in a different sense of Christ: but put subjectively, or designing a
certain subject which is the Spirit, it is no where understood of Christ, nor
the Father. Is it then lawful to reject the most usual signification of words,
which it is very apparent that Paul here followed, and to impose such a one
upon the words as is no where extant? Besides, what cause can be alleged, why
the Apostle had rather repeat the same thing thrice, than distinctly to reckon
up three distinct things, which might be expressed by the same words, and each
whereof was very pertinent to the business in hand? why, I say, had he rather
thrice to name God indistinctly, and only heap up words, than to mention first
the Unity of the holy Spirit, under the name of One Spirit, than that of
Christ, under the name of One Lord, afterward that of the Father, under this
very name? Furthermore, why did the Apostle separate these three by the
interposal of other things? why did he not at least conjoyn them, and speak of
their Unity in a continued course? The other things which he jointly mentioned,
we see are diverse, those which he mentioned apart, shall we think the same? We
know indeed that the same thing is sometimes repeated with changes of words;
but when like things are reckoned up in order, and each of the rest finished in
particular members, or That is Points or Stops.
Commaes, the same thing is not wont to be repeated in diverse members like to
the rest; much less to be sundred by the interposal of like things and Commaes.
No such example shall be alleged either out of profane or sacred Writers Add
hereunto, that the same thing is then wont to be by sacred Writers so
significantly repeated, (as here it will come to pass) when in each word there
is some peculiar force which here has no place. Certainly there will be no
force in the word Spirit; as shall presently be understood: And should the name
of that One Lord here signify the same with that One God, and so design the
supreme Monarch of all things, the whole force thereof would not only have been
expressed by the name of that one God, but also presently explained more
clearly, when after the name of the Father it is added, that he is over all;
for it is signified that he only rules over all with the highest Authority,
that it may be thence understood, that the Father was deservedly so joined with
that One God, as that we should conceive him to be the same; as if he had said,
There is one God and Father of all, as who is over all; for were not the Father
that one God, he could not rule over all with the highest authority. Now then,
had not the force of the word Lord been sufficiently expressed in these words?

But what force would there be in the word Spirit? for it would signify
nothing but one spiritual Essence. Not to say, that the Essence of God would
not presently be signified, let us even without reason suppose, that a Spirit,
or Spiritual Essence, being mentioned, the Substance of God is by name
understood? What does this make to the unity of Christians? is it because they
all believe the same to be? but neither is the mention of their faith made in
this comma; and the unity thereof is peculiarly mentioned, whilst it is said,
One Faith. How was it then pertinent to the matter, that there was one
spiritual, add, if you please, divine Essence? nothing at all: for you must
understand that the Unity of the Faithful, is not thence simply concluded, that
every one of these things which are reckoned up, is one in it self, partly in
kind, partly in number, it is common to all the Faithful; for from this
Communion of such excellent things, or Unity of things common to Christians,
their Unity is concluded: Wherefore all the things which are reckoned up, are
either such as exist in the very Christians, whether apart, as Hope, Faith,
Baptism; to which we may also refer that one Spirit; or jointly, as that
mystical Body, or else they are things which do indeed exist without them, but
yet have a manifest relation to them, and reduce them to Unity; such as are
that One Lord, and that One God, and Father common to them all, who is over
all; that is, as we said before, who alone rules over all with the highest
Sovereignty, and does alike guide and govern all; and is also through all; that
is, does by his providence diffuse himself through all, passes through all the
Members of the Christian Body, and by his goodness reaches unto all, or, which
comes to the same purpose, is as it were conversant amongst all, and is in the
middle of them, namely, by his help, aid and providence; finally, is in all,
that is, dwells in all by his Spirit; for they to whom all these things are
common, ought to be most closely united amongst themselves. But what relation
is there between the Spirit and Christians, if by that name you understand the
spiritual Essence of God; how will that be common to all Christians? for
neither is it possessed by them, as the things of the former sort, by us
reckoned up; likewise it has not a relation unto them, as the word Lord, God
and Father; Does not the thing it self show, that if you will by this word,
understand a divine Spirit, you must of necessity understand the holy Spirit,
common to all the Faithful, wherewith they are as it were animated and guided?
for then he will be in the number of those good things which they by the divine
bounty do obtain; neither indeed ought the mention of him at any hand to be
here omitted; partly because the holy Spirit is of essential note amongst the
good things common to Christians, which unite them one to another, in that he
erecteth and seals them to the hope of the same happiness. Whence the Apostle
speaking of the same thing to the Christians, after he had said that Christ or
his Church, is one body as it were compacted of diverse members, he adds, 1
Cor. 12.13.
For with one Spirit we have all been baptized into one body, whether Jews or
Greeks, whether bond or free, and we have all been drenched into one Spirit;
for the same cause he had in the precedent Ver. 4. and 7.
words in the same place, discoursed much concerning the Unity of the Spirit,
lest because of such different faculties which he did put forth in different
Christians, they should account one another for strangers, or at least in
comparison of themselves, despise them who had attained lesser gifts; and that
they might on the contrary acknowledge one another to be different members
indeed, but yet of the same body, since they were as it were inlivened with the
same Spirit of God: why therefore in this place, where the Apostle handles the
same thing, should he not expressly mention that Unity of the holy Spirit
wherewith Christians were That is Anointed or filled.
imbued? add hereunto, that the Apostle in the words immediately following, as
also in that place to the Corinthians, does discourse touching the diversities
of the gifts or effects of the holy Spirit given to Christians; so that there
is no doubt, but that he had first spoken concerning the Unity of that Spirit,
as in the other place. But where is he to be supposed to have mentioned it, but
when he spoke of One Spirit? unless perhaps he would have him comprehended
under the name of one Baptism; which notwithstanding they themselves do not
admit, who stiffly contend that the Apostle speaks of Water Baptism: nor are
we against it: and certainly if it be here spoken of a divine Spirit, and not
of the mind and will, in regard of which the Faithful ought to be one Spirit,
there is no doubt but the Apostle speaks of the holy Spirit. But if by one
Spirit you understand the holy Spirit, there is no cause why you should not by
1 Cor. 8.6.
one Lord, understand Christ, as in the foresaid place we see it done; and
consequently by the Father, that which othetwise the word it self requires,
the Father of Jesus Christ.

I suppose we have sufficiently shown, that by the name of Father in that place
to the Ephesians, is none meant, save the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and
consequently none but he, is by Paul held to be that one God.

Now if any one will fly to Appropreation or Attribution, devised by some in
this business, he may easily be confuted, if one consider these things which we
have spoken thereof in the foregoing Chapter, when we examined the first Answer
to our Argument drawn out of that place; so that there is no need any longer to
insist upon it.

CHAP. IIII.
The fourth Argument drawn from the words of Christ, Mat. 24.36. But of that
day and hour knows none, no not the Angels of the Heavens, but the Father
only: and Mark 13.32. But of the day and hour knows none, no not the Angels
in the Heavens, no not the Son, but the Father.

BEfore we go from the places which make express mention of the Father, from
Mat. 24.39. and Mark 13.32.
we think good to add an Argument more fetched from the words of Christ, Mat.
24. Mark 13. wherein he openly affirms, that the Father only, or, which is
all one, that none but the Father did know of that day or hour, namely, of the
last judgment, or his coming: for our Opinion is hence most clearly
demonstrated; for he who only sometimes knew the day or hour of the last
judgment, is only the most high God. But by the testimony of Christ, the Father
only sometimes knew that day or hour: Wherefore he only is the most high God.
The truth of the major Proposition, as they call it, is apparent to every one;
for he who only sometimes knew all things, is also only the most high God; for
the most high God, ever does and did know all things. But he who only sometimes
knew the day of the last judgment, did then only know all things; for he that
was ignorant of that day, did not absolutely know all things; wherefore he who
only sometimes knew the day of the last judgment, is also only the most high
God.

If any thing pertains to the defense of this Argument, although it is so
clear and strong as not to need it, we will speak of it Sect. 8. Chap. 9.
hereafter when we shall treat of Christ.

from 1. Cor. 12.4, 5, 6.
Now follows Arguments drawn out of those places, wherein, though the name of
the Father be not expressed, yet it is indeed spoken of him.

CHAP. V.
Argument the fifth drawn from the words of Paul, 1 Cor. 12, 4, 5, 6. There are
diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit; and diversities of Administrations,
but the same Lord; and diversities of Operations, but the same God.

IN these words of the Apostle which we have alleged, it is apparent, that
these words, the same God, does signify that one God common to all Christians.
Now since the Apostle does distinguish him both from the same Spirit, and the
same Lord, whom we have before Chap. 2.
seen, by two places of the same Apostle, to be Christ; it is clear, that that
God is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and no other besides him; for what
other can be imagined, who being distinguished from that one Spirit, and one
Lord of Christians; namely, Christ, should be designed by the name of same God,
besides the Father of Christ? But how was it possible, that under this name of
the same God, he should be distinguished from the same Spirit and the same
Lord, if that one Spirit, and that one Lord, were no less that very same God,
than the Father? Neither will any one doubt of this meaning of that place, who
will compare these things with what we have spoken concerning those two places
of the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.6. Ephesians. 4.5, 6.

The Defense of the Argument.
HEre we do not much fear, lest any one of the Adversaries should so take these
three, namely, The same Spirit, the same Lord, the same God, as we said, that
some interpreted the like words, Ephesians. 4. as, namely, to assert, That all
these are common to the Trinity, and do not each of them denote diverse persons,
or things, but that the same Trinity is described in three diverse manners. For,
not to repeat what was said in that place to the Ephesians, where we saw that
that one Spirit is openly distinguished from that one Lord, and that one God,
and that each of these names does design particular persons or things; whence
it is easy to collect, the same is done in this place likewise; which is very
like to that of the Ephesians, partly in words, partly in regard of the
Argument and drift: add hereunto, that by this means the word Spirit would not
signify the holy Spirit distinguished from the Father and the Son, but would
be taken for a spiritual Substance; as we saw some took it in that place of the
Ephesians. But besides, that this is other ways foolish, and foreign to the
meaning of the Apostle, as may from thence appear; neither does the foregoing
nor following words endure that interpretation; for that the Apostle does speak
of the holy Spirit by name, which he ver. 7, 8, 9, 11, 13.
afterward sundry times designeth by the simple name of the Spirit; all the
circumstances do argue; for he began ver. 1.
to speak of spiritual Gifts, or such as proceed from the holy Spirit, and in
the very beginning proposed a Rule whereby the Corinthians should discern the
holy Spirit from the impure one, and a divine Inspiration from a diabolical,
which might perhaps pass under the name of a divine one. Which very Rule John
also, though in other words, does in his first Epistle 1 John 4.2, 3.
deliver: for thus speaks ver. 3.
Paul, None speaking by the Spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed: and none can
call Jesus Lord, but by the holy Spirit. When he had spoken thus, he adds,
But there are diversities of Gifts, yet the same Spirit; where every one sees
that respect is had to that Spirit whereof immediately before mention was made:
as if he should say to all, who speak by the impulsion of Gods Spirit, this is
common, that they call Christ Lord, but other ways very diverse are the Gifts
flowing from that Spirit into men who have been filled with him, although that
Spirit be the same, and not diverse. Besides, afterward, ver. 8, etc. he
largely reckons up those various effects of the holy Spirit, to the end he
might explain that which he had before said, namely, That there are diversities
of Gifts, but the same Spirit. These things being apparent to every one, there
is, as we said, no great fear, lest any one should seek to get out at that
chink, although error is wont to seek all possible ways to escape.

But there are not wanting some, who say that the holy Spirit is described in
those three manners, and contend that he is one while called, the same Spirit,
another while the same Lord, another while the same God; but this
Interpretation is easily confuted by the collation of this place with that to
the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
where the Apostle handling the same Argument, does, as we have seen,
manifestly distinguish one Spirit both from one Lord, and one God, and from the
unity of each draws particular Arguments to demonstrate, that Christians ought
very studiously to maintain spiritual union among themselves; and not for
diversity of spiritual Gifts, or such like things, to separate one from
another; which very thing is by the Apostle here also done; as any one may
easily perceive if he read over this Chapter. Wherefore it is unsuitable, that
the Apostle should here confound them, whom elsewhere, treating of the same
thing, he had so openly distinguished; and when, using the same words, he might
bring three distinct arguments very fit for his purpose, he would rather
comprehend but one, drawn from the unity or sameness of the holy Spirit only:
Besides, neither does the thing it self, nor this place, admit that the holy
Spirit should be understood, when Paul says, that there is the same Lord, or
the same God; for he speaks not only of some most high God, or Lord of
Christians, by way of excellency so called, but of him, besides whom there is
no other; for the meaning of the Apostle is not, that some most high God, or
some Lord of Christians, by way of excellency so called, is the same; but
simply that, that most high God, and Lord, by way of excellency so called, is
the same. But none is Ignorant, that besides the holy Spirit, the Father is the
most high God, to whom in innumerable places, the name of God is attributed as
proper unto him, as the Adversaries themselves confess, and is in this very
place done, ver. 2: where the Spirit is called the Spirit of God. Certainly,
that the Spirit it self, is not there understood by the name of God, appears
to every one. In like manner that there is also, besides the holy Spirit, a
Lord, by way of excellency so called, innumerable places of the Scripture so
teach; wherein, by the confession of the Adversaries themselves, the name of
Lord is used as proper to Christ; yea, in this very place, in the same second
verse, it is affirmed, that Jesus is the Lord. And how often, I pray you, in
the Apostle is mention made of God the Father, and of the Lord Jesus Christ?
Why then should we think, that in this place the holy Spirit being once already
named, is understood, when afterward there is distinct mention made of Lord and
God? Wherefore rather following the custom and analogy of the Scripture, we put
a difference between God, Lord, and Spirit; as the same Apostle himself does in
the end of the latter Epistle to the Corinthians, where he speaks thus, The
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Communion of the
holy Spirit be with you all.

CHAP. VI.
The sixth Argument taken from these words, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is One God, and
One Mediator of God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus. To which are added those,
Romans 3.10. There is one God, who justifies the Circumcision by Faith, etc.

from 1 Timothy 2.5.
OUr Argument from that place of Timothy, is thus; If the Father only is there
understood by the name of that one God, the Father only is that most high God:
For if any one besides the Father were the most high God, he would be
comprehended under the name of that one God, since he is that One God, besides
whom there is no other. Now that the Father only is there understood by the
name of that One God, is apparent, in that he only is understood by that name:
between whom and Men the Apostle says, that Christ Jesus is the Mediator; as
is manifest from the connection of the words. But he is none but the Father of
Jesus Christ.

A further Confirmation and Defense of the Argument.
THat we may fully confirm this Argument that is to be proved, whereof we last
spoke; namely, That the Father only is that God: between whom and Men the
Apostle says, That Christ is the Mediator. For that Christ is the Mediator
between the Father and Men, no man doubts: but that he is the Mediator only
between the Father and Men, many men deny; for they hold that Christ is the
Mediator of the whole Trinity. But this Opinion cannot consist; for it would
thence follow, that Christ, who is held the second Person of the Trinity, would
be the Mediator of himself, or interveneth in the middle between himself, which
is contradictious. Besides, Christ in this place is most openly distinguished
from God, whose Mediator he is said to be. You will say, That Christ is a
Mediator only according to the humane nature, and that there is no absurdity to
hold, that Christ considered according to the humane Nature, is the Mediator of
himself considered according to the divine Nature, and is righly distinguished
from that one God. But this answer is not only not brought, but also wholly
rejected, by many of the very Adversaries; for others altogether contend, that
Christ according to both natures is Mediator: but some, although they are
afraid to speak so, yet do they indeed say the same, for they refer that office
to the whole Person of Christ, considered in its full latitude, or to Christ as
he is both God and Man. As for the rest, who would have Christ according to the
humane Nature only, to be Mediator; neither do they by this distinction escape
the difficulty; for there are or have been some, who would have the very humane
nature of Christ to be indeed the Mediator; and contend, that it only is in
Paul understood by the name of the Man Christ Jesus. O These, as the other
Adversaries have observed, are necessitated to confess, that the humane Nature
of Christ is a Person; for both Offices, such as Mediatorship is, agree to none
but Persons; and the name of Man, and also of Christ Jesus, is the name of a
Person. But if the humane Nature of Christ is a Person, he cannot be a Person
of supreme Deity; for there would be in him two Persons, a humane and a divine;
I say, a divine one essentially. But that there are two Persons in Christ, all
justly reject as Nestorian and contrary to the Scripture, and judged to be most
absurd.

But there are others, and those far more numerous, who to avoid this Rock,
deal more subtly; for they say, that not the very humane Nature of Christ,
but his Suppositum, or Person, is properly the Mediator; whereas the humane
Nature, is the formal Principle of that Mediation; namely, that part of the
Subject, which contains in it self the proper cause of the action; which
because it is somewhat obscure, is to be declared by an example. Philosophers
teach, that a man properly does understand, love, and hate, and also eat,
drink, run, not the very soul or the body; but that he does understand, love,
and hate according to the soul, whereas he does eat and drink according to the
body: So that the formal principle of some humane actions is the soul, of
others the body. In like manner the Adversaries say, that the Suppositum or
Person of Christ, that is, very whole Christ, is properly the Mediator, and
consequently does such things as pertain to a Mediator, but according to the
humane Nature: and they farther add this reason, because, should not the very
Person of Christ be the Mediator, the actions which he performs as Mediator,
would not have infinite efficacy and value, nor satisfy God for the sins of
men, deserving infinite punishment, which they think to be the proper Office of
Christ the Mediator. But now because his Person, which is the very infinite
God, does properly perform these actions, though according to the humane
nature, hence it comes to pass that they have an infinite force and worth. But
whilst they thus dispute, they again shut the hole to get out at, which they
seemed to themselves by the distinction of natures to have opened: For if the
very divine Person of Christ is Mediator, and performs the actions proper to
a Mediator, it is necessary that the divine Nature also should perform the
same, and so Christ be a Mediator likewise according to the divine Nature: for
as the Adversaries themselves confess, a divine Person does not really differ
from the divine Nature, nor add any thing to the Nature but a Subsistence. But
a Subsistence has of it self no power to act, but all the power to act
resideth in the Nature: the subsistence is only a condition, without which the
Nature does not act: wherefore whatsoever the divine Person of Christ does act,
his divine Nature endued with a subsistence does act. From whence it may be
understood, first, that it is not rightly said, that the very Suppositum, as
they speak, or Person of Christ, does do any thing according to the humane
Nature, since the Person of Christ, if we follow the force of the Adversaries
Opinion, is the very divine Nature, having its subsistence. But it is not
rightly said, that the divine Nature subsisting, does do something according to
the humane Nature, since the humane Nature is not a part of the divine Nature.
Whereas the word according, as it is used by the Adversaries, includes the
relation of a part; but if you take that expression, as if it were said, by the
humane Nrture, then both the Father and holy Spirit might do something
according to the humane Nature of Christ, though perhaps the Father not as the
nearest cause, and such as immediately moves the humane Nature, but the holy
Spirit dwelling therein, even as the nearest cause, and immediately moving that
Nature.

Again, it is likewise understood from what has been spoken, that that
distinction of Natures cannot cause that it may rightly be said, that Christ is
the Mediator of himself, not only because it is incongruous to say, that his
Person does do any thing according to the humane Nature, if that Person be the
very supreme God; but also, because from that Opinion of the Adversaries it
would follow, that the very divine Nature of Christ, does primarily and
properly discharge the Office of a Mediator, although it make use of the humane
nature in this behalf; for it would be necessary, that the same divine Nature
should intervene in the middle between it self and Men, which every one sees
to be absurd. Finally, it is understood, that this distinction of Natures
cannot cause, that Christ the Mediator should be distinguished from God, if
Christ be very God himself. Add hereunto, that none but those things are simply
distinguished one from another: of whom it may be simply affirmed, that the one
of them is not the other. But in this place God and Christ, who is said to be
his Mediator, are simply distinguished one from another; wherefore neither is
that God Christ, nor Christ that God; for the distinction of Natures cannot
cause, that any thing should be simply denied of some subject, which for
another Nature is to be simply affirmed thereof; as we will show more at large
Chap. 3. of the following Section. Wherefore neither can it cause, that any
thing should be simply distinguished from that, which is to be simply
predicated of it, inasmuch as such a distinction as we have seen, does tacitly
involve a simple negation of one in relation to the other.

Neither can any one here say, that Christ in the words of the Apostle, is
therefore rightly distinguished from God, and so tacitly denied that he is that
one God, because by the name of God, or that One God, the whole Trinity is
understood, whereas Christ is not the whole Trinity: for by this reckoning it
might be said, that the Father himself is not God, or that one God, because the
Father is not the whole Trinity. But who could endure to hear one so speaking?
certainly he would openly contradict the Scripture, who durst to speak in that
manner. Besides, the very Adversaries themselves do not suppose the name of
God, or that one God, to be collective; that is, so jointly signifying three
Persons, that it cannot be predicated of each apart: for in predicating, they
hold that name has the nature of an universal, so that it may be predicated of
every Person in particular. For instance; The Father is that one God, the Son
is that one God, the holy Spirit is that one God; wherefore Christ was not
therefore distinguished from that one God, and so tacitly denied to be that one
God, because he is not the whole Trinity, but because he simply is not that one
God.

Some one will perhaps say, as it follows not, That Christ is not a man,
because he is the Mediator of men, since he is rather therefore a Man, because
he is the Mediator of Men: Whence the Apostle expressly says, That there is one
Mediator of God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus: So neither from thence, that
Christ is said to be the Mediator of God, I say, the most high and only God,
does it follow, that he is not the most high and only God. This, though it be
more pertinent to the second Section of this book, shall notwithstanding
receive a brief answer; especially, because the thing does not need any long
dispute: for who sees not, when Christ is said to be the Mediator of Men, that
by the name of Men, other men besides Christ are understood, who were either
wholly alienated from God, or not so joined, but that they might be more closely
joined in a new Covenant by a Mediator? but certainly Christ was not in the
number of them; wherefore we may rather retort this Argument upon the
Adversaries: for as Christ was not in the number of those men whose Mediator he
was, nor is comprehended under them in this place of Paul; so neither is the
same Christ that God, or comprehended under the name of that God whose Mediator
he is said to be.

Finally, If the whole Trinity were comprehended under the name of that God
whose Mediator Christ is; he would also be the Mediator of the holy Spirit. But
this is disentanious to the truth; for there would be open testimonies thereof
extant in the Tables of the Covenant, whose mediator Christ was. But what are
they? We require not such places of Scripture wherein it is expressly said, that
Christ was the mediator of the holy Spirit, but from which it may clearly
appear, that Christ did so intervene in the midst between the holy Spirit and
us, as it is needful that a mediator should intervene between them who are to
be joined in Covenant, and that he performed the proper part of that Office
between him and us. According to our Opinion, which the most learned
Adversaries themselves think not to be false, although they say it is
imperfect, It is the Office of a mediator between God and men, to be the
messenger of God to men, and to strike a League between both, and so to cause,
that men being instructed with the knowledge of the divine Will, may address
themselves to worship God. But the Adversaries commonly suppose, that it is the
proper Office of Christ the Mediator, by fully paying the punishment of all our
sins, to appease the wrath of God kindled against men, and to intercede for
them to God (which we think pertains to a Priest.) But where is it taught in
the Scripture, that Christ was the messenger of the holy Spirit to men, stroke
a League between him and men, and brought men endued with the knowledge of his
Will to worship him?

Concerning the Father, there are most clear testimonies of the Scripture: some
whereof we will allege in the Sea Sect. 2. Chap. 4, 5, 15.
following Section. Certainly Christ, without expressing the Fathers name, does
sometimes John 8.26, 27, 28.
describe him thus; He that sent me; and changes this description with the
name of the Father. There is but one place, as far as I can remember, alleged
out of the Scripture by the Adversaries, to prove that Christ was sent by the
holy Spirit, and it is extant, Isa. 48.16. where the Prophet, according to the
vulgar Translation, speaks thus, And now the Lord God and his Spirit has
sent me. But besides, that the Prophet does there indeed speak of Christ
himself, as even some of the Adversaries have observed, and if any one deny
that it is to be understood of Christ, the Adversaries will have nothing to
prove it withal: It is to be noted, that those words may be rightly rendered out
of the Hebrew, as some latter Castellio.
Interpreters have done, And now the Lord God has sent me and his Spirit.
Besides, though the vulgar interpretation be retained, it would be necessary to
hold, that the holy Spirit did send Christ otherwise than the Lord God, from
whom the holy Spirit is openly distinguished. But here we speak of such a
manner, whereby Christ was the Ambassador or Messenger of the holy Spirit, as
is proper to God. In like manner, neither is there any thing read of a
Covenant-stroke, between the holy Spirit and men, to omit the other things that
might be insisted upon. As for the places which the Adversaries allege,
wherein they think it is written, that Christ pacified God toward us: the
Adversaries themselves are wont to understand them of the Father, not of the
holy Spirit: concerning whom they produce no testimony: neither are they wont
to affirm, that Christ does make intercession for us to the holy Spirit, but to
God the Father: whence 1 John 2.2.
John says, We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous,
who is a Propitiation for our sins. It remains therefore, that not the whole
Trinity, but the Father only be understood by the name of God in this place of
ours; and so that one God, and the Father, be accounted for the same. But what
need many words? the very similitude of this place, with those which we have
formerly discust, wherein by the name of that One God, the Father is
understood, or that one God, is said to be the Father, does sufficiently teach
every one, who will not be obstinate against the truth, that the same is here
also to be understood. Furthermore, as in those places, 1 Cor. 12. and Ephesians.
4. Paul would show, that there is the same God of all Christians, not one God
of these, another of those; so his purpose is here to show, that there is the
same God of all men, who accordingly is so far forth alike affected toward
all, as that he would have all saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth,
and not some to be saved, and others to perish. Whence likewise he sent one
Mediator unto men, to strike the same League with all in his Name, and confirm
it with his Blood, and so deliver all out of the bondage of sin and death,
having, as it were, given a price, and testify unto all the Sovereign Love of
God toward them.

This place puts us also in mind of that which is extant also in the same
Apostle, Rom 3.30. Romans 3.30.
where being about to show that God will alike justify by faith all men, both
Jews and Gentiles, he says thus, For there is One God, who will justify the
Circumcision (that is, the circumcised, or Jews) by Faith, and the
Uncircumcision (that is the uncircumcised, or Gentiles) by Faith: Now he
speaks of that God, of whom he had hitherto spoke many things, and to whom he
had ascribed the act of justifying, whom he sundry times most openly
distinguishes from Christ, amongst other things, affirming of him, that he
appointed Christ Ver. 25.
a Propitiatory. But that he is no other than the Father of Christ, all seem to
acknowledge. Certainly that he is not the whole Trinity, nor Christ himself,
nor the holy Spirit, may be shown, partly by the same, and partly by such like
Reasons as we have used in the place immediately foregoing, as the prudent
Reader will by himself understand. Wherefore we will no longer dwell her^upon,
especially because we would have this place to be only an accession of the
former.

CHAP. VII.
from Romans 16.27. John 5.44. Jude 4.
The seventh Argument drawn out of those places, wherein, by the name of the
Only God, or the Only wise God, or the Only master God, none but the Father of
Jesus Christ is designed.

THough out of each of those places, wherein after such a manner none but the
Father of Jesus Christ is designed, we might draw Arguments; yet because the
Arguments are alike among themselves, we will reckon them for one. Thus
therefore we may conclude, If by the Only God, or the Only wise God, or the
Only Master God, the Father only is some where understood (and we will
afterward show that he is so understood) it is necessary that the Father only
be that God, namely, Most High, Wise, Master. For it is necessary simply to
say, the Only God, or Only wise God, or Only Master God is the Father: and
contrariwise the Father is the Only God, or the Only wise God, or Only master
God. Otherwise these could not be put for the Father as equivalent; or would
not signify the Father only, but some other also. Take which of those
Propositions you please, and our Opinion will be established. If the first; it
cannot be absolutely and simply said, that the only God, or only wise, or only
master God is the Father, if the name of the only God, etc. is of larger extent
than the Father, or if any other besides the Father, is the only God, etc. For
neither is a word of a stricter signification predicated of a large one, but
contrariwise. If you take the latter Proposition; it has bin already shown in
the Defense of the first Argument, that it is all one as if you should say, the
Father only is God, the Father only is the wise God, or master God. For when
any one is said to be he to whom only something does agree, it is all one as if
you should say, that the same attribute agrees to him only, who is first named:
as if I should say, God is that Spirit, who only existed from all Eternity; it
is all one as if I should say, God only is that Spirit, who existed from all
Eternity: and so in the rest.

The Confirmation and Defense of the Argument.
NOw that we may show, that the Father only is somewhere designed in such a
manner, we will begin from that place wherein mention is made of the only wise
God, as being very clear and most suitable to that which is to be proved. And
you shall find it at the end of the Epistle to the Romans, where the Apostle
says, First place Romans 16.27.
To the only wise God through Jesus Christ be honor and glory for ever and
ever. That in this place by the name of the only wise God, no other is
understood but the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, may easily be perceived.
For it is clear that Christ is not understood by that name, since he is most
openly distinguished, from the only wise God, and that as the middle cause of
glory and honor from the ultimate scope and object of the same. Nor also the
whole Trinity held by the Adversaries. Otherwise to Christ, who would be
contained in that Trinity, glory would be attributed through himself, as
through the middle cause. For as to the refuge of two Natures, that has no
more place here, than in the former Testimony: since Christ is here considered
with relation to the Office which he sustaineth, in respect whereof he is the
middle cause of divine Worship. Whence the Adversaries themselves commonly
hold, when we are said to worship God through Christ, that Christ is considered
as Mediator. But Mediation, as also other Offices, agrees to none but a person
as he is such. Wherefore one must either say, that the humane Nature of Christ
is a Person, and to be understood by the name of Jesus Christ; or hold that
Christ here is considered, according to his divine Nature also; or that it is
primarily and directly here understood by the name of Jesus Christ, as has
been shown in the precedent Chapter. It remains, that by the name of the only
wise God, a certain divine Person, and that Superior to Christ, be understood.
For he is more worthy, to whom glory is given as to the ultimate scope, than
the middle cause, through which worship is exhibited to him. But there is no
such Person besides the Father. It is in vain here to think of the holy Spirit:
for to omit, that it is not granted, that the holy Spirit is so much as a
Person, this is certain, that the holy Spirit, is not a Person worthier than
the Person of Christ: But we have shown that that Person is such to whom glory
is attributed through Christ. Besides, that the Father is worshipped by Christ,
is both from See among other places, Ephesians. 5.20. Col. 3.17:
Scripture, and the confession of all, very manifest. But that the holy Spirit
is worshipped by Christ, what place of the Scripture, I say not does affirm,
but intimate? yea it is so far from saying that he is to be worshipped through
Christ, that it never simply says, that glory is to be attributed unto him,
especially in that manner which we here understand; nor do we there read that
it was ever attributed to him by so much as one man, concerning which thing
more largely in its own Sect. 3. Chap. 2.
place. Neither indeed is there any cause if a certain Person is here to be
understood, why we should pass by the Father, and understand the holy Spirit,
since glory is here attributed to God as the prime Author of Salvation, and of
the things belonging thereunto. Now that all those things are wont to be
ascribed to the Father, as the prime Author, if not only, yet chiefly the
Adversaries themselves do not deny, and is most apparent from that place of
Paul, where he says that the Father is he, 1 Cor. 8.6. Romans 11. ult.
Of whom are all things. Whence also he constituteth him the ultimate end of
the worship and honor that proceeds from us; for he is the same, of whom are
all things, and to whom are all things. The second The second place John 5.44.
of those places is extant in John, where amongst other things Christ speaks
thus unto the Jews, How can ye believe, who receive Glory from one another, and
seek not the glory which is from the only God? In which place that the Father
is understood by the name of the only God; First, the whole context shows
where Christ promiscuously mentions one while God, another while his Father,
neither is there any the least cause why we should suspect that Christ in the
same speech passed from one person to another: since none can deny that all
things which are attributed unto that God, are most rightly ascribed to the
Father. See now the precedent and following verses, yea that whole conference
with the Jews, beginning from the 17th verse. Again, Christ speaks of that
God, whom the Jews acknowledge for God, and concerning whom it was granted
amongst them, that the Glory proceeding from him is to be sought, although they
neglect to seek it. For he speaks of a thing which ought to precede Faith on
Christ; whereof because the Jews were destitute, they are therefore here by
Christ himself pronounced unfit to believe on him. But the Jews did then
acknowledge for God, no other besides him, whom Christ called his Father. For
that they did either imagine a Trinity to be God, or the Son, or holy
SpiSpirit, I suppose there is none that dares affirm. But Christ affirms
that of his Father, chap. 8.54. where he says, It is my Father that glorifieth
me, whom ye say that he is your God. It is therefore apparent that in this
place, that only God is the same with the Father, and the one of no larger
extent than the other.

The third place is extant in Third place, Jude 4.
Jude, who if you regard his greek words, says, that false Teachers, who had
already insinuated themselves into the Church, do deny the only master God, and
our Lord Jesus Christ. For we have already See the Book of God and his
Attributes, chap. 14.
elsewhere shown not Christ, as many of the Adversaries suppose, but some other
is understood by the only master God. For first, if he had understood Christ,
there would have been no need after he had called him the only master God, to
name him our Lord; especially since the word Master does comprehend all the
force of the word Lord. Again, neither can Christ be called the only master
God, since his Father so is, and is so See Luke 2.29, etc. Acts 4.24. compare
v. 24, with ver. 30.
called Master, that being designed by this very name, he is distinguished from
Christ. Neither is Christ any where called Master (the greek word being (...)
which Jude makes use of) in the whole new Testament; but the Father is found
so styled. No marvel, because in the great House of God Christ it not the
Master, but the Son of the Master of the Family; and has God for his Head, as
shall be spoken in its place. But the Master of the Family has not a Head in
the House, but is therein the chiefest Lord and Governor. Now whereas some
urge the Unity of the Article set before those words, the only Master God, and
our Lord Jesus Christ, they prevail nothing thereby. For the Unity of an
Article set before diverse names, does not presently argue the Identity of the
thing, but often times does only intimate some affinity or conjunction of
diverse things; as namely of those which concur to the same action, or about
which the same action is conversant. See Mat. 3.7. and 16.1. and 6.17. and
1.27. and 27.56. Ephesians. 2.20. and 3.5. and 4.11. 1 These. 1.8. Heb. 9.19.
Certainly See Beza's Annot. on Ephesians. 4.11. and 5.5.
some very learned men among the Adversaries, when they had in this Argument
urged the unity of the Article, elsewhere pronounce the reason fetched from
thence to be but weak. It is therefore apparent that Christ is not there
understood by the name of the only Master God. Moreover, neither can we
understand by that name the whole Trinity, which is held; otherwise what need
was there, after it had been said that they do deny the whole Trinity, that is
the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, to add by name that they do deny our Lord
Jesus Christ? As if that had not been sufficiently said, when it was asserted
that they deny the whole Trinity. You will say that the whole Trinity was but
confusedly, and therefore obscurely signified by the appellation of the only
Master God; therefore something more distinct was to be added for explications
sake. We answer, if that reason had any moment, not only the mention of our
Lord Jesus Christ, but also the Father, and holy Spirit, should have been
expressly made, since they are no less indistinctly and confusedly (if the
Opinion of the Adversaries be true) signified by the name of the only Master
God, then Christ: To omit, that if Christ is dinstinguished from that only
Master God, it is agreeable that Person should be adjoined to another person,
and not when three persons have been confusedly taken, one person, and that of
the number of those three, be subjoyned. But if some certain Person is to be
understood, who is there that dares affirm of the holy Spirit (to omit now the
question concerning his personality) that he, the Father being passed by, is
joined with Christ as one that rules, and set before him not only in the order
of the words, but also in dignity of title? For the Scripture in very many
places joyneth the Father, as Supreme Monarch with Christ, without making
mention of the holy Spirit, and set him before Christ both in order of words
and dignity of title: but never passes by the Father, joining the holy Spirit,
as Lord and Prince, with Christ; neither indeed does it otherwise, unless it be
very seldom, join the holy Spirit with Christ; so far is it from setting him
before Christ in order of words or dignity of title. Not to say that the Father
is expressly called Master, the holy Spirit no where; much less is the holy
Spirit designed by the name of the only Master. Yea, neither is the name of
God, any where read to be attributed unto him. Concerning which in its Sect. 3.
Chap. 1.
place

CHAP. VIII.
from Dan. 7. Rev. 4.5.
Argument the eighth, drawn from the Visions in Daniel, and John's Revelation.

TO the places hitherto alleged, two Visions are to be added, very like to one
another, from whence it is apparent that there is but one person of the most
high God. Which presently gives us to und^rstand, that the most high God is no
other besides the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Since he by the confession
of all, is a divine person; and the others, which are also believed to be
persons of supreme Divinity, cannot be so, unless he be a divine Person: since
he is the fountain and original of the rest, and whatsoever Divinity is in
them, is derived from him. Wherefore if there is but one Person of supreme
Divinity, the Father only is a Person having supreme Divinity. Not to say that
those very Visions, which we will quote, do, if they be compared with other
places of Scripture, sufficiently intimate, that the God which did in a manner
expose himself to the view, is none but the Father. The first of those Visions
is extant in Daniel, chap. 7.9, etc. where it is said that the Ancient of
days, that is the God which existed from all eternity, did sit, and that there
came to him in the clouds of heaven as it were a Son of Man, and received of
him Authority and Honor, and a Kingdom. The latter is extant, Rev. 4. and
chap. 5. where it is also described, how the Almighty and Eternal God the
Creator of all things, sat upon the Throne; and afterward a Lamb came to him,
and received a book from him, which no other was worthy to open and view, a
Book I say, of the Sacred Decrees of God concerning things to come. Now in both
places, that Most High, and Eternal God, which is understood by the sitter upon
the Throne, is represented as one Person, and openly distinguished from Christ,
and that, even then when divine Honor is given of said to be worthy to be
given unto Christ. For also in Daniel it is said, that to him, who came as a
Son of man to the Ancient of days, was by him honor given, and that all
People, Tribes, and Tongues, should serve him. Where certainly it is not spoken
of civil honor and service to be performed unto Christ, but of religious and
divine. And in the Chap. 5.13.
Revelation John writes, I heard every Creature which is in Heaven, and on
Earth, and under the Earth, and which are in the Sea, and all the things in
them, saying, To him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb, be blessing,
and honor, and glory, and power for ever. Likewise Ibid. v. 8, etc.
before, praises were given apart to the Lamb by the four living Creatures, and
the four and twenty Elders, and also the Angels; as they had been formerly
ascribed apart to the Sitter upon the Throne, chap. 4.8, etc. But were there
many Persons of the most high God, and Christ one of them, many also would have
been exhibited as sitting upon the Throne; nor would Christ have been so
distinguished from him that sits upon the Throne, or from the Eternal and
Almighty God, but that it would appear that he likewise does sit upon the
Throne, and is that Eternal and Almighty God.

The Defense of the Argument.
NOw if any one say, that the divine Essence only, which is one in number, was
represented by the Image of him that sat upon the Throne, and not some Person;
he is exceedingly mistaken. For besides the very Image of one sitting upon a
Throne, is indeed the Image of a Person, and that one Person: the actions which
are attributed to him that sits on the Throne, do altogether demonstrate
that he is an intelligent Suppositum; that is, a Person. Since actions are
commonly said in the Schools to agree unto none but Suppositums: But those
actions which are attributed to him that sits upon the Throne, are suitable
to none but an intelligent Nature. Not to say that very many Testimonies of the
Scripture, concerning which we shall afterward Sect. 2. Chap. 18.
have occasion to speak, being compared with these, sufficiently show that the
Father of Jesus Christ is understood by him that sits upon the Throne: for
they manifestly affirm, that he gave to Christ Authority, Honor, and a
Kingdom, with all other things, without any where hinting that some other gave
all these things to Christ.

As for the distinction of Christ, and him that sits upon the Throne, no man
can justly say, that Christ is according to his humane Nature only
distinguished from him, being according to the divine Nature the same with him.
For first, according to a better Nature, in regard of which, and which only, he
is believed to be a Person, were the same with him that sits upon the
Throne; he could not be simply distinguished from him, for that would be all
one as if he should simply be denied to be him that sits upon the Throne.
But that cannot simply be denied of any whole, which for another nature or part
is simply to be affirmed of the same, although it agree not thereunto according
to some one nature, especially the less excellent, as shall be understood from
what we will afterward speak, Sect. 2. Chap. 3. How, I pray you, could it come
to pass, that in the whole description of both Visions, there should not be
even the least hint, from whence it might appear, that Christ is the same with
him that sits upon the Throne, and that the diversities of Natures should be
openly expressed, but the unity in the knowledge whereof there was no less
moment, not at all? Again, since to Christ, as he is distinguished from him
that sits upon the Throne, actions agreeing to Persons are attributed, as is
manifest from the very Visions themselves, especially the latter; it is
apparent that he is considered as a Person, and so distinguished from him that
sits upon the Throne. But the Person of Christ according to the Opinion of
the Adversaries, is the second of the Deity; and so the very divine Nature it
self having its substance. Wherefore if they will speak agreeable to
themselves, they must confess that it likewise is distinguished from him that
sits upon the Throne: Or if they will not confess this, they must with us
assert, that the Person of Christ is not the second Person of the Trinity,
which they hold Furthermore, who would believe, that when divine Honor was
ascribed to Christ, he was considered only according to his less excellent
nature, and not rather whole, or according to the Nature most worthy of that
Honor? but when that Honor is ascribed unto him, he is most openly considered
as distinguished from him that sits upon the Throne. Wherefore whole Christ,
even in respect of that other Nature, or a part, which was in him most
excellent, must of necessity be distinguished from him that sits upon the
Throne. Finally, If Christ according to a divine Nature, were one and the same
with him that sits upon the Throne, either more persons, namely, that of the
Father and the Son (not to speak any thing now concerning the holy Spirit) were
to be expressed as sitting on the Throne; or it ought to be held, that the
Father and the Son are the same, not only in Essence, but also in Person. Since
there is no doubt, that the Person of the Father was expres^ed by him that
sits upon the Throne. But that there is the same Person of the Father and
the Son, all reject, and justly condemn, as a Sabellian Error.

CHAP. IX.
Sundry Arguments are briefly intimated to show, that none but the Father of
Jesus Christ is the Most High God.

BEsides the Arguments hitherto produced, many others may be brought; but
because they do in a manner fall in with those which shall in the second and
third Section by us be alleged; therefore we will in this place in a brief
manner only intimate them, and not all of them neither, but only the chiefest.

That God is wont to be taken for the Father.
The Ninth Argument of our Opinion may be this, namely, That the name of God, or
Lord, when used for the word Jehovah or Adonai, is in innumerable places of the
Scripture taken as proper to the Father, in such a manner, as that he only is
understood by that name, either simply put, or expressly with some Epithet, as
that of True, Living, Almighty, and the like, and being designed by the very
appellation, is distinguished from Christ, or the holy Spirit, or from both
together. For that would not come to pass, if not the Father only were the Most
High God, but also the Son and holy Spirit. Concerning which matter, see what
we will say hereafter, Sect. 2. Chap. 1. and Sect. 3. Chap. 5. and if you
please also, The Father is of himself.
Chap. 9, 10, 11, 12. of our Book concerning God and his Attributes.

The Tenth Argument may be this, That none but the Father of Jesus Christ is of
himself, as having received neither his nature, nor any divine thing whatsoever
from another, which is the property of the Most High God. To which this also
may be adjoined, that the Father only is, as they commonly speak, The Fountain
of Divinity. For from him the very Son himself has his Divinity, as both the
thing it self speaks, and the Adversaries also commonly confess. From the
same also proceeds the holy Spirit. And though the Latin Churches hold, that
the holy Spirit does proceed both from the Father and the Son; which if rightly
understood, not only may, but also ought to be granted: nevertheless it is
apparent, partly from the Scripture, partly from the Opinion of the Adversaries
themselves, that the Son cannot be the first Original of the holy Spirit; as we
mean when we use the word Fountain, but such an original as proceeded from
another which was before it. For he who does himself flow from another, and
from him receive his Divinity, cannot be the prime Source of another Divinity.
And indeed whatsoever is spoken in the Scripture, and tends to show unto us
that the holy Spirit does proceed also from the Son, is herein contained,
namely, that the Son does send the holy Spirit, and pour him out upon his
Confidents. But the Son sends the holy Spirit from the Father, as he himself
expressly affirmed, John 15.26. he also said that he would ask the Father, and
that he should give them another Advocate, John 14.16. and having received the
promise of the holy Spirit from the Father, he poured out upon the Faithful so
excellent a gift; as Peter testifies, Acts 2.33. compare also Luke 24.49. and
Joh. 7.39. Therefore the Greek Churches, though they otherwise agree with the
Latin concerning the Person of the holy Spirit, do yet herein differ from them;
namely, that they say the holy Spirit proceeds, or is sent or given, not from
the Father and the Son, but from the Father by the Son: which kind of speaking
is more suitable to express the true Opinion. It is clear therefore that none
but the Father of Jesus Christ, is the Fountain or prime Original of Divinity,
and consequently he only of whom are all things; which is the property of the
Most High God. For as the most high God only is he of whom are all things; so
he only of whom are all things, is the Most High God. More things belonging to
this Argument, see afterward, Sect. 2. Chap. 2, 3. and Sect. 3. Chap. 11.

The Eleventh Argument is largely diffused, and may be branched out into many;
for hereunto belong all those places of the Scripture, wherein some Prerogative
is given to the Father above Christ. Hereunto pertain, first, those Testimonies
of the Scripture, wherein the Father is expressly said to be either See Sect. 2.
Chap. 14.
greater than Christ, or the Chap. 24.
Head of Christ, or the Chap. 23.
God of Christ: those also, wherein the Father is said to have given a Chap. 16.
Commandment to Christ, and that Christ was his Servant and Minister, from the
Prerogative of the Father.
obeyed his Command, and submitted his chap. 12.
own will to his. from the Prerogative of the Father.
Likewise those, where Christ is said to be chap. 25
God's, to be the chap. 27.
Mediator of God, the chap. 28.
Priest of God, chap. 5.25.
sent from the Father, to have chap. 16.
come not to do his own will, but the Fathers. Hitherto also belong those
wherein Christ professes that not chap. 3, 19.
himself, but the Father is the prime Author of those wonderful works which he
did, that his chap. 4.
Doctrine was not his own, but the Fathers; that he chap. 8.
which believes on him, believes not on him, but on the Sender of him,
namely, the Father. To which those also are like, which teach that the Father
is chap. 19
worshipped through Christ, and that whatsoever divine things Christ either has
or performs, or are performed unto him from us, redound unto the glory of the
Father as the utmost scope; that Christ poured out chap. 17
prayers to the Father; that the Father is the true Author of the chap. 29
Resurrection of Christ; that the Father chap. 18.
exalted and glorified Christ; and consequently bestowed all things on him;
that chap. 24
Christ shall hereafter deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, and become
subject to him; that the chap. 19
Father did or does all things by Christ. Now we will show in their places,
that whilst those things which we have reckoned up, are ascribed to the Father,
a Prerogative is attributed unto him above Christ, wholly and entirely
considered, and not according to one nature only; and consequently also that he
is greater than the holy Spirit. Which is manifest even from thence, namely, in
that those things which we have reckoned up, are absolut^ly wont to be ascribed
to the Father, and no where to Christ, namely, in respect of some more
excellent Nature, and no where also to the holy Spirit. Add hereunto others
also, which have in part been observed by the Adversaries themselves; chap. 10.
See Mat. 20.23. and 22.1. and 25.34. Romans 8 29 Gal. 1.15, 16. Ephesians. 1.3. so on
to the 13.
as that the Father, not Christ, not the holy Spirit, is said in Scripture to
have predestined men, to have decreed some things to some one either before
the world was created; or from the foundation of the world. All glory, all
happiness, designed either to Christ or his confidents, was first decreed and
provided by the Father. The whole reason of our Salvation depends on him.

What should I speak of the Creation of Heaven and Earth? For though the
Adversaries endeavor to vindicate it unto Christ and the holy Spirit, yet are
they themselves wont to say, that it is wont to be ascribed unto the Father in
a peculiar manner, no otherwise than if it were proper unto him; in which
manner Redemption is attributed to the Son, Sanctification to the holy Spirit,
concerning which thing we will speak somewhat hereafter, Sect. 3. Hence also in
that which is called the Apostles Chap. 3.
Creed, the Creation of Heaven and Earth is ascribed neither to Christ, nor to
the holy Spirit, but to the Father only. For thus we say, I believe in God the
Father Almighty, Creator of Heaven and Earth; and in his only begotten Son, not
confessing Christ himself to be the Creator, but the only begotten Son of the
Creator. Neither indeed does the Scripture any where ascribe to Christ the
Creation of Heaven and Earth; and when it attributes a creation to him, it not
only speaks of a new creation, or certain reformation of things, but also no
where says that the Son himself created all things, but that all things were
created by him and in him. Finally, when the Scripture speaks either of
Religion, and the Worship of God in gross, or of certain parts thereof, it is
so wont to make mention of the Father, that it may easily appear unto all, that
the Father is he, to whom in all ages worship was to be given by all men, and
was indeed given by all pious men, and to whom only all honor is ultimately to
be referred. Whence also after Christ was exalted, yet that custom prevailed in
Christian Churches, that public Prayers should for the most part be directed
to the Father: some few to the Son, but seldom or never any (especially if you
distinguish Prayers from Hymns) to the holy Spirit: concerning which thing we
will elsewhere Sect. 3. chap. 2.
speak somewhat. Whence the Prayers made in Churches are commonly wont to end
in this manner, Through our Lord Jesus Christ, having also sometimes the name
of the Son prefixed, through whom namely as a Mediator and Priest, prayers are
poured out unto the Father himself, though we otherwise not only willingly
confess, that prayers may be poured out to Christ himself, but contend that
they ought often to be poured out; and in our Churches do our selves very
frequently perform the same. Notwithstanding that custom which has for so many
ages endured in the whole Christian world, which even that vulgar opinion
concerning three Persons of the most high God, has not been able to take away,
gives testimony to our Opinion touching one God the Father. For such a
Prerogative of the Father above the Son and holy Spirit, evinceth that he only
is the most high God. Certainly the very truth it self crept into the minds of
men, although they set themselves against it, and darted the Beams of her
clearness into them, not suffering her self to be wholly darkened with the
clouds of errors. For there appear on every side hints and arguments, from
which it is clean that the Father only is he, Romans 11.36.
of whom are all things, and by whom are all things, and for whom are all
things, as Paul speaks of the most high God; that is, by whose counsel and
decree all things are at first constituted; by whose efficacious providence and
virtue all things are perfected; to whom finally, as the ultimate end, all
things are referred. A diligent Reader of the Scripture will easily observe
this, especially being thus admonished, if he heed the diversity of things
which are attributed to the Father, Son and holy Spirit, and of the Reason for
which they are attributed unto them, and consequently of the forms of speech
which are used concerning them.

Last of all, this also may be added, The God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,
the God of the Israelites. But this is, no other than the Father of Jesus
Christ. Whence some of the more learned Calvin on Acts 22.14.
Adversaries write, That he who heretofore would be called the God of Abraham
and the Fathers, is now by a proper title called, The Father of Christ. The
name indeed or description is changed, the person remaining the same. Hence the
God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the God of the Fathers, The Father only is the
God of the Patriarchs.
being simply so called, is manifestly put for the Father only: Acts 3.13. for
thus says Peter, The God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob, the God of our Fathers, has glorified his Son Jesus. If not the Father
only, but also the Son and holy Spirit, were the God of the Fathers; why is
that God of the Fathers, simply so called, said to have raised his Son? is
Christ the Son of himself, and also of the holy Spirit? Why also does the
divine Author to the Hebrews, that I may not mention others, put that God who
diverse and sundry ways spoke heretofore to the Fathers by the Prophets, and
who is ever and anon called the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, or the God of
Israel; why, I say, does he put him simply so called, for the Father? For he
adds, that he has in these last times spoken to us by the Son. Did he not
intimate, that that God, who in the whole Old Testament, is brought in
speaking, and called the God of the Fathers, is the same with the Father of
Christ, and that the one appellation is of no larger extent than the other?
Certainly he must be more quick-sighted than Lynceus, who will discover in the
Writing of that Covenant, that Christ (not to speak any thing of the holy
Spirit) was under the old Covenant acknowledged and worshipped for the most
high God, so great a silence is there concerning this matter* But of these
things hitherto.

SECT. II.
Wherein is shown, That Christ is not the Most High God, that so it may be
understood, That the Father only is the Most High God.

IN the foregoing Section, we have produced those places, which principally
show, and that directly, that the Father only is the most high God;
nevertheless, they do also prove that Christ is not that very God; which we
have undertaken to prove in the second place, since it pertains to the
demonstration of the former. For if Christ (and we will afterward teach that
the same is to be held concerning the holy Spirit) is not that one most high
God, it remains that the Father only is he, since there is no other of whom a
Christian can so much as suspect that he should be the most high God. But we
have shown that Christ in all those places is distinguished from that One God,
and therefore cannot be that One God. For the same should be distinguished from
himself. And lest any one should think, that he can here evade by the
distinction of Natures, we have shown, that in most places, out of which
Judgment may easily be made concerning the rest, Christ is there considered not
according to some nature, That Chrst is frequently distinguished from God.
which is not a person, but in regard of his very Person: which according to
the Opinion of the Adversaries, is that One God, and the second Person of the
Trinity, as they speak.

But to those Reasons we think fit to add sundry more, not that they may not,
or ought not of themselves to be sufficient for every wise and judicious man:
but that it may appear with how many and how strong props of the Scripture our
Opinion concerning one God the Father, is supported. For by this means we hope
it will come to pass, that all wise men will not only discharge us from all
fault of impiety and rashness, in departing from an opinion received for so
many Ages, but also begin to wonder that they were dim-sighted, and saw no
clearer in so great a luster of the Truth, shining on every side, and of its
own accord darring its beams into the eyes of all; and so understand, that they
shall he impiously obstinate, if they shall purposely shut their eyes at so
great a Light, and dare to reject the true Opinion which we defend.

First therefore we will allege those Testimonies of the Scripture, and
Arguments drawn from them, which principally show that Christ is not that One
or Most High God; yet do in the mean time withal attribute a Prerogative to the
Father above Christ, and that to him alone: from which it may presently be
rightly concluded, that the Father only is the Most High God. Then we will
subjoyn them which do directly demonstrate only this, That Christ, namely, is
not the most high God.

CHAP. I.
Argument the first, drawn thence, That Christ is most frequently distinguished
from God.

AS to the Testimonies of the first sort, and the Arguments drawn thence, we
will begin from those that are largely diffused, and may be referred to the
names in some sort either denied or attributed unto Christ: of which we will in
this place allege but two. The first is, That Christ is in innumerable places
openly distinguished from God simply put. And that we may out of so great
plenty of Examples, produce a few which may put the Reader in mind of the rest.
How often do we read that Christ is called the Son of God? elsewhere we see him
called the Word or Speech of God, the Image of God: elsewhere we find it
written, that he was in the beginning with God, was sent from God, went out
from God, is the Bread of God that descended from Heaven, was in the form of
God, and equal to God, sat down at the right hand of God, or of the Power of
God, was made Lord and Christ by God, was appointed Judge by God. Now it is
certain, that by the name of God in such places, the most high God is
understood. How then can Christ himself be the most high God? For it would be
necessary by this reckoning, either that there are two most high Gods, he,
namely, who is signified by the name of God and Christ: and that Christ is
distinguished from himself, which all understand to be absurd.

The Defense of the Argument.
BUt to this Argument two things are wont to be given in answer. First, That by
the name of God in such places, the Father is denoted: and that since Christ is
a Person different from the Father, there is no marvel that Christ is
distinguished from God. Next that Christ in respect of the humane Nature is
distinguished from God, not in respect of the divine.

The first exception for two causes chiefly, is of no moment. One is, that it
would thence follow, either that there are two most high Gods, namely, the
Father and Christ; or that these twain, though distinct in persons, do yet
make, one God. The first will not be granted by the very Adversaries. The
latter also cannot consist, because the name of God, is the name of a Person.
In as much as it signifies him that exercises Imperial Power over others; and
when it is put for the most high God, it designeth him, who with supreme
Imperial Power governs all things. But this agrees to none but a Person, or,
as the Schools, a Suppositum endued with understanding, which is the definition
of a person. Wherefore he that says that there is one most high God, says
that there is one Person with supreme imperial power ruling all things: and he
that says that there are many such persons, says that there are many most
high Gods. Of which ^^sing, more in the second Book. The other Reason is,
because if the name of God taken for the most high God, is common to Christ
with the Father, there is no cause why it should be peculiarly taken for the
Father; and so Christ be distinguished from God. For how shall a word common to
the Father and the Son, distinguish the one from the other? should he in their
opinion be thought to speak rightly, who should distinguish the Father from God
simply put? Who ever, for examples sake, did read, the Father of God, the
Father sent God, the Father gave God, God went out from the Father, if ye
believe in the Father, believe also in God, as we read that Christ is the Son
of God, that God sent and gave his Son, that Christ came out from God; and he
himself pronounces, If ye believe in God, belive also in me? Do not the very
ears of men reject those first forms of speaking, John 3.16, 17. and 13.3. and
14.1.
as disagreeable to the use of the Scripture, yea, and of them with whom we
have to do? But if you say, that a common word is therefore peculiarly
attributed to the Father, because he is the Fountain and Original of Divinity;
since the Son and holy Spirit receive their Deity from him: we have already
shown Sect. 1. Chap. 1.
before, that they who answer so, do either contradict themselves, and
overthrow their own Tenet concerning a Trinity of Persons in one substance of
God, or say nothing, and obtrude upon us empty words. Wherefore we refer the
Reader thither.

As for the latter exception, which is, That Christ according to the humane
Nature, not according to the divine, is distinguished from God absolutely put:
this also cannot consist. For first we have already shown Sect. 1: Cap. 6, 8.
above, that Christ cannot simply be distinguished from God, if he himself be
the most high God, although according to some one Nature he be not so. Again,
according to the Opinion of the Adversaries, in many of the Places quoted by
us, or in such as are like to them, Christ is considered according to the
divine Nature; as when he is called the Son of God, or the only begotten Son of
God; and also when he is said to have been in the beginning with God, to have
been sent from God into the world, to have descended from Heaven, to have come
out from God, to be equal to God. The greatest part also refer hereunto those
expressions, that he is called the Image of God, the Word or Speech of God, and
that he is said to be in the form of God. Wherefore it is necessary to say,
that in such places, whole Christ, how great soever he is, is distinguished
from God, and not in respect of one nature only. But from such places, judgment
may easily be made of the rest. For why should one seek a different reason of
distinction, where it is spoken of the same person, when the same person may
every where have place? Add hereunto, that we will afterward show that the
holy Spirit also is in the same manner also distinguished from God simply put,
as we saw Christ was distinguished from him. But if the distinction be the
same, why not also the reason of the distinction; especially if the same may
have place in both, as the Adversaries either confess, or are forced to
confess. For what reason of distinction they hold in the holy Spirit, the third
person of the Trinity, as they believe, the same must they confess may also be
applied unto Christ. But if you fly to a distinction of natures, there will be
a far different reason of distinction in both. For this has no place in the
holy Spirit. Wherefore the reason of the distinction between God and Christ, is
not to be placed in this, but in some other thing. But we have shown that no
other can be imagined, than that the Father only be acknowledged the Most High
God. And let these things suffice to have been spoken concerning the first
Argument.

CHAP. II.
Christ is called the Son of God.
The second Argument drawn from the name of The Son of God.

THe second Argument may he fetched from thence, that Christ is so often in the
Scripture called the Son of God. For the Son of God cannot be the most high
God. To prove which, we will not now repeat that, which we have urged in the
foregoing Chapter; namely, that by this very appellation, the Son is
distinguished from God simply so called. We will not likewise urge, that the
substance of the Father, must of necessity be different from that of the Son:
since every one is really the same with his Substance or Essence: and
consequently the Father will be the Son, Lib. 2. Sect. 2. Chap. 1, etc.
and the Son the Father. But if there be a different Essence of the Son and the
Father, the Son cannot be the most high God, unless you hold two most high
Gods. We will not finally here urge, that, as the most ignorant understand, the
Son is in time after the Father: whereas the most high God cannot be in time
after any, since he existed from all Eternity. These things, I say, we will not
now urge, in as much as they are elsewhere to be urged; but only this, That
from this appellation it follows, that the Father is more excellent than the
Son. But none is in any sort more excellent than the most high God. For
whatsoever excellency there is, which is incident to supreme Divinity, cannot
be absent from him who is the most high God. Otherwise he would have some
defect. But such an Excellency it is, to be from ones self. For he is
excellenter and greater, who has his Essence, and whatsoever he has, from
himself, than he who has from another both his Essence, and all things that
accompany the Essence, and cannot be had without it. Now that God the Father
has from himself his Essence, and all other things which he has, is granted
amongst all; and had he not, he likewise would be the son of another, or a
creature, not the most high God. But the Son for this very reason, because he
is the Son, has from the Father his Essence, and also consequently whatsoever
accompanies the Essence, and cannot he had without it, which is the cause
(that we may note this by the way) why Christ is in the Scripture far more
frequently called the Son of God, than God, namely, because the former
appellation does so express the Divinity of Christ, as that it withal
distinguishes the same from that most high and independent Divinity, which
belongs to the Father; whereas the word God does not do so. It is therefore
manifest, that the Father is more excellent than the Son; and consequently that
the Son cannot be the most high God. Certainly even the very Adversaries
themselves, as we have already Sect. 1. Cap. 1.2. and Cap. 1. of this Section.
Cap. 14. Sect. 2.
hinted several times, acknowledge a Prerogative of the Father above the Son
and holy Spirit, in that he is the Fountain of Divinity. Whence very many of
the ancient Doctors of the Church, take that of Christ, John 14. My Father is
greater than I, to be meant of him according to his Divinity, as we shall see
in its place.

The Defense of the Argument.
BUt there will not be wanting some, who will say that Christ indeed, as he is
the Son, or in regard of his Person, is from the Father; but not as he is God,
or in regard of his divine Nature. For that in respect hereof, he, no less than
the Father, is from himself, and as they speak, Self-God. Whence it follows,
that a Prerogative and Excellency, does agree to the Father above the Son, as
he is the Son, not as God. But this hinders not, but that Christ may be the
most high God. But this answer is of no efficacy. For that very thing which
they confess, is sufficient for us to prove that which they confess not. For
first, we have shown, that none can in any sort be more excellent, than the
most high God. But they confess, and are forced to confess, that the Father is
more excellent than the Son, as he is the Son, or in regard of his Person. Add
hereunto, that the most high God is in no sort whatsoever, that is, neither in
regard of his nature, nor of his person (that we may now in this manner,
distinguish these together with the Adversaries) from another. For whatsoever
is from another, depends on an efficient cause. But the most high God in no
regard depends on an efficient cause. Wherefore if Christ is in regard of his
Person, distinguished from the Father, he cannot be the most high God Besides,
it is very ill done of them, so to distinguish the Person of Christ from his
divine Nature, as to say, that the one is from the Father, the other not. For a
divine Person, is nothing but the divine Nature subsisting, as we will show in
the second Book, and many of the Adversaries confess. For whereas they, with
whom we have now to do, say, that a person, as such, is nothing but a manner of
subsisting, which others call a subsistence; they are herein wonderfully
mistaken. And they may learn it even from thence, in that the person of the
Father does generate, that of the Son is generated.

But a manner of existence, or subsistence, does neither generate, nor is by it
self generated, but the very nature subsisting. Furthermore, as from other
places, so chiefly from John 10.36, etc. it sufficiently appears, that Christ
may of right have the name of God given him, as he is the Son of God. For
Christ there shows that, by the example of them, whom God himself heretofore
called gods, he, whom the Father had sanctified, and sent into the world, may
much more be called the Son of God. Where, for the same reason, he might
conclude, that he might much more be called a God, although he concluded it
not, that he might by this means show, that he assumed not to himself supreme
Divinity, but, as we have elsewhere explained it, do^ distinguish himself from
the most high God, by this very thing, in that he had called God his Father,
and so affirmed himself to be his Son. Certainly, those very persons also whom
Christ alleged for an example, were, in that place of the Scripture which
Christ did in part allege, for the same reason called both gods, and sons of
God. This difference only those appellations carry with them, that the former
does not by it self distinguish those persons from the most high God, whereas
the latter does distinguish them: the one does not express the dependency of
their Divinity on the supreme God, although it expresses the Divinity, which
does depend on the supreme God^ the other does also express that dependency.
From whence it is understood, that if Christ, as the Son of God, is from the
Father, and so the Father is more excellent than he, Christ also as God, is
from the Father, and so the Father is more excellent than he. Last of all, if
Christ received not his nature from the Father, he was not properly generated.
For whosoever is properly generated by another, receives his nature from
another. But they, as also other Adversaries, do altogether hold and urge, that
the Son was properly generated by the Father, and that otherwise he would not
be the only begotten Son of God. Wherefore they argue against themselves,
whilst they deny that Christ received his divine Nature from the Father, and
affirm, that he has his Person only from him. Though even in that they are not
always very constant to themselves, as has been observed by other Adversaries.

For as much as none does or can here fly to the distinction of natures in
Christ, we threfore touch it not.

CHAP. III.
The Arguments which are in the sequel to be alleged, being distributed, a
third is proposed from the words of Christ in John, Chap. 5.19. The Son can do
nothing of himself, etc.

NOw that we may leave names, and come to other Arguments of our Opinion, we
must produce such Testimonies of the Scripture, wherein something is either
denied of Christ, which could not be denied of him, or is on the contrary
attributed to him, which could not be attributed to him, if he were the most
high God. For it is to be observed, that some things agree to the Predicate of
our Question, that is, to the most high God, which agree not to the Subject
thereof, namely, to Christ: and on the contrary, some agree to the Subject
which agree not to the Predicate; that is, some things agree to Christ, which
are disagreeable to the most high God. Wherefore we will draw Arguments from
the things of both sorts. And because amongst other Writers, from Joh. 5.19
John affords us very many Testimonies both of the one, and other sort, when
in the mean time it is commonly believed, that his end in writing the Gospel,
was to show that Christ is the most high God which existed from all Eternity;
therefore we will take our rise from him, and show, that he was so far from
proposing to himself the defense of that, which is commonly believed, that no
sacred Writer has with more and clearer Arguments, overthrown that Opinion.
For indeed his drift was, to show the Divinity of Christ, but such a one, as is
wholly dependant on God. For these things, says he, are written that you may
believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, John 20.31.
and that believing, you may have life by his Name. But this very thing, that
Jesus is the Christ, that is, the Anointed and Son of God, does manifestly
distinguish him from the most high God, and shows that Christ does wholly, how
great soever he is, depend on him, and is inferior to him.

Now of those Testimonies which may be fetched out of this Writer, wherein
something is denied of Christ, which could not be denied of him, were he the
most high God; the first shall be this, which is extant, chap. 5.19. The Son
can do nothing of himself, unless he see the Father doing it. Which is in part
repeated afterward, ver. 30. where he says, I can do nothing of my self. In
the former words, as certain very learned John Maldonatus.
men among the Adversaries have shown, the word unless is put for but if, as it
elsewhere happens both in the same John 15.4.
John and in other sacred Mat. 12.14. 1 Cor. 7.17. Gal. 2.16. Rev. 9.4. and
21.27.
Writers, with whom it is sometimes simply set for but. For otherwise did the
Particle retain its force, it would follow, that Christ would signify, that he
could do something of himself, namely, if he saw the Father do it: when
nevertheless these twain are opposed, to do something of himself, and to do
something then when he sees the Father do it; so that the meaning of Christ
is, that he can do nothing of himself, but then only, when he sees the Father
do it, and, as it were, go before him therein: as any one will by himself
easily observe, and the words repeated in the 30th verse does show. From this
place we thus argue, The most high God can do all things of himself, Christ can
do nothing of himself; therefore Christ is not the most high God. The major
Proposition, as they call it in the Schools, is by it self manifest. For the
most high God is the first and supreme Cause of all things; and consequently
whatsoever he does, he does it of himself, not from another, otherwise he would
not be the first and supreme Cause; but the Person rather from whom he had a
faculty or power to do something. The Assumption or Minor is Christ's.

The Defense of the Argument.
TO this Argument a double answer is wont to be brought, neither whereof is
indeed altogether direct; since one makes a show of weakening the Major; the
other by either distinguishing or limiting the Premises, endeavors to make
the whole Argument invallid. For some answer, that Christ therefore says, he
can do nothing of himself, because he has not the power of working from
himself, but receives it from the Father, by the eternal generation out of his
Essence; and therefore they confess that Christ here speaks of himself
according to his Divinity, and consequently as he is the most high God: and
they accordingly deny, that there is any repugnancy for one to be the most high
God, and to do all things not of himself, but by a power received from another.
Others answer, that Christ here speaks of himself according to his humane
Nature, not according to his divine. So that from this Argument no other thing
will follow, than that Christ according to his humane Nature, is not the most
high God; which themselves willingly confess.

As to the former answer, that cannot consist, for two causes chiefly. The
first is, in that it does sundry ways involve a contradiction, For first, it
makes the same person both to be the most high God, and not the most high God,
the most high God expressly, not the most high God, in that it affirms him to
do all things by a power received from another. For whilst it holds so, it
denies him to be the first cause of all things, and so to be the most high
God, as appears from what was said before. Again, whilst it says that Christ
was generated from all Eternity, it together says, both that he is Eternal,
and not Eternal; Eternal expressly, not Eternal tacitly, whilst it affirms him
to be generated. Besides, whilst he says that he was indeed generated out of
the Essence of the Father, but so, that he has the same numerical Essence; yet
says that the same Christ is generated of himself. Since every one, as we
hinted before, is the same with his Essence, and the Adversaries confess, that
the divine Persons are really the same with the Essence, although they would
have them really to differ amongst themselves. The second cause, for which the
former answer cannot consist, is that such an explication of the words of
Christ, is repugnant to the Text, and thirdly to the words of the following
verse, wherein Christ being about to explain the reason of his saying, speaks
thus, Ver. 20
For the Father loves the Son, and shows him all things which himself does;
and will show him greater works than these, that you marvel. Now that the whole
business may be the plainer, some things are here beforehand to be observed.
First, these twain as we have already hinted, are opposed, so to do something
of himself, and so to do something if he see the Father doing it; and Christ
does therefore deny the first of himself, because he affirms the latter of
himself. Again, so to do somewhat of ones self, is to work by a power, wisdom
and authority of his own, and not received from another. Whence it follows,
that to do something, if he see the Father do it, is to do it not by a power,
wisdom and authority of his own, but such as was received from the Father. For
Christ in this place compares the Father to an Artist, which by his own
example instructs his Son, and most faithfully shows him what is to be
done, and by that means causes that he likewise may do the same: but himself
he likeneth to such a Son, that beholds the things shown unto him by the
Father, and learneth, and imitateth them; namely, because he received from him
that power, wisdom and authority whereof we have spoken. By giving this
therefore, the Father does show, by receiving the same the Son does see. Whence
we argue thus; if Christ did therefore deny, that he can to do any thing of
himself, because he received from the Father by eternal generation, a Power of
doing all things; it would follow that the Father had by that generation shown
him all things. But that this is false, appears sundry ways: first, because
it would follow from thence, that all things had been absolutely, without the
exception of any thing, been already shown to Christ from eternity, and that
nothing more, much less something greater, could be further shown unto him, by
that eternal Generation, out of the Essence of God. The Son had received the
Essence of God himself, and consequently also his Omnipotency, together with
all his natural Properties, as indeed the Adversaries do believe. But to him
that has these, nothing farther can be shown, or a power of doing nothing, can
any farther be given to him no more than to the Father himself. ver: 20
But Christ, as we see manifestly, affirms, that the Father would yet show
unto him greater things than these which he had already shown; that is, give
him a faculty of performing greater works. From whence it appears, that all
things had not been absolutely as yet shown unto him. Add hereunto, that Christ
being about to expla^n those greater works which the Father would show unto
him, mentions two, whereof the one is as it were subservient to the other;
namely, a faculty of quickening the dead, and authority of judging, ver. 21, 22.
But Christ afterward affirms, that these were therefore, that is, should
certainly be given unto him, because he is the Son of Man, ver. 27. from whence
it would follow, that greater works were by the Father shown to Christ, because
he is the Son of Man, than by that eternal Generation out of the Essence of
God, which makes him to be the most high God; which overthrows it self.
Besides, if the Father by eternal Generation out of his own Essence, had given
that faculty of working to the Son, he would not have given it of his own free
will, but of necessity. For that generation is by the Adversaries held to be
altogether necessary, and consequently all things that are necessarily
contained therein, or necessarily conjoined therewith. And indeed it is
necessary they should so hold, otherwise that generation would not be eternal.
For whatsoever is simply from eternity, is also simply necessary. What
depends upon the free will of God, cannot be eternal, because the free act of
his will, does in time precede it. Now Christ himself in the words, ver. 20.
alleged by us, shows that the Father did of his own free will, not by
necessity, give unto him that faculty, or as he himself speaks, showed him
all things. For he says, The Father loves the Son, and shows him all things
which himself does; as if you should say, and therefore, namely, because he
loves the Son, he shows him all things which himself does: as every one does
by himself perceive. But whatsoever God does out of his love toward any one,
he does it of his own free will; what he does out of necessity, so that he
cannot but do it, he does not out of love. Finally, when the Father is said to
show all things unto the Son, and that out of his love toward him, it is
apparent that the Son already existed when he showed him, and that he is looked
upon as already begotten, and not as one who is in that very act begotten. But
in that generation Christ is not considered as already begotten (otherwise he
would not be begotten) but as one who is in that very act produced. Wherefore
the showing was not made by generation.

The Distinction of Natures in Christ examined.
As for the latter answer, which by a distinction of Natures in Christ,
labors to evade the force of our Argument, because the Adversaries do most
frequently make use of it; therefore we must for once something more diligently
examine it, that the Reader may in the rest, where the same answer occurreth,
be referred hither. But forasmuch as the Adversaries commonly think, that they
have the Apostles for the Authors of that Description, and consequently also of
their answer, in that the Apostles say, that some things agree to Christ,
according to the flesh. Therefore in the first place we will show how much the
Adversaries are mistaken therein. Then we will teach that that Distinction is
of no moment to solve our Argument fetched out of John 5.19. and other the like
Finally, that the very saying that some things agree unto Christ according to
the humane Nature, and others not, does, as we will show, quite overthrow the
Opinion of the Adversaries touching Christ. To the intent therefore that we may
dispatch what we first proposed, of those places in which the Adversaries
commonly think, that they have an example of their destinction, the first is
extant Acts 2.30. where Peter says, that God swore to David, that he would
raise up Christ out of the fruit of his loins according to the flesh. The
second place is extant, Romans 1.3. where Paul says, that the Son of God was
made of the Seed of David according to the flesh. The third is in chap. 9. of
the same Epistle, where it is said, that Christ was according to the flesh of
the Fathers. Now the Adversaries think, that according to the flesh, is
according to the humane nature, and that to this member of the distinction is
tacitly opposed, according to the Divine Nature; especially, because Paul, when
he had in that place Romans 9. said, that Christ was of the Fathers according to
the flesh, he adds these words, who is over all, God (or rather a God)
blessed for evermore; when he seems not obscurely to afford the other member
of that distinction, namely, according to the divine Nature: But how much the
Adversaries are mistaken in the sense of that distinction, of the Apostles use,
is thence apparent; namely, that whereas those words, according to the flesh,
do frequently occur in the Scripture, yet are they never opposed to these,
according to the divine Nature, but always to these, according to the Spirit,
which have a far differing meaning. Thus Paul (to run over those places only
which come nearer to our purpose) in the same Epistle to the Romans, chap. 4.1.
says, What then shall we say, that Abraham our Father according to the flesh
found? For so rightly if you consider the sense, the ancient Interpreter has
ordered the words. Where you see, that Paul says, Abraham was his Father, as
well as the Father of the other Jews, according to the flesh, which every one
sees to be like this expression, that Christ was raised up of the fruit of
David's loins, or made of the Seed of David, or to be of the Fathers ver. 11
according to the flesh, to intimate that he here considers him not as a
spiritual Father. For though Abraham was also the Spiritual Father of the
Apostles, yet was he not also the Father of the other Jews in general, with
whom the Apostle joyneth himself in this place. For he teaches both in the
same chapter afterward, Gal. 1.7.
and elsewhere, yea in the ninth chapter Ver. 7, 8.
of this Epistle, That Abraham is the true Father of none but Believers, and
that they only are the true seed of Abraham, to which the spiritual Promises of
God belong. In the same manner, Romans 9. where Christ is said to be of the
Fathers according to the flesh; a little before, ver. 3. the Apostle calls
the Jews, his kindred according to the flesh, tacitly oppesing them to his
spiritual kindred, or to his kindred according to the spirit. Thus, 1 Cor.
10.18. he commands to view Israel according to the flesh, likewise opposing
it to Israel according to the Spirit; that is, the Christian People; for the
People of Christ is the true and spiritual Israel of God, Romans 9.6. Gal. 6.16.
thus, 2 Cor. 5.16. he says, that he henceforth knows (that is, esteemed and
approved) none according to the flesh; and if he has at any time known Christ
according to the flesh, he now no longer knows him: where likewise according
to the flesh, is tacitly opposed to that which is according to the spirit, and
is to be looked upon either in Christ, or in them who are in Christ. Likewise
that place is very notable, which is extant, Gal. 4. where one son of Abraham,
namely, Ishmael, is said to be born according to the flesh, ver. 23, 29. but
the other, namely, Isaac, according to the spirit, ver. 20. whereby is meant
not according to the divine Nature, but by the divine Power: which for the
divine Promises given before, did intervene to accomplish his nativity, compare
ver. 23, 28. and Romans 9.8, 9. although the same Isaac, if his generation be
compared with the spiritual generation of the Christians, not with the birth of
Ishmael, it may be said of right, to be made according to the flesh. Thus also
Masters according to the flesh, are fleshly Masters, as the old Interpreter
has it, Col. 3.22. that is, such as have power to command only in things
according to the flesh, and this earthly life, but not spiritual things. And
lest there should be any place for an evasion, that very place, Romans 1.3. which
the Adversaries think make for them, does confirm our Opinion. For thus says
the Apostle, Who was made of the Seed of David according to the flesh, who was
declared (Gr. defined or constituted) Son of God in power according to the
Spirit of Holiness by the resurrection from the dead. You see that these words,
according to the flesh, are opposed to those according to the Spirit of
Holiness; that is, the Spirit wherewith Christ was sanctified, and that the
discourse is concerning the matter, whereof Christ was made the Son of God by
the resurrection from the dead. Concerning which, we will speak more hereafter,
chap. 31. but according to the Spirit, does no where signify according to the
divine Nature; neither does the word Spirit, put subjectively either alone, or
with some addition, any where denote the divine Nature or Essence. And the very
word Sanctification in this place applied unto it, may sufficiently intimate to
every one, that it is not here spoken concerning the holy Spirit, the divine
Virtue, whereby Christ was raised from the dead, and appointed heavenly King of
the People of God, and consequently made the Son of God by way of excellency.
For we shall see hereafter, chap. 31. that, oftentimes in the Scripture, to be
Christ, or the King anointed by God, is all one with being the Son of God; from
whence also may be understood, another passage in the same Epistle, chap. 9.5.
For in what manner Christ is the Son of God, in the most perfect manner so
called, in the same also is he a God over all to be blessed for evermore. But
he was made or constituted the Son of God in power by the resurrection from the
dead; wherefore a God over all to be blessed for ever more. And indeed those
words according to the flesh, annexed to the precedent ones, seem to require
that the other members of distinction, should in the following member Or
sentence.
be understood, it is no hard thing to discern, that what we would have, is
rather to be understood, than what was according to the Adversaries Opinion to
be supplied. For these words, according to the divine Nature, would be
childishly understood. For this the Apostle must be imagined to speak, Who
according to the divine Nature, is God over all blessed for evermore. But when
you have mentioned the divine Nature or Essence, you have indeed already
mentioned that which is annexed But the absurdity cease if you understand
that which we say the Apostle expresses, chap. 1. of the same Epistle; namely,
according to the Spirit of Holiness. I omit that neither Peter in that whole
Sermon of his, wherein he affirms that God swore to David, that he would from
the fruit of his loins, raise up Christ according to the flesh, that argues a
divine Essence in Christ, but the resurrection and exaltation of Christ wrought
by divine Virtue, whereby he became the Son of God in the most perfect manner,
as we have already seen in part, and will more fully show in its place;
wherefore there is nothing in those places, that may establish the distinction
of the Adversaries. But if there be nothing in them that may establish it,
although among others they seem most of all to confirm it, it may of right be
concluded, that neither is there any else in the Scriptures that may establish
it, and consequently that it should not be applied to restrain so many places
of the Scripture, speaking simply, and used to turn them from their plain
meaning. But now we must come to that which we have undertaken to prove in the
second place, namely, that this distinction is of no moment to invalide our
Argument drawn from that place, John 5.19. or others like thereunto.

For first, the custom of speaking, does not admit that what may or ought
simply to be admitted of any whole should simply be denied of the same,
although it agrees to the whole, according to one part only, and not according
to the other. For who for example sake, will simply deny, that a man does eat,
drink, or is fleshly, thick, tall, or of a low stature, because his soul, or he
according to his soul, does not eat, drink, nor is fleshly, thick, tall, or on
the contrary of a short stature? Although the soul be the better part of a man,
and those things agree to him only according to the body. But if Christ be the
most high God, it is to be simply affirmed of him, that he can do all things of
himself; as was before shown: neither do the Adversaries, who say, that these
words of Christ whereof we treat, are to be understood of him according to the
humane nature only, not deny, but rather urge it. For neither are they wont
less simply to affirm of Christ, what agrees unto him, according to his better
Nature, than to deny what agrees not to him, according to his inferior
Nature. Wherefore if Christ were the most high God, it could not be simply or
without any limitation, and respect of a certain nature, expressly added, be
denied of him that he can do any thing of himself. Since therefore it is
denied, it is apparent that he is not the most high God. Add hereunto, that
Christ in this place is described by the name of the Son of God and that in
respect of God. But most of the Adversaries refer this description only to the
divine Nature of Christ, all refer it to it chiefly. Wherefore so much the less
credit is it, that that is here simply denied of him which agrees to him
according to the divine Nature, and consequently both may and ought to be
simply affirmed of the Son of God. Certainly that would be all one as if you
should say, that a man or a substance endued with understanding, cannot
understand, reason, remember, because he cannot do these things according to
the body.

But against that which we have said, some of the Adversaries are wont to
allege, that a man according to his soul is immortal, or incorruptible, and
yet it is simply denied, that he is immortal or incorruptible. But it is to be
observed that we speak of those Attributes, which both may and are wont to be
affirmed of the whole Subject simply and without limitation, although they do
primarily and by themselves only agree to one part thereof, so to the whole
only by consequence. But to be immortal or incorruptible, as the very
Adversaries together with us confess, is not simply and without limitation
affirmed of the whole man; namely, because we see the whol^ composition of man
to be dissolved, and to die, and be corrupted, although the Spirit remain after
it. But the same Adversaries contend, that as all the attributes which agree to
the Humanity of Christ, are wont simply and without limitation to be affirmed
of Christ, for example sake, that he was conceived, born of a Virgin, suffered,
dyed, was buried, raised up from the dead, and the like, so also all the
attributes of the divine Nature. Wherefore as they simply affirm that he is
God, so also they simply and without limitation affirm, and if they will be
true to themselves, are forced to affirm, that he existed from all Eternity,
Omnipotent, Omniscient, Immense, Creator of Heaven and Earth. Some allege that
of Romans 7.17.
Paul, where he affirms, that the evils which he works, he himself did not
work, but sin that dwells in him; where they think, that what is simply
affirmed of the whole, is simply denied of the same, because it agrees not to
the other part. And therefore that the contradiction which at first sight
appears in these words, is to be taken away by the distinction of parts. But
they are exceedingly mistaken, for neither has Paul respect to diverse parts in
the same subject, as if the thing were attributed to the subject according to
one part, and according to the other part taken away from the same, this, I
say, is not there done: but the same attribute is by an elegant Antanaclasis,
one while taken more largely, another while more strictly, namely, by a certain
excellency; and being taken more largely, is attributed to the Subject; but
taken more strictly, it is denied of the same whole, and not attributed to
another part of the same Subject, but to another Subject, as the place it self
shows. For the man described by Paul under his own person, is said to work
these evils, the word work being taken properly and largely: but the same is
denied to work them, as the word work signifies, to be the prime and principal
cause of working. For this, he says, is not he himself, but sin. In the same
manner he elsewhere says, that he labored more than the other 1 Cor. 15.10.
Apostles, yet not he, but the Grace of God that was with him. He affirms,
that he himself labored, if it be properly spoken; but denies the same,
because he was not the prime and principal cause of the labor; but the grace
of God that was present with him. Thus also Christ John 7.6.
says, My Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. chap. 12.44.
He that believes on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me. For the
Doctrine of Christ was his own, because it was promulgated by him; it was not
his own, because himself was not the prime Author thereof, but he that sent
him. It is believed on him, because he is the object of faith, not on him
because he is not the principal object and ultimate scope of faith; for so he
is that sent Christ.

Wherefore that we may return unto our place, it is necessary that Christ when
he simply denied, that he could do nothing of himself, did speak of himself
wholly, how great soever he is, and not only of one part of himself, or not of
himself according to one part only. Which that it may yet more evidently
appear, and the rule before set down by us, be the more confirmed, this is to
be added; If that which may, is wor^ absolutely to be affirmed of the whole,
may also simply and absolutely, without any limitation, be denied of the same
whole; namely, because it agrees not thereunto according to some part, though
an inferior one, it will be lawful simply to affirm of Christ, what we would
have; namely, that he is not the most high God, did not exist from Eternity,
did not create the World, that the Son of God was not incarnate, or made man,
was not in Heaven before he was born of the Virgin: because none of these
things agree to him according to the humane Nature: yea, it may be said, that
the Son of God, is not the Son of God, especially the only begotten one, if he
is held to be such, as he was begotten out of the Essence of the Father, which
agrees not to him according to the humane Nature. Finally, it will be lawful to
say, that he was neither conceived of the holy Spirit, nor born of Mary, nor
grew, nor eat, nor drank, nor wept, nor dyed, nor rose again, nor ascended into
Heaven, nor shall come to judgment, and other things innumerable, because none
of these things agrees to him according to the divine Nature. Those first
Expressions the Adversaries will not endure; as for the rest, the ears of no
Christian man can endure them. Who would endure such a Divinity, as permits
one simply to deny, that Jesus is the Son of God, or that he sometimes dyed and
rose again. Wherefore if those things are both Unheard, or incredible.
uncouth, and intolerable, they ought also to imagine, that their
interpretation is alike intolerable; whereby they say, that when Christ simply
says, the Son can do nothing of himself, he speaks of himself according to
the humane Nature only; whereas according to the divine Nature, he can do all
things of himself; whence it follows, that it may be absolutely said of him,
that he can do all things of himself, no less than he is absolutely affirmed to
be the most high God.

Again, They with whom we have to do, do either confess, that it may be simply,
or without any limitation added, said of the divine Nature of Christ, that it
can do nothing of it self, or they do not confess. If they do confess, why do
they distinguish between the humane and divine Nature? Why do they say, that
the words of Christ whereof we treat, are not to be understood of him according
to the divine, but according to the humane Nature? Will they perhaps say, that
also the divine Nature can do nothing of it self according to the humane? Who
sees not that such a fashion of speaking and limiting is ridiculous? Will you
say that the soul of a man has not in it self according to the body, a power
of thinking, understanding, reasoning? Or that the body is not fleshly, thick,
tall, or low according to the soul? But be it that it is lawful, having
expressly added such a limitation, to deny these things of the soul as does
indeed agree unto it, but do not agree unto the body; and contrarily of the
body, such as agree to it, but do not agree to the soul, will it be presently
lawful to do the same simply, and without any limitation? Who ever heard say,
that that should simply be taken away from the whole which does indeed agree
thereunto, because it agrees not to the other part of the same whole? How then
could that be simply taken away from the divine Nature, which does agree to the
same; namely, to do all things of it self, because it agrees not to the humane
Nature? But if the Adversaries confess not, that it may simply be said of the
divine Nature of Christ, that it can do nothing of it self, their Opinion
touching the Person of Christ falls to the ground; for if the Son of God is a
Person having supreme Divinity, it is necessary that whatsoever is simply
either denied or affirmed of him, may also simply be either denied or affirmed
of his divine Nature. For a person having supreme Deity, is nothing but the
very divine Nature subsisting; as many of the Adversaries confess; and we in
the second Book will show. Sect. 1. Chap. 4.
Since therefore it is simply denied of the Son of God, that he can do nothing
of himself, whereas that same cannot be simply denied of the divine Nature, it
must be confessed, that the Son of God is not a Person of supreme Deity.
Neither can they escape the force of this Argument, who hold a divine Person to
be not the divine Nature, but a subsistence of the divine Nature. For first,
from this very place of John, it is evinced either that their Opinion touching
a divine Person, is false, or that the Son of God is not a Person endued with
Supreme Divinity. For a Subsistence works nothing neither of it self, nor by
the showing of another. For the very nature subsisting, works all things,
either by a faculty of its own, or such as was received from another. A
Subsistence has no faculty neither from its self, nor received from another.
But the Son of God works all things by the showing of the Father. Wherefore
he is not a Subsistence. If the Son of God is not a subsistence, either a
Person of the supreme Divinity will not be a Subsistence, or the Son of God
will not be a Person of supreme Divinity. Furthermore, if a Subsistence did
work any thing, it would work in such a manner, as is agreeable to the Nature
wherein it is, and with which it is really the same. But the divine Nature,
wherein the divine Subsistence is, and with which, as the Adversaries speak, it
is really the same, works of it self, and not by the showing of another;
wherefore the divine Subsistence also should be said to work after that manner;
nor could it less simply be denied, that it can work of it self, than the same
may be denied of the divine Nature. Add hereunto, that it would no less
ridiculously be said, that the divine Subsistence can do nothing of it self
according to the humane Nature, than that the divine Nature can do nothing of
it self acccording to the humane Nature.

Besides, were the words of Christ to be restrained, as the Adversaries would
have it, Christ had not spoken to the matter. For it appears from the very
place, and all confess, that Christ answers the objection of the Jews, and
defines those words of his, namely, My Father works hitherto, and I work,
from all crime of Blasphemy and Arrogance. For the Jews objected it to him as a
most grievous crime, because by such words, he calls God his own Father,
making himself equal to God, as we read ver. 18. For thus they reason; He that
makes himself equal to God, commits a crime to be expiated by death. But
Christ makes himself equal to God, in that he calls God his own Father, and
makes himself equal to him in working. In which Argument it is spoken of whole
Christ, and not only of one Nature of his, especially the less worthy. For
neither Christ when he affirmed, My Father works, and I work, spoke only one
part of himself, and that the less worthy, but of himself as he was the Son of
God, and consequently God, as the Adversaries themselves urge, who are wont to
object against us those words of the 18th verse; to prove from thence, that
Christ is God by Nature, because he both called God his own Father, and made
himself equal to God: neither of which can agree to him, who is not God by
Nature. To which Argument of the Jews Christ answers, Verily, verily I say
unto you, the Son can do nothing of himself. What would the answer make to the
purpose, if Christ should here speak of himself, according to the humane Nature
only; when the question was concerning him, either whole, how great so ever he
is, or according to the divine Nature, as the Adversaries will have it? How had
he defended his own words, wherein he had spoken of his whole self, or of
himself, as the most high God? It is objected against him, thou make thy self
equal to God; namely, in that thou make thy self the Son of God, and by that
means do (as the Adversaries will have it) arrogate to thy self a divine
Nature. Christ answers (according to their Opinion) the Son can do nothing of
himself according to the humane Nature, and is therein unequal to the Father.
What Is this to the matter? But if you hold with us, that Christ spoke of
himself whole, how great soever he was, you will find that he spoke very
pertinently to the matter, and solidly confuted the crime that was objected
against him. For he answers, that he does not simply and absolutely make
himself equal to God, although in respect of working, he compares himself unto
God: because although he does all things that the Father does; yet can he do
nothing of himself, but those things only which the Father gave him a power to
do. wherefore in respect of the working it self, he is equal to the Father; in
respect of the manner of working, unequal. For the Father works of himself,
but he only as the Father shows him, or gives him power, wisdom and
authority. But herein is no Blasphemy, no Arrogance, no Crime. Add hereunto,
that that very equality which is seen in the very workers, considered by
themselves, is not altogether absolute. In that the Father will yet show him
greater works, and consequently something may be yet added to that equality.

Finally, If Christ had spoken of himself in respect of the humane Nature only,
when he said that he could do nothing of himself, and in the mean time would
have had it understood, that he in respect of the divine Nature, could do all
things of himself, he had not, or rather ought not to have opposed the Father,
especially alone to himself in that matter, but himself considered according to
the divine Nature, to himself looked upon according to the humane. But Christ
does not this, but the other, whilst he subjon'd, unless he see the Father
doing. Also, For the Father loves the Son, and shows to him all things which
himself does; and will show him greater works than these. For besides that, the
reason of the opposition does more rightly consist, if one nature of Christ be
opposed to another Nature; that is, of a different disposition in relation to
the thing spoken of, than if the same should be opposed to another person; no
just cause can be imagined, why Christ, when in respect of one nature, he had
denied that the Son could do any thing of himself, should not in respect of the
other nature, openly affirm of the same Son, that he could do all things of
himself, since there was no greater cause to deny that, than to affirm this.
That I may not say, that there was greater cause to affirm this, than to deny
that; since the question was concerning the equality of the Son, and that as he
is the Son, with the Father. Add hereunto, that the divine Nature of Christ
would have been the more near and proper Cause of that faculty of doing
Miracles, which he had received according to the humane Nature, than the
Father. Unless perhaps you will have the divine Nature in him to be idle.
Wherefore the power was to be ascribed to it rather than to the Father. Now
whereas some affirm that Christ attributed his works rather to the Father, than
to his own divine Nature, that he might give to the Father a Prerogative above
himself; this very thing overthrows their Opinion, and establishes ours;
especially since it is necessary, that that Prerogative should consist in this,
namely, that the Father be held to do all things of himself, the Son only by a
power received, from the Father. For by this very thing, Christ is denied to be
the most high God, whilst another is acknowledged to whom a Prerogative above
him does agree; and whilst it is affirmed that he does all things by a power,
in what manner soever received from another. On the contrary, the Father is
alone held, to be the most high God, whilst to him only, as the prime Cause,
the works of Christ are ascribed, and a Prerogative attributed to him above
Christ.

That now remains which we undertook to demonstrate in the third place,
namely, that the very Distinction which the Adversaries use, whilst they say
that some things agree or not agree to Christ, or the Son of God* according to
the divine, others according to the humane Nature, does overthrow their Opinion
concerning Christ. For from this very thing it follows, that the Son of God is
not a person of supreme Divinity, the reason whereof we have somewhere already
touched. For whilst the Adversaries thus distinguish, they show that the humane
Nature is a part of the person of Christ, and pertains to the constitution
thereof. But a humane Nature cannot be a part of a person endued with supreme
Divinity, nor concur to the constitution thereof. For whether you hold the
divine person to be the divine Nature endued with a subsistence, or the very
subsistence it self of the divine Nature; the humane Nature can neither way be
a part thereof. For neither is it a part of the divine Nature, nor of a
subsistence, since neither is constituted of diverse parts, and both existed
entire from all Eternity, and consequently a humane Nature can constitute
neither. Certainly it is necessary to hold two persons in Christ, one simple,
which existed from all Eternity; the other compounded of a humane and divine
Nature (though by this means a divine person would become part of another, and
so cease to be a person) or they must bid farewell to that distinction of
Nature. But of this thing more in its Lib. 2. Sect. 2. Chap. 6.
place.

We have dwelt longer on this place of John, partly because as any place does
more evidently overthrow the tenet of the Adversaries, (and this is one of the
most evident) so have they for the most part taken more pains in obscuring and
turning it from the genuine sense, partly because many things which have been
spoken thereof, will be profitable in the following places, in as much as the
Adversaries are wont to make answers to them, either both these ways which we
have discust, or at least one of them.

CHAP. IIII.
The fourth Argument fetched from those places in John, wherein it is denied,
That Christ is the Prime Author of his Doctrine.

NOw that we may proceed to other places in John, wherein some thing is denied
of Christ, which could not be denied of him if he were the most high God; to
that passage which we have examined in the precedent Chapter, those are of kin
wherein Christ denies that he is the prime Author of that Doctrine which he
publishes; which places are in great number; and in some of them mention is
made also of works; of which he makes the prime Author, not himself, but the
Father, no less than in the precedent testimony. For, Chap. 7.16, 17, 18. when
the Jews admired how he knew letters, having not learnt them: Jesus answered
them, and said, My Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any one will
do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be from God, or whether
I speak of my self. He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory: but
whosoever seeks his Glory that sent him, he is true, and there is no
unrighteousness in him. And Chap. 8.28 When ye shall have lifted up the Son of
Man, then shall ye know that I am he, and do nothing of my self, but as the
Father has taught me I speak these things. And chap. 12.49, 50. I have not
spoken of my self, but the Father that sent me, he gave me a Commandment, what
I should say, and what I should speak, and I know that his Commandment is
eternal Life. What things therefore I speak, as the Father has said unto me,
so I speak. And chap. 14.10. The Word that I speak, I speak, not of my self;
but the Father that abides in me, he does the works. Where under the name of
works, his words also are to be included, as the very opposition shows; and
afterward in the same chapter, ver. 24. The Word which ye have heard, is not
mine, but the Fathers that sent me. To which belong also many other Testimonies
which are extant in the same Writer, chap. 8. 38, 40. and 15. 15, 17. and 8.
14. and chap. 3. 11, 32, 34. Wherein we read, that Christ saw those things
which he spoke, with the Father, heard them from God, or the Father. And that
they were given him from the Father, and that they were the words and speech of
God or the Father: from whence it is apparent that Christ is not the most high
God. For the most high God is the first and highest Cause of all things,
neither can it in any sort be said of him, that his Doctrine is not his, Christ
is not the Prime Author of his Doctrine.
but another persons, and that he speaks not of himself; as is apparent from
the proof of the major Proposition of the foregoing Argument. But we say that
those things are very frequently and plainly said of Christ, and he constituted
not the first, but the second and middle cause of his Doctrine.

The Defense of the Argument.
THat the refuge of the distinction of Natures has here no place, we showed in
the last Argument, when we refuted the second Answer, for here Christ simply
and without any limitation denies that his Doctrine is his, and that he spoke
of himself. Therefore it is necessary that he spoke of himself how great
soever, especially since he wholly attributes what he denies of himself, not
to another Nature of his, but to another Person, namely, the Father, and
consequ^ntly does therein oppose not one Nature to another, but one Person to
another, that is, himself to the Father. For were that the meaning of the
words, which the Adversaries using that distinction, would have, he must have
said, My Doctrine is not mine according to the humane Nature, but according to
the divine; or is mine, not as I am Man, but as I am God; and not, My Doctrine
is not mine, but his that sent me; to wit, the Father. And in that passage,
chap. 14.10. how unsuitable was it for him (were the Adversaries Opinion true)
having omitted the mention of his divine Nature, to say, But the Father that
abides or dwells in me, he does the work? Where his words also are to be
understood, as we have already hinted. For when he would intimate the
intrinsecal cause of his work, or the cause dwelling in him, why did he not
rather name his divine Nature, essentially dwelling in him, and proper to him,
than a Person different from him? Why, when he had named the Father, did he,
that he might more significantly exclude himself, presently add the pronoun he,
as if he should say, the Father simply does the work? Is it not manifest that
Christ would distinguish himself wholly, how great soever he is, from the prime
Cause of his Works and Words, and having taken it away from himself, ascribed
it entirely to the Father? Add hereunto, that Christ when he says, My
Doctrine, or My Word, would have it so far forth understood, to be his Doctrine
or Word, as it was most belonging unto him; and it was most his, according to
the opinion of the Adversaries, as he was a divine Person; from whom, no less
than from the Father, that Doctrine had originally proceeded. Wherefore when he
had spoken this, and desired to have it understood, there was no cause why he
should rather ascribe it to the Father, then to himself, or his divine Nature,
although diverse natures had place in him. Finally, this thing does here quite
exclude the distinction of Natures, that Christ does here manifestly consider
himself as he sustained the Office of a divine Ambassador. But that Office
agrees to none but a Person as such. Wherefore it is either to be held, that
Christ here speaks of the divine Nature, or to be confessed that Christ is
not a Person of supreme Divinity. For as we have shown in the foregoing
chapter, and will Lib. 2. Sect 1. Chap. 14.
elsewhere show more largely, a divine Person is nothing but the very divine
Nature, having its subsistence. Besides, the Adversaries will have it, that
Christ was first sent according to his divine Nature; for they hold, that the
Son was sent from the Father out of Heaven, to assume Flesh, and consequently
to undertake the business of Man's Salvation. But if Christ according to his
divine Nature, yea, according to this in the first place, is the Ambassador of
the Father, why are those things which are attributed to him as the Ambassador
of the Father, restrained to the humane Nature only, and not rather ascribed to
whole Christ, how great soever he is? But if any one will have it, that in
these and other the like places, a Prerogative is attributed to the Father
above Christ, and that as Christ is God, as indeed the words altogether require
it, he must with all of necessity confess, that Christ is not the most high
God, but that on the contrary, the Father only (since such a Prerogative
agrees to no other, and Christ ascribes to him entirely, without making
mention of any other person, both his Doctrine and Works) is the most high God:
concerning which thing it has been spoken in the Defense of the precedent
Arguments.

CHAP. V.
Argument the fifth, fetched from those places in John, wherein Christ is denied
to have come of himself.

LIke to the former are those places, wherein Christ denies that he came of
himself; affirming that he was sent by the Father. For thus he speaks, chap.
7.28, 29. Whence I am, ye know; and I came not of my self; but he is true that
sent me: whom ye know not: but I know him, because I am from him; and he sent
me. And chap. 8.42. If God were your Father, you would love me, for I went out
from God, and am come; for neither came I of my self, but he sent me. And chap.
5.43. he had said, I am come in the name of my Father, and ye received me not;
if another come in his own name, him ye will receive. But if Christ is the most
high God, how did he not come of himself? For to come of ones self, is to come
of his own accord, or relying on his own Authority, and to discharge an office
amongst men. But how can the most high God be said to do that, which he does
not of his own accord and authority, but another? Certainly although the
Father and Son were diverse Persons in the same divine Essence, yet could not
one be sent, or come from the other, but he must withal come from himself,
since there will be the same numerical will in both, the same Authority.
Wherefore the Father could decree or command nothing, Christ came not of
himself.
but the Son would also decree that very thing with the same action. But if it
be absurd for any one to be sent from himself, and Christ openly denies, that
he came from himself. It must be held, that he is not a person of the same
Essence with the Father, and consequently not the most high God.

The Defense of the Argument.
Why the Exception concerning the two Natures has here no place, has already
been shown in the Defense of the precedent Arguments, especially because Christ
is here openly considered as sent from the Father, which thing we said
pertains to the whole Person of Christ, and is by the Adversaries wont by
name to be referred unto his divine Nature. And besides, when Christ would by
this means procure Authority to himself, and his Doctrine, amongst all the
People, what need was there to fetch that Authority from the Father, if he had
had the divine Essence in himself, and so, no less than the Father, had been
God; yea, the self same God with the Father, and would have men so to
understand it (according to the Opinion of the Adversaries) as after he makes
mention of the Father? For, to what purpose is it to fetch Authority from
another, when you have it of your self, yea, the same in number with the other,
and would accordingly possess all men, with a belief that you have it.

CHAP. VI.
Argument the sixth, fetched from those places in John, wherein Christ denies
that he came to do his own will.

IN the sixth place, those Testimonies are to be mentioned, wherein Christ
denied that he came to do his own will, but the will of the Father that sent
him. Which is a consequent of that which went before. For it is the Office of
an Ambassador, not to do and seek his own will, but the Will of the Sender.
And hereunto belong the words of Christ, John 5.30. I seek not mine own will,
but the Will of him that sent me. And chap. 6.30. I descended from Heaven not
to do mine own will, but the Will of him that sent me; that is, of the Father,
as appears from the following verses, and many other places, and from the
very thing it self. But if Christ were the most high God, how did he not seek
his own will, or not come to do it? For to what purpose had he come, but to do
the will of the most high God? yea, by this very thing, whilst he affirms,
that he seeks the Fathers Will, and came down from Heaven to do it, by this
very thing, I say, he would affirm, Christ came not to do his own will.
that he seeks his own will, and came down from Heaven to do it, if he were
the same numerical God with the Father. For as we before hinted, they who have
the same numerical Essence, must also have the self same will, and the same
numerical act of the will; as the Adversaries hold concerning God the Father,
and his Son.

The Defense of the Argument.
THat Exception touching the humane Nature, according to which Christ spoke
(that I may omit the repetition of other things that were formerly spoken) has
therefore no place; because Christ does in the second passage, from whence
judgment may be made of the first, expressly say, that he came down from Heaven
not to do his own will, but the will of his Father. But the descent of Christ
agrees to his whole Person, or, as the Adversaries believe, to him according
to the divine Nature. For they contend, that Christ according to the divine
Nature came down from Heaven to be born of the Virgin; wherefore he speaks of
his whole Person, and not only one part thereof, or if he attributed these
things to himself in respect of one Nature only, he is according to the Opinion
of the Adversaries, to be imagined to speak of the divine Nature, which
overthrows it self.

CHAP. VII.
The seventh Argument drawn from thence, That Christ did not seek his own glory.

SEventhly, Hereunto belong those words of the same Christ, chap. 8.50. I seek
not mine own glory: there is one that seeks and judges. And those words in
the same chapter, ver. 54. If I glorify my self, my glory is nothing; it is my
Father that glorifieth me. From the first of which we may thus reason. If
Christ had been the most high God, he could not choose but seek his own glory:
Since the end of all Gods actions, and the ultimate scope of them that are sent
by him, or minister to him, is the Glory of God himself: Wherefore if Christ
had been the most high God, he could not choose but seek his own glory. Again,
since he openly professes, that he seeks his Glory that sent him, namely,
the Fathers, chap. 7.18. If he had been of the same Essence with the Father,
and the same God with him, in seeking his glory, he had also sought his own.
Besides, when he says, that the Father does seek his glory, and judge, or
glorify him, it would of necessity happen, that Christ himself also at the
same time, and with the same labor, does seek his own glory, and judge, and
consequently does glorify himself, Christ did not seek his own glory.
since, as we formerly hinted, they that have the same numerical Essence, the
same will and power of working, must also of necessity have the same numerical
operation. Whence the Adversaries also hold, that the works of the Trinity
performed without, as they speak, are undivided, although the reason of that
Identity, does not admit a limitation; and although it should be admitted, yet
here, according to the opinion of the Adversaries, must needs be the same
operation, because they constitute, and are enforced to constitute that
glorification either in the exhaltation of the humane Nature, or in the
manifestation of Christ's glory before men. But now we see that Christ openly
denies that he seeks his own glory, or does glorify himself.

From the latter place we thus conclude, If Christ were the most high God, he
could not say his glory would be nothing, if he glorify himself. For how is
the Glory which proceeds from the most high God, or wherewith the most high
God glorifieth himself, how, I say, is it nothing? that is, vain and empty?
Certainly it would be no more vain than the Glory that proceeds from the
Father. But Christ openly says, that if he glorified himself, his glory is
nothing, and opposes the glorification proceeding from the Father, as true and
solid, to the glorification proceeding from himself.

CHAP. VIII.
The eighth Argument drawn from the words of Christ, John 12.44. He that
believes on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me.

THat these words of Christ which we have cited, signify that he is not the
principal object of Faith, and the ultimate scope to which it tends, and in
which it rests, all will easily understand. For thus the common custom of
speaking does require, which it is certain Christ followed, in that he desired
to be understood by the people, to whom he spoke with a loud voice. But from
hence it follows, that Christ is not the most high God; for the most high
God, is the ultimate scope and principal object of Faith. But Christ in the
word quoted, denies that he himself is so.

The Defense of the Argument.
from John 12.44.
The Sea cap. 3. of this Section.
distinction of Natures cannot here have place, both from the simple denial,
and also because Christ here considered himself as he is believed, or to be
believed on. But he is to be believed on, as the Son of God, and consequently,
if we give credit to the Sea John 3.18. and 9.30, 31. Jer. 17.5
Adversaries, as the most high God himself. For which cause, when the question
is concerning Christ, they urge that of Jeremiah, Cursed is the man that
puts confidence in man, omitting, or not considering that which follows, and
makes flesh his arm; that is, places his strength and stay in flesh, a frail
thing, and his heart departs from God. Neither of which has place in the Man
Christ, especially placed at the right hand of God in the Heavens. Wherefore
that we may return unto our place; whilst Christ constituteth himself the
object of Faith, but in the mean time denies that he is the principal object,
and ultimate end thereof, he speaks of himself as the Son of God. But that he
according to the humane Nature only is the Son of God, the Adversaries will not
grant. Add hereunto, that he considers himself as Ambassador of the Father;
for credit given to an Ambassador as such, is ultimately terminated not in
him, but the Sender, since his Authority does depend from thence, and he
proposes not his own sayings, but another, namely, the Senders. Indeed Christ
did therefore speak this, to commend the Faith placed on him; namely, that it
rests not on him, since he speaks not of himself, but tends to the Father
himself, who sent him, and is terminated in the Father. But those things which
are attributed to Christ as Ambassador of the Father, are to be referred to
Christ how great soever he is; and if he be a person of supreme Divinity, are
to be ascribed even to the divine Nature; as we have formerly shown, chap. 4.
of this Section. But if this be absurd, it must be confessed that Christ is not
the most high God.

CHAP. IX.
The ninth Argument, That Christ was sometimes ignorant of the last
Judgement-day.

HItherto we have brought testimonies out of John, wherein that is denied of
Christ, which could not be denied of him if he were the most high God. It
follows that we produce the like Testimonies out of other sacred Writers
also, and that such, wherein a Prerogative is attributed to the Father above
Christ. The first shall be that of Christ, which formerly when we treated of
the Father, was touched upon, That Christ was sometime ignorant of the last day.
Mark 13.32. But of that day or hour, namely, of the last judgment, knows
none, no not the Angels in heaven, nor the Son, but the Father; or as Mat.
24.36. speaks, but the Father only. How it may be here evinced, that the
Father only is the most high God, we have before shown. And now we must
consider, how it may be hence proved, that the Son is, not the most high God;
although the first being proved, the second follows by necessary consequence;
but we here go a contrary way to work, and do not demonstrate that Christ is
not the most high God, because the Father only is; but that the Father only is,
because Christ not. The thing is easy and open to every one; for the most high
God neither is, nor ever was ignorant of any thing. But the Son of God was
sometimes ignorant of the day and hour of the last judgment. Wherefore the Son
of God is not the most high God.

The Defense of the Argument.
HOw much the Adversaries have tortured themselves in unloosing this knot, and
what diverse interpretations, not only diverse, but the same men have devised,
may be seen, as in other Interpreters, so chiefly in Maldonat, who reports,
that Jerome and Austin, pressed with the d^fficulty of this testimony, fled to
the refuge of saying, that the place was corrupted, and that this was not to be
read, namely, neither the Son but the Father, contrary to the credit of all
books; which if we may call into question, there will be nothing in the
Scripture certain, nothing firm, nothing which one may not deny. Neither must
we only expunge the words of Mark, but also those of Matthew, which are of the
same import. Next, the same Interpreter says, that the greater part of the
ancient Authors were of opinion, that Christ was ignorant of the day of
judgment, not because himself was indeed ignorant thereof, but because he made
us ignorant of it, because he would not reveal it to us; because his Body, that
is the Church, was ignorant of it, because he dissembled the knowledge thereof;
and to that purpose he cites Origin, Chrysostom, Gregory, Hierom, Beda,
Theophilact. This Interpretation (if so be it deserves this name) the same
Interpreter does rightly confute by this Argument, because at that rate the
Father also would be ignorant of the day of judgment, in that he revealed it
not unto us. Again, what manner of reasoning had Christ used, were this
Interpretation admitted? The Disciples desired to know of him the day of
judgment, Christ answers, according to the opinion of these men, The Son
causes you to be ignorant of the day of judgment, he will not reveal it, he
dissembleth his knowledge thereof. But this was the very thing that the
Disciples ask, namely, that he will declare it unto them. A cause should have
been alleged why he would not declare it, why, as they speak, he did dissemble
it. Finally, what manner of Interpretation is this: I know not, that is, I
dissemble my knowledge? Did Christ deal thus with his Disciples, and delude
them with whom he both might and ought to deal openly? Such a kind of speech
would be unbecoming even a grave man, much more Christ. Again, the same
Interpreter says, that others, by name Origin, Epiphanius, Chrysostom
expounded it, that Christ was ignorant of the day of judgment, because he had
not yet experien^e of it. This opinion he refuteth with the same reason that he
did the former; because by this reckoning, the Father also should be ignorant
of it, since neither he himself as yet had experience of it. He says, that
others affirm this to be the sense, Neither does the Son of man know it, unless
the Father know it; but because the Father knows it, the Son of man also knows
it, as Enthymius speaks. Which Interpretation is very frivolous; first, in
that by so speaking, he had not alleged the cause, why he declared not the day
of judgment to his Disciples, nor had diminished the desire of knowing it, and
inquiring it of him, but increast it; because by this means he had intimated,
that the Son of man did know that day. Besides, neither does the word Son,
absolutely spoken of Christ, denote the Son of man, but the Son of God, as he
is such, especially since the word Father is presently opposed thereunto, and
by it God understood; and the word but, in that passage, but the Father,
agrees not with the words, nor the Son, immediately going before, but with
those, none knows. Finally, that interpretation does thwart the words of
Matthew, who says, that the Father only knows it. For how ridiculous would
it be to say, the Son of man knows not the day of judgment, unless the
Father only knows it? for it is a certain contradiction in the Additament,
and the condition that is added, subverteth that to which it is added. The same
Interpreter furthermore says, that many ancient and grave Authors, whose names
he orderly reckons up, did thus interpret, That Christ, as man, was ignorant
of the day of judgment. Which he himself thinks to be true only in this
sense, that Christ knew not the day of judgment upon that score, or for that
reason, because he was man, but because he was God. Otherwise he supposes it
to be false, and horrid to be spoken, that the humane Nature of Christ was
ignorant of any thing. For the Papists, yea, certain others also, imagine, that
the humane Nature of Christ, from the very first instant of his conception and
birth, knew all things. But that Interpretation also he refuteth, because
Christ not only denies, that the Son of man (he ought here rather to say the
Son of God) does know the day of judgment; but also affirms, that the Father
only knows it; by which speech he seems to exclude, not only the Son, but
also the holy Spirit.

Nevertheless, now a-dayes that Interpretation which the Interpreter rejects,
namely, that Christ is said truly to be ignorant of the day of judgment, not
according to the divine, but according to the humane Nature, is commonly most
received even amongst them, who otherwise hold, that in the very moment of
conception, the Properties of the divine Nature were communicated to the
humane, or the knowledge of all things infused into the soul of Christ:
therefore we must here briefly refute it, and having discust it in a few words,
also disprove that man's own interpretation.

Such an Interpretation therefore, and Answer to our Argument as is commonly
brought, That Christ was ignorant of the last judgment day.
for three Reasons chiefly ought not to be admitted. First, because Christ
simply and without any limitation, denies that the Son knows the day and
hour of judgment. Where it follows, that he spoke of himself wholly, how
great soever he is; as we have shown in the examination of the second Answer to
that place, John 5.19. Again, to omit other things spoken in the same place,
both from the simple word Son opposed to God the Father, and also by the
Gradations used by Christ, ascending from the Angels to the Son, and from the
Son to the Father, it is apparent that he altogether spoke of that Nature
according to which he is the Son of God. Thirdly, Because in Matthew it is
expressly said, that the Father only knows the day and hour of judgment:
which sense agrees also to the words of Mark, whilst he says, None knows
but the Father, opposing the Father to the Son himself. But if Christ had
according to the divine Nature, known the day of judgment, then not only the
Father, but also the Son had known it, and besides, if we believe the
Adversaries, the holy Spirit.

Now whereas in this place they so much urge the saying of Paul, Col. 2.3. In
whom are all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge hidden. First, they do not
observe, that these words may as well, yea, far better, be referred to the name
of the Mystery of God and Christ; the mention whereof immediately precedeth,
than to the name of Christ. For it is there chiefly treated concerning the
knowledge thereof, so that the sense is, in the Mystery of God and Christ, are
all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge hidden; but that Mystery is the
evangelical Doctrine, Chap. 1.25, 26, 27. Again, the Wisdom and Knowledge here
spoken of, is to be understood of all things pertaining to man's Salvation,
which have also been revealed by Christ unto us, and are diligently to be known
by us. But that the Knowledge of the day of judgment is not comprehended in
the number of these things, appears from these very words of Christ, whereof
we dispute. To omit, although otherwise it were spoken of the same kind of
things, yet this special saying concerning the day of judgment, should
derogate from the general, and not be interpreted according to that, but that
according to it. It remains that we speak something of that Interpretation
and Answer which the Popish Interpreter, having refuted the Opinions of all the
rest, did devise, although he so proposed it, as that himself seems to put no
great confidence in it; for he says, Unless The mistaken, Christ speaks in
the same manner that he had formerly said, Mat. 20.23.
To sit at my right and left hand, is not mine to give you, but to them for
whom it has been provided by my Father. Wherefore he intimates what is more;
that he not only as a man, but also as God, was in a certain sort ignorant of
the day of judgment, not that he was indeed ignorant; but because it was not
his office to know, as he said not, for whom it is provided for by me, but by
my Father, not that it was not provided by him also; but because to provide the
Kingdom, that is, to predestinate, is not his office, but the Fathers. That
also it belongs to the Father, to appoint when the world is to be dissolved,
and when the day of judgment is to be. This is that which the Apostle says,
Acts 1.7.
It is not for you to know the times and seasons which the Father has put in
his own power. Therefore he alone is signified to know it. And this, unless I
be mistaken, is the true sense. He did well, twice to add unless I be mistaken;
for he was something afraid, lest he should be mistaken; neither did this
ingenious man satisfy himse f, whilst he endeavored to satisfy others. But
neither did he rightly explain the place, but pervert it, nor take away the
difficulty, but in some part augment it. For, first, he without example, and
any just reason, departs from the proper and usual signification, of being
ignorant, whilst he interprets it, that it is not ones duty to know, unless
perhaps he allege this very thing for a reason about which we controvert,
namely, That it cannot be said that the Son is ignorant of the day of judgment,
because he ever knew, as all other things, so that day also. Again, in what
manner soever he interprets those words, it is not the office of the Son to
know that day, yet does he not escape the difficulty; for either it is not
therefore the office of Christ, because he is not bound to know that day, or
not obliged to know that day, or because he is bound to be ignorant of that
day; so that it is not so much as lawful for him to know it; which latter
sense, the places quoted by him, seem to require. If he hold the latter, he
increases the difficulty instead of diminishing it, and says more than is
needful. For he not only says, that the Son was then ignorant of the day of
judgment, but that it was not so much as lawful for him to know it. But how can
he be the most high God, who is not only ignorant of something, but cannot know
it, or to whom it is not so much as lawful to know somethings, and that as he
is God? And notwithstanding the places quoted by him, and duly compared with
this, seem altogether to require such a sense; for when Christ says, To sit at
my right hand and left hand, is not mine to give, he signifies, that it lay
not in his power and disposal, or that it was not lawful for him to do it. But
the place of the Acts makes express mention of Power, and signifies that the
Father had reserved to his own power and disposal the determination, and
consequently also the knowledge of the times and seasons. But if he grant the
former, first, what will this make to the purpose? for the sense will be, that
none is obliged to know the day of judgment, neither the Angels, nor the Son,
but the Father only. But what then? although neither Men, nor the Angels, nor
the Son be obliged to know it, yet both he and they may possibly know it, and
we, (as the Disciples may be supposed to speak) although we are not bound, are
yet desirous to know it, since, saving the truth of that saying, it is possible
for us to know it. For he against whom we dispute, does believe, that although
it were not the office of Christ to know the day of judgment, yet he did know
it. By this reckoning therefore, Christ had not quenched the desire and longing
that the Apostles had to know that day, but had left place for such a
cogitation, that it might be, that both Men and Angels did know that day. Again
how can it be said, that it is the Office of the Father, or that the Father is
obliged to know the day of judgment, and the Son not obliged, if he also be the
Supreme, and consequently the same God with the Father? for neither of them can
be obliged to know any thing, but that the other also must be obliged, since
both have the same numerical understanding, and the self-same knowledge.
Besides, whatsoever cause you allege, why the Father is obliged to know the
day of judgment, that will be common to the Son, if he be the supreme God with
the Father; yea, were it possible, that one of them should be obliged
thereunto, the other not at all or less obliged; it should be held, that Christ
is more obliged, because he sustaineth the Office of Judge; and if he be the
supreme God, does therein depend on none; so that he does according to his own
pleasure both constitute and determine the day of judgment. I omit that it is
not rightly said, that it is the Fathers Office, or that he is bound to know
the day of judgment, since he cannot choose but know; or if you therefore say,
it is his Office because he is bound to define and constitute that day,
consider how rightly it is said, that he is bound to do that which lies in his
own pleasure. But of this so far.

CHAP. X.
Argument the tenth from the words of Christ, Mat. 20.23. To sit at my right
and left hand, is not mine to give.

THe next place shall be that which a certain Interpreter, as we have seen,
compared with that testimony whereof we have hitherto treated, and is extant in
the same Matthew, chap. 20. where Christ speaks thus, But to sit at the right
and left hand, is not mine to give: So it is read in the Greek without adding
to you, which is found in the vulgar Translation, But to whom it has been
prepared by my Father. Now it is easy to every one to perceive, what the
meaning of Christ is; namely, that it is not in his power, or not lawful for
him a^cording to his own pleasure, to determine who ought to sit at his right
hand in his Kingdom, who also at the left, and so to obtain the next degree of
dignity and honor after him. For that this is due to them, for whom it has
been designed by the Father, whose Decrees Christ cannot repeal. From whence it
appears, that Christ denies such Authority to himself, as he intimates,
that the Father exercises. Whence it follows, that Christ is not the most
high God. For in the Power and Pleasure of the most high God, are all things
which fall under any power, such as is that, namely, to give or decree that one
should sit at the right hand; another at the left hand of Christ in his
Kingdom: for Christ intimates, that that has been prepared for some by the
Father.

The Defense of the Argument.
from Mat. 20.23.
YOu will say, that it is not lawful even for God himself, to repeal his own
Decrees, especially such as design some good to some person. And that therefore
it was not lawful for Christ any further to determine according to his
pleasure, who ought to sit at his right hand, who at his left, although he be
the most high God, because he has already made an immutable Decree concerning
that matter. We answer, That that is here taken for granted, which is
altogether controverted, and can be confirmed by no other testimony of the
Scripture, (for, John Maldonat
neither do we read in the Scripture, that the Son or holy Spirit, but the
Father only did predestinate any one, says the most learned and popish
Interpreter on this place) and is not only not agreeable to the words of this
place, but also foreign to the same. For were the thing so, neither would
Christ simply have said, To sit at the right hand and left hand, is not mine to
give; nor had he said of the Father only, that it was provided for some by him,
but he would have said, either that it was done by him, without naming the
Father, or at least he would have joined himself with the Father; for who would
not think it to be absurd, should it be supposed that the Father of Christ had
already made a decree of giving to some the dignity of sitting at the right and
left hand, to bring him in th^s speaking? To sit at the right hand and left
hand, is not mine to give, but to whom it has been prepared by my Son. Would
not the Father upon this account, attribute some Prerogative to the Son above
himself, and ascribe that to him, which he took away from himself? Where since
now the Son does in that manner speak of himself, it is to be held, as we see
some Interpreters do acknowledge, that Christ, even as he is God, ascribes
some Prerogative to the Father above himself, and what he attributes unto him,
takes away from himself. Which if you make a true estima^e of the thing, is no
other than to say, that the Father only is the most high God, but the Son is
not; as we have above sufficiently Chap. 2. of this Section.
taught.

Some other will say, that Christ does not here simply deny, it is his to give,
that one should sit at his right hand, another at his l^ft; but that it is not
his to give it unto those two disciples, the Sons Zebedee; for that the words
to you are either to be read, or to be understood, both because the ancient
Interpreters have them, and the following words opposed to those going before,
do require it; for it follows, But to whom it hath-been provided by my
Father. Whence it seems apparent, that in the foregoing words, is to be
understood the name of the persons, to whom it suiteth not with Christ to give
so great a thing, and that they are those disciples who asked that of Christ,
and whom the ancient Interpreter designed by the words to you. But if those
words be added, you will say, Christ affirms or denies nothing of himself,
which may not be affirmed or denied of the most high God. But, first, no reason
enforces us to imagine, that the words to you are either to be read or
understood; but there is rather good reason, why we should conceive that they
are not to be read. For as for the authority of the ancient Interpreter, there
is no cause why we should leave the Fountain, and follow the Stream, and think
that this is purer than that; yea, rather the reading of the Latin Translation
ought to yield to the reading of the Greek Copies, if they agree among
themselves, and to be corrected from it. But here the Greek coppies among
themselves, and that not only in Matthew, but also in Mark, where it is read in
the same manner, and that most learned Popish Interpreter says, he knows no
ancient Greek Interpreter, who read the words to you, yea, not so much as
Austin amongst the Latins. But as for the reasons drawn from the following
words, that do persuade us, that in the foregoing words, a regard is also had
of those persons, to whom it concerned not Christ to give that sitting at his
right hand and left; but there it follows not, that the words to you must of
necessity so be understood, and so this great felicity is denied to those two
Disciples by name. For every one sees, that these words may thus also be
rightly understood, as if Christ had said, To sit at the right and left hand is
not mine to give, namely, to whom soever I please, even to my kinsmen, such as
you are, having a regard to kindred only, or to give it to such as simply ask,
and therein prevent others as you do, but to them at length to whom it has
been designed by my Father. Again, let us grant, that those words, to you, are
either to be read, or to be understood. Nevertheless, since Christ says, that
it is not his to give that sitting, but to them for whom it has been prepared
by the Father, it follows that he is not the most high God. For by such words
he intimates, that he is not the prime Author of so great Dignity, but the
Father, and that he himself does both promise, and will at length give that
honor, according to the pleasure of another, namely, of the Father, and the
Laws appointed by him; otherwise, as we before hinted, he would have said, that
so great dignity had for some been provided either by himself, or at least by
him and the Father together. But neither of those things which we have spoken,
is incident to the most high God; for he is both the prime Author of all such
Honors and Rewards, and composeth himself to the pleasure of his own, not of
another will, and accordingly distributeth rewards and honors.

The exception concerning the humane Nature, according to which it was not his
to give, whereas it was according to the divine, has here no place, both for
the simple negation, and also because he here opposes not one Nature to
another, but his own Person to the Person of the Father, and what he takes
away from himself, he attribueth to him; and finally, because this reason would
have had no force to repeal the petition of those Disciples; for neither did
they desire, that he should give unto them what they craved, according to one
Nature, not according to another, but simply that he should give it, and
consequently, that he should give it according as he is able. Therefore if
Christ had answered, that it was not his to give according to the humane
Nature, they might presently reply, that it did nothing matter them, so that he
gave it according to the divine, according to which he was able to give it. But
they were nor so subtle, although they believed Christ to be the Son of God, as
to think of that distinction. Therefore they thought that a simple Negative was
simply to be taken, and believed, that John Maldonat.
Christ spoke to the purpose, and did not struggle besides the matter in hand.
I omit that the most learned of the Adversaries acknowledge, that John Maldonat.
Christ here spoke of himself as God; as we saw in the examination of the
foregoing place.

CHAP. XI.
Argument the eleventh, from those words of Christ. Mat. 19.17. Why do thou
call me good? none is good but God only.

THe third place shall be that which is extant in the same Matthew, in the
chapter immediately before going, namely* the 19.17. where when a certain young
man had thus bespoken Christ, Good Master, what good shall I do that I may have
eternal Life. Christ answers him with these words, as it is read both in the
Greek books with Matthew himself, and in the Latin also with Mark and Luke,
Mar. 10.18. Luke 18.19.
Why do thou call me good, there is none good but one, the God, or God only:
which place, both heretofore, and at this day, many have dared so to
understand, as if Christ would by the confession of that young man, teach, that
himself was that one or most high God. Which if we show to be false, the
Argument will be presently retorted upon them, and it will appear, that the
contrary to what they will have, is here taken for granted by Christ. They
indeed believe Christ to reason in this manner. None is good, but God, namely,
the most high God. I by thy confession am good, I therefore am the most high
God. But, first, Christ no where, though he had far greater occasions of doing
so, did either expressly say, or openly teach, that he is God, as will appear to
every one reading the History of the Gospel; yea, as we have above some where
hinted, when it was objected against him, that he made himself God, he
purposely declined the name of God, and professed himself the Son of God, so
Sect. 1. chap. 1. Sect. 2. Chap. 2. Joh. 10.33.
far was he from professing or endeavoring to demonstrate that he was the most
high God. How much less therefore in this place did he from the bare
appellation of Good, and that added to the name of Master, collect so great a
thing? Again, if Christ would teach this young man, that himself were the most
high God, he would have had him also to understand, that there was none besides
himself, to whom the name of God or Good, taken by way of excellency, does
agree; for he said, that there is none good besides one, namely, God. But we
have already Sect. 1. indefence of the first Argument. and chap. 7
elsewhere shown, that if any one be said to be he, from Mat. 19.17.
to whom only something does agree, the same is to be attributed also to that
very subject only; if Christ would teach that himself was that God, who only is
good, he would have had the young man to understand, that there is none such
besides himself. But this is false, since, besides Christ, the Father is such;
namely, that God, of whom, as different from himself, he elsewhere very
frequently, and in the same discourse speaks. But if any one say, that Christ
would have it understood, that there was no other in regard of Essence, to whom
the name of God and Good, taken by way of excellency, does agree; howbeit, that
there is another in regard of Person, he will take for granted, what all
acknowledge to be most false, that the young man already kn^w how to
distinguish between the Essence and Person, and that it was apparent unto him,
that many divine Persons might be in one numerical Essence, or he would be
forced to say, that Christ did by this speech of his, drive the young man,
ignorant of that distinction, into a most grievous error; namely, to believe
that there was no other Person besides Christ, to whom the name of God and
Good, so taken as we have said, does agree. Could it be that Christ should
touch so great a matter so briefly, and not instruct an ignorant man concerning
it? Finally, the very words of Christ, Why do thou call me good? there is
none good but God only, do openly enough teach, that Christ rejected so great a
title, as agreeing to God only; so far was he from snatching it, to conclude
thence a thing as yet more incredible; namely, that he was the most high God.
What then will you say, will not Christ be good? We answer, That the word Good,
when it is so taken, as to agree only to the most high God, in which manner it
is here done by Christ, as we have Romans 16.1 Tim. 1.6.
before hinted, taken by way of excellency, and denotes him who is in the most
perfect manner of all, and of himself, good. In which sort we have elsewhere
seen, that Wisdom, Power and Immortality, is taken, when God only is said to be
Wise, Powerful and Immortal. In this signification, Christ denies that he is
good. For if you object, that the Sea Sect. 1. defense of the first Argument
young man, did not simply call Christ Good, but Good Master, and so took not
the word Good in so perfect a signification, but in such an one as might agree
to a Master, given by God. We answer, That the young man did both in an unusual
manner, so That is, spoke to.
accost Christ, O good Master, in which manner we no where find, that he is at
any other time styled, and also would in a singular fashion call him good, and
attribute this name unto him by a certain excellency. Now although he thought
not of so perfect a signification as agrees to God only, yet such an
appellation, by reason of its singularity, receding from the common custom,
seemed to favor of a signification so perfect, and so of a certain Divinity.
It became the great Modesty of Christ, not to admit this title, as truly
agreeing only to God, but to decline and reject it. And this was far more
becoming, than to draw this title, uttered in another sense, to the Confession
of his supreme Deity. In like manner, the same Christ below, Mat. 23.8, 9, 10.
admonishes his Disciples, that they suffer not themselves, to be adorned with
the titles of Rabbis and Masters, because there is one Master of ours, the
Christ; nor that they call any one on Earth Father, because there is one Father
of ours, who is in the Heavens. Although perhaps they who called them Rabby, or
Master, did not at all think of so perfect a signification, wherein those
Appellations did agree to none but Christ, yea, although it were not so much as
likely, that they did think, neither also did we take the name of the Father in
so excellent a signification, wherein it agreed to none but the most high God:
for it is sufficient, that such a custom of That is speaking to.
accosting, does savor of something too much, and consequently of something
more divine, which agrees to none but Christ, or to the most high God; for
Modesty does shun even those things also which have a show of too much. What
therefore the Master of most perfect Humility in those words taught the
Disciples, that in this place of ours, did he teach by example, whilst he
rejected the title of Good, as too much, and proper to God only. Hence also it
is apparent, that Christ reasons far otherwise than the Adversaries, and
consequently after a contrary manner, namely, thus, None is good but God,
namely, the most high God: which is all one as if he should say, Whosoever is
good, namely, by way of Ex ellency, he is the most high God: But I am not the
most high God, wherefore I am not good, taking this name by way of excellency;
neither was I so to be called by thee.

CHAP. XII.
Argument the twelfth, from the words of Christ to the Father, Not as I will,
but as thou.

THe fourth place shall be that, where Christ in this manner concluded his
prayer to the Father, Mat. 26.39.
Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou: Or as Luke speaks, Luke 22.42.
Not my will, but thine be done. For from those words it is collected, that
Christ is not the most high God; for the most high God neither permits, nor
can permit to any other person a power to determine of him, and also to decree
contrary to what himself desires and wills; otherwise, by this very act, he
would acknowledge that person superior to himself. But nothing is superior to
the most high God. Whereas Christ permits here to another Person, namely,
his Father a Power to determine of him, and to decree even contrary to what he
himself otherwise willed. Again, had Christ been the most high God, he had also
been one and the same God with the Father, as the Adversaries themselves
contend, or of one Essence with him, otherwise there would be two most high
Gods. But it is apparent from this place, that Christ was not the same with the
Father, or of the same Essence with him: for had he been, he would likewise
have had one numerical will with the Father, and the same numerical act of the
will, as we have above This Section. Chap. 5, 6
elsewhere taught. But it is apparent from this place, from Mat. 26.39.
that the will of both was different, and the act thereof different; yea, that
it might come to pass, that the one might be contrary to the other in the thing
here treated of, although so, that the will of Christ was ready to yield to the
Fathers Will; otherwise he could at no hand have said, Nevertheless, not my
will, but thine be done; for it could not be, that his own will should not be
done, if his Fathers will were done: nor could Christ (for example) desire that
the cup should pass from him, if the Father would not have it pass.

The Defense of the Argument.
IT will be here presently answered, that it is manifestly apparent, from the
words, that Christ speaks thus according to the humane Nature, not according
to the divine. And indeed we believe, that Christ according to the humane
Nature, or the very humane Nature it self, does here speak, but so, that it is
withal to be granted, that there is not in him another Nature, namely, the
divine. For, first, the simple Negation, Not my will be done, permits not
that there was another Nature in Christ, and that a better, according to which
his own will ought altogether to be done, as it would be necessary to hold, if
there had been in Christ the divine Nature, the same in number with that of the
Father. To omit, that it is absurd, yea, altogether impossible, that in Christ
at the same time, there should be contrary wills concerning the same thing;
whereof the one would have the cup pass from him, the other would not.
Certainly it would withal be necessary to acknowledge two Persons in him. For,
to subjoyn another reason for which that distinction of Natures has here no
place, it is necessary that Christ spoke these things of himself as he is a
Person; for such operations as are, to will, and consequently also to beg,
agree to none but Suppositums, endued with understanding, as such; and
consequently, to none but persons as such. Either therefore it is necessary for
the Adversaries to hold, that Christ spoke these things of himself as he is a
divine Person, namely, one of the Persons of the Trinity; which we have shown
to be false, and they themselves, who here use a distinction of Natures, do
acknowledge: or it is necessary to acknowledge, that his humane Nature,
according to which Christ willed and begged those things, is a Person; and so,
lest two Persons should with the Nestorians be h^ld to be in him, contrary to
all, both Reason and Scripture, that there is in him no divine Essence and
Person. Finally, It is to be observed, that he does here submit himself not to
the power and will of his own divine Nature, but to the Will of the Father, and
so opposes not Nature to Nature, but to Person to Person, and the will of
that, to the will of this. Wherefore it is altogether to be confessed, that
there was not in the Person of Christ, that will, which he attributes to the
Father, and simply opposes to his own.

CHAP. XIII.
from Heb. 5.5.
Argument the thirteenth, from the words, Heb. 5.5. Christ did not glorify
himself.

HItherto we have cited places out of the Writers of the Evangelical History,
and consequently out of none but the words of Christ himself, wherein those
things are denied of Christ, which could by no means be denied of him, if he
were the most high God. To which we think fit to subjoyn those words of the
divine Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, which are extant, chap. 5.4, 5.
Neither takes any one the Honor to himself (namely, of the Pontificiate or
high Priesthood) but he that is called by God, as Aaron. So also Christ did not
glorify himself to become an high Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art
my Son, this day have I begotten thee. For if Christ were the most high God,
how had he not glorified himself to become an high Priest, if so be the most
high God can be any high Priest? Whereof hereafter. For on the most high God,
the honor of an high Priesthood does depend, and so is conferred on others.
And in that the Father glorified him to become an high Priest, as here it is
affirmed; Christ had also glorified himself, to become an high Priest, had he
been the most high God, and so one God with the Father. But that is in this
place denied, and he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, is said to have
glorified him, and not he himself.

The Defense of the Argument.
THe exception concerning two Natures, has no more place here, than in the
former places; both for the simple Negation, as also because Christ is here
considered as he has attained the Priestly Office, which agrees to him only
as he is a Person. But if that be a Person of supreme Divinity, those things
which are here either spoken or denied of Christ, must be attributed or denied
of the very divine Nature. Since a Person of supreme Divinity is nothing but
the divine Nature endued with a subsistence. Add hereunto, that those things
which are here attributed unto Christ, are ascribed to him as he is the Son of
God; for the divine Author does not therefore take those words of the second
Psalm, that he may only simply describe him that glorified Christ, and made him
high Priest, but that this very description may teach, that Christ was made an
high Priest by God. For besides the custom both of this and other divine
Authors, who are wont to make use of Descriptions of Persons accommodated to
the subject matter, not foreign to the matter; the following words also show
this thing; for the divine Author adds, As he also says in another place,
Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. By which words it
clearly appears, that in the former place also it is spoken of the Priesthood
which was given unto Christ. But that place is not commonly to be taken of
Christ according to the divine Nature, and to be wrested to his Generation out
of the Essence which the Father made from all Eternity; which though it be
absurd, and besides other things, repugnant to the words of Paul, Act. 13.32,
33. and so to this very place, does yet exclude their exception concerning the
humane Nature, according to which this very place is to be taken of Christ.
Finally, would the divine Author here have spoken of a certain Nature only, and
not of the whole Person of Christ, he would not have opposed Christ to the
Father, but to himself according to the divine Nature, and what he had taken
away from the humane, he would have attributed to the divine; but that he
neither did, nor could do. For if Christ was in that very thing made an high
Priest by God, as he was begotten by God, and consequently became the Son of
God; as we manifestly see the divine Author intimates; he could not be made an
high Priest by himself, no not considered according to the divine Nature;
otherwise Christ would have been begotten of himself, considered according to
the divine Nature, and so would be his own Son, and the divine Nature might say
to him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Which how absurd it is,
and repugnant to its self, every one perceives. Now therefore he at length
shall rightly understand this place, and the Authors reasoning, who observes
that Christ is chiefly called the Son of God, as by his favor he has attained
the greatest similitude with God; and that Christ was never made more like to
God, than when he obtained the perpetual Government of the house of God, and
the Office of eternally looking to, and saving the People of God. Which thing
is contained in this Priesthood; for the divine Author opposes nor that Office
to the Kingly, but in some sort includes this in that. But let those things be
here spoken by the by, in that they will prove advantageous hereafter.

CHAP. XIV.
Argument the fourteenth, from the words of Christ, John 14.28. My Father is
greater than I.

WE have hitherto reckoned up not a few places wherein something is denied of
Christ, which could not be denied of him if he were the most high God. It
follows that we take a view of those places, wherein something is attributed to
him, which could not be attributed if he were the most high God, and that such
in the first place, wherein some Prerogative is ascribed to the Father above
him, and so the Father made superior to Christ: from John 14.28.
of which sort those also were which we have hitherto alleged. We will again
begin from John, in whom there are very many Testimonies of this kind also;
amongst which we will give the first place to that wherein Christ, with most
open words, professes that the Father is greater than he; as he does chap.
4.28. Where he says, My Father is greater than I: to which ought to be added
that place, chap. 10.29. where the same Christ says, My Father which gave them
me (namely, the Sheep) is greater than all. Where under the name of those All,
Christ himself also is included, as both the collation with those words, chap.
14. and also that does show, that in the same place, he attributes to the
Father the giving of those Sheep unto him, and consequently unto himself the
receiving of them from the Father. But none can be greater than the most high
God.

The Defense of the Argument.
HEre many of the ancient Authors did grant, that Christ speaks of himself,
even as he is the Son of God, and says that the Father is greater than
himself, in as much as the name of Father signifies the Principle, and as the
Greeks speak, the cause of the Son. Thus besides others, that Popish
Interpreter, John Maldonatus.
whom we have above quoted, says, it is expounded by Athanasius, Hilary,
Epiphanius, Gregory Nazianzen, Cesarius, Cyril, Damascen, Chrysostom, Leontius,
Theophilact, Euthymius, citing the places of them to that purpose. But I know
not, says he, whether they granted more to the Adversaries (namely, the
Arrians, with whom they did dispute) than was meet. Indeed this acute man saw,
that it follows thence, that Christ even as he is the Son of God, is not the
most high God, in that the Father is greater than he, as such: concerning which
thing, we have already above Sect. 1. Chap. 1.
sufficiently spoken. Add hereunto, that that fashion wherein they make the
Father greater than Christ, makes nothing to the purpose of Christ; for Christ
there renders a reason of that which he had last spoken, namely, If ye love me,
ye would rejoice because I go to the Father. By which words he signifies, that
some good or happiness should arrive to him, when he was gone away to the
Father, and consequently, that the Disciples ought to rejoice even for his
sake, that he went away to the Father; as very learned men before us have
observed. But what makes it to the purpose, that the Father is greater than
Christ, as he is the Fountain of his divine either Nature or Person, and begat
him from Eternity out of his Essence? does not the thing it self hint, that
Christ would signify, that the Father was greater than he, as he was more
blessed, glorious, powerful? and that he himself, when he was more nearly
joined with the Father, and received into his own seat, should be partaker of
the same Blessedness, Glory, Power and Empire? But there is no need to labor
much in refuting the Interpretation of the Ancients, since at this day there is
scarce any one that follows it. For latter Writers observing, that by such an
Interpretation, the Arrians Opinion touching the Divinity of Christ, is not a
little established; they chiefly seized on that answer, which also not a few of
the Ancients made use, that Christ there spoke not of himself according to the
divine, but only according to the humane Nature. Which answer may be refuted by
the same reason in a manner, which above, chap. 3. of this Section, we
alleged, if you change a few things in some of them. For not to repeat those
things now, whereby we have taught, that there is no example of such a
distinction in the Scriptures, yea, that this very distinction overthrows the
Opinion of the Adversaries concerning the Person of Christ, we have shown that
that cannot be simply denied of the whole, which may, and is wont, or rather
altogether ought to be simply affirmed of the same, although it agree not to it
according to some one part, especially the less worthy. Whence it follows,
that also on the contrary, that cannot be simply affirmed of some whole, which
may, and is wont, or rather ought to be simply denied of the same whole,
although it does agree to it according to some part, especially the less
worthy. Now if Christ be the most high God equal to the Father in all things,
as the Adversaries affirm, and that without any limitation, and simply; yea,
ought simply to be denied of him, that the Father is greater than he. For
neither is it more lawful simply to affirm of him, that he is the most high
God, and equal to the Father in all things, than to deny that the Father is
greater than he, or that he is less than the Father. Wherefore neither could
Christ simply affirm of himself, if he were the most high God, that the Father
is greater than he. Add hereunto, that such an affirmation, My Father is
greater than I, is of equal force with such a Negation, I am not so great as my
Father; as every one sees by himself, and the scope of these words before
mentioned by us, does teach; for Christ would signify, that he did yet want
something which the Father has; and therefore that he also may attain the
same, he must go away unto the Father. Wherefore since we have taught, that
what may or ought to be simply affirmed of the whole, cannot be denied of the
same whole; Christ could not thus speak of himself, if for another, and that a
better Nature, he would have the contrary understood of him. Again, since he
who speaks is the very Son of God; for he says, My Father is greater than I;
thereby intimating, that God the Father is greater than his Son: either it is
necessary to say, that the Father is greater than the very divine Nature of
Christ, which the Adversaries by that very distinction of theirs, endeavor to
avoid, or confess that the Son of God is not a person of supreme Deity, since a
person of supreme Deity, is no other than the very divine Nature having its
subsistence; as we have above said, chap. 3. Besides, the Interpretation of the
Adversaries, does altogether enervate the force of Christ's words, and render
them invalid to his purpose. For we saw that therefore Christ uttered those
words, that the Disciples might see that he must go away to the Father, to the
end he might enjoy greater happiness; and therefore should not only abstain
from sorrow, but also rejoice that he went a way: but if Christ according to
one Nature only, had been less than the Father, and in the mean time, had in
himself a Nature or Person equal to the Father in all things, there would have
been no need for him to go to the Father as greater, to the end he might enjoy
greater happiness; nor would the Disciples have had cause to rejoice that he
went away from them, but rather to grieve, in that he would go away, where as
he might stay, and they might presently object to the Lord, yea, why do thou
go away to the Father as greater than thou, since thou art endued with such a
Nature or Person as is equal to the Father in all things, and that Nature is
always intimately present with thee, even whilst thou art conversant with us
on the Earth; why rather do thou not stay with us, and here procure to thy
self that happiness which thou seek with the Father? You see, that by this
reason, if it be taken according to the sense of the Adversaries, Christ could
have prevailed nothing with the Disciples. But he could prevail very much, if
omitting the distinction of Natures, he would have the words taken of him
simply and absolutely, as they were uttered.

But there are some learned men of the Adversaries, who think that those words
of Christ, as also many other places in the same John, are to be taken neither
of the humane Nature of Christ, nor of the divine, but of the whole complex,
See John Calvin's Admonition to the Brethren in Poland.
as they speak; because although he were the eternal God, yet when he descended
to us, he began to be a middle person between God and us. But this is of no
moment; for either they will have it, that the Son, when he d^scended to us,
ceased to be the most high God, or they will not have it. If they will have it,
the Son neither is, nor ever was the most high God; for he can never cease to
be the most high God. If they will not have it, the Son could not therefore be
simply called less than the Father, or, which is all one, the Father greater
than he; because none is simply, yea none is any way greater than the most high
God. And if the Opinion of the Adversaries concerning Christ, be true, the Son
ought to be termed equal to the Father in all things. But as we have shown
before, the same cannot be simply both affirmed and denied of the same whole.
Again, since that whole complex whereof they say, that those words of Christ
are to be taken, is the Person of Christ, or the very Son of God; as neither
they do deny, and we have before shown; it is necessary for them to confess,
either that that Person is not a Person of supreme Deity, or else that it may
be said of the divine Nature, that the Father is greater than it, as we have a
little before demonstrated. We forbear to repeat that reason whereby we have
confuted the Answer which is now adays most received among the Adversaries;
namely, that such an Interpretation weakneth the force of Christ's words, and
renders them ineffectual to what he intended. For the same reason is also
prevalent against this Interpretation: for if these words be so to be taken, as
that nevertheless it may or rather ought to be understood, that Christ is the
most high God; or has in him the Nature of the most high God; they are not
effectual to show, that Christ must go away to the Father, and his Disciples
ought to rejoice, that he would go away to the Father; as may be understood by
what was formerly spoken. Furthermore, did Christ therefore call himself less
than the Father, because he is a middle Person between God and us; he would
always be less than the Father in that sense, even after he ascended into
Heaven, and sat at the right hand of God the Father: since Christ is at this
time a middle Person between us and God, in that he is a Priest, and our
Advocate, interceding for us with the Father: for which cause the Adversaries
themselves say, that he is now a Mediator. But Christ shows by these words,
that he, after he was gone away to the Father, should be no longer less than
he. Whence they themselves, with whom we have to do, affirm, that Christ in
those words compares his present state with his heavenly Glory. For, as we
already hinted before, because the Son did yet want that Glory, to wit,
Immortality, and sublime Authority over all things, he was therefore less than
the Father; having attained the same, he is reputed no longer less than the
Father. For neither is a most exact and altogether absolute equality here to be
regarded. Wherefore Christ did not therefore say, that he was less than the
Father, or the Father greater than he, because he is a middle Person between us
and God. I forbear to mention at this time, that they with whom we have to do,
hold that Christ was in the same sort even from the beginning of the world, a
Mediator of God and Men. Whence it would follow, that his divine Person
existing without the humane Nature, was already less than the Father, before
that descent which they understand; neither do I here urge, that if Christ,
because he descended to us, that is, as they imagine, assumed a humane Nature,
became a middle Person between us and God, and consequently less than the
Father; it is necessary that both the Father and the holy Spirit became middle
persons between us and God, and less than themselves. For neither could the Son
or his divine Nature, assume the humane, but that the Nature of the Father, and
of the holy Spirit, and consequently the very Father and holy Spirit, would
together assume the same humane Nature, if that be true which the Adversaries
say, that those three have one and the same numerical divine Nature. Concerning
which Sect. 2. Chap. 5.
we will treat in the second Book.

CHAP. XV.
That the Son was sent by the Father.
Argument the fifteenth, drawn from thence, That the Son was sent into the
world by the Father.

IN the second place, that may be alleged which is so often read in John;
namely, that Christ See Joh. 3.17 and 4.33. and 5.23, 24. and 30.37, 38 and
many other places.
was sent by God or the Father; which is also found in other Writers, and
amongst others in Paul, when he says, God sent his Son in the likeness of
sinful flesh, Romans 8.3. and Gal. 4.4. When the fullness of time came, God sent
his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law. For it follows from hence, that
Christ is not the most high God, since it is not for him to be sent, but to
send, because it is not for him to receive any command from another, but to
give commands unto all. But every Ambassador as such, receives command from
another, and of necessity composeth his words or actions, which he undertaketh
as an Ambassador, unto the will and beck of another, otherwise he will not
discharge the Office of an Ambassador. Whence also Christ, as we saw before,
John 12.49. says, The Father that sent me, he gave me a Commandment what I
should say, and what I should speak. And in the following verse, What things
therefore I speak, as the Father has said unto me, so I speak.

The Defense of the Argument.
HEre the Adversaries are not easily wont to fly to a distinction of Natures,
partly because they hold, that Christ before he was born of the Virgin, was
sent by the Father out of Heaven, yea, sent to this very end, to be born of the
Virgin, and assume a humane Nature, partly because they see, that to be sent,
and so to sustain the Office of an Ambassador, agrees to none but a person,
as such. That I may not say, if Christ had been sent only according to the
humane Nature, it will follow, that he was also sent by himself, or by his own
divine Nature, when notwithstanding he every where makes another person,
namely, the Father, to be the Author of his mission, but never makes himself;
yea, as we formerly John 7.28.
saw, he expressly denies, that he came of himself.

Wherefore the Adversaries are wont to betake themselves to another refuge, and
to deny that Christ being sent by the Father, argues him to be less than the
Father; indeed the greatest part of them affirm, that he, saving his equality
with the Father, even then when he had not yet assumed a humane Nature, was
both before the Law, and under the Law sent by God, and was then oftentimes
styled an Angel, or Messenger and Ambassador; which we in our Book concerning
God, when we treated of the name Jehovah, have, as I suppose, sufficiently
refuted. Now they say that it is no unusual thing, that a Senator, for example
sake, should be sent by his Colleagues, to whom he is otherwise equal in
Authority and Power, and in their name discharge an Embassage. Yea, that a
greater Person may be sent by a less, either because he does of his own accord
take upon him that Office, or because it is obtained at his hands by prayers,
or other persuasions. But, first, they do not refute the reason of the
consequence of our Argument; which being safe, the Argument it self is safe.
Again, if the thing be so in divine matters, as they hold, it is inhumane;
namely, that an equal may be sent by an equal, yea, a greater by a less,
nothing will hinder but that also the Father may be sent by the Son, or holy
Spirit* which thwarteth the Opinion of the very Adversaries, who deny that the
Father may be sent by the Son or holy Spirit, either apart or jointly, though
it is a wonder that they deny it, since they hold, that those three Persons are
equal to one another in all things; so that there is no repugnancy if one of
them may be sent, that the rest also may be sent. But why do I say, that there
is no repugnancy? since it cannot be, that one should be sent, but that the
other must also be sent, if so be they are of one Essence, and a Person cannot
be sent without the Essence. For if the Essence of the Father were sent when
Christ or the holy Spirit (that we may now together speak of him (...)) was
sent, certainly it is necessary that the Father himself was sent. For he is
sent, whose Essence is sent, since every one is really the same with his
Essence. Besides, from this answer of theirs, it will follow, that nothing
hinders, but that God or Christ may be sent by Angels, and finally, by Men;
namely, being drawn by prayers or other persuasions. But if all understand this
to be most absurd, let them also acknowledge it to be most impossible, that
Christ should be equal to the Father in all things if he be sent by him; for
neither was there any cause why all should judge either this or that, which in
the first place was spoke of, to be abs^rd, than because reason it self has
taught all men, that the Sender in respect of that thing for which he decrees
the message, is, as I may speak with the Vulgar, the principal: but the
Messenger is his Minister in the same thing. And withal, this has also been
understood, that the Father can by no means be inferior to the Son or holy
Spirit, who proceeds from him, and have their Essence from him, or be Minister,
much less the Minister of Men or Angels. As for the Instances therefore, or
Examples alleged to the contrary, here they ought to remember that which they
themselves are often wont to inculcate when there is no place for it; namely,
that in this matter an Argument is ill drawn from humane things to divine. Now
the reason of the diversity is this, because no man (unless perhaps you except
sovereign Kings, who are not themselves wont to discharge Embassages) is so
great, but that he may in a certain thing, be subjected, or subject himself to
another, and so receive commands from him, and minister to him. Wherefore he
also who is equal to another in dignity, yea, superior, may be sent by him,
and discharge an Embassage in his own name, and therein become inferior to
him, and in some business be subservient to him as the principal. But the most
high God cannot so be changed, as to become inferior to any one in any thing,
and to minister unto him: but he is always superior our to all, and all
minister to him. Wherefore can he neither undertake the Office of an
Ambassador.

CHAP. XVI.
Argument the sixteenth, drawn from thence, That Christ received Commands from
the Father, and kept them.

THirdly, To these are to be subjoyned those other places in John, wherein
Christ openly professes, that he received Commands from the Father, and that
he did keep them, and they are many, for chap. 10.18. he says, This
Commandment (namely, of laying down my soul, that I may receive it again) have
I received from my Father. And chap. 12.49. The Father that sent me, he gave me
a Commandment what I should say, and what I should speak. Which words we have
quoted in the foregoing chapter. And chap. 14.31. As the Father has given me a
Commandment, so Job. And chap. 15.10. As I have kept the Commandment of my
Father, and abide in this Love. See also chap. 4.34. and 6.38. and 8.29, 55.
and 17.4. and 18.11. and those places wherein it is very clearly taught, that
Christ obeyed God, Romans 5.19. Phil. 2.8. whereunto add, Heb. 5.8. Hereunto also
may be referred, those places in the Prophets, wherein God calls Christ his
Servant, as amongst other places it is done, Isa. 42.1. (which place is cited
of Christ by Man. chap. 12.18.) and 49.5, 6. of the same Prophecy (which place
is in part cited, Acts 13.47*) and 52.13. and 53.11. and Ezekiel. 34.23, 24. and
37.24, 25. and that where Christ is called, a Minister of the Sanctuary, Heb.
8.2. All which show that Christ is not the most high God; for he can receive
Commands from none, and observe none, obey none, be the servant of none,
otherwise he would not be the Most High: for he is Superior, who gives
Commands, and who is obeyed and served.

The Defense of the Argument.
THe common exception of the Adversaries is, that those things agree to Christ
only according to the humane Nature. But the exception is easily overthrown by
what has been spoken above in the third and fourth chapter of this Section.
For, first, those things which we have alleged, are spoken of Christ simply,
and without any limitation: but were the very Essence of the most high God in
Christ, or rather were he the most high God, That Christ received commands from
God
they ought no less simply, yea, much more to be denied of the same. For it
would no more be lawful simply to affirm of him, those things which agree unto
him according to the humane Nature, than to deny those things which agree not
to him according to the divine; but the same thing cannot be simply affirmed
and denied of the same. Again, If Christ be a person of supreme Godhead, that
limitation according to the humane Nature, has no place in him, neither can it
cause, that what agrees to his humane Nature only, should be simply affirmed
of his Person. For a Person of supreme Divinity, is the very divine Nature. But
it cannot be said, that something agrees to the very divine Nature according
to the humane, and much l^ss that be simply affirmed of it, which is repugnant
to it by it self, and agrees only to a creature, such as are, to receive
commands from the Father, to keep them, to serve the Father. Now the reason is
so much the more to be pressed, if it appear that those things which are spoken
of Christ, do indeed and properly agree to a Person only, such as those are
which were mentioned. For these actions do not agree properly but to an
intelligent Suppositum; that is, a Person as such, especially because in
respect of the Office which Christ sustained on the Earth, he received Commands
from the Father, and performed them, and is now called a Minister of the
Sanctuary, as he is a Priest. But these Offices agree to none but a Person, as
such. Now that which does not properly agree but to the Person of Christ, must
needs agree to the Nature, which, with its Subsistence, compleateth his Person:
But if that Nature be divine, the limitation of the Adversaries restraining
such Attributes to the humane Nature only, falls to the ground. If it be a
humane Nature, either there will be two Persons in Christ, a divine and a
humane, or that divine, which the Adversaries do hold must be denied, and a
humane only, if you regard the Essence; but a divine, if you respect the
Qualities, whereby it is endued by God, is to be acknowledged, which is the
thing that we would have. We now forbea^ to mention, that Christ received
Commands from God, as he was his Ambassador. But the Adversaries hold Christ
to be the Ambassador of God, and not only according to the humane Nature, but
also, and that primarily, according to the divine. By what means then do they
restrain the receiving and keeping of Commandments, and consequently, the name
of Servant to the humane Nature only? For it is necessary that they renounce
that Doctrine before they use such a limitation.

CHAP. XVII.
That Christ prayed to the Father.
Argument the seventeenth, drawn from thence, That Christ poured out Prayers to
the Father.

FOurthly, We may allege those places, both in John, and also other sacred
Writers, wherein we read, that Christ prayed to the Father. Now there is a
large Prayer of his poured out to the Father, partly for himself, partly for
the Disciples, both present, and to come, in the whole 17th chapter of John. To
which add that in the Garden of Gethsemane, Mat. 26.39, 42, 44. Luke 22.41, 44.
and that on the Cross, Mat. 27.46. Luke 23:34, 46. To the former of which
poured out by Christ unto God for himself, the divine Author to the Hebrews
without doubt alluding, chap. 5.7. speaks thus, Who (Christ) in the days of
his flesh offering up Prayers and Supplications to him, who could save him from
death, with strong cries and tears, was heard for his reverence; or (as it may
be turned out of the Greek) for his fear. Furthermore, we read elsewhere, that
he continued all night in prayer to God, Luke 6.12. see also chap. 9.18, 28,
29. and 11.1. and John 14.16. From whence it is clear, that Christ is not the
most high God; for he needing the help of none, and depending on none, does
never implore the help of any.

The Defense of the Argument.
THe answer that Christ prayed according to the humane Nature only, is
sufficiently refuted by what we have spoken before both in the 3d and 14th
chapter, and also in the precedent one. Whereunto add, if Christ, as this
distinction supposes, had had a divine Nature in him, there would have been no
need that he should fly to another Person, namely, the Father; as we read
Christ very often did, and also with tears and strong cryings. For what need is
there to ask of another, and that with so great earnestness, yea, further with
tears, which you are able by your self, and that by natural strength underived
from another at all times, most freely and easily to perform, yea, which you
your selves have absolutely decreed to perform, as certainly it is to be held
of Christ if he were the most supreme God, or most High. Some here reply, that
it may be, that even he who may and will perform something by himself, may beg
it of another, to the end he may honor him in this behalf, and in a manner
leave to him the glory of the benefit. And that it became Christ, as being the
Son; in this sort to honor the Father, and to ask of the Father by name, as of
the Fountain, those benefits which proceed from the whole Trinity. Which
answer, first, takes not away the difficulty. For they who thus answer, either
hold that some Prerogative agrees to the Father above the Son, and so to the
first Person of the Deity above the second, as such, or else they hold it not.
If they hold it, those Persons are not of the same numerical Essence, nor is
the Son the supreme and most high God; as we have already Chap. 1, 2. of this
Section.
shown before. If they hold it not, there is no cause why the Son should rather
ask something of the Father, than of himself (if so be any one may ask any
thing of himself) or without any prayers performed by himself. For what reason
is there, that in an absolute equality, this honor should rather be given unto
the Father, and the glory of the deed attributed to him, than to the Son? Yea,
Christ should rather have taken heed, lest by the example of his prayers, which
he is found to have poured out to the Father only, he should give occasion unto
others, to exhibit greater honor to the Father, than either to himself, or to
the holy Spirit. For to Persons altogether equal, equal honor is also due; and
the Adversaries themselves contend, that those three Persons of Supreme
Divinity, which they hold, have equal honor and glory. But if you say, as
indeed some do, that it was Christ's modesty to ask that of the Father, which of
himself he could either assume to himself, or bestow on others. Not to repeat
those things which have been already spoken, we may demand, to which Nature
they think that modesty is to be ascribed? If to the humane, it was not its
modesty, but judgment only, to prefer the Father before the Son, and to direct
prayers rather to the more honorable. It is greater modesty to make an address
to the inferior, rather than to the Superior. Or if you think the Persons
altogether equal, you show no greater modesty if you betake your self, and
convert your prayers, to one, than to the other. If they ascribe this modesty
to the divine Nature or Person (as we said it was necessary, if this Person
were divine, that is, if he were the very supreme God) they are very absurd and
injurious to the most high God. For Modesty is a Virtue of Men and Angels, not
of the most high God; It is, I say, a Virtue of such a Nature, as may be
exalted, and cast down; not belonging to such a nature as is not capable of
exaltation and depression. But if you dare to ascribe modesty to the most high
God, as such, there will be no cause why you should so earnestly contend, that
Christ prayed to the Father not according to the divine Nature, but according
to the humane only. For it would not be impossible, that Christ according to
the divine Nature, did for modesty sake so debase himself before the Father, as
to pray unto him for others, namely, Men, and obtain gifts for them, which he
could by himself bestow upon them: which, how absurd it is, every one
perceives, and the Adversaries themselves sufficiently intimate, that they see
it, whilst all that I know of, do in this Argument fly to the distinction of
Natures.

But furthermore, the manner of Christ's prayers to the Father, chiefly
expressed by the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and also in part
intimated by the Writers of the History of the Gospel, does at no hand admit
that answer; for it argues the want of Christ, and necessity of praying, not
modesty only. This appears both from his great assiduity in praying, and also
by his strong crying and tears, and perplexity of mind, which showed
themselves, as he prayed a little before his death. If you say it was necessity
that Christ prayed, but modesty that he rather prayed to the Father, than to
himself, or his own divine Nature, not to rep^^t what was formerly spoken of
the humane Nature of Christ, be h^^^^^ be personally united to the divine, that
necessity will quite be e^^^^^^ed, especially in things pertaining to Christ
himself, wherein notwithstanding we see, that he used such cryings, and tears,
and contention of mind. For by what means, for example sake, could the
necessity drive the humane Nature of Christ to pray so ardently unto the
Father, that he would not forsake it, or leave it destitute of his help, and
that he would receive its spirit into his hands, and save it from death, if it
had been joined with an indissolveable tie to the divine Nature, which both
could and would perform it, yea, could not choose but perform it? Do we think
that the humane Nature of Christ was afraid, lest that personal union should be
dissolved. But the Adversaries do not so much as permit any one to doubt of
that; so far are they from believing that such a thing could come into the mind
of Christ's humane Nature, or of the man Christ, or could it perhaps fear, lest
then the union remained entire, yet notwithstanding might perpetually abide in
death, and so the divine Nature remain to all eternity, personally united to a
dead and bloodless corpse? who would not tremble to think of this, since if you
make a true estimate of the thing, this could not be done so much as for a
moment. It remains therefore, that Christ did not for modesty, but for
necessity, pray, and that to the Father, a different person from himself;
namely, because he could not perform by himself that which he asked for
himself, and could not bestow that which he asked for others, but by power
received from the Father, which by praying for others, he tacitly begged should
be given to himself. The first of these is intimated by the divine Author to
the Hebrews, chap. 5.8. whilst, without expressing his proper name, he thus
describes him, to whom Christ offered up prayers and supplications, with
strong crying and tears, namely, Who was able to save him from death, or
deliver him from death. For by that description* he would distinguish that
Person from the Person of Christ, and withal assign the cause why he offered up
prayers unto him, and finally intimate, what he did then so earnestly beg for
himself. But neither had he by this means distinguished that Person from
Christ, if Christ had been as able to save himself from death, as the Father
was to save him, since common things do not distinguish, but proper; neither
had he brought a sufficient reason why he made supplication unto him, with
crying and tears, that he would deliver him from death.

CHAP. XVIII.
That all things were given to Christ.
Argument the eighteenth drawn from thence, That all things are given to Christ
from the Father (...)

IN the fifth place, Those passages may be alleged where it is written, that
all things were given to Christ by the Father; and that partly in general,
partly in special terms; that is, certain things given to him by the Father,
being expressed by name. Whereunto belong very many places, not only in John,
but also other Writers. And for as much as we are citing the Testimonies taken
out of John chiefly, therefore let us begin from him principally, because it is
most frequently in him, than in other Writers expressly written, that the Father
gave something to the Son. Thus therefore he says, chap. 3.35. The Father
loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand. And chap. 5. Christ
being about to declare those words, whereof we have formerly spoken, The Father
loves the Son, and shows all things to him which himself does, and will show
him greater works than these, that ye may marvel: amongst these things he
says, ver. 22. For neither does the Father judge any one, but has given all
judgment to the Son, that all may honor the Son as they honor the Father. And
ver. 26. For as the Father has life in himself so has he given to the Son to
have life in himself, and he has given him also power to do judgment, because
he is the Son of Man. To which places as touching the Life given to the Son by
the Father, that other is not unlike which you find chap. 6.29. As the living
Father has sent me, and I live by reason of the Father, even so he that eats
me, shall live by reason of me: every thing that the Father gives to me, (that
is, every man of an honest heart, whom the Father draws to me) shall come
unto me: which in some sort he repeateth, ver. 39. and chap. 10.29. My Father
which gave them (the Sheep) me, is greater than all. Chap. 13.3. Jesus knowing
that the Father had given all things into his hands. And chap 17.2. Thou
(Father) have given him (the Son) power over all flesh, that every thing which
thou have given unto him, he should give unto them, eternal Life. Ver. 5.
Glorify me thou Father with thy own self, with the Glory which I had, before
the World was, with thee. For it is all one to glorify, as to give glory; as
it is of it self apparent, and is also evident from ver. 22.24. Again ver. 6. I
have manifested thy Name to the Men whom thou have given to me out of the
world: thine they were, and thou have given them to me. And by and by, ver. 7.
Now have they known, that all the things that thou have given to me, are from
thee. See also ver. 9.11, 12, 14. and ver. 22. And the Glory which thou have
given me, have I given them. And ver. 24. That they may see my Glory which thou
have given to me, because thou lovedst me before the making of the World. The
same John at the beginning of the Revelation, says, The Revelation of Jesus
Christ which God gave unto him. This Revelation is largely related afterward,
chap. 5. from the beginning unto the 10th verse. And this cause therefore is
added, For he was slain, and bought us by his blood, and made us Kings and
Priests unto our God. Let the whole place be read, as in a very lively manner
setting forth all the business. Moreover, In the second chapter, about the end,
the very Son of God says, He that overcomes ^^d keeps to the end my works,
I will give unto him power over the Nations, and he shall rule them with an
Iron rod, etc. as I have also re^eived of my Father. Which very same thing he
explaineth in other words afterward about the end of the third chapter, ver.
21.

Now that we may come to the other Writers of the New Testament, who either
expressly, or with words equivalent, affirm that something, yea, all things,
even the divinest of all, were delivered unto Christ by God the Father. First,
Among other things, Christ himself, Mat. 11.27. speaks on this wise, All
things have been delivered unto me by my Father. And chap. 21.24. he cites
concerning himself these words, Psalm. 118.21. The St^ne which the Builders
refused, the same is become the head of the corner: this was the Lords doing,
and it is mavelous in our eyes. Which place is also in part cited Acts 14.11.
and elsewhere, although the word Give is not extant, yet is the thing extant
which is signified by that word; that is, it is intimated, that the Glory,
Power and Empire is given unto Christ by God. Concerning which thing, Mat.
28.18. Christ speaks more plainly and openly, whilst he says, All Power in
Heaven and in Earth is given unto me. Likewise in Luke, chap. 1.32. the Angel
speaks of him thus, He shall be great, and he shall be called the Son of the
Most High, and the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of David his Father.
And he shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever: and of his Kingdom there
shall be no end. And chap. 22.30. Christ himself says, And I dispose to you a
Kingdom, as my Father has disposed unto me. For that disposal argues a
giving. Likewise in the same Writer, Acts 2.33. Peter says, Being therefore
exalted (namely, Christ) by the right hand of God, and having received the
promise of the holy Spirit from the Father, he has poured out this which ye
now see and hear. And presently after when he had cited the words of David
concerning Christ, The Lord says unto my Lord, sit at my right hand until I
make thy enemies the footstool of thy feet. He adds ver. 35. Wherefore let
all the House of Israel know assuredly that God has made him both Lord and
Christ, even this Jesus whom you have crucified. And chap. 3.13. The God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, the God of our Fathers,
has glorified his Son Jesus. And chap. 5.31. Him has God exalted by his right
hand, to be a Prince and Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and remission
of sins. And chap. 10.42. And he (Christ) commanded us to preach to the People,
and testify, that it is he who is appointed of God, Judge of qui^k and dead:
Which Paul afterward does repeat in part, chap. 17.31. Out of whose Epistles,
that we may not be too tedious, we will produce certain places, 1 Cor. 15.27.
He says out of the 8th Psalm, He (God the Father) has put all things in
subjection under his feet (namely, Christ) But when he says, that all things
are in subjection to him, it is manifest, that he is excepted who put all
things in subjection to him. Which he also clearly explaineth, Ephesians. 1.20,
etc. where he says, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, ver. 17.
the Father of Glory, did set (Christ) at his right hand in heavenly places,
far above all principality, and power, and might, and authority, and every name
that is named, n^^ only in this world, but also in that which is to come, and
has put all things in subjection under his feet, and has given him head over
all things, to the Church, which is his Body. And Phil. 2.9. Wherefore (namely,
because Christ humbled himself, becoming obedient to the very death of the
Cross) God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above
every name, that in the name of Jesus every knee should how, of things in
heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and every tongue might confess,
that Jesus is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. And who is able to reckon
up all the places of the Scripture. See among others Heb. 1.2. and so forth to
the end of the chapter, and chap. 2.7, 8, 9. and chap, 3.2, etc. chap. 5.5, 6,
7, 8, 9. and 1 Pet. 1.21.

Now in the Old Testament, besides the places which are contained in the
Testimonies of the Writers of the New Covenant, cited by us, namely, out of
Psalm. 8. and 110. that passage of the second Psalm. ver. 6, 7, 8. is very
notable; I (God the Father) have set my King upon my holy Mountain Sion, I will
declare the Decree (namely, whereby I have been constituted a King: for they
are the words of Christ, the Antitype of David.) The Lord said unto me, Thou
art my Son, I this day begot thee. Ask of me, and I will give unto thee the
Nations for thine inheritance, and the ends of the Earth for thy possession:
thou shall rule them with a rod of Iron, etc. To which is to be joined that
famous Vision in Daniel, chap. 7.13. where he says, I saw in the night Vision,
and behold in the Clouds of Heaven, there came one like the Son of Man, and he
came to the ancient of days, (that is, the eternal God, before cited, ver.
9.10. and they offered him in his sight, and he (the Ancient of days) gave
unto him Power and Honor, and a Kingdom, and all people, tribes and tongues
shall serve him; his power is an everlasting Power, which shall not be taken
away, and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. We wittingly and
willingly omit more places.

Now from these passages it is evinced, that Christ is not the most high God,
for none can bestow any thing on him, much less all things, since he bestows
all things upon all. But we see that the Father has bestowed on Christ so many
and so great things, yea, all things. Wherefore Christ is not the most high
God. You might also frame more Arguments, especially out of those places
wherein the word give or bestow is not met withal, but there is the same force
of Argument; as if you should say, He that is exalted by God, or glorified by
him, or made Lord, and Christ, is not the most high God.

The Defense of the Argument.
TO this Argument and the places of Scripture whereon it is built, neither do
all, nor the same persons, every where make the same answer. For some directly
seem to deny the Major, as they call it, of our Argument; others seek refuge in
distinctions. For as to the former, some say, that even the The first answer,
and its refutation.
Apostle does affirm, that Christ shall deliver the Kingdom to God, even the
Father, 1 Cor. 15.24. In which place, there is the same word that Christ uses,
Mat. 11.27. when he says, All things are delivered unto me by my Father.
Wherefore they say, that something mi^ht be delivered or given even to the most
high God. Again, as Christ, John 17.2, 5. desires of his Father to be
glorified, and so that Glory should be given to him, so also does he there
affirm, that he had glorified the Father, and hereafter would glorify him.

But first we will speak of such a Giving as proceeds from the grace and
bounty of the Giver: for which cause we did in our Argument make use of this
word bestow. For such is that Giving, whereby all things have been given to
Christ by the Father. For Christ openly ascribes it to the love of the Father
toward him, in the 3d and the 5th chapters of John, and chap. 17. he does
entreat for the Glory designed unto him. And God in the second Psalm says to
the Son, Ask of me, and I will give unto thee the Nations for thine
inheritance, etc. And Paul, Phil. 2. says, there was bestowed on Christ, or
given out of grace (for so the Greek word signifies) a Name that is above
every name. And the reason for which the power of quickening and exercising
Judgment was given unto Christ, namely, because he is the Son of Man, does
sufficiently argue, that it was such a Giving as we have spoken of: which very
thing is evident from that place of Daniel, chap. 7. and others like thereunto.
But that the giving, whereby Christ shall deliver the Kingdom to God the
Father, is not such an one, all men do of themselves easily perceive. For
neither can it be imputed to the grace or bounty of Christ toward the Father,
who needs the bounty of none. For that is such a delivery of the Kingdom, as,
for example sake, when a General, appointed by his King to manage a certain
War, does, when it is ended, lay down the Power that was given unto him, and
restore it unto his King, who had hitherto exercised it by him, that if he be
so pleased, he may hereafter exercise it by himself. And all this is no other
than what Right it self does require, in as much as the Power was given unto
him by the King, for the management of that War only. In like manner Christ,
who has received Royal Power from the Father, to subdue his and our enemies,
and hitherto exercises the same in the Fathers name, when all the enemies are
subdued, shall yield it up to his Father; that is, so lay it down, that the
Father may afterward exercise it by himself, and, as Paul speaks, God may be
all in all. From whence also arises another reason of diversity, in that we
speak of such a Giving, as an Inferior cannot exercise toward a Superior,
such as is the conferring of power and right on another, the giving of life, or
the like things. But the delivery of the Kingdom may be incident to an
Inferior, in respect of a Superior, yea, can be incident to none but such.
But every one does easily perceive, how much that delivery, whereby Christ
shall render the Kingdom to God the Father, does differ from that, whereby the
Father gave to Christ the Throne of David, and all Power in Heaven and Earth,
and consequently the other things. Because when those things were given to
Christ by the Father, he was said to have been made Lord and Christ. But who
dare to say of the Father, that he, when Christ delivers the Kingdom to him,
shall then be made and constituted by him Lord and Christ.

But further, let us grant that something may be given to God, who is there
that dare to say, that all things have been delivered to the most high God by
another? That all Power in Heaven and Earth has been given to him? as Christ
affirms concerning himself. Would it agree to the Father, whom all grant to
be the most high God, to speak in this manner: I dispose to you a Kingdom, as
my Son has disposed unto me? Could it be said, that it is given to the Father
by another to have life in himself? that he lives by another? Would this
speech be suitable to him, My Son, who gave me the Sheep, is greater than all?
or this, Thine were they (Disciples) O Son, and thou have given them unto me?
Run over the rest, and see whether you can without Blasphemy apply them to the
Father, or the most high God. Hence it easily appears, how frivolous that
other thing is which they allege out of John 17.2, 4. touching the glorifying
of the Father. For there is as wide a difference between the glorifying of
Christ which he begs of the Father, and the glorifying of the Father made by
Christ on the Earth, as is between the Glory Romans 2.7. Joh. 5.2. 1 These. 2.12.
1 Pet. 5.10. John 12.26. 1 Cor. 4.4.
which God promises to us, and will at length give by Christ, and that which
we are said to give or render unto God: between the blessing, whereby God
blesses us, and that whereby we bless God: between the praise and honor which
he will sometimes give to us, and that which we give to him: for the glorifying
of the Father, which proceeded from Christ, was only the illustration of the
divine Name, or the celebration, or manifestation of the Fathers Goodness,
Power and Wisdom; but that which Christ did beg, consisted in the conferring
Immortality, and Sovereign Power. Which is manifest by it self, and shall be
shown afterward when we shall refute the third Answer to our Argument. So that
in the words of Christ, Joh. 17.2, 4. there is such an elegant Antanaclasis, as
if some one of us should say, Glorify us O God, that we may glorify thee:
praise and honor us, that we may praise, and honor thee: Or, we have
glorified thee on Earth, praised thee, honored thee, finished the work which
thou have given us to do; wherefore glorify us with thy self with that glory
which thou did design to us, before the world was created.

The second answer and its refutation.
But now it is time that we see other Answers to our Argument, or rather
interpretations of the places from whence it is drawn. Some therefore answer,
that all things were given to Christ from the Father, by an eternal generation
out of his Essence. Which answer likewise seems to strike at the Major of our
Argument, and so deny it to be universally true. For it is tacitly said, that
it is only true of the Father, but not of the Son, or also of the holy Spirit.
But this answer is not to be admitted, chiefly for two Reasons. First, Because,
as we Chap. 2, 3. of this Section.
already above hinted, it does sundry ways imply a contradiction, for it
makes the same to be at once both eternal and not eternal; both the most high
God, and not the most high God; the same in Essence with the Father, and not
the same; equal to him, and not equal. The one, while it attributes to him the
same Essence in number with the Father, and affirms that he existed from all
eternity; the other, while it affirms, that he was generated out of the
Essence of the Father, and received all things of him, which he has in respect
of his Deity. Next, because it evidently thwarteth very many of the places
quoted by us. For some openly speak of a thing which was done in time, and not
from all eternity; as the place, Luke 1.32. and John 5.20, etc. where also life
is mentioned which the Father has given to the Son to have in himself; that
is, as most learned Interpreters do John Calvin Wolfg Musc. and John Maldonat.
observe, a power and virtue of quickening, which many hold that he received by
that eternal Generation from the Father. So also chap. 6.37. and 17.4. Acts
2.33, etc. and chap. 3.13. and chap. 5.31. and 1 Cor 15.27. Ephesians. 1.20. and
Phil 2.9, etc. whereunto add all those places which we have cited out of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, out of the Epistle of Peter, out of the Revelation,
also out of the Psalms, and out of Daniel. Some also express such a cause of
that giving, as has nothing common with that eternal Generation out of the
Essence of God. Chap. 3. of this Section.
As that the Father loved the Son, John 3.35. and 5.20. and 17.24. which cause
pertains also to the Life which the Father gave unto the Son, to have in
himself; Or, that the Son, namely, of God, is the Son of Man, John 5.27. or
that he was obedient to the Father even to the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.9.
and that he glorified the Father on the Earth, and finished the work which he
had given him to do, John 17.4, 5. or that he did desire and obtain it from the
Father, ibid. and Psalm. 2.8. Let these things suffice to have been spoken
concerning the second Answer.

Now that we may come to those Answers which endeavor by a distinction, to
solve the Argument, they again are diverse, For some seem to distinguish the
word Third Answer and its Refutation.
Give, and others that have the same force, others those things which are said
to be given, others finally him to whom they are given, in respect of the
diverse Natures that are in him, one whereof is such, that according to it,
something may be given to him, and consequently all things have been given; the
other such, that according to it, nothing has been given to him. Wherefore the
first will say, that the word Give in the major Proposition, is to be taken of
a giving which is really made: but the Minor is to be understood only of such a
giving as is made declaratively: For they answer to the places wherewith we
have confirmed our Assumption; especially some of them, that they ought not to
be understood, as if the Father did at a certain time really give to the Son,
the things mentioned therein, but that he declared that the Son had them, or
received them by that eternal Generation, causing that they should be
acknowledged by all. Thus many take that Glory which Christ John 17.1, 5, 23,
24.
begged of the Father; that also, that God Acts 2.36.
made him Lord and Christ; that also, that Phil. 2.9.
gave him a name which is above every name. But, first, they themselves
sufficiently see, that this answer does not agree to all the places which we
have alleged. But if the rest be safe, our Argument would nevertheless
consist, although those places which we have mentioned, or some others also,
were to be taken in that manner as they would have. Again, There is no cause
(unless they will allege that very thing which we oppose by this Argument for
a cause) wherefore we ought to depart from the propriety and simplicity of the
words; yea, there are mighty causes for which we must not depart from the same.
For as to that Glory which Christ beggeth of the Father, Joh. 17. if Christ had
it really in himself already, that which they say was to be manifested, namely,
the Majesty of that one God (for this they must of necessity understand by the
glory which they contend, that he really had with the Father before the world
was created) what need was there to pray the Father that he would glorify him?
for that would always have been no less in the hands of Christ himself, than
of the Father: nor would he less have glorified himself, than the Father him.
Since it would be necessary that external works, yea, all should be common to
them; yea, Christ beggeth it of the Father as the reward of the performance of
a work committed to him by the Father; as appears by the collation of ver. 4,
5. But besides, that no reward can be given to the most high God, what reward
is this of a work performed, that he should be acknowledged the supreme God who
is so? is not this very justly due unto God without any respect of any work?
And no less to the Son than to the Father, or to the holy Spirit. Besides, how
well they explain that, Father glorify me with thy self? for what is that with
thy self? Is it not manifest, that such words are wont to be opposed, and are
in this place opposed unto that which is done with men, or appears before
them, as in the latter words it is tacitly opposed unto them with me? It is not
therefore spoken of a thing which ought to be done with men, such as would be
that manifestation of Christ's Glory which he really had from eternity, but
which he had with God. What then? ought the Father to declare unto himself the
Majesty of the Son? had he not sufficiently known it? And when he knew it not,
ought he to declare it to himself, or else to the Angels conversing with him in
Heaven? What? had not they sufficiently known the Majesty of the second Person
of the Trinity? had they not beheld it with their eyes? As to that place, Act.
2. where God is said to have made Jesus Lord and Christ, the words admit not
such an explication, for if we follow their explication, Peter must be thought
to speak thus; Therefore let all the House of Israel assuredly know, that God
has declared him both Lord and Christ, even this Jesus, whom ye have
crucified. But to whom has he declared it? was it to Angels? Had not they yet
known Christ to be that which he was, and had long since been? Was it to men?
But Peter, and God did by him, in these very words, truly first declare that
very thing to the Jews. Again, Peter deduceth these words from those in the
Psalm. 110.1.
Psalms, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand. But in them
Christ is bidden to reign, as Paul interprets it, 1 Cor. 15.25. and is not
only declared to reign. What does the Father perhaps command, the Son himself
to declare, that he reigns, and has always reigned? But they would persuade
us, that Christ, John 17. prayed the Father to do it, since he had in like
manner already glorified him, and would hereafter glorify him again. To this
sitting at the right hand of God, Paul opposes the delivering up of the 1 Cor.
15 24, etc.
Kingdom, which certainly shall not consist therein, in that Christ shall no
longer declare that he reigns; yea, if Christ be that one God, he will then
declare unto us in Heaven, that he reigns no less than the Father, since God
shall be all in all. I omit other things which might be said concerning these
words of the Psalmist. Finally, They who will have it, that God declared Jesus
Lord and Christ, either hold that he was Christ from eternity, or made such at
a certain time. He could not be from eternity, for to be Christ, is to be
Anointed; which is not incident to the most high God, as he is such; neither
has any one, as I know, dared to say so; but all say, that it agrees to
Christ as he is man. He was therefore at a certain time made Christ, and that
by him whose Anointed he is said to be, namely, God the Father. Why then go
they about the bush, and seek starting holes? since they are notwithstanding,
forced to confe^s that he was sometimes really, and not declaratively only made
by God, Lord and Christ (for to be the Christ, is to be the Lord and King of
God's People) although they agree not with us about the time when it was done.
For that is sufficient for us here, that God has already made him Lord and
Christ. Although who is there, that if he could but That is, Obtain.
impetrate of himself, to lay aside his prejudicate Opinion for a short space,
would not see that this happened after the death and resurrection of Christ.
Since all the circumstances of the place in hand, do lead, yea, drive us
thither, that I may omit others like thereunto; amongst which is that Ephesians.
1.19. and Heb. 1.3.

As to that place, Phil. 2. neither does it admit that explication: first,
because by those words is explained the exceeding great reward of the
debasement and obedience of Christ performed to God, even with the sufferance
of the death of the Cross; but could not be to declare who and how great he is,
and always was; that is, as the Adversaries must of necessity affirm, to
demonstrate him to be the most high God; whereof we have spoken above when we
treated of the place, John 17.5. Aagain, Christ was therefore among other
things exceedingly exalted, and a name given unto him above every name, that
the knees of all things in Heaven also might be bowed to him. But what need had
the heavenly things of such a declaration, that they might bend their knees to
Christ, being the second Person of the Deity, whom they had always very
well-known, and, as I may say, had beheld with their eyes, and did yet behold.
But furthermore, the collation of this place, partly with the two precedent
ones, partly with other testimonies of the Scripture, which admit not that
explication, and are very like unto this place, show that the same is here also
to be rejected. Finally, though we grant that those places are to be understood
only of the declaration of Christ's Majesty and Glory, nevertheless, it will
from thence appear, that Christ is not the most high God. For otherwise why
should the declaration be attributed to the Father, and not to Christ himself?
For could not, and would not Christ always declare the same by himself? yea,
he could not but declare it when the Father did declare it; as we have in this
Chapter a little before hinted. And thus far concerning the third Answer.

But as for them who endeavor to escape chiefly by distinguishing the things
given to Christ, they again differ among themselves. For some (which is the
fourth The 4th and 5th Answer and the Refutation of both.
Answer) when they read that all Power was given to Christ, that he was set at
the right hand of God, that he was made Lord and Christ, and other such like
things, say this is to be understood, not of the right of ruling, but of the
act and exercise of Rule. Others The 4th and 5th Answer and the Refutation of
both.
and (which is the fifth Answer) grant that it is spoken also of the right of
ruling, which Christ got to himself by his obedience, and death, as Mediator
and Redeemer. But, first, the same may be said of both answers, that was of the
third preceding, namely, although this explication of those places was
admitted, yet our Argument would be safe, whilst the other places wherewith it
is supported, and which refuse that explication, remain safe. Again, as to the
former, those places of the Scripture admit it not, for all power in Heaven and
Earth denotes not the act, or exercise, or rule; that is, the actions which
proceed from the Regal Office; but this very right and plenary Authority to
rule and govern. There is the same force of this sitting at the right hand of
God, or in the Throne of God, or in the Throne of David. For when any one is
placed by another in the Royal Throne, or commanded to sit, not only the
exercise of rule, yea, not the exercise it self is primarily given, as which
does properly depend on him that is placed on the Royal Throne; but the very
Office, Power and Dignity is granted to him. In like manner one is not said to
be made Lord and Christ, or King, when he exercises the rule which he by full
right obtains, and actually possesses, but when he is put into possession
thereof. Besides, that we may together treat of the latter answer also, either
Christ always had a full right or faculty to reign, or else he had not. If he
had not, how can he be the most high God? Can he be the most high God, who has
not always a full right to rule? If he had, how was it given and bestowed on
him at a certain time by another; namely, by the Father, either that he might
actually rule, or attain the right of ruling? How could such an Empire be given
to him by the Father for a reward of his debasement and obedience? as not only
that place of John 17.4, 5. but also Phil. 29, etc. and sundry other places
intimate, that it was given to him. See Isa. 53.10, 11, 12. Luke 24.26, 46, 47.
Heb. 2.9, 10. and 12.2. 1 Pet. 1.11. Rev. 3.21. For what one already has in
his power, and what he always possessed with most full right, that cannot be
paid unto him for a reward, nor at all be given by another. For if any one say,
that it may be that one should obtain the same thing by a double, yea, a treble
right and title; as if he to whom another is indebted, should both by nature
and by will, become his universal Heir, likewise that it may be, that he who
already possesses a thing, may have a new right to possess the same; We
answer, if any one already possess any thing, and that by a full right, it can
at no hand be said, that it is then given to him by another, when he has a new
right to possess the same. For that which is mine, can no more be made mine,
and therefore neither given by another. But further, who would say, that that
thing is then bestowed on him, and given of Grace? who would say, that it is
then paid unto him for a reward? would you not laugh at him who should affirm,
that he did bestow on thee, or appoint for thee a reward of thy labor, and
consequently pay unto thee in lieu of recompense, a thousand Crowns which thou
already possessest, and that by very good right? yea, though thou did not yet
possess them, so they were by very good right due to thee, none would either
bestow them on thee, or appoint them for a reward of thy labor as, yet to be
performed, and consequently pay them in lieu of recompense. Would thou not
justly laugh at thy debtor, who should say, that he bestowed on thee, or for
some certain labor which thou have performed to him, pay^th to thee in lieu of
reward the money which thou had lent him? How much less therefore could Power
and Empire he bestowed on Christ, and paid in lieu of reward if he had already
perpetually obtained it by the greatest and the fullest Right; although a new
right to possess the same* had accreued to him? Wherefore since all Power and
Empire is said to have been given, and bestowed on Christ by another, since he
is affirmed to have been made by God both Lord and Christ after his
resurrection. Finally, since he obtained this as the reward of his debasement
and obedience, it could not be that he did already possess it before, yea, nor
so much as that, that he should have a full right unto that thing before he had
performed that obedience; which if it be so; how can he be the most high God?
Nor may any one here think, that that right of ruling which Christ has as
Mediator and Redeemer, is not contained in that Right and Power which the most
high God has of himself, and consequently that it might be given by another
unto Christ, although he were the most high God. For the Right and Power of the
most high God, extends it self to all things that are not in their nature
unjust, but certainly that Empire is not unjust, which is attributed to Christ
as Mediator and Redeemer. And what, I pray, is that Right of ruling? Is it not
a right of prescribing Laws unto us, and of executing them, a Right of
remitting our sins, of defending us from our adversaries, and enduing us with
eternal felicity? But what? has not the most high God a Right of doing all
these things? How then did the Father give that Right to Christ? how does he
exercise the same by him, if the most high God, has it not of himself?
Wherefore Christ also would have it of himself were he the most high God. Some
other things which might be here spoken, shall be hereafter spoken in a more
commodious place.

It remains that we examine the last, and most usual Answer of all, to the
places alleged by us, and the Argument framed out of them, which consists in
the distinction of the Natures of Christ. For they say commonly these things
are spoken of Christ, according to the humane Nature, The sixth answer, and its
refutation.
and not according to the divine. But, first, as we have before shown chap. 14.
it could not be simply affirmed, that all these things were given and bestowed
on Christ, that he was exalted, glorified, made Lord and Christ, if he had that
divine Nature, according to which those things could not be spoken of him.
Since the very same things might simply be denied of him, no less than they are
simply affirmed of him in the forecited places. Add hereunto, that such places
contain in them a tacit Negation, and that a simple one; namely, that Christ
has not of himself those things which are said to have been given to him, for
otherwise they would not be said to be given to him. But in such Negations, a
distinction of Natures has no place, as we have sufficiently shown before,
especially when we created on that place John 5 19. Again, To be, or become a
King, Christ, Lord, to hold, or exercise Empire, and if there be any thing like
to these, do primarily and properly agree to none but an intelligent
Suppositum, or Person as such. Wherefore it must be held, either of a very
Person, having supreme Divinity, as such, and consequently of the very divine
Nature, that all these things have been given to him by the Father, or confessed
that Christ is not such a person. Finally, If the Essence of the Supreme God
were in Christ, there would be no cause why it should be said, that all things
were given to him by another person; namely, by the Father, and he made Lord
and Christ, and nor rather by himself. For was the divine Nature of Christ in
this behalf idle? did it not give all things to the humane Nature? Certainly
the Adversaries contend, that it did ^ive them, and are forced to say so both
by reason of that very straight ^^ion of either Nature which they hold, and
also because the Father could not give them. But that the Son should withal
give the same things, if he is of one Essence with the Father. Why then is this
attributed to the Father, and to him alone, not also to Christ? If you say,
this is done because of the Prerogative of the Father above the Son, you will
hereby confess the Father, not the Son, to be the most high God. Howbeit,
neither could a simple Prerogative, cause that this should be so often
attributed to the Father, and so openly, but never to the Son. For neither are
they to be heard, who, when they read in certain places, that God gave
something to Christ, glorified him, exalted him, made him Lord, and Christ,
understand the whole Trinity, or the divine Essence, that they may attribute to
Christ the same action. For, first, since we so often read, either that it is
expressly written, that the Father did those things; as to omit other places, it
happens out of those places which are cited out of John, or that God
glorified the Son, or gave something to him, and since they themselves confess,
that the name of God in very many places, denotes the Father only, why do they
not confess, that he is understood in the places under contestation? does not
the very similitude of the places persuade thereunto? Are not those things
which seem to be spoken more generally or confusedly to be explained out of
those places which express the same thing more specially and distinctly,
especially since they are so many in number? Again, Is it not manifest, when
the action of giving, exalting, glorifying, is attributed unto God, a Person is
understood (for such actions are attributed unto none but Persons) and such an
one as is distinct from Christ? For who even amongst the Adversaries
themselves, would endure him that should thus speak? The Son of God gave or
bestowed a name on Christ; the Son of God glorified Christ, made Jesus Lord,
certainly he that should speak so; would by the Adversaries, and that
deservedly, said to savor of Nestorianism, and attribute unto Christ two
Persons, namely, the Son of God and Christ. But the reason is the same, if you
say that God performed those things to Christ, and by the name of God,
understand the Son. Nor are the Adversaries ignorant thereof. But who will say,
that the holy Spirit is understood? who is never found in the Scripture
expressly named God, much less by that name distinguished from Christ, and
preferred before him, is likewise no where read to have given any thing to
Christ, or to have exalted him. To omit that the same question will return
which we urged concerning the Father, namely, why those things should be
attributed to the holy Spirit, rather than to the Son, if the Son were the most
high God.

An Appendix of this Argument, wherein is taught, That Divinity was given to
Christ of the Father.
BEfore we quite leave this Argument, we think fit to add this little Appendix
thereunto, whereby our Opinion may be yet more confirmed. For it appears from
the places which we have alleged, that Divinity or Godhead was bestowed on
Christ, of the Father, and consequently that he was made a God by the Father.
From whence it also follows, that Christ is not the most high God. For he was
from all eternity of himself God, and did not at any time receive his Divinity
from another, otherwise he would not be the most high God. Now that which we
have said, may be confirmed chiefly by two Arguments drawn from those places
which we have cited and discussed.

The first is this, He that was made Lord by another, he, if he be a God, was
also made a God by another. But Jesus, of whom it is certain, that, he is a
God, was made Lord by God. Therefore he was also made a God by him. The Minor
(as they call it) or the Assumption is Peter's. Acts 2. ver. 36.
The Major is confirmed by this reason, because if he were not made God by
another, when notwithstanding he is a God, neither could he be made a Lord by
another. For he that is a God, especially in so perfect a signification, as
Christ is asserted to be a God, is likewise a Lord; and if he be a God of
himself, he is also of himself a Lord, and therefore cannot any further be made
a Lord by another. The same may also be confirmed by this Reason; The Lordship
of Christ is either the same with his Godhead, or different from it. If the
same, certainly when he was made a Lord, he was also made a God. If different,
it is either equal to his Godhead, or less. For Christ has nothing greater
than his Godhead. If equal (though they cannot speak thus, who attribute to him
the supreme and independent Godhead) there is the same reason thereof with his
Godhead; and there is no cause, why if he was made Lord, he was not also made a
God. If less, it will in like manner follow, that he has not of himself this
privilege of being a God. For if he have not of himself that which is less,
much less that which is greater. In which place it is not to be omitted, that
Ambrose in those very words of Peter, instead of the word Lord, does read the
name of God; as if Peter had said, And God has made him God and Christ, this
Jesus, etc.

The second Argument is this, He to whom that is given or granted, for which he
ought to be worshipped with divine Worship, has also Godhead given and granted
to him. For neither is there any thing besides Godhead for which we ought to
worship any one with divine Worship, or causes that any one is worthy of that
worship. But we read, how that was given and granted unto Christ, for which he
ought to be worshipped with divine Worship, namely, all Judgment; and a Name
above every name: for so, as we have seen, Christ himself speaks, John 5.22,
23. For neither does the Father judge any one, but has given all judgment to
the Son, that all might honor the Son at they honor the Father: he that
honors not the Son, honors not the Father that, sent him. And Paul, Phil.
2.9. etc. says, Wherefore also God has exceedingly exalted him, and given him
a Name, which is above every name, that in the name of Jesus every knee should
bow, of things in heaven, and in the earth, and under the earth; and that every
tongue might confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God, the
Father. Now that in both places it is spoken of the divine Honor and Adoration
which is due to Christ from all, both the thing it self shows, and all
confess. But that this worship is to be exhibited unto him for all Judgment
given him by the Father, for a Name given him above every name, the same
Testimonies do clearly show. The same may easily be proved likewise out of that
place in Daniel, chap. 7.13. Where Christ is said to have received from the
Ancient of days, that is, his Father, Power and Honor, and a Kingdom; and it
is added, that all Peoples, Tribes and Tongues should serve him, namely, for so
great Power, and the Kingdom given to him. For who would not serve his King?
Now this Service is not meant a civil one, as being to be given to one that was
not an earthly King; but a religious and divine one, as to be exhibited to a
divine and heavenly King. Why then do the greater part of the Adversaries deny,
that Godhead was given or granted unto Christ? And indeed not a few both of the
ancient and modern Interpreters of the Scripture, See among others, Corn. a
Lapide in this place. Joh. 1.1.
affirm, that when Paul says, there was given unto Christ, a Name above every
name, that the name of a God is there understood, because there is no other
name extant besides that which is above every name. Though therein many are
mistaken, who conceive that by Name, is meant the very Appellation or Title of
a God. For how was this Appellation given him at length after his death, when
John says, that the Word or Speech was a God in the beginning; namely, of that
thing whereof he speaks, which is the Gospel. Add hereunto, that Paul
speaks of the reward which God gave to Christ, for so great debasement and
obedience to the very death of the Cross. But what manner of reward is this, to
give to any one a Title, if you give him not the thing designed by that Title?
Does the most bountiful and rich God, in this manner render rewards for so
great Piety? such a reward would be unbeseeming even a Prince or other
Potentate. Besides, when any one has the thing it self, and that most
rightfully, there is no need to give or grant to him the name whereby that
thing is designed; especially when that thing has a name already set and
appointed, as here it comes to pass. If any one be indeed a King, and that
very rightfully, there is no need to confer upon him the title of a King: since
none can deny the same unto him, but wrongfully. But that is said to be
conferred, which might of right be denied. Wherefore we must understand by that
Name, not a Title, but Dignity or Power; as you have it in a like place, Ephesians.
1.21. So that a Name above every name, is Dignity and Power higher than all
other. For this is the proper cause of so great Worship and Honor. For as
civil Worship is due to earthly and civil Power; and divine Worship is due to
heavenly and divine: as also that place John 5.22. does show, where it is
taught, that divine Honor is to be exhibited by all unto Christ for the Power
of judging, which is the greatest part of his Power, yea, contained in a manner
all. Now if the thing be thus, why do the Adversaries so insult over us, for
saying that Christ is a God by the Grace of God the Father, that Godhead was
given to Christ by the Father, and he made and constituted a God by him? Why do
they upbraid us, saying that we have two Gods; the one (as some are not afraid
to jest in so serious a matter) an old God, the other a young God? As if we had
either two supreme Gods, or to have one supreme God, and another dependent on
him, and subordinate to him, is contrary to the Scripture, which expressly
affirms that there are many Gods, and affirms in downright terms, that we
have one God the Father, of whom are all things, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom are all things; or as if the Father, because he was God from all eternity,
may therefore be deservedly called an old God, or Christ a young God, because
he is after him in time, as a Son is after his Father; since old age and youth
have place in none but corruptible things, but cease in such as are
incorruptible and immortal. Now if they would have God so to be old, as Daniel
calls him the Ancient of Days, to whom, he that was like unto the Son of
Man, was brought, and received from him Power, Honor, a Kingdom, and Dominion
over all the Peoples of the Earth (which thing all see was not done from all
eternity) why do they laugh at this? Why do they impiously oppose that which
the Scripture so clearly delivers? He is not yet sufficiently acquainted with
the nature of the Christian Religion, who is ignorant thereof. For this is the
thing which does, as to this consideration, separate Christians from Pagans,
That the Christians acknowledge one most high God, nor attribute Godhead unto
any else, but to whom the most high God has indeed granted it. But this does
not yet distinguish them from Jews or Turks. For this does sunder them from
Jews or Turks, that the Christians do, besides the most high God, worship his
Son also for their God; or, as Paul speaks, acknowledge One God the Father,
of whom are all things, and for whom are we: and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
are all things, and by whom are we. But this by the by, and yet not without
necessity. For we ought a little to turn out of the way, that we might bring
them back into the way, who went astray.

CHAP. XIX.
The ninteenth Argument, That Christ ascribes both his Words and Works unto
the Father: and that he is not the First, but Second Cause of the things
pertaining to Salvation.

THat therefore we may proceed to other Arguments of our Opinion, to those
Testimonies which we even now alleged, may be subjoyned those places of John,
wherein Christ ascribes his Works and Words to the Father, as the prime
Author, not to himself, and any divine Nature of his own. On which
notwithstanding, we will not here dwell long, partly because we have above said
something concerning them, when we cited those places out of John, wherein
something is denied of Christ, which could not be denied of him, if he were the
most high God, in the second and third chapter of this Section; partly also,
because they are so nearly allied to those places immediately going before;
wherein it is said, that some dignity was given to Christ by God, and granted,
or bestowed on him, so that they are in a manner of the same purport with them.
Nevertheless, we will recite the chiefest of them, wherein Christ ascribes his
works to the Father (for those which Chap. 4.
speak of his Doctrine, That Christ* is the second cause of al^ things
were for the most part brought by us before, partly ascribing the very words
themselves, partly noting the places where they are extant) and we will further
add something to what has been formerly spoken concerning that thing.
Wherefore to omit that famous place, chap. 5. wherein Christ affirms, That he
can do nothing of himself, that the Father shows him all things which himself
does, and will yet show him greater, ver. 19, 20. Likewise chap. 14.10. where
he says, That the Father which abides in him, he does the works. Of both
which, enough has been already Chap. 3. of this Section.
spoken. Hitherto belong those words of Christ, which are likewise extant,
chap. 5.36. I have greater testimony than that of John; the Works which the
Father has given me to do, the very works that I do, they hear witness of me,
that the Father has sent me. And chap. 10.25. The works which I do in the name
of my Father, they testify of me. Now what is it to do them in the name of his
Father, than to do them by the Power, Authority and Command of the Father? and
the same chapter, ver. 37, 38. If I do not the Works of my Father, believe me
not. But if I do, although you will not believe me, believe the Works, that ye
may know and believe that the Father is in me, and I in the Father. And chap.
11.41. being about to raise Lazarus, he thus speaks, Father, I give thee
thanks, because thou have heard me. But I know that thou always bear me,
but for the Peoples sake that stand about, I speak it, that they may believe
that thou have sent me. From which place it appears, that Christ raised
Lazarus, and did other the like Miracles, because he was heard by the Father,
and a Power to do them was always afforded to him, or being o^^e afforded, was
never taken away. Which very thing we see, that even Martha, which had already
acknowledged Jesus to be the Christ, the Son of God, did believe as she
professes, ver. 22. but none of these things could be said of Christ, were he
the most high God, and performed all those Miracles of himself, or by a Virtue,
Power and Authority that was altogether proper to him, and naturally refiding
in him. I omit the end of those Works clearly expressed by Christ, namely, That
men might believe, that he was sent by the Father; and so, that the Father was
in him, as in an holy Ambassador, and most dear Son; and likewise that he was
in the Father, or closely united unto him; as the like words in the same John,
See John 6.56. and 14.20. and 15.4, 5. and 17.21, 22, 23, 26 1 John 2.5, 6, 24,
26, 27, 28, and 3.24. and 4.12, 13, 15, 16. and 5.20.
are elsewhere taken. But if Christ were the most high God, and had done
Miracles by a Power that was altogether natural unto him, this ought not to
have been the end of them, that men should believe that he was sent by another,
but rather that they might understand, that he came of himself, and did in his
own name give Precepts, and propose Promises unto all.

We have already before stopped the gap through which men fly to a distinction of
Natures, inasmuch as these things are simply, and without limitation, uttered
concerning Christ: which could not be done if he were that one God, because the
some things should also be denied of him without limitation. Again, because
those operations properly agree to the Suppositum or Person of Christ, as such;
not to a Nature, which is not a Person. Wherefore they ought either to confess,
that the humane Nature is a Person, if they will understand those things of it,
and so are forced to deny, that Christ is a divine Person, and the most high
God, or to affirm, that those things are spoken of Christ, even us a divine
Person, and the very most high God. Besides, he ought not to ascribe these
things to another Person, but to another part of himself; that is, to his
divine Nature, unless you will have it, to have been idle therein: But it was
impossible for it to have been idle, whilst the Father wrought, if both had one
and the same numerical Nature. To these places fetched out of John, are to be
added, those words of Peter, Acts 2.22 Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God
among you by Signs, Wonders and mighty works, which God did by him in the midst
of you, etc. And those of the same Peter, chap. 10.38. where he says, How God
anointed him (Jesus of Nazareth) with the holy Spirit and Power, who went about
doing good, and healing all that were oppressed by the Devil, because God was
with him. Which thing Nicodemus had before acknowledged whilst he thus speaks
unto Christ, We know that thou art come a Teacher from God; for none can do
these things which thou do, unless God be with him, John 3.2. But if Christ
were the most high God, neither would God be said to do these things by him,
nor ought Peter to allege this reason, why Christ did Miracles, namely,
because God was with him: but this because he himself was God, or because he
had in him the divine Essence, or in what manner soever he pleased to express
the same thing.

For that it cannot here be said, that by the name of God, the divine Nature of
Christ is understood, but the Father of Christ; may be shown by the same
Arguments which we made use of in the defense of the last Argument, when we
treated of those Testimonies, wherein God is said to have given something to
Christ, or to have conferred something upon him: Likewise we have a little
before excluded the distinction of Natures.

But that we may not treat of the sole. Miracles of Christ, let us add those
places of Scripture whereby is shown, that Christ was not the first, but the
second and intermediate cause of the other actions also which he did, and which
were most divine, and most of all concerned our Salvation. And this is
understood out of those places, wherein it is affirmed, That all things were
done by him; as John 1.3. That all things were created in him; that is, by him.
For that In is after the Hebrew manner every where taken for by, is most
notorious unto all, Col. 1.16. which is presently explained in the same verse,
whilst all things are, said to have been created by him. For whereas the vulgar
translation does there add, that all things are created in him; the Greek has
it, for him, and signifies the end. Thus a little after it is in the same
place said, that it pleased him, namely, God, by him to reconcile all things
which are in Heaven and in Earth. Else where likewise, All things are said to
be by him, 1 Cor. 8.6. of which place we have before Sect. 1. chap. 2.
treated; where also we have shown, that it ought not to be taken in that
manner; as it is once and again said of God himself, That all things are by
him. For that it is not so taken of God, as if some other who is the supreme
Cause of the work, did do something by him; but simply, that he is the
efficient Cause of all things, or that by his Power and Operation all things
are brought to an issue. But that it is said of Christ more than once, that
some other, namely, God, whom every one knows to be the supreme Cause of
Works, does or did all things by Christ. For amongst other things, the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 3.9. Who (God) created all things by Jesus Christ, as the Greek
Copies constantly read it, and the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, 1.2.
when he had said, that God in these last times speak to us in the Son; that is,
by the Son according to the Hebrewism a little before observed; he adds, By
whom also he made the Worlds, namely, that God who spoke unto us by him. So
also 2 Cor. 5, 18. it is said That all things are of God, who has reconciled
us unto himself by Jesus Christ. Elsewhere, That God has given us the victory
by our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.57. That God has poured the holy Spirit
abundantly upon us by Jesus Christ our Savior, Tit. 3.5. That God shall judge
the secrets of men (according to Paul's Gospel) by Jesus Christ, Romans 2.16. To
pass by other-like places, from all which it appears, that Christ is not the
most high God. For he is the first and highest Cause of all things which he
does, not the second or intermediate: But those places show, that Christ is the
intermediate, not the first and supreme Cause of those thing which he does;
otherwise it could not be said, that God does all things by him.

But if any one say, that Paul affirms, that he gave to the Thessalonians
commandments by our Lord Jesus Christ, or exhorts them by Christ, although
Christ seems not to have been the middle cause of that action in respect of
Paul, but Paul rather in respect of Christ, We answer, That that signification
which is also otherwise rare in the holy Scripture, cannot there have any
place, where God is said to have done either all things, or somethings by Jesus
Christ, as that very thing we even now speak by way of objection to our selves,
does teach. For in that manner that Paul says, he gave commandments, or
exhorts by the Lord Jesus, none but an Inferior can do something by a
Superior, for it signifies, that he did or does these things by the Authority
of the Lord Jesus interposed, and that he supported his commandments and
exhortations herewith. But God can do nothing by any one in this manner. It
therefore remains, that the most usual signification of the particle By, is
there to be retained where God is said to do something by Christ; namely, that
God be esteemed the first and principal Agent, Christ the second and
intermediate one, which depends on him. Which is further confirmed by that
famous place of Paul, which is extant, 1 Cor. 1.30. where the Apostle
compriseth all the benefits which God has conferred upon us by Christ, whilst
he speaks thus: of him (namely, God) Ye are in Christ Jesus, who has been
made unto us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. You
see that he is made not the prime Author of our Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption, but the second cause, and dependent on a former
one, namely, God, in as much as he is expressly said, to be made unto us of God,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, and Freedom, which
likewise was signified by the precedent words, wherein the Corinthians, namely,
as they were Christians, are said to be of God in Christ Jesus, or by Christ
Jesus. There is a place like unto this, Heb. 5.9, 10. where it is said, that
Christ being made perfect, was made the cause of eternal Salvation to all that
obey him, being called of God an high Priest after the order of Melchisedec.
You see that he was made the cause of eternal Salvation, and that as he was
called of God an high Priest. With this place agrees that which we have
formerly cited out of the Acts, chap. 5.31. where God is said with his right
hand to have exalted Christ to be a Prince and Savior, to give Repentance unto
Israel, and foregiveness of sins. To these add those places which spoke of the
effusion of the holy Spirit made by Christ; which action is one of the most
notable ones that pertains to the Salvation of mankind, and to omit the
repetition of that place out of John, which we have formerly alleged, when we
discoursed of the Prayers that Christ poured out to the Father, chap. 14.16. I
will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Advocate. And there is yet
another place in the same John concerning the same thing afterward, chap.
15.26. But when the Advocate is come, whom I will send unto you from the
Father. Whence you see, that Christ not for himself, as from the prime
Fountain, but from the Father would send, and consequently did send the holy
Spirit; whom he also expressly says, does proceed from the Father, making the
Father the prime Cause of him, and himself the middle cause. Concerning the
same thing, there is a notable place in the Acts, which we have formerly cited,
chap. 2, 33. where immediately after the first and most illustrious effusion of
the holy Spirit upon the Disciples of Christ, Peter speaks thus, Therefore
being exalted by the right hand of God, and having received the Promise of the
holy Spirit from the Father, be poured out that which you now see and hear.
Therefore, as Christ himself elsewhere speaks, he actually received from the
Father the holy Spirit, that had been before promised to him, and so poured him
out upon the Apostles. Which thing does signify no other, than that the Father
was the first Cause of that effusion, and Christ the second, wholly depending
upon the Father therein. Whereby likewise it may be understood, why John, chap.
7.39. said, that the holy Spirit was not yet given, because Christ was not yet
ascended, namely, because he could not give the holy Spirit till he was exalted
by the right hand of God, and glorified. Whence Christ also himself said, chap.
16.7. I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away (namely, to
the Father, and so be glorified) for unless I go away, the Advocate will not
come unto you. But if I go away, I will send him unto you. Now how far distant
these things are from that Opinion which makes Christ the most high God, and
so the first and highest Cause of all things and actions, not only we have
already shown, but every one may of himself easily perceive.

The distinction of Natures has no more place here than in the former passages
and Arguments drawn from thence, both because it would be necessary, that the
same things should be denied of the same Christ for his divine Nature, which
are here simply affirmed of him for his humane Nature; and also because these
places likewise contain in them a tacit Negation, and that a simple one;
namely, that Christ did not those things of himself, or was not the first cause
of those works, and finally, because those operations are not agreeable to any
thing, but the Suppositum or Person of Christ as it is such, and partly the
places themselves, manifestly intimate, partly the Adversaries themselves
confess, that Christ is considered in them, either as a Mediator and
Ambassador of God, or as a Priest, or as a King. And to sum up all in a word,
as a Savior, and consequently as a Person. For that these Offices do
primarily, and by themselves agree to none but a Person; both we have elsewhere
taught, and the Adversaries themselves confess: but what follows from thence,
is understood from the precedent Chapter.

CHAP. XX.
The twentieth Argument, from the words of Christ, John 8.16. My Judgment is
true, because I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me.

WE might from the places which we even now, and formerly alleged, form many
Arguments, and consequently from every one of them; that is somewhat clear, a
particular Argument: But we care not much for the number, but for the weight
and evidence, which does of its own accord increase the number of Arguments.
For this matter which we handle, is so fruitful for the evident truth of the
Opinion which we defend, that it seems that we ought to be more sollicitous
in speaking out the measure, than the plenty of Arguments. Wherefore let these
places that have last been alleged and examined, be accounted for the sixth
Argument of this rank wherein we are now conversant, and is fetched out of the
Testimonies of John, and also of other sacred Writers, and wherein something is
affirmed of Christ, which could not be affirmed of him if he were the most high
God. Of which kind there yet remain other places in the same John, which we
will not prosecute.

The seventh Argument therefore we will fetch from those words of Christ, which
are extant John 8.16. If I judge, my Judgment is true, because I am not alone,
but I and my Father that sent me. By which words Christ intimates, that if he
were alone, and the Father not with him, it might be that he might err in
judging, or at least that he might deservedly be doubted concerning the truth
of his judgment. Wherefore now there was no cause of doubting, because the
Father was perpetually with him, and so suffered him not to err in judgment.
But were Christ the most high God, from Joh. 8.16
his Judgment would have been no less true, although he had been alone, than it
is now to be esteemed true because the Father is present with him. For is not
the judgment of one person, who is the most high God, accounted as true if he
be by himself, as if it be apparent that another person, which likewise is the
most high God, is present with him? Or were they with whom Christ spoke so
stupid, as that if they had understood Christ to be the most high God, they
would presently have confessed, that his Judgment was most true, although they
had heard or thought nothing concerning some other person, which was present
with him as in other things, so also in judging.

The Defense of the Argument.
YOu will perhaps say, that Christ fitted his speech to the Opinion of the
Jews, who believed him to be a mere man, and therefore that he could not take
for granted that he was the most high God, but was forced to draw his Argument
from a thing manifest unto them. But this Answer is of no worth. For first, If
Christ would have taken that only for granted which the Jews believed
concerning him, he neither ought, nor could take that for granted which he here
affirms of himself, especially if the Opinion of the Adversaries be right.
For they did not yet believe, that God was his Father, which he here takes for
granted. Nor did they yet believe that his Father, namely, God, had sent him,
and so was also with him. Again, The Adversaries cannot use this Answer, unless
they will confess, that Christ did not therefore call God his Father, because
he was so generated out of his Essence, as that he was one God with him; for if
for this cause he had called God his Father, he had already taken that for
granted, which this answer contend he could not take. For what other thing
would it be, to take for granted that God was his Father, than that he also was
the most high God? But we manifestly see, that Christ here supposes, that God
was his Father. Now if you reply, that Christ does indeed suppose this, but
implicitly and accutely, so that the Jews did not understand it, that will fall
to the ground which our Adversaries are wont to say; namely, that for Christ to
call God his Father, and himself the Son of God, was so manifest an Argument
for the Generation of Christ out of the Essence of God, that even the Jews
themselves do understand it. And th^s they will have to be the cause why they
charged him with the crime of Blasphemy thereupon, and would have stoned him,
and did at length crucify him, in that he called God his Father, and himself
the Son of God; namely, because they understood, that he did by this means
intimate, that he was begotten out of the Essence of God, and so has one
Essence with him. For hither they are wont to draw those places in John, chap.
5.17, 18. and chap. 10.30 and chap. 19.7: and Mat. 26.63, etc.

Some other will perhaps say, That Christ intended to say that very thing which
we deny; namely, that he was that one God with the Father. For this was the
cause why they affirmed, that he was not alone, but the Father was with him,
and consequently that he could not err in judging, because the Father was
joined to him by unity of Essence. But, first, he had spoken too obscurely, if
he would have comprehended so great a matter in those words. For who is there
if any one say, I am not alone, but I and the Father, would understand his
meaning to be that he is of one Essence with God? For if you say, that this is
sufficiently hinted by the word Father, it is to be noted, that the force of
Christ words, or (as they speak) the middle term of the principal Argument,
consists not of the word Father, but in this, that the Father was present
with Christ. But that God, or the Father should be with any one, has a far
different meaning than to have one Essence with him. For it signifies,
according to the use of speaking, very familiarly unto all, but chiefly to the
Jews, that God is present with some one by his favor and assistance. Wherefore
the Jews by this means would not have perceived the mind of Christ, and the
force of the Argument. Besides, if there is so great force in the word Father,
why said Christ, that his Father was with him? As if some one might imagine,
that they whom he already understood to be of one Essence, might be parted
asunder, and the one be left from the other. Finally, that description of the
Father, that he sent him, namely, Christ, is repugnant to that Opinion, partly
because it is altogether unnecessary that there should be one Essence of him
that sends, another of him that is sent by him: nor can he be the most high
God, who is sent by another, but inferior to him; as has formerly in its
place been shown; partly because in this description of the Father, the reason
is plainly rendered, why Christ was not alone, but the Father was with him;
namely, because Christ was the Ambassador of the Father, and that an
extraordinary one. For God is always by his favor and assistance, present
with all his Ambassadors in all things, which their office does any way
require: and so much the more with Christ than with others, in that Christ was
a more excellent one than they. But unless you will acknowledge t^is, that
description of the Father will make nothing to the present matter. Whereas
Christ is not wont to make use of idle descriptions, and such as are not^ing to
the purpose. But that the Father sent Christ, can no way be the cause, that
Christ should be of one Essence with the Father.

The distinction of two Natures in Christ, if any one will here apply, it is
easily refuted by the same Reasons that we have used in the Defense of the
precedent Arguments; which accordingly a wise Reader changing, as they say,
what is to be changed, may of himself transfer it^ er, and apply to the matter
in hand.

CHAP. XXI.
from Joh. 8.14.
Argument the one and twentieth, from the words of Christ, John 8.14. My
Testimony is true, because I know whence I am, and whither I go.

IN the eighth place may be all^aged these words of Christ in the same eight
chapter of John, whence we cited the last Testimony, which certain acute men
amongst the Adversaries, have endeavored to draw to their Opinion, they are
extant in ver. 14. where Christ speaks in this manner, Though I give
testimony of my self, my testimony is true, because I know whence I am, and
whither I go. For had Christ been the most high God, he ought not to bring, and
consequently would not have brought this reason, that he knows whence he
comes, and whither he goes: but rather this, that he himself is the most high
God, or some such things, containing the same sense. But Christ did not allege
this, but that cause.

The Defense of the Argument.
THey whom we mentioned, here rise up and say, That Christ alleged this very
cause; for he spoke figuratively, and intimated more than he spaketh; namely,
that he is the natural Son of God. But if you object, Why then did he not
openly say, because I am God? They answer, that Christ used the figure of
insinuation, accommodated, and in a manner necessary, for the persons with whom
he spoke. For, say they, the Jews could not have endured it, if he had openly
called himself God, or the Son of God. Wherefore he spoke what was true, and
what was necessary to the cause: but so spoke, as that he might delude his
Adversaries with the ambiguity and obscurity of his words. But these men have
by this explication, deluded themselves and others, but so did not Christ the
Jews. They confess, and it is a plain case, that Christ does by those words
intimate, that he came from the Father, came out of Heaven, and shall again go
into Heaven to the Father. For who would make any doubt, that Christ intended
here to signify, what he elsewhere speaks in the same John, chap. 16.18. I
went out from the Father, and came into the World. Again, I leave the Word, and
go unto the Father. Which thing is more than once repeated in other, or the
like words, with the same Writer. But such words as these are so far from
signifying that Christ is the most high God, that they imply the quite
contrary. For if these words, I went out from the Father, and came into the
World, be taken of a local motion, as they spoke; that is, of a descent from
Heaven to Earth, properly so called, as those opposite ones, Again, I leave the
World, and go to the Father, are to be understood of a local departure from the
Earth into the Heavens, they are not incident to the most high God. For he, as
all confess, is not moved out of his place. But if you so take them as that
they signify, that Christ had God the Father, as the Author of his Embassy, to
whom he shall return, as it may easily be understood out of the ver. 42. of the
same chapter: neither does this argue him to be the most high God, but rather
inferior to the most high God, and depending on him, and having a different
Essence from him. But there is no other sense of these words remaining. For if
you say that Christ therefore came out from God, because he was eternally
begotten of his Essence, as they, against whom we chiefly dispute, seem to
hold, this is quite foreign to the place. For it appears manifestly enough,
that the going of Christ forth from his Father, was joined with his coming into
the world, as his return to God was with his leaving of the world, and
consequently that the discourse is of a thing that was done at a certain time,
and not from all eternity; which is also manifest enough from the 42d verse a
little before quoted. And withal, it is likewise apparent, that this going
forth from the Father, is such a thing us may elegantly be opposed to his
return to the Father, and cannot co-exist therewith. But what opposition is
there between eternal generation out of the Essence of the Father, and a return
to the Father from the Earth into Heaven? Or why cannot that return to the
Father, co-exist with that Generation, if it, as the Adversaries must of
necessity hold, does as yet continue?

CHAP. XXII.
Argument the two and twentieth, from the words of Christ, John 8.29. The
Father has not left me alone, because I always do the things that are
pleasing unto him.

THe ninth Testimony of this kind, is extant in the same 8th chapter of John,
ver. 29. where Christ spaketh thus, And he that sent me, is with me. The Father
has not left me alone, because I always do things that are pleasing to him.
The former part of which sentence, is also afterward extant chap. 16.32. where
Christ thus speaks to his Disciples. Behold the hour comes, and now is,
wherein shall every one of you be dispersed to your own homes, and leave me
alone: yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.

From which place it follows, that Christ is not the most high God, and out
of the former for a double reason. First, Because Christ does ^y the words of
both places intimate, that he should not have sufficient help and assistance,
if he we^e forsaken by the Father, which cannot be thought of the most high
God. For he has always of himself abundance of help and assistance, from Joh.
8.29
nor is there any need that any o^e should be present wi^h him, and give him
help. Again, we^e Christ the most high God, of the same Essence with the
Father, he ought not to bring, nor consequently would he have brought the
reason why the Father was with him, because he always does the things that are
pleasing unto him, but this, because he is of one Essen^e with him. For t^is
would indeed have been, both the necessary and the only cause why the Father
was with Christ: which being supposed, he could not choose but ^e with Christ,
and whereunto other causes that might be imagined, could not possibly add any
furt^er moment. For that conjunction would not only have preceded those causes
in time, ^ut would have likewise been already at the height, and so complete
and a^solute, that the Fat^er and Christ could not as yet be joined to^ether
with any sinner or s^^aiter tie.

The Defense of the Argument.
When they Maldona^us, with the Authors which he cites.
who endeavored to turn the precedent place also to a contrary sense, did see
the force of this latter Argument; they said that the particle For does
signify not the cause but rat^er the effect and sign, or argument drawn from
the consequence; for that the Father was not therefore with Christ because he
did the things that were pleasing to him, as if he would not have been with
him; but on the contrary, that Christ therefore did these things, because the
Father was with him. For there a e innumerable examples even in the very Psalm,
where the particle For is so used; out of which they produce that Psalm. 17.6. I
cried, because thou have heard me, O God. For he did not therefore cry because
he was heard, but was therefore heard because he cried. But what cause was
there that drove them to depart from the usual and simple signification of that
particle which here presently comes into the mind of every one? Certainly none
but the opinion, whereof we now here dispute, for they saw that otherwise this
place would not comply with their Doctrine concerning Christ. Howbeit this use
of the particle For is not so frequent as they say, especially in the New
Testament; and that example fetched out of the Psalms is not to the purpose.
For, to omit that it is not read in the Hebrew, For thou have heard me, ^ut in
the future, for thou will hear me; which may contain the cause why David cried
to God, namely ^ec^use he was certainly persuaded that he should be heard of
God. It is fu there well known that amongst the Hebrews See among innumerable
ones Psalm. 1.1. and 2.1.10.31. and 6.10, 17.11.1.7.12.5.14.1.15.3, 4, 5.
p^eterperfect as well as future Psalm. 1.2, 3, 4.2 1, 2, 4, 5.4.6, 7, 10.7.9
8.4. See Vata^^ and the Heb. Text on these places.
tenses are f^equently taken for present tenses, and do like present tenses
among the Latins denote a frequency or custom of action. As if David should
have said, Because t^ou art wont to hea^ me; whence also certain late See the
Bibles of Vatab. Jun and Tremel.
Writers do thus translate the place, Because thou hear me* but may not this
denote the cause for which David cried unto God? Yea most of all. For it does
most of all encourage us to pray unto God, in that we see that God is wont to
hear us. Again if Christ would have reasoned from thence, that he always did
those things that are pleasing to the Father, as from an effect; he had taken
that as sufficiently known to the Jews, with whom he discoursed, that ^e
always did the things that were pleasing to the Father. But Christ does not do
this, for otherwise, he ought likewise to suppose this as m^nifest enough to
the Jews, that he did nothing of himself, but so spoke as the Father taught
him. For every one sees if Christ always did those things that pleased the
Father, that he also did nothing of himself or of his own accord, nor spoke any
thing besides what the Father had taught him. But this latter Christ does not
suppose as manifest to the Jews, but affirms, that it should then be known
unto them, when they had exalted him, as is apparent from the preceding words.
Wherefore neither does he suppose the former to be manifest unto them, as the
opinion of these men requires. Besides, if Christ would have reasoned from
effects, he would rat^er have alleged his miraculous works, than works of
virtue and piety. For they were the most manifest effects of his conjunction
with the Father, to which he elsewhe^e likewise frequently appealeth when he
spoke of his conjunction with the Father, or of some like thing, as we read in
the same Writer: See Chap. 5.36. and 10.37, 38. and 14.11. and 15.24.
Furthermore, if it appears from other places, that this was the true cause
why God was with Christ, in that he always did the things that pleased him,
their reason, for which they think they must here depart from the usual and
simple signification of the particle for, falls to the ground: But that the
thing is so, is thence apparent, in that Christ himself does elsewhere render
this as the reason, w^y God did consequently love him, and consequently was
always with him by his assistance, namely because he had done and would
hereafter do those things that were pleasing to the Father, and agreeable to
his commandments. Now it is all one for the Father not to leave Christ, but to
be present with him, and constantly to love Christ, and to be perpetually with
him by his help and assistance. And that this which we have said was the cause
of the Fathers love toward Christ, and consequently of the help which he gave
him, is intimated by the words of Christ, which are extant afterward, Chap.
10.17. Therefore the Father loves me, because I lay down my soul that I may
receive it again. For this Commandment, as he himself adds in the following
Verse, he had received from the Father. And Chap. 15.10. As the Father has
loved me, so have I loved you; continue in my love. If you keep my Commandments
ye shall continue in my love, as I also have kept the Fathers Commandments, and
continue in his love. Where, whatsoever they say, with whom we have to do,
Christ warns his disciples, that having once obtained his love, they would
use their endeavors not to lose it again, but enjoy it perpetually; and
shows them a way how they should certainly attain it; which he had also
formerly intimated by a similitude in the 2d. Verse, namely, by keeping his
Commandments. Moreo^er, be illustrates this way by his own example, showing it
to be the aptest, yea the only means of persevering in his love, in that he
himself by keeping his Fathers Commandments, had obtained this favor, to
continue in his love, that is, to be constantly loved of him. Wherefore as we
said before, that reason falls to the ground, for which the particle For
should be thought to signify not the cause but the effect or sign in these
words, Chap. 8.29. But if it signifies the cause, the thing it self, as we
have seen, does evince, that Christ is not the most high God.

This Argument of ours cannot be solved by the distinction of natures. For
first, those causes hinder which we have above hinted in other Chap. 3.14.10.
of this Section.
places; as namely, that these things are simply spoken of Christ, and that it
is necessary here to consider him as a person, both for his Mission, and so
also for the operations which he attributes to himself according to the
capacity wherein he is to be considered. Again, this likewise takes away the
force of that answer, that notwithstanding this, Christ should rather have
alleged this for the reason why the Father was with him, and left him not
alone, because according to the divine nature to which the humane is personally
united, he was the same God with the Father.

CHAP. XXIII.
The three and twentieth Argument, That the Father is called, the God of Christ.

IN the tenth place we will recite those testimonies wherein the Father is
called the God of Christ. For thus Christ himself speaks concerning this
matter in his discourse with Mary afterward, in the same John, Chap. 20.17. Go
to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend to my Father, and your Father, to
my God and your God. And in the same Writer, Rev. 3.12. In the same Verse 12.
he calls the Father his God four times, whilst he says, Whosoever
overcomes, I will make him a pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall no
more go forth, and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of
the City of my God, the New Jerusalem, which descends out of Heaven from my
God.

As for the other Writers, first we read in Matthew. and Mark, that Christ when
he hung upon the Cross, c^yed thus to the Father, My God my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Matthew. 27.46. Mark. 15.34. And Paul, Ephesians. 1.17. wishes that the
God of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father of glory would give unto them the
Spirit of wisdom. And the divine Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap.
1.8, 9. cites of Christ those words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 45.7, 8. spoken
heretofore of Solomon, as the typ^ of Christ; Thy Throne, O God, is for ever
and ever, etc. Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity. Therefore, O
God, thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.
Thus also Micah speaks of Christ, Chap. 5.4. And he shall stand and feed in
the strength of the Lord, in the height of the name of the Lord his God. That
the Father is called the God of Christ.
From whence it appears, that Christ is not the most high God, for the most
high God has not a God, or there is no other God of him. For to be the God of
any one, is to have Empire and Power over him, or to be his Benefactor, or
finally, to be worshipped of him, as his sovereign Benefactor. But none has
dominion over the most high God, none is his Benefactor, none is worshipped of
him, otherwise he himself would not be the most high God.

The Defense of the Argument.
Here they have no other refuge left them besides the distinction of Natures.
Though not so much as this is left them, in that we have Chap. 3.14, 16.
already sufficiently stopped this hole at which they endeavor to get out;
especially because all the circumstances of those places do argue, that it is
spoken concerning the whole Person of Christ, or that he is considered as a
Person. For he is considered as the Son of God, as our Savior, as our Lord, as
Anointed of God, as God, as Prince appointed of God. Wherefore he cannot be a
Person of supreme Godhead, otherwise his divine Nature also would have a God:
besides, were Christ the most high God, although he also had a humane Nature,
yet some other, or another Person, namely, the Father, would not be his God,
but he himself would be his own God. For he himself would have sovereign Power
over his own humane Nature; he himself would be a Benefactor to it; he himself
would be worshipped of it, certainly no less than any other person, yea, more.
Why then is another, namely, the Father, rather called his God, than he himself
called his own God? But if they acknowledge it to be absurd, that any one
should be his own God, let them also acknowledge, that Christ is not the most
high God.

CHAP. XXIV.
The four and twentieth Argument from these words, 1 Cor. 11.3. The head of
Christ is God.

WE have hitherto chiefly out of the History of the Gospel penned by John,
produced those Testimonies wherein something is affirmed of Christ, which could
not be affirmed of him were he the most high God: and that such ones as give
the Father some Prerogative above Christ, and so demonstrate that the Father
only (since such a Prerogative agrees to no other) is the most high God. It
follows, that we may also from other divine Writers draw like Testimonies and
Arguments. Although we have already produced not a few when we fetched
Testimonies out of John, because they contained the same, or the like sense.

Of these places therefore which remain, we will give the first rank to that,
from 1 Cor. 11.3.
which is very near to those words that were last of all cited out of John and
other Writers, as being such wherein God is said to be the Head of Christ; and
this is done, 1 Cor. 11.3. where Paul speaks in this manner, Now I would have
you know, that the Head of every Man is Christ, and the Head of the Woman is
the Man, and the Head of Christ is God. But there is no other Head of the most
high God, or he has no Head above him, otherwise he would not be Most High.
For every one easily perceives, that to be ones Head, signifies, to have some
Empire or Power over him, and in a certain sort to govern him.

The Defense of the Argument.
HEre the Adversaries again are wont to fly to their distinction of Natures in
Christ, as to a sacred Anchor, which notwitstanding the Reader may observe,
that we have See cap. 3.14, 16. of this Section.
before sufficiently confuted. We repeat not all things that have been spoken;
we only desire that it should here also be observed, that Christ is here
likewise considered as a person; for he is considered as the head of the man,
and consequently of every man, that is, as a Lord appointed to rule every man,
even as the man also is the head of the woman. But Christ is such, as he is a
Person. Wherefore if the Adversaries Opinion concerning Christ, is true, he, as
a divine Person, and consequently the most high God, must have a Head over him,
which implies a contradiction, and is the very thing which they endeavor to
escape, who here use the distinction of Natures. Neither may any one here say,
that in the former words indeed, where Christ is said to be the Head of the
man, he is considered as a Person, but in the latter he is looked upon only in
respect of that Nature which is not a person.

For besides that, this is affirmed without reason, it is disproved by reason.
First, be^^use it is certain that God is the Head of Christ, as he has
received from him Dominion and Empire over the man. But Christ received that
Dominion as he is a Person. Why then is it not God made the head of Christ as
he is here a person? Again, if you inquire the cause, why the Apostle, when he
had asserted that Christ is the Head of the man, did likewise say afterward,
that God is the Head of Christ, you shall find this to be the chief, that he
might not seem to leave God no further power over the man, because Christ is
his Head, or Lord and King: but rather that it might be understood, that God is
also upon this very account the Head or Lord, or King of the man, because
Christ is the Head of every man, in as much as God is also the Head of Christ
himself For as the woman is not therefore exempted from the Empire and Power of
Christ, because the man is her Head, in as much as Christ is also the Head and
Lord of the man himself, so neither is the man exempted from the Power of God,
because Christ is his Head: since God is also the Head of Christ himself.
Moreover, the Apostle spoke this to give us to understand, that if we bring any
dishonor to Christ, who is our Head, it will at length redound to God himself,
who is again the Head of Christ. But neither of these Reasons would be of any
force, if God were not the Head of Christ, as he is the Head and Lord of the
man. But if God be the Head of Christ, as he is our Lord, he is the Head of
that person, as such. Finally, such a gradation ought not to be made, as to
ascend from the Man to Christ, from Christ to God, as a different person from
him, if besides the humane, there were another Nature in Christ, to which it
did no less agree, to be his Head, than to a Person different from him, but
mention was to be made of that Nature as well as of this. Now if any one will
fly hither for refuge, as to say, that by the name of God the Father is not
understood, but the whole Trinity, he must, at least, in the first place
allege some passage, from whence it may manifestly appear, that God
distinguished from Christ, denotes some other besides the Father. For we can
allege innumerable ones, wherein even by the confession of the Adversaries
themselves, it denotes none but the Father, and it is otherwise apparent, that
such things as are like hereunto, are expressly attributed to the Father in the
holy Scripture. For it is all one to be ones Head, and to be ones God. But the
latter is expressly affirmed of the Father of Christ, as every one may perceive
from these words of Christ, John 20.17. and those of the Apostle, Ephesians: 1.17.
Add hereunto, that the Reasons wherefore God is called the Head of Christ, do
all agree to the Father. Whether they agree to any other, we have no assurance
thereof: or rather we are assured, that they agree to no other; namely, because
he gave all Empire to Christ; because he gave the Laws by which he rules and
governs us; and also because he brings his will to an issue by his hands,
and provides for his own Isa. 53.10. John 13.32. and 14.13, 17. Phil. 2.11.
Glory by his Empire. But in the last place, those Reasons which evince that
Christ is here considered as a Person, permit not the Trinity here to be
understood by the name of God. Otherwise the Person of Christ, which is
believed to be contained in that Trinity, would be the head of it self, as
such. Nor can you understand the Essence it self, which is not a Person. For it
can govern none, and consequently is the head of none. But it is to no purpose
to feign a true God who is not a Person; since the name of God is, as we have
already hinted Chap. 1. of this Section.
before, the name of a Person.

CHAP. XXV.
from 1 Cor. 3. ult.
The five and twentieth Argument, from the words of Paul, 1 Cor. 3. ult. Christ
is Gods.

THe second place shall be that which is extant in the same Epistle to the
Corinthians, chap. 3. about the end, and it is not much unlike to the foregoing
one, because it is therein affirmed, that Christ is Gods. Which thing, that it
may be the better understood, we will set down the whole place. Thus therefore
speaks Paul, Let none boast in men. For all are yours, whether Paul, or
Apollo, or Cephas, or World, or Life, or Death, or things present, or things to
come, all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Any one will
easily understand from the words themselves, that to be ones, does in this
place signify, either to be in some sort possessed of another, or to be in his
Power, or at least to be dedicated to his use, and consequently to have another
for his Superior. Whence the Apostle does require them, that none should boast
in any man, no not in the Apostle himself, so as to brag, that he is Paul's, or
^pollo's, or Cephas's, that is, Peter's, as the Corinthians did: But all of them
rather glory in Christ, and consequently in God, in that they themselves are no
others, but Christ's, and consequently also Gods; and therefore all things on
the contrary (the Apostles themselves not axepted) theirs. For even the
Apostles were consecrated to the use and salvation of Christians, and so were
subservient unto them, and not contrariwise. Whence in the latter Epistle to
the same Corinthians, about the end of the first chapter, he says, We are not
Lords of your Faith, but Helpers of your Joy. And chap. 4.5: We preach not our
selves, but Jesus Christ the Lord, and our selves your Servants for Jesus sake.
Whence it is apparent, that Christ is not the most high God. For the most high
God is no ones in that sense which we have explained; otherwise he would not be
most high. Indeed God is said to be some ones God, but not simply to be some
ones. The first signifies the supreme Eminency of God above him, whose God he
is said to be, and his Empire over him: but the latter would signify that he
is as it were possessed by some one. Howbeit, although this should in some place
be affirmed, yet neither would nor could it be affirmed in that sense, as we
see it is affirmed of Christ.

The Defense of the Argument.
THis Argument can no more be eluded by the distinction of Natures in Christ,
than the precedent Testimonies: both for other causes formerly Chap. 3.14, 16.
alleged, and also because Christ is here considered as our Lord, and
consequently as a Person; and that no less, when he is said to be Gods, then
when we are said to be his. For Paul, when he said that we are Christ's, again
affirms, that Christ's is Gods, lest any one should think, that because we are
Christ's, we are no longer Gods, but rather that he might understand that we are
Gods on this very account, inasmuch as Christ himself, and consequently all
things that are his, are Gods. But if he be here considered as a Person, his
Person is not a Person of the most high God. For that is not another, unless
you will have also the divine Nature to be another, which they who here use
the distinction of Natures, do by this very distinction endeavor to avoid.
Besides, if Christ were the most high God, although he had withal a humane
Nature, yet could it not be said, that he is more another than his own. But
here he is simply said to be Gods; namely, another Persons, without making any
mention that he is also his own, or that his humane Nature is his divine
Natures. If there is any thing that belongs to the fuller understanding of
these Reasons, it may be fetched from the defense of the precedent Reasons.

CHAP. XXVI.
The six and twentieth Argument, from the words 1 Cor. 15.24, 28. That the Son
shall deliver up the Kingdom to God the Father, and shall become subject to him.

THe third place is extant in the same Epistle, chap. 15. where it is said,
that Christ shall deliver the Kingdom unto God the Father, and be himself
subject unto him, who has put all things under his subjection. For thus he
speaks, ver. 24, 25. Then comes the end, when he shall deliver the Kingdom
to God even the Father, when he shall abolish all Principallities, and
Authority, and Force. For he must reign until he put all his Enemies under his
feet. And ver. 28. But when all things shall become subject unto him, then
shall also the Son himself be subject to him, who put all things under his
subjection, that God may be all in all. Whence we may argue in a twofold
manner, and so draw a double Argument, which nevertheless we will reckon for a
single one, the first from the 24th verse, the second from the 28th verse. For
as for the first, from 1 Cor. 15.24, 28.
we have before Chap. 18 of this Section.
taught, when we spoke of those places wherein something or all things are said
to have been delivered unto Christ by the Father, that such a delivery of the
Kingdom is here understood, as consists in the deposing thereof, and the
resigning up the right which one had to reign, so that he afterward manageth
that Kingdom neither by himself, as before, nor by him to whom he delivers up
the Kingdom. In which manner a General appointed by a King to wage a certain
war, does when the war is ended, deliver his Power to the King. But the most
high God neither does, nor can deliver his Kingdom unto any one in this manner,
unless you will say, that he withal cease to be the most high God. For if he
delivers the Kingdom unto any one, as he did heretofore to Christ, he does
not so deliver it, as that he strippeth himself of the Kingdom, but only
reigns by him, as subordinate unto him, to whom he delivers the Kingdom.
After which sort, a King wageth war by his Captains. And not to stray from the
matter in hand, God is said to judge the World by Christ, whom he has made
Judge. For when he is John 5.22, 24.
said to judge none, the meaning is that he judges none by himself, but by the
Son, to whom he has given all Judgment; for otherwise God is in several Romans
2.5, 6. and 3.6. 1 Cor. 5.13. 2 These. 1.5. 1 Pet. 1.17.
places said to judge, either absolutely without mentioning the middle Cause of
that Judgment, or openly declaring it, whilst it is said, that he will judge
the World by the Acts 17.3.
man whom he has appointed, that is, by Jesus Christ, as we expressly read,
Romans 2.16. As for the latter Argument, which may be drawn out of the 28th
verse, it is evident that the most high God can become subject unto none. But
the Son of God shall at length become subject unto him, who brought all things
under his subjection, namely, to the Father. Wherefore the Son of God, cannot
be the most high God.

The Defense of the Argument.
HEre all for the most part fly to the distinction of Natures, but to no
purpose, both for the simple affirmation, which is found in both See cap. 3.14,
16. of this Section.
verses, and could not have place, if for the other Nature, namely the divine,
the same things ought simply to be denied of Christ; and also because Christ is
here considered as a King, and consequently, as a Person, so that either his
humane Nature is to be acknowledged for a Person, or these things are to be
ascribed both to his divine Person and Nature; whereof the first quite
overthrows the Opinion of the Adversaries, the other by their own confession
subverteth it self. Add hereunto, that in the latter place it is emphatically
said, the Son also himself shall become subject to him, who brought all things
under his subjection. Now who would believe that Paul, when he spoke thus,
considered Christ not according to that Nature, according to which he is the
Son of God, but according to another? For neither can any one say, that the
name of the Son, is in this place put absolutely without adding the name of
God, so that also the Son of man may be understood. For the word Son is
manifestly opposed to God the Father as its correlative, as they speak in the
Schools; neither is the word Son absolutely used of Christ, ever meant
otherwise, than as related to God as its correlative, and not to any man. To
omit that the Emphasis which is in those two words, namely, also and himself,
does require that Christ should be thought to be described in that manner,
wherein he exceeds a l the other things there mentioned, as being subject to
him, and not wherein he is either equal, or inferior to him, and that manner
is that he be called the Son of God, and not the Son of Man. For in the first
manner he is equal to Men, and inferior to Angels. But as the Son of God, by
way of excellency so called, he is superior unto Angels, as it is openly
written, Heb. 1.4, 5. Finally, if according to the humane Nature only, Christ
shall deliver the Kingdom and become subject, but not according to the divine,
why is it said, that he shall deliver the Kingdom to the Father only, why that
he s^all become subject to him only, and not also to himself, or to his own
divine Nature? Why is it added that God may be all in all? why should not
Christ himself also be all in all? For neither may any one say, that there the
divine Nature, and that even of Christ himself, is a^solutely meant. For it is
both understood from the thing it self, that some Person is designed, (for
operation and the government of all things, is ascribed to him) and that such
an one as is distinct from Christ, and all the foregoing words openly teach,
that it is spoken of God the Father, who brought all things in subjection unto
Christ, and placed him at his right hand; as we have elsewhere seen. Now
whereas some except, that it is therefore said, that Christ shall deliver the
Kingdom to God the Father, because he shall resign thar Kingdom which he has,
as Mediator, not which he has as God, this is also of no moment. For, first,
we have already shown Chap 18 of this Section.
before, that if Christ were the most high God, such a Kingdom could not be
given to him, because otherwise he would at the same time, have the same Empire
both from himself, and not from himself, be therein subordinate to another and
not therein subdinate. In a word, both the most high, and not the most high.
For we have taught, that such a Kingdom considered by it self is contained in
that Power and Empire which the most high God has of himself, For there is no
act of that Empire, which does not by it self agree to the most high God. But
if Christ, being the most high God, could not receive such a Kingdom, neither
can he deliver it to another, and depose it. Wherefore since we read, that he
shall deliver that Kingdom to God the Father, and so depose it, it is evident
that he cannot ^e the most high God. Add he^eunto, that were such an answer of
the Adversaries to be admitted, it will follow, that Christ when he has
delivered that Kingdom, shall not be subject to God the Father, contrary to
what the Apostle manifestly witnesses: For he that retaine^h a supreme and
independent Empire over all things, becomes subject unto none: Otherwise he
would acknowledge another above him, and so not be the most high. That Christ
is the Mediator of God and men.
Yea, Christ after the delivery of the Kingdom which he has as Mediator, would
be so far from becoming more subject to the Father than before, that he ought
rather to be esteemed less subject. For in respect of that Kingdom, he, as we
have said, and the holy Scriptures abundantly testify, is dependant on the
Father, and subordinate to him; which subordination contains in it self, some
subjection at least, which when that Kingdom should be desposed, would
altogether cease his supreme and independent Empire in the mean time remaining,
which suffers not that he be subject to any one. The distinction of Natures
has here no weight, partly because we have already before excluded it with
reasons; partly because they who use that answer, will have Christ according to
both Natures, or the whole person of Christ to be the Mediator, and
consequently to have and administer that Kingdom which agrees unto him as
Mediator.

CHAP. XXVII.
The seven and twentieth Argument, That Christ is the Mediator of God and Men.

IN the fourth place that deserves to be alleged which we touched at the end
of the proceeding Chapter, namely that Christ is called the Mediator of God and
men, 1 Timothy 2.5. And in the same sense, The Mediator of a new or better
Covenant, namely than the old was, Heb. 8.6.9.15.12.24. For it is meant that he
intervened in the midst between God and men, to make a covenant between them,
and was, as the divine author to the Hebrews elsewhere speaks, the surety
thereof Chap. 7.22. Now it is here understood that Christ is not the most high
God; for the most high God can be the Mediator of none, but he himself rather
has a Mediator. For if he were a Mediator, first he should have another
superior to him, between whom and men he should interv^ne in the midst. For
whether you will have him to be called a Mediator, because in making a Covenant
he m^nageth the business of God with men, as the messenger and interpreter of
his will: or therefore, because he manageth the cause and business of men with
God: either way he is looked upon as inferior to God. Therefore he would at
once be both the highest, and not the highest. Again he would be the Mediator
of himself: For if a^y one say, that this latter does not therefore follow,
because that God, whose Mediator Christ is, is none but the Father; not to
repeat that which we have Chap. 1. of this Section.
elsewhere taught, as namely, that it does not from hence follow, that Christ
is the most high God, because he is distinguished from God simply put. There
are yet two things which exclude that exception. The first is, that no cause
can be imagined why, if the Father had a Mediator, Christ should not also have
a Mediator, and that the same Mediator, if he be the most high, and
consequently the same God with the ^ather. For whether the will of the Father
was to be declared unto men by a Mediator, or the cause of men to be managed
with God, and he, as they commonly believe, to ^e pacified; the same cause
alike pertained unto Christ, and to the Father; if Christ also be the most high
God, the same with the Father. The other is, because for the Unity of Essence
it cannot be, that any one should be a Mediator of one Person, and not of the
other. For whether one Person does declare his will by some one, or whether the
business be, that his will should be bended to mercy by some one. It is
impossible, but that the will of the other Persons likewise which are of the
same Essence, should be declared or ^ended to mercy by the same. For it is
necessary, that the will of those persons, as also the understanding, and the
other properties, should be the same in number, and their operations be
altogether the same; which the Adversaries themselves confess to be true in
those things which are to without, such as these actions are: but now it is
absurd, yea, impossible, that any one should be the Mediator of himself.

The Defense of the Argument.
THe Adversaries cannot escape by the distinction of Natures, as for other
causes explained oftentimes before, so also because, Sect. 1. chap. 6. We have
taught, that some of the Adversaries, whilst they make Christ a Mediator
according to the humane Nature, do indeed make the humane Nature a Person: And
that others say, that the very divine Suppositum, or Person of Christ,
discharges the office of a Mediator (but it cannot discharge it, unless the
very divine Nature discharge it) and finally, that others openly say, yea,
contend, that Christ is a Mediator according to both Natures: of which their
assertion, they allege this Reason among others, which neither the other
Adversaries can reject, because otherwise he could not satisfy the divine
Justice, requiring an infinite price for our sins; and this is either the only
or chief ground of the Doctrine touching the Incarnation, as they term it, of
the Son of God, the second Person of the Trinity. From which it appears, that
the Adversaries cannot here fly to the distinction of Natures in Christ.
Howbeit, in the mean time, how ill those things which they say hang together,
even this does argue, namely, that Paul when he had said, that there is one
God, and one Mediator of God and Men, being about to describe him, says not
the God and Man Jesus Christ, but simply, the Man Jesus Christ: but he should
have see spoken, if the Opinion of these men were true. For descriptions of
Persons, as we have often hinted, used by the sacred Authors, are, as indeed
they ought to be, suitable to the things that are spoken of. Wherefore if
Christ had been a Mediator, both as God, and as Man, or according to both
Natures, the Apostle, when he would describe him, ought to have called him not
only a Man, but also God, especially since express mention had been made both
of God, and of Men, whose Mediator he is. And indeed the Adversaris love so to
speak, when they explain their Opinion with their own words.

CHAP. XXVIII.
That Christ is a Priest.
The eight and twentieth Argument, That Christ is a Priest.

NOt unlike to the former is this, namely, that Christ, Psalm. 110.4. And so in
the Epistle to the Hebrews, See Chapter 2.17.4.14.5.5 etc. 6. ult chap. 7. and 8, 9.
is many times called a Priest, either simply, or high Priest. Therefore we
will here add some things concerning the matter; especially because the very
Spirit of God seems by this Appellation, to have provided that none should
think Christ to be unsubordinate unto God, because of the vast power which he
has. For he that is a Priest, cannot be the most high God, For it belongs to
a Priest to be a Minister of the Heb. 8.1, 6. chap. 2.17. and 5.1.5.1.7.27.8.3.
chap. 9. and 10. Chap 7.25. chap. 9.14.
Sanctuary. Whence also the very Office of Priesthood, is called a Ministry. It
belongs also to him, to negotiate for Men with God, to offer to God for them,
and to intercede, and by that means to impetrate remission of sins from God,
and finally, to appear before the face of God. All which things are very clear,
both from the thing it self, and also from the Epistle to the Hebrews, wherein
they are in general affirmed, partly of Priests, yea, high Priests, and partly
in particular attributed to Christ himsef: but none of these things is incident
to the most high God. For he it is who has Priests, high and low, but is
himself Priest of none: to him Ministry and Oblation is performed, to him
intercession is made for others; before his face an appearance is made, that he
may forgive some Persons their sins: He ministers to none, he offers to none,
he intercedes to none, he makes appearance before the face of none, that men's
sins may be pardoned. For he by his own right and authority, forgiveth sins
unto all. Now although these things be figuratively spoken of Christ, as we
have elsewhere shown, yet this is certain, that these kinds of speaking could
by no means be applied unto Christ, if he were the first and the highest Cause
of the remission of sins, and forgave them unto men of himself, by a power not
received from another; that is, if he were the most high God.

The Defense of the Argument.
THe distinction of Natures has here no more place or strength, than either in
other places above, or in the precedent Chapter, where the Office of a Mediator
is handled, especially because the Adversaries place the Office of Mediator,
which agrees unto Christ in his Priesthood chiefly. Wherefore not to repeat
other things, we only say thus much. If Christ, besides the humane Nature, had
also a divine one, it would be necessary, that he no less than the Father,
should have an high Priest, and this Priest be himself: since neither any cause
can be imagined, nor can it any way be: that the Father should have a Priest,
and Christ not have one, if he be God no less than the Father, yea, the same
God in number with him, as may appear from those things which we before spoke
concerning the title of a Mediator. But where is even the least hint in the
holy Scripture, whereby it may appear, that Christ has an high Priest as well
as the Father? Who sees not, that it is very absurd, to hold that the Person
of Christ, offers to himself? wherefore the Priesthood of Christ is utterly
inconsistent with the divine Nature, which is held to be in him.

CHAP. XXIX.
The nine and twentieth Argument, That Christ was raised up by the Father.

THe sixth Argument of this kind, may be drawn from the places wherein Christ
is said to have been raised by another, namely, his Father; which reason is so
much the more to be urged, because the contrary thereof is urged by the
Adversaries. For they say, Christ raised himself, and by this means clearly
demonstrated, that he was the Son of God, begotten out of his Essence, and
consequently the most high God. But this Argument partly falls to the ground by
it self, in that it is grounded on a false Supposition, as we will by and by
demonstrate, partly is weakened by another erroneous Oppinion of the same
Adversaries. For they hold that the Soul or Spirit of Christ, which they also
hold concerning the spirits of other men, after he was dead, did
notwithstanding perform such actions as agree to none but Substances, that are
actually alive, and understand by themselves. Some say that it went down into
Hell, or Purgatory, and brought the Souls of the Fathers out of, I know not
what, Prison, or Limbus. But if the Soul of Christ, even during his death, did
exercise such actions, what hinders but that the same Soul, entering into his
own Body, and former habitation, should again unite it unto it self, and by
divine Power raise it up? For could the Soul of Christ, furnished with divine
Power, do less than his whole humanity when he lived, perform by the same
divine Power? could it do less, than (for example sake) some one of the
Apostles, to whom Christ sometimes gave the power of raising the Mat. 10.8.
dead, and of Act. 9.40.41. and 20.9 etc.
whom we read, that some of them did actually raise the dead? 1 King. 17.17.
etc 2 King, 4.18 etc.
Which very thing we read likewise of Elijah and Elisha. Wherefore we will far
more rightly invert the Argument of the Adversaries, and retort upon them that
weapon which they endeavor to hurl at us. For if Christ were the most high
God, his raising should be ascribed to himself, as the true and chief Author.
But it is not attributed to him, but to the Father, as the true and chief
Author thereof; yea, it is very openly signified, that Christ, i^ you speak
properly, That Christ was raised up by the Father.
did not raise himself. Wherefore he is not the most high God. The truth of the
Major, as they call it, is manifest enough. For none doubts, if Christ be the
most high God, that he did altogether raise himself, and that it was most
suitable, that he should raise himself. For since it follows from that Opinion,
that the humane Nature, according to which Christ dyed, was person^^^y united
to the divine, it could at no hand be, that the humane Nature should
perpetually abide in death; and consequently, in as much as that union,
according to their Opinion, can never be dissolved, that a dead corpse should in
an indissoluble and eternal tie, be united to the divine Nature. Furthermore,
if the humane Nature were to be raised, by whom rather was it to be raised,
than by the divine Nature of the same Christ, which both could of it self very
easily perform it, and by reason of that most strict union, did owe this
benefit unto the Nature that was joined unto it? Wherefore whether you consider
the ability of performing it, the divine Nature of Christ would have been the
prime cause of that work; for the Office of performing it, it would have
chiefly lain on that Nature. How then would not Christ have been the true and
chief Author of his own Resurrection? As for the Minor, there are so many and
so clear Testimonies of the holy Scripture, which make the Father the true and
chief Author of the Resurrection of Christ, and not Christ himself, yea, very
openly take away this work from Christ (though even the thing it self, namely,
his death, does sufficiently take it away) that it is a wonder, that any one
should doubt of it. For, first, in certain places it is openly said, that the
Father raised Christ, or that God raised his Son. But who is that God, whose
Son Christ is, but the Father? The former is recorded by Paul, in the beginning
of the Epistle to the Galathians, whilst he speaks thus, Paul an Apostle not
from men, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father that raised him
up from the dead. The latter it is affirmed by Peter, Acts 3. ult. To you God
having raised up his Son, first sent him blessing you. And Paul, chap. 13.33.
does indeed assert the same, whilst he says, And we declare unto you the
Promise which was made unto our Fathers, that God has fulfilled it unto us
their Children, having raised up Jesus, as it is also written in the second
Psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Now that he raised him
from the dead, no more to return to corruption, thus he said, etc. From which
words it appears, that he who said unto Christ, thou art my Son, this day ^
begot thee, which indeed is no other, than the Father, raised him from the
dead. The same Apostle says, 1 These. 1.9, 10. Ye turned to God from Idols, to
serve the true and living God, and is expect his Son out of Heaven, whom he
raised from the dead, even Jesus, who delivers us from the Wrath to come.
Where in like manner God is said, to have raised his Son from the dead.

To these are added very many other places, wherein it is simply written, that
God raised Christ; of which number we will here set down only one or two, with
the words at large, contenting our selves to quote the rest. Thus therefore
speaks Peter, Acts 2.24. Whom (Jesus of Nazareth) God raised up, having
loosed the Throws of Hell, in that it was impossible that he should be held by
it. For David faith concerning him, I saw the Lord always before me, because
he is at my right hand, that I may not be moved. Therefore my heart is glad,
and my tongue rejoices. Moreover, also my flesh shall rest in hope. For thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thine holy One to see corruption.
And a little after, ver. 32. This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we are all
witnesses. See also what the same Peter faith afterward, chap. 3.15. (which
verse compare with the 13th) and 4.10. and 5.30. and 10.40. and Paul, chap.
7.31. and Romans 4.24. and 8.11. and 10.19. and also 1 Cor. 6.14. and 15.15. and
2 Cor. 4.14. and 13.4. But there is amongst others a notable place in the same
Apostle, Ephesians. 1.9, 20. where amongst other things he wishes to them, That
they might know what is the exceeding greatness of his power (namely, whom he
had, ver. 17. called the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory)
toward us, who believe according to the working of his mighty Power which he
wrought in Christ, having raised him from the dead, and set him at his own
right hand in heavenly places, etc. And likewise those words which we read
chap. 2.5. and those that are like unto them, Col. 2.12, 13. Add also those of
the divine Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 13.24. and those of 1
Pet. 1.21.

We mention not those Testimonies, which indeed are not few, wherein it is
simply affirmed, that Christ was raised from the dead, which being so often
repeated, does altogether signify, that he was raised by another; as also the
circumstances of some places, do plainly intimate. See amongst others, 1. Cor.
15.4, 12, etc. where that manner of speaking is seven times used; and
afterward, ver. 15. it is openly asserted, that God did it, and the
Resurrection of Christ is made the pattern of our resurrection, which also
happens elsewhere.

A more full Confirmation and Defense of the Argument.
YOu will say, that although Christ is said to have been raised by another, yet
it follows not that he was not raised by himself, in as much as the same
action may proceed from many causes, and those equal among themselves. Moreover
that in those places wherein, it is asserted, that God raised up Christ, by the
name of God, may be understood the whole Trinity, or the divine nature of
Christ, especially, in that elsewhere the raising of himself seems to be
ascribed unto Christ.

But the first is not to be admitted for three causes chiefly.

The first is, because that at least follows from those places which we have
alleged, That Christ is not the principal cause of his Resurrection. For why
should the raising of him ^e so often and so openly ascribed to another person,
That Christ was raised up by the Father.
namely the Father, and not rather to Christ himself? But even this thing alone
might here be sufficient for us to show that Christ is not the most high God.
For we have before shown that he, if he were the most high God, would
altogether be the principal Author of his own Resurrection. Another cause is,
because the holy Scripture does so attibute the raising of Christ to God the
Father, that it does not obscurely, yea, very openly intimate, that the same
action does not indeed, agree to Christ himself. First, because if Christ had
raised himself from the dead, and that by such a power as was natural and
altogether proper unto him, it ought to have been mentioned at least in some of
those testimonies which we have alleged; and to omit other places, this ought
chiefly to be done, Acts 2.24. etc. and Romans 10.9, 10. 2 Cor. 13.4. For as to
the first place, when Peter had affirmed, that Christ had been raised from the
dead, in that it was impossible for him to be held by death; was there not very
great cause to say, that it was therefore impossible, because he was the most
high God, who accordingly could not leave his soul in Hell, and suffer his body
to see corruption? For this would have been the proper, yea, the only cause
thereof, whe^eas he having alleged the words of David, and applied them to
Christ, produces a far different cause, namely, that Christ always saw the
Lord before his eyes, because he was always at his right hand, lest he should
be moved; Whence he conceived joy, whence hope, that the Lord would not lea^e
his soul in Hell, nor suffer his holy one to see corruption; whereunto the
following words also pertain, where Christ in the Person of David, professes
that God had made known unto him, the ways of life, and would fill him with
gladness. Which cause has nothing common with that which should have been
alleged, yea, does subvert it.

Romans 10.9
As to the second place, it should therefore have been there rather said, that
Christ raised up himself from the dead, (if so be any one can raise up himself
from the dead) then that God did it, because that is there set down, which is
in a special manner both to be believed with the heart, and to be confessed
with the mouth, concerning the dignity of Christ; and which if we believe and
confess, we shall obtain salvation. But if Christ had raised himself from the
dead, we ought altogether to believe and confess it, as the Adversaries
themselves confess, yea, urge, and consequenely it should by no means, have
here been omitted by the Apostle. For he had omitted that which did not only
contain in it self the g^eater dignity of Christ, but was as necessary to be
believed by us, as that which he expressed. 2 Cor. 13.4.
As to the third testimony; for this reason in stead of that, which is there
said, That Christ does live by the Power of God. It should rather have been
said, that he does live by his own power, because the power of Christ is here
in question: and it is shown that he is powerful in the Corinthians, by
removing the suspicion of infirmity, which might be grounded on his cruel
death. To which purpose nothing had been more apt, than if it had been said,
that he revived by his own power, and vanquished the force of death. Again, it
is apparent from Acts 13.33. and Romans 1.4. Col. 1.18. Rev. 1.5. that the
raising of Christ was such an action, That Christ was raised up by the Father.
as that by it he was generated by God, and became his Son. Sect. 8. Chap, 31.
Concerning which matter more hereafter. But Christ did not generate himself,
nor is the Son of himself.

Thirdly, In some places alleged by us, God, or the Father of Christ, is,
without expressing his name, thus described, He that raised Jesus Christ from
the dead; and is by that description distinguished from Christ himself. See
Romans 4.24. and 8.11. 2 Cor. 4.14. Whence it appears, that this action is not
common to Christ with the Father, but proper to the Father, otherwise this
description, would no less, that I mgiht not say more, agree to Christ than to
the Father; and consequently, ^e who raised Christ from the dead, could not be
distinguished from Christ, for common things, as we have elsewhere hinted, do
not distinguish, but proper ones. To which may be added that place of the
Epi^le to the Hebrews, chap. 5.7. which we formerly Chap. 17 of this Section.
conside ed, when we discoursed of the prayers which Christ poured out to the
Father; for it is thence evinced by a double reason, that Christ could not
raise himself from the dead, and consequently did not: partly because he did
with so earnest prayers, with so earnest cryings, seconded also with tears,
beseech the Father to do it; partly because he to whom he made such
supplications, is thus described and distinguished from Christ, namely, that he
was able to save him from death. Conce^ning both which things, see what we have
formerly said. Finally, that place, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. may be added, which we
have formerly alleged, where it is shown, how great Power, how great Might God
the Father did put forth when he raised Christ from the dead, and set him at
his right hand in the Heavens. But what need would there have been of so great
Power, or how could it at all have been employed by God the Father, if Christ
had raised himself by a Power altogether proper and natural to him? Now if you
say, that the same Power did also belong to Christ, as being common to the
Father with the Son, there can no cause be alleged, why it should he said to
be put forth rather by the Father, than by Christ, in as much as we have
already shown that the contrary ought rather to be done.

The third cause wherefore that first exception ought to be esteemed of no
weight, is this, namely, that such a sense does exceedingly weaken Paul's
Argument, whereby from the Resurrection of Christ, he asserteth the truth of
our resurrection (as he chiefly does, 1 Cor. 15.11, etc) and so throws down
the strongest prop of our hope. For Paul does thence show, that we shall arise
because Christ arose: B^t if Christ raised himself from the dead by a power
that was inbred, and altogether natural to him, and could not but raise
himself, the consequence is of no force. For how follows it, if Christ raised
himself by a power that was proper and altogether natural, and could not but
raise himself, that we also, who are altogether distitute of that Power, and
whom our nature does not vindicate from eternal death, shall assuredly rise?

There is now scarce any need to speak of the latter exception, which is, that
by the name of God, who is said to have raised Christ, either the whole
Trinity, wherein Christ also is contained, or the divine Essence, which was no
less in Christ, than in the Father, may be understood. For we have brought
Arguments even out of those places, where the Adversaries themselves dare not
apply that exception, wherein is shown that Christ did not raise himself from
the dead, the contrary whereof is required by that exception. But furthermore,
who does not understand, that when God, or he that raised Jesus from the dead,
is distinguished from Christ, a person distinct from Christ, is understood,
which is in this place sufficient for us? That a person is understood, is
intimated by the name God, which we have Chap. 1. of this Section.
before shown to be proper to a Person, and also by the action of raising,
which agrees to nothing but a Person; but that one Person is understood the
very word God, as also that description, He that raised Jesus Christ from the
dead, being uttered in the singular number, does manifest. For neither is the
word God a collective, neither is that expression, wherein mention is made of
him, who raised Christ from the dead, general and common, but proper and
singular, but the distinction between Christ, and him that raised Christ from
the dead, is manifest from the very places. Nor as we have else where hinted,
would he escape the Tax of Nestorianism, who by the word God, understanding
Christ himself by name, Chap 18. of this Section.
should say that he raised Christ, or did any like thing about him, for it
would be all one as if he should say, the Son of God raised Christ. But what
need more words? When the very Scripture explaineth it self, for what it in one
place attributes to God simply named, it elsewhere openly attributes to the
Father, either expressing the very name of the Father, or describing him, whom
God raised by the appellation of his Son. If therefore there were any
obscurity, or ambiguity in those places, wherein the raising of Christ is
simply attributed unto God, without the addition of any other note, implying
that it was spoken of the Father, yet would the other places show that they are
to be understood of the Father. For the obscure passages are to be explained by
the plain ones, and the confused and ambiguous passages, by the distinct ones.
But there is no ambiguity, no obscurity in the word God, since there can no
place of the Scripture be alleged, where the name God put subjectively, and
also distinguished from Christ, both which happen in these Testimonies, is
taken of any other but the Father.

Now whereas certain Testimonies of the Scripture are alleged, wherein the
raising of Christ seems to be attributed to himself, as that he himself said,
that he would in three days raise up the Temple, namely, of his Body, John
2.20, 21. and that he had power both to lay down his soul, and to take or
receive the same again; for so the greek word may indifferently be rendered,
John 10.18. These passages evince no other than that Christ was the cause of
his Resurrection, and that it was so put in his hands, as I may say, that it
could be taken away from him, and interrupted by none. After which manner the
same Christ says in Luke, That he that shall lose his Soul, shall find it,
chap. 9.24, or quicken it, chap. 17.33. And John says of them who believed in
Christ, and so are born of God, that the word, namely, Christ, Gave them Power
to become the Sons of God; that is, to become immortal, John 1.13. For
othrewise so few Testimonies, whereof the first, as every one sees, is
altogether figurative, ought at no hand to be opposed to so many and so evident
Testimonies and Reasons drawn from thence, wherewith it is evinced, that this
action is properly to be attributed, not to Christ, but to the Father. Indeed
more might be said of these two places, which are alleged to the contrary, but
it is not now our intention and work to confute the Arguments of the
Adversaries, but with Arguments to assert our own Opinion. Wherefore let it now
suffice, to have touched these places.

We Meddle not here with the exception of two Natures in Christ, for the
intelligent Reader, if he shall consider both our Argument, or Arguments
rather, and also what we have spoken of that distinction in the former
chapters, will easily understand that it cannot here have place.

CHAP. XXX.
The thirtieth Argument, That Christ is called the Image of the invisible God.

THe last Argument of this kind shall be this, that Christ is called the Image
of the invisible God, Col. 1.15. which is in some part also said, 2 Cor. 4.4.
where Christ is in like manner said to be the Image of God; and Heb. 1.3. where
he is said to be the Figure of the Substance, or Charecter of the Person of
God. Chap. 1. of this Section.
Now we will not here use that Reason which we have already elsewhere, namely,
that Christ is by this means openly distinguished from God, that is, the most
high God: but another Reason, and that twofold, the former whereof is common to
all the alleged places; the latter more proper to the place, Col. 1. For,
first, no Image is of the same Essence in number with that whereof it is the
Image, otherwise it would be the Image of it self. Wherefore since Christ is the
Image of God, he cannot be the same Substance in number with God, and
consequently not be God, namely, the most high God. There is the same force,
when he is said to be the Figure of the Substance of God, or Charecter of his
Person. Again, If Christ be the Image of the invisible God, he himself must not
be invisible, and consequently not the most high God. For he is invisible, 1 Timothy 1.17. Heb. 11.27.
As whom none of men has ever seen, or can see, John 1.18. 1 Timothy 6.16. For it
is sufficiently apparent, that Christ is therefore called, the Image of the
invisible God, because whereas we cannot know God by himself, as being
invisible, Christ was given to us, in whom as in an Image exposed in a manner
to the sight, That Christ is the Image of God.
we may contemplate and know God, as other learned men also have observed, and
left in writing. But if Christ were no less invisible than that God, whose
Image he is said to be, he could not be his Image, but we should rather need
another Image, by which we should come to the knowledge of him.

The Defense of the Argument.
HEre, for as much as the greatest part contend, that Christ was the Image of
God from all Eternity, not according to the humane Nature, but the divine:
therefore that they may solve our first Argument, they are wont to fly not to
the distinction of Natures in Christ, but to the distinction of diverse Persons
in one Deity. For they contend, that the second Person of the Divinity, is the
Image of the first; that is, the Son the Image of the Father, because the Son
in respect of Essence, is most like to the Father, as being begotten out of his
Essence. But they deny that it does thence follow, that the Son will be the
Image of himself, because though he be of the same Essence with the Father, yet
he differs from him in Person. As to the latter Reason, they will perhaps
say, that the same Son, although according to the divine Nature he be God,
equally invisible with the Father, yet having assumed a humane Nature, he
became visible, and was seen by men. But these answers do not at all take away
the difficulty. For as to the former, first of all, a Person is in vain
distinguished from his own Essence; in as much as every own is the same with
his own Essence. Wherefore if the Person of the Son be the Image of the Person
of the Father, the Essence also of the Son will be the Image of the Fathers
Essence; and consequently either both must have an Essence different in number,
or the same Person or Essence, will be the Image of it self. Add hereunto, that
they themselves, as we have already hinted, do contend, that the Son in respect
of Essence, is most like unto the Father, and consequently his Image; wherefore
the Son must in respect of Essence, be distinct in number from the Father. For
an Image, as it is an Image, does differ in number from that whose Image it is,
and one like from another For these are relatives, and consequently opposites,
but opposites, as such, must at least differ in number; nor can you say, that
one is sometimes said to be like himself. For in such a kind of speech, respect
is had to a different time, in reference to which, the same is compared with it
self: but we here speak of like things, having no regard to a different time,
but to the same. To omit that the Adversaries themselves, hold that the Son
ought really to differ from the Father, that he may be the Image of the Father,
but this would make nothing to the purpose, did they not really differ as the
one is the Image of the other, if therefore the Son in respect of Essence, be
the Image of the Father, the one must differ from the other in respect of
Essence.

As to the latter exception, which also strikes at our latter Reason, it will
effect nothing, unless you say, that Christ is the Image of God according to
the humane Nature, wherein he is or was visible, which the greatest part do not
admit, for they, as we have said, hold Christ to be the Image of God, as he was
begotten out of the Substance of the Father, and consequently has the same
Substance with him, which agrees not to him according to the humane Nature;
wherefore they must first renounce this Opinion, before they make use of that
Answer; for neither can they say, that there is no need, that Christ as he is
an Image, should be visible, it being sufficient that he is or was by any means
visible. For if it were thus, the word invisible added to the name of God,
whose Image Christ is, would be altogether idle. For turn your understanding
which way you please, you shall find no other reason, why the Apostle did in
that manner here describe God, than to show that it was therefore needful, that
if we would know, and as it were view God, some Image of him, namely, Christ,
should be held forth unto us, and exposed to the sight of men, in as much as
God is invisible, and cannot be known by himself of any one of us, especially
in a full and perfect manner: which John also signifies, saying, No man has
seen God at any time. The only begotten Son, Joh. 1.18.
who is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. But if Christ, as he
is the Image of God, were no less invisible than God himself, we could no more
know God by him, than God by himself; wherefore Christ could not be the Image
of God. For it is apparent both from this description of God, and also from
that which is said in the other place quoted by us, 2 Cor. 4.4. that Christ was
called the Image of God in respect of us; namely, because he did represent in
himself, and in a manner expose to our view the Will, Goodness, Power, Mat.
11.27. John 14 7, 9. and 18.19.
and Wisdom of God. Whence Christ himself says, None knows the Father, but
the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him: and elsewhere, If ye had known
me, ye would have known my Father also, and from henceforth ye know him: and a
little after, He that sees me, sees the Father. But furthermore, although
Christ was visible according to the humane Nature, yet ought he not to be
simply distinguished from the invisible God, and herein to be opposed to him,
if he in the mean time were that most high and invisible God. For if the name
of God, namely, the most high God, may and ought to be absolutely attributed
unto Christ, as they hold; those things also may and ought to be absolutely
attributed to him; which are absolutely spoken of God, and which agree to him
in respect of his Essence. But if Christ may and ought for the divine Nature,
to be absolutely called invisible, he ought not absolutely to be distinguished
from the invisible God.

Some other will perhaps say, that Christ is the Image of God according to the
humane Nature; which seems not disagreeable to their Opinion, who together
with us confess, that Christ is called the Image of God in respect of us,
namely, because he did in himself, as it were present to our view, the
invisible God. But in the first place, they are not constant enough to
themselves, whilst they refer that which is the same with the Image of God, or
at least is of the same efficacy in our Argument, to the divine Nature; namely,
that Christ is called the Character of the Substance of God; for a Character
has not the same Substance with the thing whose Character it is. Again, By
this means Christ would have been the Image no less of his own divine Person or
Nature, than of the Fathers; neither would there have been any cause why he
should be called the Image of another, rather than of himself. But we find not
this, but that rather expressed in the Scripture. For when Christ is called the
Image of God, all the Adversaries, as far as I know, hold that the Father is
understood; and the distinction of that God from Christ, and finally, the
collation of this kind of speaking, with other-like sayings of the Scripture,
do sufficiently show the same.

I omit that Christ did in himself, as it were present to our view, the
invisible God, in that he expressed his Will by Doctrine, his Power by
admirable Works, and clearly demonstrated his Faith and Truth by both. But
these things agree only to a Person, as such, so that those Adversaries are
forced to hold, either that his divine Person, as such, is the Image of the
Father, or that the humane Nature, if they will attribute this to it only, is a
Person. The first of which, overthrows their Answer, the latter their
Opinion. And let these things suffice to have been spoken concerning those
Arguments which so show Christ not to be the most high God, as that withal they
give a Prerogative to the Father above him.

CHAP. XXXI.
The one and thirtieth Argument, is chiefly drawn from those causes for which
Christ is in the Scriptures called, The Son of God.

WE must now pass to those Arguments which absolutely show that Christ is not
the most high God, without having any regard to this, that some Prerogative is
withal given to the Father above him. Now though we might in this place allege
all the attributes of the Humanity of Jesus Christ, as that he was conceived
and born of the Virgin Mary, that he did eat, drink, grow, that he was weary
sometimes, and did weep, and was disturbed, and finally, suffered most bitter
torments, and dyed, and the like; yea, this very thing that he is and was a
Man, in as much as none of those things can be said of the most high God, as
they are, and that absolutely of Christ, yet will we here only allege those
things which contain some other Argument of our Opinion, besides that which is
common to all those Attributes. Now the first shall be this, That if Jesus were
the most high God, he would no otherwise be so, then because he is the Son of
God. For neither can any greater thing be spoken of Jesus Christ, from The
Causes why Christ is called the Son of God.
then that he is the Son of God: and the Adversaries themselves hold, that he
received the divine Essence by generation from the Father, which makes him the
Son of God. But from whence any one has the divine Essence, he has also from
thence, that he is God. But Jesus is not therefore the most high God, because
he is the Son of God, wherefore neither is he simply the most high God.

Our Assumption shall not here be proved by this Reason, that Jesus whilst he
is called the Son of God, is thereby distinguished from God, namely, the
supreme and only God: Nor also that he is by this very name, made inferior to
the Father, as wholly depending from the Father, where as the Father depends
from none other, for these reasons we have before used. But we will prove the
same by another Argument, and that a twofold one, Chap. 1, 2 of this Section.
although other things also will be brought in by the by, whilst we shall be
employed in proving the former; which things would also be fit to demonstrate
the very Question, or principal Position it self.

The first is this, That whereas several causes are expressed in the holy
Scriptures, for which Jesus is the Son of God, yet none of them is such, as
constituteth him the most high God, in that they all agree to the Man Christ
Jesus, or (that we may speak with the Adversaries) agree to Christ, according
to the humane Nature, and began at a certain time. Yea, they are so far from
either constituting, or demonstrating Christ to be the most high God, as that
they rather show him not to be so; and consequently each of them may justly be
accounted as so many Arguments to assert our Opinion. But it is impossible,
that if Jesus be the Son of God in such a manner as constituteth him the most
high God, this thing should be no where set down in Scripture; partly because
we see other reasons expressed, which would be of far less moment than it; partly
because that Reason (as indeed the Adversaries themselves contend) would be
altogether necessary to be known and believed unto salvation, and so much the
more clearly to be explained by the sacred Writers; and so much the more
diligently and frequently to be inculcated, by how much it was more removed
from our senses and capacity, and consequently more difficult to be known and
believed. For since the sacred Scriptures Jo. 20.31. 1 Jo. 4, 15. chap. 5.5.
Mat. 16.16. Jo. 6.69. Act. 8.37. Chapter 9.20.
does place the sum of our faith and confession concerning Christ herein, that
we believe and profess Jesus to be the Son of God, namely, in the most perfect
manner so called, it is necessary also that we be sure of the true and genuine
Reason for which he is called such a Son of God. For neither is it enough to
know and pronounce the words, but it is necessary to know and comprehend in the
mind the thing it self, as far as it falls under our capacity; otherwise you
shall neither truly believe the thing, nor heartily profess it.

Now the thing that is signified by those words, consists in the genuine
reason, for which Jesus is called the Son of God by way of excellency, which
according to the opinion of the adversary, is because he was from eternity
begotten out of the Essence of the Father. Neither indeed did this opinion
otherwise agree either with it self or with the holy Scriptures, would any
other reason be more true or genuine. If therefore we find not this reason
expressed, in the holy Scripture, but others far different from it, we must
hold that it is not t e true one. The latter Argument wherewith our assumption
is confirmed, shall afterward be seen in this Chapter.

A fuller Confirmation and Defense of this Argument.
NOw that it may appear that in the Scripture no such reason for which Christ
is the son of God is expressed, as makes him the most high God, but only such
as agree to the humane nature of Christ (or to speak more rightly) to the man
Jesus Christ; we will rehearse these places wherein the causes are declared for
which Jesus has been called the Son of God,, some of which Testimonies, at
least, are so ordere^, that if Jesus had then already been the Son of God, for
some better reason, and namely, because he had from all eternity been generated
out of the Es^ence of the Father, it ought not to have been omitted. Now the
causes for which Jesus is called the Son of God, have a certain order amongst
themselves, and the latter still adds something to the former, The first
Cause why Christ is called the the Son of God. Luke 1.35. John Maldonatus.
and makes Jesus Christ the Son of God in a mo^e perfect manner than before.

The first cause is declared by the Angel in Luke, where amongst other things
Gabriel thus speaks unto Mary. The holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the
power of the most high shall overshadow thee; therefore also that holy thing
that shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. Where we cannot but
set down those things which the most learned Popish Interpreter does amongst
other t ings note upon this place. for he rightly both saw and explained the
sense of the words. And first of all as concerning the last words of this
place, he notes that to call does here signify to be, according to the idiom
of the Hebrews, who take the consequent or effect for the antecedent cause, of
which he had also spoken in the 32d. verse. for there the Angel likewise says
of the Virgins Son that was to be born, And he shall be called, that is, shall
^e, the Son of the Most High. This In^erpreter has aleaged examples of that
Hebruisme out of Isa. 1.26. and the 4.3. to which is also added that place Genesis
21.12. compared with Romans 9.7. Those likewise might be added, Matthew. 5.9, 19.
and 21.13. Isa. 56.7. and Luke 1.76. Romans 9.26. Hos. 1.10. Wherefore the same
Interpreter does afterward justly reprove Calvin, who to escape the Argument
of Servetus, d^awn from those words of the Angel, says that to be called, does
here signify, to be declared the Son of God. For how, says he, can the reason
of the Angel agree with this interpretation. Therefore the holy thing which
shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God. (We ought not to abuse
the holy Scripture that we may refute Heretics.) Again, explaining that reason
for which the Angel said that Christ should be called, that is, should be the
Son of God; he says, all others whom I have seen interpret this, as if the
Angel spoke of Christ as God, or at least as man assumed into one person with
God in that both ways Christ is the true and natural Son of God: How be it a
little after he writes after this manner. Though I for my part suppose that
the words carry another sense, and are not to be understood of Christ as God,
nor as a man united to a divine person, but only of his conception and humane
generation, as if the Angel should say, He shall be called, that is be the Son
of God, because he shall be begotten not by a man but by God through the power
of the holy Spirit. For neither did the Angel speak concerning the nature of
Christ, but of the manner of his generation. And the cause which he renders,
why he should be the Son of God, in that the holy Spirit should come upon the
Virgin, and the power of the most high overshadow her, was not apt to prove
that Christ should be the Son of God, as he was God, or man assumed into the
same person with God; because a mere man might be conceived by the supervening
of the holy Spirit, and overshadowing power of the most high, who would be the
Son of God neither of those ways; in as much as he was neither God, nor joined
to a divine Person. But to prove that what was to be born of the Virgin, should
be the Son of God in such a sense as I have declared, the reason of the Angel
was very apt, in as much as the Child was to be conceived not of a man but of
God alone. Wherefore, although Christ had not been God, yet being born in such
a manner as he was, he had deservedly been called the Son of God, not only as
other holy men, of whom it is said, I said ye are Gods, and ye are all Sons of
the most high: but in a singular and proper manner, because he had no other
Father than God, being begotten by no other than him. What I pray you could be
spoken more aptly and more suitably to the place? I was therefore willing to
explain the whole matter in his words rather than in mine own, that it might
with all appear by the testimony of a Papist, how evident this opinion is which
we defend, concerning the reason expressed in these words of the Angel, for which
Jesus is called the Son of God. For what else but the evidence of the thing it
self could move a Papist, especially of that order to which he was adicted,
that contrary to the consent of all other Interpreters which he had seen, he
should follow the opinion which we hold? especially since he knew that they
whom he judged Heretics, did urge this place for their opinion concerning
Christ. Although we see that some, even of them who are called ^ospellers,
assent both to him and us in this behalf. This then is the first cause, See
Gualter on this place Je. Zanc. lib. 2. de tribus Elohim.
for which Jesus was the Son of God, in that he was conceived and born, not of
a man but of God, by the intervening of his power and efficacy, and so had no
other Father besides God. But it is incredible, if there had been a far letter
cause for which this Child, who was to be born of Mary, should from his first
birth have been the Son of God, that the Angel would not have hinted it, and so
have conceived his wo^ds, that Mary might understand that there was yet a
better cause of this thing. But that would have been a far better cause
thereof, which most I^terpreters are wont to bring, namely, that the man which
was to be born of the Virgin, or rather tha^ humane nature, was to be assumed
into the unity of the Person of the Son of God, begotten from all Eternity out
of the Essence of the Father. Why then is there not the l^ast hint of this
matter in the words of the Angel? why did he not so sp^ak, that it might appear
that the same person had already been the Son of God from all Eternity; and
should now in a new manner be the Son of God? For neither can you say with some
Interpreters, that the Angel did in some sort intimate it by the particle also,
whilst he does not simply say; Therefore the holy thing that shall be born of
thee, but, therefore also the holy thing that shall be born of thee, shall be
called the Son of God. For that the sense is, that not only the person, that
did before ex^st, is ^he Son of God, but also the holy issue of the Virgin
should for this admirable conception be called the Son of God. For this opinion
does make two Sons of God, and consequently two persons in one Christ, the one
existing before the Virgin, the other born of her. Wherefore unless you will
^ender the Greek words, and therefore, so that this expression may serve only
to connect the sentence, you must observe what a notable Interpreter amongst
the Gospellers have noted on this place. The conjunction also, John Piscator.
says he, is here the mark of Parity, and notes an equal truth of the
consequent with the anticedent of the Enthymem. As if it should be said, how
true it is that thou s^alt conceive by the singular open ation of the holy
Spirit, and therefore being a Virgin: so tr^e also is it that the Son which
thou shall so conceive and bring forth shall be the Son of God. The same Author
a little after denies that the^e is any such opposition or comparison here
made between the humane and divi^e nature of Christ, as these Interpreters
f^ame, and force out of the particle also, which is in the words of the ^ngel.

The 2d. cause why Christ is called the Son of God.
But it is now time that we proceed to other Reasons, for which Christ is called
the Son of God.

The second Cause therefore of this thing, is expressed by Christ himself, John
10.34, 35, 36. For when the Jews had charged him with the crime of Blasphemy,
that being a Man, he made himself God, namely, because he had called God his
Father, and said that he was one with him, he gives them this Answer, Is it
not written in your Law, I said ye are Gods? If he called them Gods to whom the
Word of GOD came, and the Scripture cannot be broken: how say you of him whom
the Father has sanctified, and sent into the World: thou blasphemest: because
I said, I am the Son of God? Where it appears, that Christ brings this
Reason, why he did with far greater Right call himself the Son of God, than
those Judges heretofore were called Gods, because he was sanctified of the
Father, and sent into the World. Now does this Reason constitute Christ the
most high God? For does sending, that I may speak of this first, constitute the
most high God? Has it any conjunction with the Generation out of the Essence
of the Frther? And is the Sanctification, that proceeded from the Father,
incident to the divine Nature of Christ, and not rather to the humane? This
certainly is both confessed by many of the Adversaries, and averred by the thing
it self. For that which is sanctified of God, acquireth foam sanctity, in
whatsoever thing the same does consist. But this is not incident to the divine
Nature existing from all Eternity, although it be to the humane. For neither
can any one say, that we also sanctify God and his Name, to whom
notwithstanding we procure no Sanctity. For as much as it is manifest, that God
is sanctified of us in a differnte manner, then we are sanctified of God. God
is sanctified of us, whilst we acknowledge reverence, and proclaim his Sanctity
and Majesty; we of God, whilst through his bounty we obtain some Sanctity,
whereof we should otherwise be destitute. Now if the manner that God sanctified
Christ, were of the same kind with that wherein we sanctify God, and not
rather with that wherein God sanctifies us, though different in kind and
perfection, what would that Sanctification do to show that Christ is by the
greatest right called the Son of God? For does a Sanctification which
proceeds from us, constitute God to whom it tends, our son? and not rather
that which proceeds from God to us, constitute us his sons; indeed in a more
imperfect manner than Christ, because our sanctification is also more
imperfect: but yet truly. Now what that Sanctification of Christ is, may easily
be gathered from the sending that is added thereunto. For that sending herein
consists, that the office of embassage unto men, is committed by God to
Christ. But to sanctify, signifies in the Scriptures, to segregate one from
others, and choose him to a singular office, or, as it were, to prepare him for
a more divine use. Wherefore it is either so taken in this plrce, as in
Jeremiah, Jer. 1.5.
to whom God sometime spoke in this manner, Before I formed thee in the womb, I
knew thee, and before thou came cut of the belly, I sanctified thee, and gave
thee a Prophet to the Nations. See John Maldonet. on Jerem. and John, and Wolf
Muscul on John
As learned men have noted both there, and in the quoted place of Jahn: for it
is the same as to fill with the most singular Gifts, such as is divine Power
and Wisdom, to discharge a most honorable Office on the Earth, and having by
this means segregated one from other men, to prepare him in an eminent way to
such an office, Wherefore the sending into the world, contains in it self
that very Office: but the Sanctification is a designation, or preparation
thereunto. But of what moment are these things, to assert supreme Divinity unto
Christ, or to establish the Generation of Christ out of the Essence of the
Father from Eternity? Yea, they are so far from asserting supreme Divinity unto
Christ, that they rather demonstrate that Christ is not the most high God. As
concerning sending, we have formerly shown it. The same is also to be held
concerning Sanctification, which is a designation or preparation to that
Office. Chap. 15
For if the Office it self be not incident to the most high God, neither can
the designation or preparation to that Office be incident unto him, although
the same may also be shown from those things which we have said concerning the
places wherein it is affirmed, that somet^ing was given of God to Christ. For
he that is sanctified of God, has thereby something conferred upon him by God.
But none conferreth any thing on the most high God, who gives all things to
all. Besides, if Christ had been the most high God, if he had been begotten out
of the Essence of the Father from eternity, and for that cause the Son of God,
how could it be he should here conceal it. For if there were any place where
this were to be expressed, certainly this were the place. Christ had affirmed,
that he was one with the Father, which the Adversaries will have to be spoken
in respect of a divine Nature; for they say that it was therefore affirmed of
him, that God was his Father, because he was begotten out of his Essence; that
he was therefore one with him, because he had the same Essence in number with
him. Moreover, the Jews did upon that account, charge him with Blasphemy,
because that being a man, he made himself God. Where they take the name of God
in such a manner, as is not incident to a man: and our Adversaries contend,
that they mean it of the most high God; namely because they observed that
Christ did not obscurely affirm himself, to be God in such a manner. But if it
be thus, it would have been altogether necessary, that Christ should bring such
a Reason, wherefore he is the Son of God, as might show him to be begotten out
of the Essence of the Father, and to have the same Essence with him, for
otherwise how had he defended that saying of his, which the Jews charged with
Blasphemy? How had he shown, that he of right called himself the Son of God in
such a manner as the Adversaries would have it? The Jews, according to the
Opinion of our Adversaries, object to Christ; Thou art a Blasphemer, because
thou affirmest thy self to be the Son of God begotten out of his Essence,
because thou make thy self the most high God. Christ answers, I rightly
affirm this of my self, nor am I therein a Blasphemer, because the Father has
sanctified me, and sent me into the world. What is this to a generation out of
the Essence of God? What is this to the Supreme and Independent Godhead, which
Christ is believed to have challenged to himself? You will say, that Christ
sufficiently intimated, that he was begotten out of the Essence of the Father,
and consequently the most high God, because he said that he was sent of the
Father into the world. For that this shows, that he before he was born of the
Virgin, had been perpetually with God in Heaven, and afterward descended
thence into the Virgins Womb, and became Man, which is incident to none but the
most high God. But how frivolous these thing be, men would easily observe, if
they would a little set aside a predudicate Opinion. For, first, he might both
be sent, and come into the World, who never was in Heaven. The words of Christ
himself concerning the Apostles, are in the same John very evident, where he
also compares them with himself in this behalf, chap. 17.18. As thou (Father)
have sent me into the world, have I also sent them into the world. And John
says of false Prophets, Ephesians. 4.1. that many false Prophets are gone out into
the world. But neither had these nor those been either in Heaven, or in any
other place out of this World, whence they might afterward enter into this
World. But they were appointed the Ambassadors of Christ unto men, and
designed to preach the Gospel unto them: and these came of their own accord
unto men, and as if they had been sent of God unto them, presuming to
promulgate a new Doctrine amongst them. Wherefore to be sent into the World by
God or Christ, is to be constituted his Ambassador unto men, but he may be the
Ambassador of God unto men, who never was in Heaven. Again, though it were
altogether necessary, that he whom God sent into the world, should first have
been in Heaven, and have descended thence to the Earth, which thing we
otherwise willingly confess concerning Christ, yet what hinders that he, who is
in his Nature nothing but a man, should be assumed of God into Heaven, and
being there furnished with instructions, be afterward sent down unto the Earth
to men? and indeed it is altogether necessary to hold it so, if you think that
Christ could not be sent into the World; or at least was not otherwise sent,
then that he properly descended from Heaven to the Earth. For it is
sufficiently apparent from our words, that this sending did agree to Christ
only according to the humane Nature, which certainly was not generated in
Heaven, but on the Earth; and consequently if it was in Heaven, as we also
acknowledge, it must needs have ascended thither. And indeed Christ himself
does intimate as much, whilst he says in this Writer, chap. 3.13. None has
ascended into Heaven, but he that descended from Heaven, the Son of Man (which
is or rather was in Heaven) Whence afterward, chap. 6.63. he says, If
therefore ye shall see the Son of Man ascend where he was hefore. In both
places he spaketh of the Son of Man, and here he does not say, that he was at
that very time in the Heaven, but had been formerly, and should afterward
ascend thither. From whence it manifestly appears, that he speaks not of the
divine Nature, which is neither the Son of Man, nor could ever leave Heaven,
nor ever ascend thither.

But furthermore, cannot an Angel which has continually been in Heaven, be
sent thence to the Earth, and so to men themselves? Wherefore what Christ here
affirms of himself, contains no intimation of supreme Divinity. To omit
that although it contained, yet would it not presently follow, that he was the
Son of God, and not the holy Spirit, if the holy Spirit likewise be, as they
hold, the most high God. For he also is sent out of Heaven, and nothing
hinders, if the Son of God would assume a humane Nature, that he likewise
should assume it, yea, it was necessary that it should be so, if he assumed,
who is of the same Essence with him. Concerning which thing elsewhe^e.

We must now p^oceed to the other Causes for which Christ is called the Son of
God; but with the omission of them which are also common to Believers (if you
except the high perfection of them) although they yet lead a mortal life;
namely, that he was most like unto God in Holiness, and most intimate to him,
See Soc in against Wevick, chap. 5.
for the more than fathe^ly love toward him; of which things enough elsewhere
has been spoken by our men.

The third Cause therefore for which Christ is called the Son of God, is his
resur^ection from the dead, I say, a resurrection to immo^tal Life.

For he is therefore called by Paul, The firstborn from the dead, Col. 1.18.
and also by John, Rev. 1.5. But whose firstborn is he but Gods? Although the
word Resurrection may so far be extended, as to contain the fou^th and chief
cause for which Christ is called the Son of God, namely, the exaltation or
advancement of Christ to the Empire, and sovereign Priesthood, as we will
afterward more plainly ^^w. Now there is a very notable place which shows
that Christ is the Son of God by reason of his Resurrection more largely taken,
wherein the consequent exaltation is also comprehended, namely, Acts 13.32, 33.
where Paul speaks this. And we declare unto you the promise which was made
unto our Fathers, The third Cause why Christ is called the Son God. The 4th
Cause.
that God has fulfilled it unto us their children, having raised Jesus, as it
is also written in the 2d. Psalm. Thou art my Son, I this day begot thee. A like
passage to which is extant, Romans 1.4. where when the ^postle had called Christ
the Son of God, that he might more fully declare it, he add, Who was made of
the seed of David according to the flesh, who was determined the Son of God in
power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead.
In the first place the cause why Jesus is the Son of God, is alleged to be
this, namely, that he was ^aisd from the dead. Now that this reason has
nothing common with the generation out of the Essence of God, nothing common
with the supreme deity, which agrees to Christ, is appa^e^t enough from the th
ng it self, sin^e the Resurrection is a thing of a certain time, not done from
eternity, and agrees to Christ only according to the humane nature, as the
Adversaries speak; and finally is not ascribed unto Christ as the true author,
but to God the Father; and it is so far from arguing Christ to be the most high
God, as that it rather demonstrateth him not to be so, Chap. 29.
as we have before shown in its own place. As for the latter place although
these words, By the resurrection of the dead, may be understood merely of the
time wherein Christ was made the Son of God. Nevertheless they s^ew manifestly
enough, that Christ is there said to be made the Son of God for such a cause as
had no place in him, especially so perfectly before the resurrection; which
agrees not to that eternal generation of the Son out of the Essence of the
Father, nor to any cause for which Christ may be called the most high God.

Now tha the ^atter may the more clearly appear, let us see what the adver
aries answer to these places. It is therefore wont to be answered unto both
places, that the Apostle has no other meaning than that it was declared by the
resurrection of Christ, that he was the nat^ral Son of God, tha^ is begotten
out of the very Essence of God, and that this is the meaning of the word
determined, which is in the latter place. Some further add, that In the former
place.
the word rise does not signify the Resurrection o^ Christ from the dead, but
his exhibition in the flesh; because the Apostle does in the following verse,
namely, 34. begin to confirm his Resurre tion. Others acknowledge that the
Resurrection of Christ from the de^d is signified by that word; ^ut they say
that in Greek this participle is an Aorist, which has the signification of the
prete^perfect tense, and is all one as if the Apostle had said, afte^ he had
raised up Jesus. So that the Apostle does not affirm, that the expression of
the Psalm wherein it is spoken of Christ's generation from God, was fulfilled in
his very resurrection, but after it, namely, when he was exalted, and made a
King by God. But that answer which is alleged concerning the declaration of
this, namely, that Christ is the Son of God, is of no moment. For as to the
first place, from whence a judgment may and ought to be made of the latter,
the word begotten cannot be understood of the declaration of a generation out
of the Essence of God already made from eternity. For to omit that by this
means that nice observation falls to the ground, which very many of the
adversaries fasten upon those word, to day, namely, that the e^ernity of God is
thereby signified, wherein there is nothing past or future, but present only,
in as much as it cannot be said, that God did from all eternity declare, that
Christ was begotten out of his Essencce; to omit, I say, this nicety, there are
other things which overthrow that interpretation. For in the first place, what
is this to the fulfilling of he Promise made to the Fathers, which God has
actually performed to their Children? They with whom we dispute confess, and
the thing it self shows, that the promise of giving the Messiah is here
understood. But how is it pertinent hereunto, that God has declared that
Christ is such a Son, as was eternally begotten out of his Essence, for God
could declare it many other ways, were the thing otherwise true, than by
giving or making of Jesus a King, as they, with whom we dispute affirm he has
declared, but by this way he could in no wise declare the same, for that God
has made Jesus King, is so far from arguing that he was eternally begotten out
of the Essence of God, and consequently the most high God, that the clean
contrary is rather ^vinced from it, as we have before shown, Chap 18. For if
you say that ^e made himself King, in the first place, Paul does not here urge
that, in as much as he manifestly attributes not to Christ himself but to the
Father, both his Resurrection, and consequently (as they will have it) the
declaration of his generation out of the Essence of God. But the other, not
this, should have been urged by the Apostle, would he have intimated that
Christ was declared to be the Son of God, begotten out of his Essence, by
raising up himself from the dead. Again, although Christ had raised up himself,
yet from the raising it self, whether you understand it of Christ's nativity, or
of his resurrection from the dead, it would not have appeared, whereas it ought
to have appeared, if the raising of Christ ought to declare that Jesus was
begotten out of the Essence of God, because he raised himself. Now that it did
not appear is evident enough, for into whose mind would it come, either that he
who is born is the author of his own nativity, or that he who rises from the
dead is the author of his own resurrection? inasmuch as he who is born had no
being before, and he that rises had by death lost his being, and is, as to the
strength whereby he might rise, like unto him who is to be born.

It would be therefore necessary, that it should some otherway have been
evident, that there was another Nature in him, which did both really exist
before his Nativity, and also actually lived during his death, and consequently
was the true cause either of his Nativity, or of his Resurrection: but this was
the very thing which the Adversaries hold to have been declared by the raising
him up, and to have been apparent from it. Finally, although it had been
apparent, that Christ had raised up himself, yet how had it thence appeared,
that he was the natural Son of God, eternally begotten out of his Essence? For
not to repeat that which we formerly showed, namely, that from the Opinion of
the Adversaries, it follows, that the Soul of Christ could by divine Power
raise its own Body; to omit likewise, that some other Spirit, which had before
been united to his Body, might by divine Power have performed this: if the most
high God can raise up himself, what hinders but that it was either the Father
himself or the holy Spirit, whom they make the third Person of the Deity. Be it
therefore that it appeared from the raising of Christ, that he himself was the
Author thereof; be it that it appeared that he was the most high God, what
argues that he was eternally begotten out of the Essence of God? what
connection is there of the one with the other?

Furthermore, what man is there, who having looked into the words of the
Psalm, does not observe that this is the meaning of them, Thou art my Son,
because I have this day begotten thee? What man also is there who does not
withal observe, that it is far more suitable to this sense, that the word
begotten, should rather be taken to denote, the act of generating, than the
declaration of a generation? What man is there, who, if he here such words as
these, would understand them thus, Thou art my Son, because I have this day
declared that I have begotten thee; and not rather thus, Thou art my Son,
because I have this day really begoten thee? But what need many words? for if
the resurrection of Christ, and the consequent exaltation or advancement to a
Kingdom, especially a Priestly one, is a certain generation from God, and one
may therefore be justly called the Son of God, although no other more sublime
generation did precede, why should any one understand that generation, whereof
mention is made in the words of the Psalm, rather of the declaration of an
antecedent generation, than of the very act of generating? Since that which is
expressed by the word begotten, was accomplished by the resurrection and
exaltation of Christ. But we have already shown, that the Resurrection of
Christ, was a certain Generation from God; and we will a little after more
largely show the same.

Concerning the advancement to a Kingdom, none can make a question, who
considers that Kings, Princes and Judges, are by God himself called both gods,
and also the sons of God, or of the Most High, Psalm. 82.6. which place Christ
cites, John 10.34. to show that he did not blaspheme in ^aying, that he was
the Son of God. But in that place, regard is had to nothing but the authority
and dominion, to which they were advanced by God. For to all them in general,
the name of gods, and sons of God is attributed as they are distingushed from
men of an inferior rank. And see, I pray you, how excellently these things
agree both to the other words of the second Psalm, and also to the scope of the
Apostle, fetching a Testimony from thence. For it is apparent from both, that
in these words, Thou art my Son, I have this day begotten thee, it is spoken of
making Christ a King. For after God had said, I have set my King on Zion, my
holy Mount, David subjoyneth, I will declare the Decree; what Decree, but such
a one as was made concerning that thing, whereof he had begun to speak; namely,
that God had set him King on Zion, his holy Mountain? But what are the words of
the Decree? The Lord says he said unto me, Thou art my Son, I this day begat
thee. Why then do we seek starting holes? why go we about the bush? why do not
we directly and simply understand these things concerning the Generation of
Christ, which consists in advancing him to a Kingdom by that Resurrection,
rather then concerning the declaration of a Generation out of the Essence of
God from al eternity, whereof there is here neither hint, nor footstep? By this
means we may elegantly apply these words likewise to David, a Type of Christ,
although in a far lower sense; to whom, that they are to be applied, both the
very words of the Psalm make a show, and others also before us have observed.
For when God had sometimes rescued David out of sundry calamities, and also out
of the very jaws of death, and made him Ki^^ over his People, he did in a
manner beget him, and make him his Son, and that such a Son, as would in
respect of other earthly Kings, become the firstborn in power and dignity.
Whence God speaks thus of him, Psalm. 89.28. I will make him, my Firstborn,
higher than the Kings of the Earth. But what agreed to David in that sense,
does in a far nobler way agree to Christ, who being raised from the dead, was
set at the right hand of God in heavenly places, far above all Principallities,
and Powers, and Force, and Dominion, and every name that is named, not only in
this world, but also in the world to come; and all things were put in
subjection under his feet, and he was made Head over all things to the Church,
which is his Body, the fullness of him that fills all in all. May he not
justly be said to have been begotten by God, to have become his Son? for he was
not only begotten anew to an immortal life by the resurrection, but also did by
the bounty of God, become very like to him in Power and Empire, for which God
himself is called God. But by reason of similitude with God, both Angels and
Men are called Sons of God; which the greater it is, the more justly does this
name agree unto them: but no compleater similitude can be imagined than that
which we even now showed to agree to Christ, whereby he does so far surpass
both all Angels and Men, that they in respect of Christ, are rather to be
called Servants than Sons.

From hence it is already apparent, what is also to be thought of that other
place, Romans 1.4. Although the place does sufficiently guard it self without
foreign help against the vulgar interpretation. For nei-doth the scope of the
Apostle, nor the words, nor the thing it self, suffer us to understand, that
Christ by the resurrection from the dead, was declared the Son of God begotten
out of his Essence. For the scope of the Apostle is to explain not how Jesus
Christ was declared the Son of God, but how he is the Son of God; for having
described Christ by the name of the Son of God, he accordingly declares how
this is to be understood. And lest any one should perhaps think, that it will
thence follow, that he is not the Son of David, which notwithstanding the
Scripture averreth, he shows how hoth may stand together. First, he teaches
how he is the Son of David, then how he is the Son of God; wherefore he says,
Who was made of the Seed of David according to the flesh, who was determined or
constituted the Son of God in Power according to the Spirit of Sanctification,
by the Resurrection from the dead. Does not the very opposition show, that, as
it is there taught how Christ is indeed the Son of David, so it is here
signified how he is indeed the Son of God? for neither would a declaration be
rightly opposed to the word made, nor those diverse respects be one opposed to
the other, namely, according to the flesh, and according to the Spirit of
Holiness; that is, according to the Spirit wherewith Christ was sanctified. For
that expression according to the flesh, would signify the reason of the
subject; whereas the other, according to the Spirit of Holiness, would denote
only the middle efficient Cause. Again, the word here rendered determined, does
no where in the Scripture, yea, no where at all, signify to be declared,
unless you take the word declared, as it is then taken when one is said to be
declared King or Consul, whilst he is constituted, and this Office is appointed
to him. For the Greek word properly signifies to define, to determine, but in
the Scripture it signifies nothing but to constitute, to decree or design,
which thing does excellently agree to Christ, in that he was made King by the
intervening of the resurrection. Luke 22.22. Acts 10.42 and 11.29. and 17.31.
But if you will with the ancient interpreter, render it to predestinate,
although neither the simple word it self requires that version, nor the thing
suffer it; nevertheless, it will be sufficiently evident, that Christ was not
really the Son of God from eternity. For neither is that predestined which is
in being, but which is not yet in being, and here it is spoken of no other
thing, than of the Sonship of Christ in relation to God. Yea, it will follow,
that he at length in the resurrection, was fully ordained to be the Son of God.
Finally, in the former place, Acts 13. we have shown that the resurrection of
Christ, had in no wise declared, that Christ was begotten of the Essence of
God, and so was the Son of God, but rather the contrary.

Now that which concerns their Opinion, who contend that the Greek word in Acts
13. is not to be referred unto the resurrection of Christ from the dead: but
unto his birth and first exhibition, which although we can both grant and urge
without prejudice to our principal Argument, yet we will show that this
interpretation cannot subsist. First, because in that place, as we have already
observed, such an act of God is spoken of, as whereby he fulfilled his promise
of setting up a King over the Jews; which we have also shown out of the words
of the second Psalm. But Christ was not then made Lord and Christ, or the
heavenly King of Gods People when he was born: but when he was raised and set
at the right hand of God. Furthermore, both the preceding and following words
of the Apostle, which they urge against us, show that it is spoken of the
resurrection from the dead. For when he had said, that God had raised him
(Christ) on the third day, he adds, being seen many days of those that
accompanied him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses unto the
people until now. But whereof were they witnesses, if not of that which he had
just now mentioned, and told them had been in some measure presented to their
view, namely, the resurrection of Christ, and his exaltation, which followed
thereupon? for of this thing they were properly witnesses. See above, chap.
1.22. and 2.32. and 3.15. and 4.33. and 5.32. compared with the foregoing, and
chap. 10.40, 41, 42. Therefore seeing the Apostle subjoyns, And we declare this
unto you which was promised to our Fathers, because (or that) God has
fulfilled the same unto us their Children, having raised up Jesus; and it is
necessary that he himself should speak of the resurrection of Christ from the
dead. For he affirms that he had now declared the same thing to the Jews at
Antioch, that the other Apostles had testified to the People of Judea. If he
then told them that he was a witness to the people of the resurrection, and
following exaltation, he intimates that he now also speaks of the same thing.
But that which belongs to the following words by them urged against us, is not
at length proved in that place, that Christ was raised from the dead: but that
being supposed as already sufficiently proved, it only shows, that Christ was
so raised from the dead, as no more to return to corruption. For some one might
have scrupled, that though Christ were indeed raised from the dead, yet the
promise made unto the Fathers be unperformed, seeing Christ might have been so
raised, as afterward to have returned unto corruption; whereas the Messiah
promised of old unto the Fathers, and his Government, ought to endure unto the
end of the world; as the Writings of the Prophets teach; See 2 Samuel 7.13, 14.
and compare it with Heb. 1.5. and Psalm. 45.7. (compared with Heb. 1.8.) and
110.1, 4. and Dan. 7.14. as also John 12.34. The Apostle therefore removes this
doubt from his hearers, whilst he adds, But that he has raised him from the
dead, no more to return unto corruption, thus he said, I will give unto you the
sure Mercies of David; namely, the Promise that proceeded from Grace and Mercy,
and so onward. Whereby we understand that he had spoken of the resurrection in
the words immediately preceding, and sufficiently proved the same; now to
remove all manner of doubt, he is willing to speak of the same matter somewhat
larger, although that be also absurd, that Paul, having but newly said that
Christ was at first exhibited, and either born or sent into the world, should
presently add, that God had so raised him from the dead, as no more to return
to corruption. For what connection is there? Is it not evident, that those
latter words require that the Apostle should speak next of his Resurrection?

But that which concerns those, who say that the promise of Christ, and that
expression in the second Psalm, God had not fulfilled in raising of Christ, but
when he was risen; we will not much contend with them for we our selves freely
confess, if the raising of Christ be taken in a strict sense, barely for his
returning to life, without respect to his exaltation afterward, that divine
promise and expression of the Psalm, had not as yet been really performed. But
yet notwithstanding it is to be noted first, that the expression of raising, or
resurrection of Christ, does sometimes by a kind of Synecdoche joined with a
Metonymie, comprehend the whole Glory of Christ, to wit, Immortality and
Supreme Power that he obtained by the Resurrection. And in this sense only this
word seems to be taken, Acts. 2.32, 33. and 4.33. (compared with 5.32. and 10
40, etc.) Romans 4.25. and 10.9. Phil. 3.10. 1 Pet. 1.3. and 3.21. Furthermore,
it is also to be observed, that the Participle Aorists, being joined to Verbs
of the Pretertense, have oftentimes the same force as Participles of the
Presentense when they are joined to the same Verbs. Whereof you have examples
amongst others in Heb. 1.4. and 7.21. and 11.9* 2 Pet. 2.6, 15. besides that
which is every where found in the Evangelists, he answering, said. Wherefore it
may be rightly concluded, that the Apostles words are to be understood, as if
he had said, God has fulfilled the Promise made unto the Fathers, having
raised (as an ancient Interpreter has it) or in raising Jesus; chiefly because
unto Christ's generation of God, the very restoring of him to life, did also
conduce, seeing that thereby he was as it were begotten again: but the
Immortality which Christ obtained by the intervening of the Resurrection, was
far more available. After this manner indeed he became like unto God in his
Nature; whereupon our Resurrection also is called Regeneration: and Christ
affirms, that they who shall be counted worthy of that Age, and the
resurrection from the dead, are the Sons of God, seeing they are the Children
of the Resurrection, Luke 20.36 And Paul affirms, That we look for the
adoption of the Sons of God, even the redemption of our bodies, Romans 8.23. For
the fellowship or participation of the divine Nature, which Peter speaks of 2
Pet. 1, 4. does principally consist in Immortality. But hither tends most of
all the divine Empire and Power of Christ, for which he is the Son of God in
the perfectest manner. If therefore you will only interpret the Greek Particle,
Jesus being risen, or after that he had raised Jesus, we should understand,
that the Promise made unto the Fathers, was then really and perfectly fulfilled
touching the Messiah, or an extraordinary King that was to be given to the
Israelites, and moreover also, that expression of the Psalm, Thou art my Son,
to day have I begotten thee, when Jesus was raised from the dead by God, and
set at his right hand in the heavenly places, and so made Christ, or a King,
and Lord, by the Power and Grace of God. For hence, as we have already Chap.
28. of this Sect.
seen, does the Divine Author to the Hebrews, chap. 5.5. take those words of
the Psalm, touching the glorification of Christ, on the Priestly honor that
was conferred upon him, which does indeed contain his Royal Power, seeing that
his Kingdom is Priestly, and his Priesthood Royal. And hereupon they are
elsewhere also in holy Scripture, taken for the same thing, that Jesus is the
Son of God, and that Jesus is Christ, that is, a King anointed by God over his
people, or a Lord, even him by whom alone God would administer and govern his
Church, with all things belonging to her. For upon this account the principal
doctrine of the supreme dignity of Christ, and our faith and confession of him
are promiscuously Compare Mat. 16.16. Mark 8.29. Luke 9.20. Joh. 1.50. Act.
8.37.9, 20, 22. Romans 10.9 1 Cor. 12.3. Phil. 2.11. 1 John 4.15.5, 1. and 5.
also 2.22.4, 2.3. 2 John 4. compare those also Matthew. 27.41.42.43. and Luke
23.35. add 22.67, 69, 70. and see the same places,
placed in this, that Jesus is Christ or Lord, or that Jesus is the Son of God.
Whence it likewise comes to pass, that as often as those two, namely, to be
Christ, and to be the Son of God, are mentioned together of Jesus of Nazareth,
they are never joined by the copulative particle and, as things different
(although this particle has often times the force of explication only) but
they are without it everywhere joined by apposition, to show that different
things are not connected, but the same thing is diversely described. See Matthew.
16.16.26.63. John 6.69.11.27.20.31. And it is first of all to be noted, that
that famous Confession of Peter, touching Christ and his supreme dignity, being
likewise declared in the name of the other disciples, is described by Matthew,
Chap. 16.16. in these words, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. But by
Mark Chap. 8.29. only in these words, Thou art Christ: By Luke, Chap. 9 20. The
Christ of God: Which two latter Evangelists would have left out one, and a
principal part indeed of that confession, if it had been one thing to be the
Son of the living God, and another thing to be Christ. But if both be indeed
the same thing, they have in effect omitted nothing, but only expressed the
same thing more briefly. But now to be Christ, or to be anointed of God, does
in no wise constitue the most high God, nor argue him to be so, but the
contrary, seeing that the most high God can be anointed by none, nor be made a
King by any one.

And least happily any should say that there still remains another, and that a
more sublime cause, for which Jesus may be called the Son of God; that is
refuted partly by the Scriptures silence thereof, which could not have omitted
so great a matter, and partly from those testimonies of Scripture we have
hitherto alleged. For not here to repeat other things, if there had been any
other weightier cause for for which Jesus might be called the Son of God, it
could in no wise have been omitted in the place before examined by us, Romans
1.4. For there, as we have seen, the Apostle intended to show by what reason
Christ may be called the Son of God; but he does not in that place take the
name of the Son of God in any other signification than that which is most
excellent, whilst he describes him by the appellation of the Son of God, the
proper name of Jesus Christ ha^ing not as yet been expressed. Wherefore we
ought to think that he has expressed the most excellent, or if you will
rather, the true and genuine reason of that appellation. But does he express
that to be the cause of that thing, that Christ was begotten out of the Essence
of God from eternity, and so was the most high God? by no means: but this
rather, which contradicts that and suffe^s not that Christ should be the most
high God, when he says, that he was made the Son of God, and indeed according
to the Spirit of holiness, that is according to the Spirit wherewith he was
sanctified, and that by the resurrection from the dead. for that some
understand, by the Spirit of holiness, the divine Essence, it is done both
without an example and without reason, yea contrary to the word ordained or
appointed, and finally to the resurrection from the dead, from which, or by
which that might have come to pass. It is manifest therefore that there is no
other more sublime cause for which Jesus may be called the Son of God but this,
that being raised from the dead, he was made by God both Lord and Christ, or
the heavenly and eternal King of his people. Moreover the same thing is plainly
seen from the second Psalm, a place that we have explained already. For all, as
I know, confess, that when God speaks thus unto Christ, thou art my Son, the
name of the Son of God is taken in the most excellent manner. But we have seen
that this is the cause why he is in that place called the Son of God, because
he, being raised from the dead, was not only made immortal, but also the King
of Gods people, and besides, the Priest and Prince of our Salvation, as we have
shown partly from the very Psalm, and partly from Acts 13. and Heb. 5. Whereto
may be added Heb. 1.4, 5. For, when the divine Author had there said, that
Christ having purged away our sins by himself, was set at the right hand of God
on high, he adds: Being made so much better, or rather more honorable than the
Angels, as he had inherited a more different (that is) a better and more
excellent name than they. For to which of the Angels said he at any time: thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a
Father, and he shall be to me a Son. From which place it is understood, that
the name of the Son of God is not Essential unto Christ, whilst he is said to
have inherited it, nor that it is the name of the most high God, for as much as
by his exaltation he obtained a dignity and excellency, equal to that name and
title, which does not happen to the most high God. Besides the thing it self
shows that Christ is here spoken of according to his humane nature, as they
say, and also that this is such a name as agrees to Christ according to that
nature. Unto which also the following passage accords, I will be unto him a
Father, and he shall be to me a Son, wherein the same sense is expressed. For
these words do in like manner argue that it is not spoken of such a thing, as
is proper to the most high God, and was in being from all eternity. For both
the words do openly respect something future, and in the first and literal
sense, as they say, were spoken most clearly of Solomon the type of Christ in
that respect, as others also confess. Compare 2 Samuel 7.14. with the words both
foregoing and following, and 1 Chronicles. 22.10. and 26.6. compare also 1 King
5.5.8.19. It is therefore necessary, that there should be such a similitude and
analogy between the reason whereby Christ is the Son of God, and that whereby
Solomon was the Son of God, inasmuch as this is a certain representation of
that; but how was that, whereby Solomon was the Son of God, a certain
representation of this whereby Christ is the Son of God, if Jesus be therefore
the Son of God, because he was begotten of the Fathers Essence from eternity,
and so the same God with the Father? But if Jesus be the Son of God, by reason
of most high love, and the benefits flowing from the same, which God bestowed
upon him, amongst which the heavenly Kingdom and Empire, that was granted unto
him, holds the principal place. Solomon is rightly constituted the type of
Christ, and the wo^ds, uttered of him in the litteral sense, are rightly and
elegantly referred unto him, in a mystical and far stricter sense. It is
evident therefore, that neither in the words of the second Psalm, there cited,
is any thing contained of the eternal generation of Christ out of the Fathers
Essence. Finally, who doubts, when Peter had confessed that Jesus was the Son
of God, or when we are commanded to believe and confess the same thing of him,
if we would be accounted Christians, and be saved, that the name of the Son of
God, is taken in the most perfect signification, wherein it agrees unto Christ?
But we saw then that it does in very deed signify no otherwise, than that Jesus
is Christ, or a King appointed of God, and set over his people, to defend and
preserve them for ever. wherefore it is to be concluded that this is the
principal reason, for which he is called the Son of God, neither can any better
be found. But since that does not constitute Christ the most high God, but
rather shows that he is not the most high God; it follows, that there is no
other cause of his Sonship, as they say, which can make Christ the most high
God.

We have spoken somewhat largly of the first reason, which shows, that Christ
is not the most high God, therefore because he is the Son of God; partly
because, if we rightly observe, there are more arguments of our opinion
contained in it; and partly because this, that Christ is the Son of God, is
commonly believed to contain the strongest argument of the contrary opinion.
Wherefore it is to be shown in a few wo^ds, how exceedingly men commonly err,
and the true opinion be proved from the reason whereby Christ is the Son of God.

There follows now another proof of the principal Arguments Assumption, which
we will dispatch very briefly, namely, 2 Proof of the principal Arguments.
Assumption.
that it is very clear from the holy Scripture, that Christ died for us,
according to that nature, according to which he was the Son of God, and indeed
only begotten and proper. But if ^e were in that manner the Son of God as he
was begotten of the Essence of God, and so was the most high God, he could not
have died according to that nature, according to which he is the Son of God.
For the most high God, as such, cannot die, yea, cannot in any respect
whatsoever. But that which we have already spoken of Christ, is from thence
manifest, that the greatest love of God toward us, is in the holy Scriptures
shown from this, that he delivered his only begotten, or, his own Son unto
death for us. See John 3.16. compared with verse. 14. and Rom, 8.32. 1 John
4.10. compared with verse. 9. aforegoing: add also Romans 5.10. compared with
verse. 8. But if Christ died not according to that nature, according to which he
was the Son of God; but according to another nature, which was added to the
person of the only begotten Son of God, it can neither be truly said of the
proper and only begotten Son of God, that he died, or was given for us; neither
can the greatest love of God toward us be from thence collected. For what so
great wonder is it, for some accession of the only begotten Son of God, or some
nature, that was added unto him, to have been bestowed on us, if in the mean
while the only begotten Son of God, who was from eternity, had apparently
remained safe and enti^e, nor had he felt any the least pain thereby? Wherefore
then is this so vehemently urged, that God delive^ed up his Son for us, even
his proper and only begotten Son, or that he should die for us, that from thence
the greatness of the divine love might ^e understood? But if thou beleevest
that even he, the man Christ Jesus, that was begotten of the Virgin Mary by a
divine power, that was sanctified and sent by God into the world, t^ at was
appointed Ruler and Governor of all things even before the foundations of the
world were laid who was most like God in holiness, wisdom and power, and as
Paul * speaks, Phil. 2, 6.
was in the form of God, and equal to God, and whom God (as it appears) so
entirely loved, if, I say, thou beleevest that he was the only begotten and
proper Son of God, then thou may at length understand that the only begotten
Son of God, and not any thing, that was added to him, died for us; and from
thence may learn to judge both of the love of God, and of his only begotten
Son, who gave himself up to a death so cruel for our sakes. Thus much for the
first argument of this order,

CHAP. XXXII.
The two and thirtieth Argument, That there is no mention made in holy
Scripture of the Incarnation of the most high God.

WE are able to frame a second Argument, that if Christ were the most high
God, who, as that opinion requires, came down from heaven into the womb of a
Virgin, and was there incarnated, it were altogether necessary, that this
incarnation ought to have been most plainly expressed, not in one, but many
places by the Writers of the Gospel and other divine men and the Apostles. For
to repeat some of those things that have in this place by our men bin very
fully explaind elsewhere; we see, that those things are most clearly and
frequently declared in the Scriptures, which are somewhat hard to be believed,
yet most necessary to be believed; as the creation of Heaven and earth, Gods
providence over humane affairs, the knowledge of our thoughts, the resurrection
of the dead, and eternal life to be bestowed on men. Nor do we see only those
things, which are a^together necessary to be believed, most elegantly expressed
in Scripture: But also other things besides, which we said were in themselves
of lesser moment, as that Christ came of the seed of David. But now the
incarnation of the most high God would be altogether necessary to be believed,
if it had really been, although most hand to be believed; of which that is
urged by the adversaries, who therefore accuse us of most grievous heresy and
highest impiety, that we deny it: but this they freely confess, The Scripture
speaks nothing of the incarnation of God.
and are forced to confess. For who sees not, that this thing is exceedingly
contrary to the judgment of reason, and such at least, as mere reason will
judge impossible? Wherefore it were necessary, that that incarnation should
both have been most plainly described in the Scriptures, and also most
frequently repeated and inculcated by Godly men, that were very careful of our
salvation, so that indeed no one might doubt that it was asserted and urged by
them. But that that is not done is manifest partly from thence, that what
places soever the adversaries produce to prove that opinion, are such that
there is need of consequences, to the end they may deduce this opinion, that
the most high God was incarnated or made man; partly because that incarnation
is not expressed in those places, in which if it had been true, it must needs
have been expressed. For when Matthew Mat. 118 and chap 2
and Luke describe the Luke 1.26, etc. Chap. 2.7, etc.
history of Christ's nativity, and rehearse some things that are of a much
lesser moment than that incarnation of the most high God; as that he was born
of that Virgin that was espoused to an Husband, that he was conceived by the
holy Spirit, that he was born in Bethlehem, that I may not repeat other things
which Luke very diligently declares, and Matthew omitts: how can it be that
they should have omitted what had been the principal thing of all in the whole
mattter, and most necessary to be known and believed, to wit, that the most
high God came down into the womb of a Virgin, and there assumed flesh, and
afterward was born? Luke speaks of the manger wherein Christ was laid so soon
as he was born; and would he have been silent of the incarnation of the most
high God, the hypostatical union of the divine and humane nature? whereas our
adversaries cannot now speak touching Christ's nativity without mentioning that
thing, yea how could it come to pass that Mark should leave out all the history
of Christ's nativity, wherein the incarnation should have been contained, and
John, whom they judge to have written of the incarnation, should so briefly, so
obscurely touch and handle the same? How can it be that the Apostles when they
would bring men to Christ and exhorted them to believe on him, and to that end
declareed his majesty, should make no mention of a thing so necessary: Peter
preaches the Acts 2.14, etc.
first Sermon after he had received the holy spirit, whereupon three thousand
men believed in Christ, and were baptized in his name; and also a Chap 3 13,
etc.
second to the same people, but there was no mention made of the incarnation;
Nor also in the speeches that the same Apostle made either to the Acts. 4.8,
etc. Chap. 5.30, etc.
Rulers and Elders of the people or to Chap. 10.36, etc
Cornelius and others concerning Jesus Christ. There was no mention made of it
in Paul's oration Chapter 13.17, etc.
which he made in the synagogue at Antioch, none in that at Chap. 17 22. etc.
Athens on Mars-hil, none in 26.2, etc.
that at See amongst others Romans 5.5, etc. 8.31, etc. 2 Cor. 5.14, etc. Ephesians.
13, etc. 2. throughout Col. 1.12. etc. 1 Timothy 2.3, etc. 2 Timothy 1.9, etc. Tit.
2.11. etc. 3.4, etc. 1 Pet. 1.3. etc. 2 Pet. 1.3. etc. 1. John 3.1, etc. 4.8,
etc.
Cesarea before King Agrippa, the Festus President and many others. And indeed
Athens he had a fair occasion to declare that thing, when he spoke of the
unknown God. But in all those speeches of the Apostles you can read nothing of
Christ more sublime, than that he had ^een raised by God from the dead was
received into Heaven, was made Lord and Christ, was exalted by the right hand
of God to be a Prince and Savior, to give repentance and remission of sins,
was made judge of the quick and dead. Again, How often do the Apostles commend
the exceeding great love and bounty of God exhibited in Christ Jesus to
mankind? But what more illustrious argument could there have been of this love,
then that the most high God should willingly be made man for man's sake?
Wherefore then is there so great silence in those places concerning this thing?
Namely, because it never was, neither was there any (that we may briefly add
this thing also) cause which did require that the most high God, the creator of
Heaven and earth should assume flesh. For as much as the man Christ Jesus being
asisted by divine power, was able to perform; and did really perform when he
was upon earth all things that belonged unto our salvation both in teaching,
and also in working miracles, and finally, in obeying his Father in all things,
and was able also to perform, and did so indeed perform by the same divine
power whatsoever things are required to the perfecting of our Salvation. But
who dares to say, that God would admit a thing so contrary to his Majesty,
without the greatest cause, or rather necessity, although at length it were
possible for his nature? But we will not enlarge on this matter, because these
things are here and there handled in our Arguments that belong to this place.

But if any one desire to see this also more fully explained, he may read
elsewhere See Socin. in his fragments, page 18. etc.
in ours.

CHAP. XXXIII.
The holy Spirit was given unto Christ.
The three and thirtieth Argument, That the holy Spirit was given unto Christ.

WE will make the third Argument this, that the holy Spirit was given by God
unto Christ: of which thing we do not read ^nly in one place of holy Scripture.
For both in the Old Testament, chiefly in Isaiah there are some testimonies of
this thing, and also in the New, where some places are likewise cited out of
the Old. For so speaks Isaias, in the beginning of the 11th Chapter, And
there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow
out of his roots. And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the Spirit of
wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and might, the Spirit of
knowledge and piety, or as it is in the Hebrew, of the fear of the Lord. Which
all both see and confess to be spoken of Christ. Likewise in the beginning of
the 42d Chapter, God speaks of the same Christ, Behold my servant whom I
uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights, I have put my Spirit upon him.
Which words are cited by Christ, Matthew. 12.17. And Chap. 61.1. the Prophet
brings in Christ speaking after this manne^: The Spirit of the Lord is upon
me, for that the Lord has anointed me. Which words Christ himself testifies
to be fulfilled in him, Luke 4.18. etc. But in the same Gospel we read how the
holy Spirit descended on Christ, when he was baptized of John, and abode upon
him, Matthew. 3.16. Luke 3.22. and John 1.32, 33. Whence Luke in the beginning of
his fourth Chapter says, That Jesus being full of the holy Spirit, went up out
of Jordan. And Peter with the same Writer testifies, Acts 10.38. That God had
anointed him with the holy Spirit and with power. Whence Christ proves that he
cast out Devils in or by the Spirit of God, (which thing also Peter Acts 10.
does plainly show) and accuses the Pharisees of blasphemy against the holy
Spirit, that they durst to ascribe to Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, such kind
of miracles as were done by the very power of the holy Spirit, Matthew. 12.28.31.
Mark 3. compare verse. 30. with the foregoing. And Luke says, Acts 1.2. That
Christ in the same day wherein he was taken up, gave commandment to the
Apostles by the holy Spirit, that is by the motion of the holy Spirit. For
neither did he make use of the ministry of the holy Spirit, by whose
intervening help he gave commandments to his disciples; although others by
transposition connect the words by the holy Spirit, with the following, whom he
had chosen, whereof it is not necessary to dispute in this place. For as to our
purpose the force of the words will be the same, to wit, that Christ by the
motion of the holy Spirit chose the Apostles. Neither is it a wonder, seeing
that he was the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel, the
Spirit of knowledge, that is, who produced Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel,
Knowledge, and bestowed it on Christ, as appears from Isa. 11. a place cited by
us.

But that we may from hence demonstrate, that Christ is not the most high God,
we will not now use that reason, that by this means something was given unto
him by God the Father: which Argument we have Chap. 18. of this Sect.
elsewhere explained: but this, that he would not truly have stood in need of
the holy Spirit, if he were the most high God, especially if that Opinion of
the Adversaries be laid down, that the holy Spirit is a Person distinct from
the Father and the Son. For what help, I pray you, can the holy Spirit yield
unto the most high God? What is there that the most high God cannot perform of
himself? For it is not what they say, that Christ's humane Nature needed the
assistance of the holy Spirit. For that I may not urge that now, that those
things are spoken simply of Christ, that are not to be spoken if he were the
most high God, as of whom they are simply to be denied: What need was there of
the help of the holy Spirit, the third Person of the Deity, as they will have
it, unto the humane Nature, if the very same was personally joined to the
second Person of the Deity; if the whole fullness of the divine Essence (as they
interpret that place Col. 2.9.) did dwell therein bodily; if, as the same
persons judge, that divine Nature did bestow all the supernatural Gifts upon
the humane, that happened unto it; if that did either communicate unto it all its
Properties, or at least the full knowledge of all things, as the major part of
the Adversaries judge? Whether or no the holy Spirit could add any thing to
this store? Wherefore, I pray, is Christ deciphered rather by the holy Spirit,
than by his own Nature, either to have cast out Devils, or to have commanded
any thing, or to have been endued with Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel, Might,
Knowledge, the Fear of the Lord?

The Defense of the Argument.
SOme one will perhaps say, that therefore those things are rather attributed
to the holy Spirit, than to the divine Nature or Person of Christ, because they
belong unto Christ's Sanctification, and that Sanctification, although common to
the whole Trinity, is properly ascribed to the holy Spirit. But they speak thus
not only without reason, but even contrary to reason. We will not now rehearse
that, that Christ's Sanctification cannot be rather attributed to the holy
Spirit, than to the Father, to whom the same is so ascribed, John 10.36.
that it is urged as a cause why Christ is his Son: For hence it would follow,
if the the same agree rather to the holy Spirit, than to the Father, that the
holy Spirit would be rather the Father of Christ, than God himself, who both is
the Father of Christ, and is every where in the new Testament so called. That
we will say here, which is proper to this place, if any reason can be imagined,
why that, which is common to all the Persons, should notwithstanding be
ascribed rather to one, than to another; that here would be great cause, why
this action is rather to be ascribed to the Son, than to any other Person, and
indeed a double cause. The one is that most strict conjunction which agrees
unto the Son according to his humane Nature; as the Adversaries Opinion urges.
The other is, that the same Adversaries will have the Son to be the natural
Wisdom and Power of God, by which he makes all things; and hither they bring
those words which in Prove. 8. are spoken abstractively, and in general touching
Wisdom; and also those which we read of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.24. But unto which
divine Person would it rather agree to bestow on the humane Nature of Christ
Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel, Knowledge, than to that, which was nearest unto
that Nature, and is the natural Wisdom of God himself? To what would it better
agree, than to the natural Virtue and Power of God, to do all those stupendous
works by the humane Nature? All those things therefore are rather to be
attributed to the divine Nature of Christ, than to the holy Spirit.

Besides, we demand of them that make use of this kind of exception, whether or
no they determine, that the holy Spirit contributed more to the bestowing of
those Gifts upon the humane Nature, than the divine Person of Christ himself,
or as much the one as the other Person? If that, they overthrow their own
Opinion; if this, the Scripture. For if they admit that, either there was not
so much power in the divine Person of Christ to perform the same, as was in the
holy Spirit, or not so great a will. Neither can be spoken of it, if Christ
were the most high God, and indeed of the same Essence with the holy Spirit.
But if they admit this, there will be no evident cause, why it should be
expressly attributed to the holy Spirit, that he bestowed those Gifts on the man
Christ, and no where to the divine Person or Nature of Christ himself.
Wherefore this exception has there no place, and consequently neither the
distinction of a humane and divine Nature in Christ. For this very thing we
demand, why was the holy Spirit given to the humane Nature, if that were
personally united to the divine Nature.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Christ was tempted of the Devil.
The four and thirtieth Argument, That Christ was tempted of the Devil.

THe fourth Argument of this kind, is this, that Christ, as the History of the
Gospel declares, was tempted of the Mat. 4.1, etc. Mark. 1.12. Luke 4.1, etc.
Devil, and solicited to worship him, and that he was to this very end,
namely, that he might be tempted of the Devil, led by the holy Spirit into the
wilderness. For this would by no means have happened, if Christ had been the most
high God. For first, what is more unworthy of God, than to expose himself to
this impious and wicked Enemy, whom for the contempt of his Majesty, most
clearly heretofore seen, he had thrust out of Heaven, to be tempted and
solicited to the adoration of him, and so to offer himself of his own accord
to be mocked of the Devil? Again, to what purpose should Christ do this? was it
that it might appear, that the most high God was able to endure and overcome
the temptations of the Devil? was there any one who could make any doubt
thereof, so that there should need any trial thereof? Furthermore, how durst
the Devil attempt so great a matter? I will not now mention, that the Devils
tremble at the sight of the divine Majesty, Jam. 2.19.
inasmuch as they are afraid at the memory of him, in that they were by him
cast out of Heaven, and thrust down to Hell. For feign you now in the wicked
spirit, who is very conscious both of the Wrath and invincible Power of God,
and of the bonds wherein he is held by him, as much boldness and impudency as
you please, yet must you withal confess, that he is exceeding cunning; and I
would this were not to be confessed! But how can it be, that a most cunning
spirit should tempt the most high God, and endeavor to seduce him, and
conceive in his mind such a project, as that he should solicit him to a thing
most unworthy and detestable, namely, the adoration of the Devil? For can it
be, either that he should attempt a thing which he well knows to be
impossible, or should not clearly perceive that this thing is altogether
impossible? Neither of these things are incident to him, that has so much as a
grain of wit, much less could it happen to a most subtle and cunning spirit.

Moreover, when he says, If thou art the Son of God, command that these stones
become loaves; And again, If thou art the Son of God, cast thy self down: He
sufficiently shows, that his intention is to make Christ by some means, to
begin to doubt, whether he be indeed the Son of God, whom he had a little
before Mat. 3.^1.
heard from Heaven, that he was, and consequently to seek further proofs of a
thing some way doubtful. But how could he hope by any means whatsoever, to
effect this with such a Son of God, as was begotten out of the divine Essence?
For do we think, that an enemy most practiced in this kind of fighting, who is
commonly called the Author of a thousand cunning tricks, did here use such a
kind of tempting, as was the unfittest of all to deceive, and so made use of
arms so vain and ridiculous, to assail a most valiant and wise Captain? What
would Satan get, if by any reasons he should endeavor to persuade even a
common man (who is well in his wits) to doubt of himself whether he was a man,
and not rather something inferior to a man? Would not this rather be a sport
than a temptation? But it would be much more ridiculous by any reason
whatsoever, to go about to persuade the Son of God, begotten out of the divine
Essence, that he should doubt whether he be the Son of God or not.

But you will understand that thing is far otherwise, if you observe that
Christ was pronounced by God, to be his Son in such a manner as did not belong
to his Essence, and which was indeed grounded on the divine Love, and therein
chiefly consisted, that he was already designed to be the Messiah, or heavenly
or eternal King of the People of God, such an one as he after actually became.
For you will easily understand, that this most cunning enemy did not fight so
foolishly, when he called that in question, and that there was no need of a
buckler to receive his weapons. I at present omit other things, which occur in
that History of the temptation of Christ, as that Satan having brought him into
a most high Mountain, showed him all the Kingdoms of this World, and the glory
thereof, as not sufficiently known, or not sufficiently observed by his eye, to
the end that he might the more easily allure him to worship the Devil, and that
he durst to say before him to this very end, All this power will I give Luke
4.6.
thee, and the glory thereof, for they are delivered to me, and to whom I will,
I give them. For it is apparent, that Satan understood well enough, that he had
not to do with the most high God, but with him, who in respect of his Essence,
was a Man, but out of the singular Love of God was his Son; whom because God
had of his own accord, offered to him to be tempted, to the end he might give a
proof of his Virtue and Piety; he thought it not altogether impossible, by his
arts, to draw him from God. But the ingenious Reader will of himself observe
both these and other things.

The Defense of the Argument.
NEither may any one say, that these things which we have deduced from this
History, do therefore not follow, because Christ was tempted according to his
humane Nature only, and not according to his divine Nature. For to omit the
repetition of other things, that have formerly been often spoken, the same
absurdities will still follow, although you hold that Satan tempted the humane
Nature only, but personally united to the most high God, and joined by an
indissolvable tie; and that God willed that this humane Nature should be
tempted. For it would have been unworthy of the most high God, to expose
himself in a Nature personally united to him, to an impious and detestable
Adversary, that he might mock him and solicit him to his worship. For the
humane Nature could do nothing, unless the divine did consent thereunto.
Wherefore Satan soliciting the humane Nature of Christ to worship him, should
together have solicited the divine Nature to consent to so horrid a crime, and
to permit it unto the humane Nature. Likewise it had been supersluous, to show,
that a Nature personally united to the most high God, could endure and vanquish
the temptation of Satan. For who could make any doubt concerning that matter?
Whence it is also apparent, that Satan could not have the least hope to
overcome it. For what? could Satan believe it possible, that the divine Nature
should so far forsake the humane, personally united to it, as to yield to him,
and commit a most heinous offense, and so become liable to eternal damnation?
did not Satan perceive that he had to do, not only with the humane, but also
with the divine Nature; and that this Nature was to be seduced, and the
wickedness to be persuaded to it, if the humane Nature ought to be overcome?
What therefore remains, but to say, that Satan had no certain knowledge of
that union of the humane Nature with the divine? but what? Did not Satan, who
undertook to oppose this very thing, that Jesus was the Son of God, understand
what these words did signify? But, if the Opinion of the Adversaries be true,
they signify, that the man Jesus is one Person with the son of God, eternally
begotten out of the substance of God. Who would believe, if, as the Adversaries
hold, the Incarnation of the Son, eternally b^gotten out of the Essence of God,
was foretold in the holy Scripture, declared to the Virgin Mary, and afterward
actually performed and acknowledged by her and others, and signified by the
heavenly voice of Christ's Baptism, that Satan should have no certainty of this
very thing? especially if he heretofore saw God in Heaven, and in him all his
Decrees (for the Adversaries hold these to be really the same with God or his
Essence) and consequently understood, that the second Person of the Trinity
should in those days be incarnated. But in a thing that is evident, there
needs no more to be spoken; only we will add this thing, that whereas Satan
intended to make Christ doubt, whether he were the Son of God, namely, that
Son, whom he had a little before heard the divine voice, pronounce him to be,
it is not suitable that he should in his temptation pass by that Nature of
Christ, according to which he was the Son of God. But the Adversaries hold this
to be the divine Nature. Wherefore they must renounce either this opinion, or
this limitation, whereby they restrain this temptation to the humane Nature.

Now we do not conceive, that any discreet man will say, that this Argument is
drawn from the testimony of the Devil, who is a lying spirit. For we, contrary
to the intention of the Devils words, urge, that that very man, whom the Devil
tempted, was and is the Son of God, a little before commended by the heavenly
Voice in Baptism. Wherefore the Argument is not drawn from the testimony of the
Devil, as if he had said that very thing, we would have; but partly from the
act of God, appointing Christ to be tempted, and exposed to the snares of
Satan; partly from the sense, words and intention of Satan, as effect, which
could not have come to pass, unless our Opinion were true.

CHAP. XXXV.
The five and thirtieth Argument, That Christ is the Firstborn of every
Creature.

THe fifth Argument may be drawn from thence, that Christ is called the
Firstborn of every Creature, Col. 1.15. and he does in the same sense call
himself the Beginning of the Creation of God, Rev. 3.14. Now as for the first,
the Adversaries hold, that it is spoken of Christ according to a divine Nature,
and is no mean Argument of that very Nature: when nevertheless the Firstborn
must of necessity, be always contained in the number of them; of whom, except
the Parents, it is said to be the firstborn; and consequently Christ must be
comprehended in the number of Creatures, whose Firstborn he is said to be,
which cannot agree to the most high God.

The Defense of the Argument.
FOr whereas they commonly so expound the place, as if it were said, that
Christ was born before every creature; this, if it be so taken, as that Christ
should be wholly exempted out of the number of all Creatures, is done without
any example, and contrary to the received use of speaking in the holy
Scripture, and in ordinary speech. Which very thing, certain very learned men
among the Adversaries, have sufficiently perceived. For John Piscator, although
he allow that Exposition as Orthodox, does notwithstanding propose it to
consideration, whether a different Exposition brought by him, be not genuine,
namely, that we should understand Christ to be called the Firstborn of every
Creature, because he is the chief Heir of all things. And he a little after
adds, That the native signification of the word Firstborn, hinders it from
being understood of the divine Generation of the Son of God out of the
Substance of the Father, for it properly signifies him who is born at the
first birth; and so agreeeth to the Mother, not to the Father.

CHAP. XXXVI.
The thirty sixth Argument, That Christ is equal to God.

THat place, Phil. 2.6, etc. which is wont to be urged against us, contains
several Arguments of our Opinion. For besides what we have formerly urged, that
Christ is there several times distinguished from God simply put; that he was
obedient unto God; that he was exalted by him; and that to him was given by God
a name above every name; and that the Dignity and Honor given to him, is
affirmed to redound to the glory of God the Father, as to the utmost object
thereof: besides all these things, I say, this also argues Christ not to be
the most high God, that he is said to be equal unto God. Which the greatest
part of the Adversaries say is spoken of him according to the divine Nature,
and is an open proof of that Nature. But that, which is equal, has always a
different Essence from that to which it is equal; otherwise the same thing
would be equal to it self: whereas equals are relatives, and consequently
opposites. If therefore Christ be equal to God, and that as they imagine, in
respect of Essence and essential Properties, the Essence of Christ must of
necessity be different from the Essence of God. Wherefore they must either hold
two divine independent Essences, or two most high Gods, or that Christ is not
the most higst God.

More Arguments might be brought, but we will at present be content with these;
especially because some of them shall hereafter be touched, when we shall prove
our Opinion out of such Principles as Reason it self affords. For neither
will we so draw Arguments from Reason, as that we will not now and then recall
the Adversaries to the Testimonies of the Scripture.

SECT. III.
Wherein is shown, that the holy Spirit is not the most high God, that it may
appear that the Father only is the most high God.

IT now follows, that we should show what we undertook to demonstrate in the
third place, namely, That the holy Spirit is not the most high God. Although
the business may easily be decided by what we have disputed concerning Christ.
For though those testimonies also of the holy Scripture, which s^ew that the
Father only is the most high God, do withal strongly demonstrate, that the
holy Spirit is not the most high God; seeing it is granted that the holy Spirit
is not the Father, yet will we not use them in this place. For in this place we
do not demonstrate, that the holy Spirit is not the most high God; because the
Father only is the most high God: but on the contrary, because neither the Son,
nor the holy Spirit is the most high God, we evince, that the Father only is
the most high God. But with those testimonies wherewith we have s^ewn that
Christ is not the most high God, we can here also demonstrate, that the holy
Spirit is not the most high God. For neither can it be, if Christ be not the
most high God, that the holy Spirit should be the most high God. Whence neither
was there ever any man, that I know of, who, not acknowledging Christ for the
most high God, did imagine that the holy Spirit notwithstanding was the most
high God. And the reason hereof is manifest, whether you consider the thing it
self, or the opinion of the Adversaries. For as to the thing it self, how could
it come to pass, that Christ should send the holy Spirit, and give him to men,
if the holy Spirit were the most high God, and Christ were not so? For could he
send and give the most high God, who is inferior to him? And as for the opinion
of the Ad e^saries, they hold, that the holy Spirit has his Essence as from
the Father, so also from the Son. But how can the most high God have his
Essence from him that is not the most high God? the Creator from a creature? He
that was from all eternity, from him that began to exist at a certain time?
Wherefore having shown that Christ is not the most high God, we might here stop
and bring no other Arguments, to show that the holy Spirit is not the most high
God. Nevertheless, that the thing may be made the more manifest, we will
demonstrate the same with farther arguments. And in the first place we will
draw Arguments from thence, The holy Spirit is no where called God.
that many things are omited concerning the holy Spirit in the Scripture, which
could by no means have been omitted, if he had been the most high God. Next we
will draw Arguments from these things, which are expressly delivered concerning
the holy Spirit in the same Scripture.

CHAP. I.
Argument the first, That the holy Spirit is no where openly called God in the
holy Scripture.

AS therefore to the first sort of Arguments, we will begin from the very Name
of God. For there can no place of the Scripture be alleged, wherein the holy
Spirit is openly called God. But were the holy Spirit God, how could it come to
pass that there should not be so much as one place in the huge Volume of the
Scripture, where he is openly and clea^ly called God? Concerning the Father
there are so many and so e^ident places that none can deny that he is God,
unless he da^es to deny that the Sun shines at noon. Concerning Christ
likewise, although he be not the most high God, yet there are certain plain
places of the Scripture, which show that he is God, which are commonly known to
all men. And shall there be no place at all concerning the holy Spirit,
although he be the most high God as well as the Father, and not only not
inferior to Christ, but also for as much as Christ is a man by nature, far
superior? Besides the Adversaries hold, that it is necessary to salvation, for
a man to believe, that the holy Spirit is God, yea, the most high God. And
indeed, if he were the most high God, it would seem altogether necessary to be
known; for what faithful man ought to be ignorant of his most high God, and not
to worship him? But the thing would withal be such, that unless it were
divinely revealed unto us, we could have no certain knowledge thereof, in as
much as it is not manifest to our senses. How then should a thing so great, so
necessary to be known, so abstruce, not be clearly explained, and purposely
delivered by divine men, at the motion of the Spirit himself? How would it not
have been again and again repeated and inculcated, that none might be ignorant
thereof, unless he were resolved to be b^ind in the midst of the light? But
what place will they allege, where it is purposly delivered and openly
wri^ten, that the holy Spirit is God? Certainly, so many tho^sand Adversaries,
so many learned men perpetually conversant in the reading of the Scripture,
have for so many ages, wherein this opinion, concerning the holy Spirit has
prevailed, not been able to find out so much as one, which will easily appear,
if we examine the principal places which they allege, endeavoring to show,
that the name of God is attributed to the holy Spirit.

The Defense of the Argument.
WE will here omit that place, which some have used, or rather abused, God is
a Spirit, John 4.34. For as much as the greatest part of the Adversaries have
observed and s^ewn, that in this place the name of Spirit does not denote the
holy Ghost, but a spiritual substance. For indeed it is there spoken of the
Father, as the foregoing words do manifestly demonstrate; neither has the word
Spirit the place of the subject (whence likewise it wants an article, which
notwithstanding is prefixed to the word God) ^ut of the predicate. For the sense
is, God is a Spirit, that is, a spiritual Essence or Substance. These things
therefore, because either all or the greatest part of the Adversaries do
acknowledge them, shall now be passed ^y.

But for the most part of them, that dispute concerning this subject, their
main Achilles is that place, which is extant Acts 5.3, 4. where when Peter, as
it is read in the vulgar translation, had said to Ananias, Why did Satan tempt
thy heart to lie to the holy Spirit? he adds a litt^e after, Thou have not
lied to men but to God. Much likewise is by some attributed to those words of
Paul, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Where when he had said, Your members are the temple of
the holy Spirit, which is in you, which you have from God, he adds; Glorify
God in your body. And to those in the same Epistle, Chap. 12.4, 5, 6. There are
diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit; and diversities of administrations,
but the same Lord; and diversities of opperations, but the same God, which
works all things in all. Especia^ly because it is afterward said in the 11th.
verse. All these things works one and the same Spirit, distributing to every
one as he will. Likewise out of the Old Testament, those words of David, are
wont to be alleged, 2 Samuel 23.2, 3. The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and
his word was in my tongue. The God of Israel said to me, the mighty one of
Israel spoke to me. They further add those places wherein they think the holy
Spirit is called the Lord.

First, they say, That in Deuteronomy. 32.12. it is said, The Lord alone led him
(namely, the people of Israel in the Wilderness) and there was no strange God
with him. Now the same thing is affirmed of the holy Spirit, namely, that he
led Israel, Isa. 63.14. Where it is read, The Spirit of the Lord did lead him.

Again, they say, That the Lord, Exodus 4.12. Numb. 12.6. and elsewhere
declared, that he would speak by the Prophets. But Acts 1.16. the same is
attributed to the holy Spirit; as also in that place that was a little before
quoted, 2 Samuel 23.2.

Thirdly, they say, That the Lord was oftentimes provoked by the Israelites.
But this is referred to the holy Spirit, Isa. 63.10. Heb. 3.89. Acts 7.51.

Finally, Those words of the Lord, Isa. 6.9, etc. are attributed to the holy
Spirit, Act. 28.25, 26.

These, as far as I have hitherto been able to observe, are the chief
testimonies, whereby the adversaries endeavor to prove, that the holy Spirit
is called God, or which is some way of a greater fo^ce, the Lord.

But first, it is in none of these places openly written or pu^posely
delivered, that the holy Spirit is God in that it is every where to be
concluded by some consequence; and those places, out of which it is concluded,
that the holy Spirit is called the Lord, are for the most part written in such
places, as are very distinct one from the other: and t^erefore not one of a
thousand amongst the ^udor sort, unless he be admonished by some other, will
compare those places together, especially so, as to draw such a conclusion from
thence, as the adversa^ies would have. Now, though we do not at all reject
lawful consequences, yet have we s^ewn, that in this case, it is necessary,
there should be such places extant in the holy Scripture, wherein it is openly
written, that the holy Spirit is God. For it cannot be, were he the most high
God, but that it should most openly and f^equently be written and purposely
declared. Wherefore if such places cannot be alleged, it may of right be
concluded that the consequences, which are drawn to prove the matter are not
legitimate. And this you will eas^ly perceive by examining those, which we saw
we^e alleged by ^he adversaries. For the Arguments, which are fetched out of
those places, are for the most part grounded on this reason; that those things,
which in one place are attributed to God, or the Lord, are either elsewhere, or
in the same place, attributed to the holy Spirit. Which reason, how frivolous
it is, may from thence be understood, that by this means it might not only be
concluded, that the holy Spirit is God, or the Lord, but likewise, that he is
Father or the Son; and likewise, that the Son is the Father, and contrarily the
Father the Son. For the adversaries themselves contend, that the external works
of the Trinity are undivided or common to all the persons; and allege many
places, where either in the same or in diverse words, the same thing is
attributed, either to all those persons, or to two of them. And the reason is
manifest enough, why such a consequence is illegitimate; because like things
may proceed from diverse causes, or be conversant about diverse objects, or
exist in diverse subjects, yea, the self same works may proceed from diverse
causes, either coordinate, (as they speak) and united among themselves, or
subordinate; whereof the one does depend on the o her; or is subservient
thereunto. If the^e does seem to be any further strenght in those places, that,
when we have examined each, will easily be found, to be indeed none.

Wherefore, that we may examine each place as much as it is needful; the first
place, quoted out of Acts 5, does not prove that which the adversaries would
have. First, because, as See the Annot. of Erasmus and Beza
others also have observed, it is o^herwise read in the Greek, than in the
vulgar translation. For it is not there written, That thou should lie to the
holy Ghost, but that thou should belie the holy Ghost: Or (as a very learned
John Piscator
Interpreter among the Adversaries does read it) That thou should deceive
the holy Spirit: Which translation Beza
others likewise have touched; but a prejudicare opinion hindered them from
thoroughly approving it. And this translation is confirmed by that, which is
afterward read verse. 9. where Peter explaineth the same fault of Ananias and
Saphira, in these words. Why have ye agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the
Lord? For it is the same to tempt the holy Spirit, and to belie him. Now they
tempted the holy Spirit, because they acted, as if they would try, whether the
holy Spirit dwelling in the Apostles, or the Apostles themselves, by virtue of
the holy Spirit dwelling in them, would observe the deceit or not. Wherefore
the forecited Interpreter, whom we praised before, who had so rendered the
words, verse. 5. That thou should deceive the holy Spirit, does afterward
explain them in this manner: That thou should endeavor to deceive the holy
Spirit, that is, us the Apostles, in whom the Spirit works, and to whom he
reveals the things that are needful to the edification of the Church; and
this is a Metonymie of the Adjunct. I do not now mention that explication of
those words which Erasmus delivered, and other learned men likewise have
followed, that the words may be rendered, to counterfeit the holy Spirit.

By these things it easily appears, that it cannot from this place be
concluded, that the holy Spirit is God; since Peter does in one manner speak of
the holy Ghost, of God in another. There he says, to belie, or deceive and
mock the holy Spirit; Here to lie to God. The first does simply note the
object, about which the fraud and mocking is conversant: The second signifies
the utmost scope unto which that injury and contumely does redound. For,
therefore Peter, after he had said, that Ananias would deceive the holy Spirit,
and mock him with his lie, did add, that he had not lied unto men but to God,
that he might the more perceive the greatness of his sin: as if he should have
said: Thou ought not to think, that this injury pertains to us alone, and
is terminated in us, for it tends to the dishonor of God himself. But there
had been no need to add any such thing, if he had said, that Ananias had lied
to the holy Spirit, and he had known from the doctrine of the Apos^les, that
the holy Spirit was God himself Like unto this passage is that 1 Thessalonians. 4.8.
where the Apostle had said, what precepts he had given to them by the Lord
Jesus, and upon what terms God had called them, he adds; therefore he that
despises, dispiseth not man but God, who has also given his holy Spirit to
us; that is, who has imparted his holy Spirit unto us, by whom it is apparent
that we are governed, and by whose impulsion we do speak, Whence it appears
that this injury and contempt of us, and the precepts delivered by us, redound
to God himself. Again, though it should be said that Ananias had lied to the
holy Spirit, and had lied to God withal, yet it would not from thence follow,
that the holy Spirit is God. For in one and the same a^t a man may lie to two,
and to one through another; or to one immediately, as here to the holy Spirit
dwelling in the Apostles; to another mediate^y, as to God. So he, that
persecuteth the faithful, persecuteth Christ himself: he that hears and
receives the Apostles, or, on the contrary, despises them, hears and
receives or despises Christ: he that despises Christ, despises also God
that sent him, Matthew. 10.40. Luke 10.16. Now will any one thence conclude
either, that the faithful or the Apostles are Christ, or that Christ is he that
sent him, namely the Father? But ^f we may reason in this manner: Ananias lied
to God: Ananias (at the same time and in the same act) lied to the holy Ghost:
Therefore the holy Ghost is God, it will also be ^awful to reason thus: Act
4.5. Chap. 22.7, 8 Chap. 20.14, 15.
Paul persecuted Christ: Paul (at the same time and in the same act persecuted
the faithful: Therefore the faithful are Christ, Or, he that hears the
Apostles, hears Christ, and also him that sent him: therefore he that sent
Christ is Christ. What then, will the adversaries answer to these arguments?
without doubt, that there is more in the conclusion than in the premises.
Wherefore let them imagine, that the same answer is given to them. For thus it
ought to be concluded: therefore some one who lied to the holy Spirit lied to
God. As also in those instances, which we alleged: therefore some one w^o
persecuted the faithful, did persecute Christ; some one who hears him that
sent Christ, hears Christ himself. We have spoken the more largely of this
place, because greater stress is laid on it, and yet not all which might be
said thereupon. We will run over the other more briefly.

As for the second place therefore, which is extant 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. the holy
Spirit is not understood by the name of God but is openly distinguished from
him. For is not the holy Spirit here manifestly distinguished from God, whilst
it is said that they have him from God? He speaks also of the same God in the
following words, Therefore gloryfie God in your body, etc. Now, that the
Apostle does not speak of the holy Ghost, even that is an argument, namely,
that he speaks of him, to whom we, as servants, have been bought with a
price, but who did ever read that we were bought to the holy Spirit? that we
were by Christ bought and invasseld to the Father, both the thing it self
speaks, and it will easily appear from these words of the Revelation, which
are extant Chap. 5.9.10. chap 14.4. But if they say, that it is from thence
proved, that the holy Spirit is God, because we are his temple: for none but
God has a temple: first it will not follow, that the holy Spirit is here
called God, and that openly, which is the thing now in debate; For the same
Adversaries are wont to allege many places, from whence they endeavor to
evince, that either the holy Spirit, or Christ is the most high God, where
notwithstanding both they themselves confess, and all see, that the name of God
is not attributed to Christ or the holy Spirit. Again, a temple may be
belonging not only to the most high God, ^ut also to him, who is subordinate to
God in divine Empire and worship, not only in the opinion of men but in very
deed. Last of all, it may be only so far forth granted, that a temple belongs
to none but God himself, as that a temple is not indeed dedicated to the honor
of any other person, nor possessed by any other person by a more divine right and
principally inhabited then by God. Otherwise it is inhabited in a sort by
Angels as the ministers of God, and the virtue and efficacy of God does in a
manner dwell therein, so that it may be rightly said to be the temple of the
divine efficacy and virtue; seeing God by his efficacy and virtue does inhabit
his temple, especially that which is treated of in that place to the Corinths.
wherefore if any one will conc^ude that the holy Ghost is God, in that our body
is his temple, he must demonstrate that our body is so the temple of the holy
Spirit, as that he is a person, to whose honor it is dedicated, and by whom
our body is, by such a right as is proper to the divine Majesty, possessed and
principally inhabited. But it is impossible to demonstrate this, and it does
even from thence seem to be false, because in a place, very like to this place
of ours, which is extant before in the same Epistle to the Corinths, Chap.
3.16. the Apostle does thence clearly prove, that we are the temple of God,
because his Spirit dwells in us. As also John proves that God abides in us,
because he has given us of his Spirit, 1 John 3.24. and 4.13. For if the holy
Spirit were such a person, as before we said, and consequently the most high
God, what need was the^e to conclude thence, that God abides in us, or, that
we are his temple, because his spirit is in us; and not rather from thence,
because that very spirit that dwells in us is God? What need is there, I say,
to show, that we are the temple of God, who is distinguished from the holy
spirit, and by the interveining of him dwells in us; and not rather of God,
which is the very spirit himself dwelling in us, and inhabiting us as his
temple, not by another person, as our Adversaries would have it, but by
himself? But the Apostles knew, that it belongs not to the supreme deity, in
his own person and substance to inhabit any temple whatsoever on the earth,
and to dwell in the breasts of men, but by his virtue and efficacy, and
therefore they do not conclude, that we are the temple of God, or that God
abides in us, because the holy spirit that dwells in us, is the supreme God,
but because the spirit of that God dwells in us, and was by him given to us.
For if the spirit, or force and efficacy of any deity dwells in any place,
the very deity it self is said to dwell there, and that is the temple thereof,
wherein his virtue has as it were fixed his abode.

The third place which is extant, 1 Cor. 12.5, 6. does likewise plainly prove
the contrary, for there one and the same spirit is manifestly distinguished
both from one and the same God, and from one and the same Lord, of which matter
we have Sect. 1. Chap 4.
before treated. But if they will collect from the unity of operation, which
appears from the collation of verse. 6. with the 11th. that that o^e God, and
that one spirit are the same; first, it is one thing that the holy Spirit
should be that one God, another, that he should be called that one God,
concerning which mat^er we here treat. Again, we must conclude that that God
also, which works all these things by his spirit, is the same with his
spirit, in that the same operations agree to both; that is, that the Father is
the holy Spirit, and contrarily, the holy Spirit is the Father: yea, that the
three persons which are common^y held are but one, and predicated one of
another, because they have the same external operations concerning which we
here speak. But of this matter also it was formerly treated.

In like manner neither does the fourth place, which is extant 2 Samuel 23.2.
prove that the holy Spirit is God, but rather, that he is not so; so far is he
from being there openly called God or the Lord. For he is there openly
distinguished from the Lord, which is that one God, whilst he is called the
Spirit of the Lord, of which matter more in the Below, Chap. 5.
following discourse. Now whereas they reason thus: God spoke by David: The
holy Spirit spoke by David: Therefore the holy Spirit is God; any one easily
perceives how fall^cious this reasoning is; in that it consists of mere
affirmatives in the second figure, as they speak in the schools. For if such
an argument is to be admitted, we may thus also conclude; God the Father spoke
by David: The holy spirit spoke by David: Therefore the holy spirit is God the
Father. For the Major is to be granted by the Adversaries, both for the
communion of operations, which they hold to be among the persons of the
Trinity, and also for the saying of the holy scripture. For that I may produce
but on place; the Apostles, Acts 4.25. say of God the Father, that he spoke by
the mouth of David his servant, namely by the holy spirit, as the vulgar
translation has it. But that God the Father is there understood, is apparent
from verse. 27. where Jesus is called the son of that God, whom the Apostles
spoke unto. And indeed God spoke by his Spirit, or the intervening of his
Spirit by David, in that by his Spirit and effica^y he disclosed to him those
things, which he ought to speak, and moved him to utter them. Thus in Rev.
Chap. 2. and 3. at the end of every Epistle directed to the Angels of the Asian
Churches, these words are read; Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit
says to the Churches. But in these Epistles Christ the son of God does
perpe^ually speak. Wherefore if we ought to follow the reasoning of the
adversaries, we must conclude that that Spirit, namely, the holy Spirit, is
Christ the son of God. Indeed Christ did there speak, but by his Spirit, to
whom for that reason the act of speaking is likewise there attributed. Now if
the adversaries will invert their major proposition, and argue in this manner;
whosoever spoke by David he is the God of Israel; neither that proposition will
be contained, in the place quoted, from whence the Argument is drawn, nor is to
be admitted, unless it be thus taken: Whatsoever person principally spoke by
David, he is the God of Israel. But if you subsume: The holy Spirit is a
principal person spaking by David; it likewise will neither be contained in the
place that was quoted, nor is at any hand to be granted. But again, David
spaketh there one way concerning God, another concerning the holy Spirit. Of
the Spirit he says: The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me; but of God he says,
The God of Israel spoke to me; neither is it spoken of the same thing in both
places. For in the former part of ^he words it is signified, that God moved
David by his Spirit ^o utter prophes^es: in the latter, that he spoke something
to David himself, or caused something to be declared to him, namely concerning
the regal dignity, which he first conferred upon him by Samuel, 1 Samuel 16.13.
afterward confirmed by Nathan, 2 Samuel 7.12, etc. (compare the said place with 2 Samuel 7.28. 2 Kings 5.5. and 8.19, etc. 1 Chronicles. 22.8, etc. Psalm. 88.4.20, etc.)
in reference to his posterity. Wherefore in this matter, God did not spoke by
David, but by others to David. Howbeit, that this was performed by the Spirit
of God, this, as to the force of those words, is altogether by accident. For it
had been all one, if God had spoken to David in his own person without any
Prophet that was divinely inspired.

It is now easy to give an answer to those places likewise, whereby others
endeavor to prove, that the holy Spirit is called Lord. For that in none of
them it is plainly written, that the holy Spirit is the Lord or God, which that
it was requisite to overthrow our Argument, every man perceives. But neither
do they prove that the holy Spirit is Lord. For when it is said, Deuteronomy. 32.12.
The Lord alone did guide the People of Israel; the word alone, does only so far
forth exclude others, either things or persons, which are herein subordinate to
God, in as much as they are denied to be the supreme Leaders of that People.
For if they should by that Particle, be wholly excluded from the action of
bringing the People out of Egypt, we must conclude, either that Moses did not
lead that people, which notwithstanding the History does most openly show; or,
that he also is the Lord himself. Which should also be said of that Angel, of
whom God says, That he should go before the People, and keep them in the way,
and bring them into the place which he had prepared, in which Angel he
affirms his name should be, Exodus 23.20, 21. But it is well that the very
words of the place do show, that the Particle alone is indeed opposed to other
Gods, and persons not subordinate to the Lord; in which number the holy Spirit
is, which dwelling chiefly in Moses, led the people, as may be understood from
that place of Isaiah, chap. 63.11. which has been cited. Now that this Spirit
is not the Lord himself, who is said alone to have led the People, is thence
apparent, because in these very words of Isaiah, which are compared with that
place of Deuteronomy, he is distinguished from the Lord, whilst he is called
the Spirit of the Lord: and afterward the Prophet turning of his speech unto
the Lord himself, says, Thus did thou lead thy People.

As to the other reason: The Lord said, that he would speak by the Prophets;
but the holy Spirit spoke by the Prophets; wherefore the holy Spirit is the
Lord, An answer hereunto is already evident from those things which have been
spoken concerning that place, 2 Samuel 23.2. for it is a Syllogism of mere
Affirmatives in the second Figure. And if this reason be firm, it will follow,
that the Angels also are the Lord. For in the quoted place, Numb. 12.6. the
Lord says, that he would in vision appear to the Prophets, or would speak unto
them by dreams. But the Angels also did this, as appears both from other
places, so especially from the Prophecy of Ezekiel, Daniel, Zachary, and from
the Revelation of John. See Dan. 8.16, 17. and 9.21, etc. cap. 10.5, etc. Zach.
1.8, 9, 14, 19. and 2.1, 3, etc. and 4.1, etc. and frequently in other places;
Rev. 1.1.17.1, etc. and 19.9, 10. and 21.9, etc. and 22.8, etc. and ver. 16.
Moreover, we have examples hereof in the History of the Gospel, and in the Acts
of the Apostles. And that we may not go far from the places which the
Adversaries allege; that very person, who spoke these words to Moses, Exodus
4.12. was an Angel sustaining the person of God, as we have elsewhere See the
Book of God and his Attributes.
shown; and although a man would not confess it, yet seeing the Law is said to
have been disposed, and delivered by Gal. 3.19.
Angels, in the hand of a Mediator, he must needs confess, that the Angel, in
giving the Law, spoke unto Moses, of whom those words, Exodus 4. do treat.

There is the same fault in the third reason, namely, that a conclusion is in
the second Figure drawn out of mere Affirmatives: The Israelites provokt the
Lord; the Israelites provokt the holy Spirit; therefore the holy Spirit is the
Lord. Which is refuted by that very place of Isaiah, which is cited, whilst he
is said to be the Spirit of the Lord for he says, but they provoked to anger,
and grieved the holy Spirit of him; that is, of the Lord, for of him it is
spoken; see ver. 7, etc. A like Argument hereunto would be this; The Israelites
were disobedient to the Lord, and exasperated him; The Israelites were
disobedient to the voice of the Lord, and exasperated his mouth; Therefore the
voice of the Lord, or his mouth, are the Lord himself. Or thus; The Israelites
grieved the holy Spirit, and resisted him. The Israelites grieved Moses, and
resisted him, as the History testifies in sundry places; yea, they did chiefly
so far forth grieve the holy Spirit, and resist him in the wilderness, as they
grieved Moses, in whom he dwelt, and resisted him. Whence it will follow, if
the Argument of the Adversaries be right, that Moses himself was the holy
Spirit. For it is to be observed, that the words, Heb. 3.8, 9. are not so
attributed to the holy Spirit, as if they were spoken in his person, as the
Adversaries conceive, but because they were pronounced by the impulse of the
holy Spirit. Otherwise it would follow, that the holy Spirit is David himself,
since the holy Spirit is in this place said to have uttered also these words,
Psalm. 95. To day if you will hear his voice, namely, God, etc. But it is
certain, that both these words, and also the rest, which are read in the
beginning of the Psalm, are pronounced in the person of David. Thus we saw
before, that it is ascribed to the holy Spirit, Rev. 2.3. that he spoke those
things which are most openly pronounced in the person of Christ. Therefore the
holy Spirit so spoke those words in David, as he is said to cry in our hearts,
Abba Father, Gal. 4 6. namely, because we by him, that is, by his impulse, do
so cry, Romans 8.15. and as he is said to intercede for us with groans
unutterable, ver. 26. because he makes us to pray and groan unto God.

As to the last proof; therefore the words of God are attributed in Isaiah, to
the holy Spirit, because Isaiah pronounced them by the impulse of the holy
spirit. Now as it does not follow, because Isaiah likewise pronounced those
words, that they are therefore spoken in his person, and so that Isaiah is the
Lord; so likewise neither is it to be concluded, concerning the holy Spirit, by
whose impulse he pronounced them. It is also here to be observed, what we noted
in 2 Samuel 23. it is not said of the holy Spirit, that he spoke those words unto
Isaiah, but only by Isaiah* But the Lord did not only speak them by Isaiah, but
also, as appears by the Prophecy it self, to Isaiah; because he spoke openly
by him, as one person does to another; which is neither here nor elsewhere
attributed to the holy Spirit. For if the holy Spirit is read to have said any
thing to any one, it is found to have no otherwise come to pass, than, because
somethings were declared to some one from God, by the intervening of some
Prophet. For in that the Prophets spoke by divine Inspiration; therefore the
holy Spirit is said to have spoken by them. But when God spaketh openly to any
one, or an Angel sustaining his person, the holy Spirit is not said to have
spoken to him. And thus much concerning our first Argument.

CHAP. II.
The second Argument, That it is no where in holy Scripture commanded, that we
should adore, or invocate the holy Spirit; yea, there is not so much as any
example thereof.

LEt the next Argument be this, that we are no where either enjoined, or any
way admonished in the holy Scripture, to adore or invocate the holy Spirit.
Yea, so far it is, that there is any precept or admonition concerning this
thing, that there is not so much as one example of any man there to be found,
which has done it. Now though it is said in that which is called the Apostles
Creed, that we are to believe in the holy Spirit: as many of the Ancients did
in like manner say, that we are to believe in the Catholic Church, and in the
other things that are there mentioned; yet is it no where expressly said in the
holy Scripture, that we ought to believe in the holy Spirit, or that any one
did believe in him. But, were the holy Spirit the most, high God, how could it
be, that all those things should not be openly enjoined, and many examples of
them found in holy men? first, because these things would be necessary to be
known and practiced of all men to salvation, were the holy Spirit the most high
God. Again, because these things are not only often, but most openly writ
concerning the Father; but also concerning the Son, there are partly precepts,
partly admonitions, and very many examples, although we have shown that he is
not the most high God. How much more therefore would there be many examples
extant concerning the holy Spirit, were he the most high God.

The Defense of the Argument.
The Scripture speaks nothing of worshipping the holy Spirit.
INdeed the Adversaries endeavor sometimes a by certain consequences, to evince
that these things are some way contained in the holy Scripture, but here we
shall not deal with consequences, but as we have taught, with open precepts,
that might be evident to every one, though otherwise he were but a simple man.

As for Invocation, some imagine they have an example thereof, both in Paul, 1
Cor. 13. ult. who wishes to the Corinthians, The communion of the holy Spirit:
and also in John Rev. 1.4. who wishes to the seven Asian Churches, Grace and
peace to the seven Spirits that are before the Throne of God. But they are
exceedingly mistaken; for as to the wish of Paul, it is one thing to wish that
the communion of the holy Spirit should be with men; another thing to invocate
the holy Spirit himself; for the first is no other than to wish, that the holy
Spirit should be communicated unto men, or being cummunicated, should abide
with them. For neither does the Apostle take the communion of the holy Spirit
actively, as if he wished that the holy Spirit should communicate something;
otherwise he would have added the name of something which he would have to be
communicated to the Corinthians by the holy Spirit; but as we have already
hinted passively. Thus the communion of the Blood of Christ, and the communion
of the Body of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16. is taken, where there is the same word in
the Greek, as in that place, 2 Cor. 13. ult. For whilst the Apostle wishes the
communion of the holy Spirit to the Corinthians, he explaineth in what manner
chiefly he desires that God and Christ should testify their Grace and Love
toward them, namely, in giving his holy Spirit to them, or in cherishing and
augmenting the same already given unto them, And indeed it would be a wonder,
if Paul should here wish for something from the holy Spirit, as a divine
person, that he should so often have omitted the mention of him elsewhere in
the like prayers. Of which matter more hereafter.

As to the wish of John, the very number of those spirits sufficiently hinteth,
that this place makes nothing to the invocation of the holy Spirit, whom they
would have to be the third Person in the Godhead. For then we should make seven
spirits instead of one, so that for three Persons of the Deity, we should have
nine. Which, when others perceived, they said, that by these spirits, is to be
understood the various power of God, or, as they speak, the various gift of the
holy Spirit. And therefore it is all one, as if John should pray for Grace and
Peace from the holy Spirit himself. But besides that, the Adversaries agree not
among themselves concerning this matter (for some by that name understand seven
chief Angels of God; others the manifold providence of God and Christ) what is
there that evinceth, that this virtue proceeds from the holy Spirit, which is
a third Person of the Deity? and that he is invocated, when John prays for
Grace and Peace from those seven Spirits of God? There is not the least hint
thereof in the Revelation, where mention is several times made of those seven
spirits. See besides the very place of the first chapter, chap. 3.1. and 4.5.
and 5.6. which two places compare with Zach. 4.2, 10. from whence they are in a
manner taken. In these places thou shall see those spirits called the spirits
of God, they are said to stand before the Throne. Christ is said to have them
as eyes and horns. For they are to him instead of eyes, because by them he
overseeth and takes care of his Disciples, and provideth for them; and instead
of horns, because by them he pusheth his enemies, and drives them away, and
chaseth them from his People. What hint is here of the holy Spirit, that should
be a third Person of the Deity? Does not the thing it self show, that if the
manifold virtue and efficacy of God which he has communicated with Christ, be
to be understood, John, whilst he wishes grace and peace from those spirits,
does so mention them, as if they were certain persons distinct from God and
Christ; yet in the mean time, does only declare the means and manner whereby he
desires that grace and peace should proceed from God to the Churches? and so
does tacitly repeat the invocation of God himself, whom he had before named,
and whose spirits they principally are, and to whom they do in a manner
minister? for which reason also he immediately subjoyneth them to God. But for
as much as Christ also has these spirits of God, and makes use of them,
therefore having made mention of them, he also commemmorateth Christ, and
prays for grace and peace to the Churches from him; wherefore this wish, and
the imploring of the divine help comprehended therein, is properly referred to
God and Christ, improperly to the spirits themselves. Which is the cause why
other divine men omit the mention of them in their salutations and wishes: they
who hold them to be Angels, will say that this invocation, is referred to them
only in a secondary manner, as unto Ministers, not as unto Lords, and the true
bestowers of grace and peace; and that therefore the mention of them is
elsewhere omitted, and they are therefore set before Christ, partly because
they belong unto God, to whom they are next subjoyned (for which cause also
afterward, chap. 3. the name of the New Jerusalem is interposed betwixt that
of God and Christ) partly because John intends to speak more largely of
Christ. For he therefore reserveth the mention of them to the end, that without
disturbing the course of his speech, he might more freely make an excursion
into his prayers. For if he would have reserved the mention of those spirits to
the end, he should have either used a longer Parenthesis, or begun a new
speech. It is apparent therefore that there is nothing in those places, to
establish the invocation of the holy Spirit. And here it is worth the
rehearsing, (as learned men have noted) that Hilary in his twelve Books
concerning the Trinity, never called the holy Spirit God, never said that he is
to be adored, but only to be obtained: which is likewise to be observed in
other Writers both of that and former times. Yea, the true opinion concerning
the holy Spirit, was of so great power, that even after those things, wherein
the holy Spirit began to be accounted for the most hlgh God, almost all the
prayers of the Churches were directed to God the Father, and to Christ, not to
the holy Spirit. And there are yet extant, several Books of the Papists, put
forth in the former age, and containing an account of Religion and Ceremonies
in use among them, where it is expressly declared, that we must observe how
every prayer is directed to God the Father, or to Christ, the Son, and not to
the holy Spirit, because a gift is not asked from the gift it self, but from
the bestower of the gift. Indeed we are not ignorant, that there is an usual
Hymn among them, wherein they pray the holy Spirit to come, and fill the heart
of his People; howbeit, the cause which is alleged, that a gift is not asked
from the gift it self, but from the bestower of the gift, is universal, and it
is clear that regard was had thereunto in most prayers of the Church, and
should have been had in all without exception. Now that custom of praying, is
an open token of the true Opinion, which did at first prevail in the Church.
For if the holy Spirit be the most high God, absolutely equal to the Father,
and to the Son, whom they likewise hold to be the most high God, why was he not
judged worthy of equal honor? why were either all, or at least the greatest
part of prayers not equally directed to him, as to the Father or the Son? This
indeed was the hinderance, that in those first times, it was out of
controversy; as both the holy Scripture does plainly enough testify, and at
this day many (though therein inconstant to themselves) confess that the holy
Spirit is a gift. For which cause Hilary, before cited, illustrating and
confirming his opinion concerning the Trinity, with that saying of Christ, Mat.
28.19. Baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Spirit, does in his second Book concerning the Trinity, at the close
thereof, thus explain the words, In the confession of the Author, and of the
only Begotten, and of the gift, which he does there largely pursue. Wherefore
since they had this opinion concerning the holy Spirit, they directed their
prayers not to him, but to the Father and the Son, the bestower of that gift;
knowing, that a gift is not asked from the gift it self, but from the giver of
the gift. Which custom, even the contrary error has for so many ages not been
able quite to abolish.

CHAP. III.
The holy Spirit is often not joined with God and Christ
The third Argument, That the mention of the holy Spirit, is in many places
omitted, and would not so have been, were he the most high God.

THe third Argument may thence be drawn, that in very many places of the
Scripture, where mention is made of the Father, and of the Son, and sometimes
of Angels, or other things, and persons, there is no mention made of the holy
Spirit; when nevertheless mention ought to have been made of him, no less than
of the Father and the Son; and rather then of the Angels, or of other things
and persons, if he were the most high God, coequal (as they speak) to the
Father and the Son. Which that it may be plain, we will first allege those
places, wherein there is mention made of the Father, and of Christ only; and
then those where mention is made of others, whether Persons, and chiefly
Angels, or things, which ought to have been mentioned much less than the holy
Spirit, if he had been the most high God. But for as much as the places of the
former sort are almost innumerable, we will here recite those only, which are
somewhat more illustrious, and such chiefly, as affirm the same thing of God
and Christ within the compass of the same sentence; the rest we reserve for the
diligence of the Reader.

We will begin from John; in the History of whose Gospel, we will give the
first place to those words of Christ, which are extant chap. 17.3. This is Life
eternal, that they know thee (Father) the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom
thou have sent. We do not now urge, that the Father only is said, to be the
true God; for that we have done in the Sect. 1. chap. 1.
beginning of this work; but that mention is made of the Father only, and of
the Son, and in the knowledge of these two only, eternal life, or the way to
attain it, is placed: when notwithstanding, were the holy Spirit no less the
true God than the Father, it would be necessary that eternal Life should lie no
less in the knowledge of him, than in the knowledge of the Father; and
consequently mention should have been made no less of the one than of the
other; much less that a divine Ambassador should rather be mentioned. Neither
can the Adversaries say, that the knowledge of the holy Spirit, is contained in
the knowledge of the Father, and of Christ. For though this be otherwise most
true, yet is it of no force to weaken our Argument. For the knowledge of the
holy Spirit is contained in the knowledge of God and Christ; but not as of a
person distinct from God the Father, and from Christ; but as of a divine thing
to be communicated unto men from the Father by the Son. For otherwise the
knowledge of Christ is also oftentimes included in the knowledge 2 Cor. 10.5.
Ephesians. 1.17. Col 1.10. 2 Pet. 1.3 and 8.8. and 2.20. and 3.18. 1 John 2, 3 4,
13. cap. 3.6.
of God; and on the contrary, the knowledge of God is comprised in the
knowledge of 2 Cor. 10.5. Ephesians. 1.17. Col 1.10. 2 Pet. 1.3 and 8.8. and 2.20.
and 3.18. 1 John 2, 3 4, 13. cap. 3.6.
Christ; namely, because he that knows and sees Christ, knows and sees
the Father, John 8.19. and 14.7, 9. And on the contrary, none knows the
Father, nor comes to him, but by the Son, Mat. 11.27. John 14.6. So that it is
necessary, if a man will attain the saving knowledge of the Father, that he
know the Son also. Nevertheless, Christ in that place of ours, was not content
to make mention either of the Father alone, or of himself alone, but joined the
knowledge of both together, because his intention was to express those divine
persons, in the knowledge of whom eternal Life consists. If therefore the
holy Spirit were a divine person, distinct from the Father and the Son, he
would no less have mentioned him than those two persons, seeing the obtaining
of eternal Life would consist no less in the knowledge of him, than of them.

But now let us proceed to other things, and because we have begun from John,
let us add other passages, which are extant in the same writer, partly in his
History of the Gospel, partly in the Epistles, and partly in the Revelation. As
for the History of the Gospel, among other passages, Christ spaketh thus, chap.
8.16, etc. (which place we have upon another Sect. 2. chap. 20.
occasion before discoursed) If I judge, my judgment is true, for I am not
alone, but I and the Father that sent me: It is also written in your Law, that
the testimony of two men is true* I am one that bear witness of my self; and
the Father that sent me, bears witness of me. Why now made he not mention
likewise of the holy Spirit, if he be the most high God as well as the Father?
Did he contribute less to the truth of Christ's judgment, than the Father,
although-he were one God with him? Did he less give testimony to Christ? why
therefore did he not mention his testimony, seeing the plurality of witnesses
most worthy of credit, adds greater weight to the testimony; and here Christ
urges both the number and dignity of the witnesses? Certainly in that place, 1
John 5.7. which is at this day commonly read, See the Annot. of Erasmus, and
Version of Luther, set forth in his life time, and Joh. Buckenhag. Pomerian on
the Prophet Jonah.
though extant, neither in the ancient Greek Copies, nor in the Syriack
translation, nor in most of the ancient Books of the Latin Edition, and omitted
by many Greek Interpreters, or Fathers, as they call them, yea, and by some
Latin Interpreters, and rejected by some late Writers, and finally, not very
well agreeing with the rest of the Text, and for the variety of readings
suspected, in that place, I say, t^ere is a peculiar mention made of the
witness of the holy Spirit. And indeed his testimony may peculiarly be recited,
although he be not a divine person distinct from the Father and the Son;
namely, because the testimony which God gave to Christ by him, had something
peculiar from the rest; so that he does seem in a manner to testify a part
from both; but there can no cause be brought, why his testimony was omitted, if
he be a divine person distinct from the Father and the Son: but if he be the
virtue and efficacy of God the Father, his testimony is rightly comprehended in
the testimony of the Father, as it comes to pass in the same chapter of the
first Epistle of John, where the place now under debate, is at this day
commonly read v. 9, 10. which I desire you to confer with the two preceding
verses. To these may be added that place likewise in the 5th. chap. of his
history of the Gospel v. 13. But Jesus answered them, my Father works
hitherto and I work. Yea and all the r^st that follows; where it is spoken
concerning the admirable works of Christ, ^oth that were already done, and that
were afterward to be done, where there is no mention made of the holy Spirit,
who would have had an equal share together with the Father and the Son in
effecting these works, if he had been one and the same God with both. But as we
have declared before, it would be too tedious to rehearse all such places; let
these likewise be looked upon chap. 14, 22 and 15^ 24 and 1^, 3.

Now that we may come to the Epistle of the same Apostle; what is that which is
read 1 Epist. 1.3. Our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ? why is it not added also, with the holy Spirit, if he be a divine
person distinct from both, and yet equal in all things to both, yea, one God
with both? What likewise is that, chap. 2.24. If that which you have heard from
the beginning, shall remain in you, you also shall continue in the Son, and in
the Father? why not also in the holy Spirit? What is that 2 Epist. ver. 3.
Grace be with you, Mercy and Peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of the Father? why not also from the holy Spirit? Concerning
which matter, we will afterward speak more, when we rehearse the salutations of
Paul. Add to these the words of ver. 9. in the same Epistle, He that abides in
the Doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the Son: why not also the
holy Spirit?

As for the Revelation; to omit those places, wherein other things or persons
are joined with God and Christ, which are afterward to be rehearsed by us; how
famous is that place, chap. 5.13. where all the Creatures which are in any
place, are read to have said, Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power be unto him
that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever? why not (as
now a days all the Temples of the Adversaries do ring) glory be to the Father,
and to the Son, and to the holy Spirit? why only to him that sits upon the
Throne, and unto the Lamb? For that he, that sits upon the Throne, is the
same with the Father, whosoever does not understand from that whole 5th
chapter, and from other things written in the same Book, certainly he must
needs be a man of very little understanding.

Hither belong also those words, chap. 11.15. The Kingdoms of this world, are
become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ. And chap. 12.10. Now is
come salvation and strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the Power of his
Christ* Why not also of the holy Spirit? For neither may any one say, that in
the name of our God, the holy Spirit is included. For as we have above Chap. i.
of this Section.
seen, neither is the holy Spirit any where called God in the Scripture; and he
is here called our God, whose christ or Anointed Jesus is; for it is said, and
the power of his Christ; that is, the Christ of our God. But Jesus is not the
Christ of the holy Spirit, nor is so any where called; but the Christ of God
the Father; as is very apparent from the second Psalm. For neither was he
anointed of the holy Spirit, but with the holy Spirit of God, namely, the
Father, Acts 10.38. and also Isa. 42.1. Mat. 12.17. Isa. 61.1. Luke 4.18.
Hitherto belong also those words, chap. 14.4. These are redeemed from among
men, the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb: why not also to the holy
Spirit? Llike things are read of them, which have a part in the first
resurrection, chap. 20.6, But they shall be Priests of God, and of Christ: why
not also of the holy Spirit? So also chap. 21.22. For the Lord God Almighty,
and the Lamb are the Temple of it: and ver. 23. for the Glory of God did
lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof: and chap. 22 1. proceeding out
of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb: and ver. 3. But the Throne of God, and
of the Lamb shall be in it. In which places there is no cause, why the holy
Spirit should be omitted, if he be a divine person distinct from the Father and
the Son, but equal unto both.

Now that we may come to other sacred Writers; what is more clear than those
salutations of the Apostle Paul, which are extant in the beginning of all his
Ep^stles; Grace and peace unto you from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ? Neither is that clause much unlike, which is extant, Ephesians. 6.23. Peace
be to the Brethren, and Love, with Faith, from God the Father, and the Lord
Jesus Christ. We saw also a Salutation like to these of Paul, in the second
Epistle of John, ver. 3. But why does not Paul so much as once wish grace and
peace to the Faithful from the holy Spirit? Was his grace less necessary to the
faithful, though he were the most high God? or, was he less the Author of that
peace or felicity, which Paul wished to the Faithful, or less worthy, to whom
he should expressly give the honor of invocation, then God the Father of
Christ? Certainly even this alone ought to admonish every man, that he should
not think of any third person of the Deity.

Now, that the same Paul does elsewhere pray for the communion of the holy
Spirit, that, as we have seen in the former chapter, makes nothing to the
invocation of the holy Spirit. We have likewise given an answer to those words
of the Revelation, where John prays for Grace and Peace to the Church, from
the seven spirits, which are before the Throne of God. Add hereunto those
prayers of ^he Apostle Paul for the Thessalonians, 1 These. 3 11. Now God
himself, even our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way unto you:
and 2 These 2.15. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father,
who has loved us, etc. Add also those, chap. 1. ult. According to the grace of
our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ. There are also other places extant in the
same Apostle, where there is no mention made of the holy Spirit, when God the
Father and Christ are named. Thus Colos. 2.2. he rehearses the Mystery of God,
even the Father, and of Christ. And 2 These. 1.1. he writes to the Church of
the Thessalonians, in God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. So 1 Timothy 1.1.
he says, that he was an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the commandment of God our
Savior, a^^ the Lord Jesus Christ, who is our hope. For neither may any one
think, that the same person is here described; for besides the very form of the
speech, the custom of the Apostle every where distinguishing God from Christ,
and the collation of other places containing the same sense, shows, that God
the Father, is described by the name of God the Savior. See the beginning of
the second Epistle to the Corinthians, and also of those which are extant to
the Galatians, Ephesians, Collossians, as also the beginning of ^he latter
Epistle to the same Timotheus, and to Titus; in which last place he describes
God in the same manner, as he does here, whilst he calls him, Our Savior.
For neither is that word proper to Christ alone. It does in the first place
agree to God to save, and by his means likewise to others, and especially to
Christ, whom he has raised and sent to be a Savior, and afterward exalted by
his right hand. See Acts 5.31. and 13.23. 1 John 4.14. compared with verse.
9.10. Hence God is called a Savior, in the same Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 2.3.
Where he is manifestly enough distinguished from Christ in the two following
verses. And Chap. 4.10. Tit. 2.3, 4. where he openly distingui^^eth God the
Savior also from Christ, in the two following verses. Which is done likewise
in the last verse of Jude, where it is said; To the only wise God our Savior,
by Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, etc.

Wherefore that we may return to our place, taken out of the first epistle to
Timothy: two different persons, namely the Father and the Son without any
mention of the holy Spirit, are joined together. The like is done in the same
epistle elsewhere. For to omit that place, chap. 5.21. Which pertains to the
second rank before appointed by us. Paul speaks thus. chap. 6.13. I give thee
charge in the sight of God, who quickneth all things, and before Jesus Christ,
who witnessed a good confession. etc. And in the second Epistle to the same
Timothy, chap. 4.1. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his kingdom, etc.
There are also the like words used by the same Apostle Ephesians. 5.5. Where he
denies that any fornicator or unclean person, or covetous person, has any
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of God. And Tit. 2.13. where he
mentions the appearance of the glory of the great God, and of our Savior
Jesus Christ. For whereas certain adversaries, because of the unity of the
article set before the name of God and Christ, contend that the same person is
designed by that name, they a^e therein exceedingly mistaken. For the unity of
the article does not always denote the unity of the subject, but oftentimes
the conjunction of diverse subjects, as we have taught in a like place verse. 4.
of Jude, Sect. 1. chap. 7.
where he says of certain wicked men that they deny the only Master God, and
our Lord Jesus Christ^ Where there is one article prefixed both to that Master
God and to the Lord Jesus Christ, and yet diverse persons, namely God the
Father and Christ, are joined together. Now that diverse persons are understood
by the name of God and Christ in the quoted place, is thence apparent because
Paul, as also other writers perpetually distinguish God put subjectively, as it
is done in both place,, from Christ Jesus. Moreover, if the Apostle in that
place, Ephesians. 5. would have designed the same person, he would have set first the
name of God, as being more general and less distinctly signifying that person
which he intended; and would have subjoyned the name of Christ, as being more
distinct and fitter to explain the same; whereas now ^e does the contrary. For
neither may any one conceive, that the ^postle did it for amplification sake,
intending to ascend from a lower title to an higher. For that would then have
had some place if the word God had bin spoken of some subject ^y way of
Epithet or Predicate, and not made use of to design the very subject it self;
which if it be one, such a gradation is not wont to be observed, but rather the
most special names thereof are wont to be subjoyned to the ge^e^al, the more
distinct to the confused ones. Deservedly therefore both those places, as also
that of Jude, a leadged ^y us on this occasion, ought to be added to the other
examples, whereby we have shown, that God and Christ are wont to be mentioned
without the holy Spirit, who nevertheless should be a like mentioned if he were
a divine person distinct from both, yet equal to both. Such places, as these,
are also ex^ant in Peter, who in the beginning of the latter epistle, twice does
the same thing, which we before showed John and Paul were wont to do. For thus
he says verse. 1. Simon Peter (...) the Apostle of Jesus Christ to them that
have obtained like precious faith with us, through the righteousness of God and
our Savior Jesus Christ. And again, ver. 2. Grace and peace be multiplied unto
you through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ our Lord. Those places,
wherein it is either spoken of them, who have divine empire over us, or of our
duty toward them, do not much differ from the passages hitherto alleged, but
have the same force as to our purpose, as making mention only of God and
Christ, although in a manner somewhat different. Of which we will allege some,
that the reader being admonished by us, may also observe others, that are like
unto them. Hereunto belongs that famous place, 1 Cor. 8.6. Where it is spoken
of them, who have divine empire over us, and are by us to be worshipped with
divine worship: But to us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all
things, and we in him: and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and
we by him. For why is it not added, and one holy Spirit, as some men indulging
their error, durst to add contrary to the credit of all ancient books? indeed
he is added, yea, set before that one Lord and that one God in the same epistle
chap. 12, 4. Because there it was chiefly spoken concerning the holy Spirit,
a^^ his effects in Christians. But here he ought not to be omitted, if he has
divine empire over us, as well as the Father and Christ, and so deserves
divine worship. I say a just cause may be alleged, why he was mentioned,
although he be not a person distinct from God and Christ? for as much as things
are often times in the Sc^ipture joined with persons, and those divine ones, as
has been elsewhere by our men, and we our selves by and by intend by certain
examples also to show. But no just cause can be alleged, why in such places
the holy spirit was omitted, if he be a divine person, every way equal to the
Father and the Son. Hither to belong those words of the same Apostle, which are
extant in the Acts. chap. 20.21. Where he explaineth the sum both of his
preaching and our duty, saying, that he testified both to Jews and Gentiles,
The holy Spirit i^ often not joined with God and Christ
repentance toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ* and those of the
same author, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9, 10. How ye turned from Idols to God, to serve the
living and true God, and to wait for his son from heaven, whom he raised from
the dead, even Jesus which delivered us from the wrath to come. And 2 Thessalonians.
3.5. The Lord direct your heart into the love of God and the patient waiting
for Christ. And that we may also mingle other passages, although written of
another subject; thus says Jude, verse. 1. To them who are beloved in God the
Father, and kept by Jesus Christ. And John in the Revelation brings in these
men, that fear the punishment to be inflicted on them, speaking thus: Fall upon
us, O ye Mountains, and hide us from the face of him that sits upon the
Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. Chap. 6. ult. and Chap. 12.17. Who keep
the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. Chap. 14.12.
Here is the patience of the Saints, who keep the Commandments of God, and the
faith of Jesus. And Chap. 20.4. The souls of them that were beheaded for the
testimony of Jesus, and for the word of God.

You may also every where observe other passages, which do more largely, or in
another form of speech, make mention of God and Christ only, when they speak of
divine things.

Now that we may pass to the second rank of Places, which we before appointed;
there is mention made of Angels, the holy Spirit being omitted. First, in those
words of Christ which are extant in Luke, Chap. 9.26. For whosoever shall be
ashamed of me, and of my words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he
shall come in his own glory, and in his Fathers, and of the holy ^ngels. Like
un^o which, though in a contrary matter, are those words of the same Christ,
which are read, Rev. 3.5^ He that overcomes, etc. I will confess his name
before my Father, and before his Angels. And those of Paul, 1 Timothy 5.21. I
charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, etc.
Who would believe, that the holy spirit could be omitted, and Angels rat^er
mentioned in his stead, were he a divine person distinct from the Father and
the Son, and equal to both? Was a greater weight added to his words, if
omitting the most high God, his servants were mentioned? If omitting the
Creator, his creature, we^e mentioned? You will say, that what we would have
cannon be concluded from that omission; because otherwise the same ^^s to be
concluded concerning the Father. For that he in a place like to these two,
which we have cited out of Luke, 9. and Rev. 3. is omitted, and the Angels only
mentioned, namely, Luke Chap. 12.8. where Christ says, Also, I say unto you,
whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the Son of man also confess
before the Angels of God, etc. I answer, that mention is here made of the
Angels only, because they alone among the heavenly persons shall be really
present in judgment, when Christ shall either confess or deny their names, that
are here spoken of. But in the places before alleged by us, because men^ion is
made of the Father likewise, it appea^eth that Christ and Paul intended to
mention all the heavenly persons, whose sight we ought to reverence, and before
whom it is most honorable to be praised, most dishonorable to be reproved and
rejected, the holy Spirit is often not joined with God and Christ
and so not to pass by them, who either are, or shall hereafter be present by
their power only. Whence it follows, that the holy spirit could not have been
omitted in such places, if he had been a divine person; but should have been
named in stead of the Angels, or if it had pleased the Scripture to name them
also, he should have been set before them.

Now, let us show that other things are wont to be joined with God and Christ,
whilst the name of the holy spirit is omitted. For this we have a notable place
in the Revelation, out of which we have before alleged many testimonies;
namely, Chap. 3.12. where Christ promises a reward to him that overcomes in
these words, I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the City
of my God, new Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my God, and my
new name. Where you see, that between God and Christ, or rather the name of
both, the New Jerusalem, and the name of it is interposed. Why did he not
likewise say, that he would write upon him the name of the holy spirit? Why the
name of the New Jerusalem rather than of the holy spirit, if he be the most
high God? We will shut up all our proofs with that famous place, Heb. 12.22,
23, 24. where not only Angels are joined with God and Christ, but also pious
men, partly alive, partly dead, or their spirits, and certain other sacred
things, to which Christ has given an access unto Christians, but the mention
of the holy Spirit is altogether omitted. For thus there speaks that divine
Writer, But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God,
the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, to the general
assembly and Church of the firstborn, which are written in Heaven, and to God
the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the
Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks
better things than that of Abel. Who would believe that in so large a catalogue
of persons, who for their sove^aign excellency may be called divine, the holy
Spirit could have been omitted, if he were such a divine person as the Father
or Christ?

Neither may any one say, that under the name of God the Judge of all, the holy
Spirit is comprehended. For this would ^e some way tolerable, could but one
plain place of the Scripture be alleged, wherein the holy Spirit is called God.

Again, who perceives not from the places, which were both above and also a
little before in great number alleged, that the name of God put subjectively
does denote the Father, and that he is in that manner distinguished, both from
all other persons, and also from Christ himself? Neither can it seem likely
unto any one, that the Father was he^e omitted, whom we never find in like
places to be passed by. But he was no where mentioned unless there, where
mention is made of God the Judge of all. Neither may any one say, that the
Father indeed is understood, yet not he alone, but also the holy Spirit. For if
more persons were understood, the person of Christ, no less than that of the
holy Spirit, ought to be included in that name, according to the opinion of the
Adversaries, touching the persons of the Deity. But the person of Christ the
Mediator is openly distinguished from that God, as being afterward mentioned
apart. Besides, it is at no hand to be granted, that there are many persons of
God, and not also many Gods and Judges. But here mention is made of God the
Judge of all, and not of Gods the Judges of all.

But some one will perhaps object, That, if the reason drawn from this place
were of force, it would not only follow, that the holy Spirit is no person, but
also no sacred or divine thing, such as we see ^e^e to be recited, or at least
the things here mentioned, are mroe divine than the holy Spirit; which we our
selves will not a^mit.

We answer, That this Objection would have some strength, if all things, at
least the most divine, had been reckoned up, as we see the most divine and holy
persons are all reckoned up; and also if here were the same reason of all
divine things, as is of persons. But the thing is otherwise of the good things,
that are promised us of God by Je^us Christ, namely, of immortality and
remission of sins, there is no express mention made; but only the place thereof
is figuratively mentioned, namely, Mount Sion, and the heavenly Jerusalem, and
the middle efficient cause thereof, namely Christ the Mediator of the new
Covenant, and the sprinkling of Blood, which speaks better things than that
of Abel; and the prime efficient cause of both even God. In like manner,
neither was the holy Spirit mentioned, which is contained among the good
things, which are promised to us. Namely, because he would reckon up all the
persons, with whom we have some conjunction and communion by right of the
Christian religion; so that we may be rightly said to have access unto them:
but the divine author intended to mention only those sacred and divine things,
which are in some sort without us, and elegantly answer, and are in some sort
opposed to those things to which the people of Israel had heretofore access,
when the Law was given them out of Mount Sinai by Moses the Mediator. But in
this number is not the divine efficacy or virtue which flows from God to us,
and is sent into our hearts, so neither the remission of sins and immortality.
But were the holy Spirit a person, we had come to him no less than to the
Father, and should have intimate communion and society with him; neither could
he by any means be omitted in so large and accurate an enumeration of those
persons with whom we have conjunction. But it is no marvel, that ^e is here
omitted, seeing John, as we saw before, describing our communion with divine
persons, which deserve to be so called by way of excellency, says, 1 John 1.3.
That our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ:
Intimating that it consists within the compass of those persons. Indeed the
communion of the holy Spirit is with us, because we are partakers of him: but
we are not said to have fellowship with him, because our fellowship is not with
the gift, but either with him, who bestows the gift on us, or with him that
has the same gift with us, or is in some sort of the same condition.

CHAP. IV.
from Matthew. 11.27
The fourth Argument from Matthew. 11.27. None knows the Son but the Father,
neither knows any one the Father but the Son, etc.

WE have hitherto alleged testimonies enough, wherein the mention of the holy
Spirit is omitted; but ought not to be omitted if he were a divine person. We
will now subjoyne one place, that is different from the former testimonies, and
more like to them, wherein something is expressly denied of the holy spirit.
Because though it make not express mention of the holy Spirit, yet does it in
general deny something of him, that could not be denied, were he a divine
person, distinct from the Father and the Son, and equal unto both. This place
is extant Matthew. 11.27. where Christ speaks thus: None knows the Son, but
the Father, neither knows any one the Father, save the Son, etc. But how
could this be true were the holy Spirit a divine person, distinct from the
Father and the Son, and in all things equal unto both? for some other besides
the Father, would have known the Son; and some other besides the Son would have
known the Father, namely, the holy Spirit; Yea he would have known him without
the revelation of another.

The Defense of the Argument.
Neither can it be here said, that the word none is put only to exclude
creatures. For otherwise why is it added, save the Father? Why is he excepted?
Is he happily ranked among the creatures, so that he was there expressly to be
excepted? For that only is excepted, which otherwise is comprehended under the
general name, and which, had it not been excepted, might be thought to have
been comprehended under the ^ene^al speech, and so the same either affirmed or
denied of it, which is affirmed or denied of others belonging to the same kind.
There is the same difficulty concerning the Son, if you consider the opinion of
the adversaries. For they hold him, as he is the Son of God, to be no creature.
But here he is looked upon as he is the Son. Neither may any one say, that the
holy Spirit is tacitly included in the Father and the Son. For if the holy
Spirit be a person distinct from both, by what right is this affirmed? Again,
is the holy Spirit more included in the Father and the Son, than either the Son
in the Father, or contrariwise, the Father in the Son? Certainly no more.
Wherefore if no mention be made of the holy Spirit, because he is included in
both, there ought to be no express mention made either of the Son, or of the
Father, because the one is included in the other. And truly the mention of the
Father does mo^e openly include the Son, or the mention of the Son, include the
Father, than the mention of both does the holy Spirit, if he be a person
distin^t from both; yea there is not so much as any suspicion, that he is
included. But there the very names have a mutual relation each to other.
Wherefore mention should rather have been made of the holy Spirit, than either
of the Father, when it is spoken concering the knowledge of the Son; or of the
Son, when it is spoken concerning the knowledge of the Father.

Finally, neither may any, one say, that the holy Spirit is comprehended among
them, to whom the Son will reveal, the Father or himself; because he bestows
on him, as the Essence, so also the knowledge of the Father. For to omit, that
nothing is revealed to any one, unless he does already exist; it is here spoken
of such a revelation, as happens at a certain time, and depends on the will
of the Son, and not on the necessity of nature. But that revelation, if it
ought to have such a name, as it is caused by the procession of the holy Spirit
from the Essence of the Son, is conceived both to have been from all eternity,
and not to depend on the will of the son, but on the necessity of nature. Does
not the thing it self intimate, that men are here understood to whom Christ is
willing to deliver the knowledge of the Father by the doctrine of the Gospel.
Though further, this very thing that is affirmed in this exception,
demonstrateth the holy spirit not to be the most high God. For he is not the
most high God, who receives his Essence, and whatsoever he has from another:
but he who has that from himself, as we have taught in our Sect. 2. Chap. ^.
disputation concerning Christ.

CHAP. V.
The fifth Argument, That the holy Spirit is very often distinguished from God.

AFter that we seem to have spoken enough of those things which are not
mentioned in the Scripture, concerning the holy Spirit, and which would not
have been omitted were he the most high God; it follows, that we view those
things also which are expressly delivered concerning him in the holy Scripture,
and are such; as that they show the holy Spirit not to be the most high God.
And they are of two sorts; For some are such, as being properly taken, agree no
more to persons, than to other things, or also at no hand agree to persons, but
are only proper to things: But some are such, as taken properly, agree to
persons only; but are ascribed to the holy Spirit by a certain figure. To
which we will add those also which primarily and by themselves agree to
singular substances, and only consequently unto other things. We beginning
from the first will teach that the holy Spirit is so far from being the most
high God, as that he is not a person: although this last is not proved by all
the arguments we shall allege but yet it is by many of them.

The holy Spirit is distinguished from God.
Our first Argument therefore drawn from these things, which agree no more to
persons, than things, shall be this. That the holy Spirit is oftentimes most
openly distinguished from God, or the Lord. Now, that the holy spirit is
oftentimes, and most openly distinguished from God, or the Lord even those
places do show, wherein he is called the Spirit of God, or of the Lord; or God,
or the Lord calls him his spirit, many of which are extant in the holy
scripture; of which we have before seen one or two, alleged by the
adversaries, to show that the holy spirit is called God, or the Lord, or
understood by his name; namely, those two, 2 Samuel 23.3. Isa. 63.10. Likewise of
many passages that are here and there extant in the scripture add these few:
Isa. 11.2. and 42.1. and 59.21. and 61.1. Joel 1.28. Matthew. 3.16. and 12.28.
Romans 15.19. 1 Cor. 2.11, 12.14. and 3.16. and 6.11. We have above likewise seen
other places out of the same Epistle, where the holy spirit is in another
manner distinguished from God, chap. 6.19. and chap. 12.4, 5, 6. and 2 Cor. 13.
last: which places are wont to be alleged by the Adversaries, to show, that
the holy spirit is a divine person. But in a manifest thing, no more proofs are
needful. Now we have reckoned up those places of the scripture chiefly,
wherein the adversaries do either confess, that it is spoken concerning the
very person of the holy spirit, or also urge it least any one should contend,
that it is spoken only concerning the gift proceeding from the same person, and
that it only, but not the holy spirit properly so called, is termed the spirit
of God: concerning which distinction we will treat in the following Argument.

The Defense of the Argument.
BUt they say, that when the holy spirit it is distinguished from God, or the
Lord, that by the name God, or the Lord, the Father is understood, or also the
son, who likewise is the Lord. For therefore he is called the spirit of both,
because he proceeds from both. A like exception we have seen conce^ning
Christ, who is also most frequently distinguished from God? Now the same
things, that we have there spoken to that exception, Sect. 2. Chap. 1.
or like unto them, may here likewise be alleged; Wherefore since they may
thence be fetched, there is no need to repeat them here.

CHAP. VI.
The holy Spirit is the Power of God
The sixth Argument, The holy Spirit is the Power of God.

THe second Argument of this rank, but the sixth of this Section, shall be
this, that the holy Spirit is the power or efficacy of God, namely, (that we
may explain it by the by) which proceeds from God, and issuing unto men, does
sanctify and consecrate them, and produce various and admirable effects in
them: which power they are wont to call divine inspiration; but the power and
efficacy of God, can at no rate be the most high God, or a person of supreme
Deity; as shall better be understood in the Defense of this Argument.

But even our Adversaries, who are a little more versed in the holy Scripture,
are aware, that the holy Spirit is the power or efficacy of God. For among
others, that place is very plain, Luke 24.49. where Christ says, And I send
the promise of my Father upon you: but abide ye in the City of Jerusalem, until
ye be endued with power from on high* Where, by all Interpreters that I know,
it is observed, that under the name of that power, with which the Apostles were
to be endued, the holy Spirit is understood; and this was that Promise of the
Father, from Christ to be sent upon them. See among other places, Acts 1.4, 5,
8. and 2.4, 33. Therefore this place also was brought, to illustrate those
other places, in which the holy Spirit is signified by the appellation of the
divine Power. It likes me to set down here the words of two most learned
Interpreters of the holy Scripture, one a Papist, the other a Protestant, in
their Annotations on Luke 1.35. where the Angel says to the Virgin Mary, The
holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the Power of the most high shall
overshadow thee. For the former John Maldonat.
Interpreter, after he had said, that Gregory, Chrysostom, Victor, Damascen,
Beda, Theophilact, interpret the Power of the Most high, to be Christ, or the
Son of God, adds, Others think, that he whom before he called the holy Spirit,
now is called the Power of the most high God; as Euthymius, whom I rather
follow, though of less account, and the only Author, yet saying things more
like truth than many, and those of greater esteem. For it is a repeating of the
same sentence, such as the Hebrews chiefly in songs do frequently use, one
sentence concluding one verse, which in the fore part of the verse is expressed
in some words, in the latter is repeated in other words, as Psalm. 2.4. He that
dwells in the heavens, shall deride them, and the Lord shall mock them. For
in the same manner we see, the Angel a little before to have said, Hail thou
that art full of favor, the Lord is with thee, varying the words, the sense
being the same. And the holy Spirit is wont to be termed, as the Finger, so
also the Power of God by the same similitude; as beneath, chap. 24.49. But stay
ye in the City, until ye be endued with Power from on high. Therefore Power and
Spirit are wont most often to be coupled in the holy Scriptures; as below,
chap. 4.14. and in Acts 10.38. Romans 1.4. and 15.13. 1 Cor. 2.4. Ephesians. 3.16. 1
These. 1.5. But the John Piscator.
latter so writes. And the Power of the most high, that is, the same holy
Spirit, who is the Power proceeding from the Most High, that is, God the
Father. A description. For the same sentence is repeated in other words by way
of explication. So below, ver. 24.49. the holy Spirit is named the Power from
on high. To them also, other most learned See John Calvin.
men assent. For that many of the Ancients have understood, the Son of God by
the Power of the most high, that I repeat not the reason brought by a most
learned Interpreter of the Papists, it is also refuted by other Arguments.
First, because Mat. 1.20. where the Angel expresses the same thing to Joseph,
he mentions only the holy Spirit; nor would he have left out the Son of God, if
Gabriel had by name conjoined him with the holy spirit in this place, and had
made him Author of his own conception: seeing there was no greater cause of
mentioning him here, than there. Moreover, because by this means, Christ should
be made the son of himself, seeing in the former Chap. 31:
Section, we have showed that Christ was called the son of God, by reason of so
wonderful a conception and generation.

Perhaps some other will say, that the Power of the Most High, in this place
signifies, neither the son, nor the holy spirit: but the efficacy flowing from
the holy spirit. For here two efficient Causes of the conception of Christ are
mentioned; one the Person of the holy Spirit, the other his Power. But first,
that reason which we now brought concerning the son, is against it, because by
this reason, the holy spirit should be made the Father of Christ: of which by
it self, we shall afterward in the following chapter treat. Furthermore if any
person here had been to be named besides the Fat^er of Christ, such especially,
who, being to come upon the Vi^gin, was to cause the conception of Christ, the
son had been to be named, whom the Adversaries hold, to have descended from
heaven into the Virgins womb, and there to have assumed humane flesh. But we
have already showed, and it is laid down in this exception which we now refute,
that the son was not named in the words of the Angel, as the Author of his
conception. Lastly, such an opinion should require, that that Power, of which
in the words of the Angel there is mention, should be called the power of the
holy spirit, or by the name of the Most High, whose power he is said to be,
should be understood the holy spirit. But any one sees the former was not done.
The latter is hereby refelled, because, both by the following words, and also
by comparing with the 32d* verse, it sufficiently appears, that by the words,
The Most High, the Father of Jesus Christ is understood. Wherefore this is
another place, from whence it is proved, that the holy spirit is the divine
power or efficacy.

The third place is extant in Paul. 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. where he says, And my
speech, and my preaching was not in the enticing words of man's wisdom, but in
demonstration of the spirit, and of power, that your faith should not stand in
the wisdom of men, but in the Power of God. Where you see the Apostle, instead
of that which he had before expressed in two words, spirit and power,
afterward puts only the power of God. To which are to be added also those
words of Peter, in Acts 10.38. of Christ, how God anointed him with the holy
Ghost, and with Power: and those of the Angel, in Luke 1.17. of John Baptist,
And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias. For the same thing
in very deed is designed by the name of spirit, or holy spirit and power.
Neither is it of moment, that some where the power of the holy spirit is
mentioned. For both of power and efficacy, there may be again other power and
efficacy depending on that former: And furthermore, it is to be observed, that
the Genitive Case, of the holy spirit, may with good right be taken for the
Genitive of the species. After which manner, both the gift of the holy spirit,
is taken for that gift, which is the holy spirit, Acts 2.38. and 10 45 comp.
chap 11.15, 16, 17. and the earnest of the spirit, for the earnest which is the
holy spirit, 2 Cor. 1.22. and 5 5. as both of it self it is easily understood,
as also by comparing with the words, Ephesians. 1.14. is perceived. So also the
promise of the holy spirit, Acts 2.33. is taken for the thing promised, which
is the holy spirit. But there is no need of more examples, when frequently
enough the Genitive Case put after another Noun, signifies its certain species,
as it is observed by learned men.

To the places hitherto brought, the words, Ephesians. 3.7, 20. may be added, in
which, if in the place of divine power, you put the holy spirit, you will see,
that there indeed will be no difference of the sense: as also on the contrary,
where mention is made of the holy spirit, if you put power, or divine efficacy,
or divine inspiration, there will arise no diversity of meaning; although
there, where the name of Power, as a genus, is put before it, the manner of
speaking is to be somewhat changed: or where that is added for explication
sake, it is not any more afterward to be repeated. Those words also of Christ
in Luke, chap 11.20. may be added, in which he affirms, that by the Finger of
God, he cast out Devils. Where it is easily to be seen, that by the name of
Finger, the power and efficacy of God is understood; as it also happens
elsewhere Psalm. 8.4. compared with, Exodus 8.19.
in the holy Scripture: in which manner also the hand of God is taken. For
therefore that by which God performs his Works, that is, his Power or Efficacy,
is termed Hand or Finger, because we are wont to effect our works with hands
and fingers; as others have long since observed. But Christ expressing the same
thing in Man 12 28. says, that he cast out Devils in the spirit of God: so
that the Finger of God, or the Power and Efficacy, is the same with the Spirit
of God.

Lastly, That the holy Spirit is the Power or Efficacy of God, thence
appears, because both prop^ecies, and other admirable gifts and works, which
come from that Power and Efficacy, which we are wont to call the divine
Inspiration, are all ascribed to the holy Spirit, as to the next cause, and
inwardly working in men; and that not because it is revealed by God, that the
holy Spirit does effect them, but because it is from the thing it self manifest
enough, if it appear that they are performed by a divine Power. See Luke.
1.41, 67. and 2.26, 27. Acts 4.8, 31. and 6.10, 55. and 9.31. and 10.44, 45,
47. and 11.15, 16, 24, 28. and 13.2, 4, 9, 52. and 15.8, 28. and 16.6, 7.20.23,
28. and 21.4, 11. and (that I may pass by many more places of holy Scripture) 1
Cor. 12.4, 7, etc. 2 Pet. 1.3. ult. Whence also, when the divine Writers would
signify any one to be divinely inspired, and filled with divine power, they
say, that he is filled with the holy Spirit; or using some like manner of
speaking, affirm him to be endued with a divine Spirit. But if the holy Spirit
were not the very Power and Efficacy of God, but a person distinct from the
Father and Son, there would be no cause, why all those things should be
ascribed to the holy Spirit, as the next cause, and inwardly working in men.
For as much as it might come to pass, that the Father and the son by their
Efficacy, might effect all those things, the person of the holy spirit not
intervening, as a middle cause. Certainly, although it should be manifest, that
prophecy, or any other gift, comes from God, nevertheless, it could not appear
without manifest divine revelation, that the holy spirit did intervene, as a
middle and next cause, to perform that thing. But the holy scriptures do so
speak of that thing, that they plainly enough show, that it is manifest by the
thing it self without other peculiar revelation. Neither indeed Paul, when
writing to the Corinthians, he said, 1 Cor. 2.1.
his words were in demonstration of spirit, to wit, divine: or among other
things commended himself, as the servant of God 2 Cor. 6.4.
in the holy Spirit; would at length be understood by his words, that he was
endued with the holy Spirit, and that from it his words or deeds came, but from
the thing it self. But if you say, that therefore al those things are ascribed
to the holy Spirit, and that thing was manifest to all believers, because the
holy spirit is God himself, from whom no man is ignorant all those things come;
he besides that he shall take as granted the thing here controverted, and
unknown to those men, to whom Paul, for instance, chiefly would demonstrate,
that he spoke by the spirit of God; also will not loose the knot. For nether
are those works ascribed, to the holy spirit in the same manner as to the
Father, who is by the confession of all, the supreme God: nor in that manner,
by which they are ascribed to the son, but, as also the Adversaries themselves
in part confess, by a certain proper and peculiar manner; that is, as to the
next cause, and inwardly working in men. And this is that, which the holy
scriptures in the places before alleged, and infinite other places, would have
us understand. But concerning this thing, nothing should be manifest from the
works themselves performed by divine power, if the holy spirit were that
supreme God; and yet in person distinct from the Father and son. Yea, if the
holy spirit were the supreme God, it should rather be concluded, that the holy
spirit is not such a cause of those works. For it belongs not to the supreme
God, that personally inhabiting in men, he should do any works in or by them,
but that he inspire Power and Efficacy to them, and by that means perform works
to be admired in or by them.

A larger Defense of the Argument.
SUfficiently, as it seems to us, we have hitherto confirmed our Argument. Yet
nevertheless, since two answers either are wont, or may seem to be made to it,
they are to be refelled by us. The former is against the major Proposition of
the Argument, which by an instance, the Adversaries endeavor to infringe. For
they say, that Christ also is called the Virtue or Power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24.
and yet notwithstanding, he is not only a Person, but also the most high God
himself. But this latter we have above refuted: and by this very thing also, is
sufficiently refelled, in that he is the virtue of God, to wit, the most high,
and so is manifestly distinguished from the Supreme God. But further, we take
the name of Power and Efficacy, in our Argument, properly. But when will they
prove, that Christ is the Virtue or Power of God properly so called? For
whether they take the word Power, for that Virtue which naturally dwells in
God, or for that which flows from him as its fountain, and is also in some
manner communicated to the creatures; neither of them is a person, but a
quality; and that indeed, an essential property of God common to three persons,
as they will have it. But that Christ is a person, all know, and urge. The same
may be also understood by the other term of excellency, which in the same place
(1 Cor. 1.24.) is given to Christ, to wit, that he is called the Wisdom of God.
For the Wisdom of God speaking properly, is his attribute, or natural property,
by which God both understands all things, and disposes most aptly his Counsels
and Works. But this is in no sort a person, but in like manner is his
attribute, or natural property, common to three persons; as is the opinion of
the Adversaries. Certainly, since Christ is a person distinct from the Father,
and the Father in himself, or his own person, has all Wisdom, whereby he
understands and disposes all things; neither may any one understand, by
another person, but by himself, and Wisdom implanted in himself; Christ cannot,
speaking properly, be the Wisdom of God. Therefore neither in like manner, the
Power of God. For there is the same reason of both. It is therefore to be
understood, as the preaching of the Cross in the same 1 Cor. 1.18.
place to the Corinthians is termed, the Virtue or Power of God: in like manner
also the Gospel, Romans 1.16. to wit, because in it the singular Virtue or Power
of God is put forth, and manifestly appears to all Believers: so also Christ is
called the Virtue or Power, and likewise Wisdom; because in him the supreme
Power and Wisdom of God has been put forth, and in him may most clearly be
perceived by all believers. Let the place it self be looked, and ver. 18.24. be
compared together; and that it is so, any one will easily understand. By these
things then it appears, that this instance is of no moment to invalid our
Argument, seeing we speak of the Efficacy of God properly so called, and have
showed, that the holy Spirit is the very Power or Efficacy of God, proceeding
and flowing from him. Certainly, by the Opinion of the Adversaries themselves,
it is necessary that in one wise Christ, in an otherwise the holy Spirit, be
the Power of God. For if Christ be the substantial Power of God, having his
proper person, and the holy Spirit also be such a Power of God, there will be
two Powers, or substantial Virtues in God, having their personallity; those two
persons, as such, shall be altogether like to themselves: Of which, neither can
be. Not that, because the one or the other efficacy should be in vain; since
one may altogether suffice to do all things. But in him, who himself does
nothing in vain, nothing also is altogether in vain, or nothing over much. Yea,
it is also impossible, because two forms wholly of the same Nature, cannot
consist in the same subject, unless perhaps according to diverse parts; which
has no place in God. For otherwise the thing would proceed in infinitum. Of
which we shall elsewhere Book 2. S^ct. 1. Chap. 5.
speak more plainly.

And this latter therefore cannot consist, because they both hold, and are
constrained to hold, that those divine persons, so far as they are distinct
from the Essence, are unlike. Wherefore, that those absurdities, of which we
have spoken, may not happen, it is necessary to determine, that the holy Spirit
is such a power as is not a person. And thus much concerning the former Answer
to our Argument.

The latter Answer is placed in a distinction, which otherwise the Adversaries
often use, when there is speech of the holy Spirit. For they say, the term holy
Spirit is taken in a double manner: one while for the third person of the
Deity: another while for his effect or gift flowing from him, and that indeed
properly is called, holy Spirit; but this Metonimically, in that the Cause is
put for the effect. I remember not indeed to have read, that that answer is
accommodated to this our Argument. But because it may yet be accommodated; it
will be worth our labor to examine it here, chiefly because it may seem that
nothing may be said more speciously. For when we by Power or Efficacy of God,
understand a certain force flowing from God, and his natural power into men,
some one may say, that the holy Spirit is indeed such a power of God, but taken
metonymi^ally. For that Efficacy of God, is the effect or gift of the holy
Spirit, properly so called. But in this place is not disputed of the holy
Spirit metonymically, but properly taken* not of his gift, but of himself.
Therefore our Argument is ineffectual, and makes nothing to the matter. But we
somewhat otherwise take the Gift of the holy Spirit in this Answer, or at least
stretch it wider than the Adversaries are commonly wont. For so much as I have
been able hitherto to find, they are wont by the gift of the holy Spirit, to
understand those admirable faculties implanted in men by divine Power; as the
faculty of prophesying, or speaking with tongues, and other, whether visible,
as they are called, or invisible, or if you had rather more hidden effects of
the holy Spirit in men. But that Power of God, of which the places of holy
Scripture, brought by us, speak, is not such a faculty, or faculties rather,
but the efficient of them, although it again flow from power natural resident
in God. Wherefore, if the gift of the holy Spirit should be taken so strictly,
this Answer could not be fitted to our Argument, or the places by which we have
confirmed it; unless any one would perhaps say, that in all those places in
which the holy Spirit, and Power of God, are put as equipollent, or the one is
put instead of the other, the name of the holy Spirit, or divine Power, is used
for such a faculty divinely ingenerated in a man; but no where for the divine
Efficacy that effects such faculties in men; which neither will the Adversaries
easily say, nor can it in any manner consist; as partly the places themselves,
a little more diligently looked into, will show to every one; partly will be
understood by the things which follow. Wherefore that that distinction may seem
to make something against our Argument, we will suppose that our Adversaries do
make that divine Efficacy, also flowing from the natural Power of God, which is
the cause of wonderful effects in men, to be the gift of the holy Spirit, and
so to be understood by the name of the holy Spirit, not properly, but by a
Metonymie only; namely, because it flows from the third Person of the Deity,
which properly may be called the holy Spirit.

That therefore we may refell this exception, we say that it is in no wise to
be granted, that that Power and Efficacy of God, which is in this place
understood, is only metonymically termed the holy Spirit, and not rather
properly, as far indeed as propriety has place here. For if it should be
called only metonymically, the Spirit of God or the holy Spirit, to wit because
it comes from the holy Spirit properly so called; there would be no cause why
it should not be called likewise the Father or Son, since it should no less
come from the Father and Son, then from the holy Spirit even according to the
adversaries opinion, since it is some effect of the natural power of God: which
according to their opinion is common to the three persons of the Deity; and is
indeed first in the Father, as the fountain of the Deity; then by him, as they
would have it, in the son and holy spirit, who from him have their Essence.
Neither may you say that that inspiration is therefore called rather the holy
spirit, then the Father or son; because it immediately proceeds from the holy
spirit, but from the Father and son only mediately; for what hinders the
Father or the son; since they have the same power in themselves, efficacious
for all things, which the person of the holy spirit has, to put it forth also
by themselves, as well as the person of the holy spirit? as we see by the holy
Scripture they have indeed put it forth. Yea how can it be, in this unity of
Essence, and all things pertaining to it, that the Father and the son should
not as immediately put forth their power, as the holy spirit? For it is judged
that the Father and son have so commuicated their virtue and power, whence that
efficacy or divine inspiration immediately comes, to the holy Spirit, as that
nevertheless it remained the same in number in Father and Son, and is put forth
by the three persons by the same a^t altogether. Whence therefore is that
difference, that the holy Spirit puts it forth immediately, the Father and the
Son mediately? But if the Father and the Son put forth that force and efficacy
alike immediately; there is no cause, wherefore that force should be termed
more the holy Spirit than the Father or the Son, if it be not the holy Spirit
himself, but be called so therefore only because it comes from him. We repeat
not that which we have said before, that although the Father and Son should put
it forth only mediately, the holy Spirit immediately, yet that could not ^e
manifest by the thing it self, without a peculiar divine revelation; when
nevertheless we see, as soon as any thing has been manifest to have been done
by divine virtue or inspiration, that forthwith is ascribed to the holy Spirit,
as the next cause. But further, the adversaries cannot use that answer in some
of the places brought by us, unless together they overthrow one of their chief
Arguments, whereby they endeavor to prove the holy Spirit to be a Suppositum
and person; to wit, that which is drawn from the actions proper to persons, or
at least Suppositums. For in the first place brought by us from Luke 1.34.
where the holy Spirit is said to come upon Mary, the Adversaries themselves
seem to understand the person of the holy Spirit, especially since the action
of coming upon agrees not properly but to a person, or at least to a
Suppositum. I omit that also in the place ( Ephesians. 3.20.) cited by us, the
virtue or divine power is said to work in the Apostles. Besides we shall see in
the following Chapter a new Reason by which that Answer may be overthrown.

CHAP. VII.
The seventh Argument, That Christ should be the Son of the holy Spirit if he
were the most high God.

THe third Argument of this rank, which respects the defense of the next
foregoing also may be this; That if the holy Spirit were God, or at least some
person, Christ also should be the son of the holy Spirit, yea, more rightly
should be termed his son than the Fathers; which thing overthrows it self. For
we have seen above that ( Sect. 2. Chap. 31.) Christ therefore was first termed
the Son of God, because the holy Spirit came upon Mary his Mother, and the
power of the most high overshadowed her, and so Christ was concei^ed and
begotten by the power of the holy Spirit. But if the holy Spirit be a person,
who immediately put forth that force in the womb of the Virgin, and produced
Christ, the holy Spirit is rather the Father of Christ, than God the Father,
who performed that only by the intervening of another person. Besides that
sanctification, John 10.34, 35. which Christ himself b^ings as a cause why he
called himself of right the son of God, will agree also to the holy spirit,
especially by the adversaries doctrine. For they, The holy Spirit should be the
Father of Christ.
although they would have all works to without, as they speak, to be common to
the whole Trinity, yet affirm that Creation agrees more properly to the Father,
Redemption to the Son, Sanctification to the holy Spirit. Lastly, Paul also,
Romans 1.4. as in like manner we have seen above, says, Christ was constituted
the Son of God in power, according to the spirit of sanctification, by the
resurrection of the dead: making the spirit of sanctification the proper and
next cause of that filiation. But if he be a person, or comes from the person
of the holy spirit, the holy spirit will be the Father of Christ. From which
absurdity our opinion is far remote, which makes not the holy spirit a person,
but the power and efficacy of God; which, however it concurred to the
generation of the Son, yet it concurred not as a Father, but as that by which
the Father begat. But if the holy spirit be not a person, neither is he the
most high God, as who is of necessity a person, and indeed of this thing is
here the question between us and the adversaries; Whether the holy spirit be a
divine person, namely, distinct from the Father. Therefore let this be the
third Argument of this rank.

CHAP. VIII.
The eighth Argument, That the holy Spirit is given by God to men.

THe fourth Argument drawn from those things which are openly delivered in the
holy Scripture concerning the holy Spirit, shall be this; That the holy Spirit
is given to men by God, and that men obtain, receive and have him from God by
prayers; as numberless places of the holy Scriptures show; out of which it is
sufficient to have looked into but these few, Luke 11.13. John 7.39. and 14.16,
17. Acts 5.32. and 15.8. Romans 5.5. 1 Cor. 6.19. Whence also the holy Spirit is
te^med a Gift, Acts 11.17. which compare with the precedent: Yea, in all those
places w^ere mention is made of the gift of the holy Spirit. For we showed
above ( Chap. 6. of this Section) That there is not there the Genitive Case of
the Efficient but of the Species: otherwise both the gifts rather than the gift
of the holy Spirit had been to be mentioned, and by it had not ^een signified,
that men either have received, or were to receive the holy Spirit, which
notwithstanding the holy Scriptures using that manner of speech, would
altogether show; but only some effect of it.

Now by these things it is evinced, that the holy Spirit is not the most high
God; for he is given or bestowed by none upon any, is obtained of none by
prayers. For first, Every Gift, and whatsoever is obtained by prayer, is in the
power of the giver. But the most high God is not in the power of another;
otherwise by this very thing he should have some one above himself, and
moreover should not be most high. Besides, The holy Spirit is given to men.
the gift is made also his to whom it is given, so as that it may be possessed
by him. But may the most high God be so a mortal man's, as that he may be
possessed by him? Moreover, to what end should so great a gift be given to men?
What fruit would there be of it? No other certainly can be imagined, but that
those effects may exist in a man, which the holy Scriptures testify to be
produced by the holy Spirit. What then? Is it needful, to the end God should
fill any man with such effects and gifts that he himself be given to him? When
the Father fills any man with such gifts, is it necessary, that he himself
should be given to him? Why then may not the holy Spirit be able to do the
same, which the Father, if in like manner he be most high and so the same God
With the Father?

Lastly, What cause is there why the holy Spirit should be obtained by us from
the Father or Son, if he himself be the most high God? Why is he not given by
himself if so be he may be given?

A larger Confirmation and Defense of this Argument.
TO these things I see not what they can answer, who doubt not to affirm
(neither indeed can they otherwise, as it shall hereafter be made manifest)
that the very person of the holy Spirit is given to men, together with his
effects. Therefore others endeavor to decline the blow, that they affirm, that
not the holy Spirit properly so called, is given to men by God: but its effect,
or rather various effects, such as are those which, 1 Cor. 12.8, etc. are
largly enough rehearsed, and others, common to all believers. For these are by
a Metonymie signified by the name of the holy spirit, when he is said to be
given unto men, and so to be received and had of them. For the efficient cause
is put for the effect. Although some who say, there is a Metalepsis in the
phrase, seem to take the thing a little otherwise. For neither do they seem to
take the name of the holy Spirit it self for his effects or gifts, but for that
very divine person which they hold. Nevertheless, in the mean while, they
signify that the giving, passively taken, is attributed to him only
improperly; because that which may properly agree to the effects, may be also
improperly attributed to the efficient cause it self; seeing the effects of the
holy Spirit may be properly given, not he himself. And indeed both these seem
to themselves to deal more warily, than those who simply confess that the holy
Spirit himself is given, yet in the mean time they do not perceive, that both
this hole by which they endeavor to get out is stopped; and likewise, although I
should somewhat enlarge it to them, yet are they no whit less held fast bound.
For first, it is false, that the effects only of the holy Spirit, not the holy
Spirit himself, is given to men. And further, that when he is said to be given,
or received by us, or had, it is said but by a Metonymie or Metalepsis.
Besides, although it was granted, it must be no whit the less confessed, that
the holy Spirit is not the most high God.

As to the former; we shall demonstrate it, first by certain general reason,
and common to all those places of which we treat; then by other more special
and proper to certain places; and lastly from certain hypotheses of the
Ad^ersaries.

As to the general reason; If by the name of the holy Spirit in these places,
of which we treat, is understood some divine and holy inspiration, or some
power flowing from God, which is as it were breathed into men; the holy Spirit
is properly given, that is, not by a Metonymie only, or by a Metalepsis is said
to be given unto men, to be received and had of them. That the thing is so,
will be afterward understood. For we shall first show that such an inspiration
is understood by the name of the holy spirit, when he is said to be given to
us, to be received and had by us: although it may easily seem truth to any one
by it self. Christ himself showed it and represented it by a certain external
breathing, when after his resurrection See Joh. 20.22.
appearing to his disciples, he said, Receive ye the holy Spirit. For John
relates, that he being about to utter those words breathed into or upon the
disciples. For what other thing would he show by that action, than that he was
about in a more divi^e and more secret manner to breath on them, and inspire
into them some heavenly power, which what it should be, he taught presently in
express words, When he added, Receive ye the holy Spirit. But besides, the same
thing is thence manifest, because the holy spirit in the pl^ce above noted by
us, and the like to them, is taken in that sense in which at that time it was
taken commonly among the Jews. For do we think that John Baptist, when
speaking to the people ^e said; that Christ should baptize with the holy
spirit, did use that term in a signification unknown to the people? or that the
people hearing the same, did not understand what John said? But this is that
spirit, which Christ promised to them that ask, and which was afterward given
to the Apostles and other disciples, as is understood as well by the thing it
self, as also by the place, Acts 1.4, 5. is manifest. What else meant Peter
when he discoursed to the people of the holy spirit newly poured out, and
promised the same to the auditors, Verse. 38.
if they would repent and be baptized into the name of Jesus Christ; do we
think, that he used the word holy Spirit, in a signification unknown to them,
that is, that he would not be understood, or at least was not understood of
them? In like manner when after Chap. 5. in the Senate of the Jews, he said, We
are his witnesses of these things, and so is also the holy spirit, which God
has given to them that obey him; do we think that he used the word holy spirit
otherwise than those Elders of the Jews were wont to take it? Or did not he
therefore mention these things that the adversaries well understanding what the
term holy spirit signyfied, and how much was to be given to its testimony,
might give credit to his sayings, and the rest of the Apostles? The same is to
be held of the words of the same Peter used in the house of Cornelius, in which
he affirmed, that Christ was anointed with the holy Spirit, that by this means
he might conciliate to him divine authority. What? that both John, and Christ
in him, have declared the words, by which the holy Spirit was more obscurely
designed by the simple word either of Spirit or holy Spirit: as appears by the
places brought by us, John 7.39. and Chap. 14.16, 17. to which add verse. 26. of
the same chap. and 15.26. Now this does sufficiently show, that the
signification of that word was then commonly known. But what did the Jews of
that time commonly understand by the name of the holy Spirit? did they perhaps
mean a Divine person? Why then comes it to pass, that not so much indeed as any
footsteps of that opinion remained among the Jews after that time, nor does it
appear in those who were next unto those times? Did they, that they might
disquiet the Christians, forswear all their opinions commonly received by all?
You can never persuade this to an intilligent man. What then shall we believe,
they understood by the name of the holy Spirit, but divine inspira^ion; to wit,
that which the original both of the Hebrew word, by which the Spirit is noted,
and of the Greek and Latin shows, and which among the Gentiles also however
otherwise erring in the thing it self, was understood by the name of the divine
Spirit. For both the Hebrew word Ruach and the Greek (...) which is from (...)
as the Latin Spiritus from Spirando, properly signify a wind or blast.
Wherefore nothing is more apt than that, to signify that divine inspiration, or
power which is breathed into the hearts of men from heaven. Which
signification, as we have said, was not unknown even to the Gentiles
themselves, although in the mean time they did most grievously err in the
thing, taking a false inspiration for a true one, a divelish for a divine. But
this pertaines not by it self to the force and significaton of the word. But
now if the name of the holy Spirit be taken in those places of which we treat,
for that divine inspiration or some power which from God flows into men; why
is the holy Spirit said to be given to us, or further to be received or had by
us, one^y by a Metonymy or Metalepsis? Why is not the holy Spirit properly so
called (as far indeed as that word in this matter may be taken properly)
acknowledged to be given to us? For if it be not given properly, either it is
therefore, because this holy inspiration may not be said to be the holy Spirit,
but only improperly, to wit, by a Meton^my of the efficient cause; or because
not properly but by a Metalepsis only it may be said to be given, that is only
in respect of the gifts and effects flowing from him. But both is false. For as
to the former, those things which are called by some name only by a Metonimy of
the efficent cause, do not by themselves deserve that name, but therefore only
are so called, because they come from the efficient cause, to which this name
does by it self and in the first place agree. But that power which is inspired
into men by God does of it self deserve to be termed the holy Spirit, and
accordingly is so called, without any regard had, that it comes from such a
cause, which properly may ^e called the holy Spirit: No man doubts that it is
of it self holy, and may be so called. But that it also of it self deserve the
name of Spirit, does in like manner appear from the things already spoken: to
wit, because it is inspired by God into men, and ^en are breathed upon by it.
Neither is it to the purpose that me^^phorically, or by reason of similitude,
it is termed Spirit: For in this place the propriety of the word is not so
looked upon as opposed to a Metaphor, but as to a Metonimy. Since this now is
the question. But if thou will therefore say this inspiration is improperly
termed the holy Spirit, because it is called Spirit metaphorically; see by what
means thou will defend that that third person of the deity is properly called
the holy Spirit. For therefore also they think that person to be termed Spirit,
because he is breathed by the other two: but not therefore because he is a
spiritual substance; otherwise that appellation would no more agree to that
person, then to the other two. What then? Is that person properly breathed or
blown out? Certainly far less does it agree to him to be breathed then, to this
divine inspiration, of which we treat: since that comes not forth without God;
this proceeds from God, and is inspired into men. It is manifest therefore that
that divine inspiration is properly termed the holy spirit not metonimycally
only. As to the latter I scarce believe the adversaries will deny that that
very inspiration is properly given. For how is that which is breathed and put
into the hearts of men to their greatest profit, not properly given them?
Therefore there is no Metalepsis here to be sought, by which it may come to
pass, that that which properly agrees only to the effect, may improperly be
attributed to the efficient cause, since here the very efficient cause of those
effects, which are understood, that is the very divine inspiration, is by it
self given to men. And let these things suffice concerning the general reason,
and common to all the places which we treat of.

As for the special Reasons, more proper to certain places, those words of
Christ, which we have before cited out of John 14.16, 17. deserve to be first
mentioned, I will ask the Father, and he shall give you another Advocate, that
he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth,; whom the world
cannot receive, because it sees him not, nor knows him. But ye know him; for
he dwells with you (to wit, as inhabiting in Christ, he did as it were
converse among the Disciples) and shall be in you; that is, and further, shall
be not only with you, or among you, as now, but also in your selves, being
given of the Father unto you. What could be said more clearly, to show that the
holy Spirit, properly so called, is given of God, that it is a gift which may
be obtained of the Father by faithful prayers? For what? Is not the comforter
that holy Spirit properly so called; or is it not but by a Metalepsis, said to
be given to the Disciples by the Father? The former the Adversaries cannot say,
unless they will deny that the third person of the Deity, is the holy Spirit,
properly so called; which yet they chiefly will have. For that the same is
understood by the Comforter, they altogether contend, and urge both the name it
self of Paraclet, or Comforter, as also the word another added to it, and the
actions proper to persons attributed to him in this speech of Christ; of which
below we will somewhat treat. This may of right be said, that if it be not
there spoken of the holy Spirit, properly so called, it is no where spoken of
him. It remains therefore, that they say that it is indeed here spoken of the
third person of the Deity, and that this person (...) meant by the Paracl^r:
but that he is not said to be given to the Apostles by the Father, but by a
Metalepsis: namely, because its effects or various gifts are to be given to
them. But neither has that shift here any place. For by comparing of that
place with the words in verse 26. of the same chapter, and also with the words
verse 26. of the following chapter, it will easily appear to any one, that
Christ so far asserts, that the Father being asked of him, was about to give
the holy Spirit to the Disciples, as he should send him in the name of Christ,
or Christ himself should send him unto the Disciples from the Father. For so he
says in that former place, But the Comforter, the holy Spirit, whom the Father
will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, etc. But in the latter,
But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send to you from the Father, the
Spirit of Truth, which proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me. And
truly what other thing could either the Father of the Son do, pertaining to
that giving, than that he should send the holy Spirit to the Disciples with
that intent, that he might remain in them for ever, and produce those divine
effects, which afterward appeared in them? But that sending, and the coming of
the holy Spirit, which follows it, does not agree first to the effects of the
holy Spirit, and only consequently to him; which should be, if it were
attributed to him only by a Metalepsis; but on the contrary. Whence the
Adversaries are wont to prove, the person of the holy Spirit by that mission;
which they could not do, if they did judge it primarily, and of it self to
agree to the gifts of the holy Spirit. For as much as such a mission, if it be
in no sort proper to a person, cannot also prove it. But if then that mission
primarily and of it self agree to the holy Spirit, not to his effects, there
will be the same reason of the giving also, which we have seen to consist in
that sending. But hence arises also another reason of the same thing. For that
the holy Spirit should teach the Disciples all things, and recall all Christ's
sayings into their remembrance, is put chap, 14.26. as the consequent of the
sending of the holy Spirit; and moreover also of the giving it. But if so far
only the holy Spirit should be given, as its gifts are bestowed, that thing
should be contained in the giving it self of the holy Spirit, but not be a
consequent of it. For that imparting of the knowledge of divine things, even
first of all pertains to the producing of gifts coming from the holy Spirit
upon the Apostles.

This place might have enough warned the Adversaries, that they should not date
to deny the holy Spirit properly so called, to be given to us together with his
effects. But there want not also other places which do the same. For by other
Adversaries, who therefore use not such an answer, has that place of Paul,
Romans 5.5. been taken notice of, where he says, The Love of God (that is, the
sense of the divine Love) is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Spirit which
is given to us. Where indeed it is said concerning that Spirit which diffuseth
the sense of divine Love in our hearts, and so is the Author of the spiritual
gift, that he is given to us. To which place may be added that of the same
Epistle, chap. 18.1^. where the Apostle says, Ye have received the Spirit of
adoption, whereby (that is, by whose force and impulse) we cry, Abba (Father)
for the Spirit it self bears witness to our spirit, that we are the Children
of God. Of which also in the Epistle to the Galathians, chap. 4.6. he says,
God has sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba (Father.) So
also 2 Timothy 1.7. it is said, For God has not given to us the spirit of fear,
but of Power, of Love, and of a sound mind. For what else is it, than that God
has not given to us such a Spirit, as should effect fear, and cowardice in us,
but such as begets in us, strength and fortitude, charity and prudence, or
sobriety? But I remember not that I have hitherto heard or read of any, who
could dare to deny that the divine Spirit, the efficient cause of these gifts,
is the holy Spirit, properly so called. Neither indeed in these places, has
the Metalepsis devised by others any place. For the effects also of the holy
Spirit, are rehearsed in the same places, as some things diverse from the holy
Spirit given, and so, as effects of the thing given. But if by that Metalepsis,
the holy Spirit were said to be given, to wit, in respect of the effects, those
effects should be contained in the thing given, nor should be mentioned, or
distinct from it. And let these things be said out of the sacred Writings
against the Metonimy and Metalepsis, devised in these manners of speaking.

As to the Hypothesis of the Adversaries, although we have used them in some
part already, yet it is further to be added, that by such an Answer to our
Argument, their own reason is vehemently overthrown, which they are wont to
bring further to prove the immensity of the holy Spirit, and consequently its
supreme Deity; to wit, that the holy Spirit dwelt in all Believers dispersed
through the whole world. For two ways they weaken this Argument. First,
because if the very holy Spirit, properly so called, be not given to Believers,
but only its effects, it cannot be proved that the holy Spirit himself, or his
Essence, is in very deed in every Believer, which is necessary to the
concluding of their reason. Again, Because neither such immensity, as they
understand, can be thence proved, unless withal they make also the effect of
the holy Spirit, or at least all its effects dispersed in the hearts of
Believers, though the whole world joined together to be immense, and the
supreme God. Therefore the Adversaries cannot deny, that the holy Spirit it
self; to wit, properly so called, is given by God to believers, but that
together they take away both the testimonies of the holy Scripture, and their
own assertions.

But now let us somewhat loosen those bonds by which we have shown them to be
held, and let us grant to them, seeing they will have it so, that not the holy
Spirit, properly so called, is given to Believers, but its effect only, yet
they shall not escape. For nevertheless, we will hence show that the holy
Spirit is not the most high God.

For first, if the holy Spirit were the most high God, it could not be said, no
not by a Metonymy or Metalepsis, of him, that he is given or bestowed by
another upon men, or that men receive him. For who would not reject such a
manner of speaking, as absurd and unworthy of the most high God? More soberly
do the holy Scripture speak of the most high God, than to feign in his names
such trops. But if yet any man contend, that such speaking is not unbeseeming
God, or absurd, let him show an example of the like manner of speaking, in the
name either of the most high God, or the Father, or any other which is
equivalent. Besides, if it were so, it should not be understood that that
certain gift, or if you had rather, kind of gifts is given, which yet all
understand to be given, when the holy Spirit is said to be given. For the gifts
and effects of the most high God, are of most large extent; for what good
soever there is, it comes from him. Therefore if thou should hear that the
most high God is given, namely, because his gifts are given, either thou
would understand that all gifts are given together, or, if thou would
understand only a certain kind of gifts to be given, thou would believe that
to be given, which is of all the most excellent, either alone, or conjoined
with others. The same thing therefore should be thought of the holy Spirit, if
he were the most high God, and not said to be given but in respect of gifts and
effects only. But neither all gifts are understood to be given, when we hear
the holy Spirit is given; nor that which is of all the greatest, to wit,
immortal life, or perfect justification; but presently our mind is carried to a
divine breathing or inspiration, or the effects of it in men; to wit, because
the divine Spirit, properly so called, is a divine inspiration, or a force
flowing from God into men, breathed from heaven into their hearts. This, I say,
is the true ca^se, why our mind hearing the holy Spirit to be given, is carried
to that certain kind of gift or gifts. But the adversaries will except that
there is in this case another reason of the name of God, or the Father, or also
of the Son, another of the name of the holy Spirit, although he be the Supreme
God. For they so dispute, as we have before showed; although all the works to
without are common to the who^e Trinity, yet in a certain peculiar respect
creation is attributed to the Father, remdeption to the Son, sanctification to
the holy Spirit. Now then they will say, that that kind of gift or gifts, which
we understand, as soon as we hear the holy Spirit is given, does pertain to
sanctification. Therefore it is not designed by the name of God common to three
persons, not by the name of the Father, nor Son, but the holy Spirit. Thou
see by what circuits the mind is led by the adversaries thither, whither it
is forthwith straight carried. But is it credible that those, whether Jews o^
Gentiles (who first heard of the holy Spirit to be given to men) either from
Christ, or other divine men did either already know those things, or being
ignorant of them did not understand, what was signified by the name of the holy
Spirit, and what was promised both to them and to others? Were those auditors
of John Baptist or Peter, whom we mentioned before, so knowing of those things,
that they could think at first, when they heard of the holy Spirit to be poured
out upon them, that some effect should be given them, not peculiar to the first
and second person of the Deity, but the third to whom it is proper to sanctify;
therefore that effect did pertain to sanctification, and withal was a divine
inspiration? Was it not more ready for them to think that which the word it
self declared, that a divine inspiration or its effects were promised to them?
But besides, whence is it manifest to the adversaries, that the th^ee persons
of the Deity have among themselves thus parted those three gifts? Were they
perhaps present at their council, that they so boldly affirm these things?
They will say, from the holy Scriptures it is manifest to them concerning that
thing, as which does chefliy ascribe creation to the Father, redemption to the
Son, sanctification to the holy Spirit. Of creation and redemption there is not
now place of disputing. Yet it may be said ^y the way, that creation, or that
first production of all things, is ascribed to the Father, not chiefly only but
also solely, since he was the sole author of it. That redemption is ascribed to
the Son, neither alone simply, nor as the first author; but as the chief middle
cause, who in the name of the Father and by his command, performed the whole
work of our redemption and salvation, and as yet performs it. As to
sanctification; neither is that more often ascribed unto the holy Spirit, than
to the Father or Son, especially openly; neither is it attributed as to some
person, but as to a thing by which sanctification is performed. Which first, is
manifest from thence, that where as it is read expressly of the Father that he
sanctifies, as also of Christ; it is no where said of the holy Spirit, that I
know, that it sanctifies, bu^ only that in or by it men are sanctified, or
some such way which is not proper to a person, is sanctification ascribed unto
it. Of the Father you have plain places, Joh. 10.36.17.17. to which add 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Where it easily appears, that there it is spoken of the Father,
since the holy Scripture understand him alone by the name of God subjectively
put, chiefly when he is distinguished from Christ. Neither shall I easily
believe that the Adversaries will take this place of the holy Spirit only.
Also in the Old testament many places occur, in which God affirms, that he it
is who sanctifyes the people of Israel, which either speak of the Father alone,
as we think, or at least of the Father also, not of the holy Spirit alone. Of
Christ you have testimonies, Ephesians. 5.26. Heb. 2.11.13.12. For I pass by those
places, in which in some other manner sanctification is ascribed either to the
Father or the Son. But if the holy Spirit were a divine person equal to the
Father in all things, and to him in some chief respect the action of
sanctifying did agree, how could it be, that of him it should not be once said,
that he sanctifies, but of the Father and Son it should be said plainly? The
action of sanctifying might be directly attributed indeed to the holy Spirit,
although it were not a person: since we see, that to many other Mat. 23.17, 19.
Heb. 9.13.
things, and chiefly to qualities which they call active, actions are directly
attributed in holy Scripture, and also the very act of sanctifying. But it
cannot be that the holy Spirit should be a person, and that the act of
sanctifying should agree to it in a peculiar manner, above the Father and the
Son, and yet not be directly any where attributed to it. We have by the way
touched above also other reasons; for we showed in the Argument next foregoing,
that it would follow out of that supposition of the adversaries, that the holy
Spirit is the Father of Christ, rather than God, who is every where said to be
his Father.

We have seen also Chap. 3. of this Section.
above in the Epistle of Jude, that Sanctification is ascribed to the Father,
Preservation of us to Christ, the holy Spirit being not indeed so much as
mentioned: For so the Greek Text has it; Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ, and
the brother of James, to them that are sanctified in God the Father and
preserved in Christ Jesus, the called. Or, as some later Interpreters, in some
manner studying the perspicuity of the sentence, have rendered it, called of God
the Father (or by the Father) sanctified and saved by Jesus Christ.

Is it credible, if the holy Spirit were a divine person, to whom the action of
sanctifying in some respect should rather agree, than to the Father and Son,
that this action should be attributed, as proper, to the Father, the mention of
the holy Spirit, being altogether omitted? We have seen it also affirmed by
Paul, 1 Cor. 8.6.
That all things, in any manner pertaining to our Salvation, are from God the
Father, as the first cause; all things in like manner by the Son, as the middle
cause, no mention being made of the holy Spirit. But if the holy Spirit were a
divine person, to whom so notable an action, so greatly pertaining to our
salvation, should agree, in some remarkable respect, above those two persons:
not only the mention of it could not be omitted, but also it could not be
rightly affirmed, that all things are of the Father, or that all things are by
Christ. For that person of the holy Spirit, either as the first and supreme
cause, should have something in so great a matter above the Father; or as a
middle cause above the Son; when notwithstanding not some, but all things are
entirely attributed to the Father as the first cause, and to the Son as the
middle cause, yet holding the next place from the first. Lastly the common
opinion concerning the Trinity does not bear such a partition of actions and
offices. For if those persons have one and the same numerical understanding,
will, power, and there is not any of these more in one than in the rest; it is
necessary, that there be also one operation in number of all these, as even the
adversaries confess; and that one person act not any thing, more than another.
For such diversity or inequality of action could not arise any otherwise
thence, than that one person of this thing, another of that, a third of another
thing, should either think rather, or would rather exercise it, or lastly could
better perfome it. But such a difference cannot be held in that unity: because
seeing those persons think altogether with the same understanding, not with
another and another; in like manner also they both will with the same will, and
work outwardly by the same power in number: one thinks, wills, and works as
much as another; not one more than another. It is manifest therefore that
sanctification, and whatsoever pertaines to it, does in no wise more agree to
the holy Spirit, than to the Father and Son, if he were one God with both. And
hence arises a third reason, by which it is demonstrated that it cannot indeed
be said, no not by a Metonymie of the holy Spirit, that he is given or received
by men, if he be held to be that one God together with the Father and Son. For
it will follow that the holy Spirit is no more given to us, and received of us,
than the Father and the Son. For those gifts and effects, in respect of which,
the holy Spirit should be said to be given, should no more come from the holy
Spirit, than from the Father and the Son; nor in one respect from these, and in
another from that, but in the same altogether. But who has ever heard, who
has read, that the Father was given to any, or, was prayed to be given to us,
when the gifts of the holy Spirit were prayed for? Who asks at this day, that
the Son might be given to him, being about to ask for those same gifts? Who
would brook him, that should ask Christ that he would give the Father to him,
or would pray to the person of the holy Spirit, that he would bestow the Father
and Son, and himself also upon us? But if you look on the some of the
Adversaries opinion, it will be very lawful to pray after that manner. And
certainly believers, when they ask spiritual gifts, do not intend, that those
things be given, which may by name come from the third person of the Deity; as
if it were not all one to them, whether the same come immediately either from
the Father or the Son. For what other thing do they then seek, than that being
endued with divine virtue, they may be filled either with more plentiful
knowledge of divine mysteries, or some celestial joy, or singular fervor of
piety, or other heavenly gifts? All which that they may immediately come, as
well from the Father and Son, as from the supposed person of the holy Spirit,
is easily understood by all. Wherefore, if the holy Spirit be the most high
God, there is no cause, why those gifts should be rather called the holy
Spirit, than the Father or Son: Or, when the same are asked or given of God,
the holy Spirit should rather be said to be asked or given, than the Father and
Son.

Lastly, If the holy Spirit were the most high God, he should not be given by
another person, nor commanded to be asked; but from himself rather, as both the
chief and proper fountain, those gifts should at least somewhere, be commanded
to be asked: But that is no where done. In some sort a double reason does lie
hid in this one Argument.

One, That the gifts flowing from him, are no where commanded to be asked of
him, as neither any thing else; of which matter something has been said above,
Chap. 2. of this Section.
so that there is no need I should here stay on it.

Another, That the holy Spirit is commanded to be asked, and said to be given
of another, to wit, the Father.

For, from hence it follows, that the holy Spirit cannot chose but distribute
his gifts, when the Father so wills; and on the contrary, not distribute them
when the Father will not. For if he could distribute them when the Father is
unwilling, or not distribute them though the Father be willing; it were better
to ask the holy Spirit himself, that he would bestow them on us, than the
Father. Besides, that it would thence follow, that the Father is not the most
high God; as who has not all gifts absolutely in his own power, and although
he would give some gifts to men, yet he cannot but by another consent. But now
if the holy Spirit cannot but distribute his gifts, when the Father will, and
not distribute them when the Father will not, and so necessarily conform
himself to another will, he is not the most high God. For the most high God is
altogether at his own will, at his own dispose, nor does he ever fashion
himself after another will, especially necessarily. For he should be in
another power, and so acknowledge another superior, by which very thing, he
would cease to be the most high God. Now, if you say, that the holy Spirit
indeed cannot do otherwise than the Father will, but that comes to pass, not
because he is in the Fathers power, but because he is of the same numerical
Essence and Will with him, so that he cannot otherwise either will or do, than
the Father wills or does. See into what difficulties and snares you cast your
self. For if the Father and holy Spirit, by reason of that unity, necessarily
will and do the same thing, as indeed it cannot otherwise be, if they were of
the same Essence; when the Father willed to send, and so has sent the holy
Spirit, the holy Spirit also willed to send, and consequently has indeed sent
himself; and on the contrary, when the holy Spirit would be sent, the Father
himself also would be sent; when the holy Spirit would, in a corporeal shape,
descend upon Christ, and did accordingly descend, the Father also would descend
in the same, and did accordingly descend. And what end at length will there be
of absurdities? But it is necessary that they cast themselves into Quagmires,
yea, into Precipices, who of their own accord turn from a plain and simple
Truth, so clearly expressed in holy Scriptures, which they do, who contend that
the holy Spirit himself is not given us, but his effect only. We following that
strait path, having shown, that it follows from this, namely, that the holy
Spirit is given to men, that he is not the supreme God; now we shall also s^ew
that he is not a person.

Now this hence is easily manifest, that no person at the same time can be so
given to many, much less to innume^able men, that in very deed he should be and
dwell in every one of them. And, we have already seen, that the holy Spirit is
thus given to believers, dispersed through the whole world. But that a person
cannot be given in the said manner, is hence manifest, that that person is
either infinite or finite; if infinite, t^ere is no necessity that it be given
to men, that it may exist and dwell in them, yea, it cannot indeed be given,
since it always was in them, and by reason of its infinity could not but be
so; to omit other difficulties. If finite; that I urge not, that it cannot by
the adversaries be acknowleged for the most high God, it cannot be so given at
once to many, and consequently to innumerable men, that in very deed it should
exist in every one; otherwise it would be torn into parts, which very thing it
self would destroy that person.

It is easy now to observe, that that instance of the Adversaries, fetched from
the giving of Christ, has no force: For they say that Christ also was given to
us, Isa. 9.6. Some add also that of Paul, Romans 8.32. That God will with Christ
give us all things. But they say that Christ is both a person, and besides the
most high God. That he is not the most high God we have shown before, and it
may be evinced even out of those very places which are alleged: For the most
high God is neither a little one, nor is born, nor is the Son of God; he cannot
be delivered for us, no not indeed by himself, much less by another; he is not
such as that he could be spared or not spared.

But besides, that we may mind what is proper to this place; when it is said by
Isaias, that a son is given to us, it is not signified, that he is so given to
us, that he may be indeed in us or posessed by us in any manner, in which sense
the holy Spirit is said to be given to us, but that he is given for our profit,
or for our chiefest good and benefit; which easily appears from the preceding
verse, where in the same sense he is said to be a little one born to us. For
neither is Christ said to be born to us, that he should exist in us, or be
possessed by us, but that by him we should be profited. For the Dative case of
the person often signifies, finem cui, the end to which, as they speak, not the
possessor, as is observed by learned men. And hence the appellation of the end
to which arises. But if any say, although from that place of Isa. it cannot be
evinced, that Christ is so given to us, as to dwell in us, Ephesians. 3.17.
yet that it is manifest from elsewhere; For the Apostle wishes to the
Ephesians, that Christ may dwell by faith in their hearts: it is first to be
observed, that Christ dwells in the hearts of believers, not by virtue of that
giving, of which there is mention in Isa. as the next cause; as the holy Spirit
dwells in them as soon as he is given to believers, since that giving of Christ
has happened to men even as yet unbeleevers, and has been accomplished as soon
as he was born: but Christ dwells not in the hearts of men but by faith, as the
place it self shows. Besides, this is to be observed, that Christ is there
taken Metonymically for the religion or doctrine by him delivered, as it is
also beneath in the same epistle chap. 4.20, 21. So also Moses is taken for the
Law delivered by him, Acts. 15.21. 2 Cor. 3.15. The sense then of the words of
the Apostle is. That God may give you, that you may believe in your hearts, and
adhere constantly to the doctrine of Christ, and that it may be thoroughly fixed
in your minds by faith. And though at length it were spoken of the person of
Christ; yet it would not follow that Paul wills, that he in very deed and
properly should dwell in the hearts of believers, but that he should do it by
his grace, aid and spirit, which both the Apostles wish, and the manner or
middle cause of that inhabitation expressed by him, to wit, by faith, does
sufficiently show; For if Christ by his Essence should dwell in them, he should
dwell in all men, whether believers or not believers. For that would be by
reason of his natural immensity, which would be excluded from no place
whatsoever it be; neither in that thing could there be regard had either of
faith or infidelity. For it is necessary, that what is immense in Essence, fill
all places and all men's hearts. Neither then that place of Isa. not this to the
Ephesians makes any thing to purpose. But that place of the Epistle to the
Romans (chap. 8. 32.) says not the same with that of Isa. For that all things
shall be given to us with Christ, we may so interpret, and indeed more rightly,
that God will give to us all things (to wit, which he has promised us) even as
to Christ, or as before in the same chap. the Apostle had said, that we shall
be coheirs of Christ, and be glorified together with him, verse. 17. For we
must be made conformable to the image of the Son of God, that he may be the
firstborn among many brethren verse. 29. which verse the Apostle seems here to
eye. But the manner of speaking, should offend none, as if, with him, could not
signify, in like manner as to him, since we have seen already, we are to be
together glorified, to wit, with Christ; that is, so as Christ was glorified.
So in the same Epistle, Romans 6.6, 8.
it is said, that we are buried with him, (that is, as well as he) and that our
old man is crucified with him: that we are dead with him: that we shall live
with him; that is, no otherwise than as he. See also 2 Timothy 2.11, 12.

An Appendix of the precedent Argument, in which the places are urged, in which
the holy Spirit is called, The Earnest, and by it men are said to be sealed,
and to be powered upon, baptized and drencht.
TO the testimonies which speak of the giving and receiving of the holy Spirit,
let us join others, which although of themselves also they might be urged
against the vulgar opinion concerning the holy Spirit, yet because they are not
much unlike to the former, therefore we will have them to be as an overplus of
the former Argument. And first, hither pertain those testimonies of Scripture,
in which the holy Spirit is called a Pledge; 2 Cor. 1.22. and 5.5. Ephesians. 1.14.
or rather, as the Greek Text has it, The Earnest, either simply, or of our
inheritance. But the earnest is part of the thing promised, given before hand,
which makes him to whom any thing is promised, certain of the residue also.
Therefore seeing God does not as yet in very deed exhibit the inheritance
promised, he gives to us, as it were aforehand, the holy Spirit, which may make
us sure of the future inheritance, until he really bring us into the possession
of it. But hence it sufficiently appears, that the holy Spirit is not the most
high God. For he is the promiser, not the earnest or pledge of the thing
promised. Who does pledge or give himself for an earnest? Or how can God be
received of a man for an earnest or pledge? For an earnest is in some manner,
possessed by him to whom it is given. But how may the most high God be
possessed by a man? Besides, is it credible, that God has now already given us
more, than he promised he will give in time to come? That surely neither does
the nature of an earnest bear, nor this suffer, to wit, that by the confession
of all, we shall here after at length become far more happy, and excellent in
dignity, yea, then truly happy and glorious. But he had given us more now than
is the inheritance it self, promised unto us, if the holy Spirit were the most
high God. For who dares to compare our inheritance, though infinite in time,
with God himself?

But the places quoted, advertise us also of another manner of speaking used of
the holy Spirit, which shows that he is not a divine person. And that is, that
Believers are said to be sealed with the holy Spirit. For so it is plainly
written, Ephesians. 1.13. to which the place chap. 4.30. is like. For though it is
said in the latter place, that the Ephesians were sealed in the holy Spirit,
which some interpret, by the holy Spirit; yet we shall show a little after,
that also in other places, and those such indeed where it is spoken of the holy
Spirit, the particle in by an Hebraism is redundant: and that it is so in this
place is apparent enough, both by comparing of the words chap. 1.13. where that
particle is omitted, and by the thing it self. For neither here would the
Apostle show, who has sealed, but with how excellent a sign we have been
marked, and as it were secured by God, considering which, we might not doubt of
our future redemption, and further considering how much is given to us, we
might diligently take heed, that we do not, peradventure by vanity of words,
deprive our selves of so great a good, and raze and blot out the character and
mark stamped on us by God. But the Apostle had not expressed that, if he had
only said, that we are sealed by the holy Spirit; unless perhaps any one should
take such words in such a sense, in which we would have them said: to wit, that
it may be understood, that we have been sealed with the divine Spirit, or that
the holy Spirit is as it were a sign, mark, and character impressed on us, by
which God has marked us as his proper goods, and has made us sacred and
inviolable, and safe from all danger of perishing, if we do our duty. The same
thing the Apostle has showed, 2 Cor. 1.22 especially if one compare the place
with those two, which we have cited out of the Epistle to the Ephesians, and
chiefly with the former. For in both places, the same thing is explained, nor
do the words much differ. For there indeed, after the Apostle had said, ver.
21. Now he which stablisheth us with you in Christ, (Greek, into Christ) and
has anointed us, is God. He adds, ver. 22. who has also sealed us, and given
the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. But here he says, In whom (that is,
by whom, to wit, Christ) also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that
holy Spirit of promise (that is, the holy Spirit promised) which is the Pledge
(or Earnest) of our inheritance unto the day of redemption, etc. namely, the
latter clause is added for explication of the former, and what is the earnest
of our inheritance, the same is also the seal with which we are marked. Hence
then it again appears, that the holy Spirit is neither the most high God, nor a
person. For neither is any thing sealed with a person, but with some thing: nor
is any thing more absurd, than to say that the most high God, whose propriety
we are, and who has sealed us unto the day of redemption, is the seal it self
wherewith we are sealed.

By these things also, it appears, that the Adversaries labor in vain; who
endeavor out of the words Ephesians 4.30. to deduct the person of the holy Spirit,
because he is said to be grieved and vexed by us, as if the like things were
not attributed to Charity, which is said, to rejoice in the Truth: and on the
contrary, not to rejoice (which is all one as to be grieved) with Iniquity; and
as if it were not more easy to find here a seigning of a person, than to show,
that to some person, and he indeed the most high God, it agrees to be a seal
imprinted on men. Certainly they, who else where, To. 8.26. The Defense.
will they, nill they, are forced to acknowledge, that groans are improperly
attributed to the holy Spirit, have no cause, why they will not have grieving
figuratively to be ascribed to it; especially when neither themselves can
properly asscribe grieving to it, seeing that does not proper befall God.

But if they say, that that also is improperly, and by a Metaphor, said of the
holy Spirit, that we are sealed by it, we answer, Although the thing expressed
by that metaphorical kind of speaking, be conceived in proper words, yet
nevertheless, the force of our Argument would be the same. For it is signified,
as was said, that the holy Spirit is a certain thing given unto us by God, by
which we may be certified of our future redemption, and the happiness promised
us. Besides, although that manner of speaking be metaphorical, yet it is not
such as is fitted to a person. For neither is every Metaphor accommodated to
every thing. Let there be brought forth but one place either out of profane or
sacred Writers, where some one is said to be sealed with any person. Wherefore
if the holy Spirit were a person, Paul would have used such a Metaphor, as
might have been fitted to a person, and had not less expressed the thing which
he here handled, than the word of sealing. He had said, to wit, that the holy
Spirit was a surety, or undertaker, or hostage, or had been content with the
name of earnest, or pledge: which last word is sometime by a Metaphor
accommodated to persons. But it is altogether unheard of, that any person who
is given to another to certify him of his salvation and safety, is compared to
a seal imprinted on him, who is secured, or any one said to be sealed by him.
Neither indeed in the places alleged, does any thing go before, which gave
occasion to the Apostle for so bold, yea, absurd a kind of metaphor, rather
then for another, a like fitted to his purpose, and more to the person. But
unusual metaphors and figures, are not wont to be used by considerate and grave
men, unless special occasion invites them, and leads them thereto; much less
that they speak so absurdly, without any necessity: The same we would have also
said unto them, who say these things are pronounced of the holy Spirit by a
Metonimy or Metalepsis, to wit, in respect of the gifts which come from hint.
For there are also other Metalepsis, in some manner accommodated to persons, or
at least more in use. But unusual ones are not to be ascribed to considerate
men, unless it appears that they are led to them by some certain occasion.
Although the same Adversaries also are bound to excuse a Metaphor, which would
nothing less concur with a Metalepsis.

In the third place, those places of holy Scripture deserve to be mentioned, in
which the holy Spirit is said to be poured out on men, such as are these, Isa.
44.3. Joel 2.28, 29. (which place is cited by Peter, Acts ^.18, 19.) Zach.
12.10. Tit. 3.6. to which also those are to be joined, in which men are said,
to be baptized in or with it, and its baptism is opposed to the baptism of
water used by John, as it is Mat. 3.11. and the places in the other Evangelists
answering to it; and likewise John 1.33. Acts 1.5, 11, 16. add 1 Cor. 12.13.
although there, to be baptized in one spirit, is taken by some, for, to be
baptized by one Spirit, and so we might say, we are baptized by Christ, by whom
God has poured out abundantly the holy Spirit upon us, Tit. 3.6. when
nevertheless otherwise, where ever that phrase, To be baptized in spirit, is
extant, it signifies nothing else, as all confess; than to be baptized with the
spirit; the particle in among the Greeks being redundant, which has flowed
from an Hebraism. For because that which the Greeks express by the simple
Dative case, the Latins by the Ablative, the Hebrews cannot express without the
Particle prefixed, which is for the most part Be, that is In; therefore it is
often retained by the he braising Greek Writers, and prefixed to the dative,
which alone would have that force. But that those words, in the holy Spirit,
are elsewhere so to be understood, easily appears by the opposite member. For
in most places, in which it is said, that John baptized with water, it is in
Greek in water: only in Luke 3.16. and Acts 11.16. the particle In is omitted,
and it is said simply, and without an Hebraism, that he baptized with water.
Wherefore the same is to be held concerning the place 1 Cor. 12. especially
when by the thing it self, it may sufficiently appear, that the Apostle would
demonstrate the unity of Believers by this, that all are endued, and filled
with the same Spirit. Which, that he might the more significantly express, he
makes mention also of making to drink. For because a man is then fully made
partaker of liquor, when he is both washed outwardly with it, and as it were
immersed in it, and made to drink it, or if you had rather, drencht, with it,
that he may be also inwardly filled with it. Therefore Paul, that he might
signify, that Christians were every way replenished with the holy Spirit,
says, they were so made to drink, that they breathed one spirit, and were
wholly endued with it: Which agrees with that of Christ, who in John, inviting
men to the participation of so excellent a gift, thus John 7.37.
says, If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink, understand it of that
living water; which it is manifest by the things which follow, is the holy
Spirit. Let those Isa. 61.1. Luke 4.18. Acts 10.38. Heb. 1.9. Psalm. 45.8. 2 Cor
1. 1 John. 2.20, 27.21.
places also be added to these, in which either Christ himself is said to be
anointed, or others are signified to be anointed with the holy Spirit. For from
all these it is understood, that the holy Spirit is not a person* much less the
most high God. Who will say that a person, much less the most high God, is
poured out on men, that men are baptized, drencht and anointed with it? That a
man may be said to be anointed with divine Virtue, this very thing sufficiently
shows, because Christ in that place where he is said to be anointed with the
holy Spirit, is said also to be anointed with Power, namely, divine. Those
things that we have said before, refute the Metonymy, which is feigned to be in
these kinds of speech. And although if it were admitted, it would show that the
holy Spirit is not the most high God. For who can believe, that the holy
Writers, in the name of the most high God, would so often use such Metonymies,
and forms of speaking, which not only of themselves very much abhor from the
nature of the supreme Deity, but the like of which do not readily occur, no not
in the names even of other persons, either in vulgar speech, or in the sacred
Writings.

CHAP. IX.
The ninth Argument, Drawn from those places, which argue some partition of the
holy Spirit.

BUt yet we must not altogether depart from the giving of the holy Spirit. For
the manner of its giving, or certain words which in some places are added,
where there is mention made of that donation, yield us yet another argument.
For 1 John 4.13. We read that, God has given us of his Spirit; which
signifies, that God has given not all his Spirit, but some part of it, which
cannot befall a person, especially divine, and so the most higst God. For a
divine person cannot be distributed into parts; and, if he were given to any,
could not be given but whole.

Perhaps some will say, it is read in the Greek, that God has given to us,
from or of his Spirit, which may signify, not that God had indeed given his
Spirit it self or some part of it, but something flowing from that Spirit. For
this is often the force of the particle from or of, that it signifies the
efficient cause, in which manner all things are said to be of, or from God,
Romans 11.36. 1 Cor. 8.6. And the holy Conception of Mary, to be of, or from the
holy Spirit, Matthew. 1.20. But that that interpretation is at no hand to be
admitted in this place; first, a very like place in the same John, where the
Apostle handles the same thing, does demonstrate. Now that is extant about the
end of the third Chapter, where, when he had said, being about chiefly to
commend Charity, that he who keeps the commandments of God, abides in him,
and he in him; he adds, and by this we know, that he abides in us, by, or from
the Spirit which he has given us. Do you see, he says, that God has given to
us the Spirit, to wit, his, and by it it is known, that he abides in us? Why
^hen says he not the same in our place, Chap. 4.1. where, when he had
affirmed, if we love ane another, God abides in us, and his love is perfected
in us; he adds, In this we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because (or
that) he has given us of his Spirit. The very likeness of the place evinceth,
that John, as he there said, that God has given to us his Spirit, so he also
here says the same; except here speaking a little more distinctly, he shows,
that God has given to us, not his whole Spirit, but of it, or a part of it.
Besides the thing it seif requires it. For John whould and ought to express,
what God has given to us, by which we may certainly know, that God dwells in
us. But he had not expressed that, if he had only said, There is given of the
Holy Spirit.
that God has given to us from, or of his Spirit, as an efficient cause. For
what that should be, he had only left it to be guessed at by us, and
thesentence had been maimed; like as if one should say, God has given to us
from, or of himself as an efficient cause: Which speech had not been worthy a
considera^e man, much less the Apostle. But that sentence, which we have
expressed, is both perfect, and plainly expresses the thing given, and such
indeed as may demonstrate most clearly, that God dwells in us, in some most
singular and divine manner, and we in him; and that the^e is a most strait bond
of love, and conjunction between us and him. For, how could we more straightly be
joined with him, or he with us, then when he has imparted to us of his holy
Spirit? The same thing which is showed in those words of John, is showed also
in that manner of speaking, which Luke, together with the Greek Translators of
the O d Testament, uses, describing in Greek, the Speech of Peter, in which
the place is cited out of Joel, Acts 2.18, 19. For in stead of that which God
says to Joel, I will pour out my Spirit, it is said in Peter's words, I will
pour out of my Spirit; the sense indeed remaining the same, but yet so
expressed, that it may be signified, That God would pour out not his whole
Spirit upon all flesh, and upon their servants and handmaids, but as it were
some part of it. For there is an immense plenty of it with God, which is
resident in him, as in its fountain, but proceeds and flows from him, when, and
so far, as he will, not otherwise than the light from the Sun or that force
which they call influence from Stars, or as heat from fire upon things put to
it. For, let me be allowed to illustrate a thing most divine by similitudes, to
which you have not unlike ones concerning wisdom issuing from God, in the
Author of the Book of Wisdom, Chap. 7.26.27. Therefore as the things mentioned
by us, diffuse their power, and distribute it into many subjects, and that
often unequally, so also God communicates his power and virtue to many, and
not to all in the same measure, and the same degree; whence there arises some
partition of his power, so that no man may wonder, that we following the
Scripture, urge some partition of the holy Spirit. Although what need is there
to defend or excuse that which the holy Writings do so plainly assert? For,
what is it which the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 2.4. says,
That God confirmed by his testimony, the Doctrine of the Gospel, concerning
everlasting salvation, as well by signs and wonders, and diverse miracles, as
also by the distributions or divisions of the holy Spirit, that is, by
distributing the holy Spirit among believers, and imparting it to them in
various measures as it has pleased him? What likewise is that which God long
since said to Moses, Number. 11.17. I will take off thy Spirit, and put on them,
to wit, the seventy Elders? which also we see was done afterward in the very
deed. For so we read after Verse. 25. And took (the Lord) of the Spirit which
was in Moses, and gave it to the seventy Elders, and when the spirit had rested
on them, 2 Kings 2.9.
they prophesied, etc. What moreover that which we read of Eliseus, who would
have given to him a double spirit of Elias, or as it is in the Hebrew, the
mouth of two in the spirit of Elias, that is a double part of his Spirit, or
sufficient for two, as it is explained by learned men, by comparing this place
with that, Deuteronomy. 21.17. where the same phrase occurrs, although in another
matter? For there the Father is commanded to give doubles, Heb. the mouth of
two, or a double part of goods to his firstborn Son, although bo^^ of the
hated wife. Neither truly did Elizeus in vain ask for that, as is understood by
the following words of that place. Moreover Paul makes mention also of the
first fruits of the Spirit. Romans 8.2, 3. Now what else are the first fruits of
any thing, but the first and select parts of it?

Lastly, When John says, that God gives the Spirit not by measure, John 3.34.
what other thing would he, than that God gives the Spirit most plentifully? But
that cannot be said of a thing, which can in no manner be increased, nor
deminished, nor divided into some parts. And surely John does tacitly
intimate, that God has given, or does give the Spirit in some certain measure:
but to Christ alone he has imparted a certain unmeasurable plenty of it. But
it is not necessary for us in this place to say all things which pertain to a
further explication of those places; that shall be done, if God will, else
where. For it is enough now to have shown, that a certian distribution does
befall the holy Spirit, which cannot by any means befall a divine person, yea,
no person at all, unless with some corruption of it. But the distribution of
the holy Spirit brings no corruption to it.

The Defense and Confirmation of the Argument.
BUt we have already above, shut up this way for escape, to wit, that these
things are to be understood of the gift or effect of the holy Spirit, who is a
divine person. Besides that it may appear by some places, Chap. 8. of this
Section.
alleged by us, and the like to them, that that Spirit, of which these things
are said, is one thing, the gift understood by the adversaries another thing,
namely, a quality or motion imprinted on men by a divine spirit. See Numb. 11
25, etc. Compare together Joel 2.28, 29. Zach. 12.10. and Isa. 11.2. John 3.34.
That I mention not now the History it self, of the effusion of the holy Spirit,
set down, Acts 2. by which it is manifest, that the holy Spirit poured out on
the Apostles, and distributed, is one thing, the gift flowing from thence,
another thing. See verse. 3.4. But of the same Spirit also other places are to
be understood.

Out of the places hitherto brought by us, you may easily frame many arguments.
For every manner of expression used in the testimonies, signifying either more
openly, or more covertly, some division of the holy Spirit; may supply us with
a several reason. For they so abhor from the supreme deity, that no man may
da^e to use them of it. No such thing surely is so much as intimated in the
holy Scriptures, either of the Father or of the Son. Who has either heard or
dare say, that there is taken of the Father or of Christ, that there is given
or poured out of him, that he is distributed or doubled, that he is given
either in measure or without measure, that any one has the first fruits of him,
or the first and better parts of him? But what other cause is there of this
thing, then because they are persons and indeed divine ones; although the
latter, not of himself, but by the grace and gift of God. Therefore there would
be the same reason of the holy Spirit also, if it were likewise the most high
God.

CHAP. X.
The tenth Argument, That we are forbidden to quench the Spirit, and we read
that the holy Spirit sometime was not, and that some disciples were ignorant
whether there were any holy Spirit.

THe words of the Apostle, 1 These. 5.19. (where speaking of the holy Spirit, ^e
warnes, that we quench not the Spirit) deserve the sixth place in this rank,
whence in like manner is understood that the holy Spirit is not the most high
God. For these words show that that Spirit may be quenched. But who dares say
that, in any wise of the most high God? Who would brook him, who should wa^ne
thus; beware thou extinguish not God the Father? Would not our very ears
refuse such forms of speaking? But there is the same reason of the holy
Spirit, as of the Father, if the holy Spirit be the most high God. For that
therefore cannot be said of God the Father, because he is the most high God.
But if thou would excuse it by some trope, which otherwise we deny not to be
in the words; it is to be considered (which we a little before have minded)
that tropes ought to be modest, most of all when the name of the most high God
is used, of w^om we must so speak, and the Apostle so speak, as is beseeming
his Majesty. But we have al^eady hinted that such manner of speaking agrees not
to God, and is rejected presently by men's ears as absurd. Some prophets use a
more lofty and figurative style than the Apostles, which is seen especially in
Psalms and songs. For they contain some kind of verse, and as is observed by
learned men, come nearer to the style of Poets, than to speech in prose. But
you shall read no such thing there of God; much less ought we to think that the
Apostle who scarce rises above common speech, has in delivering precepts,
used so bold and unusual a figure, if you acknowledge that the holy Spirit is
properly a divine inspiration, or certain power flowing from God into men; you
will easily understand that that manner of speaking is not at all absurd. For
nothing hinders that a divine inspiration, especially in this, or that man may
cease and be extinguished.

Hence also may be understood that manner of speech concerning the holy Spirit
used by John: The holy spirit was not yet* Because that Jesuit was not yet
glorified* from 1 These. 5.19. John 7 30 Act. 19.3.
Which some of the adversaries perceiving not to be agreeable to their opinion
of the holy Spirit, they have thought it to be thus read. The Spirit was not
yet given, which reading others See Beza. Acts 19.3
of the adversaries have noted and showed that it is not to be admitted. Not
much different from this manner of speaking is that which those disciple, that
were found by Paul at Ephesus used. For when Paul had asked of them, whether
since they believed, they had received the holy Spirit, they answered, John
7.39.
that they had not so much as heard whether there were a holy Spirit. Let the
Adversaries feign here what Tropes they will: yet will they never persuade a
serious man, and one that considers in what manner we are wont to speak of any
thing, that either John, or those disciples could speak so of the holy Spirit,
if the holy Spirit were God. Will thou say, God is not yet; the Father is not
yet, the Son is not yet, because a certain effe^t of him is not yet extant
among men? What author? What example is there for it? Shall a man say, he
knows not whether the most high God be, because he has not heard that certain
gifts of his do happen to men? But if you shall think the holy Spirit to be a
divine inspiration, or a certain power issuing from God to men, you will not
wonder at those manners of speaking. For because Christ being not yet
glorified, that inspiration was not wont to happen to men although believers,
and afterward also those Ephesian disciples knew not that it was done;
therefore John indeed said, that the holy Spirit was not yet; Christ being not
yet glorified; ^ut those disciples, that they ^ad not indeed heard, whether
there was a holy Spirit.

CHAP. XI.
The eleventh Argument, From John 15.26. where the holy Spirit is said, To
proceed from the Father.

AFter we have drawn Arguments out of those places of Scripture, in which those
things are said of the holy Spirit, which agree not rather to persons than
things; it remains that we fetch reasons also from those attributes of the
holy Spirit, which indeed properly taken, agree only to persons, or at least
Suppositums, but are figuratively attributed to the holy Spirit: or first and
of themselves agree to Suppositums, to other things only consequently.

Let that be the first of them, that the holy Spirit is said to proceed from
the Father. Joh. 15.26
There is indeed some Metaphor in the word proceeding, which the adversaries
also are compelled to acknowledge, (For to proceed, does properly agree but to
men or to living creatures, which move themselves from place to place) but it
hinders not but that we may hence draw an Argument. For it is agreed between
us, and the Adversaries, that this word being referred to the holy Spirit,
denotes its production from the Father, by which namely the holy Spirit is in
very deed that which it is. from Joh. 15.26
Whence the adversaries would that that procession was from eternity: and say
that as the Son received his Essence by gene^ation from the Father, so the holy
Spirit received the same by procession, of which thing there is no need now to
speak more largely. It shall be done, the Lord helping afterward. Lib. 2. Sect.
2. Chap. 1, etc. and Sect. 3.
Now it is enough to have hinted what we have said. For from this, that the
holy Spirit is said to proceed from the Father, and to receive his Essence, it
is manifest that he is not the most high God* For the same reasons for which we
have said before Sect. 2. Chap. 2.
that the Son of God is not the most high God, because he was begotten of the
Father, and from him received his Essence. For in this case there is the same
reason of procession, as there is of generation; yea, as we shall show in its
place, that procession devised by the Adversaries, is no less generation than
that of the Son. Wherefore what we have said of the generation of the Son of
God is hither also to be transferred. Add to those this reason also; that
Christ signify; that that procession does even yet continue. For he does not
say that the holy Spirit has proceeded from the Father, but that it does
proceed. Neither indeed do the more learned adve^sarie deny it, who have
devised such a manner of procession, as has continued from all eternity, and
is to continue unto all eternity. Therefore according to their opinion, the
holy Spirit even yet receives his Essence from the Father, and also from the
Son, and is to receive it unto all ages. But it must needs be that the most
high God has already fully had his Essence from all eternity, so that he now
any more neither has, nor can possibly received it; however it be supposed,
which is impossible, that he could at any time receive his Essence from
another. Besides, they, who contend that the procession of the holy Spirit, of
which Christ in John speaks, (For there is no where else express mention made
of it) has continued from all eternity, and that it s^all continue to all
eternity, have not considered that Christ speaks of that procession of the
holy Spirit, by which it should come to pass that the holy Spirit should be
sent from him to the disciples, and moreover come to them. For if you consider
the rest of the things spoken of in the same place, you will find no other
cause, why Christ said that the holy Spirit does proceed from the Father, than
that he might declare that which he had said, whom (to wit the Advocate) I will
send to you from the Father: neither do the adversaries seem to deny it. But
what has that procession, which continues from eternity to eternity, common
with the sending and coming of the holy Spirit to the disciples? yea that would
rather hinder this, if by that, the holy Spirit should be the most high God, as
the adversaries would have it. I omit that they, (the Greeks only excepted)
hold that the holy Spirit does proceed eternally no less from the Son than from
the Father. But Christ speaks of a thing, which is proper to the Father. For in
this behalf, in some sort he opposes the Father to himself, being about to
show, why he said, he would send the holy Spirit not from himself but from the
Father. But how much more simple and plain is it to hold, that the holy Spirit
does so far proceed from God, as it is the virtue and efficacy issuing from him
into men; than, that the most high God, who is but one only, proceeds from
another, who is in like manner the most high God; that he who is from no cause,
receives his being from another; that he who has had most fully his Essence
from Eternity, receives it, and is to receive it yet unto all Eternity.

But that the same thing which we have showed out of the words of Christ, set
down by John, is taught also by those words of Paul, in which he affirms,
that the holy Spirit is of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. For he says, Now we have
received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God. But
whatsoever is of God, is Gods effect and depends on him. But all, as we have
said, know, that God is the effect of no thing. Although there is scarce need
to make mention of effect, it is enough to say, that the most high God is from
none.

CHAP. XII.
The twelfth Argument, That the holy Spirit is sent by the Father and the Son.

THe second of those Attributes, which properly agree only to persons or
Suppositums, but are accommodated to the holy Spirit by some Trope, may be that
which is in the same place of John John 15.26. and 14.26. and 16.7.
cited by us in the next foregoing Chapter, and is elsewhere in the same Writer
extant, to wit, that the holy Spirit is sent from the Father and Son. For that
befalls not the most high God. But although that mission is nothing else than
the giving of the holy Spirit, whence that the holy Spirit is given and sent to
the Disciples from the Father, are put for the same thing, as is manifest by
comparing the words, Chap. 14.16. with the places now cited. Yet because the
Adversaries will have that mission to be such as that it can befall none but a
person, especially because Christ brings in, in the same speech, the holy
Spirit as his certain Deputy or Ambassador, Sect. 2. Chap. 15.
to be sent to the Disciples, chiefly in Chap. 16.7, 13. therefore almost in
the same manner, it may be hence demonstrated, that the holy Spirit is not the
most high God; in which we have before demonstrated the same thing concerning
Christ, from his sending; so that there is no need to add more in this place.

CHAP. XIII.
From Joh. 16.13
The thirteenth Argument from the words, John 16.13. He shall not speak (the
spirit of Truth) from himself: but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he
speak, etc.

BEcause toward the end of the foregoing Chapter, we fell into the mention of
the place, John 16.13. where it is spoken of the thing, joined to the sending
of the holy Spirit; therefore we will here examine it also. For there, not only
that is affirmed of the holy Spirit, which could not be affirmed of him, if he
were the most high God, but also that is denied, which cannot be by any means
denied of the most high God. For, thus Christ says, Howbeit, when he, the
Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you all into the Truth. For he shall not
speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak; and he
will show you things to come. He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of
mine and shall show it unto you. All things that the Father has are mine.
Therefore I said (that) he shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you. Here
it is denied, that the holy Spirit spoke of himself: on the contrary it is
affirmed, that he should speak what he heard, and should receive of that which
was Christ's. And the former indeed is therefore chiefly denied, that it may be
showed, that he is rightly called, the Spirit of Truth, that is, most true: But
this latter is therefore affirmed of him, that it might be showed, that he
should glorify Christ. But the most high God, whatsoever he speaks, speaks of
himself, and for that very thing he is true, because he speaks of himself. He
does not also hear what he should speak, nor is instructed, like an Ambassador,
by another He receives nothing from any, yea, he bestows of his own upon
all. He has not glorified Christ by receiving something from him, but by
giving to him. How then is the holy Spirit the most high God?

It will not be amiss to cite here the words of John Maldonate, a most learned
Interpreter of the Papists, who has in part unfolded this difficulty, speaking
in this manner: But (Christ) gives the reason, as Rupertus says, why he called
him the Spirit of Truth, because, says he, he shall not speak of himself; as
if, if he should speak of himself, he should speak not truth, but a lie. Which,
how true it is, it does not enough appear, seeing he rather therefore speaks
truth, and cannot speak false, because he speaks of himself. For when he speaks
of himself, he speaks as God, since he is nothing else but God. But when he
speaks as God, he cannot lie, which if he could do, then truly could he do it
when he speaks not of himself, that is, not as God. Therefore Augustine and
Bid question how it may be understood, that he speaks not of himself. For if
there were a double nature in the holy Spirit, as in Christ, one a divine, the
other a humane, or any other; we might perhaps say, that then he speaks not of
himself when he speaks as man, as we interpret what Christ says of himself,
Joh. 14.4. The words which I speak to you I speak not of my self; and what he
said before, Chap. 7.16. My doctrine is not mine but his that sent me. But
since the holy Spirit is but one, and that a divine nature, as St. Austin
disputes, we cannot say it; and thus far he. It were even to be wished to the
adversaries in this place, that a double nature could be feigned in the holy
Spirit also, as is done in Christ, that they might loose this knot. By what
hole then do they endeavor to escape, when there is none? The foresaid
interpreter brings a double answer, One of Augustine, and Bid, another his own.
The first is, therefore the holy Spirit is said not to speak of himself,
because neither is he from himself, as therefore says he, he is not of
himself, but he proceeds from the Father and Son, so he shall not speak, but
what he has received from the Father and Son by proceeding from them: as a
little after he says, He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine. But
when the foresaid Interpreter had come to those words, he clearly enough
confutes this explication of this place. The commonly received opinion of
latter Interpreters says he, is this, For he shall receive of mine, that is,
he proceeds from me. Concerning which thing I find here many subtletys in some
Writers, I know not how solid, and agreeable to the matter, which I will not so
much as recite. I only say, I am fully persuaded, that this is not the sense.
For why did he not say more clearly, he shall receive of me or from me? Why,
not, he has recieved, rather than, he shall receive, since the procession of
the holy Spirit from the Father and Son was not future, but already past? For
although I know an answer is made by some to these things, yet I had rather say
nothing, than say that and what is it else than that the holy Spirit is to
proceed from the Father and Son unto all eternity.
which they say; Besides how can it co-here with that interpretation, All
things which the Father has are mine; therefore I have said, that he shall
receive of mine? Lastly, here the matter was of the testimony which the holy
Spirit was to give of Christ, and wherewith he was to glorify him: Which ought
to be conspicuous and manifest; otherwise, how could he for that glorify
Christ? But that essential procession was not conspicuous: Therefore it could
not be brought as an argument, whence the disciples might gather, that the
works of the holy Spirit did redoun^ to the glory of Christ, For this was to
glorify him. There is no need of more words for the refutation of this
interpretation, which so much displeased a Papist, and him most addicted to the
opinions of his Church, and which he saw could not be defended unless those
things be said which he judged unworthy even to be mentioned by him. Although
also that interpretation being admitted, it can nevertheless be evinced, that
the holy Spirit is not the most high God, since the most high God, as we have a
little Chap. 11 of this Section.
before seen, Proceeds from none, receives his Essence from none. The same
interpreter a little after subjoyns his own opinion touching this thing.
Therefore, says he, the true interpretation is, that he shall receive of mine,
that is, because he shall come in my name, because as my deputy he shall
del^^er no other doctrine to you than mine. For therefore the glory of his work
and doctrine shall redound to my glory, which is to glorify me, because he
shall deliver in my name, and no other than my mysteries to you, he shall do no
other than my works. For with this sense that which follows, does fitly agree.
All things that the Father has are mine: therefore I said he shall receive of
mine as we shall presently explain it. Therefore he said by the future tense,
he shall receive, because to receive of him is to be sent in his name, and as
it were, commands being received from him; and he had not been yet sent.
Therefore he said of mine, not of me, because he would signify, that he should
receive of his doctrine and works whatsoever he should teach, whatsoever he
should do among men.

What then does that Interpreter himself answer? or, A Defense of the Argument.
in what manner does he think those things, he shall receive of mine, can be
said of the holy Spirit, if he himself be the most high God? Not, says he,
that himself had not the same things before; but because, as Cyril says, he
speaks accommodately to humane sense. For Ambassadors are wont, when they
depart from the Prince, to receive commands, both what they shall speak, and
what they shall do. But to those words, ver. 13. he shall not speak of himself,
We may more simply ( to wit, than Augustine and Bid had answered) say it is no
other thing not to speak of himself, than not to speak contrary things to those
which he himself had spoken by the will of the Father. For which opinion, John
7.16 and 14.10.
he cites some ancient Authors: and adds, For in the same manner we expounded
what he had said, My Doctrine is not mine; and the words which I speak to you,
I speak not of my self. So also he intimates, that those words also, Whatsoever
he shall hear, he shall speak, are to be taken in such manner as he had taken
that of Christ, As I hear, I judge; and that, I speak those things in the world
which I have heard of him; to wit, that Christ did neither judge any thing, nor
should at any time speak any thing, but what he did or should know to be
agreeable to his Fathers mind and will: so therefore, that neither the holy
Spirit should speak any thing from himself, because he should speak nothing but
what he should know to be agreeing with the mind and will of Christ.

But such an interpretation of Christ's words, is not every way to be admitted,
nor does it altogether take away the difficulty. For as to the former, those
former words, He shall not speak of himself, and those that are opposed to
them, but what he shall hear, he shall speak, cannot be taken of only a bare
consent with Christ's words, but do altogether signify, that he of whom those
things are said; is not the first author of his words, but that some other is
the Author of them. For otherwise it might be said, that neither the Father
indeed had spoken of himself, because he had spoken nothing but what the Son
has approved, nor the Son, even in respect of the holy Spirit; because, as the
opinion of the Adversaries is, the Son spoke nothing but what the person of the
holy Spirit consented to. But all see that those things are absurd. Add, that
that same Interpreter not only confesses it, but also urges it, that the holy
Spirit is here looked upon as Christ's Legate; that which the very context of
the words sufficiently shows. To the propriety of this Embassage, nothing can
be wanting, if the holy Spirit be a person. Wherefore those words, He shall not
speak of himself, and whatsoever he shall hear, he shall speak; and likewise,
He shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you, are so to be taken, as
they agree to a Legate. But they so agree to a Legate, that he be not himself
the first Author of his words, but only that another words and mandates be
declared by him to them, unto whom he is sent. And indeed, to a Legate,
properly so called, such as the holy Spirit would be, if he were a person, it
belongs properly to be instructed with commands from another, and to bring to
others, and expound to them, his received will and mind. For a Legate, as such,
is another Minister, and the Interpreter of another will. But that he says,
those words in ver. 14.15. He shall receive of mine, are spoken accommodately
to humane sense; if he mean this, that he should indeed receive nothing from
Christ; because he always had all things; but that it should seem so to men,
what else does he, but to elude Christ's words? as if, forsooth, Christ spoke of
it, what men, however falsely, should imagine concerning that matter, and not
rather, what should truly be, though there may be some figure in the words. Do
we think that Christ would have said, that the holy Spirit should glorify him,
because men should falsely think, that the holy spirit received of that which
is Christ's? Or do we think that he would acknowledge for his glory, the glory
that is founded in the vain opinion of men; and besides, that pertains to
some deminution of the dignity of the holy Spirit; that is, as it pleases them
of the most high God? But if he mean that, that the holy Spirit should indeed
truly receive something of that which is Christ's, but yet that a figure or
trope fetched from humane things, is in the word of receiving, let him strain
himself as he will, and turn himself every way, He shall show by no example,
that it can be said, that he shall receive from another, that he shall speak
not from himself, but things heard from another, who is first author of his
words, and to whom those words are not delivered, or some way wrought or
imprinted by another at a certain time. Although besides, if the holy Spirit
were no less properly the Legate of the Son, than the Son formerly of the
Father, no impropriety of speech, which might here be of any moment in that
matter of which it is here disputed, is to be admitted, either in the word of
hearing, or of receiving. For it will be altogether signified, that those
things which the holy Spirit has said, were manifested and committed to him by
Christ. For that belongs to such a Legate as Christ was, and such a^ they hold
the holy Spirit to be.

By which it is now understood, that the difficulty is not taken away by such
an answer, nor our Argument solved; because what ever you devise, these words
cannot consist, unless it be acknowledged, that the holy Spirit is not the
first author of those things which he made known to the Disciples of Christ,
but it came to pass by the will of another, to wit Christ, and so of God the
Father himself, From Joh. 15.13
that he should reveal those things that he dictated to the disciples. But this
befalls not the most high God: For he is the first author of those things,
which he either reveals to men, or otherwise does: Neither is it caused by
the will of another, that he does reveal any thing to men. Of which see what we
have said above, Sect. 2. Chap. 3. and 4. disputing of Christ, when he weighed
those his words, John 5.19. The Son can do nothing of himself. And those, John
7.16. My doctrine is not mine, and others like to these.

But perhaps this scruple will trouble some, how it can be that the holy Spirit
may be said to hear, and to receive from another, what he may declare to
others, if it be but only a divine inspiration, or virtue and efficacy?

I answer, Since the Adversaries also confess, and the thing it self shows,
that those things cannot be properly taken concerning the holy Spirit, there is
no necessity that we should show, that they may be taken properly concerning
divine inspiration. But if a figure in the words is to be admitted, it is not
hard to show, that they may be rightly and elegantly said concerning divine
inspiration, or virtue inspired from heaven into the Apostles. Out of those
things which follow, it will be manifest that many things are found in the holy
Scripture, spoken by a Prosopopoea, concerning the holy Spirit, as also
concerning other things. And that this figure is abhorrent from the place of
John, of which we treat, shall be by and by shown. All men perceive that it is
here spoken of the holy Spirit as of a Legate, who is to be sent by Christ to
the disciples. It belongs to a Legate, as we have said before, not to speak of
himself, but to declare to others the commands heard and received from him by
whom he is sent. These things then are accommodated, and that by right, also to
the divine virtue, long since inspired into the Apostles. For there is
something in that divine inspiration, which very well answers to hearing and
receiving from another, and declaring, and which consequently, has made way
for the Metaphor, out of which the Prosopopoea arises. For not the divine
inspiration, but he from whom that inspiration comes, is the true author of
those things, which are revealed by it to men; neither can that divine virtue
implant any other thing in the spirits and minds of men, than he would from
whom it is inspired into men; who is here indeed Christ. Therefore it is like
to some Legate, who declares nothing save the things heard, and received from
his Prince and Lord, to those to whom he is sent. But why does here Christ
speak by Prosopopey, concerning the holy Spirit, this is chiefly the cause,
because in some manner he compares him with himself, and considers him as it
were to be sent into his place to the Disciples now sadned by his instant
departure. For Christ hitherto has been, as it were their Comforter. Therefore
he said to them (being fadned by the notice of his departure) That he, asking
the Father, would give to them, or would send to them, from the Father, another
Comforter, who might abundantly supply his room in this behalf. But comparisons
of things with persons, from John 16.13
do easily bring forth Prosopopeys. Hence, that we may illustrate the thing by
examples, David comparing the testimonies of God with Princes, who spoke and
took counsel against him, and opposing the one to the other, he calls them his
Counselors, or, as it is in the Hebrew, the men of his Counsel, Psalm. 119.24.

Hence also arose that famous Prosopopey in Solomon, who brings in wisdom and
foolishness contrary to it, as certain women inviting men to them, by reason of
the comparison of a strange woman, as most learned men have noted. (See
Cornelius Jansen on the Proverbs) Let the whole place be read, beginning at
Proverbs 7.5. where that comparison begins and is continued through the rest of
the whole chapter, and the two following Chapters. Compare also with this
place, Chap. 24. Eccles.

More might be said of this matter, but there is now no place for it, and
something also shall yet be said hereafter, by which it shall appear, that no
man ought to marvel, that such a Prosopopey, or Fiction of a Person, is used
concerning the holy Spirit. Although even that alone may take away wondering
from any one, that Christ himself confesses, that he in that speech of his, in
which several times he brings in the holy Spirit as a person, spoke to the
Disciples in Parables or Figures fetched from common use; but that sometimes he
would openly and plainly declare to them of the Father, or of the things
pertaining to the Father, Chap. 16.25: But among those things, even chiefly is
the holy Spirit, of whom there is often mention in that discourse, one while
more openly, another while more covertly. Christ afterward indeed explained
the thing clearly enough, when he poured out the holy Spirit on the Disciples,
by which he lead them into all the Truth. For it, not as a true person, has
declared any thing to them, but as a divine inspiration inspired into their
minds, has wrought and imprinted in them the fullest knowledge of the Doctrine
of Christ.

Wherefore, since the event it self has sufficiently explained that Discourse,
why do we seek another Interpretation?

CHAP. XIV.
from 1 Cor. 2.10.
Three Arguments from 1 Cor. 2.10, etc. The Spirit searches all things, even
the deep things of God, etc.

THe fourth place in this rank, we shall assign to those words of Paul 1 Cor.
2. which the Adversaries are wont to use to prove, that the holy Spirit is a
divine person. For thus the Apostle there speaks: But God has revealed them to
us (to wit, those things which God has prepared for them who love him) by his
Spirit. For the Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God. For
who of men knows the things of man, save the spirit of man that is in him?
Even so the things of God knows none, but the Spirit of God. Now we have
received not the Spirit of this world, but the spirit which is of God, etc.
This place yields us diverse Arguments, some of which are above alleged by us
in Sect. 3. Chap. 5.

First, That the holy spirit is distinguished from God, whilst God is said, by
him to reveal to us the things of salvation, whilst it is called the Spirit of
God, whilst it is asserted, that he searches the deep things of God, and has
known the things which are of God, whilst, in the end, Chap. 8. Chap. 11.
it is said to be of God. Moreover, that men are said to receive it. Lastly,
that when he is said to be of God, he is made the effect of God. But none of
these, we have showed, can befall the most high God. But besides these three, as
many other Arguments may be fetched from the same words.

The first is, That God is said to have revealed something to us by his Spirit.
For thence it is manifest, that it is not the first but the middle cause of
that Revelation, which agrees not to the most high God. See what we have said
in those places above, Sect. 2. Chap. 19. in which God is said to have done
either all or certain things by Christ.

The second is, That it is said to search even the deep things of God. For
neither is any one said to search those things, the most clear and perfect
knowledge of which is first in him, and which are by him first constituted and
decreed. But if the holy Spirit is the most high God, the deep things of God,
that is, his hidden counsels, and most clear and perfect knowledge thereof, in
him is first resident, and by him they are all first constituted and decreed.
How then could he be said to search them? God and Christ indeed is said to
search our hearts, because he penetrates into the secrets of another breast,
but his own counsels, his own deep things, he is no where said to search.
Indeed neither are men said to search their own counsels, unless perhaps, when
either they are by some means slipped out of their memory, or they themselves
have not yet sufficiently examined the reason of them. But what can be wanting
to the most high God, for the most exact knowledge of his depths? From 1 Cor.
2.10.
The Apostle in this place being about to declare that which he had said of the
Spirit of God by the example of the Spirit of man, does not say, that it
searches, but knows the things which are of a man, although the manner of
speaking, which he had used of the Spirit of God, would lead him thereto, that
he should affirm that the spirit of man also searches those things, which are
of a man. But he would not affirm it of the Spirit of man, because in it first
are resident those things which are of a man, that is, his counsels and
decrees, and by it are constituted. Therefore the same reason should be of the
holy Spirit, if he were the most high God. We know indeed that it is said by a
Metalepsis which also brings forth a certain Prosopopey, that the Spirit of God
searches all things, namely, because it causes men, in whom it is, to find
out all things, even the deep and hidden counsels of God. In which manner the
same Spirit is said to intercede for us with unutterable groans, and to cry
Abba Father; because it is the cause, that we may do these things. But the
Adversaries cannot use this answer, who endeavor to frame the person of the
holy Spirit from this, that the holy Spirit is said to know all things, even
those which are of God; which they could not do, if they would acknowledge
those things to be said of the holy Spirit by a Metalepsis. For it would no
more thence follow, that the holy Spirit is a person, than that Charity is a
person, because so many actions proper to persons are attributed to it by a
Metalepsis, afterward in the same Epistle, 1 Cor. 13. Moreover such a
Metalepsis would be altogether unusual, if the holy Spirit should be the most
high God. Who would say that the Father searches the counsel of God, because
he may cause another to search them? Why then should the holy Spirit be said to
search the deep things of God, if he himself were the most high God, whose are
those deep things? We say the same words of Paul, Romans 8.27. which we touched a
little before; The Spirit it self asks (or makes intercession) for us with
unutterable groans, and he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind
of the Spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints, according to God.
For how could these things be said, even by a Metalepsis of the holy Spirit, if
he were the most high God, with whom the intercession is made, and who
searches the hearts, and according to whom, or according to whose will the
Saints intercede? For it is not convenient, that not only humane action should
be attributed to the most high God, but that his own person also should be
detracted from him.

The third Argument, which may be drawn from the aforesaid place to the
Corinthians, is, that if the holy Spirit were a person distinct from the Father
and Son, which, speaking p^ope^ly, should be said to know, it could not rightly
be affirmed that none besides him knows the things of God. For besides him,
also the Father and Son should know, and that primarily. But if they say, the
particle, none, is here opposed only to creatures, or rather comprehends only
creatures and men, as if it were said, no man knows those things; ou^ opinion
indeed may admit that, but not the adversaries. For we acknowledge in those
words, From 1 Cor. 2.11.
but the Spirit of God, a metonymy of the adjunct, which also brings forth some
Metalepsis, as if the Apostle had said, None of men knows the mysteries and
hidden counsels of God, besides those who are endued with his Spirit, by the
power of whom alone those things may be found out by us. But the adversaries,
who would have the knowledge in this place to be properly attributed to the
holy Spirit himself, cannot say that, and are forced to confess, that the holy
Spirit is therefore expressly excepted, because otherwise he should be
alto^ether comprehended in that general word, none. How rid^culous, I beseech
you, and unworthy of the Apostle had such a speech been. None of men or
creatures knows those things which are Gods, ^ut God the Father, or no Angel
knows those things which are Gods, but Christ or the holy Spirit. For what?
Is the Father in the number of men or Creatures? Is Christ or the holy Spirit
in the number of Angels? For nothing is wont to be excepted from out of a
general speech, but what otherwise is of the same kind of things, of which it
is spoken, and which, therefore, unless it had been excepted, had been
altogether cemprehended in the general speech, and the same thing either
affirmed or denied of it, as of the rest. Wherefore if the knowledge of divine
things be here properly ascribed to the holy Spirit himself, as the Adversaries
would, and that Metonymy which we have explained, is not to be acknowledged in
that word, the word none cannot be restrained to men or creatu^es alo^e, but
will comprehend also the divine persons themselves, of the number of which they
would have the holy Spirit to be. Whence it follows, seeing the holy Spirit in
their opinion is a person really distinct from the Father and Son; that the
Father and Son are excluded from the knowledge of vine things in these words of
Paul; of which absurdity there is no danger in our opinion. In the same manner,
if the Spirit of a man were a certain person distinct from the man himself,
whose Spirit it is said to be, when it is denied, that any of men knows those
things which are of a man besides his spirit; the man himself whose Spirit it
is, had been excluded: and besides that exception should have been rediculous.
What man knows the things, which are of a man, unless the Spirit of man which
is in him? For is the Spirit of man, which is in him, man? But if you take the
words of the Apostle, as if he had said, No man knows the hidden counsels, and
thoughts of a man besides himself, who conceives and understands them by his
Spirit and mind; the absurdity will cease. For it is to be observed, what
Philosophy teaches namely, that not the Spirit of a man, which they call the
soul, does properly understand, but the man by it, or by its virtue or power.

CHAP. XV.
from Mat 3.16
The seventeenth Argument, That the holy Spirit sometime descended upon Christ.

IN the last place it likes me to allege that, to which many adversaries
attribute much, when they endeavor to show, that the holy Spirit is not a
divine virtue, but a person distinct from the Father and Son. And that is, as
Luke writes, Chap. 3.22. With whom also the other writers of the Gospel History
agree, Mat. 3.16. Mark. 1.10. Joh. 1.32, 33. That the holy Spirit descended on
Christ, baptized by John, in a corporal shape, as a dove. It is an old saying,
and at this day commonly spoken among the adversaries, Go Arian to Jordan, and
thou shall see the Trinity. Surely, if the Trinity be Father Son and holy
Spirit; The Father indeed, who inhabiting in Heaven as the most high God, and
removed from men's eyes, commands them out of his supreme Authority, and on
the Son bestows authourity from his Majesty, but the Son a true man, baptized
in Jordan by John, and after from heaven annoi^ted and replenished with the
holy Spirit; and lastly, the holy Spirit, a certain thing, sent down from
heaven upon Christ, with which he was replenisht, if I say, that be the
Trinity, he is rightly commanded to go to Jordan, who does not acknowledge the
Trinity. We indeed who are sometimes commanded to go thither, long ago by the
grace of God have been there and seen that Trinty, and with willing mind
acknowledge and profess it. But if the Trinity be to them the conjunction of
three persons really distinct amongst themselves in one and individual Essence;
it is so far from being seen at Jordan, that rather in some sort it may be seen
by the very eyes, it has no existency. For what s^ew or shadow is there of one
and the same Essence in number, which may be common to the Father, Son and holy
Spirit? Is it the same numerical sub^^ance of God, who speaks from heaven not
descending hence, and of him a true man, who is baptized in Jordan; and lastly
of that thing, which descends from heaven upon him? I omit other things, which
partly are said before, partly shall be said a little after. They therefore,
who have fained such a Trinity, or defend it fained ^y othe^s, are yet to be
sent to Jordan, that they may as from a near place behold the true Trinity, and
may more rightly learn to acknowledge it. We may indeed rightly send thither
the Arians; who hold that the Son of God is a certain invisible Spirit produced
by God before the creation of the world: but our adversaries who maintain him
to be consubstantial, it is so far of, their being able to do it, that the
Arians rather might send them thither. For the tenet of the Arians is less
against that History, than that of the Consubstantialists. But we will not in
this place urge all things, which might be said, but that only, which is
written of the holy Spirit; that we may not only, wrest out the weapon of the
hands of the Adversaries, with which they f^ght against us, but also may retort
it on them. They urge that the holy Spirit has both decended, and appeared in
bodily shape, to wit, of a dove. For from thence it follows, that the holy
Spirit is some substance, not a quality. For it belongs to substances, and
those only that are Suppositums to descend, and to assume and sustain forms
and shapes; and together they say it appears, that the holy Spirit is such a
substance, as is really distinct from the Father and Son. For neither the
Father or Son descended from heaven, nor assumed that corporeal form, therefore
the holy Spirit is a Suppositum; and consequently because also he is
intelligent (For he is said to search all things, even the depths of God, and
to know the things that are Gods, and other like things, proper to intelligent
Substances, are pronounced of it) he is also a person, for every intelligent
Suppositum is a person. Since that is the definition of a person. There is need
of so much furniture, that the person of the holy Spirit may be framed hence,
which they promised we should see at Jordan together with two others. For
neither the Trinity of the adversaries can be seen, unless three persons can be
seen, and so as that it may appear they are persons. What is to be answered to
this their Argumentation shall be a little after showed. Let us do now that
which we propounded, that assuming those things which partly are read in that
sacred History, partly are affimed by the adversaries, we may demostrate the
holy Spirit not to be the most high God. They affirm, if the holy Spirit be
the most high God, that he ought to be altogether of the same essence with the
Father; yea, a so with the Son. Otherwise there will be either two or more most
high Gods, or the Father or Son, whom they take for the most high God, will not
be the most high God. But from this apparition of the holy Spirit, it is
manifest, that there is one Essence of the holy Spirit, another of the Father
and Son. For the Essence of the Father and Son descended not then from heaven
when Christ was baptized, nor took that corporeal shape, the Essence of the
holy Spirit, as is manifest by the adversaries opinion, did both. Therefore the
Essence of the holy Spirit is not the Essence of the Father or Son, but it is
necessary this to be one, that to be another. Neither indeed may they say, that
not the Essence of the holy Spirit, but the person did both. For first every
person is a substance, and a substance is an Essence subsisting by it self.
Wherefore whose person descended, and assumed some form, his essence also does
it. And besides do not they themselves, as we have seen urge, that that which
descends and sustaines a form, is necessarily a substance? But the substance of
the holy Spirit, is no other thing than its Essence, and with our Adversaries
it is all one to say, the same is the Essence, and the same is the substance of
the divine persons, to wit, because every substance is an essence, therefore
the Essence of the holy Spirit must have descended. And although at last a
person in the Deity, should not be the substance or Essence it self, but
something in the Essence, which yet is impossible (For it is repugnant to the
nature of a Suppositum, and further also of a person to be in another) yet
might not that either descend or assume a form, but that its substance in which
lastly all the accidents are and rest together, should do the same.

Besides also another shorter way from that, that the holy Spirit descended
from heaven upon Christ, and that in a bodily form or shape, we may show, that
he is not the most high God. For the most God is not moved from place to place,
and consequently descends not from heaven. Also no accident befalls the most
high God, even by the adversaries opinion. But that bodily shape in which the
holy Spirit descended, was an accident, as also that descent it self.

The Defense of the Argument.
Some adversaries, observing this, so explain the thing, that it may
sufficiently appear, that they neither attribute to the holy Spirits descent,
properly called, nor grant that he Assumed that bodily shape on himself; but
either that a certain true body in a doves shape descended from heaven, or the
shape only of a dove descending, was represented to the eyes of the beholders,
which might be a simbole or resemblance of the presence, and operation of the
holy Spirit filling Christ with gifts necessary for the discharge of his
prophetical office. But if this be so, how will hence be showed, that the holy
Spirit is a thing subsistent by it self, and consequently a Suppositum and
person really distinct from the Father, and the Son, seeing he neither properly
descended on Christ, nor sustained that form: but was only the shape of a body
set before the eyes of the beholders, when indeed there was no body: or, as the Sea Maldonat and Augustine cited by him.
opinion is of some of the most learned adversaries, a true body which
descended and sustained that shape. But even things which not only are not
persons, but not so much as indeed sustbances may be said to descend improperly
from heaven; and among others, James says chap. 1.17. Every good, and perfect
gift is from above (that is from heaven) descending from the Father of lights:
But that the same may be shaddowed by a certain outward shape, and set before
the eyes of men, as besides other things that teaches, which we read, Act.
2.3. of the first effusion of the holy Spirit on Christ's disciples. For those
cloven tongues did they not express the faculty of diverse languages to be
given to the disciples of Christ by the holy Spirit? But nothing prohibites
that they might not seem to be moved. How many such shapes of things do we see
set before one while the outward, another while the inward senses of the
Prophets? Therefore nothing, if the thing be so explained, may be hence
gathered, which belongs to prove the holy Spirit to be a Suppositum, much less
a person. Besides, although they would have all those things concerning the
holy Spirit to be taken figuratively, yet nevertheless they must hold, that
here some singular operation of the holy Spirit was shaddowed, not of the
Father or Son, or at least not equally.

For otherwise, why should not the Father and Son also be said to have
descended in a bodily shape? But if the Essence of the holy Spirit would be the
same with that of the Father and Son, the operation no less of these than of
that, had been expressed by that shape and descent; and so the Father and Son,
should be no less said to have descended in a bodily shape than the holy
Spirit. For such an operation is of the singular substance it self, having in
it self all fo^ce of opperating. Therefore seeing this is supposed the same in
those three persons, the same opperation also is equally to be attributed to
all those persons. Seeing this is not come to pass, it follows, that there is
one essence of the holy Spirit, another of the Father and Son, and
consequently, unless the adversaries would introduce more Gods, or deny the
Father to be the most high God, they are forced to acknowledge the holy Spirit
not to be the most high God.

But you will say, How nevertheless do those things agree to the holy Spirit,
to descend from heaven in a bodily shape, if it be only a divine virtue and
efficacy, not a Suppositum or Person? This although it properly pertain not to
the matter in hand, yet we will briefly explain that no scruple may remain.

First, we have already seen, that some of the adversaries, by the force of
their own opinion, are forced to hold, that those things are not properly said
of the holy Spirit, but that bodily shape and its descent from heaven, was only
an outward resemblance of the holy Spirit, filling Christ with his gifts, which
same thing, why it may not be said of divine efficacy, there is no cause.

Besides, If we would by all means have it so, that those things are properly
spoken of the holy Spirit, it is to be understood, as to that descent and
motion, that the qualities were moved together with their subjects, and
consequently in them. Wherefore also the divine efficacy, if it may exist in a
man, and in him, or together with him, be moved, it may descend from heaven in
another thing likewise, which God will use in the carrying down of it. Neither
indeed is there wanting to God a convenient and bese^ming Vehicle, that I may
so speak, for that efficacy. But as to the shape, it the subject of thar
efficacy have a certain shape, especially such as may show and resemble the
latent efficacy, nothing at all hinders but that it may be said, that that
virtue descends in or with that shape. But of these things, if God will, we
shall say more else where.

This we would have here observed, although it be written, that the holy spirit
did then descend on Christ in a bodily form, and it may be easily understood,
that which all seem commonly to think, that it appeared in some bodily form on
the day of Pentecost; yet neither here nor else where, is it ever said to have
appeared in the shape and form of any person, as we read of the Father and
Christ, when they appeared in a certain form, and also of the Angels. But if
the holy Spirit were a person, Why had it not also appeared in the shape of a
person? For whether you hold it to have been the shape of a Dove, in which it
descended on Christ, as commonly all contend, or any other; it is certain that
was not the form of a person. For neither is the Fire or Dove a Person, seeing
a person is nothing but a substance endued with understanding. As for that
whereby from the Apostles words, in which it is said, it searches or knows,
they endeavor to evince, the holy Spirit to be endued with understanding, it
is refuted in the foregoing Chapter.

CHAP. XVI.
The Conclusion of the first Book, in which it is showed, That the Adversaries
opinion, concerning the Trinity, is refuted by the very silence of the holy
Scriptures, neither does any thing hinder, but that it may be oppugned by
Arguments fetched from Reason.

WE have showed enough out of holy writ, that neither Christ, nor the holy
Spirit, but only the Father is the most high God; and that the most high God is
one, as in Essence, so also in person; not, as it is commonly believed, three
in respect of persons. Which opinion, although there were not so many reasons
as we have produced, might be refelled, by the bare silence of holy Scriptures.
For is it credible that Christ and the Apostles, that I may omit now the
Prophets, would have concealed a thing, as it is commonly believed, and as the
reason of the tenet holds forth, so necessary to be known, so hard to be
believed, and far exceeding all the capacity of humane wit? Does not the thing
it self show us, by how much that tenet should be more necessary both to be
known, and more hard to be perceived, by so much the clearer they would have
propounded it, and so the oftenner and more diligently have inculcated it?
Their diligence in other things, much less and easier to be perceived, compels
us to believe, as well as the earnest desire, or rather endeavor of the same
persons, toward the Salvation of mankind; and also that office which they
undertook and sustained.

Shall we think Christ, our Savior, the Apostles and other divine men had less
care of the Salvation of men, than they who either heretofore have defended
that tenet, as the chief concern of our Salvation, or at this day maintain it?
Was there in them less intelligence of that mystery, which they commonly adore,
or were words wanting, by which they should describe it? Could Athanasius in
his Creed express it more clearly than Christ, than the Apostles? Whosoever
(says he) will be saved, before all things, it is necessary that he hold the
Chatolick faith, which unless a man keep whole and inviolate, without doubt he
shall perish for ever. But the Catholic faith is this, that we worship one God
in Trinity and Trinity in Unity* neither confounding the persons, nor
seperating the substance. For there is one person of the Farher, another of the
Son, another of the holy Spirit. The Scripture does not teach that God is
trinune.
But there is one divinity of the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, equal glory,
coeternal Majesty, etc. What, I beseech you, is there like these things in all
the holy Scriptures? We will not now refute the errors of them, who believe not
all things necessary to salvation, to be contained in the holy Scriptures,
which is done by our men See John Volkelius of the true Religion, lib. 5. Chap.
7.
elsewhere. This only we say, that, however some positions necessary to
salvation should not be contained in the holy Scriptures; yet this, which is
made the chief, and as it were the foundation of other things by them, that it
is not openly contained there, is to be judged altogether incredible. But
letting these pass, let us deal with them, who acknowledge, and urge, that all
things, which are necessary to salvation, are comprehended in the compass of
the sacred Volumnes. What reason will they aleage, why that tenet is not
plainly contained in holy Scripture? Not few say, that though it be not
expressly comprehended in them, yet it may be deduced from them by a good
consequence. But, that I may now omit other things, we have showed a little
before, that in so hard a thing, so remore from our capacity, so necessary
there should be fully shown, not only consequences, but clear and distinct
explication, and that repeated more than once; especially because simple men,
to whom God would have the way of salvation to be manifest equally, that I say
not, more to learned and ingenious men, understand not those consequences; and
besides must take pains not only in perceiving the reason of the consequence,
but also in the force of the opinion it self, which is scarce perceived by the
learned: if yet that may be perceived, which is repugnant to it self.

Moreover, if they speak true, who say, that the Tenet of the Trinity, pertains
even chiefly to the Catholic Faith, without which no man can be saved, ruder
men must despair of salvation. For if to believe, be not only to utter the
words with the mouth, but also to embrace, and firmly to hold in the mind, the
meaning of them, who is thereof the more simple, who believes that tenet? For
if any man would comprehend in mind, the meaning of that position, it is
necessary that he distinguish between the divine essence and person. For unless
he distinguish them, either he will believe, that there is in very deed only
one divine Person, as one Essence, or hold three Essences, and so three Gods,
no less than three divine Persons: either of which deprives a man of Salvation,
according to the Opinion of the Adversaries. But how many are there, who know
how to distinguish a divine Person from the Essence, and so may conceive three
Persons, that he may not imagine to himself together three Substances
subsisting by themselves? Verily he must be a subtle man, and hold a
mavelous opinion of a Person, who does otherwise. What then shall become of
the ruder men, for whom alike Christ dyed? But let us grant, that the ruder may
perceive that tenet, will there not be need of a clear, frequent and diligent
explication of that t^ing to them? But where shall we chiefly seek an
explication of so abstruse a thing? is it not in the holy Scriptures? Therefore
if the perspicuous explication of this thing be not so much as once indeed
contained in them, it is to be concluded, that that doctrine is false, and
cannot be deduced indeed, no not by good consequence, from the holy Scripture.
We refuse not therefore lawful consequences, which we also our selves willingly
use: but in such a doctrine as that is, of which we dispute, we rightly hold,
that there are no lawful consequences, unless together a perspicuous and open
explication thereof could be held forth.

Others say, that not only this Doctrine may be drawn by lawful consequences
from the holy Scriptures, but also that it is really contained in them. For
though the word Trinity be not extant in them, yet the meaning of it is extant.
But neither do we require, that they show the very name of the Trinity, but the
thing and meaning which they commonly comprehend in that name, clearly and
perspicuously expressed. That, I say, we require, that they show where it is
written, that God is One in Essence, Three in Persons, the Father to be God,
the Son to be God, to wit, most high, the holy Spirit to be God, and yet there
are not three Gods, but those three are one God. So the Father to be eternal,
likewise the Son and holy Spirit, and yet these are not three eternals, but one
eternal. We require these, or the like to them, the meaning of which may be
manifest to all men, such as are those of Athanasius, with which at this day
all the Temples do ring. but when they bring forth such places, in which there
is need of consequence, that it may be made manifest, that this is the meaning
of them, which they would have; they shall perform no more than those, who
would have so great a thing drawn out of holy Scriptures by consequences only.
See their two Achilles, or chief Champions, Mat. 28, 29.
Baptize into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Spirit:
how far distant are these from those positions? Are there three persons in one
Essence of God? We see three things; we see not three persons: nor more one
Essence of those three; yea, rather we see diverse Essences, and those between
themselves unequal. Here certainly there is need of consequences. Again, 1 John
5.7.
There are three, who give testimony in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
holy Spirit: and these three are one. I repeat not now that which we showed
Cap. 3. of this Section.
before, how suspected this place is. Let us grant it to be undoubted. Whence
is it manifest, that here is understood the Unity of Essence? They are one: are
they therefore one in Essence? Not only the meaning it self is not extant, but
neither indeed can it be evinced by lawful consequence. To be One, is a general
word, and contains more species under it self: One in essence, One in consent,
either of mind or testimony, or of some other thing. But the genus being
proposed, some species is indeed proposed, but not forthwith a determinate One;
as in this place One in Essence. And indeed it were easier from this place, to
show, that there are diverse Essences of those three, than one, yea, it is
impossible to show this, Besides, in which words is it said, that the holy
Spirit is a person? They must of necessity fly to consequences.

Now by the things said, it appears, how injuriously they deal, who, when
Arguments from Reason are brought against that Doctrine, cry, that this is a
mystery, which is to be believed, not searched into; that Reason cannot
comprehend these things; that we must rest simply upon the holy Scriptures. We
should yield to those men, if they would prove that Doctrine by perspicuous
testimonies of holy Scripture; and not rather assert it against open and clear
testimonies of them. But now when they cannot produce such places, they do in
vain affright us with the name of a mystery, that we might not here use our
reason, and so endeavor, as with a Gorgons head set before us, to turn us into
stones. Although the trial of Reason were not indeed, no not then, to be
declined, if it were manifest that Mystery to have been revealed from God. For
what Mystery will they produce out of holy Scriptures, which is repugnant to
Reason? Mysteries indeed exceed Reason, but do not overthrow it, they do not
extinguish the light of it, but perfect it: yea, Reason alone both perceives,
and embraces, and defends the Mysteries revealed to it, which it could not of
it self find out. Paul uses Reason, when he proves the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15
12, etc.
which Mystery even most of all exceeds Reason. Further add, that the
Adversaries themselves do that ill, which they forbid us to do well. I will not
now rehearse it, that they cannot discourse of the difference of essence and
person, without the help of Reason. For where are those things written in the
holy Scriptures? And though they were written, they could not be perceived, nor
explained without Reason. I now urge that, that all use consequences, when they
dispute of this Doctrine, which they call a Mystery. What then? does not he use
Reason, who uses Consequences? Are perhaps all those Argumentations written in
the holy Scriptures? You will say, that the propositions of the Arguments are
written. First, Let it be so. But the form it self of Argumentation is not
there delivered; neither is it showed, that this which you use, is lawful, that
which the Adversaries use, is unlawful. What then does show it? Reason. But
moreover, resolve your Argumentations, and those of yours, whom you most
respect and approve, how few Argumentations will you find, which are manifest
from the holy Scriptures? What is more usual than such Argumentations as these?
To whom the Properties of that One God agree, he is that one God: But to Christ
or the holy Spirit these agree. Again, To whom actions proper to persons agree,
he is a person: But they agree to the holy Spirit. But where are those
Propositions, which they call major Propositions (that I say nothing now of
Assumptions) written? whence will they draw them but from reason? But if
Argumentation, when we treat even of Mysteries, may be firm from one
Proposition, which Reason only supplies, why may it not be also from two; if as
well Reason approves both as one? Besides, if we argue either from the Opinions
of the Adversaries themselves, or from Opinions and Principles confessed by
all, who can reprehend it, unless most unjustly? especially if we show that
that Doctrine implies, as they speak, a contradiction, and overthrows it self.
For all men, who are of right understanding, do confess, that no doctrine can
be true, which implies a contradiction, or the force of which is such, that it
is necessary, that the same thing be, and not be together, to wit, in the same
respect, part, time. For this principle being taken away, all Science is taken
away; and, although you should a thousand times demonstrate God to be three in
persons, yet it might be allowed for another alike truly to say, that he is
not three, and so in all other things. But we may, without difficulty, show,
that the common Doctrine of the Trinity of Persons in one numerical Essence,
does imply a contradiction. What then remains, but that it be acknowledged by
all to be false? But that the thing is so as we have said, being helped by
Divine Aid, we shall demonstrate in the following Book.

THE SECOND BOOK OF John Crellius Concerning. One God the Father.
HAving showed from the holy Scriptures, the Most High God to be none other
than the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; Now we will confirm the same chiefly
by other Arguments: and indeed so, that we may refel the Doctrine contrary to
this Opinion, partly from the very nature of it, and the received opinions of
the Adversaries, partly from other principles. The truth of which may be
demonstrated in a certain manner. But we shall divide this whole tract again
into three Sections. In the first we shall in general discourse of those three
Persons of supreme Divinity which are maintained, and shall show that that
Doctrine does oppose it self, and also other Suppositions of the Adversaries.
In the second of the second Person of that Trinity, which they hold to be the
Son of God. In the third we shall speak of the third Person, which they make
the holy Spirit. Which being finished, we shall so conclude this whole work, as
to show the manifold Use of this Disputation.

The first Section.
There would be three Gods.
In which is generally treated concerning the three Persons of the supreme
Deity, which are commonly maintained.

CHAP. I.
The first Argument. By which is showed, That the common Doctrine of the
Trinity overthrows it self: because there would be at once one and three Gods.

THat we may therefore perform that which we have propounded in the first place;
first, Thence it is manifest, that the common Doctrine of three Persons in one
God, does imply a contradiction, and so overthrows it self, because both one
God, and three Gods, to wit, Most High, are there asserted together: One God
indeed expressly; but three, if you consider the force of the Opinion. For they
say, That there are three Persons really distinct from among themselves, each
of which is God: For as much as they are wont to say, and are compelled to say
by the force of their Opinion, The Father, is God, The Son is God, The holy
Spirit is God, but they always speak of the same Most high God. But now where
there are three persons, really distinct from among themselves, each of which
is the most high God, there are three most high Gods. Reckon up now those
Persons, and you will have three most high Gods; for the first will be the
Father, the second the Son, the third the holy Spirit. The matter needs no
disputation with him, who by reason of a preconceived Opinion concerning God,
when there it is treated of him, has not forgot to number three.

A larger Defense and Confirmation of the Argument.
BUt nevertheless, they urge, that those three are one God. If they should so
call those three one God, as we call three or more Senators one Senate, since
it cannot be said of them separately, thus far it might be pardoned to them.
But seeing they pronounce the name of the most high God, of each person
distinctly taken, and are altogether compelled to pronounce it by the force of
their Opinion, they cannot say it. For from this Opinion it does altogether
follow, that either the Father is the Son and holy Spirit; and reciprocally, or
the Father is one God in number, another the Son, another the holy Spirit: the
former of which takes away the real distinction of the persons; the latter
overthrows the Unity of God, and manifestly makes three Gods in number. For as
to the former, thus I will argue, That one God is the Father, as the holy
Scriptures testify it, and the Adversaries confess it. But the Son, according
to the Adversaries Opinion, is that one God, that same even in number, who was
now called the Father; Therefore the Son is the Father. But the same
Argumentation may be also inverted, the premises being converted and
transposed, and in like manner may be framed concerning the holy Spirit, in
relation to the Father and Son. Nor can it otherwise be dissolved, unless you
say that the Son is one God in number, the Father another, likewise the holy
Spirit another, and so there are three Gods in number. Therefore, whithersoever
the Adversaries turn themselves, by that their Tenet, they overthrow both their
own Doctrine, and the sense of the holy Scriptures. Moreover, do I not rightly
argue thus; The Father is a divine Person, the Son is a divine Person, the holy
Spirit is a divine Person; therefore there are three divine Persons, not one?
The Adversaries will altogether so assert. Why then do I not likewise rightly
argue, The Father is the most high God, the Son is the most high God, the holy
Spirit is the most high God; therefore there are three most high Gods, not one?
If we would urge examples fetched from things created; Peter is a man, Paul is a
man, John is a man, therefore there are three men, not one: or Michael is an
Angel, Gabriel is an Angel, Raphael is an Angel; therefore there are three
Angels, not one: if, I say, we would urge these examples, the Adversaries would
cry out, that the thing is one way in creatures, another way in God. But now,
when we use the example of divine Persons, what will they say? That the thing
is one way in divine Persons, another way in God? Is it so? But what if we
demonstrate, that that very God, of whom we treat, is a divine Person, as also
on the contrary? Will they yet deny that that is in force in God, which is in
force in a divine Person? But it is easy to demonstrate that, partly from the
holy Scriptures, partly from the Opinion of the Adversaries themselves. They
say, that each divine Person is that one God, and why may they not say it?
Forasmuch as they hold, that each of them has the whole Essence of the one
God; neither can they say otherwise without overthrowing that Doctrine of the
Trinity. Now the holy Scriptures plainly affirm of the Father, that he is that
one God. But that will be false, if that one God be not a divine Person. For it
may be rightly argued thus; That One God is not a divine Person, the Father is
a divine Person; therefore the Father is not that one God. The same arguing
according to the Adversaries Opinion, will be found concerning the Son and holy
Spirit.

These things which are said of us to confirm the first Argument, might also by
themselves be alleged to refel the Adversaries Opinion. But it matters not on
our behalf, whether they be taken for peculiar Arguments, or for props of the
first. Although this may be confirmed also by another general reason, for,
wheresoever subjects are in very deed multiplied, those things also are
multiplied, which are said distinctly of each: and are indeed multiplied
according to the number of their subjects. We have already declared the thing
by examples, both divine, and angelical, and humane: neither can it at all be
refelled by any example. Run over all kinds of things, and you will find that
the thing is so. As many men as there are, so many living creatures, bodies,
substances are there; as many Angels, so many Spirits; as many Lines, so many
Longitudes and Quantities; as many Virtues, so many Habits, so many Qualities;
as many Fathers, so many Relates; and so in the rest. To wit, because all those
Predicates are multiplied according to the number of their Subjects. Wherefore
also as many divine Persons as there are, so many Gods, and indeed most high
Gods, there will be, seeing the most high God is distinctly predicated of each
divine person. Whence it appears, that the Athanasian Creed, does plainly
contradict it self, while it thus pronounces, The Father is God, The Son is
God, The holy Spirit is God; and yet there are not three Gods, but one God. And
also, the Father is Eternal, Omnipotent, Infinite; in the same manner both the
Son and holy Spirit: and yet there are not three Eternals, Omnipotents,
Infinits; but on Eternal, Omnipotent, Infinite.

Perhaps some one will say, that the word God is one way taken when it is
predicated of each person; another way when it is put absolutely: there it is
taken hypostatically, or personally; here essentially. Truly I do not believe,
that the more accute Adversaries will so answer, since they will have God, as
also some the Father, essentially taken, to be predicated also of each of the
persons. Add hereunto, that it would be necessary to make the same Ambiguity in
the word Eternal, Omnipotent, Infinite, that one should be said to be
essentially eternal, omnipotent, infinite, not personally: another on the
contrary personally. Otherwise they should again labor to reconcile that
contradiction which may seem to be in those words, that since the Father is
both eternal, and omnipotent, and infinite, and likewise the Son and the holy
Spirit; and yet there are not three eternals, omnipotents, infinites, but one
only. But I remember not that I have ever read, or heard, that the Adversaries
do feign the same ambiguity in the word Eternal, Omnipotent, Infinite.
Wherefore I do not easily believe, as I said, that the more acute Adversaries
will so answer. Nevertheless, if any shall so answer, what other thing will he
say, than that the Athanasian Creed plays sophistically, and deceives rude and
simple men with the ambiguity of a word? For who of them would think, that the
word God is there taken two manner of ways. For to what purpose, I pray you,
are those words added, And yet there are not three Gods, but one God? Is it not
for that cause, lest any, especially of the ruder sort of men, hearing the
Father to be God, the Son to be God, the holy Spirit to be God, should thence
gather, that there are three Gods? But in what signification? surely in that in
which he had heard, that the Father is God, likewise both the Son and the holy
Spirit. For this scruple does first arise, neither presently the other
signification of the word comes into the mind of a rude man. This opinion
therefore is refuted by those words; and further, the word God is taken in the
same manner in both places, not one way then when it is spoken of each of the
persons, and another way then when it is put absolutely, and God is said to be
one. Besides, from such an exception it follows nevertheless, that it may be
rightly said, that there are three Gods, if the word God be taken personally,
as indeed the Adversaries confess it is often so taken in the holy Scriptures.
And it might indeed seem strange, that they do not expressly say, that there are
three Gods, but that they see, that it is most openly repugnant to the holy
Scriptures: whilst they are bold to say, that there are three Elohim; and some
Books are extant concerning three Elohim, written by diverse Adversaries. For
what other thing does Elohim signify, than Gods? Therefore three Elohim are
three Gods; namely, they endeavor by an Hebrew, and less known word somewhat,
but ridiculously, to cover the absurdity. Indeed such manner of speaking is
reprehended by some more accute Adversaries; of the number of whom yet there
are not wanting, who judge the Hebrew Elohim, when it is pronounced of the most
high God, to be plural, no less in signification than Grammatical form. But if
it be plural in signification also, it signifies Gods, no less than the Greek
Theoi, or other words answering to it in other languages. Therefore there are
more Gods. But moreover, the distinction between God hypostatically or
personally and essentially taken, is altogether vain, especially when it is
spoken concerning the most high God. For both the very word God, is the name of
a person, since it is the name chiefly of him that has command over others;
and the most high God signifies the supreme Ruler and Monarch of all things.
But to command and rule belongs only to persons. Add, that we have showed above
in this very chapter, that that one God, besides whom there is no other, is a
person; as on the contrary, there cannot be any one hypostatically or
personally God, I say, the most high God, but he is also essentially so. For is
not he essentially God, who has the divine Essence? But whosoever is
hypostatically the most high God, he has the divine Essence. But if you will
say that God taken essentially, signifies the Essence it self, which is neither
Father, nor Son, nor holy Spirit, or contrarily, but something subsisting in
those three: First, I shall not easily believe that the Adversaries, who speak
more accurately, will admit that, since the essence, especially so taken, as
that it cannot be predicated of each of the divine persons, signifies something
abstract. But God is concrete, such indeed as is found in Substances, and
denotes an Essence, together with an Existence or Subsistence. But further,
whatever at last the Adversaries will determine of this matter, we have already
shown, that the name of God is the name of a person; and since it is certain,
that the name of one God is so used in the holy Scriptures, that it is directly
predicated of the Father: but the Adversaries would have it so, that it should
be predicated also of the Son, and the holy Spirit; it will be necessary to
show, where the word God, when there it is spoken of that one God, denotes some
such thing, as neither is Father, nor Son, nor holy Spirit. Lastly, Such a
signification will make nothing to the matter. For we dispute of that God of
whom the Adversaries speak, when they say, that the Father is God, the Son is
God, the holy Spirit is God: and not of that God, who cannot after that manner
be predicated of the divine persons. And thus much concerning the first
Argument.

CHAP. II.
The second Argument, Because each divine Person would be three in Persons.

ANother Reason by which it is showed, that the common Doctrine of the Trinity
does overthrow it self, is, that thence it follows, that each person of the
Deity is three in persons, and so it is both one, and not one together. For so
say the Adversaries, that that one God is three in persons. The same again, as
we have said, affirm that each divine person is that one God. Whence it
follows, that each divine Person is three in persons.

The Defense of the Argument.
Neither indeed may you say, that the Major is particular. For it is singular
which here answers to an universal, since nothing may be subsummed in the
Minor, which is not contained under that singular, which is the subject of the
Major, and the middle term of the Argument, or of which that singular may not
be said. But the conclusion is most false, and, as we have seen, overthrows it
self. But if any will here use a distinction, and say, that the Major speaks of
God essentially taken, the Minor of God personally taken, he shall be no whit
advantaged. For we have in the foregoing chapter refuted that distinction,
showing each divine person to be God essentially taken: because it has the
whole Essence of God. Therefore in whichsoever manner you take the word God,
yet the Minor will be true; even as I believe all the more learned Adversaries
will also say. But besides, let us feign, Every divine Person would be three.
that an Essence, which neither is Father, nor Son, nor holy Spirit, may be
rightly called God, and that it is three in persons: which manner of expression
I remember not that I have read in the Adversaries: yet if that whole Essence
be in each person, the Trinity will be in each person, and so each person no
less than that Essence, will be three in persons. For in what the Essence is,
in that is also that whole, whatsoever is in that Essence, and is predicated of
it in the concrete, especially if that thing be of it self, and not by
accident, in the Essence, as here altogether the Adversaries would have, with
whom not only the divine persons cannot be accidents of the divine Essence; but
there is no accident at all in God.

CHAP. III.
The third Argument. Because the divine Persons would in very deed be the same,
and diverse.

THe third Argument is, That the Adversaries maintain, that the Essence is in
very deed the same with the Persons, and that the Persons do really differ from
among themselves. For hence it follows, that the same thing is at once both one
thing, and more than one; differ really from it self, and not differ. For those
things which are the same really with some one thing, are really the same among
themselves also. But the three divine Persons, really distinct among
themselves, are really the same with some one thing, namely, the divine
Essence. Therefore the three persons really distinct among themselves, are
really the same among themselves.

The Conclusion does manifestly contradict it self. The Proposition which they
call the Major, rests on a Principle known to all, which they do commonly thus
express. Those things which are the same with one third thing (that is, with
something wherewith they are conferred) are also among themselves the same. And
there is the same force of the Axiom, if you add both in the predicate, and in
the subject of that enunciation, the word Really. For those things which are
really the same with one third, are one and the same thing with the third. For
what other thing is it to be the same things really, than to be one and the
same thing? But those things which are one and the same with one third, it is
necessary that they be the same thing also among themselves: otherwise that
third thing, with which those things are the same thing, should at once be both
one thing, and more things. So some of the Adversaries themselves are wont to
prove, that the divine Attributes are not really distinguished among
themselves. The divine Attributes, say they, are really the same thing with the
divine Essence. Therefore they are really the same thing among themselves.
Because those things which are really the same with one third, The divine
Persons would be indeed the same.
are also really the same among themselves.

But others, See Becan. in the Treatise concerning God, cap. 1. Sect 1. Part. 1.
who see that their Opinion concerning the Trinity, is by this means everted,
say, that this Reason is not firm, and that common Axiom, Those things which
are the same with one third, are the same among themselves; ought thus to be
understood, Those things which are the same with one third thing
incommunicable, are the same among themselves. But it is manifest, that the
divine Essence is not incommunicable, since it is the same in number in the
three Persons really distinct among themselves. Neither indeed can the
Adversaries bring any other instance, by which they may invalid that Axiom,
besides that thing, of which is here the controversy, and is refelled by this
very Reason. But that Major, proposed both by us and others, admits no instance
or exception: because the reason of it is altogether universal. For unless it
be admitted, a plain contradiction follows, as we have seen; to wit, that one
and the same thing, is at once both the same thing, and more things. Wherefore
if something be feigned communicable, which is the same thing really with three
things really distinct among themselves; as here the divine Essence which is
one thing with the three Persons, that shall at once be both one thing, and
more than one. Therefore such a communicable thing is not to be admited; and if
it be brought for an instance to invalid that Axiom in this our controversy,
this will be a mere begging of that which ought to be proved, since that
communicable thing by this very reason may be refelled. But it easily appears
to any one, that such a communicable thing imply a contradiction, if you
consider what may be here understood by that word. For here they call that
thing Communicable, which when it is one in number, yet may be common to more
in number. For so they would have the divine Essence to be communicable. For as
much as they acknowledge together with us, that it is one in number, but will
have it common to three persons in number, so that it may be distinctly
predicated in concrete of each of them; namely, in this manner, The Father is
God, the Son is God, the holy Spirit is God, and yet they would have those
three to be one God. For what other thing is this, than that one thing in
number, is more things in number; that it is individuum, and not individuum?
For it is individuum because it is one in number, not individuum, because it
may be so divided into more things of the same name, that yet the whole may be
in each of them, which thing is altogether repugnant to the Reason of
individuum. Therefore that Reason which we have propounded, is firm: which, if
it please you, you may also so propound, that it may be concluded, that the
divine Essence shall be at once both one only thing, and more than one. For all
confess indeed that it is one: but it follows from their tenet, that it is more
than one; because they maintain it, to be really the same thing with three
persons really distinct among themselves. For if those three Persons are really
distinct among themselves, it is necessary that they are three distinct things.
For the same thing really, is that, which is one thing; really distinct, which
are more things: which both the thing it self shows, and the chief of the
Adversaries confess: and they who deny it, know not what they say. For they are
necessitated to maintain the same thing to differ really from it self, which
overthrows it self. Now if the Essence be really the same thing with three
persons really distinct among themselves; it is necessary, that it be the same
thing with three distinct things. But that which is the same thing with three
distinct things, it is necessary, that it should be three things. Wherefore the
divine Essence, shall be together both one thing, and three things; which, as
we have said, is repugnant to it self.

Let us add a Corollary to this Argument, that the divine Persons will be
together one of themselves, and one only by Accident: and so one of themselves,
and not of themselves; by accident, and not by accident. For those things which
are one in respect of Essence, and that indeed the same in number, are chiefly
one of themselves. Greater Unity cannot indeed be imagined among those things,
which are conceived like diverse things. And in that manner are the divine
Persons maintained to be one thing. But again, those things which are actually,
and in the ultimate perfection two or more, are not one of themselves, but one
only by accident. For those things which are of themselves one thing, are such,
and so fitted together, that either one of them does so respect the other, as
Potentia does its Actus, or as the thing to be perfected, does some further
perfection; or may be perfected together by some other Actus, in as much as yet
it has not in it self its ultimate perfection. For it is the Actus which both
conjoyns and separates. It conjoyns, if one; it dis-joyns, if more than one.
But the divine Persons, are neither so referred to themselves mutually, nor to
some other thing; as potentia to actus, and further perfection, having already
attained their utmost perfection. The Essence cannot be such actus. For the
persons rather add to the Essence something of perfection; to wit, subsistence,
and personal propriety, than on the contrary; and that subsistence presupposes
the Essence, not on the contrary.

CHAP. IV.
There would be three substa^ces of God.
The fourth Argument. Because there would be at once one and three Substances of
the Supreme Deity.

FOurthly, By this reason also a contradiction may be showed in that tenet,
because it introduces together both one and more Substances of God. All
maintain that there is one Substance of one God. But the plurality of persons
necessarily requires more. For if a person be no other thing than an ultimate
intelligent Substance; where there are more persons, it is necessary that there
be more ultimate intelligent substances. For the Definitum, or the thing
defined, being multiplied, which is here a person, the whole definition is also
multiplied, or that whole which is expressed in the definition. For the
Definitum, or the thing defined, and the definition, or that which is expressed
in the definition, are really one and the same thing, and differ only in the
manner of explaining. You may also propound the same Reason more briefly, thus;
If each Person be a Substance, where there are more persons, there also are
more substances. For individuals being multiplied, that also which obtains the
place of a genus, as well as that which obtains the place of a species, is
multiplied in the same individuals. Because individuals are nothing else than
that which is expressed by the name of the species and genus, being contracted
by differences, which they call individuating differences. Therefore unless
that which has the place of the species and genus, so, as we have said,
contracted, be multiplied, individuals are not multiplied. Now persons are
individuals, whose genus is substance. But that every Person is a Substance,
and that a Substance is predicated of a Person, as a Superior on its
Inferior, is first manifest by induction. For both a humane and Angelical, and
divine Person is a substance. But besides these, there is no other person, if
under the name of Angels you comprehend also evil Angels, or Devils. Who doubts
Peter or Paul, or other men to be Substances? Who Gabriel, Michael, or other
Angels? Who likewise the Devils? For we regard not m^n of wanton wit, who make
the Devils I know not what against so many plain testimonies of the holy
Scripture; which same men neither will, nor can say them to be persons. Will
you perhaps deny the Father and the Son to be Substances? For there are certain
superstitious men, who dare not use the word Substance concerning God: because
it belongs to a Substance to be subject to Accidents: but is an heinous offense
with them to say, that there are Accidents in God. And yet the same do not
reprehend their own men, who say, that there is one Substance of God; and that
which is sung for many Ages in Temples, The Father, Son, holy Spirit are three
names, all the same substance. But let us free them from this fear. To be
subject to Accidents, that is an Accident to a Substance. To subsist by it
self, this is to be a Substance. But do not the Father and the Son subsist by
themselves? If they subsist not by themselves, nothing will subsist by it self.
Will you, who do fear to ascribe any Accident to God, perhaps make God himself
an Accident? But whatsoever is nor a Substance, is an Accident. I omit that no
man can deny the Son to be a Substance, but he who dares to deny him to be a
man. But it is necessary that the Adversaries say the same of the holy Spirit,
which is said of the Father and Son.

And because some, although otherwise they say, The Defense of the Argument.
that God is a Substance, yet deny the divine Persons to be Substances, as
afterward will more clearly appear. Let us prove the same thing also by
another reason, that being assumed, which is generally put out of controversy
by all the Adversaries. They all, being taught by the Schoolmen, do maintain
that a person is nothing else but an intelligent Suppositum. That Suppositum is
the Genus of a Person; Intelligent, the specifical difference of it; which
being added to that Genus, does perfect the whole definition of a person. And
that word Suppositum, although in this signification barbarous, is very usual
in Schools, when they speak of the divine Persons. For they say that there are
three Suppositums in God. But now a Suppositum, as it is explained by the
Schoolmen themselves, the authors of that word so used, is Prima sabstantia
completa.
a first or individual Substance complete: they are wont to add, that it is
incommunicable, although without necessity; as we shall hear presently. They
call it a Substance, that they may exclude Accidents; a first Substance, that
they may exclude the universal, to wit, Genus and Species; a complete and
perfect Substance, that they may exclude the parts of the substances, whether
integral or essential. Lastly, they say, that it is incommunicable, that it may
not be common to more Suppositums, nor be conjoined with another Suppositum.
Which condition they have added for the sake, partly of the divine essence,
partly of the human nature of Christ; to both which, all other conditions of a
Suppositum do agree. Therefore except they added this condition, they saw it
would follow, that both the one and the other would be a Suppositum, and since
it is endued with understanding, also a Person. Wherefore, lest thence indeed
the doctrine concerning three Persons in one Essence of God, here the tenet
concerning the hypostatical or personal union of two natures in Christ, should
fall to the ground (for there cannot be more persons in one person) they have
this prop of incommunicability put to it. But that condition, as far as it
hinders the Substance to be common to many Suppositums, is contained in the
name of the first or singular Substance. For it would not be singular, if it
were common to many singulars; as we have above (chap. 3. of this Section)
shown. But as far as it hinders, lest it may be conjoined with another
Suppositum, and so cohere with it, that it may be partaker of its subsistence;
it is comprehended in the word Complete. For now it would not be complete, but
it would be the part of another, if it would in the manner be conjoined with
another Suppositum. Of which thing we shall speak elsewhere ( Sect. 2. chap. 6,
and 8. of this Book.) In this place we have need of this thing. For neither the
force of the Argument, which we now urge, is therein placed; but in this, that
very Suppositum is a Substance. That as yet seems to be added; as we may more
rightly perceive the reason of this description, that the Schoolmen have
therefore called such a Substance, as I now have described, a Suppositum,
because that at last may deserve to be called a Suppositum; which is, as it
were, put under and subjected to all other predications, or things, which may
be predicated of some other thin^. Briefly, that which is the ultimum
subjectum, of which other things are predicated, and it self of no other. But
this is no other thing but a first and singular Substance. For this is
predicated of no other thing, because neither has it any thing inferior to it
self, nor any subjectum, in which it may be inherent like an accident: but it
is the ultimum subjectum, which both the second Substances; to wit, the Genus
and Species, and Accidents of, are predicated.

Concerning which thing, the Catagories, which are inscribed Aristotle's, may be
seen. Of those also speak the vulgar Axiom, Actions are of Suppositums;
because Actions do most properly agree to the first, and that indeed perfect or
complete Substances. If therefore every Person be a Suppositum, and every
Suppositum a Substance, every person also must be a substance: and further,
where there are more Persons, it is necessary, that there be also more
Substances.

Not a few of the Adversaries have seen the force of this Argument. Therefore
that they might avoid it, they have perverted the true definition of a person,
commonly received also in Schools, if you consider the thing it self. For they
say that a Person is not a Substance, or thing by it self subsisting, bu an
incommunicable subsistence, of an intelligent nature. This, they say, is the
accurate definition of a person: but that by which a person was defined in
Schools; to wit, that it is an individual intelligent, incommunicable, that
Substance not sustained by another, is less accurate. For it agrees to a person
in concreto, not in abstracto: but the definition of Concretums, are not
accurate, but that of Abstractums* But further, they say that the subsistence,
is a certain mode of a Being, not a Being it self. For it being con^^^ered by
it self, and abstractly, has not entity. Therefore the Fat^er, Son and holy
Spirit, being considered by themselves, and abstra^^ly, or distinctly from the
Essence, are with them non entia, or no being and in this indeed I assent to
them, that such persons as are conceived by them, are non entia, or no beings:
for they are in very de^d t^eir own devices. But that the Father, and Son, and
holy Spirit are non entia, or no beings, but modes only of a being, it is
indeed most false. Certainly this thing is of it self most unworthy of God;
yea, as we shall see by its force, takes away all Empire and Honor from the
Fat er and Son, and does in a manner lead men to Atheism. I will not now urge
that manner of speaking only, which shows its absurdity presently at the first
sight, that the Father, Son and holy Spirit are by themselves non entia, or no
beings; from which, yet men of great name among those of their own way, famous
also by their writings in Divinity, do not abhor. Fot neither do I doubt, but
that many even of the Adversaries do disapprove of it. But that very thing also
is much unworthy, that they make God and Christ (that I say nothing now of the
^oly Spirit) a subsistence or mode of a Being. For wha^? He that is God, he
that has a divine Subst^nce, is he a subsistence, and nor rather a thing by it
self subsisting? a mode of a being, not a being it self? How then does he rule?
How does he do any thing? How is he invocated by us? And that I may comprise
all in one word, how is he God? For actions, and those things which are the
p^oper consequents of actions, are not of a subsistence, but of a thing
subsisting. For the subsistence has no faculty and power, from which action
may how, but the thing subsi^ting. Does the subsistence actually will,
understand, govern, create, preserve? Do you, when you call upon Go^, invocate
some mode of the divine Essence? Do you ask, that some mode may help or
preserve you? Certainly if the divine persons be that, no simple or common men
do believe the divine Persons, being by their very subtilty, altogether out of
the reach of their bent understanding. But what do I speak only of the simple
men? Indeed neither most of the learned do respect to themselves such persons,
either when they pray, or when they think any other thing of God, or of Christ;
perhaps neither they themselves, who have devised those things, except then,
when they labor to reconcile some of their tenets to one another.

These things might sufficiently, refute the device (to sp^ak most tenderly) of
those men. But yet that both the Nature of a person may so much the more
clearly appear, and be so much the more satisfactory, let us say a little more
of that matter. First then, Whilst they make a person a subsistence, they
forget themselves, who say the same is a Suppositum. Neither indeed could I
hitherto see any man, who would deny that a Suppositum is the Genus of a
Person, and that it may accurately ^e predicated of it. And this might be here
enough for us, that all acknowledge in God three Suppositums. But now they say,
that a Suppositum is such a Substance as we have before described: and the
reason of its name, which the inventers of it have looked or, requires it. For
neither is a subsistence the ultimum subjectum, or lowest subject; of which
ultimate, all things may at last be predicated, and it self of none: but a
Substance it self, or a Being endued with subsistence: subsistence is in a
Being, and although it be ^ot an Accident, yet is it predicated of that, in
which it is in the manner of an Accident. But all such things are denied by all
to be Suppositums. Add this, that the actions which are proper to Suppositums,
agree not to a Subsistence, but to a Substance it self, or a Being that has
subsistence, as that which has a power necessary for acting: as we have a
little before minded. Subsistence does contribute nothing less, but that a
Being may subsist by it self; and moreover, may act by it, if, namely, it has
a power and some faculties. Besides, who would say that a man of an Angel is a
subsistence, and not rather a substance, or thing by it self subsisting? But
every man is a person, and in like manner every Angel: And that we may go
higher; Christ also is a substance, not a subsistence; a being, not a mode of a
being. But he is a person, therefore a person is not a subsistence. Otherwise
from the Adversaries opinion we should thus argue. Every person is a
subsistence: No Man, Angel, nor Christ himself is a subsistence. Wherefore
neither a person.

Perhaps some one will say, that created persons are indeed substances, but the
divine persons are subsistences: neither is a person a genus univocum, to a
person created and uncreated; but analogum only. But first, we may ask of him,
whether he would have Christ to be a created person only, or uncreated, or both
together? If created only, his opinion will be false, as being one who
maintains Christ to be the second person of the Trinity. For this person is
uncreated; nor could it cease to be uncreated, but that the Trinity would fall
to the ground, one person, to wit, the second, being taken out of the number of
the three. If uncreated only, Christ will be only a subsistence (if a divine
person be a subsistence only, not a thing subsisting) which all see to be
false, For he who is a man, is certainly a substance, not a subsistence. If
both together, he will have two persons of a different nature, or of a
different definition. For the one will be a substance, the other a subsistence,
not a substance. But there is but one Christ, one person of him, as all confess
and urge it against Nestorians.

Furthermore, the reason or definition of a Suppositum, which agrees even to a
divine or uncreated person, does not permit, as we have seen, the divine person
to be only a subsistence; I say, no more than a created. Lastly, that very
thing which is brought for a reason, does overthrow that Opinion. For if a
person be an analogum genus to a person both uncreated and created, it must
needs be that a divine person is not a subsistence, but a substance. For
neither are analogums the subsistence of God, and the created thing subsisting;
but the substance created is analogum to the uncreated, the subsistence to the
subsistence, the mode to the mode, and reciprocally. Wherefore if the person
c^eated be a substance, not a subsistence, or some mode, also the uncreated
will be a substance, not a subsis^ence, I say, a thing subsisting, not a mode
of a thing.

But as for that which they say, that when a person is said to be a first
intelligent substance, this definition is of a person taken in concreto, not in
abstracto. I will ask of them what they understand by the name of a person
taken in concreto, what likewise taken in abstracto? If they do in that manner
take the concretum, in which substance are said of some to be concretums; as
man, animal, whose abstractums they will have to be humanity, animality; Of
such concretums, there are delivered most accurate definitions: and in this
manner a person is altogether to be defined in this place, where it is inquired
whether the Father, Son, and holy Spirit ^e three persons in one divine
Essence. For neither the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, are personalities, but
persons* unless you will say likewise, that man is humanity, animal, animality,
Father paternity, and so in the rest: in which manner concretums will be
abstractums, and on the contrary: and so they will be in vain distinguished
from one another by the Adversaries. Furthermore, in what manner soever at last
you take con^^etum, it is all one to us if it be so, that our definition of a
person, as far as concretums may be defined, is good, or the genus at least is
rightly constituted, since there it is spoken of persons taken in concreto, not
of personalities; and it is necessary that where there are three or more
concretums, otherwise of the same condition, as three good, three wise, three
Kings, Fathers, Sons; there must be also more subjectums, or more substances,
in which that adjunct, which is in concreto expressed. There is the same reason
also of those concretums, which do in concreto express some mode of a Being or
substance, such as they commonly distinguish from Accidents. For those several
modes require several beings or substances: neither the concretums, otherwise
of the same condition, are more, unless also the subjectums, or beings, or
substances be more. Lastly, although at length we should grant the divine
persons to be subsistences, not substances; nevertheless, yet a contradiction
would lie hid in the vulgar tenet of the Trinity. For this also involves a
contradiction, that one substance in number has three subsistences; as we
shall show in the next chapter.

CHAP. V.
The fifth Argument. Because there cannot be three Subsistences of one and the
same thing.

THe fifth Argument of this kind is, that if there be more persons in one
substance of God, it is necessary also, that there be more subsistences in the
same: as the Adversaries do not only confess, but also urge, since subsistence
is the form of a suppositum. But there cannot the same thing be multiplied,
unless also the form be multiplied. Wherefore neither can the Suppositums and
Persons be multiplied, unless also the Subsistences be multiplied. The same
thing does more plainly follow from their Opinion also, who hold, that a
suppositum and person is the very subsistence. But it is impossible that there
should be more subsistences of one substance in number. First, because of one
thing there cannot be more forms of the same nature, whether they be
substantial or accidental, or with whatsoever name you may call them, lest you
should think the modes of things excluded; I say, there cannot be more, either
existences, or inherences of one thing; not more rationalities, not more
longitudes, or whitnesses, unless perhaps according to diverse parts; not more
paternities of the same nature, unless in respect of diverse, or in a diverse
time, and so in the rest. And the reason is this, because the same thing cannot
twice or more times be that which it is, but once only, namely, in the same
time, in the same respect (which is to be observed only in things related) and
according to the same parts. There is one subsistence of one thing.
Otherwise there would be a progress in infinitum. For who shall here set a
^^und? What cause is there, why a thing may not be infinite times that which it
is, if it may be twice or thrice? But a progress in infinitum is impossible,
even of subsistences or suppositums in God. Wherefore that also is impossible,
whence such a progress in infinitum does follow. And that is this, that one and
the same thing may be more times that which it is. But this again does thence
arise, because the same thing might have more forms of the same condition, to
wit, at the same time, in the same respect and part. For the form is that by
which the thing is that which it is. Wherefore where there are more forms of
the same condition, the thing is mo^e times that which it is. Add, that if the
form be that, by which the thing is that which it is, it being withdrawn, the
thing remains not any mo^e that which it was. But if there may be two such
forms, as we speak of, of the same thing, the one being withdrawn, nevertheless
the thing will remain that which it is. But that is impossible, and is contrary
to the nature of the form it self. But that subsistence which we have in hand,
is the form of a suppositum, and by it the substance, in which it is, does
become a Suppositum. For that we may exp^a^n this also by the way, the
subsistence is taken by the Adversaries in a double manner, mo^e largely, and
more strictly. The Subs^stence taken mo^e largely, is common to all Substances,
first, second, perfect, imperfect; whole, parts; and in this sense it is
opposed to inherency only, which is proper to accidents. Therefore that
subsistence is the form of each substance, or that, by which the substance is a
substance: the inherency is the form of an accident, that is, that by which an
accident i^ an accident. Concerning this Subsistence, we do not properly treat
here, although it be in some manner included in that subsistence which we have
in hand, or be presupposed by it, and although it be true concerning that also,
that the same subsistence in number cannot have more subsistences. The
Subsistence taken more strictly, agrees not but to Suppos tums, or first, that
is singular; and those indeed complete and perfect Substances, and is a certain
form of such substances, as they are such. Therefore one and the same Substance
cannot have more Subsistences of this sort. And that you may look on the matter
more nearly; do you judge, that the Su^stance of God, which is one in number
and complete, is either more times a Substance; that is, a thing which inheres
not in another, but su^sists by it self, or more time complete? If more times,
then innumerable times also, for there is no stay.

Besides, If there be more Subsistences in the same Substance, it is necessary
that there be some distinction between them. For if there be no distinction,
there will be one Subsistence, not more. But there is no distinction between
them. For the forms, whether of Substances, or Accidents, whether they be of
modes or things, if they be of the same species specialissima, cannot be
distinguished from among themselves, unless they be in diverse subjectums or
matters, or at least in diverse parts of the same subjectum, or matter, or be
distinguished mutually among themselves by diverse time or respect. But here
(that we may transfer this to our matter) neither are there diverse Subjectums,
but the same divine substance in number; the same time; nor diverse parts; since
neither the subsistence agrees but to the whole substance, nor the divine
Essence is compounded out of parts. Also diverse respects here have no place,
since subsistence is not a relatum. Therefore there will be found no
distinction between those subsistences, and consequently between divine
persons. But the Adversaries would have them, and the matter would require them
to be distinct between themselves, and that indeed really. It remains therefore
that they are not of the same nature and definition, and consequently, that
they have something in which they do agree; because they all are both
subsistences, existing in the divine Essence, and something in which they do
mutually differ, and are from among themselves specie, or in the species
distinguished. But neither do the Adversaries, admit such a composition of the
genus and specifical difference in the divine Persons. And it is impossible,
that those things should differ in that species and definition, the essence of
which is one in number. For those things which differ in the species and
definition, they do differ by this very thing also in the Essence: since the
species pertains to the Essence, and the definition of a thing explains the
Essence; which where it is altogether one, the definition also is in very deed
one. Lastly, that subsistence, of which it is here spoken, does forthwith make
the substance, in which it is incommunicable to more suppositums. Therefore
where there is one subsistence, the rest are thence forthwith excluded. For if
there would be more subsistences, there would be more suppositums. Although
here it is sufficient for us to have showed, that there are not more
suppositums in the same substance. But that that subsistence makes the
substance, in which it is incommunicable, is manifest from this, that by reason
of it the suppositum is incommunicable to more suppositums. And if the
suppositum, also the substance, which by reason of that subsistence, becomes,
and is constituted a suppositum. For every form, that which it bestows on the
whole, bestows also on the matter in which it is, or on that which answers to
the matter; and unless it would bestow it, it should not bestow it, no not to
the whole, which is constituted of it. For so far it makes the whole such, as
far as it makes the matter of the whole, which was such in potentia, such in
actu. There is the same reason of those things, which by analogy answer to
these. But here the form is the subsistence: the essence or substance (wherein
the subsistence is, and with which it makes the suppositum, or rather, which
for that reason that it has, that subsistence is the suppositum it self)
answers to the matter. But if a body, (...) long as it has the soul in it
self, is, and is called animate, as long as it has the power of feeling,
sensitive: although these forms add something real to the body: much more it
may and ought to be said concerning the divine Essence, having in it self that
subsistence, and incommunicability, that it it self both does subsist by it
self, and is incommunicable? Since these forms do add nothing really to it, as
the Adversaries themselves contend. But these things, although they may be of
right accounted for a new reason, yet we shall reckon them with the former*

CHAP. VI.
The sixth Argument. That the divine Persons should be at once both
communicable, and incommunicable.

IN the sixth place, that may be alleged, that it follows from the common
doctrine of the Trinity, that the divine Persons are both incommunicable, and
communicable, and so suppositums, and not suppositums; persons, and not
persons. For it is manifest among all, that every suppositum, and further also,
every person, ought to be incommunicable to another suppositum or person,
whether one or more. Whence also in the definition of a person, they commonly
express incommunicability. But if the divine Essence, the same in number, be
common, or, as they speak, communicable to more suppositums, or divine persons,
the suppositums also themselves, and those persons will be communicable to more
suppositums and persons. For those things, the Essence of which, and that
indeed the whole, is communicable to more suppositums, are themselves
communicable to more suppositums. For nothing can be more communicated to
another (if so be that that be another thing, and not rather the same) than
that whose whole, and the same essence in number is communicated to another:
and universally, nothing can more agree to any thing, than that which agrees to
it in respect of the Essence, and that the whole. Therefore if the whole
Essence of the divine persons be communicable to more suppositums, those
persons themselves will be communicable to more suppositums. Wherefore they
will be together both communicable and incommunicable; and so suppositums, and
not suppositums; persons, and not persons.

CHAP. VII.
From the Analogy with things created.
The seventh Argument, drawn from the Analogy with the things created: where it
is showed, That unless there be held one person of God, there must be held
infinite in number.

WE will make the last Argument of this kind, that which can be easily
understood even by the most rude men: and concerning which, it is believed by
the Adversaries, that it is easy to be eluded; to wit, that we see in things
created, that there is only one person, not more, of one intelligent substance;
and that we may extend this thing further, that there cannot be more
Suppositums, except there be also more Substances and Essences in number. Why
then should we not hold the same thing concerning God? We shall see by and by
the reason of the consequence, when we have examined the exception of the
Adversaries, by which they endeavor to subvert this Argument. For they say
that there is a different consideration of a substance created and uncreated:
for that is finite, this infinite. Therefore the finite indeed, if it be one in
number, cannot subsist in more Suppositums or Persons; but the infinite may.
But this difference is of no moment in that matter whereof we treat. For then
at length it might be of some moment, if a person uncreated should not as well
be infinite, as the Essence or Substance, in which it is believed to subsist;
or a part of something could be a Suppositum or Person. Now since the case is
otherwise, here is the same reason or consideration of a finite and infinite
Person. For why cannot a finite Substance, constitute but one person? namely,
because a person or suppositum, compriseth the whole substance in it, not some
part of it; neither can the same substance at the same time, according to the
same thing, be twice the same; and consequently, neither be twice a suppositum,
twice a person. But there is the same reason also in a divine Substance, since
each divine Person comprehends the whole divine Substance, neither does or can
take to it self only some part of it, unless it cease to be a suppositum or
person.

Wherefore an infinite Substance, can no more have more Suppositums or Persons
in it self, than a finite. To which it is added, that if by reason of the
difference of the finite and infinite, there should be also difference in the
number of Suppositums, it would follow that this difference in respect of
number, should be infinite. For the infinite distance, which is between a
finite and infinite Substance, and which is thought to bring forth that
difference of the number of persons, requires this. Therefore the Persons in
the infinite Substance of God, should be held to be infinite in number also,
not finite, and that three only. For between three things, and one, is not only
a finite, but also a very little difference.

You will say, that this reason does not evince, that there are in God,
infinite, or innumerable persons, but that there may be, or that nothing
hinders, but that there may be; because the infiniteness of his Essence may
permit it. But besides, that the Adversaries say, that Esse and Posse are the
same in God, this is certain, that whatever things may be naturally in God, and
do not depend on his free will, they are in very deed also, and necessarily in
him. For it is necessary, that they con^^^n in them some perfection, and that a
natural one. But no natural perfection, which can agree to God, can be absent
from him, since he cannot be of an imperfect nature, or such, as to whom any
thing of perfection may be yet added.

Something pertaining to this exception, shall be said in the following
Sections, where the manner of the Generation of the Son, and Procession of the
holy Spirit, devised by the Adversaries, shall be examined.

The Second Section.
In which is discoursed concerning the Second Person of the Supreme Deity,
which is held by the Adversaries.

HAving refuted the Doctrine of the Trinity, from those things which pertain
generally to the three persons which are held to be in God; it remains, that we
refel the same Doctrine from these things which particularly are asserted
concerning certain persons. And they are those things which properly do pertain
to the second and third Person of the Trinity, or also to the first, in respect
of these two. And in this Section we shall indeed treat of the Second Person;
as in the beginning of this Book we promised. In which place two Doctrines
chiefly occur to be examined. The one is concerning his Generation out of the
Essence of the Father from all eternity: the other concerning his Incarnation.
For either of them being taken away, that Opinion commonly received concerning
the second Person of the Trinity, falls to the ground.

CHAP. I.
The Son of God should be the Son of himself.
The first Argument. By which is refelled the Doctrine of the eternal
Generation of the Son of God out of the Essence of the Father: because the Son
should be the Son of himself.

THat therefore we may come to that former Doctrine; the Adversaries affirm,
and, unless they would affirm it, they could not defend the Doctrine of the
Trinity, that the Son was so begotten from eternity out of the Essence of the
Father, that nevertheless, he has the same Essence in number with the Father.
But that doctrine is full of many contradictions, and absurdities. For first,
it follows thence, that the Son is the Son and Father of himself. For out of
whose Essence any one is generated, he is his Son. But if that opinion of the
Adversaries, concerning the Son of God, be true, it follows that the Son is
begotten out of his own Essence, wherefore the Son shall be his own Son; and
moreover, the Father of himself: which thing implies a manifest contradiction.
There is no need to demonstrate the Proposition of the Argument, which they
call the Major, seeing the thing is manifest even with the Adversaries. But the
Assumption or Minor is thence manifest, because if the Essence of the Father
and Son be the same in number; certainly if the Son be begotten out of the
Essence of the Father, he is b^gotten out of his own Essence. Neither indeed
can they say, that that Essence was not yet the Essence of the Son, because
they hold there was no time, in which the Son was not existent, and had not the
divine Essence, otherwise he should not be the most high God. You may also in
this manner propound the same Argument. None is generated of himself; for then
he should be before he is; he should be so, because he should be the principle
and cause of his own generation: he should not be so, because he should be
generated. That of which any thing is generated, and that which is generated of
it, are relatives. But relatives cannot be in the same thing, in the same
respect, and at the same time; for they are opposites. But the nature of
opposites is such, that they mutually destroy one another, in the same subject,
at the same time and respect, according to the same thing, or the same part.
But now if the Son be begotten out of the Essence of the Father, and the
Essence of the Father and Son be the same in number, the Son is begotten of
himself, because he is begotten also out of his own Essence. But none can more
properly be begotten of any one, than when he is begotten out of his Essence.

The same absurdity is manifest also from the manner in which the ancient
Fathers, partly the Architects, partly the Patrons of the common opinion
concerning, the Trinity, have affirmed that the Son of God is generated from
eternity; which also at this day very many acknowledge: since they cannot
devise another manner by any reason agreeable to their opinion. For they say,
The Father has begotten the Son by understanding himself: as again they hold,
that the Father and the Son together have produced and breathed the holy Spirit
by willing and loving. Which thing may be thus explained after the Adversaries
mind: There are in God only two operative Principles, or that have some power
of working; whose operations may be both immanent (that is, may remain in God
himself, and do not pass into any other subject) and be employed about God
himself; to wit, understanding and will. For God both understands himself, and
wills and loves himself as the chiefest good. Indeed the Omnipotence of God, is
also an operative Principle: but its opperations are employed only about other
things, not about God himself, and are terminated to other subjects. Now from
these things then the Adversaries draw out the second and third Persons of the
Divinity in this manner. They say, the understanding does not understand, but
by the Image of that thing which it understands. Wherefore since God has
understood himself from all eternity, it is necessary that he conceived an
Image of himself also from all eternity. And this must be necessarily God
himself. For they say, that both whatsoever is in God, is God by reason of his
greatest simplicity: and that Image of the infinite God must be infinite. But
nothing is infinite besides God. But they say that it is likewise necessary,
that that Image be a distinct person from him that produced it, otherwise God
should have produced himself. Whence at last they conclude, that that Image is
the Son of God; because it is both produced, and like to the producer, as his
Image, and the same in substance with him. But further, because God loves
himself being known, and that his Image, which by understanding he produced,
and is again loved by it; this very act of will makes the third person of the
Divinity. For both that love is in God, and infinite, and moreover, no less God
than that Image produced by the understanding; but in person is necessarily
distinct from them by whom he is produced. These Mysteries do they open unto us
concerning the production of two divine persons, it is wonderful with what deep
silence of the holy Scriptures kept secret, and how foreign from those things,
which the same holy Scriptures do in most plain words deliver concerning the
Generation of the Son by God: and in their due place Sect. 2. Lib. 1. Chap. 31.
are produced by us. Here they who cry out, that Reason is blind in divine
things, who would not that any may dispute from it against the Trinity, who
have often that in their mouth, The searcher of the Majesty, shall be oppressed
by its Glory, as they think was written by Solomon: here, I say, they ought to
cry out, that Reason is blind: that these search the divine Majesty: that it is
unlawful to attempt to express the unutterable Mysteries. But unless such
things had been devised, they had not at this day had their Trinity. But it is
wonderful how preposterously the Adversaries do here behave themselves. For
whilst they do so urge the simplicity, that whatsoever is in God, they hold to
be God, yet in the mean time bring in more persons into him, and, if you
consider the force of their opinion, infinite, or numberless, they by this very
reason quite destroy the Simplicity. But that is yet more grievous, that whilst
they seem to be willing to have such regard to the Simplicity, of which
notwithstanding the holy Scriptures are silent, as being not necessary to be
known to the salvation, and are altogether unknown to the more simple men, they
take away the unity, which the holy Scriptures so often and so plainly
inculcate. But let us now let pass both these, and not a few other absurdities,
which are contained in this opinion; of which some are shown above; some shall
be shown afterward: and let us demonstrate that which a little before we
propounded; to wit, that hence it follows, That the Son of God is his own Son.
Neither is it difficult to demonstrate that. For if the Essence, and moreover,
the Understanding of the Father and the Son, be the same in number, there is
also the same operation in number of the understanding; especially because the
more acute Adversaries, by reason of the greatest Simplicity of God, hold that
his intellect and intellection are the same thing. Therefore if the Father has
begotten the Son by the operation of his understanding, the Son also, whose the
same operation was, begat himself. Yea, further, the holy Spirit begat that Son
of God existing from eternity: and so is the Father of the Son, and Principle
of his own Principle. For by the same intellection, together with the Father
and Son from all eternity, he understood and contemplated himself and his
Essence, and also even the Father and the Son. And so, because with the same
act of will, the holy Spirit, together with the Father and Son, willed and
loved whatsoever they will and love: if the holy Spirit be a certain act of
will, or something produced by the Father and Son by the operation of will, the
holy Spirit also has produced himself.

Besides, It is to be affirmed, that by this means, not only the same persons
have produced themselves, but also infinite or innumerable others. For since
each person understands both himself, and the other persons, and des^res, and
loves them: it is necessary that each again produce more, both Sons and holy
Spirits, if those things be true, which they inculcate to us concerning the
divine Intellection and love. For there must be a different, and so an unlike
Image of the Father, as he is the Father; and of the Son, as he is the Son; and
of the holy Spirit, as such. For the Father and Son, as such, are opposite
between themselves; and in like sort the holy Spirit, as he is produced by
both. For they are relatives: and all relatives, as we have said above, are
opposite: but there must be opposite Images of opposite things. However this
be, there must be different Images of those things which really differ, which
may exactly express them, and not only show how they agree between themselves,
but also how they differ: But according to the diversity and multitude of those
Images, there will arise also a multitude of acts of will and love, with which
those several persons embrace those Images; and again, those Images prosecute
the persons, by which they are produced, and each also themselves, and at
length one another. Wherefore if both those Images produced by the intellect,
and those acts of will in God are persons, or at least principles of diverse
persons, the persons will be in infinitum multiplied. Although, if whatsoever
is in God, be God; another way also will divine persons arise. For in God there
is an Image of every thing in particular, which he understands (if an
intellection be not in God, but by an Image:) likewise both decrees of infinite
things, and love toward things created, and diverse acts of will: All these
things therefore shall be God; yet shall differ in persons from him, or those,
from whom they are produced. Therefore even thence, we shall have infinite or
innumerable persons in God.

CHAP. II.
The second Argument. Because there would be innumerable Sons, as also
innumerable holy-Spirits.

LEst any one perhaps, should think that they only should fear an infinite
multitude of divine persons, who have devised that manner of generation of the
Son of God, and procession of the holy Spirit, which in the precedent chapter
we have explained; we shall show, that others also must hold the same, who will
have the Son of God to have been generated from eternity out of the Essence of
the Father: and moreover, since they see, that the infinite multitude of the
divine persons is most absurd, they must acknowledge that also the Doctrine
from whence it flows, is most abhorrent from the truth. For if God have
begotten the Son out of his Essence, and again, together with the Son, have
produced the holy Spirit, and these are with him the same God; there is no
cause, why the son also has not begotten another Son again, and in like manner
the holy Spirit another, and this also another, and so in infinitum. For what?
cannot the Son and holy Spirit do what the Father could? Then they are not the
same God with him, since they have not the same faculty and power, but an
unequal one. Will you say, that they would not? But such things, which pertain
to things ad intra, or to within, as they speak, in God are altogether
necessary, and are not subject to the free will. But if they be subject to the
free will, it may come to pass, that within some time more divine persons may
grow, when those persons will, which hitherto would not beget or breath other
persons.

Some say therefore it cannot be, that the Son or holy Spirit should produce
another Son or holy Spirit, not because there is some impotence in the Son and
holy Spirit; but because, whatsoever might be begotten or proceed in God, that
has been already begotten and produced; There would be infinite Sons.
but that, which is already generated or produced, cannot any more be produced;
for it should at once both be, and not be: in which manner, neither this world,
can be any more created by God, because it is already in being; not by reason
of any impotence in God, but by reason of the impotence of the thing it self,
as I may so say. Indeed it is true, that the world which now is, cannot any
more be created. But do not the Adversa^ies believe, that another world besides
this, may be created of God? I trow they do altogether believe it. Let us apply
this to our purpose. That Son, which is already begotten, cannot any more be
begotten; neither that holy Spirit, which is already produced, can any more be
produced. But what hinders another Son, or another holy Spirit to be produced
by the Son and holy Spirit, and by them again others? since we have showed
Sect. 1. chap. 7. of this Book.
above, that it follows from the Suppositions of the Adversaries, that the
divine Nature is capable of infinite persons in number. Wherefore they say, not
things agreeable to their own Supposi ions, when they say, that whatsoever
could be generated or produced in God, all that is already contained in the
Son, whom the first person of the Divinity has begotten, and in the holy
Spirit, whom the first and second person has produced; and therefore another
Son, and another holy Spirit could not be produced by the Son and holy Spirit;
for as much as there, as yet, has been place for infinite or innumerable
persons. And let this be another Argument against that eternal Generation of
the Son out of the Essence of the Father.

CHAP. III.
The third Argument. Because the Son of God both had been, and had not been
from Eternity.

LEt this be the third Argument, by which the same Doctrine is refelled, that
thence it would follow, that Christ both did exist from all Eternity, and did
not exist: that he always was, and sometime was not. It must needs be that he
was from all Eternity; because both it is openly said, that he was begotten
from all eternity; and, if he had exist at last in a certain time, he would not
be the most high God. For the most high God was existent from all eternity. But
that he was not from all eternity, is manifest from this very thing, that he
was begotten, and indeed in respect of his Substance, and with a Generation
properly so called.

You will here presently cry out, and say, that you do easily understand what I
would; to wit, that a Generation properly so called, is a change from not
being, to being. Therefore if the Son of God was properly generated, he was
sometime no being, or sometimes in very deed he was not existent. I say, this
very thing I would. But you will say, that that definition is to be admitted
only concerning natural generation, not concerning supernatural. But this
generation of the Son of God out of the Essence of the Father, is supernatural,
The Son had been and had not been from eternity.
not natural: When the Adversaries say these things, first we very much desire
constancy in them. For, if the Generation of the Son of God be supernatural,
and so different from the natural; why do they so much urge in this very thing,
the example of the humane Generation, whilst they do so often inculcate, that
he, who is the proper, only begotten, natural Son of God, is necessarily of the
same Essence with the Father? For whence do they frame such a Proposition, but
from humane things, and altogether natural? And indeed they even expressly bring
examples of Sons begotten by men, that they may establish that Proposition;
neither can they bring any other. For what? are there perhaps some other only
begotten, proper, natural, but supernaturally begotten Sons of any one extant,
whom they may bring for an example, and from whom they may frame such a
p^oposition? They will say, that the generation of the Son of God, in that
agrees with the humane and natural generation, that the Son by it became like
to the Father in substance, not in that, that sometime he was not existent. But
may you be allowed so to urge, when you list, the reason and similitude of the
natural generation; and when you list again, to refuse it? So indeed the
Adversaries more than once hold forth the propriety of words, when it serves
their cause; and when it does withstand, they reject it; change the received
Axioms and Definitions in Schools; enlarge, restrain and bow them like a
Lesbian Rule to their opinion. Never did the boldness of humane wit permit it
self, to feign more things than concerning God, as being a thing remote from
our senses, in which it has believed its devices could not so easily be
detected. But that we may return to our matter, if you urge the propriety of
the word, when Christ is said, he is begotten of God, and conclude thence, he
is altogether be often out of his substance, because they, who are properly
begotten of any, must be begotten of his substance: Why do you not also see,
that Christ out of a no Being, is made a Being, and so sometime was not
existent; since this no ^ess than that, pertains to the propriety of the
generation of them, from whom you gather that former assertion? For this, a you
confess, is e^^en^ial to the natural generation, that it be a change from no^
being, into being* Further, why do you not acknowledge, that there is one
substance of the begetter, another of the begotten? Since this is at last
produced by a generation, that already was before existent; the one is the
cause, the other the effect. Lastly, why do you not acknowledge also, t^a^ the
Son is latter in time than the Father? Bu^ if you will not acknowledge these
things in the generation of the Son of God, neither does your opinion permit
it, you have no reason to urge the prop^^e^y of the word, or estimate it from
natural things. But if you depa^t from the propriety of the word, and be
content with the rema^kable and singular similitude, which is between the
humane, and that divine Generation, we shall easily make the matter plain for
you, without the generation out of the Essence of God, as both we, treating of
the Son of God, did show in the first Sect. 2. Chap. 31.
Book; and is by our men elsewhere showed. But you ought so much the rather to
have done this, because you contend, and that rightly, this Generation to be
supernatural. For look over all supernatural and divine Generations, you will
find none, in which God has begotten any thing out of his Essence. Neither may
you want examples: there are as many as there are Angels, who are all called
the Sons of God: as many as godly men, and believing in Christ there are
extant; as many as there s^all hereafter become immortal. For all these are
either begotten, or as yet to be begotten of God; as is manifest from the holy
Scriptures. Neither is there need you should fear, lest that in a Generation of
this sort, you should find no special manner, which may he either altogether
peculiar to Christ, or so remarkable, as to exempt him from the catalogue of
the rest, and make him the only begotten Son of God. For those things which are
disputed, both by us in the said place, and by others elsewhere, will free you
from this fear.

But besides, that I may omit, that the Generation out of the Essence of him,
who generates, such as the Adversaries will have Christ's to be, even chiefly is
natural, not supernatural; every Generation properly so called whatsoever,
whether you would have it to be natural, or supernatural, is a change from not
being, into being. So, namely, that it is necessary, that that which is
begotten, did sometime not exist, and afterward by the generation began to
exist. For what? is not every Generation properly so called, a production and
acquisition of an Essence, I say, an acquisition in respect of a begotten? But
how can the Essence of that be produced, which does already exist, and was in
very deed always in being? How can that acquire an Essence, which always had
it? Is not perhaps the supernatural Generation, although substantial, and
properly so called, a production and acquisition of an Essence or Substance? If
it be not, we understand no more, no not indeed the name of the generation,
when it is uttered concerning supernatural things; and you do use an unknown
tongue, who tells us of such a generation. But what ever at length you think,
this is certain, that the holy Scriptures, when they mention the Generation of
the Son of God, do speak with us in a popular language; and therefore do so
speak, that we may perceive the force and meaning of the words, although we do
not thoroughly understand the whole reason or nature of the thing. But go to: if
it be not necessary, that that which is generated, should not before exist,
that may be generated, which now is very deed is existent: and further, nothing
will hinder, that he, who to day in very deed is, and cease not to be; to
morrow or the next day may properly be generated By this means he has been in
the end of the way to which he tends, before he has entered into the way, or
gone through it. For the generation is the way to to be; in very deed to be, or
to have an Essence, is the end of that way. Who therefore does not see that to
be absurd, and against all the nature of the Generation? That may indeed be
conserved which is already in being: but not generated. But if the generation
may be of a thing already existent, as it existeth, the generation will be the
conservation of a thing. But the generation is the Antecedent of the
conservation; that produces the thing; this upholds, it being produced. If
therefore it be repugnant to the nature of the generation, that that be
generated, which already does in very deed exist, it is necessary, that that,
which properly is generated, sometime was no being, or sometime was not in very
deed existent.

They will perhaps say, that to that Generation, which may be performed by an
Emanation, as they call it, it is not required, that the thing generated,
sometime should not exist; for it is enough, that it has not its Essence from
it self, but from another; to wit, from that from which it emanateth or flows.
So the light, or beams, perpetually flow from the Sun, and are generated, not
therefore because they were not before existent, but because they have not
their Essence from themselves, but from the Sun. For imagine, say they, the Sun
to have been existent from eternity, it will be necessary, that it begat light
and beams from eternity; and so beams, although generated, should have existed
from eternity. But now they say, that the Son of God is begotten of the Father
by an Emanation. For he is begotten of the Father, whilst he understands
himself, and conceives the image of himself; which action perpetually endures.
Likewise also, that the holy Spirit is produced by a continued act of the will.
Of which thing we have treated above. But by this device they profit nothing.
For that I may let pass other things mentioned above in the first chapter of
this Section, the example of the Sunbeams, which they think to be most fitted
to their opinion, makes not for it. Seeing we, with our Adversaries, here speak
of the Generation properly so called. But there is no Generation, properly so
called, of light and beams, since they are Accidents. But Generation properly
so called, is not of Accidents, but of Substances only, as is well known. But
if the Emanation of beams from the Sun, were a generation, properly so called,
there had been no necessity, that the Adversaries should so carefully
distinguish between the natural and supernatural generation, when we urge, that
whatsoever is properly generated, it necessarily sometime was not existent,
since the Emanation of beams from the Sun is natural; and if it be a Generation
properly so called, then they will have an example of a natural generation, in
which that, which is generated, even now before (as themselves here urge) was
existent, and might always be existent. Further, those things, which in a sort
are generated by an Emanation, have not a perfect and consistent Essence, but
their being, as they speak, is in fieri; that is, they are only in being, in
that they are produced, and pass even as actions and motions. But the Son of
God has a perfect and consistent, not transient Substance. Wherefore he is not
begotten by an Emanation.

Lastly, Also in those things, which continually do emanate, and in that regard
are as it were generated, that is generated, which was not before existent. For
those things have successive parts, whereof one goes before, another follows;
and that, which once was generated, because it has already received its being,
is not generated any more, but another which was not yet existent; wherefore if
the light be generated perpetually by the Sun, another and another successive
part is still generated Otherwise if the whole were once produced according to
all parts which should be ever existent, it should not be continually
generated, but, being once produced, should be conserved only. By these things,
that also appears, that the Son of God cannot be generated by a continued
Emanation; or if they will have him to be generated by an Emanation, he cannot
be the most high God. For the most high God has not parts, by which he may be
successively generated; that I may forbear to say, that whatsoever is generated
by an Emanation, whether perpetual, or not perpetual, the Essence of it depends
on that, from which it flows. But the Essence of the most high God depends on
none.

CHAP. IV.
The fourth Argument. Because the Son of God should be already generated, and
to be generated unto eternity.

THe fourth Argument may be hence drawn, That if God have begotten the Son out
of his Essence from eternity, he does also now beget the same, and shall beget
him unto eternity. Which thing even many of the Adversaries confess, they
especially; who say that the Son is generated of God by the intellection. For
that intellection perpetually endures; and will endure unto all ages. But not
only they, who acknowledge such a manner of the generation of the Son of God,
are compelled to confess it, but all others also, unless they would overthrow
their other Doctrines. For if God begat the Son from eternity, and now begets
him not any more, he is made of a ^ege^ter, a not begetter, which change, since
it respects not the creatures, but abides within God himself, befalls not God,
nor is acknowledged by the Adversaries to befall him. Add, that either the Son
is not the most high God, or was begotten of the Father by necessity of nature.
For if the Father had not begotten him by necessity of nature, he had begotten
him freely and contingently. But he is nor the most high God, who exists
contingently, not necessarily. But if God have begotten the Son by necessity of
nature, he does perpetually beget him, since his nature is always altogether
the same. Besides, with God, if we believe the Adversaries, there is no
distinction of time, but the whole eternity is gathered together at once with
him, and contracted to a certain point.

Therefore whatsoever he does, it is necessary, that he does it in all
eternity, and so perpetually. Add, that not a few urge that of Psalm. 2.7. To
day have I begotten thee. For they say, that the word of the preter tense, [I
have begotten thee] signifies that Generation to be already finished; but the
word, to day, signifies it to be as yet present; Because the Son of God should
be already generated and to be generated unto all eternity.
because to day notes the present time. That is indeed frivolous which they
urge: but you may flay the Adversary with his own, even a leaden Sword: as if
indeed to day had not a latitude, and did not comprehend something even pa^, as
also fu^ure. Do all things, which are done to day, as yet continue; or which
are to be, are they already? Do you as yet speak all things which you have
spoken to day, o^ all the things you are about to speak to day; do you already
speak? Do I as yet write, what things I have written to day? You will say, that
in men or creatures the matter is so, not in God. But whence do you know, that
to day notes the present time with God? Is it not from this, that otherwise it
is always taken for the present time? Do you perhaps conclude, that to day,
notes the present time from this, that that word is used of God, but with God
there is nothing but present? I trow not. But in that manner it is also
manifest, that to day has a latitude, and consists not in an indivisible
moment, but comprehends some certain tract of time: Because otherwise it is
always so used. But that there may be no place of tergiversation; I say, that
the word to day, being used of God himself, denotes a certain and definite
time, and the actions which ^he is said to have done, or to be about to do to
day, are circumscribed with a certain time, and so are not eternal: and that is
indeed perpetual, since that word is no where used of God otherwise. For that I
may pass by those words of Cain to God, Genesis 4.14.
Thou drivest me this day from the face of the earth. So Moses says of him,
Exodus 14.13.
See the great things of God, he is about to do to day. Did God pe^haps, even
then when Moses spoke so, do those things; yea, had he done them from all
eternity, or was about to do them to all eternity? Moreover, God himself also
says of himself, Exodus 34.11.
Observe all things which I command thee to day. And again Moses, Lev. 9.4.
For the Lord will appear to you to day. See also Deuteronomy. 2 25, 26. and 16.18.
and 29.12. Jos. 3.7. 5.9. 1 Samuel 4.3. and 11.13. and 15.28. and 26.8, 23. and
28.18. That I omit many other places, which every one by himself may observe by
reading the holy Sc^iptures. But now even from this very t^ing it appears, that
God does not any more beget, nor that he will beget the Son unto all eternity,
since he has said, that he has begotten him to day, which that it signifies a
certain space or article of Time, in which that a^^ion has been finished,
appears from the examples of the like expressions brought by us: especially
since a contrary example cannot be brought* and the Adversaries themselves
confess, that the word, I have begotten, signifies, that that generation is
already finished, or that the Son by that generation, is already perfectly
produced. But it should not signify that, unless it might have the force of
the time past. But what need we many words? The thing it self shows, that he,
who is already long ago in very deed, and perfectly extant, as it is manifest,
that the Son of God is extant, cannot be any more begotten: which both we have
before proved by Reason, and all they acknowledge, whose minds the false
Philosophy does not pervert. And many indeed are wont to hide that their
mystery, from men ignorant of that their Philosophy, unless when they are
constrained in some manner to open it; because they see they shall not easily
be credited by them; and it seems absurd to any in his wits, that the Son of
God, whom he knows to have been existent in very deed for so many ages past,
should now be begotten, and to be begotten perpetually.

That also may be added to the Argument already brought: That since a person is
nothing else but a first intelligent Substance, as was showed in the foregoing
Section; if the second person of the Deity be begotten out of the Substance of
the first, there will be two Substances in God, the one of the first person,
out of which the Son was begotten; the other, which is the Son himself. Which
also follows from this, that a generation, properly so called, such as they
will have the Generation of the Son of God to be, is not but of a Substance:
Now a substance cannot be born but of a substance. Yet again, if the Substance
of the Son be born, and the Substance of the Son and Father be the same in
number, it follows that the Substance of the Father is also born, and indeed
from it self. Therefore also the Father is the Son of himself. For how is he
not begotten, whose substance is begotten? How is he not his Son, out of whose
substance he is begotten? There might also other Arguments be brought, but we
will be now content with these.

CHAP. V.
The fifth Argument. By which the Doctrine of the Incarnation of the Son of God
is refelled; because the Father and the holy Spirit had been also incarnated.

WE must pass to the Incarnation, which all they are constrained to
acknowledge, who hold Christ to be the most high God. For since it is most
manifest by the holy Scriptures, that he is by nature a man, and at a certain
time born of a Virgin; it was necessary, that they should hold him, or his
divine Nature, so to have assumed the humane, that the unity of person
remaining, he should be at once both God and man. For if God and man should be
different persons, neither the Son of God had been a man, nor a man the Son of
God, no more than the Father is that Son, whom they hold to be the second
person of the Trinity, or the holy Spirit, or on the contrary: yea, less: since
the nature of those persons is held to be the same, ^ot only in the genus or
species, but number also: but the nature of the most high God and man, have the
farthest distance even in kind from one another. But in that opinion, which we
have spoken of concerning the Incarnation of the Son of God, begotten out of
the Essence of the Father from eternity, many absurdities are ^^ntained. We
will here bring some only, and those more pertinent to our present matter. For
first, thence it follows, that not only the Son, Because the Father and the
holy Spirit had been incarnated.
but also the Father and holy Spirit have assumed a humane nature. For he has
assumed an humane nature, whose proper nature or substance has assumed it, and
with it is personally united. But if the divine Nature of Christ has assumed
an humane nature, also the proper Nature of the Father, and the holy Spirit
has assumed it, if so be, it be the same in number in those three persons. And
indeed the contrivance of the error, has made, that some of the Adversaries
have not feared to say, that the whole Trinity was incarnated; and lately there
was one Cornelius a Lapide, a Jesuit, in his Commentary on the lesser Prophets
of a certain chief Sect of the Adversaries, a man of a most famous name
amongst them, and now indeed teaching Divinity at Rome, who dedicated his Book
to the uncreated Trinity, and in Jesus Christ created. Which if it be true,
both the Father and the holy Spirit was born of a Virgin, and suffered, and
dyed, and was buried, and raised again, and whatsoever we read Christ to have
ever done, or was done to him, that also agrees to the Father and holy Spirit.
So the Heresy of those Ancients, whether Sabellians, or Patripassians,
condemned by the Adversaries themselves, will revive. And indeed, if you
consider the thing rightly, the common opinion of the Trinity is nothing else
but a Sabellianism, a little more subtly propounded and varnished with some
new colors, and choked with new names. For the same God (...) number,
considered with this mode or subsistence, is the Father; ^ith another mode or
subsistence, is the Son; again with another, the holy Spirit. Which what other
thing is it in very deed than what Sabellius held? For the same God in number,
and the same substance, is also in very deed the same person, having three
different modes or subsistences.

But that we may return to that, which we began to do, they will say, that the
divine Nature indeed or substance, did assume the humane, but not in every
subsistence, but only in the subsistence of the Son: to this only that union or
conjunction of the humane and divine Nature, is terminated. You would say, that
these men saw with their very eyes that Incarnation, who know to explain so
accurately, in which subsistence that union was terminated, although there are
three subsistences in the same nature, not really as they speak, different from
it. But that the vanity of this device may be showed, let us somewhat explain
what they would; if so be that the matter may be understood. True and real
union, such as that should be, which is devised by the Adversaries, is at least
between two things, whereof of the one explain^, or applies its terminos or
extremities, whether properly or improperly so called to the other. The case is
clear in bodily things, which we see with the eyes, and from which the word
terminus, which they use in this matter, is taken. For a board is joined to a
board, a stone to a stone, whilst the superfices of the one is joined to the
superficies of the other: but the superficies is the extremity, or a certain
terminus of a body. But because a superficies of some whole body is extended
through al its sides, and for examples sake, one part of it is before, another
behind; therefore it may come to pass, that the union and conjunction of two
bodies is not terminated unto every part of the superficies or body. So two
square stones touch one another according to the superficies only of one side;
unless perhaps the one includes the other, and then the outer superficies of
the containing stone, will not touch the superficies of the contained in any
part; wherefore to that outer superficies of the containing stone, that union
or conjunction will not be terminated, but to the inner only. Now in things
incorporeal, there are properly no termini or extremities, no diversity of such
parts. Whence it was necessary, if the humane nature was joined to the divine,
which all hold to be incorporeal, that it was joined to the whole divine
Nature. But yet with our Adversaries, instead of diverse termini, there are
diverse subsistences or modes of the divine nature; whereof one makes the
Father, another the Son, a third the holy Spirit. Now they say, that this
personal union is terminated to the subsistence of the Son, or so far the
humane nature is joined to the divine, as this subsists in the Son, but not as
it subsists in the Father or holy Spirit; therefore the sub^ stence of the Son,
not that of the Father or holy Spirit, is communicated to the humane nature;
and this subsists by that, and further makes one person with the Son of God,
not with the Father or holy Spirit. The Adversaries usually explain the matter
more obscurely. But either this is it the^ would have, or what indeed they
would, cannot at all be understoo^ But they do nothing. For if the whole divine
nature be joined to the humane, and there be three subsistences in that whole
nature, whereof one differs no more from the Essence than another, or is more
thoroughly fastened to it, the humane nature also is no more joined to one
subsistence, than to another, and so that union is terminated no more to one
than to another, and the humane nature no more subsists in the subsistence of
one person than of another. Yea, if there could be any difference between these
subsistences, it should subsist rather in the subsistence of the Father, as
being that which is the first in the divine nature, and upon which the two
others do as it were lean, than of the Son and holy Spirit. Which that it may
be made so much the more clear, that is to be remembered, which we showed
before, that they hold that there is a certain real union between the two
natures, and moreover, that the one nature is joined to the other nature first,
and by it self; but to those things which are in the nature, only consequently.
For nothing can really be joined and united with the most of the thing, but
with the thing it self. We see that in the conjunction of body and soul, which
example among all other things they judge to be most like to that hypostatical
union. For the body is first and by it self joined unto the soul: consequently
to those things which are in the Soul, or to its modes, as to existe^ce, or if
there be any other thing, which they may be pleased to call a mode. But if the
body he only secondarily joined to those things which are in the soul, it
cannot be joined more to one of them, than to another, unless perhaps one be
more or before in the soul, than the rest. But it is already showed, that the
subsistence of the Son, is not in this manner in the divine Essence. But
moreover, although in some regard the humane nature should be more joined to
the sub^^stence of the ^on, yet it would suffice to the incarnation of the
whole Trinity, that the whole Essence of the Trinity is united with it. For how
is not that whole incarnated, the whole Essence of which is incarnated? Add,
that since those subsistences exist not without the Essence, yea, are in very
deed the same with it; it is necessary that those subsistences also be
incarnated together with it. Therefore the whole Trinity is incarnated, has
sufferred, satisfied the Father for sins. Oh egregious Divinity, which brings
forth such fruits! But let us go on to show the absurdity of that Doctrine.

CHAP. VI.
The second Argument. Because the second person of the Divinity would cease to
be a person.

SEcondly it follows from the same Doctrine, that one person of the Divinity
has ceased to be a person; for it became a part of Christ, constituted of a
divine and humane Nature. But it is of the Essence of a Suppositum, and
consequen ly also of a person, that it be not a part of another thing, as it is
confessed by all. The Confirmation and Defense of the Argument.


The Adversaries confess, and it is a thing too manifest, that Christ is a
certain whole, consisti^g of a divine and hu^ane nature. Although they say,
that he is not an essential whole, but personal. W ich thing does not infringe
our Argumentation, but establish it rather. For what? Is it not equally
repugnant to a person, to be the part of a personal whole; that is, of a person
and suppositum, as to be the part of an essential whole? Yea verily most of
all: because by this means, there should be two persons in one person, the one
a part, the other a whole. Therefore that which perhaps some may think, is
nothing, that the distinction between an essential and personal whole, which
otherwise they use, is pertinent to the subverting our reason. Although also
otherwise in vain is a personal whole feigned, which together is not an
essential. But there is no need now to demonstrate that. What then? Will they
say perhaps, that the humane Nature of Christ is not a part of him? Thither
some of the Adversaries seem to incline; although many no less contradict them,
than that most received opinion, with the defenders, concerning that
^ypostatical union for so many ages past. For what is more usual with them,
than to oppose Christ to either nature several^y taken? Whereto pertains that
distinction between whole Christ, and the whole of Christ? Besides, if the
humane Nature be not a part of the person of Christ, it will be an accident of
that person, A g, 2. The Son would cease to be a person.
an accident, I say, such, as some call physical or predicable. For it is easy
to be showed, both by reason and the authority of the Philosopher, that it is
an accident, which is inherent not as a part, and may be absent from that, in
which it is. Now if the humane nature of Christ be not a part of Christ; all
that which we have said agrees to it. For it is in the person of Christ, and
subsists in it, as the Adversaries would. But now it will not be a part.
Lastly, it may be absent from that in which it is, to wit, the divine Person or
Nature of Christ. For should the divine Nature or Person perish, if the humane
should be separated from it? I say not that it shall be separated; which they
deny shall ever be: But if it should be separated, the divine Person should not
be destroyed: which is enough in this place. For there are also inseparable
accidents, as they are caled in the Schools; which although they are never
separated from the subjectum, yet it is therefore said, that they may be absent
from it, because if it were supposed, that they are separated from that, in
which they are, yet it would not be necessary, that the thing it self should
perish. But if the humane nature be an accident of the person of Christ, how is
the person of Christ, or the Son of God a man? Christ might indeed be said to
be humane, but not a man. For that which is an accident to another, is not
predicated of it synonymically, or univocally, but paronymically? So a Cup, to
which Gold adhers, as an accident, is said to be golden or gilded, not a gold;
an Iron, in which is fire, is said to be fired, not a fire; and so in the rest.

But besides, how is not that a whole, which is one thing, and consisting of
two things separable in their nature? But such is Christ. For he is some one
thing, consisting of a divine and humane nature, either of which in its nature
is separable; although this, according to their opinion is not to be separated.
How therefore is not the humane Nature a part of Christ? If it be, then the
other part will be the divine Nature, having its subsistences that is, the
divine person, which has assumed the humane But a person, as we have seen,
cannot be the part of another, (...) that indeed a suppositum or person.
Perhaps some will say, that the Iron fired, is some thing united of an Iron and
Fire; and yet the Iron it self does not loose the reason or nature of a
Suppositum, but only the Fire subsisting in it. Wherefore although Christ be
somewhat consisting of a divine person and humane nature, yet not that but this
loses the reason or nature of a person, because this subsists in that. For in
this part there is the same reason of a person, and a suppositum: because that,
of which we dispute, whether it befall a person, may therefore befall it, or not
befall it, because it may befall or not befall a suppositum. But if there be in
that Iron a substantial Fi^e, and that Fire, as some part of it, makes that
Suppositum, which is called an Iron fired; certainly the Iron taken by it self
without that Fire, will be no more a Suppo^^tum. For a Suppositum should be a
part of a Suppositum. Neither behooves it any whit, that nevertheless we should
call that Iron a Suppositum. For we would not call that Iron severed from the
Fire, a Suppositum, but conjoined with it, although the denomination be made
from the Iron, as the chief. But if that substantial Fire, together with the
Iron, does not make one Suppositum, or is not a part of it; first, I see not
how it may be said, that it has lost the reason o^ nature of a Suppositum. For
it will be so in the Iron, as the air spread through the pores of the Iron. But
this is in the Iron only, as it is contained in a certain place, neither in the
mean time does it cease to be a Suppositum, as neither the water insinuating it
self in the spaces of more loose bodies, and diffused through them. Besides,
this example will not serve the turn: because we ^ave demonstrated, the humane
nature to be a part of Christ. Let the Adversaries choose now which they will of
these things, which we have said of the Fire (for there is no need that we
should decide that controversy) and they shall and, that that instance, or
example of the Iron fired, which in this thing they often use, makes nothing to
overthrow our reason.

CHAP. VII.
The third Argument. Because the most high God and man are Disparatums.

THe third reason is, because by their opinion, it is necessary that Christ be
together both God, to wit, the most hi^h God and Man, and that God is man, and
man is God. But the most high God and Man are Disparatums. But one and the same
Subjectum cannot be together two Disparatums, nor one of the Disparatums be the
other; or, as they speak in the Schools, the Disparatums cannot be predicated
of the same Subjectum, univocally, or in quid, and indeed each severally
without any limitation or adjection. They cannot al^o be said one of another,
univocally or in quid, unless per^aps by a metaphor or similitude: as if I say,
a man is a Lion or Fox, that is, like a Lion or Fox. But Figures here have no
place. For the Adversaries would have it to be so properly, and are constrained
so to hold, partly because of their own doctrine of Christ; partly because of
plain expressions of the holy Scriptures. Of which thing somethi^g shall be
said afterward. But why the disparatums in that manner, we have said, cannot
be said of one and the same subjectum, muc less of one another, this is the
reason: because the disparatums are opposite, although in a loose^
signification, than Aristotle took that term. And the Adversaries do not deny
it. For they see, that the disparatums contain in them a hidden contradiction,
which is the greatest and unreconcileable opposition. God and man are
Disparatums.
For by the essential differences, by which they are opposed to each other,
they exclude mutually each other, and the one is denied by the other. So a Man
and a Horse, differ as a man, and not a man; rational, and not rational; a
horse, and not a horse. A Man and a Plant differ not only as a man, and not a
man; but also as animal, and not animal; or as sensitive, and not sensitive;
and by how much farther any thing is distant from another, by so much more
essential differences, which they call generical, are found between them, and
by so much more contradictions arise between them. But now if any thing in the
genus of the substance, be distant from the man, it is God, if yet our
Adversaries will permit us to r^fer God to the Genus of the Substance, to hold
which here, there is no need. Yea, if we exclude him from the Genus of the
Substance, so much the farther will he be distant from man, and so much the
more differences will arise between him and man, and contradictions, which
cause that they be opposed one to the other. For man and God differs as man and
not man, a^imal, and not animal, natural body, and not, natural body, and if
th^re as yet any other differences be found, by which God is severed from the
genuses of a man. Therefore God and man cannot be predicated of the same
Subjectum, as Christ is, simply and absolutely, and that vnivocally or in quid.

Neither indeed may you think, those things are said of Christ synecdochycally,
the names of parts being put for the whole. For first, both words, as
elsewhere, so also when they are used of Christ, do denote nothing else but the
person of Christ. But the person is a whole, not a part. Besides if they were
only predicated of Christ synecdochycally, I might most rightly say, Christ is
not God, Christ is not man; yea, so only should I speak properly and
accurately: as I say most truly, that a man is not a soul, a man is not flesh,
to wit, taken distinctly from the spirit. For this expression is proper and
accurate; the other improper and figurate; to wit, a man is a soul, a man is
flesh. But who would brook him that says, Christ is not God, is not man? Add
that hour the parts are wont to be said synecdochycally of the whole, yet are
they not wont to be predicated mutually of themselves. For I do not say, flesh
is the soul or spirit; or on the contrary, the soul is flesh. But here God and
man are predicated of each other mutually. There is no need to speak of the
Metaphor, whereby sometimes the Disparatums are predicated of the same, or
mutually of each other; as if I say, some man is a Lion or Fox, that is, like a
Lion or Fox. For Christ, neither after the Adversaries, or our Opinion, is said
to be metaphorically God or man, but both properly: and according to them
essentially; according to us man indeed essentially; but God in the same manner
in which he is said to be a King: which thing does not reach to the Essence.

Not a few of the Ad^ersaries have seen this knot; which when they could not
loose, would notwithstanding say, that this is an unusual manner of predicating;
and certainly it is unusual, because it says, that which in its nature is
impossible, since, as we have showed, it implies a contradiction, to wit, that
the same at once simply is a man, and is not; is God, and is not. Neither may
any say, those Disparatums which contain a hidden contradi^tion in them, are
not predicated of Christ according to the same part, but diverse; and indeed
the one according to the divine nature, the other according to the humane. But
that the same thing may be affirmed and denied of the same according to diverse
parts, For as the same thing cannot be both affirmed, and denied of the same
whole simply, or without a limitation, or some addition; although it be in it
according to one part, and be not in it according to another, as we have showed
in the first Book, Sect. 2. Chap. 3. so neither are those things said of the
same Subjectum simply, which contain such a hidden contradiction in them,
however they may be in the same thing according to diverse parts. For that
neverthel^ss would be all one as if the same should be both affirmed and denied
of the same whole simply. But such we have showed two disparatums to be, which
are predicated of the same subjectum univocally, and properly. Besides, the
species, under which every individual is contained, is never predicated of the
whole in respect of one only integral part or like to the integral, but of the
whole, as it is a whole. Bu^ man is a species under which Christ is contained:
and if he were not, it should be denied, that Christ is properly a man.
Wherefore man is predicated of Christ not in respect of one part only, but of
the whole as it is a whole. Why then should not also God be the attribute of
the whole as such? But Disparatums cannot be said of the same whole as it is a
whole; for contradictories should be together predicated of the same whole, as
it is such.

CHAP. VIII.
There would be two persons of Christ.
The fourth Argument. Because in Christ should be two persons.

WE will make the last Argument this. If the humane nature, [We use the
appellation frequent with the Adversaries] be a person, Christ cannot be a
divine person in that manner, in which the Adversaries hold it. For there
should be two persons in one Christ, a divine and humane: which thing
overthrows it self.

But now that the humane nature of Christ is a person, is proved first from the
definition of a person. For every first intelligent substance is a person.

For that which some say, that this is the definition of a person taken in
concreto, has here no moment. For neither would we prove any other thing, than
that the humane nature of Christ, taken in concreto, is a person; such as
Peter, Paul, other men; and besides, every person is some concretum. Therefore
they will answer, that this definition is more large than the thing defined.
For not every first (that is, singular, and one) substance intelligent is a
person, although the word person be taken in concreto. But that is not righ^ly
answered; first, because otherwise it would follow, that some intelligent
suppositum is not a person: which thing there is none which do not acknowledge
to be most false: for every first intelligent substance is also a suppositum;
even for that very reason, because the action of understanding does properly
agree to it; but actions do not agree save to Suppositums.

Lastly, What instance, what example will they bring to the contrary? Run over
all humane substances; run over angelical, and the natures of Devils: all are
persons. We have showed the same before of the divine substance. And be it
indeed as the Adversa^ies would, that it subsists in three subsistences, and so
i^ three in persons; it is enough, that it is a person, whether one or more.
For now, when we assert its personality to the humane nature of Christ, we
dispute not of the number of persons, but of the thing it self. We will give
you leave to feign it, even three in persons. But what other first intelligent
substances do remain there, which are not persons? You will say, the souls of
men separated from their bodies. For they are first, or singular, and
intelligent substances. For they may understand, and so in very deed do
understand, being separated from bodies. But if the thing be so, why are they
not persons? For will they not be intelligent suppositums? You will say they
are not suppositums, because they are natural parts of men, or are by nature
appointed to it, that they may constitute some whole. What? are not the natural
parts of the substances dis-joyned from each other suppositums? Certainly, as
it is the common, so also the most true opinion of the Schools, that they are
Suppositums at that time. For it matters not, that they either have been, or
may be naturally parts of other things; if so be that now in very deed they are
not, but by themselves make up some wholes. The actions of suppositums agree
properly to them, and to each separate actions. Surely to the humane souls, if
the opinion of the Adversaries be true, not only actions do agree, but also
even the most excllent, and most proper to persons, to wit, to understand and
will, and if there be any conjoined with these. How then shall they not be
suppositums, how not persons? But if they be not persons, let not the actions
proper to persons, be ascribed to them. Which will be done, if you shall say,
that those souls, as long as they subsist separate, cannot a^tually understand.
For the soul is not intelligent, ut quod, or, as which (we speak with the
Schools) but ut quo, or, as by which, that is, it does not by it self
understand, but is that by which the man understands. Therefore as long as the
man himself is not his soul, by it self cannot understand. But since a person
is defined, a first substance intelligent, or an intelligent suppositum, that
is said to ^e intelligent, which may by it self actually understand, or which
is understanding ut quod; or as which, not ut quo or as by which. With what
instance then will they infringe our definition? Whether by the example of that
nature of which we dispute? But that cannot be done without begging of the
Question. Will they say the humane Nature of Christ is not intelligent ut quo,
or, as which; but ut quo, or, as by which? Then it will not be a substance
endued with understanding; as we are; and so neither a humane nature. For every
substance endued with understanding, is intelligent ut quod, or, as which; that
is, it self by its act is able to understand. Of which thing we shall say more
hereafter.

The second reason by which it is proved, that the humane Nature of Christ is a
person, is this, that it is a man, I say a singular or individual man, and the
son of man. But he who is a man, or the son of man, is a person: for these are
names of persons. Whence some more acute Adversaries, will not call the humane
nature in Christ a man; and they say not a miss, that this phrase savours of
Nestorianism, if any say, God ass^med man. For it should be said, God or the
divine Nature assume^ a humanity, or humane nature. Besides if the humane
Nature of Christ be in very deed a man, and the son of man, no man may doubt
that those things are to be understood of it, which are said of the man Jesus
Christ, or the Son of man; as Christ calls himself in the holy Mat. 16 13, 15,
16 John 3.14, 16. and 5.26, 27. 1 Timothy 2.5.
Scriptures. For there were not two men in Christ. But that son of man is
called the Son of God; or on the contrary, the Son of God is called the Son of
man: The man Christ is called the Mediator; and other things are attributed to
him, which by all men's confession, agree not but to a person. Certainly if that
man be not a person, it will be lawful so to argue. The son of man is not a
person; the son of God is that son of man; therefore that son of God is not a
person. But it is manifest by the definition of a man, that the humane nature
of Christ, which they fear to call a man, is in very deed and properly a man.
For to which the definition agrees, to it also the thing defined agrees. For as
much as the thing defi^ed, and the definition, or the thing comprehended in the
definition, differ not but in the manner of explaining, otherwise they are
altogether the same thing. But now does not the definition of a man agree to
the humane Nature of Christ? Wa^ not it as all other men, a ^ational animal? Of
its being ^ational, there is no doubt; for his Nature had not been humane, if
it had not been rational. Of its being an animal also, ^e ought not to doubt,
who knows that the animal when it is made the genus of a man, is no other
thing, than a body endued with a sensitive soul. What? was not the humane
nature in Christ such a body? Was it not a body, that is, a corporeal
substance? Was it not endued with a sensitive soul? He has put off all sense
and reason, who dares to deny it. Therefore the humane nature of Christ is a
man. But of its singularity, or individuality, who doubts? But if he be a man,
he also is the son of man* as well because the holy Scriptures put
promiscuously the son of man, and a man, as also is commonly known; as because
he who being a man, is born of a woman, cannot but be in p^oper speaking the
son of man.

Perhaps some one will say, that the humane nature of Christ, to speak properly
and accurately, is neither a man, nor an animal, nor a body, but Christ endued
with humane nature, is both a man, and an animal, and a body: because a man and
animal, are concretums, and likewise a body, when it is put for the genus of a
man: but that the humane nature of Christ is an abstractum. But we on the
contrary: if the humane nature of Christ, speaking properly and acurately, be a
corporeal substance, which no man can deny, but he that believes not sense any
more, the same also is an animal, since it is en^ued with a sensitive soul: and
further, a man, since it is also endued with a rational soul. Wherefore that
which they say, that it is some abstractum, and call it humanity, or the humane
nature, not a man, rests on their bare opinion. But besides, what is with them
humanity, corporeity, animality abstract? They will not say, that they are
universals, as it were severed in the mind from singulars, which sort of
abst^actums we willingly admit in the kind of the substances; for this makes
nothing here to the purpose, since the humane nature of Christ is singular, and
one in number. Also they will not say, that it is the form of a man, animal, or
body. For neither does t is make any whit to the purpose, since the humane
nature of Christ is no^ the form of a man, but something endued with a form;
not a part of the humane essence, but the whole essence. What therefore are in
their opinion those abstractums? Are they the singular nature of a man, an
animal, or some body, abstracted from all these things which are not required
to constitute it, and considered barely by it self? First, what constraines to
consider so the humane nature of Christ? since in it there were many things not
belonging to the constitution of the essence of the humanity it self, as in
other men* And that I may more nearly touch those things, which are wont
commonly to be looked on in such concretums; there was in him an existence
proper to singulars, of which no regard is had in the definition of the species
and genus; there were differences, which they call individuating: it was
existent in a certain place, in a certain time; I say it was a being in very
deed existing, and, as other substances, subsisting: but such things are not
wont to be called abstractums. Besides, I cannot see, why a whole essence, and
in all the parts absolute, which is really existing, although it be abstracted
in the mind from those things which are in it, deserves not the name of its
species or genus: why, I say, this humane nature, which is indeed existent (for
of this we speak) ought not to be called a man, or this entire nature of an
animal, animal. In vain the latter Philosophers seem here to have sought a
distinction unknown to the Ancients, and by reason of difference of words
(although also it was necessary to feign those simple abstract words of the
substances, as of the humanity, taken for the humane nature, animality,
corporeity) to have brought in a certain difference of the thing, and
signification it self. But perhaps they will say, that the humane nature of
Christ subsists not by it self, but subsists in the person of the Son of God,
by whose proper subsistence it is sustained. Therefore he either ought not to
be called a man; or if he be called a man, yet he is not a person.

But that I may omit now other things to be said a little after, that
subsistence, which they say the humane nature of Christ wants, either
appertains to the constitution of the nature of a man, or appertains not to it.
If it appertains to it, the humane nature of Christ without it will not be
entire: and so Christ shall not be a perfect man, contrary to the mind of the
holy Scriptures, and the Adversaries themselves: If it appertains not to it,
its absence will no whit hinder, but that the humane nature of Christ may be
properly called a man.

Thirdly, It is proved by this, that the humane nature of Christ is a person;
because it in proper speaking does act, and sustains certain offices. But
a^tions, as often we have minded, after the common opinion of ^^e Schools, are
not properly but of suppositums, which if they be endued with understanding, by
the confession of all are persons. Likewise also offices are proper to persons,
as also the Adversaries confess it. But now that the humane nature of Christ
properly acts, is proved by that, that it does also really subsist, and has in
it self a strength or power also and faculties sufficient to act. For it has
not less than any man; yea, by so much greater, by how much greater gifts and
greater power is given it of God.

But what is required to it, that any thing may in proper speaking act, but
that it may really subsist, and have in it self a strength or power sufficient
to act? Surely it should be denied that we do properly act, if that might be
denied of the humane nature of Christ, which, as we have said in those things,
that are required to the action properly so called, does not only equal us, but
also in many respects exceed. And that we may declare that thing more
peculiarly, does not it, speaking properly, by it self understand, and reason?
Then it is not an intelligent substance, and endued with a rational soul, and
further, neither an humane. For that is an intelligent substance, that can,
especially with some access of use and exercise, really, I say, properly, not
improperly, understand and reason. But even the understanding alone would
suffice to prove its person, for it is proper to persons, as also we have
before minded.

Further, Take now other actions, whether proper to men or animals, as to will,
desire, eat, drink, move it self in a place, and stirs its members to act. If
the humane nature had not faculties to exercise these actions, either it was
not an humane nature at all, or it was maimed either in respect of the body, or
soul. The Truth, or the Adversaries opinion admits neither. The Antiquity
condemned the Monothelites, who held one only will in Christ. But if there were
in him a double will, one in the divine nature, another in the humane; as the
divine nature has willed, and does will by its proper will; so also the
humanity by its; for wherefore else should it be in it? Faculties are for
actions. And surely his humane will showed forth it self abundantly, Mat.
26.39. Mar. 14.35, 36. Luke 22.42.
whilst he sought of his Father to remove the cup frow him. Although here it
might be enough for us, that this nature might properly will; for that ag^ees
not but to Suppositums.

Perhaps they will say, that the humane nature did not subsist by it self, but
in the person of the Son of God, and therefore also by it self could act
nothing. For that which subs sts not by it self, does nothing also by it self.
Wherefore all the actions properly and directly, are not to be ascribed to the
humane nature, by which they are performed, but to whole Christ, although
according to the humane nature. For in whole Christ, or his person, they are
term^nated and founded. But if you would directly ascribe those actions to the
humane nature it self, the expression or speaking would be improper; as when I
say, the soul understands, wills, feels: when yet the soul does not properly
understand, will, feel, but the man with, or by, or according to the soul. So
neit^er does the body eat, drink, but the man himself by the body: So lastly,
neither does the arm move it self, although we sometimes so speak, but the man.

Which things let us consider of what moment they are: and first that, why they
deny the humane nature of Christ to subsist by it self. Now the^e may be a
threefold meaning of that expression, which may here come into ones mind. For
first, that may be said to subsist by it self, which ^eeds not any subjectum,
in which it may in here, and from which if it be removed, it will loose its
being. In this manner all substances subsist by themselves; accidents do not
subs st, those, namely, which are wont commonly to be distributed into nine
Categories, or Predicaments. In this manner the humane nature, by the
Adversaries confession subsists by it self? for it is a substance, not an
accident, otherwise it would not be an humane nature. Besides, that subsists by
it self, which needs not at all any outward prop, that it may subsist, and be
preserved entire and safe. In this manner no created thing, and depending on
another, subsists by it self. But that hinders not, but that the things
destitute of this way of subsisting by themselves, act properly, as is manifest
to any one. For things corruptible, and chiefly men, want both many causes,
that at first they may exist, and many helps, that they may be conserved; and
yet they do properly act. Wherefore that will neither hinder the humane nature,
that it should not, speaking properly, act.

Thirdly, That subsists by it self, which is not a part of another, but
constitutes some whole by it self, and absolute in all its respects. In this
manner the parts of any thing, whether integrant or essential, are not said to
subsist by themselves, and therefore not to act by themselves, but the whole by
them. And hitherto belong all those examples brought a little before. Perhaps
in this manner the Adversaries will say, that the humane nature of Christ does
not subsist by it self: because it is a part of another suppositum, to wit, of
whole Christ, or his person. But if the thing be so, neither that second person
of the Divinity, with which the humane is said to be united, and which
therefore is the other part of the same suppositum, shall properly any more act
any thing. So a divine person, that is of the supreme God himself, who,
speaking properly, has acted, is become that, which, speaking properly, cannot
act, than which nothing can be thought more absurd. For certainly if the humane
nature be a part, there will be also some other part of the same whole. But
what is it besides the person, by which it is assumed, and with which it is
said to be united? Wherefore this also will be a part, and consequently will no
more subsist by it self (to wit, in that manner of subsisting which we now
handle) than the humane nature. But besides, if the humane nature of Christ be
full and perfect, consisting of a humane body, and a rational soul, both of
them absolute in all respects; is it not by it self an entire thing, having
faculties sufficient to act? Certainly if you deny any of these, either you
will deny the entireness of the humane nature, or you will deny also that we
our selves are such entire things. The Adversaries being constrained by the
very truth of the thing, grant the humane Nature of Christ to be by it self an
essential whole, neither dare they say it is an integrant part of Christ,
because they hold those only to be integrant parts which have quantity.
Wherefore if Christ should consist of a humane nature and a divine as integrant
parts, also the divine nature being the other part of this suppositum, would
have quantity. Therefore some say that the divine and humane nature are as it
were essential parts, or like essential parts: and that the humane nature is as
it were the matter and thing to be perfected, the divine, as it were, the form
and thing perfecting. But whilst they say this, they thereby confess, those
Natures to be improperly called parts, but properly wholes: or at least if the
divine Nature cannot be termed a whole, because it is destitute of parts; the
humane Nature by it self to be some whole consisting of all essential and
integrant parts. But this indeed is to subsist by it self, when that expression
is taken in the third signification, which was set down by us. Wherefore in
vain do the Adversaries, when they say, that that subsistence of which we
speak, may by divine power be separated from an entire and perfect substance,
such as is the humane nature in Christ. And I believe indeed it may be
separated, i^ together it cease to be perfect and entire, and becomes either an
essential part of some thing, or integrant growing together with another body.
But that it remaining perfect, and making up an essential and integral whole by
it self, should not subsist by it self, implies a contradiction. For that would
be that it compleats a whole by it self, and does not complete it, that it both
is entire and perfect by it self, and is not. And this reason indeed does not
only show that actions properly agree to the humane Nature, whence further it
is concluded, that it is a suppositum and person; but also does immediately
show that. For if the humane Nature be a substance subsisting by it self, to
wit, in that stricter manner of subsisting by it self, which we expounded in
the third place, it is altogether a suppositum; for as much as this
subsistence, is the form of a suppositum, by which a suppositum is a
suppositum; as the Adversaries themselves teach: who also bring no other cause,
nor can by their opinion, why the humane nature of Christ is not a suppositum,
and further, not a person, than because it is destitute of that subsistence.

But that we may return to actions; Thence also it is manifest, that they
properly agree to the humane Nature, because othe^wise it should be necessary
to hold, that all Christ's actions; whatsoever at length they have been, are to
be properly attributed to his divine suppositum, as it is a suppositum; or that
that divine suppositum has properly performed those actions. But thence arise
those absurdities which my mind abhors even to think of. For all natural
actions proper to humane imperfection, and our mortality, which are common to
man with brutes: some also, however necessary, yet uncomely, shall properly
agree not to the humane Nature, but to the divine Suppositum it self; that is,
to God himself, as he is a Suppositum. He who fears not to think, these
absurdities of God, he has not yet learned to reverence enough that d^eadful
and most glorious Majesty, and does the greatest injury to the most holy
Religion of Christ. Which by this means he exposes to the mockery of those
which are without. Surely that should be far from them who so much abhor to
ascribe any accident to God, or any genus, and the like: which although they
were erroneous, yet they could be both conceived, and spoken without
disparagement to his Majesty. But so it usually comes to pass, that they which
strain at a Gnat, swallow an Elephant; and they whom those things which pertain
only to the philosophical subtlety, would be wary even to superstition, but in
these things which touch the reverence of the Deity, they are more than
careless.

Therefore that we may return to our purpose, since it is sufficiently, showed,
that actions do properly agree to the humane Nature, it is also easy to show,
that offices also agree to the same.

For, first, that the humane Nature of Christ may bear some office, that which
would here be sufficient for us, it is easy to demonstrate. For he that may
discharge actions proper to intelligent beings, and those very eminent, may
also bear some office. For what else is required to the office in general?
Besides, the same is without difficulty showed in particular. Three offices of
Christ are held by all, Prophetical, Priestly and Kingly. The part of the first
is to expound and confirm the divine Will to men. Of the second, to offer to
God, and to intercede for sinners. Of the third, to govern, keep and save the
people of God, although also to save belongs to the Priestly office; of which
here is not place to speak: But do not these offices agree to the humane Nature
of Christ? It is the office of a Prophet not to speak in his own name, but
another, to wit, Gods (for God when he speaks in his own person, does not
execute a Prophets office) and to deliver Oracles or Doctrines unto others
received from him. See Book 1. chap. 2. Sect. 8.
And Christ expressly says of himself, that he heard the things which he speak,
from the Father; that he was taught of him; that he received command from him
what he ought to speak; that his Doctrine was not his own, but his, who sent
him. All which things the Adversaries will have to have been said of Christ
according to his humane Nature; nor can they otherwise. For the divine Nature
or Person, as such, cannot learn, or receive commandments: all things, which he
has or delivers, are his, not another. But if the humane Nature properly does
not act, we must say, that the divine Person properly has done those things,
which are said to have been done according to it: It therefore has properly
heard of the Father, has properly learned, received commands; and further,
has spoken by another command; has promulged another not his own Doctrine;
it properly has managed the Prophetic office: likewise also has wrought
piety, temperance, chastity; and other virtues: has done miracles by divine
Power: has by its death confirmed his Doctrine: which was the complement of
the Prophetic Office.

Now that we may come to the Priestly office: To intercede for another with
God, agrees not to God himself, nor to a divine Person, as such; as even the
Adversaries themselves do see; likewise neither to offer to God; especially
because by the expiatory oblation it self, the intercession is made with God
for another. Therefore it is necessary, that it be said, that Christ has done
those things according to his humane Nature. Whence further it follows, for the
reason a little before alleged, that the humane Nature has done, or does
those things, and so performs the Office of a Priest.

Lastly, Since we see that Christ is said to have been made and anointed by God
a King, and that all Power is given him in Heaven and in Earth, since it is
necessary to understand those things of Christ according to the humane Nature;
it follows that the humane Nature has that Power; and further, also does
exercise it; which belongs to a King.

These things are plain; and have in them no scruple and difficulty. There is
no need here of communication of Properties: There is no need to distinguish
subtly between Expressions in concreto, and in abstracto: to difference the
Person from the Nature; again, one Nature from another: to seek how you may
attribute humane things to the most high God, and things proper to the most
high God, to a Man; how the same Person one while governs as the most high God,
another while as a Mediator, and so the same person is in some sort
distinguished from himself,

Now from that which has been said, that may also be understood, That there
was no heed of the Union of two Natures. For if there had been need of it, it
had been for this cause, That Christ might bear and manage those Offices. But
Christ mi^ht discharge them, although he were but a man in Essence: Yea, if he
had been God, he could not discharge the two former, he could not receive the
last, nor therefore discharge it, because that Kingly office is not the Empire
of the most high God, as he is such, but, as the Adversaries speak, such a
Kingdom as Christ manageth as a Mediator. And indeed the confirming our faith
and hope, and the Glory of the most high God required such a Kingdom. But if
any say, that greater than humane ability or power was requisite to discharge
those Offices, that would be of some moment, if it had been necessary, that he
should have that ability or power from himself, nor could receive them from God
himself. But now since he both might receive them from God, and the holy
Scriptures so often testify, that he has received them from God, what need
was there, that he should be the most high God? Rightly they say commonly, God
and Nature do nothing in vain; although God does those things also that Nature
does. But if God does not things unnecessary; much less those things which
hinder, and are otherwise unbeseeming his Majesty. But we have showed that that
union would have hindered the administration of those Offices. We have showed
also, that it attributes to God not a few absurdities, and things unbeseeming
his Majesty, and most apt either to take away out of men's minds, or at least to
diminish in them that veneration of it which he would establish by Christ.

The Third Section.
That the holy Spirit should be the Son of God.
In which is discoursed concerning the third Person of the Supreme Deity, which
is commonly held. And it is showed, That the holy Spirit should be the Son of
God, if the common Opinion concerning him were true.

WE have said enough of the second Person which is held to be in the Trinity.
It remains that we add something also of the third. There is no need that we
should say much of it, because those things which have been said of the Sons
Generation out of the Essence of the Father, being a little changed, may be
applied to that procession of the holy Spirit, which the Adversaries have
devised. For which reason we also before sometimes have expressly joined the
holy Spirit with the Son, and so anticipated the treating of those things,
which might have been here alleged: nor did we that without cause. For if you
rightly mark it, both the Generation of the Essence of the Father, is some
Procession; and on the contrary, such a Procession, as the Adversaries
attribute to the holy Spirit, is like that Generation, which the Adversaries
attribute to the Son of God. The former the more l^^rned of the Adversaries do
confess, who treating of the Generation of the Son, and Procession of the holy
Spirit, say, That there are two P^ocessions in God. But why the word Procession
is accommodated perticularly to the holy Spirit, and so is distinguished from
the Generation of the Son, they assign this to be the Reason, Because there is
a special word wanting, by which that proper and peculiar manner, whereby the
holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and Son, may be designed. Therefore, as in
other things it often comes to pass, the general name is attributed as proper to
the species, and so is distinguished from the other species. But that the
Procession also of the holy Spirit is a Generation, if that Generation of the
Son of God, which the Adversaries hold, be indeed a Generation, is not hard to
demonstrate. For what other thing is required to a Generation properly to
called, than that one receive his Essence from another, either the same in
kind, or (as the Adversaries opinion of God is) in number with his Essence,
from whom he receives it? In brief, generation properly so called, is a
communication of a substance with another. And is not that Procession of the
holy Spirit, devised by the Adversaries, such a communication? Did not the holy
Spirit by that Procession, receive the same essence in number with the essence
of them from whom he proceeded? So indeed Adversaries think and contend. But
if the Procession of the holy Spirit be a Generation, properly so called; we
have in the Trinity two Sons; one of the first person only, another of the
first and second: and also two Fathers; one of the ffrst person, who will be a
Father by a double name; to wit, because he has begotten the second and third
person of the Deity; another the second person, who together with the Father,
has begotten the holy Spirit. But we have learned both from the holy
Sc^iptures, and the Adversaries, that there is but only One Father, and only
one Son; to wit, by excellency so called.

The more acute of the Adversaries have seen this Rock of their opinion, and
have endeavored to avoid it. Therefore they have judged, that that definition
of a Generation, which otherwise they themselves have delivered, is to be
limited, and have said, that not every communication of a substance with
anohter, is a Generation, but at length that, that which such a relation
follows, as is between Father and Son which is barbarously called Paternity and
Filiation. In which indeed they are rediculous. As if forsooth it could be,
that a person may communicate his substance really to a person, and yet such a
relation may not thence presently follow; and that person, which communicates
his substance to another, by that very thing were not forthwith a Father, or
(where there is a distinction of sex, which is not in God) a Mother: and again,
he to whom the substance is communicated a Son, or (where there is a distinct
sex) a Daughter. The Adversaries themselves confess, that the words, Father,
Son, Generation, Procession, as also other-like words, are by an Analogy said
of God and creatures, and that by reason of likeness they are translated from
these to God. But in things created, as soon as the substance is produced, the
things is properly said to be generated; nor is there any thing more required
to the propriety of the word, but if a person have produced a person, presently
the one is called a Father, or, as we have said, a Mother; the other a Son or
Daughter. Therefore that which in God is analogum to that Generation, does also
deserve to be termed Generation. But that is a production of another person, or
a communication of the substance with another person. And the necessary
consequence hereof is Paternity and Filiation, Analogum to that which we see in
humane generations. For that generation is conversant among Persons.

But say some, therefore the production of a person is called a generation,
because by it a person is produced not only like to the producer in essence,
but also in some other peculiar respect. For that second person, as such, is
the image of the first, as that which is has produced by understanding it
self; but that the Image is like to that the image of which it is. They say
there is another reason of the Procession of the holy Spirit, for he is
produced from the Father and Son by willing. But it is not the property of the
will to produce something like to that thing which it wills and desires.
Therefore that the holy Spirit, however by his Procession he is become like to
the Father and Son in Essence, or rather the same, yet in respect of his
person, by which he is distinguished from the Father and the Son, he is like to
neither. But that Procession at last is rightly termed a Generation, by which
the person produced becomes altogether like the producer, but that procession
is rightly distinguished from a generation, of which in that respect there is a
different reason. But these subtle devices avail them nothing. For besides
that, we have refuted already Sect. 3. Chap. 1.
above that device of the production of persons, which may be by understanding
or willing. There are yet two things which show the vanity of this exception.
The former is that to the propriety of a generation from another, it is not at
all required, that the thing generated be like the thing generating in all
things: but it is enough if it be like to it in essence or substance; from
which likeness follows also a likeness of natural properties, and common to the
whole genus or species, although the property of generation by it self, is not
seen in this, but in that; and if it could be, that the substance of the thing
generated, were like to the substance of the thing generating, but the
properties of both diverse, nevertheless the property of generation would be
certain, although perhaps it might not be so easiely acknowledged because we
for the most part know things themselves by the proper tokens, and consequents
of things. Wherefore if the holy Spirit by virtue of his procession, became
like in substance to the Father and Son, yea, the same, (for according to the
Adversaries identity, takes not away procession nor generation in divine
persons) the holy Spirit was generated of the Father and Son, and so that his
procession is generation. In how many things, if you except the Essence and
properties immediately following it, are sons wont to be unlike the Fathers?
yet nevertheless, they are not therefore less properly said to be generated of
them, or to be their Sons. But here the essence and natural properties are
altoge^her the same. What then is there wanting in the holy Spirit, to the
propriety of generation? That I may omit, that the holy Spirit cannot be unlike
the Father and Son, no not indeed in that propriety or character which they
call hypostatical, if another, opinion of the same Adversaries concerning those
personal properties, be true. For they hold them to be the same really with the
Essence common to the three persons, and only distinguished from it by the
understanding. Whence it necessarily follows, that he that has that essence in
himself (as each of those three persons has) has also all those properties in
him, and that those properties are no less common to the three persons, than
the Essence. Although that opinion overthrows it self. For they will be at once
common and proper in respect of the same persons; and will make those persons
unlike, and not unlike, diverse, and not diverse.

The latter, Why that reason or exception of the Adversaries cannot have place,
is; Because if we follow their opinion concerning the divine attributes,
nothing can proceed from the will, but together it proceeds from the
understanding; and on the contrary. For with them all the divine attributes,
and so the understanding and will, if you cons^der the thing it self, are
altogether the same thing. For they are the very Essence of God, to which
indeed does agree, no not the least composition or true diversity. And indeed
many Schoolmen say, that they may express their opinion, That the understanding
and will in God, as also his other attributes, are not only really, but also
formally the same thing; that is, that they are not only so joined together, as
that they can never be severed from one another, but also are not so much as
indeed by proper forms or essences, and definitions distinguished from each
other. Aristotle would say, they are the same in reallity and reason. For with
Aristotle, those things are the same in reason, which have the same form, and
the same definition; he says they differ in reason who have diverse. Now if in
this manner, the will and understanding are the same thing in God, and so the
understanding as the will it self; and reciprocally, whatsoever procedes or is
generated from the understanding, procedes also, and is generated from the
will, and on the contrary. Therefore the production by the understanding, is no
more generation, than that which is said to proceed from the will; nor does
that produce a person like to the producer, more than this; neither is the Son
more a Son than the holy Spirit; neither is the same Son less the holy Spirit,
than the third person of the Trinity. For the Son has no less proceeded from
the will, than the holy Spirit; nor the holy Spirit less from the
understanding, than the Son. These indeed are the fruits of the subtilties,
wherewith the Scholastick-Divinity swarms. And yet we see, that those who
acknowledge the holy Scriptures for the only Rule of Faith, do follow and
admire them.

But they will say, the same Schoolmen have prevented these difficulties. For
the divine attributes by their doctrine, although they be not actually
distinguished by the nature of the thing, or without the consideration of our
mind in any manner, neither really, nor formally, yet are they distinguished
eminenter; that is, vertually and potentially. And this difference is the
foundation of the diversity between the processions of two persons, of which we
now treat, and likewise between various effects flowing from God; and lastly,
between the conceits and cogitations of our mind concerning the divine
attributes. For we do inadequately conceive the divine attributes by reason of
the imperfection of our understanding, and therefore consider them as diverse,
which in reality are altogether the same thing. And this the Schoolmen call
distinction of reason, which they very often use. For when they have confounded
together things diverse, yet because the diversity of things offer it self of
its own accord to the minds of them that contemplate them, and they themselves
are compelled to speak and dispute of them as diverse, they fly to this
irrational difference of reason, as to a sacred Anchor. But although we might
dispatch this error, lying hid even in obscurity of words, as in its lurking
hole; yet I am willing first to draw it out thence, that the thing may be more
clearly seen by them, who were never conversant in the Schools. To be
distinguished eminenter, and to be distinguished actu, are by the Schoolmen
opposed one to another; for it is known that potentia and virtus, are opposed
to actus with the Philosophers; and when the Schoolmen say that something is
distinguished eminenter, it is all one with them as if they said it is
distinguished vertually and potentially. Those things then are distinguished
eminenter, which however, they are the same altogether actually, yet may be
distinguished, because they have in some manner the force of more things, on
because diverse operations and effects may flow from them; or because being
compared with things diverse in some manner, they answer to the forms of each,
or have diverse respects to the same. But what ever they imagine, either there
is an actual difference in the thing of which it is treated, or there is no
distinction. For those things are actually distinct of one of which something
is rightly affirmed, which of the other at the same time is rightly denied. For
if those things nevertheless, be altogether the same thing actually,
contradictories will be together in the same thing, or the same thing will be
together both affirmed and denied of the same thing, which is impossible. But if
you would be so obstinate against the most dear Truth, as to say, nothing
hinders but that contradictories may agree, to the same thing, if so be that it
may vertually, or potentially be more things, nothing will hinder but that all
things which are any where extant, are one thing actually, but diverss
vertually, or potentially: and if any will assert it, he can be refuted by no
reason. For if contradictions do not evince those things, of which they are
spoken to be diverse actually, nothing will be able to evince it. For
whatsoever differenceth one thing from another, differenceth it by the force of
a contradiction: and every opposition, every difference does tacitly include it
in it self, and unless it did include it, there would be nothing to hinder, but
that opposites should agree to the same thing. Rightly has the Philosopher
said, and said it indeed according to the common consent of all men, if two
things are said to be the same, whatsoever is said of the one of them, is said
also of the other. If thou any thing truly may be said of one thing; which is
to be denied of the other, those things cannot simply be the same actually; but
it is necessary that they be distinguished in the thing, or in reason; that is,
in form and proper essence. That thing verily does necessarily happen in the
understanding and divine will, if those things be true, which we discoursed
before according to the mind of tne ancient Fathers and Schoolmen, concerning
the diversity between the Generation of the Son, and Procession of the holy
Spirit. For the Generation is said to have been performed by the operation of
the understanding; the Procession of the holy Spirit not so; this again by the
operation of the will, that not so; it is said to agree to the understanding,
to produce something altogether like to the thing understood, which is denied
of the will: the Father alone is said to have produced the Son by the
understanding; the Father not alone, but together with the Son, is said to have
produced the holy Spirit by the will. But if these things be true, and did
exist actually before all consideration of our mind, it is necessary that the
divine Understanding and Will, were also actually distinct without all
operation of our mind. Wherefore let them either cease to deny, that there is
indeed any actual difference between the divine attributes, or let them take
away the difference between the generation of the Son, and of the holy Spirit,
and say that the Son is the holy Spirit, the holy Spirit again the Son; by
which very thing they will overthrow the Doctrine of the Trinity. For so,
besides the Father, there will be only one person, the difference between the
Son and holy Spirit being taken away.

Before we put an end to this disputation, since we are fallen into this
discourse concerning the vertual distinction, as they speak, I am willing to
add this fu^ther, that the devise of the same Schoolmen is very vain, when they
say, that the persons of the Trinity are distinguished from the Essence neither
really nor formally, but eminenter only; and further, by the intellect, which
may even there conceive a distinction, where there is actually none. For if, as
they hold, the divine Essence be actually communicable to more persons, and was
communicable before all operation of our understanding; but on the contrary, a
person is incommunicable to more persons; also there must actually be a
difference between the essence and person; otherwise if altogether they are
actually the same thing, contradictories may together be actually in the same
thing, as is said before. Neither indeed in that alone, which we have now
expressed, a contradiction will be employed, but in all those things, in which
the person is distinguished from the Essence: as for example, That is a
suppositum or person, this is not; that is really distinguished from the other
persons, this is not distinguished; that has properly begotten, or was
begotten, or proceeded from the Father and the Son, this not so. But what need
we more words? altogether irrational, as we have said, is that distinction of
reason, which is there fained, where indeed there is none. Truly they who apply
this distinction of reason to things, are much like to them, who, when they see
but one man, they seem to themselves they see two. These are deceived in their
eyes, those in their minds. For the opinion of our mind cannot be true, if it
conceive the thing otherwise than it is: For Truth is adequation, as they
speak, or agreement of our understanding, and further also, of our words with
the thing it self. But if men do truly conceive that as distinct, which is not
in very deed distinct, the conceits of the same thing contrary to one another,
will be true, to wit, of God and morral men. For God, and the blessed Angels,
and Men, who see God as he is, conceive in their mind no difference in God (if
the opinion of these men concerning the divine attributes, be true) because
there is none in him: mortal men do. But true cannot be contrary to true, no
more, yea, less, than an Egg to an Egg, Milk to Milk. Neither may they fetched
patronage of so absurd a distinction from Aristotle, who says, as we have
before minded, that some things are really distinct; some in reason. For with
him those things are distinct in reason, which the schoolmen say, are formally
distinguished; that is, which although they be united together, and by a
certain indissolvable knot, either on both sides, or on one part joined, yet
differ in forms and proper Essences; as docility, and the faculty of admiring
in the same man: generation and corruption. For every natural, and properly so
called Generation, is the corruption of another thing, and on the contrary.
Nevertheless, these things differ, yea, are opposite, and so have opposite
essences also, which are in the same matter in respect of diverse things. For
one thing is corrupted, another thing is generated. So the foundations also are
distinguished from the relations which rest on them. But those things differ
also in the whole genus or predicament. So also the comparisons of the same
thing, with diverse relations, have forms and essences diverse either in the
genus or species, or number: as also termini and correlata differ. Therefore
the intellect does not feign those distinctions in things, but in very deed
finds them in them: and the Schoolmen themselves say that those things are
distinct actually, which although we think not of them, are distinct in forms,
although they exist together. But if they would acknowledge such a difference
between the divine persons and essence, the Patrons of it will neither be able
to reconcile the common Doctrine of the Trinity with it self, nor with their
other Doctrines. Not with it self, for by this means, each person will have its
proper form and essence; and so those persons will be, and will not be at once
of one essence. Not with their other doctrines, because the exactest simplicity
of God will fall. But if they acknowledge not that distinction, then the
Trinity will fall, all true difference between the essence and the persons, and
thereupon of the persons also between themselves being taken away. Wherefore
which way soever the Adversaries turn themselves, they will not be able to
defend that their Trinity, or plurality of persons in one Essence of God; and
therefore there remains no other thing, than that they confess together with
us, that there is no less one person, than one substance of God.

The use of this Disputation.
The Conclusion of the Work.
In which the Use of this Disputation concerning One God the Father, is
explained.

THerefore having demonstrated, that the most high God, is no less one in
person than in essence, and that he is no other than the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, it remains that we show the Use of this Doctrine. Now this is so
much the greater, by how much the contrary Doctrine is more hurtful; and so
much the farther it spreads it self, by how much the farther the incommodities
of the contrary opinion are extended. For, first, how necessary it is to
understand and believe, that there is only One most high God, both the holy
Scriptures show, which do often inculcate it, and all men easily understand.
But now unless you hold that there is only One Person of the Supreme Deity, you
can neither sufficiently understand, nor constantly believe and maintain the
Unity of the supreme Deity. For as much as it is sufficiently showed by us,
that more persons having supreme Divinity, are more most high Gods, But
although this error be somewhat infringed and diminished by another error,
whilst it is affirmed, that there is one essence in number of those persons,
yet it is not altogether taken away, and suffers not men to understand
sufficiently, and to believe constantly that which is said of the Unity of the
divine Essence. For although you endeavor never so much, you cannot conceive
in your mind, one and the same essence of three persons really distinct from
among themselves; especially if you will think of those things that, which
either the holy Scriptures, or the Adversaries themselves asser^ of the Father,
Son and holy Spirit, belonging to the differencing of them from each other. For
whosoever hears even those very names, and thinks the Son to be truly begotten
of the Father, the holy Spirit to have proceeded from both, forthwith he must
needs think three essences diverse in number, however otherwise most like one
another, or in some certain manner coupled together. Likewise he who thinks,
that the Father sent the Son, and again both together the holy Spirit, that the
Son descended from Heaven, and, as they hold, assumed flesh, neither of the
other descended or assumed flesh; again, that the holy Spirit descended in a
bodily shape, the Father and the Son not descending; how is he not together
constrained to cocceive in his mind distinct essences? And if he shall
attribute supreme Deity to each of them, he will conceive three Gods in number,
although most like one another, and in a certain manner united together. Seeing
therefore by this means, a multitude of Gods is brought in by that opinion, it
is necessary that that by the same means also fall into those absurdities which
follow from the multitude of Gods. He that holds more most high Gods,
distributes the glory and honor due to one, unto more, and as much as he
attributes to the rest, so much he takes away from that one. For since they are
held to be equal one to another, nor is one acknowledged to be subordinate to
the other (although also a false opinion of subordination is as none) that
which is attributed to one, does not come to another. Wherefore he, who
acknowledges and worshippeth more persons, having supreme Divinity, transfers
to more that which was due to one, and detracts from that one that which he
attributes to the rest. And, that you may more nearly behold the matter, if the
Father alone, as we have demonstrated, be the most high God; who does not see
that those absurdities do follow from the contrary opinion concerning the
Trinity. For, first, the honor of the Father is diminished, whilst that, which
by far he has of all things most sacred, and wherein he excels all things, is
equally communicated with others; to wit, the supreme Deity; and further,
whatsoever things are proper to this alone, whether they be his works, or ours
respecting his Glory and Honor. For presently it is necessary, that both the
creation of Heaven and Earth, and, that I may let pass other innumerable works,
the raising up, and exaltation of Christ, which we have showed Lib. 1. Sect. 2.
chap. 18, 29.
by most clear testimonies of Scripture, to be imputed to the Father alone, be
thought common to the whole Trinity, as indeed the Adversarias think. So
neither does the love of men, which ought to come ultimately to the Father
alone, and to rest in him only, come ultimately to him alone, but is dispersed
among more persons, who are held to be altogether equal to him: likewise both
honor, and trust; and invocation, and all sorts of praises, are ultimately
divided unto more, which wholly ought to come at length to one person.

And these absurdities indeed arise as well from the opinion of the supreme
deity of the Son, as from the doctrine concerning the supreme deity of the holy
Spirit. But that is more proper to the opinion concerning the holy Spirit, that
divine empire and government is attributed to it, which does not at all agree
to it; and moreover, it is held to be God; to be adored of it self, invocated,
and celebrated, as the giver of all good things whatsoever; whereas none of
these, as we have seen, Lib. 1. Sect. 3. Chap. 1, 3
are attributed to it in the holy Scriptures, nor can be attributed, since it
is not a person. Therefore although otherwise the holy Spirit be subordinate to
the most high God, as the middle cause of most divine actions; yet is it not so
subordinate, as a person is wont to be, to whom an empire and manageing of
affairs, and the parts of honor and worship, which are wont and ought to
follow it, are granted by another, in which manner we see Christ, who is
expressly both called God, and being placed in the Throne of God, is said to
command all things, to be subordinate to God. Whence also it is commanded, that
he be adored by all, and that all men put their trust in him, and so be bold to
implore his aid; neither is there any part of the divine Honor, which is not
found to be attributed to him, although so, that it tend ultimately to the
Father. None of these things are found concerning the holy Spirit. Wherefore
the Adversaries do not only sin in that, that they make the holy Spirit the
most high God, but also simply in that, that they hold it to be a God, or
endued with a divine Empire, and governing humane affairs; and further, that
they say, that it is no less to be invocated and adored, than Christ, and that
other things also are to be attributed to it, which properly are due to a
divine and heavenly King, and Lord; being unmindful of the most plain words of
the Apostle, asserting 1 Cor. 8.6. That to us there is but one God the Father,
of whom are all things, and we for him: and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are
all things, and we by him.

But although this absurdity, which we have explained in the latter place, does
more appear in the common opinion concerning the holy Spirit, than concerning
the Son of God; yet it does appear also in this; and unless another error; to
wit, of the incarnation of the Son of God, had somewhat corrected that other,
it would be yet more grievous. For whilst before and besides Jesus Christ born
of the Virgin, I say; that man, whom they call the humane nature only, there is
feigned an only begotten Son of God, who existed from all eternity, who was
always endowed together with the Father with a divine Empire over all things;
a Deity is attributed to that thing, which not only was not subordinate to the
most high God, or invested with so high an Empire by him, but indeed was never
existent. And in this latter part, this error of it self is more grievous,
than that which is committed about the Deity of the holy Spirit. For the holy
Spirit not only existed, and does yet exist, but is also, as we have said, a
most divine thing, and truly united with, and subordinate to the most high God
in most excellent works.

We hear sometimes some saying, that even therefore their opinion touching
Christ, is to be preferred before our, because it is conjoined with his greater
Glory. But the very love toward Christ our Savior, requires, that we rather
add some honor to him, than detract from him. Which men indeed first so deal,
as if the matter did depend on our arbitrament, and were not altogether to be
estimated by the determination of the holy Scriptures; that is, of God himself,
and the manifest reason of the thing it self. Seeing therefore the holy
Scriptures themselves have in this part set us certain limits, beyond which it
is unlawful to pass; as it is not lawful for us to take away any t^ing from the
honor of Christ, so neither to add any thing to it. Neithe^ indeed does the
true love toward Christ, how great soever it be, require that we ascribe any
thing to him beyond truth, and honor him with false titles and praises. For
neither is he del^ghted with false honor, who abounds with true honor;
neither does he account any thing to be his praise, which does diminish the
glory of his Father, from whom all honor, all divinity is derived. But that
opinion of the Adversaries conce^ning the supreme divinity of Christ, does, as
we have seen, diminish it. Therefore although it should at length be lawful out
of our affection, to add something to the honor of Christ, yet that would not
be lawful, which is conjoined with the Fathers injury. It is not lawful to
detract any thing from the honor of Christ: But neither is it lawful to take
away any thing from the honor of the Father. It is not lawful to detract any
thing from the love toward the Son: But neither is it lawful to take away any
thing from the love toward the Father. Since even that former is not lawful,
because whilst the honor due to Christ is denied, also the honor due to the
Father is denied; and whilst the Son is less loved than is meet, the Father is
less loved. For John 5.23.
He that honors not the Son, says Christ himself, honors not the Father
who sent him. And John 15.23.
He that hates me, hates my Father also. For as John says, 1 John 5.1.
He that loves him that begat, loves also him that is begotten of him.
Therefore the most high regard is to be had to the honor of the Son, but no
less to that of the Father, for whose sake he is honored and beloved. Neither
indeed are we those, who detract any part of honor from the Son, or desire to
detract, for whose glory trusting to his aid, we refuse not indeed even the
cruell^st death. Being instructed by him we refel the honor falsely, and with
imminution of the divine glory ascribed to him. That which he himself refuses,
we will not do. And that you may see that we leave to Christ his honor
undiminished, and endeavor as we are able to maintain it, what more does
Christ himself requi^e of us, than that we honor him as we honor the Father?
Does any greater honor agree to him? I think none but he that is out of his
wits will say it. But for what cause does Christ cha^lenge that honor to
himself? Is it therefore, because he is the most high God, and existent from
all eternity? No indeed: but because the Father has committed all judgment to
him; For so he says: The Father judges no man, but has committed all
judgment to the Son, that all men should honor the Son as they honor the
Father; of which thing we have spoken more in its place Since therefore we
honor him because of all judgment given to him by the Father; since we adore
him because of his sublime power, See the Appendix of chap. 18 Sect. 2. Lib. 1.
because of a name given him above every name Phil. 2.9. etc.
We bow the knee to him, and profess him to be our divine Lord, placed at the
Fathers right hand in heavenly places; we reverence him as the judge and
avenger of all our deeds, words, counsels, and the inmost retirements of our
mind, no otherwise than as the Father; do we detract any part of due honor
from him? But would to God that many, who, that they may testify their love
toward the Son of God, honor him with false praises, would show more
earnestness in that thing, in which Christ places the true love toward
himself, and that they who would be liberal toward him of that thing, which is
another, were not so strait handed in that which is their own! And that indeed
is that they may observe Christ's precepts. John 14.21.
For so says Christ, He that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is
who loves me. Herein, herein must we all thoroughly labor, herein the greatest
love toward Christ is to be showed, which if we perform, we shall deny him no
due honor. But verily it is more easy to accumulate praises and titles of
honors without measure, than to execute commands; as we see it more easy in
humane affairs, to flatter and adorn another even with too many praises, than
to perform the office of a true friend or faithful servant. We take nothing
here to our selves, being rightly conscious to our selves of our defectiveness;
neither detract we from all others the praise of piety, whilst we desire more
of it in many; neither are we more solicitous of another than of our own duty.
But yet we could wish less were ascribed to that love toward Christ, which
con^^sts only in opinion and specious words; and that it were at length, as it
ought of right to be, brought into suspicion by them who too much please
themselves in it.

Besides (that we may likewise pass to other incommodities and absurdities,
which flow from the opinion of the Adversaries concerning more persons in the
most high God) they themselves, who attribute to Christ false honor, do in the
mean time either take away from him that which is true, or very much diminish
and obscure it. Therefore they themselves do that which wrongfully they object
to us, and whilst they endeavor to lift up Christ higher, they unawars thrust
him down from his own throne and height. For that opinion touching of the
second person of the Trinity, or the only begotten Son of God, who was begotten
from all eternity out of the Fathers Essence, does so obscure the true
Divinity, not only of the Father, but also of Jesus Christ himself born of the
Virgin, that it does almost extinguish it. For first it does not permit that
Jesus Christ himself, that very man himself, I say, who in time was born of a
Virgin, may be acknowledged for the only begotten Son of God, and so called in
the holy Scriptures by way of excellency; but for a certain accession of him,
or a nature assumed to him. For although the Adversaries call the man Jesus
Christ, the only begotten Son of God, yet it is not done by them but by
communication of properties, by which those things, which agree to Christ
according to one nature, are attributed to him described by the other nature.
But that humane substance it self, consisting of a body and rational soul,
which they fear to call a man, is not with them by any means of it self the
only begotten So^ of God, but a nature assumed by him. Whence also they are
wont to compare it to a garment, which he has put on. Therefo e that humane
substance, that is, if you judge of the thing according to truth, the man Jesus
Christ himself, shall be no more the only begotten Son of God, than our Body is
the Soul, because this is clothed with that, and knit with it in so straight a
bond. But it manifestly appears by those things which we have said before Lib.
1. Sect. 2. Chap. 31.
out of the holy Scriptures concerning the reason, whereby Jesus is the Son of
God, that the man himself born of a Virgin, nor any other before or besides
him, is the only begotten Son of God. How then does not that opinion of the
adversaries lessen or rather take away his true glory? To which is added, that
the same opinion casts down the man Christ out of the Kingly Throne, in which
he was placed by God, and permits us not to acknowledge sincerely that he is
made by God, Lord and Christ. For these things happen not but to a person less
than the most high God; such as with them neither is the man Christ, or, as
they call it, the humane nature, nor his divine person. Not this, because it is
the most high God, and therefore no whit less than he; not that, because with
them it is not a person, nor can be, if it subsist in another person. And to
what purpose is that power of the humane nature, if it cannot exercise it by it
self? For nothing can act by it self, if it be not a Suppositum; but God
himself only acts according to it. To what purpose is a double empire in the
same person, which can be exercised but once by him? If any one would join the
Moon in an indissoluble tie with the Sun, he should make its light superfluous
and useless. For neither should the Moon impart its light to us, the Sun
illustrating all things by its beams, and as it were obscuring the Moon it
self. But the same disjoined from the Sun, imparts such light to the Earth,
however received from the Sun, that it is called in the holy Book, together
with it a great Light. Genesis 1.16. Psalm. 136.7.
So also the man Christ, if you join him into one person with God, he loses
that sacred splendour of his empire and majesty, being obscured and made useless
by the glory and splendour of the supreme divinity. For that supreme divinity
would by it self illustrate all things sufficiently by the beams of its power,
wisdom, and goodness. But if he be distinct from the most high God as in
nature, so also in person being as it were illustrated by his beams, he imparts
a most comfortable light to the Earth, and makes that those who could not lift
up t^eir eyes to the splendor of the supreme divinity, and behold it by its
self, may contemplate it in a sort more mildly shini^g in Christ, and that
those who could not by reason of so great distance of nature elevate their
minds to the most high God, may be bold to lift them up to Christ, conjoined in
the vicinity and similitude of nature with them.

Which that it may be the better understood, we shall recite yet more
discommodities of that opinion which makes Christ the most high God, that it
may be understood, that we have not rashly, but for most weighty causes
departed from that opinion, which has been received in so many ages. For that
opinion in a great part takes away that end for which God would have the whole
affair of our salvation to be managed by a man; and further also it, suffers
us not to understand why God would so do. For God looked on two things in that
matter, to wit, the eternal glory of his Name, for which he does all things,
and the incomparable fruit of mankind. They take that away from God who make
Christ such a one, as that he could receive nothing from his Father, and could
do all things by his own strength without another aid, which thing they do,
who make him the most high God. For in that so great a glory of God which he
looked after, is chiefly placed, that he has performed so hard things by a
man, in whom otherwise there is not so great an abil^ty, and being raised from
the dead, has lifted him up to so sublime an height of empire in the heavens.
But the same men take away from us the fruit of so great a thing, because they
withdraw from us the props and helps of our hope and trust, by which through so
hard a journey, we endeavor toward heaven. For first, they enervate the
example both of so laborious piety, and felicity propounded to us by him, which
we ought to take from Christ. For God would, that in Christ we should see not
only what we ought either to perform or to attain to; but also what we might.
God himself might be to us an example both of holiness, and felicity, to which
we ought to aspire, as indeed he is propounded to be looked on by us in both.
For we are commanded 1 Pet. 1.15, 16.
to be holy as God is holy. 1 John 1.7.
To walk in the light, as he is in the light. That I may omit other things by
which we are incited from the example of God to some See among other places,
Mat. 5. last. Luke 6.35, 36. Ephesians. 4. last. chap. 5.1.
certain and very excellent virtues. And it is promised, that we shall be at
last 1 John 3.2.
like God; and be partakers 2 Pet. 1.4.
of the divine nature. But men wanted a nearer example, and more fitted to
their weakness. For by the example of God himself they might indeed learn what
that is which they ought to do, or hope for (although neither that indeed
exactly enough, since on both sides much i^ wanting to a fuller likeness) but
they could not know thence, what they could do. But that we learn abundantly
from the example of Christ: For thereby God has taught us, that we may
perform, and obtain those things by his power, which we could not by our own.
For as concer^ing the former thing, even Christ was encompassed with flesh like
to our flesh, that is as Paul speaks, Romans 8.3.
Flesh of sin, or sinful, which also all the occasions which draw us to sin,
might of themselves invite and provoke. It did no less abhor than ours from so
bitter a death as was set before him: But that which it could not do of it
self, God effected by his help in it. For he brought Christ to the most exact
holiness, and free from all blemish; that thence might flow to us an example,
by which we might be forbidden to doubt, that we being supported by divine aid
might perform that piety which God requires of us, not indeed equal, but like
to the holiness of Christ. And hither among other things does Paul look when he
writes to the Romans, especially if you view his words in Greek, What was
impossible to the Law, in as much as it was weakened by flesh, God having sent
his Son, in the likeness of the flesh of sin, and (or, and that) for sin,
condemned sin in the flesh, that the justification of the law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. It was
impossible for the Mosaical Law to free us from the empire and power of sin,
and consequently also of the everlasting death. It endeavored indeed to
perform it, but our flesh so prone to sin, withstood its endeavor, and
lessened its force, so as it could not attain to that which it would. What
therefore the Law could not effect in us, that God afterward effected by his
Son Jesus Christ. For he sent him to us encompassed with flesh like to ours,
which is so prone to sin, and obnoxious to the same evils, with which sinners
a^e wont to be pressed; and that he might abolish sin in us, first he took away
and blotted out its force in the flesh of Christ, that so the justification,
which the Law promised indeed, but could not, as was said, perform, by reason
of our flesh, might happen to us also, living after the example of Christ, not
after the lusts of the flesh, but after the guidance of the Spirit. By which
things it easily appears, that God would propound to us in Christ such an
example of piety, as by which we might learn, not only what we ought to do, but
also what we may do being enabled by his aid.

As to the latter thing, we are in like manner taught by the example of Christ,
not only what that is, which we ought to obtain, but also that we may obtain
it, although we can by no means by our own strength. For even Christ also, who
was heretofore mortal, and wholly l^ke to us in nature, became immortal, and
indeed in that way, which exceeds all limits of nature, that is, by the
resurrection. Whence, as we have demonstrated in the first book Sect. 2. chap.
29.
Paul manifestly shows, that we also may rise, and so shall rise, if Christ
have risen from the dead.

But now they weaken the example of both, that is, piety and felicity, and take
away its greatest force, whosoever makes Christ the most high God. For as to
the former, what marvel is it, that the most high God lived holily? Can we
learn from him what we are able to do? Is there such a proportion of strength
pertaining to the holiness between us and him, as there ought to be between us
and Christ in respect of his holiness? But if you say that the humane nature of
Christ nevertheless was like unto ours, which was endued with such holiness by
divine aid, that from it we may take such an example, you are much deceived.
For if the humane nature was not a Suppositum, it also, speaking properly, has
done nothing, but the divine person of God himself according to it. But it
matters much, yea infinitely, if we look to the power of doing, whether the
most high God act, or man. Besides, nevertheless in that humane nature did an
infinite power of the supreme Deity personally dwell, and so restrained it from
all sin, that it was altogether impossible for it to sin; What l ke to that is
in us? I forbear to speak of those things which they often inculcate,
concerning the unlikeness between us and Christ, in respect of the original
sin, and the same great corruption of our nature, which was not at all in
Christ, but in us is thought to be so great, that we being left to our selves,
can do nothing almost but sin.

But as to the latter, to wit, our felicity, and the way of attaining it, what
marvel is it that the most high God (for they will have us believe, that he
being made a man, could die) did rise again from the dead, and after became
immortal? Is there any even the least ability remaining in us after death, by
which we maybe able to loose our selves from its bonds, and recall our selves
into life? Shall we then learn by the example of Christ that we may do what he
could?

But the opinion of the Adversaries concerning Christ, does another way also
overthrow the props of our hope and trust, which God set to st^engthen it. For
God would not by himself, or immediately, as they speak, govern the whole
business of our salvation, and bring it to an end, but has put it into the
hands of Jesus Christ, both conjoined to us by nature, and having suffered all
evils which happen to no serving him, that so he might erect us to the furest
hope, namely, that he would not despise our baseness, but so much the more
readily succor us, being vexed and afflicted. That which the divine author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews has showed in several places; and first indeed of
all about the end of the second Chapter; for he had said, That Christ no where
took hold of Angels, but took hold of the seed of Abraham; that is, No where is
it said in Scripture that Christ was destinated by God to lay hold on, and help
(for that is here (...)) Angels, or that, he was employed therein; but this was
his business, that he may embrace the posterity and sons of Abraham by his
care, that he may help and for ever keep them, to wit, those, who were not only
born of Abraham according to the flesh, but those also who imitate his faith.
Therefore when he had said thus; he adds, Whence he ought to be made in all
things like to his brethren (to wit, the true sons of Abraham, yet endued with
flesh and blood, and subject to all kind of adversities) that he might be made
a merciful and a faithful high Pciest to God (or in those things which pertain
to God) that he might make reconciliation for, or expiate, the sins of the
people. For in that in which he himself suffered, and was tempted (or when he
was tempted) he is able to help them also who are tempted. Which same thing in
some sort he repeateth about the end of Chapter 4. and more fully declares
Chap. 5. Compare together verse. 2, 3. and 7, 8. chapter 5.
Namely the divine Author teaches, that Christ, because he had experience of
the same evils, is so much the more prone to help and succor us, being put
into the like affliction? But how may we sincerely enjoy this consolation, if
Christ be the immortal God himself, and free from all, even shadows of
affliction? For it does no whit avail, that the humane nature has suffered and
was dead, if so be these things happen unto that which is not a Suppositum. For
if that nature be not a suppositum, and consequently does not any thing by it
self, but whatsoever it does, the divine person, that is, the most high God
himself does according to it, what avails it, that it suffered and had an
experience of our evils? For the divine person himself, who is to be
accommodated in very deed to do whatsoever Christ does, nevertheless did not
feel those evils, nor could be made more prone for that cause to help us. And
although the humane nature be held to concur to that action, by which help is
brought from Christ to us; yet it shall not concur as left to its own will, as
that which necessarily obeys the will and impulse of the divinity, without
which it can neither act nor cease from acting, Therefore it will be all one in
this respect, as if God himself immediately should govern the whole business of
our salvation. Therefore as they are injurious to the glory of God, and the
true honor of Jesus Christ, so also they are very injurious to themselves, who
ascribe unto Christ a supreme divinity. But we together assert to God and
Christ their true honor, who adore the man Jesus Christ, exalted for the death
of the cross, by the mighty right hand of the Father to the greatest height,
and made a ^rince and our Savior, and profess according to the doctrine of
Paul, Phil. 2.11.
him to (...) Lord to the glory of God the Father; and together are sensible
both of the power of his resurrection, and the fruit of his glorification, and
experience that to be truly said of Peter 1 Pet. 1.21.
That by him we believe in Gods; who raised him from the dead, and gave him
glory, that our faith and hope might be in God; in which very thing we
acknowledge, and with thankful mind accept the greatest goodness of God toward
us.

Great and grievous are those discommodities of the opinion of the Adversaries,
which we have hitherto alleged; which even alone would suffice abundantly to
show its absurdity; but there is not an end yet. For one absurdity being
granted, many follow, and a chain of errors is easily knit. For besides, that
it is necessary, that the Adversaries pervert many places of the holy
Scripture, repugnant to their opinion, or not consonant to it, and waest them
to another meaning; some other Doctrines very hurtful to the Salvation of men
are built upon it, which must needs fall down, it being overthrown. You may
here rightly place that most gross error of many, concerning the ubiquity, as
they call it, or omnipresence of the body of Christ, by which the very
substance of the body of Christ, together with his divinity, is fained to be
entirely present in every place, least and greatest; which error, whatever the
patrons of it say, suffers not Christ any more to be moved from place to place,
than the divine nature it self; and by its force takes away whatsoever things
are read in the holy Scriptures (as there are read innumerable things) which
show him to be comprehended in a certain compass of places, and that he went
from place to place; and among other things, the conception of him in the womb
of the Virgin; unless any say, that the Virgin was farther extended, not only
than her garment or house, but all heavens; likewise also his ascent into
heaven and return from it, so necessary, as they call them Articles of
Christian Religion and Faith; which whilst they defend, who also hold the
ubiquity of the body of Christ, they contradict themselves, and assert neither
of them fully and constantly. This is a grievous error both of it self, and if
you mark it, because it overthrows the foundations of all Christian knowledge
and faith. For it denies credit to be given to the senses, and will not that
any more credit ^e given to the eyes, nor hands, by which Christ overcame of
old the most stiff incredulity, as Luke 24.39. etc.
of other disciples, so John 20.27, 28.
of Thomas. For it requires to be believed that Christ was in very deed in that
place already before he came, into which he was seen by their eyes to have
come; and that nevertheless he remained in his very body in that place from
which he was seen to have departed; and that now also those places are full of
the body of Christ, consisting of flesh, blood and bones, which not only the
eyes, but also the hands do testify to be empty of it, and to be filled with
other bodies. But if Faith be to be denied to these witnesses, there will be no
cause, why Christ should not be discredited, John 3.11, 32.
testifying those things which he has seen; there will be no reason why we
should believe the Apostles affirming Christ's Miracles, Death, Resurrection,
which they perceived Joh. 20.30, 31. 1 Cor. 15.5, etc.
by their outward senses; and those holy Writers, who affirm that they Luke 1.2
rest themselves on the credit of eye witnesses. In vain did John write 1 John
1.1.
What we have heard, what we have seen with our eyes, what we have beheld, and
our hands have handled of the word of Life; if both the eyes and the hands may
be deceived in so manifest a thing, yea, we must also doubt, whether we read
those things in the holy Scriptures which we do read. But I will say no more of
this error, as being not common to all the Adversaries. Although in the mean
while also a greater part of them affirms the like things concerning the
presence of the substance of the body and blood of Christ in the Eucharist,
against the credit of the senses themselves. And lastly, none of them can
satisfy thoroughly the patrons of that ubiquity, as long as they hold the
humane nature of Christ to be joined by an inseparable tie to the divine, which
wholly may subsist in its essence in all places. For unless the humane nature
be altogether in the same places, in which the divine is; the humane nature
will at the same time be joined and not joined in place to the whole divinity.

But there is another error, both injurious to the greatest goodness of God
toward us, and also very hurtful to piety, and consequently also to men's
salvation, which leans on that doctrine, and is vulgarly common to all the
Adversaries. For if Christ be the most high God, who dejected himself from the
heavens into the Virgins womb, who an infant cried in the cradle, who eat,
drank, wept, and underwent as other things proper to humane frailty, so also a
grievous death; there was to be sought some end agreeing to so absurd a thing,
that is equally absurd, which has put the most high God willing to save us on
this necessity. Now that is commonly held to be, that the infinite God partly
might make a full compensation for the disobedience of infinite numbers of men
by the infinite merit of his obedience, which they call active; partly also by
the infinite price of his death, might most fully satisfy his Father angry
with us for all our sins, both past and present, and to come; and might fully
discharge all our debts to him; yea, if those things which they say be true,
might also pay much more than we should owe, since they say, that even one drop
of the blood of Christ, as being infinite God, has satisfied for all the sins
of the whole world. Such a satisfaction, seeing because it could be made by no
creature, and yet was necessary to appease the wrath of God; therefore they
say, that God ought to be incarnated. There are indeed some found who have
rejected the former part of that satisfaction, which consists in the active
obedience of Christ, as they call it. For they saw, that if Christ by his
obedience had fully recompensed our disobedience, there would remain no sins
for which he should satisfy by his death, all being already abundantly
recompensed and extinct by that obedience. But they are both few, and
nevertheless vehemently urge the latter satisfaction, consisting in the passive
obedience, or Passion and Death. More are found, who also have endeavored to
mitigate somewhat the other part of that opinion: either because they have
taken away the necessity of it, or because they have asserted that that
satisfaction by its own virtue, does not extinguish our debts, unless the
bounty of God be added. But besides that that opinion which we have before
explained, is more common; it must needs be that that was a necessary and
inevitable thing, which compelled the most high God to that thing, than which
nothing can be imagined more unworthy of him; and very many of them, who deny
the necess^ty of that satisfaction, not depending on the Decree of God,
nevertheless do hold that price, which was paid for us, to be infinite in
worth, and equal to our debts. But this opinion, besides that it permits not
to acknowledge the true virtue of Christ's death, in procuring us the remission
of our sins, and eternal Salvation, it deprives God himself also of the praise
of the greatest goodness, which he has afforded us sinners; yea, and takes
away from him the right of further requiring piety from us; by which very
thing, it both destroys the study of piety in us, and together with piety
takes away salvation. For God has neither pardoned our sins to us, if all that
which was due to him, was paid to him by another in our stead and name, nor did
he bestow his Son for us a price of our Redemption, if it was paid him by the
death of his Son. Where then is that which the Ephesians. 1.7
Apostle speaks of so much, That we have Redemption in Christ by his blood,
even the Remission of sins, according to the riches of the Divine Grace? The
holy Bible, especially of the New Testament, is See among other places, John
3.16. Romans 3.5, 6, etc. 8.32. 2 Cor. 5.18, etc. Ephesians. 2.4, etc. Col. 1.14. 1
John 4.9, etc.
full of the praises of so great a bounty and immense love of God toward us.
But by what right could God any more exact of us the duty of piety, if Christ
has abundantly performed and recompensed all things, both by obeying the Law
in our stead, and also (of which thing now there was no more need) more than
sufficiently discharging all the punishments of our sins by his death? For him
it is lawful to exact as yet something from the debtor himself, who is not yet
fully satisfied by another, in the name and stead of the debtor. He who pays
for the debtor, has a right of receiving that which is his own from him,
unless he has promised that he will forgive it unto him: But Christ will not
have that right, if he be the same God with the Father. For if the matter be
so, Christ himself was to be satisfied no less than the Father; and when he
satisfied him, he satisfied himself also; if so be that any can satisfy
himself. If therefore that he paid of his own, not of another, we remain his
debtors, we owe as much to him, as before to his Father. There is a
transferring of debts, alike grievous to us, unless you make the Son more kind
than the Father. For if there remain an infinite debt, as before, not to be
discha^ged but by an eternal death; neither is there any more provided for our
Salva^ion than before: But no man does easily think that; all willingly believe
that it is paid; no man thinks that he does owe so much as he did owe before.
Therefore God and Christ have lost their right of commanding piety to us, and
if we refuse to perform it, of punishing us. This besides that it is an impiety
to think, it also takes away the necessity of living piously; but if there be
no necessity for us to live piously, piety is lost. Who is there that without
necessity would undertake a thing which is hardest of all? For if there be any
that says piety is not necessary to salvation, and yet in the mean while lives
piously, he understands not himself sufficien^ly, and thinks better than he
speaks: For indeed he acknowledges the necessity of a pious living, and would
also profess it, if he did either better search, or would express the secret
meaning of his mind. But it is known too much (the more is the pity!) how
dangerous and how contrary doctrines (which it would be too long here to rekcon
up) to piety, are built upon this one thing, of which we have now spoken.
Withdraw from them the foundation ill laid, even the opinion concerning the
supreme Deity of Christ, you will perceive them all by and by to fall to the
ground.

But that opinion of the Supreme Deity of Christ does not only hurt them that
hold it, but also others; for it keeps back those from the embracing of the
Christian Religion, who are as yet averse from it, and further, suffers them
not to enter into the way of Salvation. For whilst that those things are the
heads, and the chief heads of the Christian Religion, which are commonly
believed of Christians, concerning the Triune God, the Incarnation of the most
high God, and the rest, which in some manner depend on those; and yet in the
mean time do perceive, partly from the light of their Reason, partly from the
holy Scriptures of the Old Testament, the manifest falsity of them, they cannot
but be averse from Christian Religion, as false, and not instituted by ^od. For
how can that be a true Religion, how instituted by God, some doctrine of which,
altogether pertaining to the constitution of it, is found to be manifestly
false, and contrary to those Writings which came from God? Wherefore it becomes
no man to be so careless of his own and others salvation, that I say not an
enemy to it, that he may not care what he hold and profess in this matter;
neither ought it seem marvelous to any, that we have not doubted to forsake an
opinion commonly received for so many Ages, although we be therefore exposed to
the desquieti^g hatred and infestations of all men, and the p^rpetual losses of
Fortunes, and lastly of Life it self. For we judge that fruit, which we have
taught, to redound thence to the glory of God, the true honor of Christ,
lastly to our own and others salvation, to be far greater, than that our Life
and Fortunes, and whatsoever in humane affairs we count d^ar, may come into
comparison with it. Whence also we judge that those, who refuse to lose their
life for the profession of this Truth, and dishonestly forsake and betray it,
being acknowledged, are to be numbered among those, who are ashamed of the Son
of Man and his words, Luke 9.26. and who neither love the glory of God and of
Christ, nor their own salvation, as it is meet, nor prefer it before all other
things; by whom, what is to be expected, every one may easily imagine. Yea,
that also is hence easily understood, what we are to think of them, who when
they have all helps, and more th^n a common occasion of acknowledging the true
opinion which we defend, yet contemn it, yea, also contumaciously resist it, to
wit, that they will together with other contemners of the Truth of God, and
enemies of the divine glory and piety, receive punishments unless they repent.
In the mean time it is not our part to condemn them, who out of mere ignorance
adhere to the contrary opinion, or perhaps by reason of long accustomedness to
error, and other things which procure it a show of Truth, cannot leave it
without great difficulty, if so be that otherwise they are studious of piety,
and do not prosecute dissenters with hatred. For Charity enclines us to the
part which is more favorable, where the manifest sentence of the Supreme
Lawgiver and Judge, does not force us to the part more severe. The opinion of
the Adversaries is dangerous, and of it self injurious both to God and Christ,
and also to piety: but we think pardon may be given by the most gracious Judge,
on this side indeed to error and ignorance, if contumacy and contempt be
absent; on that side to piety, partly lessening, partly covering the absu^dity
of the opinion; and so much the more easily, by how much the same men shall
less condemn others for the contrary and more true opinion. But what hope is
there for them, who wanted not helps to know the truth, whose either negligence
or pertinacy appeared manifest in so great a matter; whom nothing but the fear
of men, and the shunning of the cross of Christ, and such things as are like to
them, have kept back from the true opinion? What will they pretend for their
error, when they shall stand before the Tribunal of the most dreadful Judge?
But what will they do who damn others, as is done by most, so rigidly, so
proudly, for this opinion, and not only enveigh against them by reproaches, but
even censure them as to be put to death, or at least to be driven into
banishment? If I had not come, says Christ, John 15.22. and spoken to them,
they should not have had sin: but now they have no cloak for their sin. Let
them think that the same thing is said to them, to whose hands these Writings
come, whence they might learn the truer opinion. But let all together know,
that by how much the more our opinion is agreeable to piety, by so much the
more must they, who have embraced it, give diligence, that they join holiness
of life with it, being assured that the knowledge of the Truth, without
Godliness, will more hurt than profit them.

The God of Peace grant that all be mutually affected one to another with the
same mind, according to Christ Jesus: that with one heart and one mouth, they
may glorify the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: to whom himself also be
honor for ever. AMEN.

An INDEX of CHAPTERS of both BOOKS, touching One GOD the FATHER.
The FIRST BOOK.
SECTION. I.
Wherein is directly proved, That only the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is
the most high God: And first out of those Testimonies of the sacred Scriptures,
which speak expressly of the Father.

Chap. I. Argum. I. FRom the words of Christ, John 17.3. This is life eternal;
that they may know thee (Father) the only true God, and whom thou have sent,
Jesus Christ. page 1 Chap. II Arg. II Taken out of the words of Paul. 1 Cor.
8.6. To us there is one God the Father, of whom are all things, page 13 Chap.
III Arg. III From the place of Paul, Ephesians. 4.6. There is one God and Father of
all, page 22 Chap. IV Arg. IV Drawn from the words of Christ, Mat. 24.36. But
of that day and hour knows none, no not the Angels of the Heavens, but the
Father only. And Mark 13.32. But of the day and hour knows none, no not the
Angels in the Heavens, no not the Son, but the Father, page 27 Now follow
Arguments drawn out of those places, wherein though the Name of the Father be
not expressed, yet it is indeed spoken of him. Chap. V Arg. V Drawn from the
words of Paul, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. There are diversities of Gifts, but the same
Spirit; and diversities of Administrations, but the same Lord; and diversities
of Operations, but the same God, page 28 Chap. VI Arg. VI Taken from these
words, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is One God, and One Mediator of God and Men, the Man
Christ Jesus. To which are added those, Romans 3.10. There is One God, etc. page
30 Chap. VII Arg. VII Drawn out of those places, wherein, by the Name of the
Only God, or the Only wise God, or the Only Master God, none but the Father of
Jesus Christ is designed, page 36 Chap. VIII Arg. VIII Drawn from the Visions
in Daniel, and John's Revelation, page 40 Chap. IX Sundry Arguments are briefly
intimated, to show, that none but the Father of Jesus Christ is the most high
God. page 42
SECTION II.
Wherein is shown, That Christ is not the most high God, so that it may be
understood, that the Father only is the most high God.

Chap. I Argum. I DRawn thence, That Christ is most frequently distinguished
from God, page 47 Chap. II Arg. II Drawn from the Name of the Son of God, page
50 Chap. III The Arguments which are in the sequel to be alleged, being
distributed, a third is proposed from the words of Christ in John, Chap. 5.19.
The Son can do nothing of himself, page 52 Chap. IV Arg. IV Fetched from the
places in John, wherein it is denied, That Christ is the prime Author of his
Doctrine, page 65 Chap. V Arg. V Fetched from those places in John, wherein
Christ is denied to have come of himself, page 67 Chap. VI Arg. VI Fetched from
those places in John, wherein Christ denies that he came to do his own will,
page 68 Chap. VII Arg. VII Drawn from thence, That Christ did not seek his own
glory, page 69 Chap. VIII Arg. VIII Drawn from the words of Christ, John 12.44.
He that believes on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me, page 70
Chap. IX Arg. IX That Christ was sometimes ignorant of the last Judgment, page
71 Chap. X Arg. X From the words of Christ, Mat. 20.23. To sit at my right
hand, is not mine to give, page 76 Chap. XI Arg. XI From those words of Christ,
Mat. 19.17. Why do thou call me good? none is good but God only, page 79
Chap. XII Arg. XII From the words of Christ to the Father, Not as I will, but
as thou, page 81 Chap. XIII Arg. XIII From the words, Heb. 5.5. Christ did not
glorify himself, page 83 Chap. XIV Arg. XIV From the words of Christ, John
14.28. My Father is greater than I, page 84 Chap. XV Arg. XV Drawn from thence,
That the Son was sent into the world by the Father, page 89 Chap. XVI Arg. XVI
Drawn from thence, That Christ received Commands from the Father, and kept
them, page 91 Chap. XVII Arg. XVII Drawn from thence, That Christ poured out
Prayers to the Father, page 93 Chap. XVIII Arg. XVIII Drawn from thence, That
all things are given to Christ from the Father, page 96 An Appendix of this
Argument, wherein is taught, That Divinity was given to Christ of the Father,
page 107 Chap. XIX Arg. XIX That Christ ascribes both his words and works unto
the Father and that he is not the first, but second cause of the things
pertaining to Salvation, page 110 Chap. XX Arg. XX From the words of Christ,
John 8.16. My Judgment is true, because I am not alone, but I and the Father
that sent me, page 115 Chap. XXI Arg. XXI From the words of Christ, John 8.14.
My Testimony is true, because I know whence I am, and whither I go, page 118
Chap. XXII Arg. XXII From the words of Christ, John 8.29. The Father has not
left me alone, because, I always do the things that are pleasing unto him,
page 119 Chap. XXIII Arg. XXIII That the Father is called, the God of Christ,
page 122 Chap. XXIV Arg. XXIV From these words, 1 Cor. 11.3. The head of Christ
is God, page 123 Chap. XXV Arg. XXV From the words of Paul, 1 Cor. 3. last,
Christ is God's, page 126 Chap. XXVI Arg. XXVI From the words, 1 Cor. 15.24,
28. That the Son shall deliver up the Kingdom to God the Father, and shall
become subject to him, page 127 Chap. XXVII Arg. XXVII That Christ is the
Mediator of God and Men, page 130 Chap. XXVIII Arg. XXVIII That Christ is a
Priest, page 132 Chap. XXIX Arg. XXIX That Christ was raised up by the Father,
page 133 Chap. XXX Arg. XXX That Christ is called the Image of the invisible
God, page 139 Chap. XXXI Arg. XXXI Chiefly drawn from those causes, for which
Christ is in the Scriptures called, The Son of God, page 142 Chap. XXXII Arg.
XXXII That there is no mention ^ad^ in the holy Scripture of the Incarnation of
the most high God, page 160 Chap. XXXIII Arg. XXXIII That the holy Spirit was
given unto Christ, page 163 Chap. XXXIV Arg. XXXIV That Christ was tempted of
the Devil, page 166 Chap. XXXV Arg. XXXV That Christ is the firstborn of every
Creature, page 169 Chap. XXXVI Arg. XXXVI That Christ is equal to God. page 170
SECTION III.
Wherein is shown, That the Holy Spirit is not the most high God, that it may
appear that the Father only is the most high God, page 171

Chap. I Argum. I THat the Holy Spirit is no where openly called God in the
holy Scripture, page 172 Chap. II Arg. II That it is no where in the holy
Scripture commanded, that we should adore or invocate the Holy Spirit; yea,
there is not so much as any example thereof. page 181 Chap. III Arg. III. That
the mention of the Holy Spirit is in many places omitted, and would not so have
been, were he the most high God. page 185 Chap. IV Arg. IV. From Mat. 11.27.
None knows the Son but the Father, neither knows any one the Father but the
Son, etc. page 194 Chap. V Arg. V That the Holy Spirit is very often
distinguished from God, page 195 Chap. VI Arg. VI The Holy Spirit is the power
of God, page 197 Chap. VII Arg. VII That Christ should be the Son of the Holy
Spirit, if he were the most High God, page 204 Chap. VIII Arg. VIII That the
Holy Spirit is given by God to men, page 205 An Appendix of the precedent
Argument, in which the places are urged, in which the holy Spirit is called,
The Earnest, and by it men are said to be Sealed, and to be Poured upon,
Baptized and Drencht, page 218 Chap. IX Arg. IX Drawn from those places, which
argue some partition of the Holy Spirit, page 222 Chap. X Arg. X That we are
forbidden to quench the Spirit, and we read that the Holy Spirit sometime was
not, and that some Disciples were ignorant whether there were any Holy Spirit,
page 225 Chap. XI Arg. XI From John 15.26. Where the Holy Spirit is said To
proceed from the Father, page 226 Chap. XII Arg. XII That the Holy Spirit is
sent by the Father and the Son, page 228 Chap. XIII Arg. XIII From the words of
John 16.13. He shall not speak (the Spirit of Truth) from himself; but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, etc. page 229 Chap. XIV Three
Arguments, From 1 Cor. 2.10, etc. The Spirit searches all things, even the
deep things of God, etc. page 235 Chap. XV Arg. XVII That the Holy Spirit
sometime descended upon Christ, page 238 Chap. XVI The Conclusion of the First
Book, in which it is showed, That the Adversaries opinion concerning the
Trinity, is refuted by the very silence of the holy Scriptures; neither does
any thing hinder but that it may be oppugned by Arguments fetched from Reason,
page 242
The SECOND BOOK.
SECTION. I.
In which is generally treated concerning the Three Persons of the Supreme
Deity, which are commonly maintained. page 247

Chap. I. Argum. I. BY which is showed, That the common Doctrine of the Trinity
overthrows it self: because there would be at once One and Three Gods, page 248
Chap. II Arg. II Because each Divine Person, would be Three in Persons. page
252 Chap. III Arg. III Because the Divine Persons would in very deed be the
same, and diverse. page 253 Chap. IV Arg. IV Because there would be at once, One
and Three Substances of the Supreme Deity, page 256 Chap. V Arg. V Because
there cannot be Three Substances of One and the Same Thing. page 261 Chap. VI
Arg. VI That the Divine Persons should be at once both communicable and
incommunicable, page 264 Chap. VII Arg. VII Drawn from the Analogy with the
things created; where it it is showed, That unless there be held One Person of
God, there must be held infinite in number, page 265
SECTION II.
In which is discoursed concerning the Second Person of the Supreme Deity;
which is held by the Adversaries, page 267

Chap. I Argum. I BY which is refelled the doctrine of the eternal generation
of the Son of God out of the Essence of the Father: Because the Son should be
the Son of himself, page 268 Chap. II Arg. II Because there would be
innumerable Sons, as also innumerable Holy Spirits, page 271 Chap. III Arg. III
Because the Son of God, both had been, and had not been from Eternity, page 272
Chap. IV. Arg. IV Because the Son of God should be already generated, and to be
generated unto Eternity, page 276 Chap. V Arg. I By which the Doctrine of the
Incarnation of the Son of God is refelled: Because the Father and the Holy
Spirit had been also Incarnated, page 278 Chap. VI Arg. II Because the Second
Person of the Deity would cease to be a Person, page 281 Chap. VII Arg. III
Because the most High God and Man are Disparatums, page 283 Chap. VIII Arg. IV
Because in Christ should be two Persons, page 286
SECTION III.
IN which is discoursed concerning the Third Person of the Supreme Deity, which
is commonly held. And it is showed, That the holy Spirit should be the Son of
God, if the common Opinion concerning him were true. page 295
The CONCLSION of the WORK.
IN which the use of this Disputation, concerning One God the Father, is
explained, page 302
An INDEX of places of the holy Scripture, which are in this Book, either wholly
explained, or in some part illustrated.
Chap. Verse. Page. Deuteronom. 21. 17. 224. 32. 12. 173, 179. II. Samuel. 23 2,
3. 173, 178. II. Kings. 2. 9. 123. Psalm. 2. 6. 152. 7. 152, 156, 276, etc. 17.
6. 120. 118. 21. 92. Isaiah. 6. 9, etc. 173, 180, etc. 9. 6. 216, 217. 63. 10.
173, 179. Jeremiah. 17. 5. 71. Daniel. 7. 9, etc. 40. Matthew. 1. 20. 222. 3. 16.
228, etc. 11. 27. 194, etc. 12. 4. 53. 16. 16. 157. 19. 17. 79. 20. 23. 76,
etc. 23. 8, 9, 10. 80. 24. 36. 27, 72. 26. 39. 81. 28. 18. 104, etc. 19. 244.
Mark. 1. 10. 238. 13. 32. 27, 72. Luke. 1. 17. 199. 32. 101. 35. 144, etc. 197,
etc. 3. 22. 238, etc. 11. 20. 199. 12. 8. 191. 22. 42. 81. 24. 49. 197. John.
1. 1. 109. 13. 139. 32, 33. 238, etc. 2. 20, 21. 138, 139 3. 34. 224, etc. 4.
34. 173. 5. 13. 187. 17. 62, 63. 19. 52, etc. 20. 101. 22. 109, 128. 24. 128.
44. 36, 37, 38. 6. 59. 96. 69. 12. 7. 16. 60. 37. 221. 39. 114, 226. 8. 14.
118, etc. 16. 115, etc. 16, etc. 186, 187 19. 11. 29. 115, etc. 55. 11. 10. 18.
91, 138, 139. 25. 111. 29. 85. 34, etc. 51, 52, 146, etc. 12. 44. 60, 70, etc.
14. 7. 11. 10. 65. 16, 17. 209, etc. 26. 228. 28. 84, etc. 15. 4. 53. 10. 121.
26. 126, 227. 16. 3. 11. 7. 228. 13. 229, etc. 18. 118, etc. 32. 119. 17. 1.
107, etc. 2. 100. 3. 1, etc. 185. 4. 100. 5. 5. 102, etc. 22, 24. 102. 25. 11
20. 22 207 31. 11. Acts. 1. 2. 163, etc. 2. 3. 240. 18, 19. 223. 24, etc. 136.
30. 56, etc. 33. 33. 119. 36. 102, 108. 38. 199. 5. 3, 4. 173, etc. 31. 114.
10. 38. 199. 45. 199. 11. 17. 205. 13. 32, 33. 150. 15. 21. 217. 19. 3. 226.
28. 25, 26. 173, 180. Romans 1. 3. 56. etc. 4. 150, 157, 158 16. 201. 3. 30. 30,
35. 4. 1. 57. 5. 5. 210, 211. 6. 4, 6, 8. 218. 7. 17. 60. 8. 2, 3, 4. 308. 3.
89, etc. 15. 211. 23. 224. 26. 180. 27. 236. 32. 216, 217, 218 9. 3. 56, etc.
5. 56. 10. 9. 136. 11. last. 45, 222. 15. 6. 23. 16. 27. 4, 5, 36, etc. I. Cor.
1. 18. 201. 24. 201. 30. 113. 2. 4, 5. 198, 199. 10, etc. 235, etc. 12. 228. 3.
22. 126, etc. 6. 19, 20. 173, 176. 7. 17. 53 8. 6. 13, etc. 190, etc. 214, 222.
9. 6. 10. 10. 18. 57. 11. 3. 123, etc. 12. 1, etc. 29. 4, 5, 6. 28, etc. 173,
177. 13. 221. 15. 10. 60. 24. 23, 99, etc. 127, etc. 28. 127. II. Cor. 1. 3.
23. 22. 199, 218, 221. 3. 15. 217. 4. 4. 139, etc. 5. 5. 198, 199, 218. 16. 37.
11. 31. 23. 13. 4. 136. last. 182. Galat. 1. 4. 23. 2. 16. 53. 4. 4. 89, etc.
6. 180. 23, 29. 57. Ephesians. 1. 3. 23. 13. 219, etc. 14. 218, etc. 17. 11, 122,
125. 3. 7. 199. 17. 217. 4. 4. 24, etc. 6. 22, 23, etc. 9. 24. etc. 20, 21.
217. 30. 219. 5. 5. 189, etc. 20. 23. Philip. 2. 6, etc. 170. 9, etc. 102, 103,
108, 305. 4. 20. 23. Coloss. 1. 3. 23. 15. 139, etc. 169, etc. 16. 112. 2. 2.
23. 3. 74, etc. 3. 17. 23. 22. 57. I. These. 4. 2. 113: 8. 175. 5. 19. 225,
226. II These. 3. 12. 113. I. Timoth. 1. 1. 188, 189. 17. 4, 5. 2. 5. 30, etc.
6. 15, 16. 4, 5, 9. II. Timoth. 1. 7. 211. 2. 11, 12. 218. Titus. 2. 13. 189.
Hebr. 1. 1. 113. 3. 139, etc. 4, 5. 158, etc. 2. 4. 223. 3. 8, 9. 173, 180. 5.
5. 83, etc. 12. 23, etc. 192. I. Peter. 1. 3. 23. II. Peter. 1. 4. 156. I.
John. 1. 3. 187, 193. 2. 3, 4. 11. 13, 14. 11. 3. 1. 11. 4. 7. 11. 13. 222,
etc. 5. 7. 186, 244. 20. 11. Jude. 1. 214. 4. 36, 37, 189. 25. 4, 5.
Revelations. 1. 1. 96, 97. 4. 182, etc. 3. 14. 169. 21. 105. 4. several 40,
etc. 5. several 40. 13. 187. 9 4. 53. 11. 15. 187. 12. 10. 187. 21. 25. 53.

An INDEX of remarkable things contained in this BOOK.
A.
ACtion agrees not to the Subsistence, but to the thing subsisting, page 259
Things actually two or more, cannot be one of themselves, page 255 What things
are actually distinct, page 299, 300 The force of an article in appositions,
page 9, 10. What the unity of the same set before diverse names, denotes, page
38, 39, 189. According to the flesh, to what it is opposed in the Scripture,
page 56, 57, etc. The Aorist of Participles, being joined to Verbs of the
Pretertense has oftentimes a force of the Present-tense, page 156 What the
Apostles (when they spoke of the dignity of Christ) do mention as the chiefest
and most sublime thing. page 11. They were properly witnesses of the
Resurrection of Christ, page 155 The Opinion of the Arrians touching Christ,
page 238 Those things are not wont to be asked of another, which he himself that
asks them, is both willing and able easily to perform, page 93, 94 The word
all is wont to be referred to the subject matter, page 20
B.
Things hard to be believed are frequently expounded in the Scripture, page
160, 161
C.
To be called, for, to be, page 144 To be Christ, what, page 103 To be Christ,
and to be the Son of God are oftentimes all one in the Scripture, page 58, 156,
157 Many things are either affirmed or denied of Christ in the Scripture which
could not be either affirmed or denied of him, were he the most high God, page
52, 53, etc. The Head of Christ is none besides the Father, 125. What Cause
Christ is of Salvation, 18, 19, 110, 111. How he was made Christ, 103. He was
in the Heavens before he began to discharge his Prophetic Office, 149. What
manner of Creation is attributed unto him, 44, 45. He is to be believed on as
the Son of God, 71. All things are given to him from the Father, 96, 97, etc.
and that out of grace, 99. not by eternal generation, 101. Whether the Kingdom
is given to him as Mediator, 104, 105. or according to his humane nature, 106,
107. How He is given to us, 217. How He is not excluded from true Godhead, 4,
5. The Name of God is given unto Him, as he is the Son of God, 51. He did no
where either expressly say, or openly teach himself to be God, 79. It can
without absurdity be said, that He is made God, 108. Those that deny Him to be
the most high God, are compelled to deny the same of the Holy Spirit also, 171.
Whether He is Synecdochically said to be God or man, 284. And whether by an
unusual manner of predicating, 284, 285. He has openly differenced himself
from the most high God, 11. How He is distinguished from God, 48, etc, Divinity
or Godhead was bestowed on him by the Father, 107. What manner of Lordship he
has, 19. He is not the Prime Author of his Doctrine, 65, etc. He is an example
to us, both of holiness and felicity, and that nearer than God, 308, etc.
Wherefore he is called, The Son of God, 143, etc. Wherefore chiefly, 84.
Wherefore far more frequently the Son of God, than God, 50. He is the middle
scope, and end of the Divine honor, 18. Which is his greatest honor, 305, The
same is detracted from him not by our opinion, 305, 306. but by the opinion of
the Adversaries, 306. Whether his humane Nature is a Person, 286. Whether a
man, 287, etc. Whether an abstractum, 288, etc. Whether it does act in proper
speaking, 289. Whether it subsists by it self, 290, 291, 292. Wherefore Christ
is called, The Image of God 139, etc. He has received both the Authority and
Exercise of Ruling from the Father, 104. and that indeed as the reward of his
obedience, 104, 105. A double Empire is to no purpose ascribed unto him, 307.
He may, yea often ought to be invocated, 45. He received commands from the
Father and kept them, 91, 92. Wherefore he is called Mediator, 34. Whether he
be the Mediator of the whole Trinity, 31. Whether of himself, 32, 33. Whether
of the holy Spirit, 34, 35. And whether according to the humane nature only, or
according to both natures, 31, etc. In what consideration he died for us, 159,
160. All the Offices do agree to him as a man, 293, 294. He is no where simply
called Father, 21. He ascribes all his works unto the Father, 110, etc. He
prayed to the Father, not only out of modesty, but because of necessity, 93,
etc. He is from the Father even as he is God, 51, 52. He showed himself wholly
to depend from the most high God, 11. How all things are by him, 18, 19, 112,
113. Whether it is rightly said, that his Person does do something according to
the humane nature, 32. Whether he received the power of doing all things from
the Father by eternal generation, 54, etc. By whom he was raised, and whether
by himself, 133, etc. He is distinguished from Him that sits upon the
Throne, 40, 41. He is called, Gods Servant, 91. Unto him was given the holy
Spirit, 163, etc. Whether he be totum quid, or a certain whole Substance,
consisting of a Divine and an Humane Nature, 281, etc. He came not of himself,
67, etc. nor to do his own will, 68, etc. He was not anointed by the holy
Spirit, but with the holy Spirit, by God the Father, page 188. Christ taken for
the Religion by him delivered, page 217. What that is which distinguishes
Christians from Jews or Turks, page 110. Every communicating of a substance to
another, is a generation, page 269. To Come from himself, what, page 118.
Comparisons of things with persons do easily bring forth Prosopopeyas, page
234. The force of a Contradiction lies in the distinction of things, page 299.
Things containing a hidden Contradiction are not predicated of the same
Subjectum simply, however they may be in it according to diverse parts, page
285. The first Creation is in the Scripture and the Apostles Creed, ascribed to
the Father only, page 44, 213.
D.
The Dative Case of a Person, often denotes finem cui, or the end to which,
page 217, The Descriptions of Persons in the Scriptures are not wont to be idle
or useless, page 13, 17. The word, To day, being used even of God denotes a
certain and definite time, page 277. What the word Determined (Gr. (...))
signifies in the New Testament, page 154. Every Difference does tacitly
include a contradiction in it self, page 299. What the nature of Disparatums
is, page 283, etc. Whether the divine Essence be communicable, page 254, 255.
No Doctrine that implies a contradiction can be true, page 245, 246.
E.
Earnest, what, page 218. To be distinguished eminenter, what, page 299, 300.
That which is Equal, has always a different essence from that to which it is
equal, page 170. That Which depends upon the free will of God cannot be
eternal, 55, 56. Whatsoever is simply from eternity is also simply necessary,
page 55. What things are wont to be excepted, page 194. Whether Eternal life
consists herein, that we know the Father, and Christ to be the only true God,
page 10, 11.
F.
The sum of our Faith concerning Christ, page 143, 144. There is neither any
example nor any precept extant in the Scripture concerning Faith in the Holy
Spirit, 181. How that is to be understood, which is contained of it in the
Apostles Creed, page 181. Every Father either properly or improperly so called,
if he be endued with understanding, is a person, page 22. The word Father, does
no where in the Scripture denote the Trinity, 20, etc. 24. Whether God may be
called Father, because of the first Creation only, page 20, 21. The Father of
Christ is called his God, 122. and the God of the Patriarchs, page 45, 46. He
is more excellent than the Son, 50. His substance is different from that of the
Son, 50 He is worshipped through Christ, 37. His manifold prerogative above the
Son and the Holy Spirit, 43, 44. He alone is of himself, page 43
Unusual Figures when used, page 220. The First Fruits of a thing, what, page
224 The Firstborn is always contained in the number of them, of whom (except
the Parents) it is said to be the firstborn, page 169. The particle For (Gr.
(...)) may signify an effect in the New Testament, page 120, One thing has
but one form, page 261. What it is to be the same thing formally, page 298.
Future tenses are among the Hebrews frequently taken for Present tenses, page
120. The particle from or of (Lat. ex) often signifies an Efficient cause, page
222.
G.
Every Generation, properly so called, is a change from not being to being,
273, etc. What manner of generation that is, which is said to be performed by
emanation, and to what it does agree, 275. There is no supernatural generation
out of the Essence of God, 274. The Opinion touching the generation of the Son
of God out of the Essence of the Father is is refelled, 54, 55, 101, 268, 269,
etc. 278. as also the manner of it, either by intellection, 268, etc. or by
emanation, 275, etc. It would be the same with the procession of the holy
Spirit, maintained by its Patrons, 295, etc. How far it is necessary that the
thing generated be like the thing generating, page 297. That which any one does
already possess by a full right, cannot be said to be given unto him again, and
that indeed out of grace, page 105, 109. The Glory of God is the ultimate scope
both of his own and their actions that serve him, page 69, 70. How much
difference there is between the glorifying of the Father, which proceeded from
Christ, and that of Christ which proceeded from the Father, page 100. What
absurdities the multitude of Gods bring forth, page 303. What it is to be the
God of any one page 123, 126. What difference there is between the appellation
of God, and that of the Son of God, page 52. The name, God, is in its own
nature common, 4. It is the name of a Person, 48, 251. whom it denotes, being
taken by way of excellency, 20, 48, 49. Whom, being put subjectively, 13o. It
does in its own nature signify something more excellent than the bare name,
Lord, 20. It is in innumerable places of the Scripture taken as proper to the
Father, 42. One God in number cannot directly be predicated of many persons
distinct in number, 15. Who is to be accounted the most high God, 17, 18. He is
in no wise from another, 51. Neither is he dependent upon another arbitrary
will, especially necessa^ily, 216. He cannot be given for an earnest or pledge,
218. He can do all things of himself, 53. What it is when God is said to be
with one, 117. God taken hypostatically or personally and essentially is the
same, 251, 252. He is bestowed by none upon any, 205. He is to us an example
both of holiness and felicity, 308. He can receive commands from none, 91. He
cannot be sent by any, 89, etc. In him are all perfections necessarily, which
can naturally be in him, 266. God and Father joined together by the copulative
particle, denote the same subject, 22, 23. Wherefore God is called Father,
either simply, or our Father, 20, 21. How all things by him are, 18, 112, 113.
How f^r his power extends it self. 105. Old age cannot properly be attributed
unto Him, 109, 110. In what sense those things that are proper unto him alone,
are denied of them that are dependent on him, 5. How he does deliver the
Kingdom unto any, 128. How he sanctifies us, and how he is sanctified of us,
147. It is necessary that He should be One, page 18. How it is either repugnant
or not repugnant to the Scripture, to have two Gods, page 109, 110. The Opinion
of the Greeks touching the procession of the holy Spirit, page 43.
H.
To be ones Head, what, page 124. The opinion of Hilary touching the holy
Spirit, page 183, 184.

I.
The Jews did acknowledge for God, none but him whom Christ called his Father,
page 38. No Image is of the same Essence in number, with that whereof it is the
Image, page 139, 140. The particle In is often redundant in the Hebrew tongue,
page 221. There is no mention made in the holy Scripture of the Incarnation of
the most High God, 160, etc. There was no need of it for our Salvation, 162.
The absurdity of it, page 278, etc. 312, etc. Whether Incommunicability is to
be expressed in the definition of Suppositum, page 257, 258. There is neither any
command, nor any example in the Scriptre of invocating the holy Spirit, 181,
etc. Whether it was anciently in use, page 183. John's scope in penning the
Gospel, 53. He affords many Arguments against the common Doctrine touching
the Deity of Christ, page 53.
K.
What manner of Knowledge that is wherein Religion consists, page 11. The
Knowledge of God is oftentimes includ^d in the knowledge of Christ, and on the
cont^ary, 185, 186. How the Apostles do ex^r^ss the knowledge of an whole
Complex or Proposition, page 11, 12.
L.
What things agree to a Legate or Ambassador, 131, 132. Credit given to a
Legate or Ambassador, is ultimately terminated in the sender of him, page 71 In
what sense one is said to be like himself. page 140 He that is made Lord by
another, if he be a God, is also made God by another, page 107 The name of
Lord, used for Jehovah, or Adonai, is very often taken in the Scripture as
proper to the Father, 42. With what difference it is used both of God and
Christ, 17, 18. And how is it by way of excellency attributed to Christ, page
19 Wherein the Love of God toward us is most of all shown, page 162
M.
He that is a Man is a person, page 287 The Miracles of Christ were the most
manifest signs of his conjunction with the Father, 121. Christ frequently
appealeth unto them, page 121 Modesty has no place in God, page 94 Moses taken
for the Law delivered by him, page 217 No Mystery is repugnant to Reason, page
245
N.
The vulgar distinction of Natures in Christ examined, 56, etc. It overthrows
the vulgar opinion touching Christ, 64, 65. It cannot cause that that thing
should be simply denied of the Subject which for another nature is to be simply
affirmed of it, 33. or that it should be simply distinguished from that, which
is to be simply predicated of it, page 33
O.
Offices agree to none but Persons, page 31 What force the word only has, 2,
8, etc. 36. It belongs to the subject as often as it is employed to exclude
other subjects from the communion of the predicate 7. where it is wont to be
placed in the whole sent tence, or complex, when it is referred to many
subjects. page 10 Opposites include in themselves a tacit contradiction, page
299
P
The parts of the same thing are not wont to be predicated mutually of
themselves. page 284 The parts of substances being disjoined from each other do
become Suppositums. page 287 Person what, 48, 51. Whether is it a manner of
subsisting or a subsistence, 51, 258, etc. whether the definition of Person,
namely, that it is a first substance intelligent, ag^eeth to it taken only in
concreto, 260, 261. Whether the same definition is more large than its
definitum, or Person defined, 286, etc. What a divine Person is, 67. Whether
it is a substance, 256, 257, etc. It differs not from the divine Nature, 32,
51, 300, etc. The same eason or conside^ation of a finite and infinite Person,
265, etc. No Person can at the same time be so given to many, that in very deed
he should be or dwell in every one of them, 216, 217. No man is sealed with a
Person, page 219 Power and Spirit are oftentimes coupled in the holy Scripture,
page 198 To heavenly and divine power, divine wo^ship is due, page 109 The act
of Predestination is in the Scripture attributed to the Father only. page 77
The Present-tenses do among the Latins denote a frequency or custom of action,
page 120 Preterperfect tenses among the Hebrews are frequently taken for
present-tenses, page 120 He that is a Priest, cannot be the most High God, page
132, etc. The Priesthood of Christ contains his Royal Power, page 156 The style
of Prophets, page 225
R.
When the same thing is wont to be Repeated by the sacred Writers, page 25
Things really the same, and really distin^t, what, page 255 Reason in divine
things is not to be rejected, page 245 What thin^s are according to Aristotle
disti^ct in Reason, page 301 Redemption, how ascribed to the Son, page 213
Relatives cannot be in the same thing according to the same respect, part, and
time, page 268 What the right of ruling given to Christ contains, page 105 The
Rising of Christ from the dead is one ^eason amongst others of his filiation,
136, 137. It does sometimes comprehend his whole glory, page 156
S.
To sanctify, what it signifies in the Scripture, page 147 Whether
Sanctification is in the Scripture attributed to the holy Spirit in a peculiar
manner, 164, 165. Whether the same is more often ascribed to the Holy Spirit
than to the Father or Son, 213, etc. The action of sanctifying is attributed by
the Scripture even to things which are not persons, page 213 The vulgar opinion
touching the Satisfaction of Christ, brings forth several absurdities, and what
they be, page 312, etc. The word Savior agrees to the Father also, page 189
The Opinion of the Schoolmen touching the distinction between the divine
Att^ibutes, and the examination of the same, 298, etc. Again, touching the
distinction of the persons of the Trin^ty from the Essence, page 300, 301.
Whether and how is any one said to search his own counsels, page 235. Those
that deny credit to be given to the senses, overthrow the foundations of Faith,
page 311, etc. To be sent, agrees not to the mo t high God, 12, etc. What it
is to be sent into the world, 149. One can be sent into the wo^ld, who never
was in Heaven, page 149 To whom is the word Son absolutely used of Christ,
related, 129. The name Son, is not essential to Christ, 158. The Son of God
cannon be the most high God, 14, 50. The contrary opinion diminishes the
honor of the Father, 304, 305, etc. neither is it conjoined with the glory of
Christ, 304, etc. yea it does diminish the same, 306, etc. It robs both God of
that glory, which consists in managing our Salvation by Christ, 307. and us of
that incomparable fruit, which God looked upon in the same, 307, 308, etc. The
Son of God is not the first original of the holy Spirit, 43. The Son of God is
called the Son of man, and on the contrary, page 287 Why the Souls of men,
separated from their Bodies are not Persons, 286, 287. and how they are said to
be intell^gent, page 287 The Spe^ies is predic^ted of the who^e Individuum as
such, page 286 The wo^d Spirit p^t subjectively does no where denote the divine
essence, 58. nor the three persons of one divine essence, 24. How it is
predicated of the Father and Son, page 24. The same put both simply and with an
additament, does oftentimes denote the holy Spirit, page 24
The holy Spirit why called so, 208, 209. All things that come from the divine
inspiration are ascribed to it, 199, 200. How it is said to have spoken unto
any, 180. How its knowledge is contained in the knowledge of the Father and
Son, 185, 186. The holy Scripture is silent of its adoration or worship, 181,
etc. It is often not joined with God and Christ, 185, etc. even where the
angels or other sacred things are mentioned, 191, 192. It is not the most high
God, 14, 171, etc. The cont^ary Opinion diminishes the honor of the Father,
303, etc. The same is no where called God in the Scripture, 39, 172, etc. It is
often distinguished from him, 195, etc. How was its descent upon Christ 241. It
would not be said, no not indeed by a Metonimy, to be given unto men, if it
were the most high God, 214, 215. W^ether the same it self be given or its
effects only, 206, etc. How may it be distinguished from its effect, 202, etc.
Its effusion upon the ^postles, how attributed unto Christ, 114. Its mission
what, 228. It does admit a partition, 222, etc. and how, 224. whethe^ is it a
person, 216, 217. It is no where said to have appeared in a form or shape of a
person, 241. It is no where com^^ehended under the name of Father, 21, 22. It
would be the Father of Christ if it were a person, 204, 205. Its procession
what, 226, etc. 297, etc. Whether that which is commonly maintained, be any
wise different from the generation of the Son of God out of the essence of the
Father, 295, etc. How it does proceed from the Son, 43. What cause it is of the
divine revelation, 235. What its common signification was anciently, 207, etc.
What manner of power or efficacy of God it is, page 197 The same Subject is
often described by di^ers names joined toget^er by a copulative particle, page
23. The subjects being multiplied, those things also are multiplied, that are
distinct^y said of each of them, page 250 A subsistence ha^h of it self no
power to act, 32. It works nothing, 62. How many ways it is taken by the
Adversaries, 262. One substance has but one subsistence, page 261, etc. To
subsist by it self, how many ways ^e said, page 290, 291, 292. Whether the
word substance may be used concerning God, page 256, 257 Suppositum, what, 257,
258. wherefore be i^ called so, 258. What kind of suppositum constitutes a
person, page 286, 287
T.
A Temple may be his also who is not the most high God, page 176 The things
that are the same with one third thing, are also among themselves the same,
page 253, etc. Things are oftentimes in the Scripture joined with persons, and
those divine ones, 190. Things that are not persons, can both descend from
heaven, and be shadowed by an outward spec^es or shape, page 240 To be tempted
of the Devil agrees agrees not to the most high God, page 166, etc. The
Common Opinion touching the Trinity may lawfully be refuted by arguments fetched
from Reason, page 245, etc. It brings in three most high Gods, page 23, 248,
249, etc. 302, etc. It bears not a did nction of offices and actions in the
Persons, 214. It overthrows it self, page 248. It diminis^eth the honor of the
Father, 303. etc. It cannot be perc^ived by rude men, 243. It is not contained
in the holy Scripture, 242. etc. It is in very deed a Sa^ellia^ism, 279. It
does hinder them that a^e strangers to the Christian Religion from embracing
it, 314. Why that opinion is acurately to be examined, page 315
Truth what, page 300
U.
The Doctrine concerning the Vbiquity of Christ's Body is very absurd, page 311,
etc. There was no need of the Union of two Natures in Christ, page 294. From
whence and how does Paul conclude the Unity of the Faithful, page 25, 26
Unless, for, but, or but if, page 53
W.
That cannot be simply denied of the whole, which may or ought simply to be
affirmed of the same page 41, 59, 60, etc. What that is for which any one is to
be worshipped, page 108 The end or scope of the works of Christ, page 111 With
him, for, in like manner as to him, page 218
Errata.
Page 7. line 17 communion. p. 11. l. 18. d. ne. ib. marg. 1 John 2.3, 4, 13,
14. and Joh 6.69. p 23 l 41 Tr^nity as. p 24 l 28 for nor, r or of. p 38 l 39 f
it, r is. p 57 l 1 dele of. ib f also r so. ib marg G^l 3 7. p 59 l 5 f
admitted r affirmed. ib l 16 d not. ib l 43 compositum. p 60 l 45 and is wont.
p 61 l 40 from one part of. p 62 l 5 any thing. ib l 46 of one. p 65 l 37 and
17. 8, 14. p 70 l 9 exaltation. p 72 l 9 Christ is. p 73 l 11 Euthymius. p 75 l
2 which he says to the Apostles. ib l 16, 17. it is not the office of the Son
to know that day. p 78 l 17 to be. p 86 l 21 f yea, r it also. p 95 l 6 f of, r
if. p 100 l 3 that delivery. ib Rom 2.7. 10 and 5.2. marg. p 104 l 29, of rule.
p 106 l 30 he was. p 109 l 33 so divine. p 117 l 6 why he. ib l 25 f of, r in.
p 125 marg. and 17. 1. p 127 l 7 that Christ. p 131 l 36 so. p 134 l 18 f for r
or. p 136 l 18 would. p 140 l 24 every one. p 144 l 29 to be called. p 149 m.
Wujek. p 150 m. the Son of God. p 152 l 25 hears. p 153 l 45 neither. p 154 l
43 cannot. p 156 l 34 participle. p 161 l 46 at Athens. p 182 l 8, 2 Cor. p 183
l 39 of him ib l 40 praises. p 184 l 1 times. p 188 l 26 f though r if. p 200 l
1 inwardly. p 202 last naturally. p 208 l 3, 4 either by the simple word
Spirit, or by the words, holy Spirit, p 209 l 38 by prayers for or to believers
p 211 l 20 f or r as. ib l 24 Hypotheses. ib l 29 dwells. ib l 37 through. p
212 l 22 f gifts r goods. ib l 42, 43 (who first heard either from Christ or
from other divine men of the holy Spirit to be given to men.) p 213 l 11
chiefly. p 220 l 3 him. ib l 8 properly. ib l 39 Metalepses ib l 43 which
notwithstanding would etc. p 230 l 12 Austin p 233 l 7 f he r we. ib l 23 is
not. p 239 l 2, 3. wrest the weapon out of, etc. ib l 27 also. p 240 l 5 we may
also another shorter way show from hence, namely, ib l 6 d we may show ib l 7
mo^ high. ib l 14 Spirit a descent properly so called, ib l 28 substances. p
243 l 22 more than, ib l 23 they must, ib l 32 there of. p 257 l 27 Universals.
ib l 38 f here r hence. p 258 l 1 that manner. ib l 3 have no. ib l 4 every. ib
l 5 that we. ib l 17 d of. ib l 32 incommunicable substance. p 259 l 20
represent. ib l 36 ultimately. ib l 44 else. p 260 l 40 substances. p 261 l 10
add* may be or exist after expressed, p 262 l 46 they be modes. p 278 l 24
first. p 279 l 41 f explains and extremities r joyneth and extremes. p 296 l 27
to another ib l 28 from which such a relation arises. ib l 41 thing. ib l 47
to another.

FINIS.

