Advice to Communicants For necessary preparation, and profitable improvement
of the great and comfortable Ordinance of the Lords Supper: That therein true
spiritual Communion with Christ may be obtained, and the eternal enjoyment of
God Sealed.

By Robert Craghead Minister of the Gospel in L. Derry.

Acts 2. 42. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and
fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayer. 1 Cor, 11. 28. But let a
man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.
verse 31. For if we would judge our se^ves, we should not be judged. EDINBVRGH,
Printed for William Dickie Bookseller in Glasgow, and are to be sold at his
Shop in the Saltmarket, 1695.

To the Right Honorable, The Lord Provost, The Bailiffs, The Dean of Gild, The
Deacon Conveener; and remnant Members of the Council of the City of Glasgow,
etc. And all the Inhabitants thereof.
THe unquestionable duty of all men, who cannot pay just Debt, is at least to
acknowledge it; specially where the Debt is so great that the Debtor is not
responsable: when I remember the good hand of God upon me, in bringing me to
such a refuge as Glasgow; through so many difficulties and dangers; having
stayed in Derry until the second day of its Siege, could not get out of the
Gates without great difficulty, and forced to leave the half of my Family
within the Walls, by the violence of Soldiers; and the next day was taken and
Robbed by the Enemies: yet coming unto you in grief, for the lamentable State
of this Nation, and particular relations: found no less affectionat tenderness
and care, than if I had come among so many near Relations, being suffered to
want nothing necessary for this life. Many others also of this Nation do, and
have reason to remember gratefully your labor of love, in their destitute
condition; I can see no reason, why such seasonable compassions should be
buried in oblivion; but rather should be published according to many Scriptural
precedents; rendering fragrant, and perpetuating the memory of such Christian
Sympathy. And though in point of modesty, some find it difficult to commend
Benefactors to their face, yet find no less dissicult to be ungrate. Your
friendly reception of me at first was not all, for after ye were pleased to
call me for a season, to labor in Gospel-work, your acceptance of my poor
labors was yet a greater comfort; and the testimonies I had of affection from
Magistrates, Ministers, and People, were really surprising, being conferred on
so worthless a Creature: and that which added yet more to render my lot
comfortable at that time, was the exemplary conversation of many Christians,
whose knowledge and experience in godliness was such, as gave occasion for my
own edification every day.

Pardon this confidence of perfixi^g your honorable Names to so mean a Work;
which I the rather hope to obtain, because experience of your former
indulgence, has made me thus presume, to hope for acceptance of an affectionat
and obliged testimony of gratitude; though it be but as a mite, where so many
Talents are due.

And that ye may continue of one heart and way, exemplary as hitherto, in
appearing for, and promoting the Kingdom of Christ, that your labor of love
may be fruit abounding to your account, that the Countenance of God may be
lifted up, and his face shine on your assemblies, and that upon all the glory a
defense may be created, to continue from generation to generation, is the
desire of

Right Honorable, Your obliged Servant in the Lord ROB: CRAGHEAD.
L. Derry, Feb. 26. 1694/5
TO THE Christian Reader:
REason requires, that the ensueing Discourse appear with an Apology in the
entry, for troubling the World with any thing new on the Lords Supper, by so
unpolished a Pen; after so many elaborate, and profitable Treatises on this
subject, but for thy satisfaction know: that though I presume not to offer any
thing near so excellent as others, yet having occasion to converse with many in
soul-distress, on the account of the Lords Supper; some doubting if they should
Partake, others troubled because they did Partake, and some afflicted because
they did not Partake: Finding also some objections from their own mouths that
have not been usual, and because they have not occurred to others, are
therefore not discussed, by such as have written Learnedly and Piously on this
Sacrament: and being peculiarly concerned with some who are thus troubled;
found it Duty to endeavor their relief, by a few particular instructions; not
presuming a Treatise on the Lords Supper; so Divine and profound a Subject as
gives work sufficient (if not more) t^ the most able and choice of men, if all
things be considered, that natively belong to tha^ Ordinance. The Lords Supper
is a larg^ and fertile Field, where diligent Reapers may yet find more and more
for the gathering, both for the comfort of Believers, an^ seasonable warning to
the presumptuous.

As for Believers, First, There is an appointed meeting between Christ and them
the desire of all Nations is there to be received, He who is our all, the one
pea^^ for which when the richest of men sell their Earthly all, yet have him
freely, and for nothing: the light and glory of Heaven comes down to us, to be
the hope of Glory in us, He comes with Garments rolled in Blood; to make us
know what we cost him; and through these Garments, Eternal, and overcoming love
shines, warmeth, and attracteth the hearts of Believers. 2. Christ comes in
this Ordinance, to give Believers a hearty taste, of that intimate Communion
which shall hereafter be the fullness of their joy, their Crown, and their
Glory: and though now they see him but darkly, yet they know it to be himself,
and not another; and when he and they shall meet again in another manner, when
he shall come to receive them without a Vail on his glorious Face, they shall
know it is the same blessed Face which they beheld before, but as in a Glass.
How sweet to think on that meeting with Hope? Where the hope is sure, as an
Anchor already entered within the vail: at the first Celebration Christ willed
the Communicants to raise up their hearts, to the Meditations, and joyful
Expectations of that blessed Communion to come, by putting them in mind, that
he and they shall drink together of the new Wine in his Fathers Kingdom. 3.
Believers admitted to true Communion with him in this Ordinance, receive with
himself; grace to love his fellowship, grace to hate what offers to separat,
grace to love the means of its continuance, grace to long for its perfection:
when he who is full of grace and truth comes near to a poor sinner, the savor
of his Ointments goes to the poor man's heart, Christ brings him near, not
that he may look at him, and get nothing, but look and be saved, behold and be
transformed into the same image, eat and be satisfied: Christ's fullness of
Grace overfloweth, yielding showers of Blessings to the dry and parched Ground;
we cannot so much as touch him by Faith, but virtue proceeds for healing the
poor sinner. 4. Here also is the Seal of Christ's Testament, securing the
Believer he shall be preserved unto the Heavenly Kingdom, and be forever witb
the Lord: he has given himself to them, and they bave received him; Therefore
now no Sin, no Death, no Devil, no ensnaring World, nothing present or to come,
shall separate from his Love. The believing Receiver may, and should conclude
this, because the honor and regard that is due to Christ's Seal, and therefore
together with dependence on the Spirits sealing, the Believer is not to be
idle, waiting only if assurance will drop down upon him, but is to endeavor
the assuring of his own heart by the Seal of God.

On the other hand, the danger is great, if this Ordinance be profaned: for the
more of Christ's Love shine in any Ordinance, and the nearer he comes with the
offers of his Love, the more heinous is the profanation: Now of all Gospel
Ordinances, Christ offers to come nearest to us in the Lords Supper;
preaching is to bring us near to Christ; but in the Lords Supper the Believer
directly acts Communion with Christ: and therefore this Ordinance does in a
peculiar manner bear this name of Communion. There is no cause then of judging
it great severity, when it is said he that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks Damnation or Judgment to himself: some are ready to say;
these were monsters of men, who imbrued their vile hands in that precious
Blood, and they would not have been guilty of it for all the Kingdoms of the
Earth; who yet forget that the Lord charge the same guilt on themselves, for
profaneing that holy Ordinance being thereby guilty of the Body and Blood of
the Lord.

The danger of this has made me insist the more largely on that head of
Self-examination before partaking at the Lords Table; which perhaps some may
think tedious, but if it may conduce as a mean, to prevent the guilt of one
poor soul I shall not think any pains too much: as for others who find no need
of so many and particular Examinations, they may pass them by, and leave them
to others.

Some may be apt to Object the same against so long discoursing on Communion
with God: but whosoever Objecteth this, let him Consider. First, That Communion
with Christ is the very Text and Subject in hand. 2. If Men know nothing of the
Nature and Way of Communion with God; how shall they seek after it in the
Sacrament. 3. If true Communion with Christ be obtained at the Lord' s Table,
then it ought to be Cherished and Entertained in a Believers Walk, for Christ
being Received we are to Walk in Him: It were great Ignorance if not
Ir-religious profaneness, to say that Communion with Christ being Obtained at
His Table, we are to be no more concerned with it until the next Communion; for
such as are of this Opinion have just cause of Fear they never yet had
Communion with Christ any where. 4 The very Happiness of men consisting in
Communion with God, this being the Believers only help and Comfort, and it is
interruptions his great loss, grief and disquiet, finding that without it he is
as nothing, and for nothing but evil, I therefore wish this little hint of it
may be serviceable were it for no more, but to excite others better Qualified,
and Blessed with more experience, to write on this Subject of Communion with
God by it self, in a more full and particular manner than I have yet seen, or
such a weak Person as I am able to perform.

Some also will probally Object against the many Objections here Published,
especially these Temptations mentioned, that it might be Prudence rather to
conceal some of them, To which I answered. First, That many Horrid Temptations
are Recorded in the Holy Scriptures, as also the Mercy of God's delivering from
them Published to His Glory; Therefore His Gracious support under such
Temptations, and granting frequently a Comfortable Victory is not to be
concealed. 2. It Is necessary that People be Warned and Armed for the worst of
Temptations, that so they may be fixed by the Armor of God, before they be
assaulted. 3. Many conceal their Temptations too long, until they are ready to
sink, and are s^ill silent for this very Reason; that they hear so little of
the Temptations of others, and therefore think there is no sorrow like theirs,
which adds to their Affliction, whereas some particul^ar Instructions
Pertinent to their distressed Case, and ready at hand, might by the Blessing of
God be Useful, especially in the beginning of their Temptations. 4. This
requires the more Public consideration, because such distressed Souls under
grievous Temptations and Suggestions, are more Numerous than is commonly
Apprehended: and these not only of our Perswassion, for I can give Instances of
several sober Persons now living, and of another Perswassion Afflicted in like
manner. 5. Let it be Considered, that their is nothing in the following
Discourse for Indulging any manner of Temptations, but what is said is to
resist them in a Christian manner.

The last thing I am to acquaint thee with, is, that this little Treatise being
wholly practical, and designed only to for help to the weaker sort of
Christians, it is style is fitted for the meanest, for though Controversies
cannot be Managed without words dificult to the Ignorant; yet it has
sometimes grieved Me to see some Excellent practical Books Thrown away by some
Readers, for no other Reason, but that the Words were above their reach; which
I Humbly Conceive should be conscientiously prevented, for knowing Readers can
understand the plainest, but the Ignorant cannot understand words for which
they had no Education.

That this Essay, notwithstanding it is Manifold Imperfections, may Obtain thy
candide reception, and that it may prove by the Blessing of God in some Measure
Servicable to to thy Souls great Interest is the desire of

Thy Souls well wisher and Servant, for Christ's sake. R. C.

CHAP. I.
1 Corinthians 10. 16. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the Blood of Christ, the Bread which we break is it not the
Communion of the Body of Christ?
COmmunion with God is justly the wonder of all that obtain it, who can do
little more while here but wonder, not understanding it is value, until the
shaddows flee away, and they see His Face in a greater brightness; This dignity
and mercy must be exceeding great, seeing the blood of him who is God was shed
for it is Purchase, The just suffering for the unjust, to bring us to God, 1
Pet. 3. 18. But when his servants shall serve him, and see his Face, and thereby
themselves be made to shine in their Fathers Kingdom, then shall the glory of
that love which contrived, and the glory of that love which purchased this
Communion, be celebrated in another manner: Yet this Communion being begun on
earth, we must according to the measure given, aim at the celebration of the
glory of this love, in the manner required by himself, who has instituted this
Sacrament of the Lords Supper for a memorial of his love, in humbling himself
unto death; requiring this his death to be showed forth until he come again,
and allowing his people such Communion with himself in this Ordinance, as shall
be to them a Seal for their eternal Enjoyment of him, when he comes again to
receive them to himself.

The Blessings of this Ordinance are so great; that it is our mercy we have it is
institution, it is several Parts the signification of each Part* the Manner of
acting on our part, and the Benefits to the believing Receiver. All
particularly recorded. And in the words of this Text we have all these
blessings summed up in our obtaining Communion with Christ, for he being ours,
all is ours.

The Connection of this verse with the words immediately proceeding is not so
very obvious, as the Scope will make it appear, for what end the Lords Supper
is here mentioned.

The Apostle is giving seasonable warning to these believing Corinthians, now
eminent for Gifts, to take heed lest they fall, verse 12. For which end he
gives them to understand that the people of God of old, were privileged above
all other People, with signal testimonies of Gods peculiar favor, they were
under the cloud, miraculously carried through the red sea, did eat the same
spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink: And all these mercies by
Christ the Rock that followed them; Yet with many of them God was not well
pleased: And among other evils whereby God was provoked, their early Idolatry
was most provoking: Therefore says the Apostle, flee from Idolatry, ver. 14.
and proposes this Text as an Argument against Participation with Idolaters, in
their idolatrous service; For says he ye have solemnly professed Christ, and
Communion with him, in the Sacrament of his Supper; and therefore must renounce
all Worship, that is inconsistent with the said Profession, and Communion; such
as the Sacrifices of the Gentiles being but Sacrifices of Devils, etc. And ye
cannot drink of the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils, ver. 21. Now that
this Ordinance is such a solemn professed Communion with Christ, he asserteth
as undeniable by this interrogation is it not, etc. Making the Affirmative
strong, being such as themselves could not deny.

In the words we have these four things. First the general nature of this holy
Sacrament, that is, the signs of Divine Institution, and the promised Blessing
thereto Appertaining. 2. Both the signs distinctly discribed, and both to be
made use of by Believers. 3. The special and great benefit of Communion with
Christ represented by these Symbols. 4. That in order to a Believers
participation of Christ's Body and Blood, these visible signs must be blessed
and set apart for that holy use, the Apostle here begins with the Cup, where
we are to consider four things, First what is understood by the Cup, Secondly,
How it is called a Cup of Blessing, Thirdly, How it is said to be the Cup which
we bless, Fourthly, That the Cup Blessed is the Communion of the blood of
Christ.

For the First, the Cup signifies the Wine in the Cup, and the Wine
represents Christ's Blood; and therefore evidently a figurative speech, Mat.
26. 27. And he took the Cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying,
drink ye all of it, for this is my blood of the New Testament, etc. and Luke
22. 20. This Cup is the New Testament in my blood. So that by the Cup is set
forth the precious blood of Christ the price of our Redemption, Ephesians. 1. 7. In
whom we have redemption through his blood, and 1 Cor. 6. 20. Ye are bought with
a price.

Secondly, It Is the Cup of Blessing; being indeed a Cup of Salvation, full of
blessings to the believing Receiver, being blessed with all spiritual blessings
in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 3. The cursed made blessed, and the guilty made righteous.
Next, It Is the cup of Blessings or Praises, the word also signifying giving
thanks, for hereby the blessings of many ready to perish come upon the
Redeemer, who loved and gave himself for them.

Thirdly, It Is the Cup which we bless, the cup must be blessed, and set apart
for representing of that precious blood: Therefore we find that Christ blessed
it; He took the cup, and gave thanks; the benefit of which is yet to be
expected by Believers. Secondly, and his servants by Office, who in his Name
administer this Ordinance, and give the Cup, pray for this blessing, and in his
Name bless and set apart the Cup for this sacred use, that it may be to the
partakers by Christ's blessing the Communion of his Blood; which is,

The fourth thing to be considered. The Communion of his Blood: The word
signifies Common or Communicable to others giving and receiving, as 1 Timothy 6.
18. willing to Communicate; It Is the same word, So there is giving on Christ's
part, and receiving by the Believer which is this Communion of his Blood; so
the same word is translated fellowship, 1 Cor. 1. 9: You are called unto the
fellowship of his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. Believers having most intimate
fellowship with Christ, they in him, and Christ dwelling in their hearts by
Faith, So the word is also translated Partaking, 2 Pet, 1. 4. That by these you
might be partakers of the Divine nature, that is to have Communion with the
Divine nature: and possibly it had been as safe to have translated its
Communion or Fellowship, as partaking, for some weak people have mistaken that
Expression (partaking of the Divine nature) and overstretched it, to whom
fellowship with the Divine Nature had been more plain, as the word is
translated* 1 John 1: 3. Our fellowship is with the Father, and his Son Jesus
Christ. The Cup here is said to be the Communion of his blood, that is the Cup
being blessed according to Divine Institution, and made use of by the believing
Receiver, he partakes of the benefit of Christ's blood, his Death and Purchase,
he has Communion with Christ crucified, his Death being for him, and in his
stead; he is said to be crucified with Christ, Gal. 2. 20: satisfying the
Justice of God, in and by Christ crucified, and so has the Communion of his
blood.

The next visible sign is the Bread, where these three things are to be noted,
first, that it is bread, Secondly, Bread broken, and Thirdly, that this Bread
broken is the Communion of Christ's Body.

For the first Bread is made use of by our Redeemer, as that which is necessary
for preserving the life of man, and therefore fit to signify, and represent
the Bread of life, Christ is our spiritual food, his flesh meat indeed John 6:
55: Secondly, It Is not any bread but this bread blessed and set apart for this
representation, Mat. 26: 26: As they were eating, Jesus took bread and blessed
it, Thirdly, after it is blessed, it remains still bread, the Apostle does not
say the Body which we break, but the Bread which we break; now the Bread is not
broken before, but after it is blessed, for he took bread and blessed it, and
brake, and the Apostle says expressly it is Bread which is broken! but if after
the blessing or consecration, the bread were transubstantiated into the natural
Body of Christ, then the Apostle had said the Body which we break: sure the
Apostle knew what name to give it, having received of the Lord what he
delivers, and what can be more plain, than that it is still Bread when it is
broken, which is after it is consecration; this breaking of the bread is so
material a part of the institution, that the whole of the Sacrament bears its
name called the breaking of bread, Acts 2. 42. The breaking of Christ's precious
Body being thereby signified, Christ requires this discerning of his Body,
broken saying, this is my body which is broken for you, 1 Cor. 11: 24: and the
breaking of the bread must be Sacramentally, and publlckly performed in sight
of the Communicants, for their instruction, as in the first Celebration.

And in the last place, the sincere Believer in eating of this bread according
to Christ's institution, does by Faith receive himself, has special Communion
with him, and partakes the benefits and purchase made through the offering of
the body of Jesus Christ once for all, Heb: 10: 10: This is the Sacrifice he
came to give, when no other could do; and therefore it is memorial should be
always fragrant.

Many pertinent Doctrines may be here observed, both from the scope and words
of this Text, but I shall name only this one.

Doct. The worthy receiver at the Lords Table has Communion with Christ, in
partaking the benefit of his precious blood, and broken Body.

From this great and comfortable truth, these ten inferences following appear
native, which shall be the subject matter, of the ensuing Discourse, First
inference the celebration of the Lords Supper, being an holy transaction
between Christ and Believers, wherein they have the Communion of his Body and
blood, then the Doctrine of Christ concerning himself, what he is, what he has
done and suffered, should be firmly believed as a foundation for our partaking
of this blessed Communion.

2. Inference, the Lords Supper being the Communion of Christ's body and blood
to the believer: then all who partake are obliged to prepare for so great a
blessing, particularly to examine themselves before they eat.

3. This blessed Ordinance of Christ, being the Communion of his body and
blood: Then Communicants are to approach it with a humble sense of their sin;
as needing the virtue of that precious blood.

4. The worthy Receiver obtaining the Communion of Christ's body and blood. Then
Communicants are obliged to understand what that is which is called Communion
with Christ before they partake.

5. Seeing such blessed and near Communion with Christ may, be obtained at the
Lords Table: then Communicants should prepare for entertaining communion with
him in the very time of that Solemnity.

6. This blessed Ordinance of the Lords Supper, being the communion of Christ's
body and blood: then believers are obliged to have a sincere desire to partake
of so great a mercy.

7. This holy Ordinance, being the Communion of Christ body and blood: Then
believers should approach it, with Faith, and expectation of this blessed
Communion with Christ.

8. Seeing so great a benefit as the Communion of Christ's body and blood, may be
had in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: Then Christians are obliged to
endeavor the removal of all objections, and stumbling blocks that stand in the
way, to obstruct their partaking of this benefit.

9. This holy Sacrament, being the Communion of Christ's body and blood: Then
after partaking, Communicants are obliged to try if they have obtained that
blessed Communion.

10. This holy Ordinance, being the Communion of Christ's body and blood: Then
Communicants are obliged to live suitable to so great a benefit, and testify
their gratitude, by an holy walk and conversation.

CHAP. II.
The Doctrine of Christ Crucified, must be believed by Communicants.

The first Inference,

THe celebration of the Lords Supper, being an holy transaction between Christ
and Believers; wherein they have the Communion of his body and blood, then the
Doctrine of Christ concerning himself, what he is, what he has done, and
suffered, should be firmly believed, as a foundation for our partaking of this
blessed Communion.

For if the Doctrine unto which this Sacrament belongs, and whereupon it
depends, be doubted, such also will our partaking be, not in faith, but
doubting; therefore all concerned, who have a due value for their Souls, are to
labor for fixedness, in the great Gospel truths concerning Christ, and the way
of obtaining Communion with him. I shall God willing make this appear, in this
Chapter, and conclude it with a few words of advice to such Communicants as
have most need of greater establishment in the truth.

Consider first, that men's professing of Gospel truths is not sufficient proof,
that they believe these truths, for many profess that which they do not
believe, having no firm persuasion of these truths, in their own minds; but
stand yet in need of being taught, which be the first principles of the oracles
of God, even after such profession, and opportunities of knowledge, that they
might have been teachers of others, Heb. 5, 12.

2. Nor is want of doubts concerning these truths, sufficient evidence, that
they are firmly believed, for the want of doubts does not always proceed from
fixedness in Faith, but sometimes from being unconcerned, whether the Doctrine
be true or false, not being so serious, as either to believe, or doubt,

3. Nor is it sufficient, that people have an implicit Faith in what
concerns their Salvation, because their teachers instruct them so, and they
so receive, having nothing against it: because men may be easily shaken out of
that sort of Faith; and therefore we are to receive the Doctrine of Christ, 1
These. 2: 13 not as the word of men, (but as it is in truth) the word of God.
Particularly, first if we do not believe there was and is a Christ, we cannot
converse with him, for who can seek Communion with one of whose very being they
doubt? Would to God all professed Christians, believed in heart firmly; that
there is a Christ, as our merciful God, has given us full evidence for our
belief. 2. If we do not believe that he is God and man, God manifest in the
flesh, we cannot have Communion with him, as such, and if we have not Communion
with him as such, then we have not Communion with the true Christ, the Mediator
and sent Savior of the World. 3. If we do not believe, that he really died,
then we can have no Communion of his Body and Blood, Not believing that his
Blood was shed. 4. If we do not believe that this his Death, and offering
himself a Sacrifice to the justice of God, for these who were given him of his
Father, was accepted of God, then we cannot lay the burden of our sins upon and
trust our Souls to that Sacrifice. 5 If we do not believe, that God has
provided a way for our partaking of that Sacrifice, and the benefits thereby
purchased; then we cannot believe a Participation and Fellowship of his
Sufferings. 6. And if we know nothing of that appointed way, viz. by Faith then
we cannot make application of his Death, and so shall not have the Communion of
his Body and Blood. And that the necessity of firm believing the Doctrine of
Christ may appear, Consider;

First that we may see with grief, how many turn Apostates, Athiests, and
Blasphemers, who were professed Christians, and appeared to have no doubt of
what they professed, for many years, yet by frequent Ap^stacy men's Souls are
ruined, Religion reproached, and Satan's kingdom advanced.

2. It Is found also, that others of a better stamp, who do not precipitate
themselves into such Gulfs of Apostasy, improving the benefit of a good
Education, their practice being in some measure according to their knowledge:
yet in progress of years, when they come to be more deeply concerned with their
eternal state, and to know on what grounds they can warrantably expect to be no
worse, but better, when this life has its period; searching into these
grounds, do often find such difficulties to believe the truths whereof they
doubted nothing in their younger years, that their souls are cast into deep
disquiet, and sometimes are made to bless God who has kept them alive, and
under means of knowledge, that they may yet be confirmed in some important
truths, which nearly concern their very Salvation. And notwithstanding that
conscientious Christians, are cautious and sparing in uttering their Doubts,
specially, when they are such as might prove stumbling to others; Yet where the
benefit of cordial Sympathy is obtained, many are found under distressing
conflicts of this nature, in so much that if their gracious God, did not
relieve, they could not stand long in their profession, but would be noticed to
their grief as fainting: Such temptations have not yet left this World, in
vain, I have washen my hands in innocence, Psalm. 73. 13.

3. It Is also too evidently found, that some by reason of not being fixed in
the great Gospel truths concerning Christ, and Salvation, are retarded in their
whole Christian progress; for the foundation not being firmly laid, they cannot
go on to perfection, this is no charge against the foundation which God has
laid; for that is still sure and unmovable, 1 Cor. 3. 11. For other foundation
can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. For which we are to
bless God, but it is men's not being fixed upon, and cemented with the true
foundation: and whether men will or not, this has a Secret, strong influence
to deaden all their religious practice, when they doubt but all their pains may
be in vain at last, and that they have been but beating the air, 1 Cor. 9. 26.

4. Some are assaulted with violent temptations, tempting them to doubt of many
truths at once, and such as are of great consequence; and then their weakness
appears, then they smart bitterly, for not being established in the truth,
having no solid answer for repelling of such temptations, then they are tossed
to and fro with any wind of Doctrine, yea, many woes are at hand, then they are
ready to call good evil, and evil good, and put darkness for light, then they
are ready to run down the stream, and yield all, were it not that God knows
how to deliver his own out of temptation, 2 Pet. 2. 9.

5. Known instances may be given of some who in their day shined to the glory
of God, and Edification of many, who yet not long before their great change
found it their greatest trial and difficulty, to be fixed in believing, even as
to the object of their Faith: which should be remarked as a warning to weaker
persons to spend more of our time and seriousness for rooting in the truth,
that we may know whom we have believed, which was the Apostles great rejoicing.
2 Timothy 1. 12.

6. It Is also to be observed, that especially at Communions Doubts do arise in
many of the People of God, when they are examining their Faith, and Knowledge,
and Satan always going about to resist good, laboring to obstruct the best
works (whereof self-examination is one) instead of questioning their own
weakness in knowledge, or slowness to believe, he tempts them to doubt of the
object of their Faith: and if not fixed they are at least so disturbed in their
Souls, and cast down; that they have no confidence for going to the Lords
Table: and supposing they were not afflicted with such temptations, yet if
fundamentals Gospel Truths be not understood, nor a judicious assent of the
mind yielded to them; then there can be no consent. An assent of the mind may
be to the truth without consent, but we cannot choose and consent to that which
the mind does not believe to be truth. So then you cannot consent to receive
Christ at his Table, except ye believe the report and testimony that God has
given of him, 1 John 5. 10. Therefore spare no pains for knowledge, dig for it
as for hid treasures, account the knowledge of Christ excellent knowledge, as
others did who knew him better than you, who did look upon other things as but
loss and dung, Phil. 3. 8. Thou have none to know like him, nor any knowledge
so necessary as to know him, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Who is made of God unto us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, be not too easily satisfied with
thy knowledge of Christ, as many in this age are: Let it be an exercise of thy
Soul by it self, how to know Christ, lest thy first knowledge of him be as of a
Judge to give out Sentence, Depart, I know you not: lay this to heart, though
thou had not the Lords Table to go to, but if thou will go to it ignorant of
him, ignorance it self will render thee an unworthy Communicant, as I sear it
does too many in our times, who yet cannot be judicially debarred; what if thy
own conscience should rise upon thee when thou art going to his Table, and
accuse thee of presumption, for attempting a Communion with him, to whom thou
art a mere stranger, not so much as believing the record God has given of his
Son? Can such a person be accepted of him? Labor then to be acquainted with
him in time, Job 22. 21. Acquaint thy self with him rendering praise to God,
that thou has yet a season for it; and if thou do not affect ignorance; but
art one who longest for the knowledge of the Holy, fearing thou art the very
person that has not that knowledge, Prove. 30. 3. Fearing the danger of thy
Soul, were it for nothing else, but thy ignorance of Christ, fearing also to go
to the Lords Table, on the same account, then Consider;

First, all the true knowledge thou can have of Christ, and the Doctrine of
Salvation by him, is supernatural, thou can not dig it out of thy self, None
knows the Son, but he to whom it is revealed, Matthew. 11. 27. And when Peter
gives an account of his knowledge of Christ, he is told, Matthew. 16. 17. flesh
and blood has not revealed this unto thee: Then thy work is to pray for this
knowledge what ever other means thou use, thou must have it as a free Gift, 1 John 5. 20. He has given us an understanding to know him that is true, it is
also given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom, Matthew. 13. 11. despond not,
though this day thou art very ignorant of Christ, and the mysteries of his
Kingdom, it may be thou has too much depended on thy own understanding, and not
prayed for a given understanding; the neglect of this keeps many in
ignorance, for though we sometimes grieve, because we are ignorant; yet we are
naturally so proud, that we had rather have it of our selves, than take it as a
free gift of God: but take his counsel, who says, If any man lack wisdom, let
him ask it of God, who gives liberally, Jam. 1. 5. Blessed Jesus Christ is
sent to open the eyes of the blind, Isa. 42. 7. Let him have his work beseech
him to open thy eyes, he will not fail to perform what he came for, if thou will sincerely acknowledge thy blindness, remember what he says, John 9. 41.
if you were blind ye should have no sin, take it then as a great mercy to be
sensible of thy blindness, it being the surest way to the best light.

2. Consider also that there are degrees, both of knowledge and faith, though
thou come not up to the first Worthies, yet thou may be no unworthy
Communicant if Christ has so manifested himself unto thee, that thou can not
live contentedly without him? If what thou have discovered of him has
captivated thy Soul? If thou love all thou know of him? And followest on
to know more? Though thou see not him flying in that glorious brightness,
that some did on the Mount, yet Christ will come and meet with thee waiting for
him, though at the foot of the Mount, he will come down to thee, when thou
can not go up to him, and he will be as good as his word, in manifesting
himself to all who love him, and keep his words, though he do not manifest
himself in a like manner to all, we must be glad to see him though through a
lates's; if so be we are sure it is he, the very Lamb of God, who takes away
the sin of the world; any sure knowledge of him, any manner of his manifesting
himself, should be highly valued, for where he manifests himself, there will
he come and make an abode, Joh. 14. 23.

3. It deserves a special remark, that though the Disciples continued long
weak in their Knowledge, confessing their ignorance that they knew not the way*
John 14. 5, and sometimes that they knew not what he said, Joh. 16 18. And as
yet they knew not the Scripture, that he must rise again, Joh. 20. 9. They were
not so fully confirmed as afterward, yet as to the state of their souls, Christ
declares them clean, Joh. 15. 3. and admitted them to his Table yea, and
gives a comfortable account of them to his Father, Joh. 17. 25* and these have
known, that thou have sent me, and verse. 6. they have kept thy Word. O! the
depth of his love, and faithfulness; First, to open the eyes of the blind, and
reveal his Father unto them, and then though they see but darkly, to give this
comfortable account of them, father they have known: What piercing eyes has
Christ, to observe the good, as well as the evil of his people, and to bring
forth a^^^t^e of his own fine Gold from under vast rubbish, and make it shine
before his Father, as fruit of the travel of his Soul. Let not the Reader
mistake, in making a bad use of this, to his own hurt, in presuming without
some competent knowledge: for by Christ's testimony it is evident, the Disciples
had knowledge, only Christ's condescensions must not be concealed, in allowing
his Table to such as were but weak; that others in succeeding generations
grieved for their weakness, might not despond; since it is not the altogether
perfect that Christ expects at this lower Table, but at the higher: where
that unknown, that reserved new wine may be drunk without danger, Matthew. 26.
29, I might here also add, that believers sometimes have a real knowledge of
these Gospel mysteries, which themselves think they know not: As for instance,
Joh. 14. 4. and whither I go, ye know: but in the next verse, Thomas denies
both, saying, we know not whither thou go; and how can we know the way? This
contradicts what Christ had said, he saying ye know, and ^homas saying, we
know not. Now what Christ said, is in^allibly true, and needed not that any
should testify of man, for he knew what was in man, Joh. 2. 25. And it was
very ill manners in the good Man, to contradict his Master, and little better
than give him the lie in his face: Who would bear such things as meek Jesus
does! The man should have well p^ndered the words spoken by Christ, as
certainly true, because he spoke them, and should have rendered praise for his
discovering that in himself, and others which they could not observe; and
thereby allowing them comfort as to their knowledge: but as he, so some
Christians yet take a sinful liberty, to deny the goodness of God to their
souls, by a mismanaged, I will not say pretended kind of humility: when some
reflect on their knowledge, and find it mixed with darkness, and indistinct; How
ready are they to conclude, and say they have no knowledge: Whereas Christ may
have other thoughts of them, for his thoughts are not their thoughts, Isa. 55.
8.

Fifthly, Yet by all means, study to grow in grace and knowledge, the hand of
the diligent makes rich: It Is very observable, that some Christians are more
obnoxious to doubts, than others, and find them a great hinderance to their
Spiritual advancement; yet when they set themselves to Diligence, in observing
Christ's Works in them, and for them, and the sweet harmony betwixt his Word and
Works, do often get their doubts cleared, their Fetters fall off, and then they
run, and not weary, knowing they run not in vain: When the Disciples attend
diligently to Christ's Words, then they come to say cheerfully, Now we believe,
and are sure, Joh. 16. 30.

Sixthly, Be diligent, to practice what ye know, John 7. 17. If any man will do
his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I
speak of my self. Hearken carefully to this counsel, as thou would be confirmed
in the truth, for our not practicing what we know clearly; provokes God to
give us no more light, since we improve not what we have.

CHAP. 3.
Self-examination required of all, before Partaking.

THe second inference, is, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, being the
Communion of Christ^ Body and Blood to the believer; then all who^ partake, are
oblidged to prepare for so great a Blessing* particularly, to examine
themselves, before they eat.

I shall therefore, by the Lords help. First, Giv^ some reasons, why this
Examining a man's self, must no^ be omitted. 2. Answer some objections made
against it. 3 Show the manner, how it ought to be performed. And in the last
place, Point at these heads, wherein we are chiefly to examine our selves,
before we partake.

For the First, The reasons, why every man should examine before he eat, are
these,

First, It Is expressly Commanded, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a man examine himself, and
so let him eat. Here is no exception of one by another, and therefore we should
make none. It Is not said, let a poor ignorant man examine himself, but men of
knowledge need not; it is not said, let a man examine himself, the first time he
receives only, but whenever he is to eat, let him examine himself. Therefore
the neglect of this one Duty, will render a man guilty before God, take care
how ye enter the work, if ye go out of the road in the beginning of the way,
you shall not easily know where to fall into it again.

2. The transaction betwixt Christ, and partakers of the Lords Supper, is of
the greatest importance for a man's soul, for either he shall be guilty of the
Body and Blood of the Lord, by unworthy receiving, or be blessed with the Seal
of God for his eternal happiness; if he truly receive Christ: Therefore,
previous examination is most necessary.

3 It Is Gods great mercy to our souls, that he requires this Duty of examining
our selves; and therefore should not be looked upon as a burden, but a mean for
preventing our ruin; for if after examination, you find your selves in the
bond of iniquity, and in the broad way to the Pit; It Is your mercy to know it,
before you feel it: Can you in cold blood, think it advisable, that the Pit be
your first wakening! When the unquenchable flames of Gods wrath are about you,
are ye resolved to understand the state of your soul no other way? Can this be
the way of Wisdom? Can you approve it? And if you cannot in your own conscience
approve it, but knows it to be a sinful, and dangerous neglect: Why then will
you take a young Hell in your breast, to the old? Why do you prepare such a
gnawing Worm as this will be? That here is a man, who never had so much regard
to Heaven, or fear of Hell, as to enquire, which of them he was going to.

On the other hand, if after examination, ye shall find any thing of true Grace,
the least grain of that fine Gold tried in the Fire, though covered with much
rubbish, if any love of Christ, and holiness; though but as a smoking Flax:
would not the comfort abundantly compense thy pains, can thou deny it? If
Christ has given thee grace, is it not worth the looking on, that thou may
at least give him thanks for it? Search therefore diligently, for thou know
not the many blessings that may attend a conscientious Examination, Psalm. 119.
59. I thought upon my ways, and turned my feet to thy testimonies.

4. We are naturally inclined to flatter our selves in our iniquity, Psalm. 36.
2. He flattereth himself in his own eyes. And if we could, to deceive and
flatter God with our lips; And therefore are obliged to make a diligent search,
lest we vainly think we stand in need of nothing, when we are wretched and
naked, Rev. 3. 17.

We may think that we live, and have a name that we live, and yet God find us
Dead, Rev. 3. 1.

What woe of woes, what a costly delusion to the poor Soul, if still among the
Dead, and at last under the second Death, and the poor man has no more to say,
but I thought I was alive in my Soul, and many others thought so of me? I
thought that I might be as welcome to the Lords Table, as any Christian was
there, I thought my self more upright than many of them, my heart said so to
me, I many times thought their many Prayers, Whinings, Groanings, Doubts, and
examining themselves, was either but Hypocrisy, or vain Labor? But now
iniquity has found me out, cannot now have one hour for the Work I despised,
night is come, I cannot now see how to work, Night is come without hope of a
Morning: Be wise then, as to your latter End; for the time is at hand, when men
will need no Examinations: you will be all at a point in a few Years, and
eternally fixed in your Lot.

5. If people will not be at pains to examine themselves before a Communion,
they will easily neglect it at other times, and so are apt to live out of this
Duty while they live; when men become so impudent as to face the Lords Table,
not observing his Direction, and the manner how to approach it, the Direction
being perremptory. But let a man examine himself: So that albeit there be a
reluctance to this profitable Duty; yet this should constrain to it, as we
would not profane the holy things of God: and when people make Conscience of
it, though the Sacrament be in its own nature a confirming Ordinance; yet this
previous examination has been signally blessed of God, being the very time and
mean of awakening many out of their secure sleep in their Sins. I know many at
this day now exemplary in Holiness, who can declare that preparation for
Communions in their younger years, was the very time their hearts were first
engaged to Christ and his ways.

6. Some without due examination take up an opinion, that they have no grace,
no Title to Christ, or his Table; and so deprive themselves of that benefit:
This opinion was not the result of serious Examination, but rather a temptation
to obstruct both their Duty, and Mercy; and this becomes both a Sin, and snare
to them, a Sin, because they have not followed Gods Directions in knowing the
very state of their Souls, and a sna^e being thereby barred up from their
spiritual good; therefore, this Self examination is most necessary every way.

Notwithstanding of the many clear and ponderous Reasons for this examining
before Partaking of the Lords Supper, yet some object against it, as,

First, I know my souls condition so well already, that I am resolved not to
Communicate; an^ therefore it would be to me but an unprofitable toil, and
therefore I will leave that Work to such as intend to receive.

Answ. By what Rule can, or dare ye resolve not to partake, before ye take the
way of Gods appointment to examine first, and then determine? Is it not just
with God, to leave you to your own counsels, ^ince ye will not follow his? Is
your method better than Gods? Your way is either for never Communicating, or
never to Communicate aright; for if you will not examine, ye shall not Communicate
aright; Dare you say, that any of Gods Commands are unprofitable, whose
Commands are for our good always, and in keeping of them is great reward. Psalm.
19. 11. Will ye join with these impudent wretches, who say, what profit is it,
that we have kept his ordinance, Mal. 3. 14. But when ye say it is tedious, then
ye speak your heart, and discover the root of your objection, even as the
Sluggard, he will be undone, and slain if he go out to his work, Prove. 22. 13.
The slothful man says there is a lion without, I shall be slain in the
streets; yet no other sees this lion in the way, but the sluggard.

2. Object. I am a Believer, and all Believers will be saved, and have a right
to the Lords Table, what needs more searching?

Answ. If ye know it, the less labor in examining will serve, and if it be as
you say, you are the most inexcusable for this neglect, and do foolishly
requite the Lord for his bountiful dealing, and gracious obliging you to all
cheerful obedience; If your faith be so clear already, what harm to bring it to
the light, specially in a season when the Lord requires the trying of it.

2. Do ye know before you try, that your Faith is not Dead? Do ye consider the
direful consequents of a mistake in this? Is not the trial of your faith more
precious than that of gold, 1 Pet. 1. 7. Are ye become wiser than the Apostle
James, who insisteth so much in the discovery of precious justifying Faith,
that it may be discriminate from a delusive dead Faith? which leaves its owner
dead in his sins, Jam. 2. 17, 18, 19.

3. Object. I acknowledge it a Duty to examine my self, but it is such a Duty as
I am not able to manage, I find my self incapable of any advantage by it, for
when ever I Essay it, I can come to no conclusion, as to the state of my Soul:

Answ. If you give up with all holy duties that are difficult, then take heed
that ye do not next give up with the way to Heaven, for it is a narrow way as
Christ has told us; and if you take a Liberty to step aside always when you
find it narrow, how do you think to get through it? if you must needs have an
easy way? it is very easy to find it in the Broad way leading to Destruction,
you will have plenty of fellow* travellours there, who all love it because it
is easy: Are not all Holy Duties difficult to perform because of the
Perverseness of our natures? shall we therefore abandon them all? Do ye judge it
best to give over Prayer, Meditation, Watchfulness, Mortification, Plucking out
the right Eye, etc. And all because it is not easy to perform them aright: why
then should, ye neglect to Examine your selves, which is an hand maid and
furtherance to seriousness in all Duties? but still you say it is a Duty ye
cannot perform.

Answ. For your help who are willing, but are Discouraged by your weakness to
perform it to advantage; first Pray that God would determine your heart to so
clear a Duty, that you may be in Suspense no longer whether to perform it or
not, and Pray for asistance to it is profitable management.

2. Allow for so great a work convenient time, and place, that thou may not
be Diverted, nor the Work Hurried over superficially for want of time to attend
it, which many are Guilty of who are too Prodigal of time otherways. A Heathen
could teach us that we should not Complain so much of having little time, as
that we lose much; you know how much time is often wasted on very Trifles, and
worse: Let securing of your Eternal State have at least some share, otherways
your last farewell to time may be very bitter: when Death shall say not a Moment
longer is my Commission, though possibly thy Conscience tell thee some time
must be taken to Examine, the Scriptures require it, Ministers press it, and it
is the Custom of all who have any seeming seriousness, and Conscience, it is
mouth must be stopped lest it be Clamourous; but then the time allowed is so
scant that nothing is duly Pondered, and so it turns to a Name of nothing.

3. As thou art to allow Competent time, so also due seriousness is necessary,
that it may be suitable to the work in hand, Examine your selves, know you not
your own selves, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Remember you have a deceitful heart to search,
the deceitfulness of sin is such as to hide it self in a searching time, but
you are now to find out Gods Enemies, and your own, you are now to Try Titles
whose you are, Christ's or the Devils, what Title you have to Christ's Feast of
love, do you love or hate Him, has he clothed you with a Garment of
Salvation, that you may sit down with Confidence at his Table or not: if these
things be still triffled over, know that the time is at hand when thou will be
more serious than thou desire; serious I say, in Hopless Terrors: The God of
Mercy have pity upon a kind of Infidel Christians in this Age, who do not, and
will not Believe what is coming, though Christ has often given Warning, yea,
five times together in one place; Mark 9. 43, etc. That the Worm dies not and
the fire is not quenched; and that for not being serious and painful in the
Duties of Religion.

4. When thou do examine thy self, six upon a sufficient Rule, not thy own
imaginations, but the word of God, the Law and Testimony. Isai. 8. 20. Bring
forth the hidden works of darkness to this light, for they must shortly be made
manifest: But if thou shall say then, I may end my Examining work when they
begin, for I have nothing to stand before that light, my best works are but
darkness where that Lamp shines, I cannot answer for one of a Thousand of my
ways.

Answ. Thou have no other safe Rule, for if thou advancest either thy own
Opinion of thy self, or the Opinion of others as a Rule, thou art nothing the
wiser, for these may deceive thee and do deceive many, some thinking they are
rich when they are poor, Rev. 3. 17.

And some have by the Opinion of others, a Name that they live, but Christ
says they are dead. Rev. 3. 1. Whether can thou go, but to the word of his
lips, who looks upon things that are equal, from whom thy sentence must come.
Psalm. 17. 2. 4. But Secondly, when thou considerest Scripture Precept* consider
also Scripture Condescension, or Gods gracious Condescension there revealed, as
when the Scripture says, cursed is every one that continues not in all things
which are written in the book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10. Yet the same
Scripture of Truth says, Christ was made a curse for us. v. 13. so John 3. 18.
He that believes not, is condemned already. But Romans 8. There Is no
condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus: Observe also that God accepts
of sincerity where obedience to the precept is not perfect John 17. 6. They
have kept thy word, yet their obedience was evidently Imperfect, Therefore let
not this break up thy work, that thou have nothing suitable to the purity of
Gods Law, neither conclude thy self graceless, because thou do not that
which thou would in obedience to God, Romans 7. 19.

5. Beware of insufficient marks or evidences either of a gracious or graceless
State, for thou may deceive thy self either of the ways: It Is not a
sufficient work of Grace, thou take delight some times in approaching to God,
as Isai. 58. 2. Nor great appearances, if there be no root. Matthew. 13. 5.
forthwith they spring up, the appearance may be such, as beholders may take
notice there is a great change, the seed springs up, then appears a fresh
green field, that appeared not before, yet no sound Root; none of the
uncorruptible seed which springs up to Life Eternal. Thou may be again and
again ashamed of thy sin, and confess it as Saul, yet no Godly sorrowing on the
account of sin it self, you may also have the out side clean and whited beyond
others, and yet be but whited sepulchers, nothing within but Death, what is
whiter than a dunghill covered over with snow? but when the snow is gone the
dunghill appears as it was.

On the other hand, it is not easy for a Christian when he Examineth his Souls
State, to take the highest degrees of grace which has been attained by the
Saints, and makes them the only Evidences of true graces, as Paul's wish, Romans
9. 3. For I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ for my brethren,
my kinsmen according to the flesh. There is no ground to think that is recorded
as a Mark whereby every Christian must Try if he be in a State of Grace, a man
may be a sincere Christian and not know how to manage such a wish. The Apostle
Paul understood how to abide in Christ, notwithstanding of this, his
extraordinary Zeal for his Contrymen, but the measure of grace is given
according to the gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4.

The safest way is to take Scriptural Marks, such as are set down, as evidences
of sanctifying Grace, for it is Dangerous to overlook these, such as that, John
3. 3. Except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. And
2 Cor. 5. 17. Therefore if any man be in Christ he is a new Creature, old
things are past away, behold all things are become new, and such as that John
14. 23. If a man love me he will keep my words: Such as these are the Marks we
should Try our selves by; for the Spirit of God has given them as Discoveries
of Grace and our Interest in Christ, and therefore it is our sin to neglect
them; being a great Mercy that the Lord in a manner Condescendeth to answer our
Questions: How shall I know if Heaven shall be my Habitation? It Is answered, we
must first be born again, we must be regenerated by the Spirit of God: How
shall I know if I be in Christ? It Is answered, I must be a new Creature. How
shall I know if I have the love of God. It Is answered, Prove. 8. 17. I love them
that love me, again, how shall I know if I Love him. It Is answered, I must keep
his Words, and 1 John 5. And every one that loves him, that begat, loves him
also that is begotten of him.

6. When thou art under this Trial seek to have thy Witnesses assisting and
speaking freely. Romans 8. 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirit
that we are the children of God; albeit Grace has been freely given thee, yet
thou will need the help of the Spirit of God to make known the things that are
freely given thee, as 1 Cor. 2. 12. If the Giver of Grace shine not on Grace,
it will not appear; the Spirit is the Comforter even on this account, to give
the Comfort of his own Grace to to make it evident, for thou can not Judge
without evidence. 1 Cor. 2. 10. The Spirit searches all things, yea the Deep
things of God. Thy second Witness is thy own Spirit or Conscience, for the
Spirit bears witness with our Spirits: Let your Conscience speak freely all
it has to say, as to the very Intentions and Designs of thy heart, for what
end, and by what Motives thou performest Duties; if thy Conscience can Charge
thee with hypocrisy, let all its Depositions have a fair hearing, if it accuse
thee of any retained Idol of heart, or any lust thou make Provision for? if
faithful Witnesses be not heard* how shall thou Judge of thy State? or if thy
Conscience warrantably Excuse and Comfort thee, as to thine Integrity that thou
can humbly appeal to the Searcher of hearts, and thy very Soul content he
Search thee, then thou art not to pass from thine Integrity, Job 27. 5. I will
not remove my integrity from me.

7. Search not only into your sins, nor only into your Grace, but search out
both: some who are under Bondage by fear when they Examine themselves look only
into their faults, and often are apt to say what need for any further Search,
here are so many sins often prevailing, I see them, I feel their Power, the
world also may see many of them in my Practice, though they cannot see all;
whereupon they are forthwith discouraged, they open their eyes upon such Words
as these, Psalm. 65. 3. Iniquities prevail against me: and their faint heart not
considering what follows, as for our transgressions, thou shall purge them
away; nor the Interest they have in such Comfort that the Lord will purge away
their Iniquities, nor that the Grace of God has made it their ordinary care to
keep themselves from their iniquities Psalm. 18. 23. and cannot deny but sin is
their greatest burden Psalm. 38. 4. And that there is a constant warfare against
it, Romans 7.

Some on the other hand sinfully covering their sin, consider only their best
side Luke 18. 11. Lord I thank thee that I am not as other men, I am more holy
than many others, Isa. 65. 5. But these are found most unsavory before the
Lord, as a smoke in his nose, they please themselves as preferable to all
others, they will soon say come see my zeal 2 Kings 10 16. but dare not say as
Psalm. 139. 24. see if there be any wicked way in me: If thou cover thy sins
thou shall not prosper, Prove. 28. 13. Therefore be ingenuous with God, and thy
own Soul search out the worst, as well as the best, and the best as well as the
worst; the worst that thou may be yet more humbled, and the best that thou
may praise.

8 Remember also to search into thy former ways, as well as present: otherways
there may be unpardoned Guilt upon thee for former sins. Psalm. 79 8. Remember
not against us former sins. And Psalm. 25. 7. Forgive the sins of my youth: Try
what way thou have taken for the pardon of them, lest as Lam. 3 42. thou find
we have transgressed, thou have not pardoned: Consider also what the Lord did
for thee, what he wrought in thee in the days of thy youth, that though thou be
not now as lively as then, yet thou must be excited to cry unto God as Job 29.
4. O that it were with me as in the days of my youth, when the Secret of God
was upon my tabernacle: and though thy declinings should be bitter to thee, yet
try if it did convincingly ever appear thou wast the Planting of the Lord, a
tree of righteousness bringing forth fruit unto holiness: for If it was so,
though the Tree appear to be cut down, as Job 14. 7 There is hope of a tree if
it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and verse. 9. through the scent of
water it will bud and bring forth boughs like a plant; gather what thou can
safely of this nature that thou may yet hope to sing as in the days of thy
Youth, for trees of righteousness never utterly decay both root and branch.

9. When thou has not only thy souls Condition and way to Examine, whether
advancing or backsliding from the ways of God; but the very State of thy Soul
whether under the Dominion of Sin or Grace, and must draw some Conclusion from
the whole of thy Examinations, for thou art allowed to Judge, 1 Cor. 11. 31.
For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged: Then take care that
rash Judgment proceed not, look to God that thy Sentence come from before him:
it being of great moment what thou may safely judge of thy self, and
particularly for clearing thy Right to the Lords Table, Delusions being the
Ruin of most men.

The fourth thing to be considered is, what we are to Try and Examine, and the
things that I conceive to be the most necessary are, 1. Our knowledge. 2. Our
Faith. 3. Our Love. 4. Our Repentance, and 5. Our Obedience.

As to our Knowledge. 1. It Is necessary we have some measure of Knowledge of
the Lord Himself. 2. His Covenant. 3. Of the Sacrament it self, particularly
how to Discern the Lords Body.

Ye are first to Try your Knowledge of God in Christ, for though it be a small
Portion of him we can know, yet we must know or perish. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. Christ
is coming to render Vengeance to them who know not God. This Knowledge of God
we must have by Jesus Christ, for the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of
God is in the Face of Jesus Christ 2 Cor. 4. 6. We cannot transact with him in
this Ordinance if we be Ignorant of him. 1 John 1. 6. For if we say that we
have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness we lie. Therefore some
competency of Saving Knowledge we must have, lest we be found Children of
Darkness, yet 2. In Examining this think not to find a Knowledge unto
Perfection, for that which is Perfect is to come, 1 Cor. 13. 10. And when that
is come, all that is in that Infinite Divine Majesty, can never be be known by
us or finite Creatures. We are apt vainly, and some times Presumptously, to
desire such a knowledge as is Gods peculiar Prerogative perfectly to know
himself, and too often more curious to know what we cannot know, than what we
should and may know: how silencing to all flesh should be. Exodus 3. 14. I AM
and though all Creatures be incapable of a comprehensive knowledge of that
Glorious Immense being; yet 3. Great shall be our mercy to apprehend aright of
him, if your conceptions of him be suitable to the Revelations he has given of
himself in his Word, content thy self with these, lest thou wander in thy
Imaginations and lose thy self in Aspiring further. 4. Do not conclude thou
know nothing of him, because thou know not as thou would, or know
not as thou a Believer shall hereafter. 5. Yet try if thou art sure that though
weakly, yet it is certainly the Lord himself, thou know this is a greater
attainment and mercy then many think, to have the Soul delivered from fear of
delusion in it is apprehensions of God. These words Jer. 24. 7. are of great
Consideration, I will give them a heart to know me that I am the Lord. These
people had long professed the Knowledge of God and yet need to know that he is
the Lord. 6. To be sure of thy knowledge, try what Impressions have the Divine
Attributes made on thy Soul, what effects attend thy knowledge. Psa. 9. 10.
They that know thy name will put their trust in thee. Try also if thy practice
can prove thy knowledge. Jer. 22. 15. 16. Thy father did judgment and justice,
he judged the cause of the poor, then it was well with him, was not this to
know me says the Lord v. 7. In a special manner try if Christ has manifested
himself to thee, if thereby thou has been enabled to Behold him, and in
Beholding transformed into the same Image. 2 Cor. 3. 18. Be particular with thy
Conscience, to have an account wherein that Blessed Image does appear.

2. We must try what knowledge we have of the Covenant of Grace, Because,

First, This Ordinance of the Lords Supper is one of it is Seals; for here we
have the New Testament in his Blood, and this blood is the Blood of the
Covenant. Heb. 13. 20. The blood of the everlasting Covenant, therefore the
Seal shall be profained, if there be no knowledge of that gracious Transaction
and Covenant unto which it is a Seal. 2. We are obliged actually to renew our
Covenant with the Lord when we partake of this Ordinance, for we are to embrace
Christ according to the Terms of his Covenant: Receiving of Christ, and joining
our selves to the Lord is the very Substance of the Work, which cannot be
performed if we be Ignorant of the Covenant, for who can take hold or join in a
Covenant whereof he is utterly Ignorant? and the man who takes not hold of the
Covenant, cannot have a right to the Seal, try then particularly.

First, If ye know the chief Articles of the Covenant, if ye know the
Difference betwixt doing, as the Condition of the Covenant of Works; and
believing as the Condition of the Covenant of Grace: try if you believe this
great Gospel truth in your heart, that whosoever believes shall not perish
^ohn 3. 16. 2. And that the Covenant of Grace requires perfection, though
sincerity be accepted, Matthew. 5. 48. 3. And that all sincere believing has
gracious Fruits and Works attending it, for we are created in Christ Jesus
unto good works Ephesians. 2. 10. 4. Do ye know him who is surety of this better
testament Heb. 7. 22. In whom all the Promises are, yea, and Amen. Do ye know
that all your Interest in this Covenant is by Jesus Christ? who is given a
Covenant for the people, Isa. 42. 6.

5. Do ye know that all your Salvation and all that ye should desire is in this
Covenant. 2 Samuel 23. 5. That it is Ordered in all things for your good and sure,
has the Lord showen you his Covenant, Psalm. 25. 14. Do ye in heart believe it
to be sure? 6. Were ye ever taught of God how to take hold of this Covenant,
and how to Subscribe your selves the Lords, Isa. 44. 5. One shall say I am the
Lords, and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord; If ye know
nothing of it, ye cannot perform it, and if not performed the Seal is not
yours, for ye have not Subscribed to the Deed. Remember Christian thou have no
other Charter for thy part of Heaven but this Covenant of Grace, and if thou
art a Christian indeed, it will be to the as a Fountain of Joys, that he has
made with thee an everlasting Covenant, thou will never think thy self safe
till thou know thou art Savingly in it; and therefore it will be the great
concern of thy Soul how to Join thy self to the Lord, especially before thou
partake of it is Seal: blessed is that hour wherein a man may say, now I
subscribed my self the Lords, I have given my self to him, and he has received
me graciously, what has thou to do from thy Birth to thy Grave, like this which
can make thee sing in the face of Death.

3. Try thy Knowledge of the Sacrament it self, specially if thou can
Spiritually and believingly Discern the Lords Body, for if thou Discernest no
more than Bread and Wine, thou will Receive no more; and if thou Receivest no
more, thou have not Received the Sacrament of Christ's Institution, thou have
but a shadow for the Substance; besides the Guilt of profaning that Holy
Ordinance: The words of the Holy Ghost are carefully to be remarked. 1 Cor. 11.
29. he eats and drinks Damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords Body.
This Discerning of his Body is a Discerning Spiritually Christ himself as
Crucified; and if this one thing be wanting, the Communicant will surely Eat
and Drink unworthily: Therefore put such Questions as these to thy self: First
I am persuaded that the Son of God, did take unto him our nature, and in due
time did shed his Blood, for the Remission of the sins of many? 2. That this
our Blessed Savior did Institute this Ordinance of the Lords Supper to be
Celebrated in Remembrance of him. 3. That the Bread and Wine there presented
and Blessed, does Represent his Body and Blood. 4. That Christ who Offered
himself to his Father, does in this Ordinance Offer himself to be Received by
Believers. 5. That in Offering himself to be Received by them, he Offers unto
them also the Benefits purchased by his Death. 6. That every partaker must so
Discern him by Faith. 7. And every Partaker is Obliged by Faith to Receive
himself with all his Benefits, when he Receives that Bread, which Christ
Requires to take and eat, and that no person should presume to eat of that
Bread or drink of that Cup, but with a full purpose of heart thankfully to
Receive himself? seek to be established in these before thou go to the Lords
Table, that thou may partake in Faith, and not by eating and Doubting, or
Eating and Ignorant what thou art about, many Souls are Guilty before God, for
taking so little pains to prevent their being Guilty of the Body and Blood of
the Lord, and some not of the very worst, obstruct their own Comfort by
indistinct Communicating: there being no action under the heavens that
Requires more fixed, ripe, and distinct apprehensions, than partaking at the
Lords Table.

Secondly, Our Faith must be Examined before we go to the Lords Table. Consider
first the Reasons why this must be done. And 2. How to find out Saving Faith.
The Reasons. 1. Christ himself is to be Received at his Table, and this
Receiving of him is Believing, as is plain by John 1. 12. But as many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them
that believe on his Name. Therefore Christ cannot be Received without Faith,
and if he be not Received, the Sacrament is profaned: The Communicant should be
a believing Believer, having Faith not only in Habit, but in Act.

3. Our Faith must be Examined, because we are Warned that there are many
sorts of Faith, and yet but one kind of Faith Is Saving whereby the man is
Justified: we Read of a Believing which Devils have James 2. 19. Some wicked
men also are said to Believe, yet remaining in the bond of Iniquity, Acts 8.
13. We have an account also that some Believed for a while Luke 8. 13. It Is
Lamentable that men stand not in awe of such Scriptures, and so few moved with
fear, least their Faith be no better, we Read also of some men's Faith raised so
high as thereby to work Miracles, and yet their last Sentence Depart from me,
Matthew. 7. 21, 22. It appears these men did mistake true Saving faith, thinking
such as they had, would carry them to Heaven; for they make it a plea for their
Admissions, did we not cast out Devils in thy Name; doubtless this made them
Christians of great Fame in the World: but how easy is it even for men of
great Gifts to mistake Faith, and go to Death without a Discovery of that
Mystery. We are warned also of a dead faith James 2. 17. Such a faith as
found men, and leaves them dead in their sins. It cannot therefore be safe
after such warnings, for any man to Conclude, that because in the general he
belleveth, therefore he shall be Saved, and has a Right to the Lords Supper,
except the nature of his faith be instructed and made out to be such as thereby
he is united to Christ, and so shall be Justified.

4. This Danger of mistaking Faith being so great, it is our Mercy that there is
a particular Command to Examine our Faith as we would be Secured, we are not
Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13. 5. So that if this be still neglected, we not only
endanger our Souls by Delusion, but shall be found sinfully disobedient to a
merciful Command.

5. That which is said Heb. 11. 6. That without faith it is impossible to please
God, should of it is self engage us to Examine our Faith; what Regard can we
have to God, and be contentedly in that State, wherein it is impossible to
please him, or be ignorant whether in that State or not? can ye look up to God
and think it not worth the while to enquire whether ye be pleasing or
displeasing to him? Dare ye sit down at his Table not knowing, but it may be
said of you in particular, it is impossible for this man to be pleasing to me?
and no wonder he cannot be accepted as not being in Christ, there is no
acceptance but in the Beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6.

These few Reasons without adding mo, may convince, that it highly concerns
thee to be at the utmost pains in trying of thy Faith; Consider also that all
thy pains shall be richly paid Home, if by searching thou shall find that God
has bestowed upon thee Precious Faith, 2 Pet. 1. 1. The Faith of Gods Elect,
Tit. 1. 1. That Faith whereby a sinner is justified and has peace with God,
Romans 5. 1. That Faith whereby thou art Sanctified, Acts 26. 18. That Faith the
end whereof shall be the Salvation of thy Soul, 1 Pet. 1. 9. Receiving the end
of your faith even the Salvation of your Souls. What pains should be valued
where this is the Result. How great may be thy Joy in his Salvation, when thou
can say, The beloved is mine, and I am his, Cant. 2. 16. Christ is mine, the
Pledges of his Love are mine, his Fellowship is mine, his Food and Table is
mine, He has clothed me with the garments of Salvation, Isa. 61. 10. I shall
not be rejected for want of a Wedding Garment, Shall be not with Christ freely
give us all things, Romans 8. 32.

Q. But what way shall I take to Examine my Faith? First try if you can observe
the direct Actings of Faith, that you may say now Lord I believe, though before
it be well out of your lips, ye must add Lord help my unbelief, Mark 9. 24.
Acceptable Believing is of so great Importance, that serious souls are
solicitous so to Believe, as that they might immediately Reflect upon it, and
finding it believing indeed; Blessed Jesus Christ would needs have it out of
his Disciples own mouths that they did Believe, John 16. 30. By this we
believe, They do not say we have Belleved, but in the very present time we
Believe. And in the next verse, Christ says Do ye now believe, for this Cause
it were good especially for you who doubt of your Faith, to set your selves for
actual present Believing before ye go to the Lords Table; some people are apt
to weary of long Debates in their mind, whether they have Believed or not; and
tempted to give it over, who by the Blessing of God upon this mean are Relieved
of their Fears, and cleared of their Doubts, Addressing themselves to the Lord
with all the Reverence and Seriousness they can attain, and in the Sense of
their sin and need of a Savior, set themselves to Receive and Embrace Christ
as their Redeemer and Lord. This Mean has been so Countenanced of God, that
after it is serious Performance, some has gone to the Lords Table with desire,
Cheerfulness, and Peace though Doubting before.

Oject, But I cannot Believe when I please, nor is it so light a matter to go
off hand and Believe, and so have done.

Answ. 1. Ye cannot Believe too soon; if you Believe indeed. 2. This is an
Opportune Season for it, when ye are called to Partake of an Ordinance which
you cannot neglect without sin, nor Partake without Believing.

3 Ye are peremptorly Commanded to Believe, therefore it is Duty to endeavor
it; and it is such a Duty as should not be Deferred: That ye are Commanded
Consider, John 14. 1. 1 John 3. 23. And this is his Comandment that we should
believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. And that it is a Duty not to be
Delayed, see John 3. 36. He that believes not, the wrath of God abides on
him. If you still reply, I cannot Believe though it be a Duty: I will Answer
that no more can you perform any Religious Duty aright, will ye therefore
resolve to perform no Religious Duty? will ye not Pray, because ye cannot Pray
aright? will ye never praise, because ye cannot do it aright? see what thy
very Reason can Answer to this plain Argument; what ever God Commands we are
obliged to endeavor Obedience unto it, but God Commands us to Believe,
therefore we are Obliged to endeavor Obedience to this Command of Believing.
And though it be granted that we cannot Believe when we will, yet we are to
endeavor, and put out the Withered Hand, hoping we may take it in Whole: if
the Lord shall say arise from the dead, as Ephesians. 5. 14. Should we Dispute and
Proudly Quarrel in stead of Obeying? cannot the Lord of Life give Life with the
Word of Command as to Dead Lazarus, mind John 11. 25. He that believes in me,
though he were dead yet shall he live. But if ye cannot find the Truth of your
Faith by this manner of Trial; yet ye are not so to leave it, for what quiet
can a man have in his Soul, not knowing but he is still under the Wrath of God?
as all Unbelievers are, and not knowing what hour that Wrath may Surprise him,
with it is intolerable weight and Eternity. Therefore other Means must be
essayed to Search it out by it is Fruits, for Luke 6. 44. A tree is known by his
fruits, and the Apostle James says He will show his faith by his works: it is a
great mercy that there is any way to have it secured.

Consider these two ways, wherein by the Blessing of God, the sincerity of your
Faith may be Discovered, as first, by trying your ordinary Dependence on God,
and 2. By searching into the Gracious Fruits of Faith, specially that by Faith
the heart is purified, Acts 15. 9.

For the first, enquire at your own Conscience, what Course is ordinarily taken
for Light and Direction, when ye are in Darkness or Doubts; do ye still lean to
your own Understanding, or on Christ as made of God Wisdom unto Believers, 1
Cor. 1. 30. 2 When ye do Pray for wisdom and Light, is it that you may walk
according to that Light or Direction? Deal ye Ingenuously with God? not seeking
Counsel of God, with a Reserve, if it be to your own Humor, but Resolved to
walk in his Light whithersoever it lead you, has thy Soul fixed on the Lord as
thy Guide, then Remember what is said; Psalm. 73. 24. Thou shall guide me with
thy Counsel, and afterward recelve me to glory, for Glory will follow, to the
Followers of this Guide.

2. Try also what way thou takes for thy Guilt: whither do thou go for ease
to thy Conscience when it accuses thee? (as it certainly will if not seard) is
it to the Blood of Christ? or do thou make a cover to thy Sin of thy Duties,
thy Tears, thy Mourning, thy Amending of some evil Practices, and thy not being
as some other men? if this be thy way, thou art yet a Stranger to Gospel Faith:
but if thou believe in thine heart, that the Blood of Christ cleanses from
all sin, and thou will not dishonor that perfect Sacrifice, by thinking it
insufficient for thy sin, and therefore leans thy Soul with all it is Guilt upon
him, who made his soul an offering for sin, Isai. 53. 10. Thy care is to be
found in him not having thine own Righteousness, but that which is by the Faith
of the Son of God, thou must have a Jesus to Save thee from thy sins, thou must
flee to him as thy Refuge, then Consider what is said, Heb. 6. 18. That we
might have a strong consolation, who have fled for a refuge: our merciful
Redeemer says not to the poor sinner, thou had never come to me, but because
thou could make no other shift, thou has made me thy last choice; therefore be
gone. No no but when the poor sinner comes only by a Consent of necessity, yet
he will in no ways cast him out, though he could find no other Refuge, yet when
he comes he shall have strong Consolation; thou find Blessed Jesus like none
but himself, for this not the manner of men.

3. Search thy way, as to the subduing of thy Sin: if thou suffer sin
peaceably to prevail as its willing servant, or is its prevailing bitter,
making thee often complain to God against thy self, as Psalm. 65. 3, Art thou
not often crying to him, that no sin may have dominion over thee? That he would
cleanse thee from secret faults, and keep thee back from sinning, Psalm. 19. 12,
13. Art thou not searching also upon what ground thou may expect the
mortifying of any sin; For if thou art sincere with God, and pained with Sin,
thou will be as earnest to know upon what grounds thou may expect the subduing
of sin, as the pardon of it. Therefore it will not suffice thee to have it to
say, thou has prayed for a clean heart, but to know what encouragement God has
given to hope for it, this will make thee search the Promises for cleansing and
sanctifying of thy Soul, and what interest thou have in these Promises, this
will make thee careful for an interest in Christ Crucified, that by him thy
lusts may be crucified, and that thou serve sin no more, as Romans 6. 6. And
though it be one of the greatest trials of thy Faith, to believe the
mortification of some rooted sins that easily beset thee, yet dare thou not
distrust the Promise of God, Ezekiel. 36. 25. From all your filthiness, and from
all your I dols will I cleanse you: Though thou has been striving many years
against some particulur sins, without the desired success, yet thy regard to
the Promise continues, thou dependest still upon it, as Mic. 7. 19. He will
subdue our iniquities: This is the Faith of the Saints, who now inherit the
Promises.

4. When thou has Duties to perform, far above thy strength: try what is then
thy ways? Do thou neglect them, because they are difficult, or do thou go
to thy work in the strength of the Lord God? If thou go to work in his
strength, then thou art acting Faith: Art thou not strongest, when weakest in
thy own opinion; and upon this experience, that out of weakness thou art made
strong, and that God never fails thee, thou resolvest to refuse no duty he
requires of thee? for thy Ebenezer is set up hitherto has God helped: this is
direct living by Faith; and if Believers were more exact in remarking, how
often God does countenance their essays to believe, when they are weakest in
their own eyes the comfort of their Faith would not be so rare; how gratefully
is it to be remembered, that when there is sharp sense of guilt, and fear of
being deserted, because of guilt, yet engaging in work that God calls unto,
some can hardly instance a time when they lean to promised strength, but God
appears the glory of their strength: Whosoever observes these things, are in the
way to understand the loving kindness of the Lord, and so obtain the comfort of
their Faith.

5. If thou can not yet take comfort to thy self, that this precious Faith is
thine: Search yet further, for it is worth the pains of many days or years, if
it be found at last: Try then if thou can find it in the Furnace of
affliction* where sometimes it shines more brightly, than in any easy lot.

In the day of thy Calamity whether go thou for help, to the arm of Flesh,
or to the arm of Jehovah? Where go thou first, do thou no sooner come to
trouble, but thou look up to meet with God as soon as the trouble? There is
much to be discovered of the dependence of a Soul, by the way it first takes
in Affliction; for what is habitually trusted, is commonly first resorted unto;
When godly Job hears the surprising tidings of the Death of his dear
Children, and other losses; immediately he looks to God and Worshippeth, Job
1. 20. So when David was distressed by the Amalakites, taking his Relations,
and all away Captives, 1 Samuel 30. 1. The first thing he does, is to encourage
himself in the Lord, verse 6. But the first thing we hear the poor Men
speaking, who were not so acquainted with dependence on God, was the Stoning of
David. Next, when thy trials are overwhelming, so that thou art ready to sink;
Try if thou believe that there is a Rock able to bear thee, and the heaviest
of thy Burdens; and that God has not left his people so destitute, as that
perishing must needs be the result of these overwhelmings: But as it is, Psalm.
61. 2. When my heart is overwhelmed, lead me to the rock that is higher than I:
So thou betakest thy self to God, as thy Rock; and withal commits the leading
of thy soul unto this Rock, to him who is thy Rock, here is abounding Faith,
not only trusting the Lord as the Rock of Ages, but the leading of thy soul to
himself, thou commits the very management of thy Soul into his hands, if thou
can claim this as thy way, then thou has the precious Faith thou art seeking
after.

Try also the unseignedness of thy Faith, by other unseigned fruits: If thou
has true Faith toward God, it will carry up thy heart to him; thou will live
upon Christ, and obtain some real victory over this World, it shall not
captivate thy soul, as it does the souls of Men who have their portion in this
life, 1 John 5. 4. It will raise thee to the affectionat Meditations of thy
better Country, and there thy desires will be captivated, until thy self be
placed with them, Heb. 11. 16. Thou will find the first fruits so pleasant^, as
to deaden thy heart to the pleasures of sin: for Faith will purify thy heart*
Act. 15. 9. And though this evidence of Faith appears difficult, because of
the many impurities of heart remaining in Believers: Yet the Words of God must
be regarded, and this purifying of the heart, must, and will be found, where
justifying precious Faith is; for Believers even in this life obtain some
measure of true purity, as appears by Matthew. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God. For here Christ declares some are pure in
heart, before they come to see God, as they shall see him hereafter, so, Joh.
15. 3. Now are ye clean, or pure, as the word is commonly rendered; Believers
being in a justified state, they obtain in this life some real purity of heart,
notwithstanding of their Imperfections; and it becomes a snare, or woe to
souls that study no purity, because of no entire perfection in this life, and
these have the true beginnings of holy purity, who follow that example, and
direction, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God; for,

1. Christ died, to purify a people unto himself, zealous of good works, Tit.
2. 14. And he will see the travel of his soul.

2. Christ dwells in the heart by Faith, and where he dwells, there the
throne of iniquity cannot stand, Psalm. 94. 20.

3. All who receive forgiveness of sins, are sanctified by faith in Christ*
Acts 26 18.

4. Sin shall not have dominion over any, who are brought truly under grace,
Romans 6. 14.

Search diligently for this purifying of the heart, as thou would not be
deceived of thy faith and hope, for according to 1 John 3. 3. Every man that
has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure; think not of
accepting thy self, where the words of God are, every man examine your selves,
Particularly in these 4 things;

First, If thou find an active Principle in thy Soul standing in opposition
to sin; if sin be hated, so as thou can say of it, it is the evil I hate, Romans
7. 15. See that this hatred be not pretended, and Sin in the mean time
cherished; for it is not only a sure step toward, but also a great length in the
purity of holiness, to be a hater of Sin.

2. And to secure the truth of this hatred, try if there be an ordinary warfare
against Sin: For if it be hated, there will be opposition made to it, as Romans
7. 23. Thy sins will feel thy grace to have some power; and therefore Christ
compares the mortifying of sin to the cutting off the right hand, etc. And
where there is nothing of this, it is vain to pretend hatred.

3. Try if thou love the Law, which requires this purity: for to love that
very Law which re^^r^ineth from Sin, yea, the sins that easily beset us; is a
blessed, but I fear a rare attainment, to be content to be hedged up from the
way of our own hearts; and to love the hedge of Gods making, not to wish in
heart, that the Laws of God were otherwise, that we might have a greater
liberly for sin, Psalm. 119. 97. O how love I thy law. There is the greater
necessity of searching into this, because it is given us as the character of a
godly man, to delight in the law of the Lord, Psalm. 1. 2.

4. Try what success attends your endeavors against sin: if by dependence on
the spirit of Christ, which mortifieth the deeds of the body, it may be said of
you, as 1 Pet. 1. 22. Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth*
Mark these words ye have purified: whereby we may see that Believers have some
success against their sin, their work is to cleanse themselves, and their
labor is not in vain in the Lord: and it is necessary, that every Christian
have some instances, and proofs of this in readiness, that he has purified his
Soul, and kept himself from his iniquity: and shut not your eyes upon that
awful evidence of an interest in Christ, Gal, 5. 24. They that are Christ's have
crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. Know then, that it not only
should be, but is a sound Believers work to be purifying his Soul, though he
get not sin abolished in this life.

3 Communicants should also examine their love to Christ before they go to the
Lords Table: and if any shall say that this is a superfluous burdening of people
with unnecessary questions, their says being clear what needs examining of
love also? But I find Christ is of another mind, who examineth his followers,
both as to their Faith, and love, John 16. 31. Do ye now believe? And John 21.
16. love thou me. Therefore we are concerned to be in a readiness to answer
both, and if our love cannot abide the trial, no more can our faith, for faith
works by love, Gal. 5. 6. Consider first, that Christ manifests himself to
such as love him, John 14. 23. And if Christ do not manifest himself to us at
his Table, we shall never be able to discern him aright. A manifested Christ is
the blessing and beauty of that work, even when he manifests himself, as
crucified, bleeding to death; he is then most lovely and beautiful to the
Believer, he then shows himself dying in pure love; and what manifestation of
him should be more engaging, and overcoming; but no eyes can thus profitably
behold him, except he manifest and show himself, which the lovers of Christ may
expect, and therefore our love to him should be examined.

2. This holy Communion is a banquet of love; and therein it might well be said
he gives his loves, giving himself and the pledges of his love, Cant. 7. 12.
And is appointed only for the lovers of Christ, they are his friends and
beloved, who are allowed to eat and drink abundantly, Cant. 5. 1. The lovers
of Christ are the only prepared persons for Communion with him, for he that
dwells in love, dwells in God, 1 John 4. 16. And no man is capable of
Communion with him who wants it; love being necessary to true fellowship:
There Is need then to search for it, lest Christ have it to say, as Joh. 5. 42. I
know you, that ye have not the love of God in you.

3. This grace should be carefully searched for: Because we are ready to
flatter and deceive our selves, with an hypocritical love, Ezekiel. 33. 31. with
their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after their
covetousness. They make a show of what they have not, men are not willing to
charge themselves with the want of love to God, it appears so heinous, and
therefore must have it is shadow, but their heart is reserved for others, and
far from God, Isa. 29. 13. They have removed their heart far from me, Yet the
poor men were honoring God with their lips.

4. Blessed Jesus Christ not only declares, that love is the great Command,
Matthew. 22. 37. But also searches most narrowly and pressingly, for this grace
in his people, as appears by questioning Peter 3 times if he loved him, until
the godly man was grieved, fearing his love was suspected; This wounded him,
that he was asked the third time, Joh. 21. 17. Christ's questions, should teach
us to question our selves, and to be in readiness for such an answer, as was
then given, Lord thou know all things, thou know that I love thee; He
could give an account of his love, and appeal to the searcher of hearts for
it is sincerity, and so should we.

5. It distresseth serious souls to be in doubt of their love, being of the
same mind with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 12. If I have not charity or love, I am
nothing. And ver. 3. Though I give my body to be burned, and have not love, it
profits nothing. Some of the people of God know well, that they take pains in
religious Duties, but have no comfort in them, fearing their diligence flows
not from a principle of Love, it would be great joy to them if they were
assured, that ever they performed any duty by a constraint of the love of
Christ; and is worth the labor of many years, when our searching comes at
length to this issue; Lord thou know I love thee: and no wonder it be most
sweet to the soul to know the truth of its love, for thereby it may warrantably
read and conclude it self beloved of God, 1 John 4. 19. We love him, because he
first loved us, Prove. 8. 17. I love them that love me, and Joh. 16. 27 the
father himself loves you, because ye have loved me: This being discovered, the
Believer may go to God as his exceeding joy, Psalm. 43. 4. What riches, or
honor like this, to be actually interested in the love of God? with what
pleasure and confidence may such a man go to the Lords Table, knowing that the
master of the Feast loves him.

And for your help to discover, whether ye love the Lord Jesus in sincerity or
not, take notice of these few things,

First, Christ himself condescendeth to give us help how to resolve this
question in proposing to us a sure evidence of love, John 14. 23. If a man love
me, he will keep my words. And though this mark appear difficult, because of
our many failings in keeping of his words; yet it will be dangerous to overlook
it, and may prove a contempt of the mercy that is in such a discovery, and a
neglect of so gracious a bond to obedience, that as we would testify our love
to Christ, we must keep his words.

2. Hereby Christ also shows that a study of obedience, and pleasing him will
natively flow from love, if we love, we cannot but endeavor to please the
Party beloved, his commands will not be grieveous, 1 John 5. 3. This is the
love of God, that we keep his Commandments and his Commands are not grievous.
Love makes his yoke easy, and pleasing him their delight, 1 John 3. 22. We
keep his Commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight. Try
if your way be formed for his e^e, and greatest care to please him, whoever
else be displeased.

3. And when this is become your habitual affectionate ear to please him,
though there be fuilings; yet Christ can discern the sincerity of your love,
and say, you have loved me, Joh. 16. 27. He can discern a willing spirit, when
the flesh is weak; though Christ had his Disciples often to reprove, yet
knowing he had their hearts, and that their ordinary care was to obey him: He
as their good advocat, declares to his Father that they had kept his Word,
Joh. 17. 6. And they have kept thy word.

Secondly, If ye be lovers of Christ, ye will desire his fellowship, I sought
him whom my soul loves, Cant: 3. 1. Their prayers are not only to quiet their
conscience, that they have not neglected their Duty, but they long to be near
to him, and must seek until they find, it was himself they sought, and nothing
else can supply his room.

Thirdly, True love to Christ is earnest for his love, and cannot be quieted
without it: there is a wonderful boldness in this Grace, they aspire to no less
than to know that Christ's desire is toward them, Cant. 7. 10. Then they know
they are safe, then they know he will not be long from them, the desire of
their soul being toward him, Isa. 26. 8. And his desire toward them, his favor
and love is better than life to them: And therefore they cry as, Psalm. 106. 4.
Remember me O Lord with the favor that thou bear to thy people: It Is the
love that thou have to thy chosen that is my happiness, whatever other mercies
I get, yet they will all leave me miserable if I have not that favor, which is
peculiar to thy chosen, Lord give me that favor which will at length make me
glory with thine inheritance, Lord do to me, as thou usest to do to those who
love thy Name, Psalm. 119. 132. Try what earnestness and wrestlings you ever had
for his love, or if common mercies, or common Gifts of the Spirit, be all which
you seek after.

Fourthly, If thou be a sincere lover of Christ, thou will love his honor,
yea, the very place where his honor dwells, Psalm. 26. 8. Thou will desire
his praise may be glorious, Psalm. 66. 2. Sing forth the honor of his Name,
make his praise glorious. As thou art able, thou will set forth the beauty of
Christ to engage others, to love and praise him, Cant. 5. 10. And if thou
love him and his glory, thou will be active in glorifying him thy self, Psalm.
86. 12. I will praise thee O Lord my God with all my heart, and I will glorify
thy Name for ever more. Put such questions as these to thy own soul. Is it on
my heart how to glorify him? Do I cry to God in secret for help to glorify
him? Is it my rejoicing, when he gives help to do it? Have I fear, that vain
glory be more studied, than his glory? Am I as much grieved for dishonor to
him, as dishonor to my wretched self? Has the grace of God so far prevailed,
that no applause of men is satisfying, except I have some testimony in my
conscience, that I really designed the glory of God: That blessed Word of
Christ's, should humble us, and make us ashamed of that predominant sin of pride
in the World, John 8. 50. I seek not mine own glory: How great is the mercy to
hear that part of his Image, and the victory sweet. when it can be said, Nor of
men sought we glory, 1 These. 2. 6. The want of this love to Gods glory, and
indulged love to vain glory, makes many a poor man lose all his labors in
Religion, and there is no remedy without uprightness of love to God.

Fifthly, Every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is
begotten of him, 1 John 5. 1. If thou love Christ, thou will love his Image,
and where his renewed Image shines most, there thou will love most: This is so
much regarded, that it is improved for the certainty of men's being passed from
Death to Life, because they love the brethren, 1 John 3. 14. Try then who are
the excellent in the earth in thy account, try if thou love godly persons
though mean in the World, or if thou art such as can value no man for his
godliness, except he be rich in the World; Try if thou can love a godly man,
though he have no great opinion of thee, it may be thou deservest no great?
opinion, and should not love him the worse for that: Try thy self the more
exactly in this point of thy love to the people of God, because* God is greatly
dishonored in this age for the want of it. Beware of patcht up counter feit
agreements, and love before Communions. But as thou art to labor for Communion
with Christ himself, so labor to the utmost of thy power, for a cordial
Communion of Saints, that you may Feast together here in love and hope, to be
together in a better place, and be not saying, I forgive such a Christian, but
I desire never to see him, I desire never to speak with him: this will not be
found forgiving from the heart as Christ requires, Matthew. 18. 35. Let your
love be without dissimulation, Romans 12. 9. Not in Word only, but in Deed,
promoting the good name of one another, See that ye love one another with a
pure heart servently, 1 Pet. 1. 22. These are the Words of God, but Ah how
little regarded, and I fear shall not be much regarded, while we continue
falling from our first love to Christ, love to him, and his followers must
revive together.

4. We should also examine our Repentance, because;

First, Christ has enjoined it with a certification, that except we repent, we
shall perish, Luke 13. 3. How speechless will it render the impenitent perishing
sinner, when the Books are opened, and this found, that this obdured sinner was
forwarned of this perishing, but shut his ears, and would not hearken.

2. This repentance is that part of Religion, which we are most averse either
to act, or try; and therefore the greater need to oblige our selves to search
if we have it: For to hear of Faith, and love, and Love goes more easily down,
the very naming of them is sweet to such as know little of them; but cannot
with patience hear of conviction, mourning, or departing from iniquity; many
also continue to ensnare their own souls with the conceit that they believe so
well, that they need not trouble themselves with repentance; but they should
remark Christ's requiring of both, Mark 1: 15. Repent and believe.

3. Others observing repentance to be peremptorly commanded, Conclude that some
repentance they must have, but are satisfied with a shadow of it, and are so
superficial, that any extorted flash of sorrowing, any change any returning,
though not to the most High satisfies them. We find, Hos. 7. 16. That some
return, but not to the most High. They think they have returned sufficiently.
And therefore need no more saying as Mal. 3. 7. Wherein shall we return? The
Lord sees that they are yet to turn to him, as in the same ver. return unto
me, says the Lord, but they think otherwise, this should make us afraid, lest
God do not judge of our Repentance as we do, and therefore to examine it in
time; It Is easy for people to think themselves sufficiently qualified for a
Communion, or for Heaven it self, but the woe will be that it was only
themselves thought so, when they find God their judge of another mind,

4. There is the more need to examine our Repentance in this age, wherein the
broken in spirit, and contrite in heart, are as signs and wonders; as if all
the broken in heart before us had been in an error, and troubled themselves in
vain, or as if God never regarded any such Soulexercise, and wounding of
Spirit, though he has expressly declared, Isa. 66. 2. But to this man will I
look even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my
word. Then it is necessary as men would have God to look favorably upon them,
as ye would have a comfortable reviving, look at this Table, to try if ever you
were wounded in heart for your sin: See to it lest the searcher of hearts have
it to say, here is a man, that to this day was never humbled, Jer. 44. 10.
Never pierced at the heart; never at what shall I do to be saved, never so
wounded, but he could easily cure himself, no use for that mercy, Psalm. 147. 3.
He heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds. You will needs go
to the Communion, but it is not for any great business you have to do there, you
have no burden of sin to take off; as finding it too heavy for your selves,
Psalm. 38. 4.

5. There is the greater need to search particularly into the sincerity of our
Repentance, before we approach the Lords Table; because some serious Christians
may deprive themselves of that benefit, fearing their Repentance is not sound,
and that because they had never such a measure of grief as others, never so
deeply wounded for sin as they think they should, or as they have perceived by
others who refused to be comforted, were long in bondage of fear, and ready to
be swallowed up with grief and terror.

To clear this alittle, Consider, first, That trouble or terror of mind of it
self, cannot prove any gracious good in a soul: A Judas has terror of mind,
but no grace, terror is sometimes a Judgment from God, as Lev. 26. 16: I will
appoint over you terror; and Deuteronomy. 28. 20. The Lord shall send upon thee
vexation, And some wicked persons are consumed with terrors, Psalm. 73. 19.
Therefore it is not safe to desire such terror of mind as some have been under;
for it was their plague.

2. Men may have a temporary sorrowing and grie^, which sin has occasioned,
and yet their sorrowing is not for their sin, nor any sanctifying grace in
their mourning. A Saul may lift up his voice and weep, and confess others more
Righteous than himself, and yet still go on in his sin, 1 Samuel 24. 16, 17. Some
may make a great noise of their repentance, as he lift up his voice and wept.
And yet but a worldly sorrow that David was like to have the Kingdom is his
greatest grief.

3. Some are surprised with a sudden fear of Wrath, which they cannot shake
off; but are as captives, so far from any true and humbling sense of sin; that
all their trouble is for being troubled, and cannot help it. They are in chains
and fetters not knowing for what, for it seized them without any apprehension,
or sense of their sin: This does sometimes make a great alteration and
commotion while it continues, so that they tremble under it, as Felix, Acts
24: 25. The poor man knew not what was come on him, he is frighted but gets
no good of it; and therefore desires Paul to be gone: I have seen severals
after the same manner frighted with a sudden fear of Judgment, and for any
thing appeared, their Religion never went a greater length; yet their trouble
in the time was great, and made a great noise, but when the fright was over,
their Religion was also over. It is not safe then to set up such as paterns for
your Repentance, though the degree of their anguish might be greater than yours.

4. Though the Law be our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, Gal. 3. 24.
Whereby we must have the knowledge of our sin, be convinced, be humbled: Yet we
shall not find that every one who comes to Christ is, or must be a like measure
humbled, all are not in a like depth, before their heads be brought above
water, all have not the pangs of the new Birth alike painful, all are not
struck down to the ground, and made blind before they be comforted, as Paul, We
find not the degree of any man's grief for sin, set up as a Standard, whereby
all others must be measured; but we find the difference between a worldly, and
a godly sorrowing much regarded, 2 Cor. 7. 10. For godly sorrow works
repentance to salvation, not to be repented of, but the sorrow of the world
works death. Therefore we shall be wiser to search out the nature of our
grief, than its degrees only, If it be a godly sorrowing on the account of sin,
and its sinfulness, in provoking a holy and gracious God, This we find made a
ground of comfort to the people of God, ver. 11. That they sorrowed after a
godly sort, and reformation attended their sorrow.

5. It Is necessary also, that we take care lest our pressing for such a measure
of grief, be not by the secret deceitfulness of our hearts, designed as a
Sacrifice for our sin, Idolizing it too much, as if thereby sin might be
expiated.

6. It would be also considered, that poor frail men may be swallowed up with
overmuch sorrow; so that some persons seek after they know not what, even such
a measure of sorrow as might be their own ruin, 2 Cor. 2: 7, You ought rather
to comfort such a man, lest perhaps he be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.

7. Where sorrowing for sin is truly godly sorrowing; yet one Christian may
have a higher degree, than another who is also sincere; a man may have true
Faith, true Love, true Repentance; and yet another exceed him in all these: for
both the grace, and its measure are the gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 7. But unto
every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ.

8. Yet because the most common danger is a defect in this godly sorrowing, and
no sincere humbling found, with many professed Christians, no such grief or
hatred of sin, as can bear the name of sound Repentance, and effectual turning
to God: Therefore as it is a most necessary grace, we should seek to grow in
it, as we would have God to lift us up, we must be humbled, Jam. 4: 10. And
blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, And that you may be
in some measure helped to discern the soundness of your Repentance, Search thy
own soul for these things.

First, If thou grievest for the first moti^ns of sin in thy heart, and resists
them; though they go no further than thy thoughts and imaginations, and though
not intertainted by thy affections; For the thought of foolishness is sin,
Prove. 24: 9. But thou find a hateing of vain thoughts, Psalm. 119: 113. This
was a comfort to the man of God, and so it may be to thee.

2 Do you not find a sincere loathing of your selves, so that hardly can any
man judge thee worse, than thou judge thy self, and this thou feel without
dissimulation; By this ingenuous judging of your self, you may take comfort for
what is said, 1 Cor. 11: 31. For if we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged, ye shall not be judged into condemnation, godly J^b looked upon this
abhorring of himself, as sound Repentance, Job 42: 6. For he really judged
himself vile, Job 40: 4.

3. Do thou not search out thy sins purposely that thou may mourn over
them, and turn from them? This makes it appear, that sin is hated in the soul,
when thou do search for it as an enemy to be cast out, when a soul is so
straight with God, that help is desired to find out his enemies, Psalm. 139: 23.
Search me O God, and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts; And see if
there be any wicked way in me: It Is good when a Christian resists sin that's
obvious to him, but it is better, when he desires Gods help to discover secret
sins that may be lurking in his heart, that he may oppose every sin, though
this give him more matter of mourning, yet being sincere he must pursue sin to
the utmost.

4. And does it not endear thy heart to God, when thou get'st help of this
nature, that thy greatest enemy triumphs not over thee? Yea, for the very
hope that he will subdue thy iniquity, Mic.

5. Is not sin bitter to thee, even when thou have no present thoughts of Wrath
to follow upon thy Sin? I do not say but it is lawful to mourn for fear of
Wrath, but it is comfortable to a Christian when he can Observe, that some times
on the first Discovery of sin, before any thought of it is woeful fruit come into
his mind, it forthwith wounds his heart, for then it appears to be grief for
Sin, because it is sin, which is true Godly sorrowing, we find Psalm. 65. 3.
Iniquities prevail agairst me, as for our transgressions thou shall purge them
away. Here is sin Lamented as bitter, when yet there is Faith in the very time
that these sins shall be purged away; thou has cause to be Comforted to whom
sins is bitter when thou have greatest expectations of pardon, and the
remembrance of thy sin melting thy heart into the greatest grief, when thou
considerest the tender Mercies of thy God, in pardoning all thy iniquities;
sins against Love gives the Child of God the deepest Wounds, have thou it not
to say, that the thoughts of Hell and Wrath has often left thy heart very
obdured? but the thoughts of Gods Love, and care of thy Soul has softened, and
poured it out in mourning, that even thou should provoke him to anger who is
so Gracious to thee.

6. Can thou not give some Instances of particular sins, that are now in a
great measure Subdued and thy heart departed from them, by nothing that thou
can know of but by the Grace of God? such sins as thou wast once a very slave
unto? Can thou not now say that by the grace of God thy feet are kept from
falling in a great measure, Psalm. 18. 36. Thy turning from sin, is the surest
evidence of Repentance, Psalm. 119. 59.

5. We are obliged also to try our Obedeince to God.

First, Because Christ will not own us for his friends, if we be not found
Obedient to him. John 15. 14. Ye are my friends, if ye de whatsoever I command
you. Therefore as we would enjoy the happiness and comfort of this Friendship,
we must study obedience, as we would have his Countenance lifted up upon us at
his Table, and be used as his Friends indeed; we must endeavor to have it
clear that we obey him from the heart, Romans 6. 17.

2. By our obodience we testify whose servants we are Romans 6. 16. Know ye not
that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom
ye obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness. This
therefore should be carefully tried, if the course of our life he serious to
the Lord, if we be indeed his Servants he will make us eat, but others shall be
hungry, his Servants shall eat of the hidden Manna, ye shall have his Company
when others are far from any Fellowship with him. John 12. 26. And where I am,
there shall also my servant be: If any man serve me, him will my Father honor.
As ye would enjoy all these, the very choicest of Mercies. 1. To eat the best
of Soul Food^ 2. To be accepted into near Communion with Christ^ 3. The Father
to put honor upon you. 4. As ye would Sing for Joy when others houl for
vexation of Spirit, and 5. As ye would at length serve him, and see his Face
together, Rev. 22. 3. 4. Labor to have it Secured that ye are entered into his
service; and let it not Discourage you from this search into your serving and
obeying of him, that ye find great failings: for he whose servant ye desire to
be, has the tongue of the learned, and is able to furnish you with such
distinctions as that ye may be found faithful, though not perfect Servants: he
saw it necessary to have that recorded for encouraging all the sincere in
heart. Matthew. 26. 41. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. And that
some persons of many failings, yet their heart was perfect all their days as
Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. The Lord knows how to manage his own peoples heart so,
as these condescensions shall not be perverted into a Latitude for sinning, but
only to strengthen when they are under fears, that their Service is not
accepted: this the Apostle Paul Comfort himself, that though he found a Law
hindering him from the good he would, yet he delighted in the Law of God after
the inward man, Romans 7. 22. nor was this Comfort only Paul's, but remains to
be a great Encouragment to every Christian who can say without delusion or
dissimulation, that he finds his heart inclined and set upon Obedience to God
in all things. Psalm. 119. 112. I have inclined my heart to perform thy Statutes
always, even unto the end.

3. The Lords Table should be approached in obedience to his Command. A
Communicant should be engadged to that Ordinance, not only because of the rich
benefits he may expect there, if he be se^king Christ, but because of his
Command, Do this in remembrance of me, and therefore should Examine if a
Principle of Obedience ^eadeth ^^m to that work, and for your help to find out
the sincerity of your Obedience Examine,

First, if thou seek the Lords precepts; that not only thou endeavourest to
perform what thou already know, but lest any Duty be omitted, thou searchest
for thy Duty, this was a comfort to the man of God. Psalm. 119. 45. I will walk
at Liberty because I seek thy precepts; Thus we find the man of God, so often
praying that he would teach him his Law, and not hide Commandments from him,
Psalm. 119. 19.

2. When Duty is discovered to you, and that it is the present season for such a
Duty; Dare ye not deferr it, conferring with flesh and blood to darken a clear
Duty: as many do who have no mind to obedience, taking pains that it may
appear no Duty, which once was made clear; Disputing their Light into darkness,
whch becomes a snare to their Souls, putting Light for Darkness and darkness
for Light, Isai. 5. 20. But if the Laws of God be so written in thy heart, that
thou makes haste and delays not to keep his Commandments, as Psalm. 119. 60.
Then thou art in the way to the same Comfort expressed, verse 57. Thou art my
portion O Lord.

3. Is it not the desire of thy Soul to be always in some obedience to God.
Psalm. 119. 44. I will keep thy Law continually, art thou afraid to be out of
path of Duty at any time? never thinking thy self safe but when thou art
obeying God? even in thy worldly concerns or whatever thou have to do? And
can thou go from one Duty to another willingly as the Lord directs? though
thou be engadged in a Duty very pleasant to thee, yet if the Lord call thee to
another, thou go not grudgingly to it, not wishing in thy heart that God had
not Commanded it, but judging all his Commandments to be Right, Psalm. 119. 128
Thou dare not carve out thy own work, thou dare not be wiser than thy Lord,
saying such a piece of work would do better than that he requires; for to be a
follower of God is sufficient to thee, this is the Principle of his children as
Ephesians. 5. 1.

4. Has God made thee serious and frequent in Prayer, that he would teach thee
to do his will, not only to know it, but do it. Psalm. 143. 10. Teach me to do
thy will. Do thou improve the Promise of the new Covenant for new Obedience.
I will write my Laws in their heart, Heb. 8. 10. and drawest grace out of
Christ's fullness for doing of his will, John 1. 16. Go then and get more where
he Offers himself.

5. Is it the Rejoicing of thy heart when God helps thee to obey, with
Spiritual cheerful Gospel obedience, when he makes thy feet as Hinds, Psalm.
18. 33. So that thou runnest, and do not weary, and if thou find thou have
not Obeyed God from the heart in any Duty, though men should give thee
applause, and be saying God appeared in such a performance; yet thy heart is
heavy and ready to sink within thee, for want of the Testimony of a good
Conscience, knowing thou did not serve God in Spirit? Do thou frame thy
duties for Gods Eye, and not for man's? Is pleasing of him thy Study? can thou
safely averr it with any confidence in the sight of God, that notwithstanding
of many failings, yet it is thy constant endeavor to please him, then thou
may have Confidence toward God, 1 John 3. 21, 22. Beloved if our heart
condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. And whatsoever we ask we
receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are
pleasing in his sight: And for thy Comfort whom God has made sincere, compare
this with the words of the same Apostle, 1 John 1. 8. If we say that we have n^
sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. Here you may see how
these 2. Things consist in the same persons, 1 The sense of remaining sin, and
imperfections, and yet. 2. The certainty of doing these things that please God,
whereupon the Conscience is comforted, and Holy Confidence arises: but let
that still be remembered, that what we do can only be acceptable, and our selves
accepted in the Beloved.

6. Do thou take care not to be ashamed of thy Lords words? but Confessest
him before men: then take comfort from what Christ says, Mat. 10. 32.
Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before
my Father which is in Heaven; and mind what follows in the next, verse But
whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny: and though we have
not often the occasion of such public confessions, as many Blessed witnesses
had before us, yet while we converse with men on Earth, we shall still be found
either confessing Christ, his words, and true godliness; or ashamed and
fainting: great may be their Comfort who a vow Holiness in all companies. This
is the more to be adverted, because if some Christians be permitted to keep
their chambers, or much retired from Converse with men, then they obtain some
measure of comfortable exactness in their Practice; but no sooner engadged in
Company, but some fainting appears, shrinking from their former exactness, and
failing of the Duties required in all company, sinfully forgeting God; whereby
they often return with loss to their Souls, and a condemning Conscience.
Therefore let the fear of being Denied by Christ, still influence thy
deportment, more than fear of men's displeasure. 7. When thou art helped in some
sincerity to Obey thy Lord, having a respect to all his Commands, endeavoring
to act all thy obedience by Grace out of Christ's Fullness, and taking delight to
do his will; yet art thou not of the same mind that Christ requires. Luke 17.
10. When ye shall have done all these things which are Commanded you, say, we
are unprofitable servants: though ye take comfort in obeying from the heart, as
an evidence of Gods grace and Favor, yet dare not trust to it, as a procuring
Cause of the least of your Mercies? thou think in heart there is no more
cause to boast of the best of thy performances, than if a man should declare
himself a fool, by boasting of filthy rags: then the Grace that helps thee to
obey, makes thee also humble, and of the poor in spirit, who are rich and
Blessed in Christ's account.

CHAP. IV.
Sense of sin necessary before Partaking.

The third Inference,

THis Blessed Ordinance of Christ being the Communion of his Body and Blood:
Then Communicants are to approach it with a humble sense of their sin, as
needing the Virtue of that Precious Blood.

And that this is necessary, Consider.

First, That if ye have not the Sense of your sin, you cannot duly regard a
Crucified Christ; and so may mistake the whole work, despising his Death as of
no great use for you, and so cannot and will not apply his Blood for purging
away of Sin and Guilt: for thou art not sensible of Guilt: This of it self were
there nothing else, will make thee eat and drink Unworthily; undervaluing that
Life-giving Death, for the Communicants work is humbly and thankfully to
receive a Crucified Christ Represented in that Ordinance, as knowing they
perish without him.

2. If there be no humbling Sense of sin, thou shall Partake as an hypocrite:
pretending before God and men, that thou come to Embrace Christ as the only
propitiation for thy sins; and yet there is no such thing on thy heart: Thou
do not Judge thy self so Guilty, or that ever thou provoked God to such
wrath, but that less might have served; Thou felt no such a Burden of thy sin,
but such as thy self could bear with great ease, thou wonderest there should be
such a stir in the World about sin, thou never committed any sin but thou
had a Covering of thy own to cast over it. Thou could at any time after
thy greatest abominations with the whorish Woman, Prove. 30. 20. Wipe thy mouth
and say I have done no wickedness: If thus thou come to the Lords Table thou will but receive Bread and Wine, finding need of no more.

3. If thy sin do nothing smart and wound thee, thou wants the very best
Qualification of a Communicant, which is hungring after the Bread of Life, For
he satisfies the longing soul, Psalm. 107. 9. The Lord has his Eye upon such,
more than all others. ^sai. 66. 2. But to this man will I look, even to him
that is poor and of a contrite spirit; he finds out such when others are
passed by, such as are so sensible of their Guilt that they wonder that he
should look upon them, any other way but to Consume them, such as are ashamed
to look up to him because of their Iniquities, Psalm. 40. 12. And yet are
Longing for a Favorable Look, They cannot look up, and yet cannot but look up,
necessity constrains them to hang upon him for Mercy, knowing they perish
without him; such as these will be Graciously Visited and Received. Isai. 57.
15. He will revive the spirit of the Humble and revive the heart of the
Contrite ones. But thou a Stranger to these Contritions of heart, will be a
Stranger also to these Revivings, and no wonder, for thou feel no need of
them, and therefore Consider.

4. That it is the way of God, first to wound, and then to Heal, Deuteronomy. 32. 39. I
wound, and I heal: If thou did never know any Wounding of heart for sin, what
Healing can thou either expect or value; for no wounding, and no healing, no
casting down, and no raising up, no sickness, and no Physician, For the whole
need not the Physician but the Sick; Thou have no use for his coming with
Healing under his Wings, Thou has nothing to Heal, he may spare his Visit until
thou has more need of him, and keep his Medicines for others. Thus thou may
sit down at the Lords Table with the Best, but Christ and thy Soul have no
Merciful meeting. When the poor and needy are drawing out of Christ's fullness,
getting their Diseases Healed, and their Souls Restored, Thou art sent away
Empty, neither art thou Disappointed for thou sought after no more; Thou can
not complain of Christ, for he Refused thee nothing thou sought, Thou art like
these, Rev 3 17. I have need of nothing.

5. Consider also, that of all the meetings between Christ and poor sinners on
this Earth, this is the most Endearing and Comfortable, when Sense of deep
Guilt and deep Mercy meet together: some times the poor sinner is ready to sink
under the weight of Guilt, it is a Burden they cannot bear, the Fear of Gods
Wrath and Separation from him being intolerable; The Soul choosing rather if
possible to be Reduced to nothing; and some times ready to Cry out, O happy no
Beings, being compared with me, they shall have no Anguish, but my Anguish I can
neither bear nor escape, no Mountains can cover me from my Judge, no Death will
extinguish my Pain, but if I die in my sins my pain shall never Die, Death will
flee from me: when thus the the poor sinner is Bruised and can stand no longer,
how Gracious is that Message, as Job 33. 24 Deliver him from going down to the
pit, I have found a ransom. And Ezekiel. 16. 6. I said unto thee when thou wast in
thy blood, Live. I die for thee that thou may not die. I am come that thou
may have Life; then the Blessing of these who were ready to perish are
poured out upon the Ransomer. Then as Mic. 7. 18 Who is a God like unto thee,
that pardons iniquity. The deeper thy Sense of Guilt be, being joined with
some hope of Mercy, thou art in the surer way for the rich Consolations of God,
they that Sow in Tears shall reap in Joy, the Lord has appointed the Garment
of Praise after the spirit of Heaviness, Isai. 61. 3.

6 And though thou has no fear of Wrath; having ground to hope that thou art
Reconciled to God by the Blood of Christ: Yet come humbly because thy sins are
against such Streams of Mercy running upon thee, and passing by others; thou
know that thou have never lived Suitable to the Greatness of thy Mercy,
never fully paid thy Vows, never Glorified God in body and spirit, as it
became one not his own but Bought with a Price, much is required of thee,
because much is given thee; let the Sense of this go deeper in thy heart; for
if hope of Pardon make thy sin easy; thou has cause to suspect both thy self
and thy hope: There are no Convictions should be more humbling than foolish
requiting of the Lord, and no Grief more grieving than grieving of his Spirit,
who minded our griefs and knew our Souls in adversities: Thou will not want
Matter of humbling to take with thee to the Lords Table and need of Renewed
Application of that Precious Blood, If thou open thine eyes to see thy way,
Jer. 2. 23.

7. Come humbly in the Sense of thy sin; that thou may value the least of
Mercy and the very Crumbs that fall from his Table, and if such a full Cup of
Consolation be not poured out to thee as to others, or as at other times to thy
self, yet to Justify God in thy heart not thinking thou have hard measure, not
wondering if he hide his face from thee, but rather wondering if it shine upon
thee, considering thy Provocations: This true Sense of thy unworthiness will
make thee think, O that I may have a Cup of Salvation when I go to his Table,
whether it be a Cup of present Consolation or not.

And that thou may approach with some humbling sense of thy sin. Consider,
that there must be some more deadly poison in sin, than we do apprehend, when
no less does expiate the guilt, than that Blood, which is called the Blood of
God, that no other Sacrifice nor Offering could avail. Study O Christian to
know more of the demerit of sin, the greatness of the Justice of God, that
would accept of no other Atonement, and the greatness of thy deliverance; if
thou art now a Believer, that the weight of wrath is not come upon thee; And
think with thy self, thou by thy sins pierced him, thou brought blessed Jesus
to sweat these drops of Blood, thou pressed on him with the weight of thy sins,
until he cries out, My GOD, my GOD, why have thou forsaken me. Can thou want
a humbling sense of sin, and think this was for thee? Can thou yet mind it,
and not mourn? What hateful hearts have we, that are not more pierced with the
piercing of Christ, and a wonder, if many of us find an interest in that Death,
wherewith we are so little concerned.

2. Be Particular and Impartial, in searching out the Aggravations of thy Sin,
from thy Youth up; and when convictions arise in thy Conscience, choke them
not, but intertain them as a Mercy, until they be ripened for gracious
humbling? Thou may soon lay aside thy convictions, but not so soon take them
up again, it may be God gave thee the mercy of many Convictions, but thy love
to sin has mastered them all, that now thy Conscience lets thee sin with ease,
being seared, and thy heart hardened; and no wonder for many wakenings of
Conscience that still end in security, makes our hearts as the Iron, many
heats, and many cools, makes the Iron harder.

3. But when none of thy Meditations, or Convictions can soften thy heart, but
thou can behold thy sin, and not grieve, and often confess it, yet can not
mourn, never get thy heart poured out to God, except some weight of Affliction
press thee, and then thou will pour out a prayer when the Lord is chastening
thee, and when thy affliction is over, the pouring out of thy heart is at an
end: I say, when nothing prevails with thy obdured heart* yet bless God, that
there is a promised spirit of mourning, Zech. 12. 10. They shall look upon me
whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn. Cry to God for this help, that
thou may go to this blessed Ordinance, as is expressed, Jer. 50. 4. going
and weeping, and verse 5. join thy self to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant.

CHAP. V.
Communion with Christ should be known, before Partaking.

The fourth Inference,

IF that the worthy Receiver at the Lords Table obtain the Communion of his
Body, and Blood: then Communicants are obliged to understand what that is which
is called Communion with Christ, before they Partake, lest they be found
ignorant of it when they Partake: Consider then that true Communion with Christ
being the happiness and honor of all who obtain it, meriteth the greatest
seriousness, to know how sinful Mortals partake of it: And though it be
wonderful, yet the exceeding riches of free Grace has made it sure: for
Believers have the privilege of entering into the holiest by the blood of
Jesus, and so obtain a more gracious nearness to God, than those who remain
only in the outer Court: and that this may appear for the encouragement of
those who still retain a value for it, but fears that this fellowship is
reserved wholly for a better life; I shall by the help of God, show first that
Believers in this life partake a peculiar and intimate fellowship with Christ.
Secondly It Is preparatory Antecedents, whereby they are brought unto it And
Thirdly, Wherein it consists, and the way how it is enjoyed, so far as God
gives to understand it, I can promise the Reader no more.

For the First, This blessed Communion with the Lord, is not only Commanded
both in the Old and New Testament, Micah 6. 8 walk humbly with thy God. Joh.
15. 4. Abide in me, and I in you: and so is made the plain Duty of the People
of God to seek after it, but is also promised, Psalm. 140. 13. The upright shall
dwell in thy presence, Joh. 14. 23. We will come unto him, and make our abode
with him; So that Believers may expect success to their Prayers, and endeav^urs
after Communion with God, For faithful is he who has promised, Heb, 10. 23.

Secondly, The near Union that is between Christ and Believers, does undeniably
prove this Communion, he being the Head, and Believers the Body, supplied in
every part by the Head, Ephesians. 4. 16. He the Vine, and we the Branches, Joh. 15.
5. The very design and scope of these similitudes is, to hold forth Christ's
continued Communications, and the Believers Participation.

Thirdly, The experience of the godly who have published it does also prove its
certainty, 1 John 1. 3. And truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ. Cant. 2. 3. I sat under his shadow with great delight.

Fourthly, Believers remarking his drawing near, and withdrawings from their
souls, Cant. 5. 1. He has come into his Garden, and Cant. 5. 6. he had
withdrawn himself, Lam. 3. 57. In the day when I cried, thou drewest near, and
Psalm. 13. 1. Why hidest thou thy face, etc.

Fifthly, This Communion with Christ, is of such necessity, that a Believer can
do nothing without it, and on this account, Christ requires his followers to
abide in him, Joh. 15. 5. So that they do but discover their ignorance, and
estrangement from God, who think there is no nearer Communion with him
necessary, than the external administration of Ordinances, by the Word and
Sacraments; for many do enjoy these externally, and do only draw near to God
with their lips, and their hearts far from him, Isa. 29. 13. The godly man
finds it good to draw near to him, and so near as to find him the strenght of
his heart, Psalm. 73. 26. That is intimate Communion indeed, to have the Lord
the strength of a man's heart, Oh that our merciful God would give the
understanding of this to many, who have never thought on so near a help as
this; for such may well go in the strength of the Lord God to any work he
requires, himself being the strength of their heart; What if our heart be
found as a dried withered branch of a Vine that is fit for no work, yet that
witheredness shall not be known, when he comes to be the strength of our heart.

For the second thing proposed, how the People of God are brought into this
Communion with Christ.

First, The Fountain of it is the eternal and free love of God, whereby so many
as pleased the Father are given to the Son, by that eternal, mysterious and
merciful transaction between the Father and him, and by him to be redeemed and
prepared for the everlasting enjoyment of God, compare Joh. 17. 6. Thine they
were, and thou gav^st them me, with Joh. 6: 37. All that the Father gives me,
shall come unto me. He will effectually draw them into his Communion, they
shall come unto me, and so must meet together. 2. According to this glorious
transaction in the Covenant of Redemption, the eternal Son of God, is declared
to have his delight with the Sons of men, before the foundation of the World,
Prove. 8. 31. Fore-known unto God, are all his Works from the Beginning, things,
future being as present to his intuition; So that the Son of God has always
taken pleasure in these of the sons of men, who were given him of his Father.
3. Pursuant to the same transaction, and in order to its accomplishment; It
pleased the Son of God often to appear before his Incarnation in the similitude
of man on earth, and converse with Men as a fruit of his eternal delight in
them, and a prelude of his Incarnation, as one hasting this gracious nearness,
and more conspicuous Communion with him, Genesis 32. 24. Jacob was left alone, and
there wrestled a man with him, Dan. 3. 24. He appears as a man keeping
company with the three godly men in the Furnace, and his form appeared also as
the Son of God, this fourth glorious man made the place designed for torment to
the three, a place of joy, and a very Paradise. 4. In order to the same
partaking of Communion with God, a Covenant of Grace is published, which is a
marriage Covenant, Isa. 54. 5. Thy maker is thine husband, 2 Cor. 11. 2. I have
espoused you to one husband by virtue of this honorable relation, Believers
may plead for his dwelling with them in this holy Communion. 5. In due time the
Son of God was Incarnate, taking unto him our nature, that his Fellowship might
be the more agreeable to our nature, and we come the more familiarly unto him;
and thereby to have the more feeling Sympathy with us, Heb. 2. 14. For as much
then as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself
likewise took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that
had the power of death. and ver. 18. For in that he himself has suffered,
being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted. Having taken our
nature, he continued for some time in the World, and conversed with men
especially his own, Joh. 1. 15. He dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory. And
though this people were not always to have his bodily presence; Yet at that
time he did manifest so much of his power, meekness patience, and mercy; that
thereby he did facilitate the knowledge of spiritual Communion with him, some
also beheld his glory, and had Spiritual Communion with him, while he was in
the World. 6. After he had given a gracious taste of his Fellowship, and given
instructions for its continuance in a spiritual manner, in his own appointed
time he purchased reconciliation for all that were given him, laying down his
life for them, that being reconciled by his Blood, they might be capable of
Fellowship, being agreed they might walk together, and 1. Pet. 3. 18. The just
suffered for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. and Ephesians: 2. 13: But now
in Christ Jesus, ye who sometime were far off, are made nigh by the blood of
Christ, So that his suffering were to bring his People into this gracious
Fellowship with God. 7, In order to their actual Fellowship with him, he
qualifieth them by pouring out of his Spirit, Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new heart will I
give, and a new spirit will I put within you. Whereby they are made meet for
the Masters use, as a sanctified People, 2 Timothy 2: 21. Without this, there
could be no Communion with a holy God, our perverse natures being rather
inclined to hide our selves from him, and say, Let the Almighty depart from us;
but by the renewing of the Holy Ghost, they have the spirit of Love, whereby
the desire of their soul is toward him, his Fellowship comes to be their
deliberate and delectable choice; So great a change does the spirit of Grace
make, Ephesians. 2. 22. In whom also you are builded together for an habitation of
God through the spirit. And by the same spirit, they obtain the grace of Faith,
which is a fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. And by this Faith they receive
Jesus Christ himself, John 1. 12. Then we are united to Christ by receiving
him, and being united to him, he dwells in our hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17.
So that Communion with Christ does infallibly follow upon our union with him,
for where he is received, there he dwells; no wonder Faith be called
precious, seeing thereby we are brought into this inestimable benefit, of having
Christ the hope of glory dwelling in us, not for any intrinsic worth of our
Faith, but according to Romans 4. 16. Therefore it is of faith that it might be
by grace, free grace began it, free grace carries it on, free grace will
perfect this Communion, in placeing the Believer there, whence he shall go no
more out, but be for ever with the Lord, and where it began, there must its
eternal center be, Even the praise of the glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1. 6.

The 3d thing is to know more particularly, wherein this Communion with Christ
does consist, and how we partake it, which we are to consider these two ways,

First, As Believers are receivers only of Communications from Christ. 2. As
they are made active themselves in entertaining this Communion.

For the First, Believers are said to be partakers of Christ himself, Heb. 3.
14. They have him, he is theirs a great interest, a great gift! Shall he not
with him freely give us all things. Romans 8. 32. A large Inheritance broader
than the Earth, larger than the utmost Heaven of Heavens, the light and glory
of the best and purest Heaven, what thought of the Worm man can apprehend
aright of this Wonder? That, that one may be said to be ours, Cant. 2. 16. He
is mine, and I am his. Believers partake of Christ, as to both his natures, 2
Pet. 1. 4. We are made partakers of the Divine Nature, they partake of his love
and favor, and thereby admitted to a gracious access, Ephesians: 3: 12. In whom we
have boldness, and access. 2. They have the benefit of his Divine Attributes,
Omnipotency, Wisdom, Holiness, Mercy, etc. Ezekiel. 36: 9. For behold I am for
you. The Believer also has the benefit of his humane Nature, Heb. 4. 15. For
we have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, and yet without sin.
This sweetneth and strengthens our Communion, as the words of the following
ver. shows, Let us therefore come with boldness to the throne of grace.

2. Believers have Communion with Christ in his Offices: as to his Priestly
Office, he is our Passover Sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5. 7. The Believer is
blessed for ever, by that one Offering. Heb. 10. 4. As to this prophetical
Office, Christ is the great Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18. 18. Whom we are to hear, Who is
made of God unto us wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Thus we have that benefit of an
understanding to know him that is true, 1 John 5. 20. Here also our debt by
partaking of Christ is deep; for we were blind, and had remained so for ever,
if he did not open the eyes of the blind. So also as he is King in Zion, Psalm:
2. 6. And King of Saints, Rev. 15. 3. Thus he makes a blessed conquest of us
unto himself, making us a willing people by his power, Psalm. 110. 3. There is
no more to do when he pleases, but arise and follow me, and it is done, Matthew.
9. 9. Thus he rules in Believers, Subduing their iniquities. Thus his people
are commanded to rejoice greatly, because of their King, Zech: 9: 9. Here also
Believers share deep in Communion with Christ, bearing them through the throng
of enemies within and without safely to Heaven, and making themselves Kings,
and Priests unto their God, Rev: 5. 9.

3. Our Blessed surety, and Redeemer, not only died to bring us to God, but to
secure this Communion, carries the Believer still along with him, for in his
Resurrection he has them together with him, they are quickened together with
Christ, Ephesians: 2: 5. And raised up together, ver. 6. That very act of power that
raised him from the Dead, raises all his: They were dead in Sins, and while
such, they were incapable of Communion with God, but by virtue of Christ's
Resurrection, they are quickened, and qualified, for converse with the Living
God, So that there also the allowance is large, and the Communion near, being
raised up together with Christ.

4. In his ascension, he does not leave them as to Spiritual Communion with
them, for when he is ascended and the World sees him not, yet Believers by
Faith see him: Joh. 14. 19. The World sees me no more, but ye see me: and
wheresoever he go because he lives, they shall live also; then their Communion
with him still holds, the influences of Life continuing upon Believers, they
live with him, and see him when the World cannot see him.

5. And when he is set down at the right hand of God; yet there they are not
forgot, for he appears in the presence of God for them, Heb. 9. 24. And
continues his Intercession, for perfecting of this blessed Communion: he ever
lives to make Intercession, the Believer has Communion with him as his
Advocat, to plead his cause before the Father; 1 John 2. 1. He has not turned
off his people on Earth, when he is exalted himself; O happy Interest in
Christ's love, that nothing can separate, no increated, inconceiveable pleasure
and glory in the high and lofty Place, causing any forgetfulness of the poor
weary Travelers, longing to be with him, but what ever they have to do there,
he is ready, and will appear their Advocat and do their work: so that when they
have finished their course, they shall have no more to do but enter into peace,
all being friends where they go, and all this by him.

6. And when he comes again, accompanied with his mighty Angels, to judge the
World, yet Believers must still be near him; therefore they are set on his
right hand, Matthew. 25. 33. But this is not all, for they shall be set on
Thrones also, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Matthew. 19. 28. They
cordially consenting to his judging, and what Sentence he shall pass: neither
is this all, but more is yet coming, with what humility Reverence, Sobriety,
and Admiration should we think on these words following? Joh. 17. 22. And the
glory which thou gave me, I have given them: that they may be one, even as we
are one, and Rev. 3. 21. To him that overcomes, will I grant tosit with me in
my Throne: He only who spoke these words, can give us to understand them for
our good and comfort, without erring by proud, vain, and dangerous
imaginations; but let us observe these two things, 1. That the glory of the
Believer is still to be near Christ. 2. That he who before time had his delight
with the sons of men, continues his love, until he set them down in heavenly
places together with himself: so that this blessed Communion was eternally
designed, and shall be eternally enjoyed.

And now in time, is the season to have it secured, before we enter into that
eternity; what pains can be sufficient for a pledge of being for ever with the
Lord? Oh, that so few of men appointed to an eternity, mind where it shall be,
whither with Christ, or with Devils: a little more time will discover it, and
time is precious on this very account, that we are as yet called into
fellowship with the Son of God* and may have hope of such a beginning of it
here, as nothing present, or to come shall separat. 1 Cor. 1. 9.

Blessed Jesus Christ has opened a door for it by a new and living way, which
he has consecrated for us through the Vail, that is to say, his flesh Heb. 10.
10.

He has opened his door, and stands knocking: knocking at our doors for this
fellowship. He has a desire to use his Followers as Friends, and to admit them
unto a comfortable Communion with him. Joh. 15. 15. Henceforth I call you not
servants; for the servant knows not what his lord does: but I have called you
friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto
you. Which is not so to be understood, as if they were no more to serve him;
for when they are at their best, his servants shall serve him, and see his
face; Rev. 22. 3. and well may it serve the best of them, at their best. But
the matter is, that Believers are admitted to more than the ordinary privilege
of Servants, which is to have great Mysteries and Secrets communicated to them;
for so our Lord explaineth it, the servant knows not what his Lord does, but
I have made known to you, etc. He sometimes opens the very secret counsel of
God to them; the Father himself loves you. Joh. 16. 27. and Psalm. 25. 14. The
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. This leads me to the second
thing proposed; That Believers are made active in entertaining this communion,
wherein Christ and the Believer do intimatly converse together as Friends; though
with a due distance on their part: this communion is the very life of a
Believer. Gal. 2. 20. I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me: this only
makes the Believer fruitful. Joh 16. 4. Abide in me, and I in you. As the
branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine: for the
better understanding of this actual fellowship with Christ, I shall premit
these few things.

First, That though the Infinite and Immense Divine Majesty, be not far from
every one of us; For in him we live, and move, and have our being, Act. 17. 28.
Yet as to his gracious presence, some are said to be far off, Ps. 73. 27. They
that are far from thee shall perish: and we are required to draw nigh to him,
Jam. 4. 8. and these who were far off, are made nigh. Ephesians. 2 13. So that these
Expressions of being near unto, or far from God, are Scriptural: and therefore
should not be mistaken, or stumbled at by any, on the account that God is every
where present.

2. There is no special and gracious communion with Christ, where there is not
first union with him by faith: some wonder they have not that communion with
Christ that they read and hear of, but consider not the reason that they are
not agreed, and so cannot walk together. How confidently, and I fear
ignorantly, do some speak of communion with God, as if it were due to them, who
as yet are incapable of it, until they be reconciled to God, there being no
entering into the holiest but by the blood of Jesus.

3. After a poor sinner is united to Christ by faith, he is never altogether
deprived of some communion with him, Joh. 14. 19. Because I live, ye shall live
also, and Christ dies no more; and verse. 23. We will make our abode with him.
And he that believes shall never die. Joh. 11. 26.

4. Yet every Believer is not admitted to the same degree of nearness, as to
the manifestations of Gods gracious presence, every believer gets not his
face to shine with that glory as Moses, Exodus 34. 29. Yet he manifests
himself to all who firmly love him. Joh 14. 23.

5. The best of Believers obtain not in this life, that degree of nearness
which sometimes they desire; when Moses got his face to shine, yet was he
covered with the hand of God, and did see but his back-parts, after he had
beseeched God to show him his glory. Exodus 33. 18, 22, 23.

6. Nor does one and the same Believer, enjoy the same degree of this nearness
at all times; Moses had fellowship with God, before that time his face did
shine; so the Disciples who were on the Mount, must come down and take share
with other Believers, of that which was ordinary; you may be sitting under
Christ's shadow with great delight this day, and in a little time crying out,
saw ye him whom my soul loves, my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone.
Cant. 5. 6.

7. Sometimes Believers do not discern in the very time, how near they are unto
God, and he to them. Genesis 28. 18. Surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew
it not. And sometimes he makes them know distinctly, that they have fellowship
with him, Cant. 5. 1. and and themselves can give an account of their
fellowship, Cant. 3. 4. I found him whom my soul loves, I held him, etc.

8. There is sometimes strengthening communion with Christ, when their comfort
is not so great as at other times; Psalm. 138. 3. In the day when I cried, thou
answeredst me, and strengthnedst me with strength in my soul. Here is prayer,
and an answer to it, which is blessed communion with God, and is made out by
the strengthening of the soul; so Paul 2 Cor. 12. 8. He besought the Lord
thrice, and obtains a strengthening answer verse. 9. My grace is sufficient for
thee; this the Lord said to him, giving it him as his answer: this also was
true communion, and sometimes there is great delight in this fellowship, the
Lord is free to dispose of it as he will. Cant. 2. 3. I sat under his shadow
with great delight. Ps. 63. 7. Because thou have been my help, therefore in the
shadow of thy wings will I rejoice. Who can but rejoice, when they know they
are admitted to such an habitation, the wings of the Almighty spread about
them: Its also seriously to be observed, that when the Children of God make
mention of their great joy in communion with him, they are found usually
clearing the soundness of their joy, by the gracious help that their souls
partake of; so in this Scripture, because thou have been my help, I find it was
true communion I had, by the help I got; and therefore it is allowed joy. Psalm.
28. 7. My heart trusted in him, and I am helped: therefore my heart greatly
rejoices. Here is communion with the Lord, for his heart trusted, and the Lord
helped; and finding this help, he greatly rejoices. Its necessary for the
people of God to try any joy they have in holy duti^s, whence it arises:
because some may have delight in acts of worship, and yet have no fellowship
with God, as Isa. 58. 2. And many are apt to think, if they have joy and
pleasure in these duties, that then doubtless they have fellowship with God,
which becomes a snare to them, not considering the deep deceit and hypocrisy
of man's heart, which can easily stretch it self in the externals of Religion,
and that with pleasure, that thereby they may think themselves religious, as
well as to be thought so by others; this yields them some delight, and so
much the more, that notwithstanding of all they perform in Religion, they can
reserve their lusts, and Idols of heart entire, even the whorish woman can
delight in her peace offerings to God, that she may have the more peace in her
wickedness. Prove. 7. 14, 15. Its her delight that she can please God well
enough with a show and ceremony of Religion, and her heart and practice go to
her own pleasure therefore; therefore all delight in worship is not found, and
will not prove fellowship with God: for natural Vivacity, the exercise of
common Gifts, hope that it will please God, and sometimes hope of the applause
of men, may, and does go a great length to make these Duties pleasant, where
there is neither joy in the Lord, nor sanctifying communion with him: That
which is indeed the joy of the Lord, is strengthening to us, Neh. 8. 10. The joy
of the Lord is your strength. And if you be admitted to gracious nearness, so
as to behold him, we shall thereby be in some measure, changed into the same
image, 2 Cor. 3. 18. These spiritual advances in godlinese, and conformity to
the image of the Son of God, are the safest indications and proofs of the truth
of our communion with God.

9. Consider also, that this Communion with God is to be found, both in our
worship and walk; for where he records his Name, he comes to his people, he
meets with them, and blesses them. Exodus 29. 43. As also in their practice,
Isai. 64. 5. He meets him that rejoices and works righteousness: these
things being premised, let us now consider, how this blessed Communion between
Christ and believers does appear.

First, There is a peculiar knowledge, that Christ and Believers have of each
other, John 10. 14. I am the good shepherd, I know my sheep, and am known of
mine; Though he knows all things, yet he knows them in in a special manner,
with approbation: and for his enemies, because they are rejected, he says,
Matthew 7. 23. Depart, I know you not. And therefore he Manifests himself,
where he designs to make abode, Joh. 14. 21, 23. They know his voice, Cant. 2.
8. The voice of my beloved! behold he comes: and verse 14. He knows their
voice, Let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice; strangers who never
converse, know not the voice of one another: they who are His, know His voice,
that they (will) follow his voice, and will fly from the voice of a stranger,
Joh. 10. 45. They know his voice when he speaks to them by his Ordinances,
and when they observe his voice, there they attend; knowing the danger of
souls, to take the voice of strangers for his: they know his call and knock,
Cant. 5. 2, It is the voice of my beloved that knocks, saying, Open to me:
and he understands their secret moans, Jer. 31. 18. I have heard Ephrain
bemoaning himself, Thus Christ and Believers have a peculiar way of
acquaintance, that is unknown to others.

2. They mutually mind others in love, he has them ever graven on the palms of
his hands: Isai. 49. 16. And they remember him in his ways, and these the Lord
meets with, Isai. 64. 5. Thou meetest him that rejoices and works
righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways: He is the good High
Priest, that bears the names of his people on his heart, and the desire of
their soul goes toward him: Isai. 26. 8. It is the Believers great joy, to
think that he minds him, Psalm. 40. 17. I am poor and needy, yet the Lord
thinks upon me: how satisfying is it to cordial friends, when they are
assured that what ever they be, yet are affectionatly minded by a friend of
worth: If a man live until most of his intimate friends are gone, what a bare
comfortless World do they leave him: when friends and familiars are put far
from him, he sees none that he can unbosom his soul to, this makes the World
like a very wilderness to him: but here is a brother born for the day of
adversity; when father and mother, or most Sympathizing friends are removed,
yet he is the same, yesterday, to day, and for ever, he supplieth all; and
often dearest friends are removed from Believers, that Christ himself may be
their all, that himself may have their heart and fellowship more entirely; they
used to run to their Sympathizing friends with every grief, and it may be
before they went to Christ with it, which Christ observing in any with whom he
determines fellowship, turns the Cisterns utterly dry one way or another, and
then the man must come to the Fountain, or faint: Blessed Jesus loves to be
remembered by his people, he writes a Book of remembrance, for them who thought
upon his Name, Mal. 3. 16. Complains when they forget him, Jer. 2. 32. My
people have forgotten me days without number: But when his people come to be
well acquainted with the blessings of his fellowship, the meditation of him
becomes sweet, Psalm. 104. 34. The love they have to him, makes remembering of
him habitual, native, and in some respect easy: rather a pain to be long
without thoughts of him, and the same love makes it most uneasy to be
forgotten by him; it is as Death to them, if they think their Lord forgets
them, Psalm. 88 5. Free among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave,
whom thou rememberest no more:

3. There is pains taken for this blessed fellowship on both sides, though the
unequality be greater than we can imagine; he being at the greatest Pains and
Expense, who has no need of such company, yet he is found standing and
knocking at our Door, pursuing this fellowship, Rev. 3. 20. Behold, I stand at
the Door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the Door, I well come
in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. It is Communion with thee I
am seeking, and let me have it: I will Sup with thee, and it shall not be at
thy Charges, I will bear the Cost, all is provided, and you shall find it meat
indeed: how many wonders are in this love, that the Prince of the Kings of the
Earth should thus urge our nearness! as if he were to have some great Prize, is
this the manner of men? Where did you ever hear of a King in possession of his
Kingdom and Splendour, come to a poor man's Door, and stand there waiting for a
word of him, or to let him in to do him good: I think this passes all
thoughts, but silent Admiration, yet he stands there till he complain, that
his Locks are wet with the drops of the night, Cant. 5. 2. This increases the
wonder, but however wonderful, glory to God that we safely may and must believe
it; on the other hand, the Believer having tasted of the blessings of his
fellowship, cries out, O when will thou come unto me? Psalm 101. 2 and Cant. 1.
7. Let me know where thou feedest, that I may feed there, I can feed no where
but where thou art, this meeting cannot but hold at last, when both are on the
way to other.

4. And when the Believer does so meet with Christ, as that he knows he is
come, by the lifting up of his countenance, with how great joy is he received,
Isa. 12. 1. Though thou wast angry, yet thou have turned away from thine anger,
and comforted me; now thou art become my song and my salvation: how meanly do
they think of any pains they have been at, in seeking after him? Cant. 3. 4. It
was but a little farther that I went, and I found him whom my soul loves. If
it were to do, I would go on though I should be torn by the way; for it is as life
from the dead, when he comes and brings healing under his wings, then it is
that they sit down under his shadow with great delight, his countenance is the
health of their countenance. Psalm. 42. 11. Then their Graces have a reviving
and a new Spring; then their Spiknard casts forth its smell, when the king
sits at his table. Cant. 1. 12. Then it is that worldly Comforts become
insipid, and of no value; then it is they say, what have I to do any more with
idols? Hos. 14. 8. When they sit under his shadow, they know then that no
idols ever gave them such entertainment; then they can say their Lines are
fallen in pleasant places. What out of Heaven can be compared to that
complyancy between Christ and Believers, when they can without terror,
converse with God, and solace their souls in him? He delighting in them, Isa.
62. 4. And they delighting in him, Isa. 58. 14. And commanded to do it, Psalm.
37. 4. This made the godly Martyers go through Flames cheerfully to the full
possession of this Fellowship.

5. In this Communion, there is great freedom on both sides: the Lord allowing
them to pour out their hearts before him, Psalm. 62. 8. And they accordingly, as
Psalm. 142. 2, 3. I poured out my complaint before him, I showed before him my
trouble, When my spirit was over whelmed within me, then thou knew my path.
They willingly expose all that is in their heart before him, and are content he
search them, Psalm. 139. 23. It would be an affliction to them, if their nearest
friends knew all that is in their hearts; but a sincere Soul desires to conceal
nothing from him, but rather desires his help to search, fearing there may be
evils in them which they cannot search out themselves, they dare not proudly
boast, as if nothing evil were to be found in them, but humbly beg that he
would see and heal, what they see not, and so far as they know, they lay their
hearts open before him, their most secret sins, complaining how they prevail
against them, such evils as they could reveal to none on earth: so also their
Doubts and Temptations, their Griefs, their Fears, and what they desire most,
all their desire is before him, Psalm. 38. 9. And blessed Jesus Christ is
faithful to them, and free with them, both as to necessary reproofs, I have
somewhat against thee, Rev. 2. 4.

And as to encouragement, Thou have a little strength, and have kept my word,
Rev. 3. 8. and Psalm. 25. 14. He shows them his Covenant, he opens it up to
their understandings, and there they find all their Salvation, there they find
relief as to their Sins, Doubts, and Fears, there they find their victory
secured, for, The secret of tho Lord is with them that fear him: and he will
show them his covenant.

6. In this Communion, there is still desire for more nearness to Christ, Cant.
8. 6. Set me as a seal upon thy heart. What boldness of Love is? Oh, is there
nothing will satisfy less than Christ's heart! They must be placed there, for
his love is their happiness. 2. They desire it may be made evident for their
comfort as by a Seal, that thereby they may read his desires is toward them,
this secureth their comfort, when they can say, his desire is toward me, Cant.
7. 10. If it be thought never so great ambition, yet sincere love to Christ is
kept in pain without some evidence of the love of his heart; his mercies are
sweet, his graces very sweet, but his heart is sweetest of all. I question, if
there be any sincere love to Christ, where this is not desired, though such an
habitation, such a seat as the heart of Christ cannot be enjoyed without
admiration. 3. When it is said set me as a Seal, etc. That is, ratisie, and
confirm this my Interest in thee, and Communion with thee, as by a Seal, that
thy love shall be my allowance, and Communion with thee, my privilege for ever.
4. When it is said, set thou me as a Seal, is as much as an humble
acknowledgement, Lord I cannot place my self where I would be, I cannot bring
my own soul to this near Communion with thee, but I commit it to thee, who can
draw my heart to thy heart, I trust thy efficacious power, that what ever be my
natural aversness to such holy Communion, yet my heart is under thy dominion,
thou can prepare and form it for thy self, all this Salvation is thy own
doing, and thou can bear me up to this eminent part of it, to be so near as
on thy heart: Therefore it is my humble request, that thou set me there, the
Spouse does not say, I will set my self there, but set thou me as a Seal etc.
It Is observable, that after Moses had near Communion with God on the Mount, yet
he still presses for more, Exodus 33. 13. I beseech thee show me thy glory.
What he had obtained, did but excite his desires for more: and so it is with
all who have the true beginning of Communion with God in this life, though they
have it not in the manner Moses had, the Communications that Believers receive
here are discoveries of a greater beauty and glory yet before them, and these
foretasts captivate their love and desire, so as they cannot but pursue for
greater discoveries, the first fruits they have found, are so sweet to their
taste, that the more they get, the more they hunger, Romans 8. 23.

7. That which Believers obtain in Communion with God, is so strengthening and
comfortable, that the hideing of his face is most bitter, Psalm. 30: 7. Thou
did hide thy face, and I was troubled. If there be no grief of heart upon the
hiding of his Face, there is just cause of fear, that such persons have not
known the shining of his Face; as on the other hand, these who diligently
observe the Lords withdrawing from their souls, and are forthwith pained and
wounded for his absence; do thereby testify their acquaintance with the
blessings of his presence, especially, if their grief be that they have
provoked him to withdraw, and that his withdrawing is not only as to comfort,
but as to the measure of strengthening Grace formercy allowed them, the very
fear of the Lords deserting, does often mix water in the best of their wine,
that until Christ and they be at home in their Fathers Kingdom, their brightest
and most serene days, are often overcast with clouds; and therefore, when they
do enjoy his gracious presence, fearing some alteration, though not of their
fixed gracious estate, yet of their present blessings, cry out, Stir not up,
nor awake my love, till, etc. Cant. 2. 7. O that he would stay, and not leave
my soul destitute, and when the Cloud covers them, O what a damp it gives,
then Darkness, Jealousies, and Fears arise, as Job 29. 1. O that I were as in
months past, when his candle shined on my head, ver. 2, 3, 4. As I was in the
days of my youth, when the secret of God was upon my Tabernacle, when the
Almighty was yet with me. This godly man's desires were fulfilled, for Job 4. 2.
So the Lord turned the captivity of Job, and ver. 12. blessed his latter end
more than his beginning. But many now come to old age, are almost hopless, that
they shall ever in this life be, as in the days of their youth, and decline so
far, that they tempt themselves to doubt if ever the Almighty was with them,
and his secret on their Tabernacle.

8. Where true Communion with God is, there its perfection is desired, not only
to have that measure continued, which is here allowed, but to be for ever with
the Lord, 1 These. 4. 18. Here their Fellowship is but as seeing through a
Glass, there it is often interrupted, as to its comforts, here a body of sin is
still pressing them downward to this Earth, that they get not their Affections
staid and fixed on things Above, here they are surrounded with snares and
temptations, such as have made strong Cedars to shake; And therefore having
already the first fruits of a better Country, they desire to be where he is,
who has taken up their hearts to himself: For to be with Christ, they
sincerely think best of all, and Heb. 11. 16. But now they desire a better
country, that is an heavenly, It Is not some extraordinary persons only, who
are of this mind, but all true Believers, for Rev. 22: 17. The spirit and the
bride say, Come, Christ says, I come quickly, and they agree, even so come
Lord Jesus. The crown of righteousness is laid up for all who love his
appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 8. So that it is dangerous for a Christian to want desires
of this nature, for they are consistent with submission to his appointed time;
but since the Crown is laid up for such as love his appearing, every Christian
is concerned to try, whether the meditations of that day be his terror or
delight, these being a few of the great blessings found in Communion with God;
there remains yet one difficulty which perplexeth some serious souls: that is
how to have this blessed Communion ordinary, so as they may be said to walk
with God, knowing that this walking with him is more than to perform some
stated Duties of Worship; the grounds whence this difficulty arises, are;

First, They hear and read of abideing in Christ, Joh. 15. 4. Setting the Lord
always before our eyes, Psalm. 16. 8. of waiting on God continually, Hos. 12. 6.
of resorting continually unto him, Psalm: 71: 3: When they think on such
Scriptures, and withal the regard God has to such as remember him in his ways,
Isa. 64. 5. And such as thought on his Name, Mal. 3: 16. And his Indignation
against these who forget God, Psalm. 50. 22. These and the like passages being
laid to heart, they think that God should be always actually remembered, and
some few find great disquiet, if any considerable portion of time be spent
without thoughts of God.

On the other hand, they find themselves concerned in worldly affairs, or
Reading, Studying, etc. Which cannot be managed without serious and suitable
thoughts to the work they are about; God clearly calls them to these other
things, it were sin in them to ruin their families, and neglect the duties of
their station, some of which duties may require a considerable portion of time,
and seriousness in that time: now their strait is how to manage these external
necessary Duties, without sinful forgetting of God.

Answ. 1. Whatever weakness may be found in this difficulty, yet it appears to
flow from a good root of love to God, and fellowship with him, it is a savoury
kind of trouble, yet;

2. It Is not safe for a Christian, to arraign himself for a forgetter of God,
when he is serving God in the duties of his station, but;

3. It will be found, that the bitterest ingredient of this accusation is, when
there is opportunity for remembering God, without obstructing any other duty,
that these opportunities are not improved: and for the help of such who find
trouble of this nature, as I know some for many years afflicted with it. I shall
propose but these 4 things, leaving their usefulness to the blessing of God. 1.
The continued exercise of the love of God, 2. Performing our external Duties as
obedience to God. 3. Frequent retirements to God, and 4. many ejaculations.

For the First, The lively exercise of the love of God, makes the remembrance
of him delectable; a Christian has a great advantage, when the desire of his
soul goes to it, for then he is so far from grudging that God have his
affectionat thoughts, that he cannot be easily kept from them, this being one
of the strong constraints of Love, to think on the object Beloved, you may
observe the Spouse in the Book of Canticles cannot be kept long from the
thoughts of her Beloved; either seeking after him, or delighting in his
Fellowship, or commending him to others; Christ's love is the surest Bond on the
soul, to prevent sinful forgetting, and if it decay, your thoughts and
meditations will decay with it; but vigorous love will make you both embrace,
and seek for opportunities of converse with him, and the meditations of him
sweet, Psalm. 104. 34.

For the 2d, Even our external duties, should be performed as obedience to God:
Therefore, 1. Take nothing in hand, but what is Duty. 2. And present Duty, for
God has appointed a season for every Work, Eccl. 3. 4. 3. Do what is Duty,
because it is Duty, because God requires it: For a man may do that which upon
the matter is Duty, and yet not to do it, because God requires it; and then he
cannot be said to serve God, there is need to advert to this, for it is a great
mean of peace to a man's Conscience, when he knows that which he has been
employed in, was the very work God called him into; and therefore he engaged in
it, and though it were a worldly concern, and did take a considerable time, and
intent thoughts; yet he is not to think all this time was sinfully spent,
because he was not on the meditations of God all that time, for God called him
to be about other things, which could not be performed without the thoughts of
his mind. 4. These external affairs should be attended no longer than Duty
requires: This also should be considered, lest love to the World keep your
minds hanging upon them longer than need requires, this becomes a snare, and
a great obstruction to Fellowship with God; you need fear nothing that God
Commands, will of itself mar your Spiritual good; for his Commands are, For
our good always, Deuteronomy. 6, 24. But fear thy own mismanagement, and weakness in
making Duties to interfer, and justle out one another: Seek therefore to get
thy heart inclined to perform his Statutes always, Psalm. 119. 112. Be always
about seasonable Duty, give no allowance to idleness, and vain thoughts; for
it is misspending of time, and being out of all manner of Duty, that does most
procure these disquieting reflection; for if thou be conscientiously serving
God, and working righteousness, then thou shall find peace and quietness, as
Isa. 22. 17. And the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of
righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever; Yea, the Lord will meet with
thee, when thou art performing works of righteousness, Isa. 64. 5. Thy acting
of Justice and performing Duties to men, shall not obstruct thy Fellowship with
God, for he meets with such.

For the third Help which is frequent retiring to God in Secret Worship, pray
always Luke 18. 1. and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Pray without ceasing, this requires
more than only a Praying disposition, for a mere disposition is not the acting
of Prayer which is required, though I grant this disposition is required in the
Command of Praying always; and if there be not a disposition and willingness,
Prayer will soon be but a burden, and if there be an inclination and
disposition, Prayer will be frequent where God gives an opportunity, David not
only Prays three times a day, Psalm. 55. 17. but prays seven times a day,
Psalm. 119. 164. which appears to be stated ordinary times for Worship daily:
there is great guilt on many for seldom praying, who have times at will, and
sometimes knows not how to spend it; they can tell you they weary, they think
long, they know not what to fall about, how to put off time, they will go to
such a place or such a company only to put off time, and yet very seldom
retiring to secret Prayer: have you no concerns with God? have ye all the
Communion with him that ye desire? have ye nothing to ask of him? or nothing to
Praise him for? how Just will it be with God to cut thee out of these
opportunities, either by sudden Death, or cast thee in such Sickness and pain,
that it shall be more than thou can to bear thy Affl^ction, and hopelessly
wish for such full opportunities of Conversing with God, as formerly thou
had, some of you have now your chambers at command, your meat and drink
provided seasonably for you, and your worldly business not thronging you: yet
you will go any where rather than to God, frequent Retirements to God when
sincere are a great part of this Communion with him, while we are on Earth, and
prevent long forgeting of God, are a help to have our Conversation such as
becomes those who are often to come before him, a great mean to keep the
Conscience in ordinary awe of God, and to understand how it is between him and
our souls, to obtain help for present Duty, or trials, and to be Spiritually
minded which is life and peace, and to make Christians savoury and profitable
to one another as relishing the company where they resort.

The 4th. Help for this Communion with God in our walk, is frequent ejaculatory
prayer: when there is not opportunity for retireing to Worship, these may be
very numerous, and are more numerous than can be well counted by a walk with
God, who has acquired a gracious habit of making his request known to God in
every thing, Phil. 4. 6. by this kind of Prayer, a man may often mind God,
without any detriment or prejudice to his other concerns, the Motions of the
soul being swift, when Jacob is predicting the Lot of his Children, Genesis 49.
18. and speaking to them, there is no loss to his work by that pathetick and
pertinent Meditation such as do all their works in the Lord, cannot but
frequently mind him. Pious Nehemiah 2. 4. when in the presence of a great
Monarch, has his short Prayer to the God of heaven, there being no season then
for retiring and Bowing his knee to his Maker; yet he will not manage his
Design without some application to God; no company could keep him from his God,
on whom his dependence was, This Example might Instruct in Many Things, for 1.
Nehemiah had Prayed before, for Success in the first Chap: and particularly
that God would grant him Mercy in the sight of that man, v. 11. Yet now in the
presence of the King he prays again, many such as we would be ready to think
we have prayed for this already, what needs more prayer, and there is no
opportunity for prayer now, and so let it alone, but he will not utter his
Request till he pray again, 2. He was Surprised with the King's unexpected
demand verse 4. For what do thou make request; When ever we are surprised, we
should go first to God, whatever company we are in. 3 He was in great fear,
Chap. 2. 2. Then I was very sore afraid, and therefore betaketh himself
immediately to God as a present Help and Refuge, and if we would do so in our
fears, it would much strengthen our Communion with God. 4. That which he was
concerned in was of great Consequence, and therefore besought God to be
concerned in it, neither should we attempt any thing of moment without
application to God, this would be another Help to prevent our forgetting of
God. 5. Here was an opportunity offered for doing good, and he must go to God
for Direction, how to manage it, his Design was now much Ripened, when the King
desires to know his Request, and lest by his weakness he should obstruct the
good of others, he Addresseth himself to God for Counsel, so should we when
ever, and wheresoever occasion Offers to be useful in the World, this would
be another Help to keep us near God, many such occasions Offer which are
sinfully neglected, I say Occasions for being Profitable, though not in that
manner, of Nehemiah 6. Here is a present Duty must be performed immediately,
Nehemiah must now speak, there was no Deferring of his Answer, but he
appears, Self Deemed not, daring to Trust his own Understanding, and
therefore must needs go to God with it, what shall I speak, he had been at this
time an accomplished Courteour and Favorite, and admitted near the King's
Person, yet he will not Trust his Parts or Elocution; but he will Trust his
God, here also is another profitable Example that when men are clearly called
to speak, either before few or many, and have not time to premeditate, yet
there ought to be a serious humble looking up to God for his Assistance, what
ever be men's Station in the World, no doubt Humility is a Mother of many
Prayers, and if this Example were followed, how Blessed a Help would it be for
frequent Remembering God, these are but a taste of the many Occasions we have
for these short Ejaculatory Prayers, which will do hurt to no man's other
concerns in the World, but are a great Help to Communion with God.

CHAP. VI.
Pertinent Meditations in the time of Communicating.

The fifth Inference,

Seeing such Blessed and near Communion with Christ may be obtained at the
Lord's Table, then Communicants should prepare for entertaining Communion with
him in the time of that Solemnity, after serious preparation great Diligence is
necessary, that this Holy Ordinance be managed on our part in an acceptable
manner, that we may find it a true Communion with Christ, suitable to it is
name, and of all Communicants they have the most peculiar advantage, who are
acquainted with Communion with God before they come to the Lord's Table; for
except there be some admirable work of power and Mercy, men will surely profane
the Sacrament, who have their Fellowship with Christ then to begin, not knowing
how to receive Christ when they receive these Sacred signs, or how to Feed upon
him: I say without some great work of God's Mercy, for we must still leave
place for Sovereign Power and Mercy, who can not only Confirm such as have
doubted of their Fellowship with God; but even then give it a Being which had
no Being before; and in one day or hour give both Faith and Fellowship with
God: yet this is no Warrant for any to presume without endeavoring both Faith
and Fellowship before they come to the Lord's Table.

It should also be remarked that many godly persons find themselves at a great
loss when they come to the Lord's Table, by not knowing how to act their part
distinctly in Communicating, and though they have made some Conscience of
Preparation before, yet complains they act but confusedly in the very time of
the Solemn Action, which does much obstruct their Peace and Comfort, yea,
though they dare not Charge themselves with Hypocrisy as to their desires for
Communion with Christ, or that they were altogether inconcern'd in Partaking;
yet not knowing what Meditations were most suitable in the time of Partaking,
and wandering from one thought to another without fixing on that which was most
proper for the work, do often fall into impertinecies alien to the great work
in hand, which being Reflected upon, gives such a Wound to their Conscience,
that the day or hour which should have been the time of their great Joy, is
turned into Grief and Complaints: and that which will appear strange unto
Strangers to these things, that some find more dificulty to be Composed in
their minds in the very time of that Solemnity, than they found before they
came to it; whereby they are Surprised and fall into great Consternation, that
when the Soul should have been most United, Fixed, and elevated for Communion
with Christ, that than their thoughts should be a gathering: though possibly
the things they were thinking of were Pious and Good in themselves, but
altogether unseasonable: such would Consider that Feeding on Christ is so
excellent and profitable for the Soul, and so Destructive for Satan's Interest,
that no Devices or Temptations will be wanting to frustrat that Profit; and
therefore should be Guarded against, not only to Resist Temptations in the
time, or any thing Impertinent to the Work in hand, but withal before we come
to Partake, this should have a peculiar Consideration, how we should Act in the
time of that Solemn Action: and who knows but the Neglect of this part of
Preparation may provock God to let us find our own Weakness to our Grief, if we
be so proud as to think we can Act the Most Solemn part of the Work of our
selves, without any Preparation, therefore it will be found our Duty both to
Pray, and Meditate before hand, how to be Employed in the time of Receiving:
and such are in a special manner concerned to notice this who have Smarted
already for it is Neglect, complaining that God had Deserted them, for no other
reason but because of their Impertinent wandering at the Lord's Table.

And for your help in this part of the Work, how to Act your part of this Holy
Communion, I shall propose by the Lord's help, a few things to your
Consideration, I say how to Act, lest any should say there is no Acting required
of us but only Receiving: but such would Consider, that our Receiving of Christ
is the Acting of Faith, as is clear from John 1. 12^ Wherein also Love to our
Blessed Redeemer must be Acted, so that we must Act our part in this Holy
Communion, if we expect the Benefit for which also we should be active in
Praises.

First, Then when we are to enter on this Blessed Duty, we should humbly
request for the Lord's Asistance and Presence with us, that our hearts may be
Established by his Grace, and kept closs to the Work; this should be done were
there never so many about you.

2. It Is necessary also that what the Lord sends by his Messengers for
clearing the Nature of the Sacrament be Diligently hearkened unto; and I do the
rather mind you of this, because some do then shut their ears from attending to
any thing spoken, being wholly taken up with thoughts of their own: I am not
yet speaking of the very Instant of Receiving, for at that time People must be
exercised with their own Meditations, and should not be diverted with many
Words, but that which I say, is that before the Sacred Action be engaged, some
take a liberty to Neglect all they hear, attending only to their own secret
thoughts and debates: but this is not the seasonable Work, for if it be
Ministers Duty to Preach, and open up the Nature of the Sacrament, and teach
the Duty of communicants, then it is the Peoples Duty to hearken, not knowing
but the Lord will Direct that unto them, which may either clear their present
Doubts, or set them on some more seasonable Work than that wherewith they are
at present Exercised.

3. When ye are entering the Work labor to come to it cheerfully and
thankfully, Blessing God you have so Blessed a Work to go to, as actual Solemn
Communion with Christ, and that the Lord himself has brought you into the
Banqueting House, Cant. 2. 4. He brought me to the Banqueting House. This is
Comfortable when a Communicant is so far cleared, that the Lord has brought
him there, begin it with hope of a Comfortable meeting with Christ; it is a
feast of Love wherein thou a Believer and lover of him may find his Banner
of Love spread over thee, and himself a covert from the Tempest of all
Temptations that may assault thee.

4. When thou art to Partake that thy Meditations may be Pertinent and suitable
to this Holy Action, labor to have thy thoughts agreeable to the Institution
it self, considering the Elements and what they Represent, and pondering the
very Words of the Institution, because these Words of Christ's Institution
point out thy present work, and what should be the nature of thy Meditations;
nor can thou partake aright if thy mind be not Exercised with what Christ
speaks in that Action, besides that, this will be the Blessing of God an
hedge in the way, to keep thee from Impertinent excursions, and unseasonable
thoughts, but no hedge to the Breathings of God's Spirit or Limiting of him,
for thou art to expect most of the Spirit's help when thou art closs at thy
Duty, and this is the present Duty to Meditate on the Words of Christ spoken by
him at the Celebration of this Ordinance, and to be suitably affected with them.

5. And more particularly when thou see the Bread broken, and read or
hear that word, this is my Body which is broken, then thou art to Meditate
on Christ Crucisied his Blessed broken Body, and Bleeding Wounds, and so to
Behold him as in exquisite pain, Crying out of being Forsaken, Mocked, and
Tempted by the Wicked to come out of that pain, and relinquish the work, Mat.
27. 48. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the Cross. Thus we are to
Behold him, and Mourn for the deep hand we had In all his Sufferings, we having
Pierced him, are oblidged to Look and Mourn, and this mourning with Admiration
of that Love that provided so Costly a Remedy for us, and leaning to him who
made his Soul an Offering for sin is a part of our acting this Blessed
Communion with Christ.

6. When thou hear that Blessed Word (take) and that by taking the Bread,
thou art to take Christ himself; here thou art to Meditate on the Great Offer
made to thee, and to Believe in thine heart, that now the Redeemer and Savior
of the World Offers Himself to thee, and requires thee to take Him; as He
gave Himself for thee, so now He gives himself unto thee: this giving, and thy
Receiving is the very Acting of this Blessed Communion, He gives Himself to be
thine for ever, and so thou Receives; He gives Himself entirely with all His
Purchase, and so thou by Faith Receives, thou come with the Sense of thy Sin
and Guilt, and He gives the Benefit of His Blood to Cleanse thee from all Sin;
Thou come with the Sense of thy Diseases and thy Sins often prevailing
against thee, and out of His fullness thou receivest Grace, by Receiving Him
thou have a Right to all the Blessings purchased as thy need Requires here, and
a Right to Glory, which in due time thou shall Possess, setting thee down
together with Him in Heavenly places, Ephesians. 2. 6. O Blessed Communion begun here
on Earth, and shortly to be perfected in that Eternal Communion where there
shall be no more paining distance.

7. When thou hear that Word (eat) and thereby Christ saying take me into
thy heart, eat, and be Satisfied, now fill thy hungry Soul, eat abundantly,
make Room, open for me, I will come in and sup with thee, and the Meat shall be
my Flesh, Meat indeed: What a pain is it sometimes to a Believer that he cannot
duly value this Love, even when he valueth it most; and therefore will Eat and
Wonder, and VVonder and Eat, but dare not for all his wondering say Lord it is
too Good for me, I dare not touch or eat it, no no says the Believer my Life
is in it, I cannot want it, let His gifts be like Himself, though I be still
like my self mere naught: I find Him saying, if I eat not His Flesh I have no
Life in me, John 6. 53. Therefore I will choose Life and Eat; and whatever may
be said of eating of Christ's Flesh when a man believes, yet I will eat in
this manner, because he Requires it, He has opened my heart and prepared His
place in my Soul, O let him come and Possess His own Conquest, and since he
allows to take and eat, I will do it, I will take Him into my very heart,
that I may Live, and Live to Him for ever, and I do Request Him to take deep
Possession of all the Powers of my Soul by the Graces of his Spirit, and
animate them all for His Service, as meat is diffused through the Body, for
it is service. Here is intimate Communion with Christ in His Ordinance.

8. When that overcoming word is heard (for you) broken for you; Christ
Himself making Application of the great Sacrifice to thee, as this goes
deepest into the heart, so it raises the greatest Admiration that it was for
me even for me, who was not only worthless, but a Rebel and dishonourer of Him;
this cutteth through the heart, giving it a deep Loves wound, was I then in His
thoughts and upon his heart? and did He thus Suffer for me who acted against
Him for so many years? and resisted as I could His Love, when pursued by it?
what shall I now render to the Lord, what can I render, what have I to render,
but what is His own? and that same I often keep back, how good is it that by
what I now receive I shall be qualified to Extol His Love in another manner,
and in a better place, though my Praises cannot through Eternity recompense His
Love, for He is above our Blessing and praise, only I shall take pleasure to
Sound out His Praises before Angels and men, when I am taught the Song of the
Lamb; I am this day deep Debitour to His Love, and shall be so for ever, I shall
Glory in it, and spend, but cannot out-spend Eternity in acknowledging this
Debt, that His Precious Body was Broken for me, and Himself allowing me now to
Believe it: This is also a part of the Believers Communion with Christ at His
Table.

9. When thou hear these words, This do in Remembrance of Me. I Consider
who Requires this, is it not He who Remembered me in my low estate, wallowing
in my Blood, and no eye to pity me but His, Remembering me when I was not
remembering my self, nor come to my self to consider my forlorn estate, when my
wretched self, and all the World about, me would let me Sink into the Pit
whence there is no Redemption, no man caring for my Soul, is not this He who
Remembers me still? has He not mercifully Remembered me this day in bringing
me here where I find the Bread of Life? has he not now made me taste of that
Tree of Life which shall be food for ever? and all by His Gracious Remembering of
me, and shall I not Remember His Love more than Wine, no thanks to me, O Lord to
Remember Thee, and thy Love, had thou required me to pass through some flames
of a Hell, it were my part to essay it at thy Command, how much more when I
have nothing but Love to remember, shall not I remember thy unquenchable Love,
who have rescued me from unquenchable Flames? I have many times VVretchedly
done what I could to quench thy Love, but many waters has not done it, I do
remember it Lord, and through thy Grace will remember it, and I will do this
which thou now Requirest in remembrance of Thee and Thy love, giving Thee
thanks for Commanding it, and had I nothing else to do in this Ordinance, yet
by Thy grace Thy gracious Command shall be Answered, though in great weakness.
Here also is another part of this Blessed Communion, Christ requiring
remembrance, and the Believer cordially yielding it.

10. And when thou hear of the showing forth of His Death, which Christ is
not ashamed of, but will have it in this manner Published; then says the
Believer, that Death brought Life to my Soul, that Death has overcome Death
for me, that now I may say O Death where is thy Sting, by this Death is the
Death of Deaths, Hos. 13. 14. O Death I will be thy plague, and 1 Cor. 15. 54.
Death is swallowed up in victory. Death was long my terror, and kept me in
Bondage, not knowing what hour the first and the second Death might surprise me
together, now when I must go through that Passage I hope to fear no evil,
Christ has Sweetened the Passage, made it no Enemy, but a necessary step for
putting off Corruption, that I may be Clothed with incorruption, there shall be
no Prints of Sin or Death seen upon me, no spot or wrinkle by the shrugs of
Death, I shall take no stench of Death with me where I go, and all this by His
Death who was Slain and is Alive: I will this day apply it thankfully, and
Solemnly show it Forth: Christ Crucified being my Glory, and He who brings me
to Glory; desiring in my Soul that His Death were showed Forth, from the Rising
to the Setting of the Sun. Here also is a part of this Blessed Communion,
Christ Requiring His Death to be showed Forth, and the Believer cordially
performing it.

11. When the Believer hears that the Cup is the New Testament in His Blood:
Considering that by the Death of the Testator, the Testament is of Force, Heb.
9. 16, 17. The Believer Interested in the Legacy, may now with Confidence
expect what is bequathed, for the Testament thus Confirmed cannot be
Disanulled, Gal. 3. 15. Then says the Believer, I will give Credit to the
Tokens and Pledges devised by Himself for my Confirmation; He requires me to
take them as such, and so I receive them from Him who is Faithful. I will from
henceforth expect all the Promised Blessings that I stand in need of, for in
this Covenant or Testament is all my Salvation; Christ has made all sure by
His Death, and now He has made all sure to me by His Seal: I dare not distrust
His Seal or Pledges, He has made me a Believer, He has this day given me to
believe in Christ Crucified, I have Received Him according to His Offer, He
has given me power to become one of the Children of God, His Testament
therefore is for me, and it is Seal seals me up unto the day of Redemption,
and here is a comfortable part of this Communion with Christ, He gives the
Pledges and Seal of His Testament, and the Believer joyfully receiving them as
such, and Rendering Him Praise; the Believer resolving now to go to Death in
humble confidence, That the Lord has made an everlasting Covenant with him,
ordered in all things, and sure.

These are but a taste of the seasonable Meditations in the time of Partaking,
and a Help for preventing Impertinent wanderings of the Mind; and though a
Communicant reach not all such particular Meditations at one time, yet one or
more suitable serious Meditations on Christ's words of Institution, will be
found by the Blessing of God a mean to keep the Soul at that work, which God
then Requires, and so prevent the wounding Reflections of many after they have
Communicated: for it must be supposed that every Godly Communicant will reviewe
the way how his Soul was Employed at the Lord's Table, and if he find that his
Meditations were not opposite to the work, it cannot but make a very bitter
Reflection.

Know also that these Meditations already hinted, are but for putting some weak
People in mind to keep close by the Institution, lest their thoughts go off
their Work; but no ways intended as any Restriction or Limiting of
Communicants (except from wandering) for if Christ manifest Himself and
entertain thee with His Loves, thou will not need such Helps, for He can soon
Elevate thy Soul into such Meditations, affections and joy, by the Breathings
of His Spirit, as thy self cannot Express, and all of them suitable to the
Blessed work thou art about.

CHAP. VII.
Believers should desire to Partake of this Communion.

The sixth Inference,

THis Blessed Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, being the Communion of Christ's
Body and Blood then Believers are oblidged to have a sincere and an earnest
desire to partake of so great a Mercy.

And that we should desire this great Benfit, Consider,

First, The Lord Commands it, and therefore we should have a desire and a
delight to do His will, we may not choose or refuse as our inclination leads,
which appears to be the Error of many, not Considering that the Lord will
call to an account what Regard is testified to so Gracious a Command: which is
to be Lamented that so many make their Humors their Rule, they have not a mind
to it, it is not their present desire and so lay it aside: forgetting that it
should be their desire, because of Christ's Merciful Command.

2. Because it is a Feast of pure Love on Christ's part, therefore it should be
desired: it was His Love that laid it is Foundation in laying down His Life. 2.
It Is His Love to appoint such a Memorial of it. 3. His Love and the Tokens of
it then to be Communicated to Believers in a special manner: Can there be Love
where there is no desire to meet with Love and entertain it? Consider what is
to be your Feast, the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the World, if
this be believed in heart, how can ye but hunger and desire to eat? for such
Food will not be always in your Offer; give praise that ever ye had the Offer
of that which will make you praise for ever, and be satisfying to thy Soul when
all other things fail thee, Psalm. 22. 26. The meek shall eat and be satisfied:
Can ye with peace keep your selves out of the way, where such an Offer is made?
know ye not that the Receiving of Christ is your begun Eternal happiness? which
neither Death nor any thing else shall deprive you of? if thou say thou have
received Him already in another manner, and do hope to be Blessed in Him for
ever, though thou never Receive Him at the Lord's Table. I would Answer that
thou art the more Ingrate, who do not desire to Receive Him afresh in the
manner He has appointed: Art thou weary of Receiving Him? did thou get such
a fill of Him before that thou desire to Receive Him no more? this is ground
sufficient to make thee suspect thou did never yet Receive Him, if thou be
wearied of it, for thy heart should be still open to Christ.

3. Is it not Communion with Christ thou art daily Praying for? and if thou
prayest in sincerity, then it should Elevate thy heart to hear of His
appointments for obtaining it; when he says in such an Ordinance I am to be
present in a peculiar manner, allowing you a most intimate fellowship, as near
as you can expect in this Life; there thou may expect the return of thy
Prayers; and if thou have no regard to it thou rendrest thy self and Prayers
suspicable of mere Hypocrisy, will thou not be ashamed to call thy self a
praying Christian for fellowship with Christ, and yet have no desire to be
there where thou may meet Him and have Him? do thou not often say, O that
I knew where I might find him! Job 23. 3. He answers in this Ordinance I will
be present, giving my Self and my Loves: if thou regard not this, and yet has
no desire to be where He is, what can thy self judge of thy Prayers but as
words of course, and flattering God with thy lips? beware of bewraying thy
estrangement to Christ as one that has never seen Him, in any part of His
Beauty, lest thou be of these who say, as Isai. 53. 2. There is no beauty that
we should desire him.

4. The Love we owe to the Glory of our Blessed Redeemer oblidgeth to this
desire, of showing it forth in the manner He has appointed: yet on this
account also many are Guilty by the neglect of this Ordinance: for these
Dangerous mistakes are too much rooted in many, thinking because they receive
Christ at any time when they Believe, therefore they need not be solicitous for
Receiving Him at His Table; and because they may Render Him Glory at other
times for His Love in Dying, therefore they need not go to the Lords Supper to
perform it: but these thoughts involve you in great Guilt, for however frequent
thy praises be at other times, why would thou presume to wiser than thy Lord?
who has appointed this Public Solemn manner of performing it? Dare thou say
in His face Lord I think this way of showing forth thy Death needless, I think
a more private way may serve? will thou Impudently advance thy own wisdom as
above His? whether does He or thou know best which way He is to be Glorified,
whether art thou to give Him Rules or to be Ruled by Him? if thou will be so
arrogant as to plead that thou know better how to do thy Duty, than he can
teach thee; it is no wonder thou have no desire for the Lords Supper; but rather
if thou can regard any Gospel Ordinance, since thou art wise enough to teach
thy self: Think with thy self, I must once compear before my Judge, the same
blesed Redeemer who requires his Death to be showed forth, what shall I answer,
when thus charged by him; the just died for the unjust, I submitted to agony in
my soul, and torments in my body, to relieve poor sinners from eternal
torments; thus my Death was the reconciliation of the whole Elect World, who
thereby now stand upright in Judgment; I required, that this my Death should
be showed forth unto this day, that I am come again: But here is a man that
thought it not necessary, to render me that public honor. What can be thy
answer, but speechless consternation? Think also with thy self, if I expect
reconciliation with God by that precious Death, how can I refuse, Nay, should I
not rejoice to publish that love, especially in so comfortable a manner, as in
Communion with Christ, and his Saints on earth; and contribute my mite to keep
its memory fresh and fragrant in the world: It Is great ingratitude to have no
longings for this Ordinance; yet it appears, that if some were placed in such
circumstances, as no occasion offered, it would be no great grief of heart to
them: or if occasion offer, but it may be at some distance, occasioning bodily
trouble in attending, they can easily forego it; though perhaps performing
longer journeys at the same time to other places: or if opportunity offer in
the place of their residence, yet it comes undesired; and a very triffle shall
detain some from partaking; and all this, because there is no love and desire
of soul after it: I speak not this of all, but it is shameful to be found in any
professing Christian, and so much the more, because our blessed Redeemer
testified so great regard to this Ordinance, that when he was immediately to
engage his deepest sufferings; yet even then he would have this Feast of Love
celebrated, and fixed for after generations. Shall our Savior testify so great
desire for our good, and we have no desire to receive it? Shall we so undervalue
that Love, which can neither be overvalued, nor duly valued? Luke 22. 15. And
he said unto them, with desire have I desired to eat this passover with you
before I suffer: Appointing this Communion of his Body and Blood to continue
until he come again.

5ly, If thou be a Christian indeed, then thou art duly praying for grace to
strengthen thee for the Duties thou must perform, for Strength against thy
secret or open sins, for strength against Temptations, from thy own heart, or
from Satan and his Instruments, for strength to bear thy afflictions, and grace
to carry Christianly under thy trials; therefore thou should desire to be
there, where he is to be received, who shall be the strength of thy heart: Art
thou not often fainting, both in thy Duty and Trials? Then believe in thine
heart, that Christ is that true bread of life, Joh. 6. 48. Hereby thou shall be
strengthened for Duties far above thy own strength, hereby thou shall be enabled
to cut thy way through the greatest difficulties; Thy Redeemer is thy strength,
Psalm. 19. 14. Thou art to receive that which will make thee a lively Christian,
for the honor of thy Lord. refusing nothing he commands, and sinking under
no burden he lays on thy back: Great is the mercy to believe this strength,
and great is the loss of our souls, when that strength is but thought upon, as
an uncertain may be, Remember Christian, and believe in thine heart, what
Christ says, Joh: 6. 56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
dwells in me, and I in him: If thou do believingly receive at his Table;
doubt not thy strength, seeing Christ dwells in thee; and what have ye to
desire like an indwelling Christ? And that thou may desire; be sure to
believe his Words, thou shall dwell in him: how desirable is it to have him so
near, and how encourageing against all manner of assaults, when we can say as 1 John 4 4. Greater is he that is in us, than he that is in the world.

6ly, By sincere Communicating, ye may warrantably expect to be confirmed
Christians, by the Seal of God for a blessed Eternity: and therefore the desire
of the Soul should be to partake of this blessed Communion. For this Ordinance
is designed for securing Believers of a Title to all the benefits of the new
Covenant; for which cause these pledges are given by Christ: have ye pondered
the greatness of that mercy, to have a Charter for Heaven ratified with Gods
own Seal? And that thou shall be preserved unto that heavenly Kingdom: Is not
thy poor soul many times ready to faint, by reason of thy Doubts, that thou has
no interest in Gods special Favor, that thou never received the mercies of his
Chosen, that though thou have received many mercies, yet thou know not but
an Hypocrite may have all that sort of mercies conferred on thee? Art thou not
sometimes afraid that if death should now seize thee, thou may have no
better than the Hypocrites portion? Would not some solid persuasion of God's
love be a great relief to thy poor soul, to know that Christ is come to dwell
in thee, from whose love thou shall never be separate? Who shall make thee live,
because he lives: Then consider what Christ the truth says, Joh. 6. 51. I am
the living bread which came down from heaven, If any man eat of this bread, he
shall live for ever. He well knows, that our eternity is our great concern,
and t^erefore takes pains to secure those who depend on him, that if they
receive him, they shall have no cause of fear, he is so deeply concerned with
the Believers certainty and comfort of his Eternal wellbeing, that in this 6.
of Joh. He pours out Arguments to secure it, ver 50. This is the bread which
comes down from heaven. That a man may eat thereof, and not die, and ver. 51.
Is an man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever, and continues to inculcat
the certainty thereof, to ver. 59. Trust then what he says; that if thou eat
of this Bread of Life at his Table, which the believing Partaker does, then
thou shall not die, but live for ever: This should raise thy desires for this
enriching Ordinance, that thy Doubting may be turned into rejoicing in God thy
Savior.

I might add here, that our desire for this holy Communion should be so sincere
and strong, that Believers should endeavor frequent Communicating: But having
occasion elsewhere to speak a little of frequency in partaking; I shall now only
put you in mind: that some Celebrating this Sacrament much more frequently than
others, should both be charitable one to another; where neither precipitancy
can be charged on the one side, nor sinful negligence on the other: There is no
doubt, but many godly Ministers celebrate the Lords Supper very frequently by
principles of Conscience, and Love to that Duty; and should not be otherwise
Judged of by these who celebrate more seldom. And other g^dl^ Ministers cannot
have this Ordinnce so frequen^ly Celebr^ted, ^ho by their principles judge it
necessary, to examine most of the Communicants before Celebration, that they
may the better know the state of their flocks, which requires a considerable
portion of time for its performance; there is no cause of stumbling on either
hand, when it is known that in both ways there is a conscientious and
affectionat regard to that great Ordinance of Christ: the Scripture mentioning
often, but not how often; yet because it mentions often, and because of the
love we should have to frequent Fellowship with Christ, in that way of his own
appointment: frequency should be endeavored; and if people cannot frequently
partake in in the place of their residence, other opportunities should be
improved, as God gives occasion in his providence, which is now frequently
offered, and embraced also by the most serious.

It may not be improper in this place, to enquire why some that profess a
desire to partake of the Lords Supper nevertheless may be warrantably debarred.

Answ. 1. The desire of partaking simply of it self cannot qu^lify a person for
the Lords Supper, except this desire be qualified by a right principle, for a
good end, and due preparation endeavored; otherwise a profane Ruffian,
Apostate, or Atheist, might pretend a desire, and so be admitted; if a
pro^essed desire were a sufficient qualification, and so that holy Ordinance
profaned.

2ly, These who are appointed stewards of the mysteries of God are required to
be faithful, 1 Cor. 4. 2. For they must give an account to their Master, and
therefore cannot dispose of what is his, but by his own direction.

3ly, His express direction is, Matthew. 7. 6. Give not that which is holy unto
dogs: And therefore the Gospel priledges, wherewith they are entrusted, must be
dispensed only to those who have a right to them: As none were to partake of
the Passover, but such as were clean and sanctified, 2 Chronicles. 30: 17. Jer. 15:
19. If thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth.

4ly, Seeing these holy mysteries are to be administered to those only who have a
right to them, then the Stewards without presuming on Gods Prerogative to know
the hearts of men, and who have a right in Gods sight; they are to dispense
these Mysteries, according to ordinary Rules given them by their Master, and
recorded in the holy Scriptures: wherein we find some actually deprived of the
privileges of others, and cast out from the Communion of Believers, 1 Cor. 5.
4, and 5. ver. and verse 13. Put away from among your selves that wieked person.

5ly, When men are thus deprived of these Benefits according to the rules of
Gods Word; Subjection and Obedience should be yielded unto those who are set
over them in the Lord, Heb. 13: 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and
submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give
account:

6ly, When it is apparent, that some who press to be at the Lords Table, have no
knowledge of the Covenant of Grace, unto which the Lords Supper is a Seal, nor
any competent measure of the knowledge of Christ himself, nor how to discern
the Lords Body, or Secondly, Are so obstinate, that they will subject to no
trial, whereby Ministers may know to whom they Administer that holy Ordinance,
such as will give no account of their soundness in the Faith, nor declare a
consent to receive Christ as Redeemer and Lord, or Thirdly, Are of such ungodly
conversation, that they testify themselves to be strangers to Christ, and the
power of his grace: these persons while they continue such, could not but
profane the Lords Supper, and therefore should consider that they deprive
themselves of that benefit: For Ministers must not transgress the Laws of
Christ to humor men, nor must they be partakers of other men's Sins, who would
precipitate themselves into that heinous guilt of the Body and Blood of the
Lord.

7ly, And these who are thus debarred, should not take this censure, as if they
were totally rejected; but rather for their present good, to prevent the guilt
of eating and drinking unworthily: and for the time to come should pray and
endeavor to be qualified for partaking with others in that holy Ordinance.

CHAP. VIII.
Believers should come to the Lords Supper with Faith and Expectation.

The seventh Inference.

THis holy Ordinance being the Communion of Christ's Body and Blood; then
Believers should approach it with Faith and Expectation of this blessed
Communion.

And that the Believer is obliged to this Faith and Expectation, Consider,

First, I hat Believers must render unto Christ, the honor due to his
faithfulness, since he makes an offer of himself, saying, take eat; then we
are to believe in our hearts he will be present making good his offer to the
believing Receiver: otherwise we dishonor him, as if what he says and
offers were not to be trusted: which would run us unto deep guilt, besides,
that it would render the whole transaction on our part, Faithless Void, and
Unprofitable; this therefore should be carefully adverted, that there be no
suspicion of the truth of Christ's offer, or his faithfulness; lest we profane
that holy Name, who will not suffer his faithfulness to fail, Psalm. 89. 33.
This his honor should be most dear to thee, who was so dear to him, as to make
his soul an offering for thy sin, and now offers himself to be thine; Come
therefore believingly to the Lords Table, trusting him who is truth it self,
Joh. 14. 6.

Secondly, The whole of this holy work must be managed by Faith; for we have no
other way of seeing him, with whom we are to have Communion, but by Faith,
though now we see him not, yet we believe, 1 Pet. 1: 8. Faith is now our eye to
behold him: ye go to the Lords Supper in Faith of a Divine Institution, ye go
to it, believit's your duty by Christ's Command, ye go to it, believing he was
slain, and is alive, ye go to it, believing he has provided a way for Interest
in his Body and Blood, and are to go to it actually believing in him for your
personal partaking of this Communion, so that Faith is required in all the
parts of it, and grounds laid down for the Believers comfortable Expectation.

3ly, Come to it with Expectation, for herein thou art about thy Lord and
Masters service, which he requires: thou need not fear it to be said, who
has required this at thine h^^d, for himself has required it, and there is
still good to be expected in doing of his Will, Rev. 22. 14. Your labor shall
not be in vain, for ye serve the Lord Christ, Col. 3. 24. Blessed are all his
attendants whose care is to serve him. For Christ says, Where I am there shall
also my servant be, Joh. 12. 26. Thou may expect he will be with thee at his
Table, who art his servant in sincerity.

4ly, Come in Faith, and Hope; for the promise is to him that believes, Gal.
3. 22. Believing is the only sure way for this blessed Fellowship, and your
seeing the glory of God in his power and mercy toward you; Consider your need
of the Lords appearing for your good, and do not obstruct your mercy by
mischief, remember what is said, Mat. 13. 58. And he did not many mighty works
there, because of their unbelief: If he shall say, according to thy Faith, so be
it unto thee, and thou have no Faith, then blame thy self if no mighty works be
done for thee; for he will not humor thy misbelief; Labor then not only to
have some actings of Faith, but being strong in it giving glory to God, devise
liberally of thy God, seek that he will deal bountifully with thee, and
remember what is said, Mat. 15. 28. O woman, great is thy says, be it unto
thee, even as thou will.

5ly, If thou come not to this Ordinance with Expectation; thou will be ready
to think the matter is not great, whether thou partake or not* for thou
expectest no great benefit by it, and so any trivial excuse will prevail to let
it alone: for our natural corruption is so strong, and our grace commonly so
weak, that pure Duty of it self does not always engage us without some prospect
of advantage, but when our own good appears in the work, then we have an
argument from our own souls to resist obstructions standing in the way of this
profit: and if thou should go forward, and partake; yet thy expectations being
languide, thy seriousness will too readily be proportioned to thy hope, and
languid also: but remember that proclaimed gracious Name, Exodus 34. 6. Is in a
peculiar manner recorded in this Ordinance, and having recorded his Name, he
will come and bless his people, Exodus 20. 24.

6ly, Endeavor to approach the Lords Table with expectation of good, that ye
may be able to encourage others to the same Duty; many of you will have the
occasion to see and speak with one another before ye partake, and out of the
abundance of the heart, the mouth will be speaking, for which cause ye should
observe where there is need of strengthening the hands of weak and doubting
persons, and purposely let something fall which may be gathered by others for
their encouragement: as in thy own Family, when thou art considering who of thy
children or servants may be most ripened for that holy Ordinance, who had never
yet the confidence to presume it; yet drop words of encouragement, by showing
the excellent things to be there obtained, the happiness of those who indeed
receive Christ, the dignity and mercy of being solemnly engaged to Christ, the
comfort of having a Pledge of his love, the mercy of being admitted unto such
near communion with him: thus a word may be blessed for engaging others in that
Duty, which may be their blessing for ever. Whereas on the other hand, if thy
mouth be filled with complaints, and others hear thee saying thou have no great
benefit by Communions, thou questions whether thou will go to the Lords Table
or not, especially if thou be a person noted for Religion; these who hear such
Discourse being weak, will be tempted to think, what a fool am I to take in any
thoughts of communicating, when such an eminent Christian speaks so meanly of
it, as if little or no profit were to be had, I will give it over: and thus
some poor tender smoking Flax, may be quenched by your means; and if
compassionate Jesus be tender of them, (as no doubt he will) yet no thanks to
you, who are guilty by casting water on their little coal, which could have
quenched it, if a better friend had not kept it in life.

It may not be amiss to consider in this place, what may be the reasons that so
few professing Christians go to the Lords Supper with this necessary believing
expectation: seeing its dishonorable to our blessed Redeemer obstructeth our
own good, and is often found prejudicial to others.

Ans First, It will be found that the seeds of Atheism, and unbelief of Gods
Word and Promise, has a deep hand in this woe. Ah! few Christians by profession
are established in the truth; men do not and will not lay this to heart, though
they often hear it, and I fear are disgusted, because they so often hear it:
proud Nature taking it heavily to be charged with unfixedness in the Faith; and
these disrelishing such warnings most, who have most need of them. I wish the
Reader concerned in this, retire to his own Conscience and put the question
closly home: do I firmly believe the history of Christ's Passion? And that
Salvation is by no other Name? I speak not now of men's persuasion, that Christ
has loved them, and washed them in his own Blood; but men's persuasion that he
was dead, and is alive. I^ ye will not try your unfixedness in fundamental
Truths in season, you may soon come to know your misbelief by experience, to
your grief in an hour of temptation, or at the hour of death: try therefore in
time what ye believe, and on what grounds; seek to be fixed in the faith of
Christ and his truth, otherways your expectations will still be faint. Nor do I
speak here of such persuasion and fixedness in the truth, as is inconsistent
with any degree of doubting: for here we know but in part, but that which I
speak is against that dangerous unfixedness, that has no degree of persuasion,
under which too many are perishing.

Secondly. But some others are not so much discouraged by misbelief of this
nature, as by their fears that Christ will have no regard to them, that he will
never honor them with such communion with himself: others they grant may have
it, but for themselves, they look for nothing but a dry Fleece, when others are
wet, they have deserved no better, and expect no better.

Ans. If our mercies be dispensed according to deserving, then we may all stop
together, and proceed no further. But blessed be God, that our expectations
depend on free gree grace, I will freely love them. Hos. 14. 4. 2. Has he not
regarded thee already, in opening thine eyes to see thy wretchedness, which
thou did not see before? Does he not discover Diseases in order to a remedy?
If he had no regard to thee, he could have suffered thee to run on in
presumption, and sit down at his Table, without ever minding a wedding Garment,
and made thy rising thy terror; but now he preventeth it, by making thee
consider what thou art about. Therefore 3. If thou would be regarded at his
Table and accepted, know, that a garment of Salvation will cover all thy spots:
give praise that this Garment is ready for the putting on, give praise that its
not only provided for the putting it on, but himself puteth it on: Isa. 61 10.
He has clothed me with the garments of salvation. Give praise that ever any
poor sinners were secured of these garments, and render praise that there is a
minut of time left thee to beg these garments, that fine Linen of the Saints,
under which covering thou can not be despised, no^ thy holy Expectation
disappointed.

Thirdly. Others faint in their expectations; because though they have been often
at the Lords Table, yet they never get great profit. Ans. and whose fault was
this? If thy misbelief deprived the of the communications of grace, where will thou leave thy complaint? For he warned thee, that mighty works were not to be
expected where unbelief had the dominion; thou may go to a hundred
Communions and never be the better, if thou do not believe nor draw out of
the Wells of salvation: therefore if thou have a sincere value for Communion
with Christ, if thou would not always carry away a bad report of that enriching
Ordinance, if thou would prevent a contempt of it in thy own soul: consider
seriously what has been thy manner of communicating formerly; see thy way
wherein thy particular defects have been; thy neglect of preparation, thy
hypocrisy; thy lukewarmness in the whole of the work; and thy misbelief at the
work: repent of these evils, that thou may not say thou had a hard Master,
but an hard heart.

Fourthly. Others are discouraged in their expectations, because they observe
not others who frequent Communions, much bettered in their conversations.

This I grant is for a lamentation, that so few appear like communion with
Christ: yet it is not so with all, and though they were but few, as Isa. 17. 6. a
few berries in the utmost fruitful branches. Its Gods great mercy, when some
are preserved as Witnesses against a declining generation, who not only are
made suitable to a public solemn Communion; but such as rarely, any thing can
be discovered in their practice, that is not consistent with present fellowship
with God, though possibly ye discern it not, as being ignorant of walking with
God your selves. 2. If this be thy regrate, that that thou see so few
fruitful Christians after Communions, then labor to add one to the number of
these few, lest others be discouraged by thy practice also. Thirdly. However it
be as to partakers, tho many prove very unfruitful; yet this is never
occasioned by want of provision, being allowed to eat and drind abundantly, and
the hungry are filled with good things; and many have found their souls made as
a watered Garden in attending this holy Ordinance. O that we were stirring up
our selves, and stirring up one another, to pray down such showers of
Blessings, as has been found at Communions in the days of old.

CHAP. IX.
Objections of doubting Christians answered.

The eighth Inference.

THe eighth Inference from the words, is, That seeing so great a benefit as the
Communion of Christ's Body and Blood, may be had in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper: then Christians are obliged to endeavor the removal of all Objections,
and stumbling Blocks, that stand in the way to obstruct their partaking of this
Benefit.

Before the particular Objections be mentioned, I shall premit these few things.

First. That all professed Christians should make conscience, not to pretend
Scruples and Objections where there is none; for where the Conscience is not
really burdened with some difficulty, its but hypocrisy to frame Objections
against peoples partaking of the Lords Supper, that they may appear more
serious than others: the heart of man is so desperately wicked and deceitful,
that some have need of this Caution.

2dly. Yet on the other hand, when some are exhorted to prepare for the Lords
Supper, especially young people who did never partake before: if fears and
doubts arise in their hearts, whereby they stand in need of counsel and help of
the more experienced; they should not deprive themselves of that help, fearing
they may be thought Hypocrites, or get a name of more seriousness than they
deserve: as some have kept up their doubts from all others, until their doubts
were too strong for them, and brough them under such distress, that it had been
much their advantage to have revealed them sooner.

3dly. Where stumbling Blocks are such as may be removed with a little pains,
or some more humility; all should make conscience of getting them removed: As
fore Instance, if there be variance betwixt persons, where a little true
humility would cure all, in confessing of wrongs and injuries done to others,
or forgiving injuries: then men should go to the utmost against their own
pride, and submit to one another, rather than to deprive themselves of so
blessed a communion with Christ. Ephesians. 5. 21. Submitting your selves one to
another, in the fear of God

4thly. Where Objections are really serious and of weight, yet Christians
should take care not to indulge them by heaping up of Scruples, and in the mean
time, shutting their ears against any solution or mean of cle^ring their Doubt;
they should not conclude, that such Objections cannot be answered, and so
determine to follow their own Opinion, before means be used. As for Instance,
some because they find such a particular evil in themselves, or because they
have no persuasion that Christ will countenance them in that Ordinance; do
inconsideratly conclude they will not partake: but such should use all means
within their reach, to know if these or the like Objections, be sufficient
arguments to keep them from the duty of communicating.

5thly. When some are observed to withdraw from the Lords Table, if they be of
sober and Christian Conversation; its uncharitable to judge them Hypocrites on
that account, and to load them with Reproaches, as if they were all
distempered, if they be not Hypocrites; for ye are discharged to judge. Mat. 7.
1. Judge not, that ye be not judged.

6thly. Such as are of that Opinion, that all professing Christians should
without debate be Communicants, should consider, that all Communicants are
required to examine themselves, and accordingly act: and the Examination
required, is in order to partaking, that he who examineth, may find clearness
in his Conscience to partake: and without this, no man should approach the
Lords Table; that is, no man should partake, who in the mean time doubts,
whether he should partake or not, for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Romans
14. 23. I grant a Christian may partake, though he has may other doubts; but he
cannot safely partake while this doubt remains: therefore all means should be
used, to have his conscience convinced, that its his duty to partake: It cannot
be sufficient for a Christian, to say I am not clear to communicate, and so
continue neglecting that Ordinance, if he make not conscience of getting
stumbling Blocks in his way removed; the man is guilty of his own bondage, who
does not what he justly may, to get his Fetters off.

And for your help I shall consider, and by the Lords help answer some of these
Objections, which I have most insisted on and urged. As,

First. Some object, I am not a Believer, and therefore should not go to the
Lords Table.

Answ. Some object this indeliberatly; is it easy to think thy self no
Believer? Do thou consider what will be the eternal lot of Unbelievers? sure
this comfortless Conclusion should have very evident reasons. But its to be
lamented, that some will very lightly object their not believing, when it may
serve a turn, and keep them from a Duty they have no mind to, and yet little
exercised, or grieved for the matter. You are easily satisfied not to go to the
Lords Table, but will not take pains conscientiouslly to examine your faith,
putting it to the trial of Gods word; but thou think thou art no Believer,
and there is an end, and thus thou may sinfully neglect that Ordinance while
thou live.

2dly. Before thou do impartially examine thy self, thou art not sure but the
grace of Faith is given thee; and if it be given, thou art most ungrate to deny
it: for a conscientious Christian doubting of his Faith, dare not therefore
peremptorily say he has no Faith, lest he be injurious to the free Grace of
God, not knowing but after serious examination, he may be enabled to say, I
know in whom I have believed. 2 Timothy 1 12. He finds it very uneasy, to charge
himself with a graceless state, except the grounds were undeniable; therefore
search well, before you fix so comfortless a Conclusion.

3dly. Weak Faith should not be looked on as no Faith; for Faith admits of
degrees, some are of little Faith. Mat. 6. 30. O ye of little faith. Some are
of great Faith. Mat. 15. 28. Woman, great is thy faith. And if you be of the
very meanest, who have obtained like precious Faith, acknowledge it to the
glory of the Giver: see that your Faith be of that kind, which uniteth Christ
and the sinner. Ephesians. 3. 17. Thy' ye cannot say that ye are strong in faith, yet
if you have received Christ, ye have a right to the childrens food. Gal. 3. 26.
By faith we are the children of God.

4thly. See that you mistake not the nature of saving Faith, as if it were only
a persuasion that you shall be saved; which is to follow after believing: if
you cannot deny, but the desire of your soul is toward him; then you have
ground of comfort: for the people of God have comforted themselves with this
desire. Isa. 26. 8. 9. The desire of our soul is to thy Name, with my soul have
I desired thee. If God has wrought this in you, do not deny the thing you
find: What pleasure have ye to deny God his due glory, and keep your souls in
perplexity? Ye see the Children of God, have searched out their very desires,
and avowed them thankfully before the searcher of hearts, which is also your
duty; and if you cannot deny some real willingness to have Christ as he
offers himself, then a day of gracious power has come to thy soul, for
nothing could make thy heart willing but divine power, Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people
shall be willing in the day of thy power. God has bestowed more on thee than
only light, this is the Light of life, therefore search it carefully if thy
soul be made willing, and if thereby thou have been opening thy heart for
Christ: for where the heart is opened by willingness, Christ has certainly
performed his word, Rev. 3. 20. He comes in and suppeth with such. There is no
willing opened heart for Christ, but he is in that heart: therefore I would
say, despise not the day of small things, but that I dare not call any real
desire or willingness for Christ small things; they are so enriching to every
soul that has them: the willing heart gets the water of life. Rev. 22. 17. and
therefore a willing heart is a believing heart. Try also if thou find thy
soul leaning on Christ; that notwithstanding of all thy fears and doubts, yet
thou still hangest upon him, thou can not be rent from him, its as death to
think on separation from him: if thou thus depend and lean upon him, then he is
the beloved of thy soul. Cant. 8. 5. The spouse leans on her beloved. Though
thy condition be as a Wilderness, because of griefs and fears; yet thou
choosest him for thy alone. Stay, thou seek rest to thy poor soul in none
other but in him: then according to Psalm. 2. 12. Blessed are all that stay on
him, or trust in him. Thou come to him for rest, neither able to bear thy
self, nor thy burden; he will be as good as his word, Mat. 11. 28. I will give
you rest. And thy coming, is thy Faith. Joh. 6. 37.

Object. I cannot come to the Lords Table, for I have no hope to be accepted of
him, how can I expect to meet with Christ there, who for any thing I know, did
never meet with him? How can I think to be accepted at his Table, for I do not
find that ever he accepted of me?

Ans. This Objection is of weight, but savoury. For 1st, it relisheth a
discerning of the true intent of that Ordinance, which is a blessed meeting
with Christ. 2dly. Some remarking of Christ's absence. 3dly. Some desire for
that Meeting and Communion. And 4thly. A remaining grief in the soul for his
withdrawing, and fear that they are not accepted: but to your Objection more
particularly.

First, Take care you be not mistaken as to your acceptance, for by reason of
our weakness, its not easily discerned; you may be accepted of God, and not
comforted, and you may be comforted, and not accepted; Christ may be near, and
doing you good to a high degree, and yet your self not knowing he was near you,
Genesis 28 16. Surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not: and on the
other hand, you may have delight in approaching to God, that is in the
externals of duty, and yet be but proud hypocrites: as Isa. 58. 2. Therefore
take heed how ye judge of acceptance, for too many, and these not of the very
worst, advance their comfort in prayer as a rule, thereby to judge of their
acceptance with God, if they have freedom to speak, and some joy attending
their speaking, though they know not whence that joy arises: for all may be
mere nature or common gifts, for any thing they know, yet thereby conclude, God
has surely accepted of them, because at such a time, they had a great measure
of joy and delight; but this Conclusion is not safe, except they can instruct
and make it out, that it is the joy of the Lord, spiritual strengthenin joy.

Secondly, Consider that you may be accepted of God, and answered in such
things as are most necessary for you; though you be not answered in the manner ye
would, if thy answer should be as Paul's, 2 Cor. 12. 9. My grace is sufficient
for thee, thou art mercifully accepted, and answered; though the Thorn in the
flesh be not presently plucked out, ye may smart yet longer by its pain, and the
grace sustaining you is your answer and pro^f of your Acceptance.

Thirdly, Your persons may be accepted, when some of your requests are not
accepted: a Moses accepted into extra ordinary nearness and intimacy with God,
yet some of his requests are not accepted, so as to be granted, Deuteronomy. 3. 25. I
pray thee let me go over and see the good land that is beyond Jordan; but verse.
26. let it suffice thee, speak no more of this matter. Many Christians are too
ready to conclude, that God has no regard to them; because he grants not
what their hearts is set upon, whereas he is about to give them better things:
Canaan was a pleasant land, but a mere triflle to that heavenly Canaan bestowed
on Moses.

Fourthly, And supposing your requests were spiritual and necessary, for your
souls good; yet ye are to wait for his answer: yea, though it tarry, wait for it:
Hab. 2. 1. I will watch to see what he will say: thou think there is no
delay, thou art in a horrible Pit, yet remember Ps. 40 1. 2. He brought me out
of a horrible pit: after he had patiently waited for him, a Song of Deliverance
will at length clear all, that your selves were accepted, and your necessary
Petition recorded.

Fifthly, Yea its safer for you to question the truth of your coming unto God,
and the sincerity of your prayers; than the truth of his accepting such as come
unto him, He having said he will in no ways cast out, Joh. 6. 37. It Is too
common, though a dangerous evil, to charge God with our own faults, and to
complain of him for refusing, when we either ask not, or ask amiss: who dare
say that they seek and search for God with their whole heart? But he is found
of them. Jer. 29. 12. Who are put away that bring their hearts unto God? If
thou do well, shall thou not he accepted? Genesis 4. 7. Yet proud Nature, will
still blame God rather than it self.

Sixthly, Consider well on what account ye can be accepted of God, that it is
only in the beloved Christ, Ephesians. 1. 6. Proud Nature hurts us here also,
prompting us to think, we may be accepted for our own sincerity, or fervency;
etc. And so, acceptance with God is not sought in Christ's Name; and if not
sought in his Name, by what warrant can we expect it? Joh. 14. 14. If ye shall
ask any thing in my name, I will do it: its not sufficient that men's judgments
are satisfied it should be so; for many are not ignorant of this, who yet do
not perform it; therefore as ye desire acceptance with God at any time, and
especially at the Lords Table, labor, 1st. To be found in Christ. 2dly. Let
all your Prayers be actually, and as distinctly in his Name as ye can reach.
3dly. Observe well what answer ye get, especially when your souls are bettered
and strengthened in holiness after prayer, that ye may no more complain that ye
have no acceptance with God, but enabled to say, as Psalm. 66. 19 But verily God
has heard me, he has attended to the voice of my prayer; and then bless him
as in the next Verse. That he has neither turned away thy prayer, nor his grace
from thee. 4thly and finding that the Lord has mercifully accepted of you, and
your prayers, otherways than ye thought, then be encouraged in the Lord, and
say, as Psalm. 116. 1. I love the Lord, because he has beard my voice and my
supplications: and Verse. 13. I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon
the Name of the Lord. And therefore 5thly. When thou art at his Table, set thy
soul for accepting of Christ, and be not jealous of his Offer, for thou shall
have a blessed Meeting. I may say of this Ordinance, as is expressed by the
Prophet, pointing at Gospel Ordinances in the latter days, Ezekiel. 20. 40. This
is the mountain of the height of Israel, and there will I accept thee: here is
a Mercy-seat indeed, Christ revealed, as dying to obtain mercy for poor
sinners, and on this Mercy-seat he meets with his people. Exodus 25. 22.

Object. I cannot go to the Lords Table, for I know that I shall not live
suitable to Engagements made there, I find it already to my grief, that all my
former Vows are broken; I will break no more engagements of that nature, better
keep my self free of that addition to my former sins, and pray that the Lord
would pardon me for my unfaithfulness in times past.

Ans. Its to be supposed in charity, that you do not design to be unfaithful,
if ye should communicate again, for ye appear to grieve for it; but for you to
prophecy that it will be so hereafter, is a limiting of the power and mercy of
God? What do you know what is to come? For you may have that at one Communion,
which you never obtained before. Is the spirit of the Lord straightened, that ye
cannot be made faithful? Micah. 2. 7.

2dly. It appears to have been your custom, to trust your selves with keeping
of your Vows, for ye dare not trust God with it; you think it dangerous to put
your selves so far in his reverence, as that either you must trust him, or be
treacherous, and therefore you will not expose your selves to that necessity of
his help: Ah poor soul! will thou not be beholden to God for holding up thy
goings? Psalm. 17. 5. Hold up my goings. Will thou not be beholden to him, for
causing thee walk in his ways, and making thee faithful? Ezekiel. 39 27. Cannot
his mercy and grace preserve the, when thy foot is ready to slip? Psalm. 94. 18.
When I said, my foot slippeth, thy mercy, O Lord, held me up.

3dly If thou be a Christian indeed, and concerned in Christ, then thou art
commanded to do this in remembrance of him. Now what sort of a Christian art
thou, who dare say to him in his face, Lord, thou say do this? But I say, I
will not do this; for thy Objection runs so, I resolve I will not communicate
more; and give thy reason, because I will not come under such Engagements as
I am ready to break; and because thou can never communicate but thou will come
under such Engagements, its all one, as if thou had said, I will never
communicate. Christ says, his yoke is easy, Mat. 11. 30. Thou say it is so
uneasy, I will never put my neck more under it. Can thou hold up thy face
and tell him so? Remember who said Psalm. 2. 3. Let us break their bands
asunder, and cast away their cords from us. Here is the Mystery; pretend what
ye will, that the Bonds of Duty are troublesome, and therefore these Cords must
be cast away, and then we shall have some more liberty to do as we list: and
thus thou make a snare for thy own poor soul, thou look on thy Duty as a
snare to thee, but now thou art caught in a snare of thy own making, to sin
with ease.

4thly. Thou appears to think it unlawful to come under such a Bond, as if we
should not make such Engagements; How then say thou to that? Psalm. 76. 11.
Vow unto the Lord your God and pay: there the Lord makes it a Duty, which thou
refusest as evil. Psalm. 119. 105. I have sworn and will perform it, that I will
keep thy righteous judgments. It was never the way of Godly men, to say I will
engage no more to God, but their way has been, to resolve on paying of their
Vows to God. Psalm. 61. 8. That I may daily perform my vows. And Psalm. 56. 12.
Thy vows are upon me O God, I will render praises unto thee. And therefore,

5thly. Thy best way is to lament and mourn for thy unfaithfulness, and yet
resolve upon paying of thy Vows, blessing God that there is yet a Season for
repentance: and if thou repents indeed, there will be a care for the time to
come, that no Duty be neglected; thou will be afraid to neglect communicating,
but labor to prepare for it; because Christ has made it a Duty, thou will not
think that any sinful omission can cure thy former evils.

6thly. Whereas thou say, that thou will seek for the remission of thy
former failings which thou hopest to obtain, though thou never go to the Lords
Table. I answer, if thou obtainest pardon, it must be by the Blood of Christ,
which cleanses from all sin. 1 John 1. 7. The blood of Jesus Christ his son,
cleanses us from all sin. Now in the Lords Supper, there is an offer of the
benefit of this precious Blood: and if thou deliberatly refusest the
application of Christ's Blood, in the way that he has appointed, its just that
thou should never get that precious Blood applied in thy way, since thou
knowingly refusest his way: for albeit the pardon of sin does not absolutely
depend on participation of that holy Ordinance, but that he who believes,
eats Christ's flesh and drinks his blood, Joh. 6. 54. And a Godly person may
be in such Circumstances, as he cannot have the benefit of the Lords Supper;
yet the contempt of Christ's Institution where this Ordinance is administered, is
a sin of an high nature; as if Christ had instituted it in vain: and therefore
I say its just with God, to deprive thee of pardon in thy way, while thou
despisest his way.

7thly. No Christian who observes his own way, but will find cause of
mourning, for being unsuitable to such holy Privileges and Engagements: will
it therefore follow, that no Christian who has failed in his Duty, shall again
partake? Then the best of men might resolve on no more communicating, and
Christ shall not have the public honor due to him by it. But if you say, your
unfaithfulness has been very grievous and extraordinary? still answer, you
have the more need of the virtue of Christ's Blood for remission, which should
be applied in that special manner he has required; and therefore thy Duty is
to repent, and prepare to show forth the glory of Christ's love manifested in
that holy Ordinance; and the greater thy transgressions be, the greater is thy
debt to show forth his Death: by which Death, only thou can be preserved from
that second Death which thou have deserved.

Object. I cannot go to the Lords Table for he has forsaken me, he has cast
off my soul, he sends nothing for my good, and nothing does me good, he has
left me to my own counsels; why then should I profane so holy an Ordinance?

Ans. 1st. Its your mercy, if you can discern where the Lord either comes
unto, or deserteth your souls; for such as are utter strangers to God, know not
the one by the other: if you had got no merciful visits, how had ye known these
departings?

2dly. You may think your selves forsaken, because ye have not the comforts of
Gods countenance which sometimes ye had, and yet not be forsaken as to the
influences of his grace. Jer. 20. 9. Then I said I will not make mention of
him, nor speak any more in his Name. Yet verse. 11. But the Lord is with me as a
mighty terrible One; my persecutors shall stumble.

3dly. You may utterly mistake, and think you are forgotten, when God says the
contrare. Isa. 49. 14. But Zion said the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord
has forgotten me. But verse. 15. Can a woman forget her sucking child, etc. And
verse, 16. I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands.

4thly. If ever you had the favor of the chosen of God, if ever ye had
testimonies of his love: then whom he loves, he loves to the end, Joh. 13. 1.
and will never utterly forsake: but labor to have this sure, that ye have
enjoyed the sanctifying mercies of the chosen of God. Psalm. 106. 4. Pray for
such mercies as these, lest it be as you fear.

5thly. If you be left as to influences of grace, it is a bitter forsaking; yet
some have been left as to degrees of grace, who were not totally forsaken, nor
altogether deprived of grace, as Solomon 1 Kin. 11. 9.

6thly. The Lord may thus forsake, both as to comforts and many degrees of
grace, and yet return again: For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with
great mercies will I gather thee. Isa. 54. 7. And Micah 7. 19. He will return
again, he will have comp^ssion on us.

7thly. It should be considered also, that we are often forsaking our God in a
great measure, and then say he has forsaken us: its our wretched way first to
fall back from him who is our life, and then what good we had begins to wither;
which being discerned, in stead of blaming our selves for declining, we first
begin and challenge God for forsaking of us, as if he were the author of all
the hurt, and not we: O! how much does he bear at our hands? Our way is to cast
off the thing that is good. Hos. 8. 3. and then we cry out, Why has he cast us
off?

8thly. If the Lord should forsake us, yet we must not forsake him: h^ has no
need of us, but we have need of him: we cannot want him, but he may well want
us: it does not become us proudly to debate with our God, whether he or we
shall first draw to other again, but it becomes us humbly to look up and wait
for God, when he hides his face. Isa. 8. 17.

9thly. And its to be observed, that the Lord approves most of these who
pursue his mercy most closly, when he appears displeased, as having no regard
to them: as is evident in the woman of Canaan, Mat. 15. 25. etc.

10thly. Be sparing in thy complaints of God, and rather leave thy complaint
upon thy self. Job. 10. 1. I will leave my complaint upon my self. Remember he
gave thee warning of old, 2 Chr. 15. 2. If ye forsake him, he will forsake you.
Lay to heart how thou have procured this unto thy self, Jer. 2. 17. Have thou
not procured this unto thy self, in that thou have forsaken the lord thy God,
when he led thee by the way? Remember how often thou have turned the back on
him, when he was doing thee good; acknowledge this thy sin, and that thou have
fallen by thine own iniquity, and return unto the Lord thy God, as Hos. 14. 1.
And if thou will take his counsel, hearken yet to what he faith, Mal. 3. 7.
Return unto me and I will return unto you, says the Lord of hosts. Bless God
that there is yet any hope of a meeting again in mercy, Draw near to God, and
he will draw near to you, Jam. 4. 8. Yea though thou have played the harlot with
many lovers, yet return again unto me says the Lord. Jer. 3. 1. What would
thou have the Lord to say more? But say thou I need one word more yet, for I
have lost all spiritual strength, I know its my duty to return to him, and
praise him while I live, for this condescension ever to invite me any more,
that there is any door of hope left open: but I cannot return to him, if I
should never meet with him in favor; what then will thou do, will thou leave
it so? Art thou resolved to forsake, and be forsaken? Ah poor sinner! who will
be the loser? Better for thee yet to hearken what he will say further to thee:
remark then what is said Prove. 1. 23. Turn you at my reproof, behold I will
pour out my spirit unto you; set to your duty, endeavor to turn to him, and
you shall have the help of his Spirit: defer not then, but while he calls
entertain his kind offer, and give it such an answer, as Jer. 3 22. Return ye
backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings: behold we come unto
thee, for thou art the Lord our God: this will make a comfortable meeting
again, so that thou shall not need to stay from his Table, As one forsaken of
thy God, thou shall be as though thou had not been cast off, Zech. 10. 6. He can
soon make thy latter end better than thy beginnings. Ezekiel. 36. 11.

Object. I doubt if I should believe, for I think my self one of these who
would not be the better, fearing still I am none of Gods Elect.

Ans. If such Objections were not framed to my hand, I should neither form nor
publish them: but being often proposed, and particularly this fear of not being
elected, and some souls distressed thereby, cannot pass it altogether but for
answer.

First, You may as well say I doubt whether I should be saved or not, as to say
ye doubt whether ye should believe or not; since he that believes not, the
wrath of God abides on him: can you deliberatly think ye should not desire to
be saved? This needs no refutation, I hope ye will be ashamed of it.

2dly. Consider you are under a command to believe, and to reject it
designedly, is rebellion against God, besides your own ruin: and what success
you can dream of in a course of rebellion against a merciful God, I understand
not.

3dly. No revelation from God allows you to defer believing until you know you
are elected; you must have this from some new unhallowed Bible, but neither
from Old or New Testament.

4thly. The way to know of your Election, is first to believe: and if you have
grace to believe, you are elected; and if ye be elected, ye will believe: for
Act. 13. 43 And as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed

5thly. By what revelation do ye know that ye are not elected, answer this if
you can? For though ye had lived a godless life to this hour, that will not prove
it, for God effectually calls the elect at what time he pleases, some in
their younger, and some in their elder age: What presumption is this in you, to
judge so presumptuously of the Decrees of God? For your great concern in
Election, is to judge by its fruits, that ye are elected; and thus ye are
directed to make your Calling and Election sure by the Graces of Gods Spirit,
which are the fruits of Election, 2 Pet. 1. from the 5th verse. to the 11th of
that Chapter. But to make it your first question whether ye are elected or not,
before ye believe, is a way of your own devising, having nothing from God to
warrant it.

6thly. Whatsoever tempts you to disobey the Command of God, is from a
Principle of darkness; but this tempts you to disobey the Command of God, and
therefore its from a Principle of darkness: and whatsoever has a direct
tendency to separat you from Christ by not believing, you should take as
proceeding from the same Principle, and so without further dispute to reject it.

7thly. Though Satan be so cruel to thy poor soul by his temptations; yet be not
thou so cruel to thy self, as to hearken to him: but put it home to thy own
Conscience, am not I a sinner deserving the wrath of God, what course should I
take? Or whether can I go but to him who has the words of eternal life, who
directs me to believe, and promises I shall be saved. Joh. 3. 16. What
should more, to raise thy indignation against all suggestions or temptations
that oppose thy believing?

Object. Some say they cannot go to the Lords Table, because of fearful
suggestions and horrid temptations that go near to blasphemy, which they cannot
get out of their thoughts, and are ashamed to utter them to their dearest
friends or relations: whereby they think themselves unworthy the name of
Christians, or the society of men.

Ans. I shall premit a few considerations before any particular answers be
given; for the case of such distressed souls is sometimes the most distressing
part of a Ministers whole work, how to minister a word in season, for their
relief and comfort. For,

1st. They often conceal the worst of the temptations which are most horrid,
and are so disturbed with them, that they can hardly consider any thing that is
spoken: they will appear to hearken to what a man speaks, but in the mean
time are busied in talking with their temptations; their adversary laboring to
keep them so close at his work, that they shall hearken to nothing else, that
being his interest and their hurt.

2dly. In some of these tempted persons, their appears no exercise of
godliness, nothing but these dreadful temptations sometimes vexing them: for
great levity is found in their conversation, otherwise as being unconcerned for
salvation; yet are they often frightened with temptations tending to blasphemy.
Others again who for many years have given good testimony of serious piety, yet
are afflicted with temptations no less horrid and hateful; so that this trial
of being assaulted with such suggestions and temptations, cannot of it self
prove either a gracious or graceless state; and therefore cannot be spoken
unto, as if they were all godly, which makes the difficulty the greater: for
though tenderness be due to them, yet must not be flattered, as if these troubles
of mind were proofs of true godliness: nor on the other hand, should the
fearers of God be discouraged, as if such suggestions could make evidence that
they are cast off of God.

3dly. Though there be great variety of these hellish temptations, which cannot
all be named, nor expedient to mention; yet commonly the sum and scope of them,
is to represent God as without mercy; and the Author of all their woes, that so
God may be hated, and the poor tempted souls expect no good from him: this
being Satan's great design.

4thly. Their temptations are sometimes so violent, that their understanding is
in present danger, or their lives, or sometimes both; which increases the
difficulty how to be serviceable to them in season, besides, that many of these
tempted people, are found so fixed in their melancholy apprehensions, that
whatever opinion they once conceive, either concerning their own temptations,
or souls state, they are therein so tenacious: that except the very power of
God accompany what is spoken, neither Arguments nor Exhortations will move
them: I say, except the power of God appear, for sometimes his power has
appeared in blessing seasonable words for a relief unto them, which themselves
have acknowledged; as for the Physicians part, and wherein they may be useful
for correcting the excess of melancholy, I leave to themselves; but doubtless
the Bonds of humanity, and much more Christian sympathy, oblidgeth so far as we
are capable, to endeavor their good: and therefore though I be very unfit for
such difficult work, yet having frequently occasion to speak with such persons,
I shall humbly offer a few things to consideration as God helps.

First, Great compassion is due to such tempted souls, by praying for them, and
with them as God gives opportunity; and not amiss to let them know our
sympathy, that they may be the more encouraged to a free discovery of the very
worst: it will not be found safest, only to chide them for having such
thoughts, or to say you are very sinful for having them, because the distressed
person will reply; such suggestions are my burden and misery, I cannot keep
them out of my mind, and that you call me sinful for having them, you are of my
mind: for I do not think there is such a monstrous sinner in the World as I
whose soul is a receptacle for such suggestion^: for fear of sin in having such
thoughts is the poor man's anguish already; and thus he finds you adding to
his grief.

2ly, After ^hey have fully discovered their T^mptations, or so much as they
will reveal: sometimes by the blessing of God it is found very useful to let
them know, that others have been as deeply tempted as they and to as great
evils as they, who now by the mercy of God are delivered; for it is a great
ease to them if they can be persuaded that any others have been in the the like
case and are at last cured: and when they do not much regard other things that
are spoken, yet they will readily hearken to this; and sometimes urge to know
it is certainty with great importunity: at which time it were not a miss to
gratify them with some particular instances of such persons now delivered from
their bondage: and albeit they commonly think that no sorrow is like to theirs,
and that there are some evils in their hearts, that was never in the heart of
any other; yet I have seen such instances blessed for allaying the extremity of
terror.

3ly, It were necessary also to know the rise and first beginnings of their
disquiet, if natural, or accidental melancholy and grief, has first opened a
door to their troubles, as also if their understanding or bodies begin to
suffer; that means may be the more dexterously and seasonably managed for their
good, both as to soul and body.

4thly, It has been observed to be sometimes useful, to improve for their
encouragement, any word that droppeth from them savouring of respect to God,
and fear of sin, for some of them do inadvertently let fall most savory
expressions, and where these 3 things are found, 1. Speaking honorably of God.
2. Bitterly against their own Sin, and 3ly, Prayer continued, there is good
ground to hope for a merciful Issue, Lam. 3: 25. He is good to the soul that
seeks him.

5ly, It Is necessary also prudently to conceal what Temptations they discover,
for if they find them published, they will be ready to impart no more; and
withal if their most frighting Temptations be published, the very shame of them
may heighten their anguish, and tempt to worse.

6ly, It Is expedient also, their friends take care, that they be not troubled
with such company, as may increase their affliction, such as are not prudent,
but may be ready to quarrel them for some of their expressions, or possibly
mock them, which will be to their grief: as also from such company as are in
like case with themelves, and not yet healed of their wounds: but these who
have been in such trouble, and are now at liberty from their former bondage,
are most meet for converse with them, to declare what God has done for their
souls, Psalm: 66: 16.

7ly, Great prudence and caution is necessary to any friend of theirs, who
would persuade them to go to the Lords Table while under the violence of these
Temptations: for to urge them without some composure of mind, and freedom in
their own consciences, may have bad effects: the safest way is to use arguments
for convincing them of their Duty, and if this cannot be obtained, better
forbear until God make light to arise, and they be more fitted for it: I have
known some who being pressed by their friends, have been persuaded to go to the
Lords Table, but being there did not open their mouth either to eat or drink,
which afterward raised their trouble to a great height, and are at this day
under deep distress on that account: it appears then to conduce more for the
good of such souls, to suffer them to wait for a more serene hour by the
arising of the Sun of Righteousness, whereby the dark clouds surrounding them,
shall be dispelled, and then in his light they s^al see light, Psalm. 36. 9.

And for such as are tempted, all of you are not in a like danger; and
faithfulness requires to be plain with such of you as have never been concerned
for your salvation, that your danger is great every way until ye flee to Christ
as your refuge: and though ye hear that godly persons has been assaulted with
horrid Temptations, yet that is no ground for you to think your selves godly,
because ye have such Temptations, for ye may have their Temptations, but want
such grace to resist them; if ye embrace not Christ and Salvation through him,
ye expose your selves as a prey to any Temptation; having no interest in him
who came to destroy the works of the Devil: Therefore cry to God to make you
serious for Salvation, to make you sincere Believers, and convert you to
himself by his spirit of grace; and the more ye are tempted, be the more
diligent, make the greater haste, that ye may be found in Christ, by whom ye
shall be overcomers: and who knows, but meat may come out of the eater, and he
who goes about as a roaring lion seeking to devour, be disappointed of his
design, and thy affliction under these very temptations be made by the
overruling power of God, a mean to make thee flee to Christ for Salvation to
thy soul, and deliverance from all thine Enemies, and if you will fix on this
way for your relief, and all of you who have done so before ye came under these
fiery trials, Consider,

First, That blessed Jesus Christ was tempted himself, and tempted to the
greatest sins, even to worship the Devil, God's great enemy, Matthew. 4. 9. And
to destroy himself by being guilty of his own Death, ver. 6. By casting himself
down from the Pinnacle of the Temple All this and more he subjected unto, and
being carried by Satan from one place to another, that thou a poor weak tempted
Believer might be persuaded, he knows the greatest and worst of thy
Temptations, 2ly, That he will have Sympathy with thee as being tempted
himself, Heb. 2: 18. 3ly, That he has sanctified this trial to Believers, by
subjecting to it himself; for though the wicked Temptations be not sanctified,
yet thy lot under them is thereby sanctified. 4ly, That he overcoming them all,
thou in him as thy head, shall also overcome: Therefore adhere still to him,
and thou cannot sink, Rev. 12: 11. He who accuses day and night is overcome by
the blood of the lamb.

2ly, Consider, That there are some Temptations that are the Devils sins,
rather than ours, not arising from our selves, nor entertained by us, are but
the fiery Darts of Satan cast in by violence: if Satan should now appear or any
other way should tempt a godly man, to renounce God and worship him, this godly
man at the very first rejecting such Temptation with Indignation and hatred, is
not guilty by that Temptation, albeit the nature of the Temptation be most
horrid and blasphemous; and albeit the same godly man have sin remaining in
him, yet that temptation is not his sin; because it neither had it is Original
in his heart, nor in any measure entertained by him: therefore do not so far
yield to the Adversary, as to take with all his Temptations, as if they were
your sins, for that is no final part of his design, thereby to terrify you, as
if ye were the most monstrous sinners in the World: the Apostle Romans 7. 17.
Finding a gracious principle in his soul against Sin, and Sin making war
against the law of his mind, he can say of this Enemy that warreth against him,
this Enemy is not himself, it is no more I but sin that dwells in me: the
tempted Believer may well say, it is not I, but Satan who tempts me; and so
much the more, because these Temptations had never that place in his heart that
his Sins have: albeit it be afflicting to a child of God, that Satan should
come so near, yet he is in all this but at War, not gaining nor yielded unto.

3ly, Therefore be sure of your resisting these Temptations from first to last,
for voluntary entertaining such Suggestions would soon weaken your confidence,
and strengthen your adversary; therefore let all your thoughts be resisting
thoughts, and then the Temptation, and thou are still Antagonists opposite one
to another, when thou art resisting, thou art still in Gods way for a victory,
Jam. 4. 7. Resist the Devil and he will flee from you. And whatever ye do, be
careful to keep on Gods ground, keep by your post where God has placed you,
yielding nothing, and having done all, to stand. Ephesians. 6. 13.

4ly, Consider also, That we are not alone in this conflict, Ephesians. 6. 12. For we
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world. And though all
Believers have not a like violent Temptations, yet all of them have Satan's
Temptations to wrestle against, nor do ye know the Temptations of many others,
though your own smarts you most.

5ly, Whatever be your Temptations, know that God has not left you destitute
of Armor against them, Ephesians. 6. 11. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may
be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil. The very believing of this in
thy heart, that God has provided armor to preserve his people from danger,
will be an encouragement to thee; but if thou think there is no relief, them
thou faintest, and thereby thy Adversary has advantage, a fainting man is soon
overcome, but if thou think in thy heart there is relief at hand, then thou
waxest valient in fight: and if the hope of this Armor be so strengthening
what will the putting of it on be; take counsel then who has provided it, and
put it on, for it was provided for such as thee; and remark well what is said,
ver. 16. Above all taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to
quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. Christ's Armor will be proof, though
the Darts be dipped in Hell, they shall not consume thee, though thy trial be like
a fiery Furnace, yet set thy self to follow the footsteps of the Flock, who by
Faith, Quenched the violence of fire, Heb. 11. 34. And when thou art at the
lowest, labor still to retain the impressions of God's omnipotence, think
nothing too hard for him, do not so dishonor him, as to think thy case
incurable, Jer. 32. 17. Is there any thing too hard for me.

6ly, Give thy self frequently to Prayer, and complain of the violence done to
thy poor soul by thine Adversary, hearken to no suggestion against Prayer, for
thy God commands thee to call on him in the day of trouble, and he will
deliver, Psalm. 50. 15. Thou will be tempted to think it is in vain to Pray: but
believe not the father of lies, God has not required to seek him in vain, Isa.
45. 19. He will tempt thee to think thou art not the better of Prayers, thou
art not heard; but what if thou should be for a short season, that thou
could observe no answer of Prayer, remember that better than you, have
complained of the same, Psalm. 22. 2. O my God I cry in the day time, but thou
hear not, and in the night season, and am not silent, but was it always so?
No, Mark what is said in the same Psalm. ver. 24. and 25. For he has not
despised nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted, neither has he bid his
face from him, but when he cried unto him he heard. And then follows a song of
praise in the next ver. I know of some at this day under deep desertion, and
assaulted with some of the worst of Temptations, but their condition is hopeful
on this very account, because they expressly say if God should never hear me,
it is my Duty to pray, and I will pray: let no depths hinder thee, but pray the
rather, Psalm. 130. 1. Out of the depths have I cried unto thee O Lord. And ver.
4th It follows, But there is forgivenness with thee, and ver. 7th Let Israel
hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenterus
redemption. It should be observed, that where violent Temptations do most hurt,
commonly these tempted persons will not be persuaded to pray, and such as
continue to pray, do ordinarily obtain a comfortable victory.

7ly, Resolve also to wait on thy God, for at his Command the storm is soon
changed in to a calm, Weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the
morning, Psalm. 30. 5. A fixed resolution to wait on God, is both thy Duty, and
will be a great advantage to thy soul, Remember Ps. 40. 1. I waited patiently,
and he brought me out of an horrible pit. Give not way to sudden conclusions
that thy hope is lost, and thou art cut off, as Ezekiel. 37. 11. make no
unwarrantable prophesies that it will never be better with thee, if thou but
resolve this on thing to wait, Satan shall be disappointed, whose great design
is to have thee as desperate as himself; still leave place for the mercy and
infinite power of God, Incline your ear, come yet unto the Lord, hear and your
soul shall live, Isa. 55. 3. Let God have a hearing for shame, since Satan's
suggestions has got so long hearing, God says hearken to me, Satan says
hearken not to God, that thou may be another rebel to God as he is: but let
thine Enemy know that thou have an open ear for thy God. I will hearken what
God the Lord will speak unto me, for he will speak peace unto his people, Psalm.
85. 8. And if thou shall say, Oh what can I hear? That will do good to me? No
words can break Bars of Brass and Iron, I am Bound and in a Prison, yet
nevertheless. stay until you hear who speaks, and what he speaks, Therefore
Consider,

8ly, That if you will hearken, you shall hear of doing for you, which is more
than Words, ye complain that ye are bound, and cannot shake off your Fetters;
how then do ye like it to hear of one who is coming to open your Prison, Isa.
61. 1. The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me
to preach good tidings unto the meek, he has sent me to bind up the
brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the
prison to them that are bound. Sure this is worth the hearing, that Christ has
it in commission to open such Prisons, and 2ly, That he is able to perform his
Commission. For he opens, and who can shut, Rev. 3. 7. and 3ly, That his Name
is Faithful who has this work to do, Rev. 19. 11. Look up then O Prisoner of
hope, for Satan endeavors still to have thee looking down, desiring to have
thee fall down at last where he is, he knows that long and steadfast looking
into a frighting deep place, is apt to turn a man giddy, and thereby endangered
to fall into the same depth, so his great care is that thou never turn thine
eye upward, knowing that to be thy relief: therefore be not befooled by him,
but look up and be saved, Isa. 45. 22. Say as Psalm. 142. 7. Bring my soul out
of prison, that I may praise thy Name.

9ly, Mind also that thine Adversary is still in Chains, and cannot go beyond
Divine permission. They are in chains of darkness, 2 Pet. 2. 4. so also Jude
ver. 6. They are reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day. And so we see nothing could be done by Satan against
godly Job, but as Divine power ordered and overruled, Job 1. 12. And the Lord
said unto satan, behold all that he has is in thy power, only upon himself put
not forth thine hand, and Chapter 2 ver. 6. And the Lord said unto satan,
behold he is in thine hand, but save his life. So thou art not at thy worst,
absolutely under his Dominion, he is never out of the Chain; thou art still
under the absolute Dominion of thy God, not an hair shall fall from thy head in
this conflict, without a Divine Providence; keep the impression of this upon
thy heart, for it is a grand design of the Tempter to have thee thinking, thou
art now wholly in his hand without remedy, he will tempt thee to think that God
takes no care of thee, has no pity on thee, and never regards thee, that so
he may draw thee either to some dislike of God as merciless, or to deny that
there is any Providence of God, and so carry thee on if he can to doubt if
there be any God but himself, if he can drive thee to this, then his hellish
design is far ripened, then he tempts thee to think thou must obey him, thou
art wholly in his hand: I have heard some acknowledge this was their
Temptation, but when Satan did drive hardest, he made but fools haste; for that
Temptation became so frightning, that they were helped to hearken the less to
any of his temptations, and so the Devils malice overrun his policy; the Lord
discovering the wickedness of his devices: for when poor tempted souls are at
the very brink of ruin, and knows not what to do but yield all to the Tempter,
yet The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of Temptations, 2 Pet. 2: 9.

10ly, Know also, that though thy Temptations be very dreadful, yet while God
helps thee to continue resisting them as an hateful burden, under which thou
groans, then thou stand yet on God's side against his Enemy, thou fightest
against these Temptations, as God's Enemies and thine, then God will be for
thee. I am for thee, Ezekiel. 36. 9, Faint not in his Service, he will not leave
you alone, Hag. 2. 4. Be strong, for I am with thee. He will not see thee
perish in his own cause fighting against his Enemies, he will send from above,
and draw thee out of these depths, though thine Adversary has thrust sore at
thee, that thou might fall, yet thou shall have it to say,, But the Lord
helped me, Psalm. 118. 13. And though thou be sore wounded in the time, yet he
will tenderly bind up these wounds, Psalm. 147. 3. Hold on the fight, and the
Lord will teach thee to fight, Psalm. 144. 1. He teaches my fingers to fight,
and ye shall fight because the Lord is with you, Zechariah 10. 5. Yielding is
thy greatest danger.

11ly, Do not gratify Temptations by allowing time to attend them, since thou
art to pray that thou be not led into Temptation, then do not cast thy self
into it by idleness, neglecting the Duties of thy Calling, set about thy Work,
whether thy Station lead thee to employment of the Mind or Body, thou have thy
God and his service to wait upon, and has no time allowed thee to attend his
enemies and their service, if thou give the tempter time he will give thee
Work, he will strive to have thee so far engaged as to draw back from thy Duty
to God and man, and attend what he has to say; if thou yield to this he has
too great Advantage: I know you are ready to retire from all company, and your
ordinary Affairs, and say ye are not capable of business; but see that many of
your retirements, be not rather to talk with the Tempter, than to talk with
God; I acknowledge frequent Retirements for Prayer are most necessary, but then
take care that the time be not worse spent, advert to this especially in the
beginning of thy Temptations, that thou enter not the conflict with present
sinning, by omitting of plain Duties to God, relations or others.

12ly, And that thou may have the benefit of Christ's coming to destroy the
works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. And the comfortable hope that Satan who has
so bruised thee, shall be shortly trampled under thy feet, Romans 16. 20. Essay
yet once more to believe, and in believing thou shall see the glory of God,
Joh. 11. 40. When thou have toiled and outwearied thy self seeking rest, yet
thou shall find it no where, but in Christ who inviteth thee to come and get
rest to thy Soul, which he promises to give, Matthew. 11. 29. Here must be the
end and conclusion, If thou desire and expectest to enter into rest, for Heb.
4. 3. We which have believed do enter into rest. Labor then through the throng
of all opposition and difficulties to adventure on believing in Christ, as
himself commands, Joh. 14. 1. Let not your hearts be troubled, ye believe in
God, believe also in me. Here is the true cure for a troubled heart, adventure
on Christ's counsel, keep still by his Word, for it is the Sword of the Spirit.

I know some who were almost crushed under violent and most dangerous
Temptations; in so much that friends were dejected, both because the
Temptations were so strong that they could hardly be concealed, and a recovery
more and more hopless: but one day that person by the tender mercy of God begun
to think; that there is no mention in all the Scriptures of Christ's rejecting
any poor Sinner coming to him for relief, whereupon forthwith that person
resolved to Essay believing in Christ, whatsoever should follow; the Essay was
no sooner made, but instantly the God of mercy gave a comfortable victory over
all these Temptations, with increase of Grace, and great joy attending the
healing of these wounds; and yet continues of a Gospel becoming conversation,
free of all these afflicting Bonds: This I can attest for truth from the
persons own mouth the next day after God had broken these Bars of Brass, and
Iron. And judge it Duty to publish it for the encouragement of poor tempted
souls; that they may consider how signally our gracious God does countenance
such as in the very throng of Temptations, cast themselves and their burden
upon the Lord.

Quest. But may I take any comfort in the hope that these frighting Suggestions
and Temptations are not originally from my self, it is grievous that they should
be in my thought at all, but much more, if I be the Author of them.

Answ. 1. It Is certain that our selves are the Authors of many Temptations,
Jam. 1. 14. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust,
and enticed.

2ly, It Is also clear, that Satan who is called the tempter, Matthew. 4. 3. Does
work upon men's own corruptions and promoteth the wickedness of them, so that
the lusts of wicked men are said to be the lusts of the Devil, Joh 8. 44. And
the lusts of your father ye will do. So he Improveth the prevalent Sins that
men have the greatest propension unto, as the covetousness of Judas, and the
excesses of men's passions, as grief to have them swallowed up with overmuch
grief, 2 Cor. 2. 7. Lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with
overmuch sorrow, and ver. 11. Lest satan should get an advantage of us, for we
are not ignorant of his devices. And melancholy souls darkened with their own
Imaginations give great advantage, to the Rulers of the darkness of this World.

3ly, But Temptations do sometimes arise only from Satan, as to their first
original, and therefore he is called the tempter, Matthew. 4. 3. Because it is his
work to tempt, and therefore tempted where there could be no hope of prevailing
as appeared in his tempting of Christ.

4ly, And because of our depraved natures, we are in danger of infection by
these Temptations, that has their source and first rise from Satan.

5ly, All Temptations to Evil should be resisted, whether we know the first
spring from whence these Temptations flow or not, our work is to reject them
whether they be our own, or mixed, with Satan's Temptations, or his only.

6ly, Some of these Temptations that are immediately from Satan, are called the
fiery Darts of the wicked One, Ephesians. 6. 16. So that the Dart comes from the
Devil, and not from the man's heart, they are called fiery Darts, being suddenly
thrown in for setting all on Fire in the Soul, whereby there is such an unusual
disturbance and surprising terror, as if all were in a Flame, it being as
death to them, finding such suggestions against God, and their own Salvation,
as they never found before, and these so rageing that they know not where or
how to hide themselves from the fury of the Flame, these will be charged on
Satan's account, Considering,

First, That upon their very first appearing and assault, thou meetest them
with hatred indignation and horror.

2ly, Though they continue sometime, yet they are no more welcome, than if
Fireballs were thrown into thy House to burn thee and it up together, thou
give no consent to them.

3ly, As thou can, thou resistest them.

4ly, Thou look up to God to deliver thee.

5ly, If they remove thou rejoycest.

6ly, Thou art so far from cherishing of them, that their returning is thy
great fear.

7ly, And any wicked suggestion against the honor of God, is paining to thy
soul.

These may help thee to understand, that such hellish blasphemous Temptations
are the Darts and Sins of Satan.

Object. Some say, they dare no more presume to go to the Lords Table: because
when they did partake they are persuaded that they did eat and drink unworthily
so that it is not only an unsuitable deportment that they have to bemoan as to
their practice afterward, but conclude that when they did Receive, they did eat
and drink Judgment to themselves; and therefore wish they had never Received, I
heard some say, that they thought their Communicating was the greatest Sin they
ever committed in their Lifetime; but then they were overwhelmed with other
temptations, so that this was said in an hour of Darkness.

Answ. Who can say, that they eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup so
worthily, but that their failings are great in the very time of Receiving, for
which if God would enter into Judgment they could not stand? What humble man
dare say his apprehensions of a crucified Christ were so distinct as ought to
have been? Or that his Faith and Love were acted to that degree required? Shall
therefore the best of men on Earth, conclude that they did eat and drink
unworthily, and so are guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, and leave his
Table always with Anguish, rather than rejoicing in God their Savior, do you
not see this a Temptation, tending to the utter rejection of that blessed
Ordinance of Christ?

2ly, Some of you who make this Objection, cannot deny but that you did make
Conscience of serious Preparation, and that you desired with reverence and love
to Receive Christ himself, when you did receive the visible Signs, only ye had
not that measure of Faith and Love which you desired, the worst you have to
charge your self with was your weakness, not Contempt, nor was it Ignorance, as
to the discerning of Christ's Body: but because your graces were not so lively
as they ought; I grant it is necessary to bemoan our Failings, but this is not
the place of our perfection, when that comes, we shall not need to Partake in
such a manner as now, but while we are here, we must apply that precious Blood,
for purging away the guilt we contract in our best actings, yea, in the very
time of Communicating, we must apply Christ's Blood for the pardon of our
Failings in Communicating; so that your better way were to go again to the
Lords Table, and when you Receive, learn and practice that way of applying that
precious Blood that cleanses from all Sin, to cleanse you particularly from
any sin you are guilty of by your weakness in Communicating.

3ly, And know, that there is a necessity of distinguishing between Sins of
Infirmity, and Sins allowed: The Apostle Paul was constrained to make use of
this distinction for his own comfort, when he says Romans 7. 15, For that which
I do, I allow not.

4ly, But supposing it were as you Object, that you did once eat and drink
unworthily, it does not follow, that eternal Judgment shall be inevitable,
albeit the Sin be repented of, for the clearing of this alittle, Consider,
First, That it is granted, every sin deserves Judgment, yea, eternal Judgment,
and therefore, 2ly, This Sin of unworthy Communicating deserves that
Judgment. 3ly, The Apostle by Judgment here does not understand only Eternal
Judgment, for he speaks plainly of temporal Judgments inflicted, for
profanation of the Lords Supper, ver. 30. For this cause many are weak and
Sickly among you, and many sleep, therefore he understands not only Eternal
Judgment. 4ly, Some Partake of these temporal Judgments as chastenings, that
they should not be condemned with the World. ver, 32. Yet these chastenings are
for their sinful Communicating, then it follows, that some who are sinful in
their manner of Communicating, yet many obtain pardon, the Lord chastening them
for not Communicating aright, that they may not be condemned with the World;
Though they deserved Eternal Judgment by profaneing that holy Ordinance, yet by
free grace they are forgiven, God in his tender mercy reserving room for
Repentance.

Consider also, that the Passover was a Seal of the same Covenant of Grace,
and great Sanctifying Preparation required for its Celebration, for every
Partaker was to be sanctified unto the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 30. 17. But some had not
cleansed themselves, yet did they eat the Passover otherwise than it was
written, ver. 18. But Hezekiah prayed for them, that the Lord would pardon such
as prepared their hearts to seek God, though he be not cleansed according to
the purification of the Sanctuary, ver. 19. And the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah,
and healed the people. ver, 20, Whereby we may see that sins of that Nature,
are pardoned when sincerely acknowledged, and application made unto the tender
mercies of God. The knowledge of this is necessary for some, who fear their
condemnation is inevitable, because of their not Communicating aright; but by
these Scriptures ye may see that all shall not be condemned who have been
guilty by sins of that nature, where Repentance is, there is remission of sins
by Christ, giving both together, Acts 5. 31.

CHAP. X.
Communicants obliged to review their Communicating.

The 9th Inference.

THis Ordinance being the Communion of Christ's Body and Blood, then, after
Partaking, Communicants are obliged to try if they have obtained that blessed
Communion.

Consider 1, The Reasons why this should be tried, and 2. A few helps how to
perform it.

All Communicants should seriously examine the way of their own hearts, when
they did Partake, because,

First, It was our blessed Redeemer's way, after the first Celebration of this
Sacrament, to set the Communicants in this Road of searching themselves,
whether they did then believe or not, Joh. 16. 31. Do ye now believe. This was
demanded of them, when they had but lately risen from the Lord's Table: and
therefore is a question that Communicants ought to put to themselves, and
obliged to have a ready Answer, as these Communicants had, which is the more to
be noticed, that after they had declared their Faith, ver. 30. Yet ver. 31.
Christ urges it again that they may be deliberat, and know well what they say,
when they say they believe.

Secondly, Our Communicating should be carefully reviewed, lest we did eat and
drink unworthily: otherwise we shall be found despisers of that important
warning, 1 Cor. 11. 27. That such as eat and drink unworthily, are guilty of
the Body and Blood of the Lord. Men have neither a due fear of the anger of
God, nor regard to their own souls who having partaken, think there is no more
to be done, not so much as to enquire whether they came from the Lords Table
guilty of his Body and Blood or not: for the best of men should take notice of
the great regard God has to Sealing Ordinances. The First thing we find Godly
Hezekiah considering after the Celebration of the Passover, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18.
Is the transgression of the people, who did eat the Passover otherwise than it
was Written, for whom he prayed, and the Lord mercifully answered his prayer.

Thirdly, If the pains thou did take in preparation before Partaking was
sincere, that thou might have a blessed meeting with Christ, then the same
principle will lead thee to enquire if he did meet with thy Soul: for no man
can be said to be earnest for that which he will not so much as observe if it
be found, if Communion with Christ was the desire of thy Soul, then it will be
thy desire now to be secured of it, that thou may say, I sought, and found
him whom my soul loves, Cant. 3, 4.

Fourthly, If thou shall find after searching, that thou did obtain real
spiritual Communion with Christ, this will make thy Thanksgivings sincere, this
will be a mean to endear thy soul to Him, and increase thy Love, (which thou
know has need to be increased) when thou has it to say, he came and
manifested himself to thy Soul, did draw the in to his Fellowship, fed thee
with the hidden Manna, whereby thy Soul was revived; can thou then but Love
and seek to have thy heart enlarged for more Love? This will also endear thy
heart to this holy Ordinance wherein thou found Him, this will make thee
forward in seeking occasions for it hereafter, because there the Lord appeared
unto thee. This will help thee to be a good example to others, who are
negligent in seeking after it; this will be a mean to endear to thee the
Promises, to thee the Lord promised to come and bless his people, where he
recorded his Name, thou has found it even as he has said, his Words be true,
now thou know it to be a mere Temptation to doubt of his Promise, or think
that it fails, now thou can say, I will no more distrust any offer that
Christ makes of himself to a poor Sinner, for as he offered, so I did embrace
and am not disappointed; now thou can Sing by experience, as Psalm. 33. 21.
For our heart shall rejoice in him, because we have trusted in his holy Name.
Be persuaded then, of the clearness and necessity of this Duty, to review thy
work at the Lord's Table, that thou may know what to conclude of thy self,
whether thou may safely take comfort to thy Soul, as a sincere and accepted
Communicant or not: for a mistake here is dangerous: if on the one hand thou
judge thy self a worthy Communicant, and thy self but a stranger to Christ*
this will harden thy heart in Sin, and render thee obstinate against all
necessary admonition, and reproof, and thus you may go on adding to your guilt
at every Communion, and remain impenitent; ye, thinking it improper for you to
repent for any sinful Communicating, on the other hand, it is also dangerous for
you to conclude your selves unworthy Communicants without sure grounds, or ever
searching into the matter: for thus you may deny the grace freely given you,
and belie the operations of the holy Ghost, and thus ye may deny God the glory
due to him for his mercies, and cast your own souls into perplexing diquiet and
bondage: therefore there is much need to be guided of God in this Search.

And for the clearing of this a little: we are to Consider, both how it was
with our Souls in the time of Communicating, and with what impressions and
help, we come from that work, as for our work in the time of that Solemnity,
albeit by the Word of God it may be declared how Communicants should act, and
if they have so acted, then they are not unworthy Communicants: yet no man can
discover the internal acts of other men's souls whether they have acted as they
should or not; none can know that but God, and men's own consciences: Therefore
when ye are to try your sincerity at the Lords Table, the Word of God must be
your Rule, the spirit of God your Guide, and your own Conscience a Witness; for
the utmost that can be said by men is Conditional, that is if you have acted
suitable to the nature of the Work, if you have embraced Christ, etc. Then you
are accepted and not unworthy Communicants. 2. When Communicants are trying
whether they have Communicated acceptablly, or Unworthily; they must
distinguish between their being helped to perform the Substance of the work
then required, and having their Graces revived and elevated by the shining of
God's Face upon them; because a Believer may sincerely receive Christ Offered
to him in the Sacrament when ^^ere is not such lifting up of God's Countenance
upon him as at other times, a Believer may be under some deserved rebuke even
at the Lord's Table, and yet he cleaves to Christ, though hiding his face, and
affectionatly Embraces Him, though his affections be not raised to that hight
that they have been and should be. 3. There is great need of wisdom from God,
how to Judge of the passions of men's souls in time of communicating; for some
men may have great flashes of Grief, or joy, at such times, who know no such
thing at other times, or if they should be so at other times, yet no better
than the weeping of an Esau, or the joy of an Hypocrite which soon perishes:
others again at the same work may have true Godly sorrowing, melting down their
hearts before the Lord in the Sense of their sin; and sometimes the Joy of the
Lord's true Spiritual comfort replenishing their fouls, so that they find it
unspeakable, and these elevated affections having a sincere Root, flowing from
indignation at sin or Love to Christ are most desirable; so that it should or
will be painful to a Believer if he find not some gale of affections; suitable
in some measure to the love he is receiving, and publishing at the Lord's
Table: nor will it abate his regard to these due affections, that an Hypocrite
may have the Counterfit of them.

Fourthly, Such Believers as doubt of their acceptance at the Lord's Table
(which doubt does often arise from people not being comforted at that time, or
the lowness of their graces not acting vigourously when they were Partaking)
such Communicants I say, for preventing of disponding disquiet of mind, must in
Reviewing their work. Consider if that which was indispensably necessary was
performed, that is the souls receiving of Christ as He is offered in the
Gospel, and offers Himself to His people in that Ordinance, if the heart was
opened for Him, and He embraced; then the most Substantial part of the Work
was performed: though there be Cause to Mourn that the affections were so low
at such enriching and Honorable work, yet Bless God if thou wast enabled to
Join thy self to the Lord: for the Ordinance is not profaned; and though thou
wast a weak, yet not an unworthy Communicant. It may also contribute to thy
Comfort, if when thou come from the Lord's Table thou find in thy Soul.
First an Inclination to Praise and Exalt thy Redeemer, and for this
particularly that He did not utterly forsake thy soul, as thou know was
deserved; and though thou had a Rebuke by the hiding of His Face as to thy
Comfort, yet thou submits to it and does not cease to love Him, knowing that He
can make a Blessing of that froun, to render thee more humble and diligent for
the time to come. 2. If thou find a desire to hold fast what thou have
received: Thou art so far from having done with Christ, when thou has done at
the Table, that thy heart cleaves close to Him; and so much the more if thou
had any fear of His anger by withdrawing of His Comfort; if thou can not sray
from Him, but must have some renewed Testimony of His Love, fear of His anger
being too heavy for thee to bear, Job 10. 2. Psalm. 80. 7.

Thirdly, When thou comes from the Lord's Table thou find upon thy heart a
fear of sinning, that thy Lord be not provoked more; and this fear is of any
manner of sinning, so that there is no Trial or trouble thou fear so much as
sin, and so much the more because thou think thy sin has provoked thy God
already, thy indignation is now raised against all sin as thy greatest Enemy,
making thee long to be Delivered from Root and Branch of it, Romans 7. 24.

Fourthly, If this thy Indignation at sin, be Testified by thy watching against
it, and all Temptations leading to it, though it were as Plucking out of the
Right Eye, if thou find thy heart Purified, then thou has the Faith of God's
Elect, the cleansing Virtue of Christ's Blood has reached thy Soul, for
nothing else could do it, 1 Peter 1. 19, 22.

Fifthly, If thou come from the Lord's Table with this fixed on thy heart,
that from henceforth whatever come in thy way, thou will Believe, let the
Difficulty be never so far above thy Strength, thou will Honor thy Redeemer by
Trusting Him with any thing without exception; thou has now Professed thy self
a Believer, before Angels and men, and by Grace thou will act as becomes a
Believer: thou fear sin, thou fear Temptations, thou wants not fear, that
the Burden of some Trials is ready to break thy Back: but now thou dare fear
none of them with a faithless fainting fear, knowing thy Redeemer is Strong,
and that thou art Solemnly Engaged to Trust Him at all times. If this be the
fruit of thy Communicating, then the Bond of the Covenant has bound thy heart
to thy Lord, then thy heart, bears the Impression of His Seal, Psalm. 52. 8.

Sixthly, Since thou came from the Lord's Supper; observe what Gracious
alterations are to be found in thy Soul and Practice that were not found
before: what thou can find of that exceeding great and Mighty Power, whereby
the Lord works in them that believe, if thou has not only brought Godly
resolutions from that Ordinance, but virtue and power, if thou can observe more
of the Spirit of Power in thy Duties, if there be any observable new spring
that decayed Graces are revived, if thy sin be languishing, and Grace
flowrishing, if whatever Holy work thou art Engaged, in some vigor Life and
strength appears thou art not now desiring to shift clear Duties, thy heart
and thy work go now together, which often before were far asunder; thou now
take delight in doing thy Lord's Will, thou can run now and not weary as
formerly; if this be found, then the Lord has abundantly Blessed thy
Provision, thy Meat has been thy Blessing, and thou may now find it even as
Christ said, His flesh Meat indeed, and His Blood Drink indeed.

I shall add but one word more to such, as still fear they did not Communicate
acceptably even as to the very Substance of the work, and cannot say they
Believed when they did Partake.

Answ. This Fear is very afflicting; but some who find not comfort at a
Communion are so cast down, and so disturbed in their apprehensions, concluding
the Lord has diserted them; that they can see nothing for their Comfort, and
sometimes refuse to be comforted; having a strange kind of pleasure to harden
themselves in sorrow, though they did Believe in the time of Partaking; yet now
they have not an eye to see it: No wonder the Lord be sparing of His comforts
to some people who so dote upon them, that the help of Grace is not so much
valued, if they want Comfort: be not so proud as to think ye deserve Comfort,
nor so ignorant as to think the Lord is not free to dispense Consolations when
He sees fit, but not when ye think it fit; and learn to value the help of
Grace more than Comfort by it self, joy without Grace will deceive thee,
therefore search yet if any sincerity can be found in thy Communicating, that
thou may humbly and thankfully acknowledge it to His Praise.

Secondly, If after thou have again tried it; yet thou can find no Faith in
thy Communicating, thou art then to try if ever before that time thou did
sincerely Believe in Christ, receiving Him as thy Redeemer and Lord, for if it
was so, the Union then made can never be Disolved, For he that Believes has
everlasting Life, John 3. 36. And by this Union, thou has an Interest in Grace
to make thee Repent for sinful Communicating Acts 5. 31.

Thirdly, If neither before Partaking, nor in the time, thou could say thou
ever Believed: Yet if thou shall now Believe thou shall be Saved, Acts 16. 31.
What ever has been thy Guilt, the Blood of Christ cleanses from all sin.

CHAP. XI.
Communicants should Live suitable to such Holy Communion.

The tenth Inference,

THIS Holy Ordinance being the Communion of Christ's Body and Blood: then
Communicants are Oblidged to Live suitable to so great a Benefit, and testify
their Gratitude, by a Holy Walk and Conversation.

The last thing to be Considered is, that after Examination of our way in
Communicating, if we did truly Partake the Communion of Christ's Body and
Blood; we are to endeavor a Practice suitable thereunto; and in order to this
Holiness of heart and Conversation.

I shall put you in mind of these four things.

First, A brief hint of that Conversation required. 2. That our performance
should be early begun. 3. That Engagments and Vows be particularly performed.
4. That for Strengthening to the whole Work required, our begun Communion with
God be cherished and continued in that Holy walk which God has Prescribed.

For the first, the Conversation required of us is.

First, To be blameless in all things, Phil. 2. 15. That ye may be blameless
and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke. Stains on Communicants does much
obstruct the Progress of Religion and true Godliness; it should grieve us much
to be a Comfort to the wicked in their wickedness, Ezekiel 16. 54

2. In a particular manner, our Conversation should be Just and Conscientious,
Israelites indeed in whom is no guile. 1 Thessalonians 4. 6. That no man go
beyond, and defraud his brother in any matter: It Is true Godly men will be
reproached by the wicked carry as they will; but then be sure their Accusations
be false that so they may be ashamed, 1 Peter 3. 16. It Is a most wounding
reflection on Religion, if an ordinary communicant shall be found in unjust
Practices.

3. Our Conversation should be meek and lowly, this being a Bright Ray of
Christ's Image, which He requires us to learn of Him, Matthew. 11. 29. It Is the
very best Ornament of a Christian that all should be clothed with, though it be
most difficult to proud nature yet must be Learned, otherwise God will look
upon us afar off; but He dwells with the humble, Isaiah 57. 15. His dwelling
with such should suffice to make us Love it.

4. Believers must walk Circumspectly, and be watchful in all things, Ephesians
5. 15. Sins within us and temptations from without are never wanting move where
we will in this World; Therefore we must be always on our Guard, which was
Christ's Solemn Counsel, Mark 13. 37. What I say unto you, I say unto you all,
Watch. We cannot spend a Day nor an hour of a day, without sin and loss to our
Souls if this Direction be not followed, our unwatchful hours being many woes
for many days which we cannot shake off; but the watchful Christian is the
Blessed Servant in Christ's account, Luke 12. 37.

5. Our Conversation should be ordered and designed for Edification, Romans 15.
2. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to edification: We
must not say with Cain, am I my brothers keeper: we are required to do good to
all men as we have Opportunity, Galatians 6. 10. What a bitter farewell to the
World shall that man have, who when he must go hence has that to take to the
grave with him; Here is a man leaving the World, who never did good but hurt to
the Souls of men whom he leaves behind him.

6. Our Conversation should savor of Communion with God, and Spiritual
heavenly things. Phil. 3. 20. Our Conversation is in Heaven. We should learn
to be more as Strangers on Earth, thinking and speaking more of our Better
Country, and Comforting one another with the Hope of it, 1 Thessalonians 4.
18. we have no cause to be ashamed of our Country, it is well if it be not
ashamed of us; yet many of us now a days appear ashamed to speak of Heaven or
heavenly things, lest we be thought either too Religious, or Hypocrites; but
the matter is that Heavenly Meditations and Affections abound not in our
hearts, and therefore the mouth speaks so little of them.

7. Our walk should be suitable to Gospel Promises and Privileges, that the
World may see neither our Hope nor Portion is in this Life: the Believers
Inheritance shall be for ever, Psalm. 37. 18. And therefore ought not to be cast
down with worldly Losses, but learn to be Content in every State, knowing how
to be abassed and how to abound; the Believer should Rejoice in Hope of the
Glory of God, knowing that he shall be shortly above all the griefs and Comforts
that this World can give; and therefore should go through his Journey
cheerfully, in Hope that he shall soon Rest from his Labors, and desire nothing
but what he shall Possess. Hebrews 4. 3.

These are a part of the ways that thou art Engadged to walk in having taken
the Seal of God's Covenant: thou art in a special manner Bound to all the
Duties therein required, but thy Comfort is that the same Covenant allows
thee help to perform, and He whom thou have Received, has all the fullness of
the Godhead in him, Colossiaans 2. 9. John 1. 16.

2. Enter thy work early to pay thy Vows, lest thou forget them and so render
thy Guilt great, lest the present sense of thy Obligations go off thy heart;
defer not a day, for many Christians come to loss after Communions by triffling
away time, until the Edge go off, and their hearts are coolled again, and so
much cooled that they are nothing like what they were, when their hearts burned
within them in Communion with Christ, these Disciples mentioned Luke 24. 32.
were wise in this that they Improved the Season of their Mercy, feeling their
hearts to burn within them they would not part with Christ, but verses 28. and
29. Albeit He made as though He would go away, they constrained him to stay
with them* unto which He Graciously yielded approving their Diligence to have
their Mercy continued; Keep your selves in the love of God, Jude 21. And
remember that these Disciples who fell asleep presently after Communicating,
the next thing we hear of them was forsaking their Master.

3. As thou art to begin thy work early, so Engage in it Effectually and
particularly to follow the Lord fully; Remember before thou came to the Lord's
Table, when thou was Examining thy heart and Practice, how many sins then
appeared and how Heinous, insomuch that thou thought it hard for thee to
approach the Lords Table lest thou should prof me it, and durst not resolve on
Partaking until thou had resolved and Engadged against such and such
particular sins, as for Instance thy pride and seeking of vain glory to thy
self, polluting lusts, over reaching of the si^ple, wasting of time in company
without necessary occasion, thy being often ashamed of thy Lord's Words, rather
complying with, than rebuking of evil, thy offensive passions, fretting at thy
Lot, thy fainting in time of Trial, thy earthliness of mind, thy frequent
neglecting of Prayer, thy lukewarmness in it; thy neglect of Meditation on the
state of thy Soul, thy wearying of Sabbaths or the Holy Duties then required,
thy Ingratitude for many signal Deliverances and Mercies, thy being un^utiful
either to the Souls or Bodies of thy Relations, or to the Poor, the bad example
thou often give to thy Family, and the like sins, If all these or any such
evil were wounding to thy Conscience, acknowledged to God, Lamented and
Engadged against, as in the sight of God when no M^^tal eye was witness, and
with this Engadgment on thy Conscience to Reform thy ways, to endeavor all
Duty, and cast away all thy Transgression^ by the help of Grace, if thus thou
came to the Lords Table, and there Solemnly Renewed thy Covenant with God,
av^ching Him that day to be the Lord thy God, and to walk in his ways, Deuteronomy 26.
17. And in Testimony of thy Consent to all the Articles of the Covenant of
Grace, did receive the Lord's public Gospel Seal? then know that God will
call thee to account for thy observation of this Covenant, take care lest thou
be Charged as these, Psalm. 78. 36. Nevertheless, they did flatter him with
their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tong^es. For their heart was not
right with him, neitheir were they steadfast in his Covenant. Take heed ye be
not as these who said they would not Transgress; and yet are found wandering
from God and playing the Harlot every where. Jeremiah 2. 20. And that ye may be
steadfast in your Covenant with God, and faithfully performing your Vows, that
ye may shine more and and more bright unto the perect Day, and continue that
Blessed Communion with Christ which is begun. Resolve on a true walk with God:
this honorable Walk is often mentioned, and diverse ways expressed in
Scripture; whereby the Lord Condescendeth to our weakness for our good, that we
may the better understand how to manadge this Walk. as

First, Walk in Him. Col. 2. 6. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the
Lord, so walk ye in him. What a wonderful walk is this, to walk in Christ! who
can understand this if it be not given from above? yet they are the Words of
God discovering our Duty, our Privilege and our greatest Help for this Holy
Walk. 1. Our Duty still to abide in Christ, never to go from Him, to any hand,
to have all our way consisting with Communion with Christ, to admit willingly
of nothing, but that which He will admit of in fellowship with Him; that so our
fellowship may be continued. 2. Our Privilege in partaking of so great
Happiness as to be Interested in His Favor, His love and care; and Blessed
with such nearness as to have Him for our Habitation, where we may live and
walk at a Holy Liberty. 3. Here is our greatest Help, and the very Fountain of
it, if all ordinary Cisterns were dried up, the Believer shall Live by the
Fountain itself, because Christ Lives, he who is in Him shall Live also: the
Believer Lives upon Christ and His Fullness, there he has Grace to make him
Love this Holy walk, and hold up his goings in it.

2. Walk with God. Micah 6. 8. Walk humbly with thy God. Let none be so profane
as to say are not these one? to walk in Him, and to walk with Him, and what
need is there for Expressing this walk so many ways, for they are the Words of
God and therefore all to be Regarded. This walking with God is a Testimony and
Proof, of our being agreed with Him; otherwise there could be no walking with
Him: For He puts away all the wicked like dross, Psalm. 119. 119. The Lord
confereth this honor upon Believers, that being now reconciled by the Blood of
Christ, they may draw near with some Holy confidence, and without Presumption
walk with their God: though it must be Humbl^, because He is God, and we but
dust: nor is it possible to keep up this walk without Humility, for the proud
in heart are an Abomination to Him: and the rareness of true humility makes
this walk so rare. 2. It Is to walk with God, that is in His way, not in our
ways; we must attend Him in His own ways not expecting to walk with Him in our
sinful ways: this is the more to be regarded, because we would willingly have
God to be with us in our own way, to own and countenance us, in the way of our
own choosing; when there is little care taken to be with God in his ways, but we
cannot walk with Him out of His own way; and as we would have Him to be with
us, so we should take care that we be with Him, 2 Chr. 15. 2. The Lord is with
you while ye be with Him.

3. Walk before me, Genesis 17. 1. I am God Almighty, walk before Me and be thou
perfect. 1. To walk as being under Gods al-seeing Eye, which is a great help to
a Holy walk, laboring to do nothing but as being content God behold it,
setting the Lord always before our eyes, or as the Apostle expresses it, I
forsaw the Lord always before my f^ce, Acts 2. 22. Blessed is the man who
frames all his way for that Omniscient Eye. 2. To walk before Him, is not only
to be impressed with His discerning all our ways; but to set Him before our
eyes as our all sufficient God and help; Believing in our hearts that He can
strengthen, and bear us up in all the difficult steps of our walk. 3. To walk
before Him or before His face, is to Encourage the Believer that not only God
can help; but that His Eyes Mercifully upon His People, observing all their
necessities and weakness, and the need they have that His Gracious Power be
forthcoming to them; He has them still before His Face or Eyes: all which are
strengthening for this Holy walk, and keeping up Communion with God, yea this
walking before Him in a Believing manner, is the way to bring us nearest unto
Perfection; walk before me and be thou perfect: and this should be the Study of
every Believer, to be always making Progress toward Perfection; the very
endeavoring of it is also a great help to this Holy walk.

4. We are to walk after God, Deuteronomy. 13. 4. Ye shall walk after the Lord your
God, and fear Him. This walking after Him is; that we may not mistake our
selves, by forgeting our due distance, but understand that no Dignity, no
Privilege, no Intimacy granted should make us forget what He is, and what we
are; it is the Honor of His dearest Children to be His Followers, Ephesians. 5. 1.
2dly. We are hereby instructed that walking after Him, is to fear Him and keep
His Commands; this must be in every step of our walk, no pretense of a good
Design, no Invention of our own without His Command, will agree with this walk.
3. When the Believer is admitted into true Fellowship with God, yet he is to
follow on for greater nearness, and at the nearest in this Life, is to follow
for more; and the more near there is still the more of these Infinite
Excellencies Discovered, that makes the Believer's Communion with God still a
following after Him. Phil. 3. 12. Not as though I had already attained, either
were already perfect, but I follow after.

5. We must walk as Christ walked 1 John 2. 6. He that says he abides in Him,
ought himself also so to walk, even as He walked: we must not shut our eyes,
upon the Holiness of this walk required in this Scripture, and must not throw
it by, saying it is impossible for us to Imitate Christ, O that prejudice
against the holiness of this walk, did not more obstruct our Imitation, than
that Christ's Practice was in many things Unimitable: for though it be true
that no man is foolishly to presume an Imitation in all things, or to attempt
pure impossibilities, yet it is no less true that we are Oblidged to learn by
Christ's Practice and Example, wherein He is imitable. For Matthew. 11. 29. He
requires us to Learn of Him, for says He, I am meek and lowly in heart. The
Command is to learn by His Example; there is the greater cause to Regard this,
because no man can Love Him, and not desire to be like Him, so far as is
imitable, in hope to be more like Him ere long when He shall appear, 1 John. 3.
2. Consider then O Christian His d^^^gence still going about doing good; His
not seeking His own Glory as a man, His patience both toward His friends and
foes His Humility and Meekness; His Submission to His Father's Will, His
Diligence in Prayer, sometimes continuing all Night Praying, as Luke 6. 12. How
much should it sweeten any Duty that Christ Practiced it before us; get this
necessary Imitation once upon your Conscience as a Duty John 13. 15 Do as I
have given you Example; here is a Pattern that cannot deceive, as the best of
sinful men may do! Therefore follow no man further than he is a Follower of
Christ 1 Corinthians 11. 1.

6. Walk worthy of God 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. That ye would walk worthy of God, who
has called you unto His Kingdom and Glory. These also are the Words of God,
and must be regarded whatever difficulty appear in them; the Believer must
Study a suitableness to the Relation God has honored him with. 1 John. 3. 2.
Now are we the sons of God, Believers must represent this Relation by the
shining of their Father's Image upon them: There are some of whom He is not
ashamed to be called their God Heb. 11. 16. Walk suitable to your Engagements,
many eyes are upon you, and your Conversation will be sure either to do good,
or hurt to others; let no man Converse with you but so as he may have occasion
for some good to his Soul, let never poor Creature have cause of complaint,
that you hardened them in their sin, and pushed them on to Hell; walk suitable
to thy hope of that Kingdom and Glory whereunto thou art called, walk as it
becomes an Heir of that Kingdom neither cast down, nor lifted up with any thing
that a little time shall consume; labor to walk carefuly, as an expectant of
Heaven hoping shortly to be in it, with thy best Company: and that thou may
get these things in some measure cheerfully performed.

First, Seek to be Confirmed that thy fellowship with God is begun.

2. Adore the Mercy that ever brought thee so near Him.

3. Mind often what is revealed of the Glorious eternal Communion to come.

4. See that Love constrain thee to keep still near God.

5. Watch, and oppose whatever allureth thy heart from this fellowship.

6. Yet Commit the keeping of thy Soul into the hands of thy Redeemer.

7. Trust Him with every thing thou have to do.

8. Seek to delight in Him as thy exceeding Joy, in all Revolutions Public or
Private.

9. Meditate on thy Mercies, as well as either thy sin or wants.

10. Grieve not the Holy Spirit, whereby he dwells in thee, and Seals thee.

11. Lay out thy Graces or Gifts for the Master's use, and so they will grow.

12. Labor to know better what a Conversation in Heaven is, that thou may
be daily drawing out of Heaven, that which will help thee to it, that which
will sweeten all the severities of the way to thy Home, and these First Fruits,
that will secure it to be thy Home; and make thee desire that better Country;
and while thou art here, draw out of Christ's fullness with Joy, abide in Him
who purchased that Inheritance, and has prepared it for thee, and is the way
to it, and shall receive thee to Himself, when thy walk is over, and place thee
with Himself in His Father's Kingdom, whence thou shall go no more out, nor
ever desire to be out.

FINIS.

