LICENSED,

October 26. 1666. Roger L'Estrange.

Fortune's Uncertainty, OR YOUTH'S UNCONSTANCY.

Wherein is contained A true and impartial Account of what happened in the space
of few Years to the Author, whom you will know in this ensuing Discourse by the
name of RODOLPHVS.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring at the George near Cliffords-Inn in
Fleet Street. 1667.

TO THE Reader.
Courteous Reader,
IF those hours I have lately spent in this little Volume, may purchase thy
contented perusal, I shall not term them, as I once intended, Idle. I know it
is hard to please all, especially some Carping Critics, that delight in
nothing but censorious disreputes; it is not to those that I dedicate this, for
I owe them no such service; but to thee that wilt encourage the first blossoms
of my labors with thy favorable construction, do I present this, with a
promise that a second part may follow, if I have cause to write my self thy
debtor.

Rodolphus.

Fortune's Uncertainty, OR Youth's Inconstancy.
IN the year 1652. by the peculiar and tender care of a most loving and
indulgent Father, 'twas thought convenient (Rodolphus's years then making him
capable of Scholastic impressions) to place him abroad, not under an illiteral
and raw-pated fellow, (of which sort the world is too too full) but by a most
prudential and paternal care, he was sent to a grave and reverend old
Gentleman, a Doctor of Divinity, whose life and learning speaks him
sufficiently eminent: of this old Gentleman, I may say as Alexander once spoke
of his Tutor Aristotle, that he owed more to him than to his natural Father;
the one giving him a life only, the other learning and reason how to govern and
preserve that life: the time was more, than in such like cases is usual, that
he spent under the grave tuition of this discreet Schoolmaster: and these
advantages for a generous improvement, was likewise very great, and (especially
in those depraved times) hardly to be paralleled; for then was the time when
Rebellion and Treason were counted Piety and Loyalty; then was the time when
the glory of these three Nations lay buried and trampled under-foot; when the
Nobility and Gentry were hunted by so many Wolves, and enforced to fly to Rocks
and Mountains, to unfrequented places and dark Cells, for their securities; I
say, in the midst of these horrible transactions, Rodolphus sound a privileged
place for an advantageous education; a place which by its then calmness,
peaceable, and loving neighborhood, seemed to represent a felicity far above
earthly enjoyments; or a pleasant spring, where for its tranquillity the
innocent birds fly as to their sanctuary: such was the harmonious government
and conduct of this wise Captain, that the flourishing youth more delighted in
a submissive obedience under his commands, than the rebellious rout did in all
their tyrannizing cruelties: here was the Loadstone that drew so many lesser
Luminaries to be its diligent attendants; nay I may boldly say, that England in
those times could scarcely afford such a clustre of young Gentry as then lay at
Anchor in that calm and smooth Harbor: it is a sufficient proof that the Pilot
was rarely skilful, otherwise the loss of so many innocent Passengers had been
inevitable, being forced to sail through so perilous an Ocean: but thanks be
to the Gods for the safe arrival of these Passengers into their desired Port,
and for our dearest Guidesman's safe arrival into his everlasting Port; the
former attaining to theirs by our ever happy Kings return; the other at his by
that signeo canteo, or sweet resignation of his life to a better place. But to
proceed, Rodolphus had not been happy in the great enjoyment of this good
society above a year or two, but the youthful exorbitances of himself, and two
or three more among them, invited them to such extravagancies, that had not the
seasonable persuasions of some of their Relations interposed, they had been
made incapable of conserving themselves as members of that Society, by the just
resentments of their incensed Master; for the daily complaints of the Country
people, some lamenting the loss of their Geese, others of their Turkeys and
Hens, some of their fat Pigs, but most, of their Orchards being robbed, did so
perplex that good old Gentleman, that when he perceived private chastisements
(which they seldom wanted) would not prevail, he took a course less painful,
but far more disgraceful to them; for in his very Sermons he would take the
opportunities of public checks; nay, their crimes (and partly his age) would
so highly provoke him, that he would often particularize their names in the
open Congregation; which was so insufferable, that two or three among them,
most guilty, could not endure to be thus galled, but in revenge must needs be
gone, every one to their particular friends, with protestations never to
return, pretending some great injury received: They had no sooner taken this
resolution, but they as soon put it in execution, and without giving the least
notice either to Master or School-fellows, they stole away to their several
homes; and every one found alike entertainment, for as if their Relations had
foreknown of their arrivals, and within themselves concluded of their
reception, though they lived many miles asunder; yet thus went the humor, that
no sooner came they home, but as soon were they sent back again, with their
Parents servants with them, and Letters to the old Fox, who smilingly
congratulated their return; but the next morning he taught them the difference
between words and blows, and made every one of them know, that stolen Geese
must have whipping Sauce: thus are they returned and reinstated in so good a
condition, that others more wise would think it a happiness not to be
paralleled; but the School and the Rod were always enemies to liberty and
ease, and so thought they; yet necessity has no Law, for to their studies they
must, and indeed they might acknowledge a thanks, rather than discontent, for
such supposed severities: for should not youth be bridled from those unsatiable
and boundless extravagancies they are usually guilty of, they might
(Phaeton-like) with their unadvised ambitions, hurl themselves, and perhaps
their relations, into many inconveniences, sooner to be sorrowed than quitted.
History and experience daily tells us of many woeful examples that giddy-headed
young men run themselves into: had Icarus been advised by the discreet
foresight of his wise Father Dedalus, (who too truly feared the success of his
ingenious Arts) perhaps to to this day we might have wanted a name for the
Icarian Seas, or at least have found one less ominous: but what need I dilate
on that which a whole Cart-load of Books are full of, my intent is otherwise;
therefore ad rem. By the stayed and aweful authority of Rodolphus respected
Tutor, he kept within bounds for two or three years after this first lashing
out, and indeed was never guilty of any notorious noncompliance (unless his
selling some Books now and then, and losing his clothes at gaming, or the like)
till from that Nursery he found a removal into a more spacious Plantation,
where he had a larger liberty to exercise his youthful inclinations than was
heretofore allowed him; for no sooner was he thought fit (perhaps more by
favor than learning) for Oxford, but immediately with all possible care had he
a Chamber, Tutor, and Servitour provided for him in that ancient and famous
College of Christ-Church; where he had not long continued, till he quickly
found the want of that true and Orthodox Principle he was all along brought up
in: A fine moderate methodical way of teaching was used by his Reverend Master,
with such a staid gravity and piety, that his influence was very great upon the
most stubborn Lad among them; but now the case is altered, Quot capita tot
sententiae, and as Ovid says in relation to the first Chaos, 'twas a rudis
indigestaque moles, and so certainly did it appear here; for every body would
be something, and yet no body was any thing, especially his little Tutor, who
like a second Protaeus could ingeniously disguise himself into the most safe
shape; sometimes one of Goodwins Disciples, then a Presbyterian Zealist;
sometimes a Yea and Nay must be the burden of the Song; then were they all
Hobby-horses without a second Dip: thus ran he his divisions, now a lesson in
Philosophy, then in Divinity; sometimes in Metaphysics, then in Mathematics;
sure I am he had as many tricks as a dancing Bear, but they had quickly trick
for trick with him: for whilst he was beating his addle brains about new
innovations, they were still inventing new recreations; so that Billiards,
Tennice, Bowls, Cards, Dice, each were as well acquainted with them as all
Fantastic Principles with him. Time runs apace, which makes Rodolphus quickly
pass the months of a Freshman, and soon understand that more honor lay under a
ragged Gown than a new one; he quickly learned how to take things upon faith,
and for half the worth to sell them for ready money; he thought it a very good
shift, for I am sure among their rattle-headed pates, they rattled all away
from poor young Gentlemen, who had nothing to help them but their money, and a
very little of that too; for Rodolphus could never learn the art of turning his
eyes topsy turvy, nor their long yaunings, nor false spittings, with their
counterfeited smiles nor Crocodile tears; he could never do any thing of it,
therefore must suffer for it: however in the midst of these extremities he had
comfort in having some Companions in his miseries; for doubtless they had a
knot that could be as merry as they, and perhaps as drunk too, but not
altogether so private: they had not got the right way of the Presbyterian
drinking, and I hope never will. Thus after this mazed rate rubbed he out, till
the desires of some of his Relations incited him to manly improvements, which
quickly took so good effect, that he soon became a good Proficient in the art
of Fencing; which surly exercise inanimated him so much, that he began to think
himself a man; and indeed his age being then between 15 and 16 enabled him to
execute that which gained him some applause with his Military Master, and
likewise so good a sort of acquaintance, that after a little time they dared so
much confide in one another, that no secret or design whatever, but what was
common among them. There were three besides Rodolphus, who were fully resolved
to hazard their fortunes in a year or two's Travel, and notwithstanding two of
them were elder Brothers, and now men of great Estates; yet their Credits were
then so indifferent, that for the furtherance of this design they were not able
to raise above thirty pounds, and that too by selling their Books, Bedding, and
other Furniture of their Chambers. Rodolphu's own stock was but small, yet for
the prosecution of such Heroic Intentions, his endeavors were very earnest;
for what with his Bedding, Books, and Gown, and likewise his Credit, he made a
shift to raise above twenty pounds: so that among them they had at least fifty
pounds. This great sum, with the fear of a discovery made them almost mad; but
to be quickly free from those doubts, they hired each of them a Hackney Horse,
(but never intended the owners should see them again till their return:) being
thus accoutred, and every thing secure, I know not what unhappy Planet
discovered it, or what Argus's eyes discerned it; but certain I am, they were
all discovered, and this hopeful design nipt in the very bud, and I fear me by
the too too great industry of one of Rodolphus's Relations, who having no
inconsiderable Authority in Oxford, and having had some hint in the business
(would the tongue were out that told it) immediately took half a dozen of the
Officers of the Town with him, and made a general search, but could hear
nothing of them till eleven or twelve a clock at night, when they were all
Booted and Spurred, just going to take Horse, the Officers met our young
Scholars full butt in the Streets, who immediately bid them stand, and they as
immediately bid them follow them, for they all took heels and run for it, their
Consciences frighting them more then their Followers; but Boots and Spurs, and
other lumber about them, prevented their desires, and slackned that expedition
which they highly wanted in such a case; so that they became preys to their
enemies, but on very honorable terms; for when our young Scholars saw
themselves in the net, they were resolved to run out of it, or break it, which
made them draw, with a resolution far exceeding their years, or cause, and
commanded their pursuers at their perils to stand, which was obeyed, and a
parley proposed; which being accepted, they made their conditions according to
their desires, only were forced to lay down their Weapons and retake themselves
again to their Gowns, but with a solemn engagement, that their Parents should
not be acquainted with this extravagancy, but should return Statu quo prius.
This being granted, they returned their moneys to redeem their Beds, and
satisfy other Creditors, which grieved them most of all; for certainly so
great a sum of Money was never seen among them: but according to promise all
was hushed, and no notice taken of this frolic for a great while; but at last
some malicious tongues began to whisper so loud, that all the Town rang of it,
so that Prayers and thanks were offered up by many of their poor Creditors for
this fair deliverance, and the owners of the Horses could not be backward in
acknowledging their escape. Whether this were politickly divulged by any of
their Relations, that others should not trust them any more, I will not now
question; but this I am sure of, that their credits were grown so small upon
it, that they could keep open Shop no longer, but were forced to part, some one
way and some another, till a more favorable day might bring them together
again; which came to pass according to their wishes, as in the process of this
discourse you shall understand. In the midst of these transactions, and some
other little frolicks which are too inconsiderable to particularize, the
Saint-like Tutor of our young Rodolphus began to be troublesome, and thunder
out his furious threats, which amounted to little less then excommunications;
for he solemnly protested the very next extravagancy committed by our late
criminal should be punished by no less a chastisement then an expelling;
notwithstanding all this Rodolphus was not yet satisfied, nor dreaded these
severe pronunciations so much, but that he must have another fling; and a
little while after a convenient opportunity presented it self; for the great
fame of the Funeral solemnization of the late Usurper began to grow so eminent,
that he was no Gentleman that would not see such a Ceremony: Our young Gallant
was spurred on to this enterprise with earnestness, for he never saw the famous
City of London till then; his desires therefore not to be satisfied, but by an
accomplishment, made him the more diligent in the prosecution thereof: but what
inconveniences and shifts must he still run into that has neither Money nor
Credit to assist his designs? This certainly would discourage any but our
Author, who was resolved by hook or by crook for London: There were in the
College two or three of his associates well principled young men, who had the
same desires; but that which was most to be lamented, the same purses and
credits likewise as himself; but Labor omnia vincit improbus, for the perpetual
industry of our young Gentlemen amounted to so good an effect, that against the
time Rodolphus had gotten not only two good Hackney-Horses for himself and
Servitor, but likewise a very rich embroiodred Coat, with Boots, Sword, and
Belt, which the credulity of one of his Brothers Servants entrusted him with;
his Companions were likewise successful in every thing but Moneys, for there
was not twenty shillings among four of them and their Servants, at their
leaving of Oxford; but gone they are, Friends nor Tutors know not whither; they
feared their flight to be beyond the Seas, and too late shut the Stable door;
but they were all mistaken, for London was the farthest place for their
designed Travels. They were forced to lie one night upon the Road, which made
such a deep impression into their little stock, that after their Reckoning
paid, they had but two shillings left to carry them to London, and in what part
to go to in that huge place they could not imagine; for to be near the Temple
they dared not, some of their Relations being there resident; to be near the
Court they likewise were afraid, having several of their Kindred interessed too
too much in that rebellious Compliance. This consideration put our young
Travelers into a great nonplus; but after a serious consultation it was
proposed by one of them, that Tuttle-street would be most convenient to receive
them, by reason that his Tailor dwelt there, who would be very necessary among
them, being all strangers in London: This proposition was generally liked of,
which made them steer their course directly thither, where in few hours after
they safely arrived, and at the two neck't Swan took up their quarters, but
could hear no news of the Tailor: they had no Money left, but spared not
calling plentifully, their Horses being good pledges for an honest payment.
Well you see we have brought these young Scholars to London, where for a while
we will leave them, and look back a little from whence they came, and how all
things go there: Our young Gentlemen's Tutors quickly found that the Birds were
flown, and as quickly gave the Alarm to Rodolphus's Relations, who lived not
far from Oxford; they all proclaimed him the ringleader of these Contrivances,
and made him the chiefest criminal, when indeed they were all equals: they were
so surprised at the suddenness of their flight, that had not the Credit of
Rodolphus his Relations prevented it, they had sent Hues and Cries after them
and their Horses; but they looked before they leapt, and wisely considered that
a better plaster could not be applied to this wound, then a discreet
concealment; which being agreed amongst them, they patiently waited the event,
and daily put up their Orizons for a speedy return of their supposed lost
Pupils: but whilst the careful Tutors live in suspense at Oxford, their jolly
Pupils merrily divert themselves at London; but their guilty fears often caused
their jealous discontents, and put them into many dangerous frights; amongst
the rest this is worthy the taking notice of: One day they must needs walk down
to the Waterside, and being come near the Thames in Westminster-Yard, the
Watermen (as they thought) came strangely up toward them, crying, Sculler or
Oars, Sculler or Oars? which confused noise our young Gentlemen not being
acquainted with, verily believed them to be men set there on purpose to
apprehend them, and really thought they had cried Scholars and Rogues, Scholars
and Rogues! which made them all return, but faster than they came thither,
never looking back till they had got to their quarters, and verily believed
their escape proceeded from the swiftness of their flight: they no sooner came
in but immediately they consulted their securities; and after a long and
serious debate, 'twas resolved among them, that their best way would be to
avoid this verily believed search by changing their Lodgings; they could not
effect their desires by reason of a Reckoning not satisfied in their Inn, which
put them almost to their wits end, and made Rodolphus try once more how to get
their necks out of this confinement: he had a Sister lived at Hammersmith,
which put him in hopes that if he should go to see her, his credit, or her love
would contribute to a supply suitable to their deliverance; he went accordingly
and found her at home, but withal he likewise found at her house his Brother
and other Relations, which for the reason aforesaid, being clad and furnished
with his Brothers finery, he had as leave seen old Nick as his face at that
present: he no sooner understood of his Brothers being there, but as soon he
made his escape, and returned as empty as he went thither of money, though
fuller of fear; his necessities notwithstanding daily increasing, and his
credit decreasing at his Quarters, he was enforced to send his Servitor within
two or three days after, with a Letter to his Sister, full of earnestness for
the lending of money; when he came to her she made him alight (though contrary
to the commands his Master gave him) and after she had got him into her house,
she brought him to the Brother then so much feared by our young Rodolphus, who
immediately took this puisne Servitor to task, and after some great words made
him confess where his Master lay; this being understood, th^^ immediately
caused his Coach to be made ready, and with himself, Wife, and two or three of
Rodolphus's Sisters, put themselves abord this Leather Bark, and by the
assistance of the silly Guidesman, steared their course directly to his Masters
Harbor, and arrived within a very little time there, at the very instant when
Rodolphus was selling one of his hired Horses; but their coming changed the
Scene, and as Fortune would have it, much for the better; for the great
complasance of Rodolphus's Brother plainly testified his contentment rather
than resentments of his youthful frolicks. And after some little repast given
by Rodolphus to these new come Guests, he calls for a Bill or Reckoning, which
his Brother liberally paid, and redeemed these young Pawns from their unthrifty
engagements; and gave order, that (the next da^ being the great show of the
ambitious formality of Olivers Funeral) Rodolpbus should wait on his
Sister-in-Law, to see what he so far came for; which he did accordingly, and
had a convenience far exceeding his expectations, and among persons of so good
a repute, and such brave young Ladies, that our young Gentleman quite forgot
his late extremities, and by this sudden alteration did begin to believe that
he was born to live a Courtier; but the very next day by the order of his grave
and careful Father, who was then at the Temple, and had heard of his Sons
lashing out, he sent one of his men with a command to see him safe home at his
College again, otherwise he should certainly incur his Fathers displeasure:
these summons at first surprised Rodolphus, being just warm in the enjoyment of
gallant company, and brave entertainments; but the sensibility of his late
crimes made him wisely consider, that it would not be safe to incense an
already provoked Father too much; but since he he had so fair an opportunity,
and on such good terms to return, he presently obeyed, and gave a farewell
(though unwillingly) to his late acquaintance; and with his Servitor, and
Fathers Man took Horse that very afternoon, having lest his Fellow-Scholars two
or three days before, and tends his course for Oxford, where the next day he
arrived, without any considerable adventure on the Road; and coming to his
Chamber, he accidentally met with his Tutor in the Quadrangle, and after some
complements passed, this little puppet must needs begin to charm his harsh
Pipe, and take the liberty to check his Pupil for his late extravagancy; but
the London Air had so much altered our young Gentleman, that no such Oxford
breath was pleasing to him, which made him roughly quit his Tutors Company, and
tell him, that if he found no better welcomes from others then from him, he
would return from whence he came, where (as he said) he should be free from
such taunts. This is the second time of Rodolphus's resetlement in his
Colledge-life, after two considerable flyings out, and had not the musical
temptations of the warlike Instruments invited him abroad, perhaps at this day
we might have found him in Christ-Church; but what certainty can be expected
from Women and young Men, the one representing the Wind, the other the
Weather, for their unconstancy? One day Rodolphus with two or three of his
accustomed companions, being drinking a glass of Wine together at the
Mermaid-Tavern in Oxford, accidentally saw marching up the high Street, a
gallant Party of Horse, bravely accoutred, and well mounted, advancing with
their Officers at the head of them, and their naked Swords in their hands in so
noble a posture, that it hugely delighted our young Gentlemen, but especially
Rodolphus; who being ravished with a martial resolution, immediately began to
incite and encourage the minds of his Associates, with a desire of completing
that gallant company with their own persons and endeavors; he need not strike
fire twice, the tinder receiving the first spark without denial; for no sooner
had they contrived a convenience, but as soon they executed it, and without
further delay immediately pawned their Gowns in the Tavern, and merrily drank
the Health of their new Admirers, as far as the worth of their Gowns would
permit them; and afterward solemnly protested, that in exchange of such a
Monkish Habit, they would put on the Buff-Coat, with the iron Hat and Doublet,
and never wear Gown more in Oxford. This resolution, by most of them was
quickly put in execution, but particularly by our Rodolphus, who by the
interest of some acquaintance in those Troops (when persuasions of Friends
could not prevent it) got himself mustred among them; and his delight in that
military employment gave him no cause to repent of his change of life; for
favor libertized him so much, that he was seldom sensible of any hardship or
Duty; but riding about and exercising among them when he pleased was grown a
custom to him, till one of his Relations (a Colonel of that Army) resolving to
make him a Soldier, began to have a strict eye over him, and kept him at last
so close to his Duty, that as often as it came to his turn, he was forced to
watch with his Comrades; which then made him perceive the difference between a
hard Board-Bed at Paul's, and a soft Feather-Bed at Christ-Church.
Notwithstanding this rough usage, our young Soldier's resolutions were too
great to admit of the least discouragements in his Martial Proceedings; for so
much was his delight in this new kind of life, that he neglected not only fair
opportunities of more considerable advantages then he at that time enjoyed, but
likewise by no persuasions whatever could he be invited from that rambling and
loose kind of life, to a noble and gentile education at the Temple, which his
Friends would then most willingly have bestowed on him. This intended
perseverance continued not so long, but perhaps the too too severe checks and
Commands of a Brother, which was then his Colonel, urges a Vale from such
infranchisements by our young Soldier: A disobedience to his Superior Officer
he well knew was not to be tolerated, nor proper for a Soldier to be guilty
of; but a neglect of a Brothers commands he thought pardonable, or at least
would make it so; there being ever a natural antipathy, in such cases; for
equals in birth and nature could never yet subject themselves to a willing
compliance of each others humors: this being then the case of Rodolphus, he
fully determined to venture his fortunes in one year or two's Travel, rather
then submit himself to a Brothers Commands, having at that time a most
convenient encouragement to execute his intended designs; for two of of those
young Scholars which, as you have heretofore heard, parted with him at
Christ-Church, came and found out their old Associate, which they so long
wanted, and after a mutual congratulation given and received among them, they
soon resolved what was to be done, and being pretty well provided for their
Voyage, they all parted from Tanton-Dean (where Rodolphus then quartered) and
with what privacy possible got to Plymouth, where they intended to take
shipping: and being there safely arrived, their first business was to enquire
what Vessels were bound outward, and whither; which being asked, 'twas known
that two were then ready for France, and stayed for nothing but the advantage
of a fair wind: which news was not a little welcome to these young Gentlemen,
France being the stage coveted by them all to act their first parts in. They
quartered at the Three Cranes, where they began to discover that a person of
more than ordinary quality lay there wind-bound, and afterward understood his
imbarking to be in the same Vessel which they intended to venture in: this
person of quality took great delight in our young Travelers, and gave them
such large and generous proffers of his civilities, that this unexpected good
fortune hugely animated Rodolphus and his companions, who began to think
themselves the happiest young men living; they wanted nothing but a wind to
waft them over that uncertain Element, nor desired nothing more; they lived
gentilely where they lodged, and made but few meals, which was not in the
company of the supposed Nobleman: but who must I complain of; or what Destiny
directs things so severely, that our poor Rodolphus can never rightly
accomplish his generous inclinations? we see him here safe at Plymouth, and in
a company which his very soul delighted in; yet we must sound a a retreat, and
resign a contented enjoyment for an uncertain disappointment: but we hourly see
the fairest day has some showers, and the most serene sky in the morning,
often clouded with dark vapors by noon; thus we find Rodolphus his
unparalled contentment soon eclipsed by the too curious search of his
brothers Soldiers, who no sooner found him wanting, but he sent a Party after
him with a full Commission to bring him back again: this design of his brothers
was discovered to Rodolphus by one of his Sisters, before 'twas altogether put
in execution, which enforced him to sell his Horse, which he intended to
transport, but worst of all, to leave that dear company he so entirely loved;
and that very night the Soldiers came into Plymouth in search of him, he
privately took Posthorses, and by the next morning got to Exeter, where he met
with very kind Letters from his brother, with notice that he had got him a
Commission for Cornet of Horse: this news at first startled Rodolphus, but at
last he considered that this might be only a trap to ensnare him in, and a
decoy to invite him to his own Net, which made him take no notice of these
Letters, but made what haste he could to Englands Metropolis, where he assured
himself of a privacy suitable to his necessitated security; he took fresh
Posthorses at Exon, and rid with all Expedition till he came to Salisbury; but
there he met with so infallible assurances of his brothers reality, and
likewise some seasonable advice and persuasions to return and comply with his
brothers humors, that from Salisbury he went directly to his brothers, who lay
but eight miles from thence, and found a very civil reception from him, with a
Cornets Commission in his brothers Pocket, according as his Letters signified:
but these fair Proposals could not invite our Rodolphus to put his neck again
under the disaffected yoke of his brothers Privileges, which as his superior
Officer, he had over him; but instead of his Commission he desired to ride in
General Monks Lifeguard (who was then lately come out of Scotland:) his
brother seeing him thus averse in a second re-engagement, and perceiving his
neglect of such fair proffers, gave way to his own inclinations, and with
Letters of recommendation to Sir Philip Howard sent him going, who being glad
of such an Errand, with Horse and Arms, and other accommodations suitable for
such employments, he gets to London, where he soon found out Sir Philip, and
received the satisfaction of a very civil reception from that ever Honorable
person, with a promise of an admittance into the Guard the very next Muster;
which afterward was accordingly performed, with a civility and respect far
exceeding his expectations: but Rodolphus being yet very young, not exceeding
18. or 19. at most, began to lash out there more then ever; for he soon
perceived that his years had not yet made him capable of such experimented
Companions as Lifeguard Men; his money whilst it lasted fled merrily about,
and in les^ then a twelvemonth his Horses head was swollen so big, that he could
not get him out of the Stable door; a disease very incident and almost
infectious among those Gentlemen's Horses. This accident happening in a very bad
time, made Rodolphus almost mad, and put him to his wits end for new shifts how
to rub out; which he endeavored so long, that he rubbed every thing bare he had
to do withal, and at last rubbed himself out of the Guard: Rub, rub, and a good
cast, the Proverb goes; I am sure here were rubs enough, and yet the cast bad.
This one years extravagancy did not only cost his Relations several sums of
Money, besides his pay, but likewise contracted debts, not inconsiderable to
him: notwithstanding which, upon a serious promise of reformation, our
Rodolphus was again received into his Fathers affection, who paid all his
debts, and placed him in the Temple, with so great a care and convenience, that
he lived amongst, and conversed with the best of that Honorable Society: but
having not yet sowed his wild Oats, and finding the Law-French, very crabid in
comparison of the smooth style of Pembrokes Arcadia, or a Scudamores Cassandra,
he was not able to endure such harsh Lectures, despairing of ever attaining to
that knowledge of the Law, which some of his Predecessors has been very eminent
in; which consideration made him once more design to see some other then the
English world; which his Relations perceiving, and seeing that nothing would
tame this unbridled youth but champing on the bit, they freely gave way to his
desisired Travels; but withal cunningly contrived his transportation to a place
far different to his expectations, and in a condition befitting the worst of
Criminals; for instead of a plausible voyage to see the world, and benefit an
accomplishment by it, he was fairly shipped for Virginia, and as fairly sold as
any Slave that ever went thither. Now Rodolphus has brought his Hogs to a fair
Market, and has solitary Woods enough in that unfrequented place, to moan his
unexpected and intolerable misery: I verily believe the worst of his lives in
England would then have been as welcome to him, as liberty is to those whose
strict confinement forbids their seeing the Sun for some years; but it is too
late to repent, too late to wish, or almost hope, he sees himself bought and
sold like a Nag in Smithfield, and he that gave most for him had him: Is this
the success Rodolphus of all thy enterprises, and are thy generous undertakings
but a breeding qualm of this prodigious birth? is this the prize of thy always
large endeavors? surely, surely, thy designs were never so mechanic to
purchase such mean successes; but thou art not the first thus horribly plunged,
for at this day the Turkish Galleys afford too many presidents of like, or
worse effects to noble and generous souls. Had our Rodolphus enjoyed but a
companion in these extremities, I have often heard him say, that his burden
would then have been but light; for his charity was then so little, that he did
not only bemoan his Associates felicities in their French Travels, but with
reality wished them at his dirty employments: The Mattock and the Axe must be
the only company for Rodolphus diversions, which at first seemed most severe,
the beginning of enterprises being usually more hard then the effecting them;
but use makes perfectness; so that our young Virginian passes his slavery with
a better performance, and far better content then at his first arrival; he
daily improves himself in those strange exercises, and quickly learnt to be so
good a Cooper, that he may never despair of an ordinary livelihood from his
late gotten skill: His usual exercise was felling down Trees, hooping of
Hogsheads; and his task would be often so severe, that grim despair would
sometimes present himself in those Woods, which are fitting for nothing more
then such hellish Executioners; but providence protected him with patience, and
at last gave him an opportunity of a fair deliverance: for by the sudden fancy
and opinion of a generous soul (for whose sake Rodolphus continues a Vassal to
her Sex) he found his liberty from his tyrannizing Master, and a fair
privilege for his safe return: he meets with this Charitable Woman by
accident, who came into a Barn where he was working, and being very inquisitive
about several particulars, she immediately grew so concerned for him, that she
told him he was his own man; for she had already bought him as her own Slave,
therefore he was at her dispose, and might go or come when and where he
pleased: This unheard of generosity surprised our young Captive so much, that
had he found the least correspondency either in Birth, Parts, or person with
himself, or indeed had he found either Youth or Beauty in her, I am persuaded
his soul was then so full of gratitude, that he would have thought of no other
requital then himself to give her; but where all such invitations are wanting,
and only the relics of a rough Planter to be courted, he thought the return of
her immense kindnesses could not be better acknowledged then by present thanks,
and future profit, as he plentifully promised; for indeed had there been all
that belongs to the accomplishment of a woman in this Virginian Widow, his
youthful Inclinations were already prepossest, and the entire affections which
he then owed to a young Lady in England, made him altogether incapable of a
second passion: seeing therefore he could not possibly satisfy the expectation
of his Benefactress (who certainly had more then an ordinary respect for him)
he began wisely to consider the promising danger he was liable unto in a long
stay there; for as women are the best things living, if pleased, so once being
incensed, are they the worst things breathing. History is so full of diabolical
designs, and executions of these sort of Furies, that he fully resolved to shun
the event, and not allow opportunity a convenience to make him the subject of
such transactions: but since fortune had been so favorable to open the Prison
Door, and unlocked his Fetters, he thought it high time to rouse himself, and
not to abuse that unconstant Deities civility, fearing her frowns, as well as
rejoicing at her smiles: he therefore with all privacy and expedition prepares
for a farewell from those wild Barbarians, who had so often made his heart to
bleed by their Turkish usages; and after some little time spent in the
observance of that pleasantly made Country, he left those parts with as much
joy, as with grief he came to them. I have often heard him speak with so great
a delight, and so much favor of the Country it self; that the pleasantness
thereof was the only cause of his patient sufferings; for in the midst of his
slavery he would divert himself with the several objects of wild beasts, and
the natural order of a pleasant Wilderness; he observed it to be situated in a
moderate Clime, and a commonly serene sky; he found the whole Country a Grove
full of Oaks, Pines, Cedars, Cypress, Laurel, Sassafras, Mulberries,
Plum-trees, Peaches, and Vines, all of so dilectable an aspect, that the
melancholiest eye in the world could not look upon it without contentment, nor
content himself without admiration: there are no shrubs or underwoods to choke
up the passage; and in its season your foot can hardly direct it self, where it
will not be died in the blood of large and delicious Strawberries; the plenty
of Fish, Fowl, and Beasts, fitting for the sustenance of man, are innumerable:
And indeed there is nothing wanting in this fruitful and plentiful Country,
that can be desired for the satisfaction of the most voluptuous wishes. But
it is time to follow our Rodolphus, who is now tumbling over mountains of Seas,
and in so rough a season, that the memory of man never afforded such a stormy
passage; 'twas the great Hurricane, that blew so many Trees from their mother
Earth, which by providence brought home our young Traveller, though hundred
others steept their bodies in Neptunes brine; no Sun appeared in many weeks to
direct the Seaman's observation; nothing but showers and blustering storms; the
Porpoises skipping and swarming about the Ships, plainly told them of their
present dangers; and the hourly spectacles of most sad and lamentable
Shipwracks portended their own destructions, without an Almighty Providence: in
this horrible condition sailed they through the turbulent Element, and at last
upon the English Coast, in Bristol Channel they were cast away, and amongst 36
Passengers and Seamen, five only escaped this furious violence, among which
Rodolphus was one, who could not swim, nor assist himself in any thing more
than desiring the help of the Almighty Assistor, who miraculously preserved his
life, and pulled him out of Neptunes jaws, whilst others were swallowed up by
that greedy Devourer: but after a tedious and insensible tumbling in the Seas,
their cruelty at last ceased, being appeased with the Victim of 30 of them at
least; the rest being cast on the neighboring Rocks, where they made a shift
to scramble from that unkind entertainment they lately received; and after the
warm Sun and fixed foundation had a little comforted them, they began to revive
like those which newly came forth of a deadly Trance; and when their frozen
tongues began to melt, they first expressed their joy for the great mercy of this
admirable deliverance, and with the same tongues lamented the loss of all their
poor acquaintances, with so great a sorrow, that the very Rocks they then sat
on seemed to accompany their complaints; they saw the Bodies, Goods, and Vessel
of their loving friends tossed on the Seas, with so angry a motion, as if they
resolved to revenge poor Rodolphus's escape on those already inanimates; they
were not able to endure this pitiful spectacle, but with what have their feeble
limbs would permit, they got away, hunger and cold forcing a march; the best
furnished among them was so poorly clad, that Rodolphus was best provided,
having only a Shirt, Wastcoat, and Linings; but his charity would not permit
him to wear them, for the Captain of the Vessel, who was likewise saved from
this miserable shipwreck, had not so much as a Shirt to his back, which forced
Rodolphus to lend him his, leaving himself only Linings and Wastcoat. In this
poor habit march they along, being near twenty miles from Bristol, and being
forced to live on the charitable contribution of the better sort of Householders
till they got thither, Rodolphus was the Speaker wherever they came, and played
the part of a Beggar so well, that had they been for a considerable time to
endure this kind of life, they perceived this begging Oratory would keep them
from a hungry belly, or at least a starving; but they were not the right sort
of Ramblers, who destine their lives to such theevish and lazy exercises; for
their bare feet, and almost bare backs, gave them many bitter remembrances, and
sharply advised their speedy deliverance out of those necessities: they often
found taunts and threts, as well as compassion and relief; which made them of
an opinion, that none has those privileges in the discovery of men's affections
and conditions, as these State Caterpillars: They went still to the better sort
of Houses, and if any of them proved to be Gentlemen, they could give so civil
a satisfaction of any demand proposed, that most were apt to believe they were
not born wanderers. One day they all addressed themselves toward a house,
which by its largeness and situation, promised the owner to be a man of
repute, and to them a plentiful relief; being come thither they received but a
surly answer from a kind of Porter, who was at the Gate; but poverty enforcing
patience, made them bear his uncivil language without retort, and continue for
some while in an open Hovel, to repose their weary limbs, and refresh their
coming stomachs with those Provisions the charity of some had bestowed on them;
it chanced whilst they were thus employed, that a maidservant belonging to
this Gentleman's house, accidentally came to the Hovel, and finding these poor
Travelers sitting on pieces of old Carts and other lumber, and in such a
strange guise, her tender heart began to take compassion at this unexpected
sight, which made her courteously ask what they were, and whether they expected
relief from that House? this emboldned the heart-broken Paupers, to let her
know their conditions, and desire her if she were a Christian, and had any
consideration of goodness (which was not possible, as Rodolphus told her, that
one of her aspect could want) that she would do them the kindness to let the
Master of the house know that some poor shipwrackt Travelers were without, and
to desire him to consider their condition: this well-disposed Maid was so glad
of the Errand, as if she believed the execution thereof to be meritorious, and
delivered her message with so good a success, that orders were presently given
to these newly-begun Beggars to come to the Hall door, where (out of curiosity)
stood the Mistress of the House, with several other Gentlewomen, expecting
their coming; they had not waited long ere they saw our Travelers, whose
extremities put wings to their feet, and made them advance with a motion well
testifying their wants: the Ladies first demands were, from whence they came,
and what they were, with many other questions; which being answered by
Rodolphus, they began more curiously to observe these Wanderers, and finding
something in them more than in the common sort of such Vagabonds, the young
Ladies then began to be more inquisitive in knowing their names, birth, and
Country; all which Rodolphus gave them so plentiful an account of, and so true
a one, their names only excepted, (for 'twas pre-agreed among them, to go under
the notion and assume other names, by reason of their poverty) that they were
not only highly satisfied in the reality of that free declare, but the Lady of
the House with a strong passion flies out in the admiration of providence, who
she verily believed had brought to her a near and deer Relation in the person
of Rodolphus; she runs to him with open arms, and embraces him with such
earnestness, that it hugely surprised the standers by: by this we may see, that
if the supposed belief of consanguinity has power to create so great a
kindness, what then must be the force of blood not mistaken; if Rodolphus found
himself from a beggar wrapped in the sweet embraces of a worthy Lady, by an
abused opinion, what had been his reception or rather his happiness, if truth
would have allowed a sympathy in these affections? but as his case then stood,
he thought it not convenient to undeceive this well-minded Lady, but let her
run on in this kind error, till by her assistance he might do himself and
Companions some service in their necessities; he therefore returns her chaste
caresses, with an expression as zealous as her own, and admired his better
Fortune in guiding him to so deer a Kinswoman, as he called her. The name he
took on him chanced to be her maiden name, and his pretended Father her own
Uncle; he did it not unadvisedly, for he picked out a Family which was gentle
and ancient; and such a Family, that if by accident he should meet with any
that knew them, he could give as good an account of them as of his own; it is
not convenient to give the name he then owned, let it therefore suffice, that
by it he got this good Kinswoman, who spent no longer time in an airy
congratulation; for being sensible of their wants, she presently commands a
good Fire to be made in the Hall, and what dry clothes the house afforded, to
shift their wet and thin Garments; the assisting hands of every one of those
pretty Ladies to this charitable work made all things insensibly ready; and
when they saw the scarcity of men's apparel, Smocks and Petticoats were
immediately brought in, and so comfortably aired and warmed, that our drooping
and benumbed Travelers found a sweet refreshment and alteration by this
seasonable relief: The next convenience provided, was good Liquor and Meat to
nourish and cherish them within; and that nothing might be wanting to the
completing of these unparalled kindnesses, the Ladies (as soon as they were
shifted) came in to them, and by their presence made them far more happy then
by all their other bountiful provisions. Rodolphus was quite at a stand for
words suitable for a grateful return; yet he expressed himself so conveniently,
that they were all assured their kindnesses were not bestowed on those that
wanted thankful souls. Now begins the Lady once more to be earnest with her new
found Kinsman, to give her a true and impartial account of all his Travels and
successes, and likewise of his Relations, she being almost a stranger among
them, by the great distance of place Marriage had confined her unto. Rodolphus
was as free in obeying as she in desiring; so that she soon understood what she
requested, and not with so small a satisfaction, but that the best things in
this good Gentlewomans house were all too bad for the accommodation of her
shipwrackt Cousin. Rodolphus's companions were no losers by his good success,
for whatever he enjoyed was freely distributed among them; he would not accept
of the least particular assistance, which might any ways capacitate his
condition better then theirs. Time runs and it grows late, which made them
think of a farewell that night; so that they all parted to their several
lodgings, where (especially our weary Travelers) did soundly repose their
weary Limbs: they arose the next morning with an intent to go on in their
pilgrimage; they waited some hours to see the Ladies, and to give them an
adieu: at last they left their night Quarters, and came among their Guests,
with a new addition of their yesterdayes gallantry; and indeed in so noble a
garb were the young Ladies, and in so advantageous a dress, as if they designed
to make a conquest of Love as well as Courtesy to their already Prisoners.
Rodolphus and the Captain of the lost Vessel, though in their ordinary Habit,
yet were very pleasant and merry among them, and without offense took a freedom
befitting such company. The Lady of the house would needs have obliged
Rodolphus in the acceptance of a very noble suit of clothes, which were lately
made for her Husband, but never on his back, he being at London when they came
home; he could not out of civility but put them on, the importunities of the
Lady commanding it; but proving much too big for him, he gladly returned them
with thanks, for he had a real desire to see his own Relations in the condition
he was then in, believing to move some of them to a sorrow, especially those
whom he thought the cause of this mechanic Voyage. In this time Dinner was
providing, which being brought in, they broke up other discourses, and
exercised themselves one hour at least, at that which no less than their lives
were concerned in. Rodolphus took this opportunity, being altogether, to
declare his own and Companions thanks for all their generous obligations, and
then in his own behalf more particularly he made his application to his
Kinswoman, concluding with an earnest request that he might without
disobedience leave her; for notwithstanding no persons or company whatever
could be more satisfactory or deer to him than her self and the other Ladies,
yet the necessity of his parting was so extreme, that no persuasion whatever
could invite his l^nger stay; which the Ladies perceiving, they would not
longer load him with importunities, but after mutual and loving Embraces they
parted, our Travelers toward Bristol, and I verily believe the Gentlewoman to
her Closet, where with freedom she might vent her charitable sorrows for thus
parting with her poor Kinsman; but she was something satisfied with the
Captains assurance that he gave her at parting, which was, that he doubted not
of supplies sufficient to accommodate all their necessities when they arrived
at Bristol; for notwithstanding he was a stranger in that City, yet he believed
to meet with a Confident, who would answer his expectations, were it for
hundreds: this belief purchased the discontented Ladies satisfaction, thinking
her Cousin would find a better accommodation by the Captains assistance, than
by her neglected proffers; yet this mirror of goodness could not be at quiet
after Rodolphus was gone, but she must needs send a trusty Messenger after them
to observe those inconveniences she was jealous they would engage in; and
likewise gave orders, that if her Servant perceived they were disappointed in
their Bristol expectations, he should immediately proffer to furnish Rodolphus
with forty pounds to be at his dispose: thus marched our Travelers being
fourteen miles from Bristol, with the Ladies Servant following them
unperceived, and by their willingness they got to their journeys end that
night; they took up their quarters at a mean Alehouse, places of greater
repute refusing the entertainment of such naked Guests; the honest Servant
comes to the same house, took a room next to theirs, and diligently observed
and listened to their discourse, which he perceived full of admration and
thanks for his Mistresses civilities, and likewise full of sorrow and complaint
for their present miseries, being frustrated of all hopes of supplies in that
unacquainted City, by the late death of the Captains friend: this being
understood by the faithful Messenger, the next morning for our sorrowful
Travelers Breakfasts he gave them the comfortable news of his Mistresses
commands, and told Rodolphus, that if he refused her desired courtesy, she
should then have great cause of unkindness for him: this unheard of generosity
strangely obliged Rodolphus, and put him almost to his wits end, whether 'twere
best or not to receive this sum, doubting his disability of a punctual payment,
and so made guilty of the horriblest unhandsomness in the world, by abusing the
best of women; but now being absent from her, and necessity speaking aloud for
an acceptance, he thanked the Messenger, and told him, since his Cousins
commands were so, he dared not disobey her, especially being utterly unprovided
for any thing necessary toward his long Travels: this made the Servant go with
expedition where he was ordered to receive the money; he no sooner demanded it
but had it, and no sooner received it, but paid it to Rodolphus, who liberally
rewarded his honesty, and with a Letter full of acknowledgments sent him back
to his Mistress; and out of hand provided himself of a very handsome suit of
Clothes, and some good Linen, and furnished the Captain with twenty pound, who
accommodated the wants of his Seamen, and so they parted, Rodolphus to his
Fathers in Oxfordshire, the Seamen to their homes at London. What a redemption
providence has bestowed on our lately miserable wanderers, let the reader
judge; and if he thinks on it, and not admire it, I am deceived; for from a
wretched and distressed Beggar, in a place as incapable and destitute of
acquaintance as Virginia it self; from a poor and miserable slave in the
Indies, to be thus restored, not only to his former liberty and native Country,
but likewise delivered from such a horrid and dangerous shipwreck, and from a
naked and despicable poverty to a gallant and gentile equipage: I say this is
not only unparalled but miraculous. Rodolphus is on his march for
Oxfordshire, where he soon arrived; but 'twas in vain to aver his sufferings,
nor yet his losses; none admitting a belief by reason of his then gallantry,
for he made himself as fine as possible, and took Sir Walter Raleighs advice as
authentic, that all young men should rather endeavor an equipage above then
below their qualities; he needed not such a spur to prompt him to that which
his own inclinations always invited him unto, but more particularly at this
time; for extremes being commonly the Scenes and Parts of such Actors, he
thought he could not better quit the opinion of his late poverty, then by a
glorious and splendid show of gallantry, let the world see, that he could
become such a garb as well as his late rags: His Relations were full of hopes
and expectations of some considerable return from his long voyage: but they
soon understood his chiefest Riches and Merchandise to be on his back. About
this time our Queen Katharine arrived at Portsmoutb, and an Army was designed
for Portugal, the Lord Inchequeen being their General. This design was cried up
to the Skies, and extolled with such high Encomiums, that he had not the spirit
of a Gentleman, who would not testify his Loyalty by this foreign service.
Rodolphus had scarce rested his tossed and wearied Body at his Fathers house,
but he must once more expose himself to the mercy of that rugged Ocean which
lately had been so discourteous to him; and having a Relation that went a
Commander in this expedition, he got the consent (by perpetual importunities)
of his Parents, and listed himself in a Western Gentleman's Troop, which then
lay at Plymouth ready to take Shipping; and by the favor of his new Captain,
mustred a man: Being thus provided with a couple of able Geldings, and good
Clothes, and Money, he took Shipping with the rest of the Soldiers: and by the
favor of a fresh and moderate Gale they soon arrived at Lisbon, where they
found a plausible reception at their first landing, with Bonfires and ringing
of Bells, and many other tokens of outward Joy: some of the Officers and a few
young Gentlemen, at their first arrival landed at Lisbon, the residue of the
Army being transported farther in the Country. Among those that stayed behind
to have the advantage of seeing that famous City, was Rodolphus, whose
curiosity made him earnest for that liberty which easily was granted by his
Superiors; they dressed themselves at their first entrance into the City, with
all the advantages imaginable, and had the honor of kissing King Alphonsoes
hand; who seeing such a gallant Company, he pleasantly told them, that his
desires to his Brother, were (meaning the King of England) to accommodate him
with Soldiers to fight with the Spaniard, but he believed he had sent him his
Courtiers to kiss his Country-women. I verily believe, there was never a more
gallant party went out of England upon any design whatever, than were that
Regiment of Horse which Inchequeen commanded; of six hundred, there were at
least four hundred of them Gentlemen's Sons; they came into the Country full of
money and gallantry, and those which survived left it as full of poverty and
necessity: But they startled the Portuguees, and made that proud people
confess, that few Princes in Christendom, but must vail their Bonnet to
Britains King. I shall not insist upon any thing which is not directly to
Rodolphus's concerns; I shall wave therefore the giving any account of that
Brigado, or of their several marches and separations, with many eminent
adventures and transactions which happened among them, and prosecute our mark
with a diligent endeavor, not leaving him an hour without a strict observance
of his actions in this relation. Rodolphus was highly taken with Lisbon, he
admired the situation of it, with the noble Harbor and gallant appearance of
shiping, which was constantly riding under their very windows; he liked
extremly the several orders of the Religioses, both men and women, and was not
dissatisfied with their contraries the Temporals, whose Fashions and Customs,
with their plausible civilities, made them much esteemed by our young
Traveller: his chiefest exercise (whilst he continued at Lisbon) was the
hunting of the wild Bore; which heroic sport was much advanced by the Kings
presence, who seldom mist on Mondays and Thursdays those pleasant diversions:
his stay was not long there, because of that obligation all Soldiers are bound
unto by an unavoided residence; he therefore with two or three more of his
Comrades, makes what haste he can after the already marched Soldiers, but
withal took the advantage of seeing those Cities and other places of greatest
repute, which lay in or near their way: this caused their journey to be hugely
pleasant, never wanting variety of delightful objects to satisfy their
greediest curiosities; sometimes the religious Hermit, in his dark and
unfrequented Cell, would invite their going astray a mile or two, the tops of
Mountains or desolate Wildernesses being their usual places of abode; their
severe and rigid life, with a strange sequestration from the worlds concerns,
was not a little to be admired; their Diet and Lodging was as strange, feeding
on nothing but wild Fruits, and drinking nothing but spring water, wearing
nothing but a hairy Gown (and that next to their skins) nor lying on any thing
but green Turfs and withered leaves: thus the Hermit: Then their riding through
large and spacious Vineyards, thronged with stately Fig Trees and Mulberries,
with several other delicious Fruits, made them wish themselves perpetual
Pilgrims in these Elizian Fields. Sometimes would they go through brave and
sumptuous Groves of Olive Trees, so close and shady for many miles together,
that they proved great friends in so near a neighborhood, by keeping off the
scorching Sun from the melting Passenger: Then would they be extremely
delighted in the Orange and Lemon Groves, which pretty fruit seemed to outvie
one another in their amity, by nodding and bowing their yellow and sappy heads
to the gentle Traveller to pull and eat his fill; next would present to their
views the Citron and Pomgranet, who with a more surley and swarthy countenance
would tell them, that notwithstanding their sullen looks, yet their inside
exceeded the rest of their neighboring Kinsfolk both in taste and color; and
those that would not believe might try: Then the prickle Pares humility was
worth the taking notice of, spreading it self on the the ground, and subject to
the trample of every Ass; yet his goodness perhaps not inferior to those who
grow more proudly and loftier: what should I say, but in few words let you know
that our mother Earth seems to be delighted in nothing more then a plentiful
production of every thing which may contribute to the benefit and satisfaction
of her commonly ingrate children? the very mountains, the most desolate and
barbarous places of that Land, this generous mother clads them in a noble
Mantle, and attires them in no worse an equipage then the best of our English
Gardens; for there is no riding over any of those places, but of necessity
their Horses Feet must tred on, and bruise the tender Herbs and choice Flowers,
which grow so abundantly, that 'twould puzzle the best Herbalist or Flowerist
to give their names, and ^^aze them in their variety: The plenty likewise of
Herds of Goats, and other Cattle was considerable, the Shepherd of every Flock
being their proper owners, and attending them in such a careful, but musical
manner, that none could see them without a particular observation; they all
played on the Guittar and Cittern, and the irrational Animals prettily kept time
to their musical Notes: There was no Passenger, but with civility might be
welcome to a draught of Milk, which the Shepherd liberally bestowed on any that
desired it, having a little Cork Bucket fitting for such a purpose. Through
these delightful Objects pass our amazed Travelers, till they came to the
Frontiers of Portugal; which proved much more barren to that already known
Country which their late Travels had acquainted them with. The contin^^l Wars
between them and the Spaniard is the only cause of a scarcity in those parts,
the Soil and Clime being as good as in any other place of the Kingdom; but who
knows not what an enemy War is to Plenty? After Rodolphus's first arrival at a
considerable Frontier-Town called Estr^moss, he took up his Quarters, the
residue of that Troop he belonged to being there disposed of. As he went up the
Streets, it chanced that a Portuguez Nobleman took notice of him, and
immediately fancied him to resemble a Brother of his which died not long before
his coming thither; this Brother being very much beloved by Don Juan de Silva,
who is this Nobleman, caused him to give Rodolphus an invitation to his House,
and courteously told him, that if he pleased to accept the accommodation he
there found, the best which his house afforded, should freely be at his
service: this proved a civility very rare among those Country Gentlemen, whose
privileges exempt them from quartering Soldiers, and whose jealousy seldom
admits of hardly their relational Acquaintances to come to their houses.
Rodolphus therefore finding such an earnest Invitation, embraced it with
thanks, and with his Servant and Portmanteau, went to Don Juan's; where they
first found good Stabling for their Horses, and afterward as good Provision
for themselves: He found many conveniences (by Don Juan's continued
kindnesses) which the best of his Contrymen wanted; for there his Diet was
incomparably dressed, and always seasonable hours observed, and a Table so
plentifully spread, that Inchequeen himself would have envied the entertainment
of our young Traveller, could he have imagined his varieties to exceed so much
his own: but Rodolphus could not be satisfied with the uncivil custom which
they use to their Wives and Sisters, nay to their Mothers themselves; for they
never admit them to sit down at Table with them, nor never so much as drink
with them; they keep them at so strange a distance, that their Wives must not
lie with them but when they send for them, and then not above an hour or two; a
stranger must not look on them, nor speak to them: which made Rodolphus at
first commit many errors, being ignorant of their mode: he was often in Don
Juan's House so mistaken with talking and drinking, and other familiarities
among the Gentlewomen, that had it not been Rodolphus, he had found a
chastisement far exceeding his crimes, yet answerable to the Portuguees
jealousies; but the great love his noble Patron had for him, made him take no
notice of his actions, or at least past them by with a prudent carelessness;
yet not so unconcerned, but that Rodolphus soon found his mistake, and by
degrees weaned himself so much from his English Fashions, that he became almost
a Portuguez; which made him enjoy with the greater freedom the advantages that
his noble quarters afforded him: he never had a Napkin twice, nor a Towel two
days together; he never lay in Sheets above a week, nor never wanted the best
conveniences that the curiosity of the better sort of that Country enjoyed: he
continued six months at least at Don Juans House, and lived in so great a
plenty and gallantry, that the best of the English Brigade came far short in
their accommodations, although they paid dear for it. But the time of action
draws on, and a summons given for a speedy preparation to a Campaigne life: the
Spaniard is already in the field, and doing considerable mischiefs, which makes
the greater haste for a general Muster; Rodolphus takes leave of his beloved
Landlord, and tenders with earnestness a retaliation of his kindness; he would
willingly have satisfied Don Juan for the great charge himself, Servant, and
Horses had put him unto; but he could fix nothing on him with all his
Rhetoric, but found a free-Quarters for that long residence; and at his
farewell this noble person bestowed several conveniences and provisions on
Rodolphus, suitable for a Campaignes want; he accepted only of an English
Rapier, and that by perpetual importunities. But time calls away, which
enforces Rodolphus's march, for by this time the Spaniard had possessed himself
of one of the most considerable Cities in Portugal, called by the name of
Ebora; whether the success of that bold achievement was by the Spanish valor
or Portuguez treachery, I will not now question; but certain I am, that the
loss of this City did not only surprise, but likewise startle and discourage
the whole Army at the news of it: but Don Zancho a Portugal, and Conde
Chombergh a Frenchman, being both wise and resolute men, and Generalissimos of
the Portugal Forces, did by their discreet conduct quickly regain their lost
City, and in a great and bloody fight overthrew the Spanish Army with such a
general rout, that the whole plunder of the field, with all their bag and
baggage, and thousands of their lives paid for their late bold attempt: the
resolutions and valor of the English Brigade, was not a little instrumental in
this great Victory, although the ingrate Portugal would not acknowledge it. I
shall however wave their continued and treacherous baseness which they always
showed to the English Army, which deservedly merited their best esteem; and
only let you know, that in the fight there were lost no less than four hundred
of the English Cavalry, the whole number being but six hundred; which miserable
rack caused the poor Englishmen to return with hoarse Trumpets and dead-beating
Drums, notwithstanding a certain and absolute Victory: Rodolphus at that time
was Cornet of Horse, but after the fight there were left more Officers than
private Soldiers, the number of that gallant Regiment being reduced to one
small Troop: this caused a general endeavor by those that survived, to bestow
themselves in other capacities, and list among the English Infantry; some got
commands by vacancies which the engagement caused; among which by the favor of
Colonel James Apsly, Rodolphus got a Commission for Captain of Foot, in which
he continued for some months, till the fortune of War made him Prisoner to the
Spaniard; whose noble and heroic civilities obliged Rodolphus so much, that he
fully determined at his releasement to quit his command, and never engage
himself more against a Nation which proved so far exceeding in all worth and
honor, to those he before hazzarded his life for: he with three or four more
Englishmen were taken by a party of Spanish Horse, when they least thought
on it, and in the midst of their recreations, being merrily flinging Oranges at
one another in a pleasant Grove near Estremos, a Frontier Town in Portugal:
Whilst they were thus diverting themselves, the Spaniards came rattling in
amongst them, and immediately disarm them, and carry them all away to a City
called Batajos in Castile, where as Enemies they were honorably entertained;
and during their confinement, they found all the courtesies and respect that
could be imagined from their greatest friends; they had their liberty to walk
where they pleased on their paroll, only a Keeper with them; and after six
weeks imprisonment, by way of Exchange they were restored to their former
liberty; and after their arrival among their former Associates, Rodolphus
immediately resigned his command, and took shipping at Lisbon, with a fair and
prosperous Gale, which soon brought them to Dover, where he took Posthorses
for London; but at his arrival there, he found all his Relations gone, which
made him make what haste possible to his Fathers in Oxfordshire, his stock
being then but very small. His Friends were a little surprised at his first
coming home, his return being so sudden, and his equipage so mean; but they
soon considered his former adventures to be much after the same manner, and
where ever he went (though never so well provided) yet the best account of his
profit was always mean and poor: they all very well knew, that when he left
England, his accoutrements for Habit, and Horses, with money in his pocket,
stood his Father in little less then 200 l. yet they soon perceived all the
clothes on his back not to be worth two pence, and all the money in his pocket
not amounting to 6 pence; but in health and in wealth, in poverty and in
sickness, Rodolphus still found a most loving and indulgent Father: he now
returns like the true Prodigal, especially in one sense, having eat and fed on
Acrons in his Portuguez hardships. After some months residence among his
Friends, he begins once more to work at the rough and hard Anvil of the Law, he
keeps the Terms, is called to the Bar, and for a time goes on with delight; but
he now meets with a rub, which usually overturns more serious and fixed intents
then his own; he is by Friends advised to a Mistress, and his own inclinations
invite him to another; here is a Scilly and Carybdis, which certainly Rodolphus
can never escape without a miserable shipwreck: This takes him off from all his
new begun studies; now he begins once more to lash out, and designs his
courtship braveries so high, that he quickly found the inconveniency of such
excesses; he cares not for the party whom his Friends recommend him unto, nor
she which his own fancy leads him to, cares not for him. Thus we see poor
Rodolphus miserably tossed in Loves Blanket: he knows not how to fly or get out
of this new confinment, but by traveling once more; he tries that way, and
takes the opportunity of seeing Ireland, where yet he had never been; he
traverses all parts of that Country, and hoped his absence would have defaced
or at least diminished the intent of Relations or his own Affections; he
returns after a twelve-months travel in that naked, yet plentiful Country; but
finds his Mistress still continues in his esteem, and his friends still in
their resolves: He flies obedience to pursue love, but begins to wish he had
fled love to pursue obedience; he lives in a timorous suspense for some months,
till a continued disregard from his Admiress, began first to cool his amorous
flame, and at last clearly quenched it. Being free from the very worst of
captivities, he once more resolves to follow his Studies, and in obedience to
his Fathers commands, he repairs to London; where at his Chamber in the
Inner Temple he continued with an unconcerned industry, till going to see a
relation of his at Hammersmith, he there finds another Devota; his fancy began
to work Chimaeras, and in the midst of his most serious thoughts, such idle
Ideas would present themselves before him, that it hugely disquietted his then
contentment: he knew the danger of that malady he so lately to his hurt
underwent, and he was very sensible that a relapse was more dangerous than the
first infection; he therefore endeavors to disengage himself from that growing
inconveniency, and in time to nip that inevitable evil in the bud; his desires
were not in vain executed; for he lived with a very great indifferency, and his
actions and demeanours clearly testified his disesteem of any thing but his
Book: he could see his quondam Mistress without concern, and could be in her
company without the least appearance of Loves discovery: this made Rodolphus
live hugely c^ntented at his Sisters House in Hammersmith; till a Gentlewoman,
which the Heavens had decreed to be his, came thither; the first sight of her
assured him she was born to be his, and his real affections to her confirmed
him in the belief of it: he misseth no time in prosecuting his suit, nor from
the beginning will never admit of a denial; his endeavors are with success,
for in less than two months he proved to be her Admirer, her Servant, and her
Husband. Now it is time to sing a Requiem, not only to Rodolphus's Travels and
uncertain ramblings, but to this Discourse, which notwithstanding it be
illiterate and imperfect, yet the Truth and Reality of it I hope will find an
acceptance from those who bestow the perusal on Youth's Inconstancy.

FINIS.

