THE PLEA, CASE, AND Humble Proposals Of the Truly-Loyal and Suffering OFFICERS.



LONDON: Printed for the Truly-Loyal and Suffering OFFICERS: March 30. 1663.

To the Right Honorable the LORDS, And to the Honorable the COMMONS Assembled
in PARLIAMENT.
May it Please Your Honors,
IT is not the King's Party, but His Cause, that lies now at your Feet: and the
Question is Briefly but This: Whether or no, from this time forward, Loyalty in
an Englishman shall be Reputed a Crime or a Virtue? Our Comfort is, that we
have the Authority of the Nation, for our Protection; the Justice of it, for
our Judges; the Wisdom, Vote, and Interest of it, for our Advocates: and This
Address is but an Appeal from the Inquity of our Oppressors, to the Piety of
our Governors. We shall not trouble your Honors with Compleynts against a
General Corruption; (how- True, and Dangerous-soever) but content our selves
with a Particular Case, wherein the Parties to this Paper are Peculiarly
Concerned, and only Relievable by Your Honorable Aid, and Authority Which
Case, in short, is This

There appear so many Pretenders to the Sixty Thousand Pounds, etc. lately
Granted by His Majesty, at Your Honors Request, for the Relief of the
Truly-Loyal, and Indigent Officers, that without a strict Examination of the
Certificates, the King, the Kingdom, and the Party, will be Deceived of Half
the Money. This Inconvenience was Prudently foreseen by the Honorable, the
Commissioners Appointed for the Distribution of it; who thereupon Directed the
Regimenting, and Printing of the Certificates in Order to a Review: which Vote
was no sooner Past, but Presently Hands were Gathered to call for a Present
Dividend; (Although as yet there were not above Five Thousand Pounds in the
Treasury) Some Honest Gentlemen were Drawn into This Petition, who now see
Their Error; and that the Scope of it was, by a Confusion of all Qualities,
and Interests, to Hinder a Discovery.

Those Interruptions being at length Removed, and the Book Perfected, and
Printed; by the Express Approbation of His Sacred Majesty; The License of a
Principal Secretary of State; and the Unanimous Allowance of the Commissioners
aforesaid; We do most Humbly Crave leave to Acquaint Your Honors, that there
is Great Industry still Employed, to frustrate the Effects of it by Disgracing
the Thing it self, and by Hastening a Distribution, before we can Reap the Fruit
of the Intended Inspection: When yet The Abuse is so Gross, and Palpable, that
not Any Man that has ever born Office in the King's Army, but can Point to the
very Particulars, and say [This Officer has been dead This Seven-year. [That
never had any Commission. [A Third never had any Men. [This left the Party and
Served the Enemy, etc.] So that, finally, only. Those will be Gainers by a
Sudden Distribution, that would be Losers by an Inspection. Nay, so Unfortunate
we are, that it has been several times Refused us to Enter an Advertisement of
This List into the News-Book, which is the only Public, and Common way of
Notice.

All These Cross Circumstances put together, have driven us upon a Necessity
of Saying Something to do our selves Right; and That Is the only Scope of our
Plea, Case, and Proposals, which, with all Dutiful Reverence, are the Subject
of This Dedication. The First Part Containing our Answers to several
Objections, touching the Reason of our Proceedings. The Second Part is Chiefly
a Report of Fact, to Vindicate us in Point of Modesty. The Third Consists of
Certain Proposals, which we rather commit to the Motions of Providence upon
Your Hearts, then Presume in any Degree to Press upon Your Inclinations. If we
have Offended in Point of Form, we are Ready, with all Dutyful Submissions, to
Acknowledge our Offense: For Although the Indignation, to see our Selves bought
and sold like Slaves, and Practiced upon by every Knight of the Post, may
Possibly Divert us from the Regular Method of Good Manners; Yet, where the
Question is either Duty to Your Authority, or Gratitude to Your most Generous
Obligations; we shall much rather Lose the Remnant of our Miserable Lives, then
Fail of any Proof which may Demonstrate the Truly-Loyal and Suffering
Officers, to be of All Others

In the most Inviolable Bonds, and Resolves of Reverence, and Obedience At Your
Honors Devotion Robert Croft
In the Name of the Rest.
The Truly-Loyall OFFICERS PLEA, etc.
THere is a Book lately Printed under This Title:

[A List of Officers Claiming to the Sixty Thousand Pounds, etc. Granted by His
Sacred Majesty for the Relief of His Truly-Loyall and Indigent Party.

Which List is made Public, by the Consent, and at the desire of the
Honorable the Commissioners Appointed by Act of Parliament for Distribution of
the said Moneys.] To which must be added, that This List is Published by the
Kings Express Allowance, and Licensed by His Majesty's Chief Secretary of
State.

It will now seem Needless, perhaps, or worse, To plead the Cause of an Act,
Executed by so Ample, Solemn, and Unquestionable Authority; unless we first
acquaint the World, that, notwithstanding This Authority, great Endeavors are
Used, to Blast, and Discredit the Proceeding: Every Stationer's Shop being
Buzzed with Arguments against the Thing: mostly (as in Charity we believe) out
of Mistake, or Misenformation; but not a little also, out of Project, and
Design; for, there are very many Persons, whose Interest it is to Suppress the
List, as the Evidence and Story of their Own Crimes: Whereas, on the Other
side, it is as much the Behoof of the Truly-Loyall to Promote the Ends of This
Book, as it is for the Benefit of their Opposers to Destroy the Fruits of it:
Since not only the Reputation, and Wellbeing of the Party, but the Cause it
Self lies at Stake, and (to speak with Reverence, and Modesty) the Honor and
Safety both of the King, and Kingdom, are Concerned in the Consequence of This
Miscarriage. The Grounds of which Opinion, we shall as frankly submit to the
Censure of Others, as we readily Engage against Their Objections to Acquit our
Selves. Which Objections we shall Undertake in the first place: and They are
(according to the best of our Enformation) in Sum, and Weight, as follows.

Object. 1.
FIrst; The Printed List of Officers, Exposes the Royal-Party to have Their
Throats Cut, in Case of an Insurrection, which was the Compounders Case in the
days of the Committee of Safety, when upon Printing a List of Their Names, it
was proposed, that the whole Party might be Massacred.

Answ. 1.
FIrst; It is a Charge upon the King, to suggest that His Party are in the same
Danger now, under his Majesty's Protection, which they were formerly in, under
the Persecutors of His Royal-Father.

Secondly; By the same Reason, All his Majesty's Loyal-Subjects, must either
wear Vizors, or Hide their Heads, when the King's in Danger (for Men are better
known by their Faces, than by their Names) and what Mischief soever Threatens
the Royal-Party, is but in order to the Destruction of the King-Himself.

Thirdly; The Members that Voted This Money, and the Commissioners that are to
Distribute it, All Their Names are Printed; and where is the Greater Hazard of
Printing Their Names too that are to Receive it?

Object. 2.
IT is a Dishonor for so many Persons of Quality to be Published for Indigent:
besides the Inconvenience of being Laid open to their Creditors, and the loss
of other Preferments, by being known to be Necessitous.

Answ. 2.
FIrst; The very Act require that They be Publicly Certify'd, and Publicly
Registered as Persons that have not a sufficient Livelihood; so that as to the
Point of Publishing Their Indigency, the Thing is done Already.

Secondly; Touching the supposed Dishonor of being known to be Poor, let it be
considered, That every Man's Loyalty and his Poverty are Recorded together: and
certainly, no Person of Honor will Think it any shame, to Proclaim to the
world, that He has spent his Fortunes in the Service of a Prince, that laid
down his Life for the Preservation of His People.

Another Branch of This Objection is, concerning the Consequence of appearing
Necessitous; which, in This Particular, we are so far from fearing, that we
Reckon the Enlisting of our Names upon a Public Roll, to be the only Secure
and Honorable way of Redemption, whereof our Condition is Capable.

First, as to our Creditors; our fair, and warrantable Debts, do, by such a
Record, become virtually the Debts of the Nation; and they are Effectually so
Acknowledged, both by the King, and Kingdom, in the late Act of Parliament,
where it is Declared, For the Perpetual Memory of the Eminent Deservings of the
Loyal Party, and for the Encouragement of Loyalty to future Ages, that Their
great Services and Sufferings exceed all possibility of present Compensation,
from a Kingdom Exhausted by the Rapine and Oppression of a long Rebellion.]From
whence it appears, that Our Necessities are but Dependent upon the Necessities
of the Public. Shall the Kings Party now be Ashamed to Publish Their Wants,
when His Sacred Majesty is Content to Confess His Own? or, What better Security
can our Creditours, either Wish, or Expect, than to find us Recommended (as in
another place we are) to future Employment and further Reward? (which will
Enable us to satisfy them). And This Recommendation will be most Solemn, and
Effectual, upon a Public and Inspected List: Whereas, otherwise, for the
shadow of a Reputative Disgrace, we quit the substance of a lasting, and
monumental Honor: Concealing our Disease, out of a scruple at the Remedi; till
at last, we Perish One by One, unknown;
and the whole Party sinks by degrees, into a Condition both Wretched, and
Ridiculous.

Again; that the Printing of our Names, should be any Hinderance to our
Preferments (without the greatest Indignity possible to his Majesty) is the
Thing we cannot upon any Terms either Admit, or Comprehend.

If we Consider the Party; take their Character, in the Preamble to the late
Act for their Relief. It is That Loyal Party, Which through all Hazzarde and
Extremities, in the Defense of the Kings Person, Crown, and Dignity, the Rights
and Privileges of Parliament; the Religion Laws, and Honor of the English
Nation did bear Arms by the Command of His Late Majesty of ever Blessed
Memory, according to their Duty, and the known Laws of this Land; and did with
an Unwearied Courage, Faith, and Constancy with their Lives and Fortunes,
Oppose that Barbarous Rebellion raised against His Most Excellent Majesty, in
the year 1642. -- That Loyal Party, Which after the Horrid Murder of Their
late Glorious King with the same Uigorous and Active Loyalty asserted the
Rights and Interests of his Royal Successor, and with the same Restless Zeal
Opposed all succeeding Usurpations, until His Sacred Majesty Returned in Peace
and Triumph, etc. Will it binder any Man's Preferment now to have his Name
affixt to This Character? Where Is the Gratitude, and Justice of the Nation? If
Those Persons that have Ruined Themselves in the service of the Public, shall
fare the worse for being known to have done their Duties? Where Is the Wisdom
of the Nation, if it be rendered more Beneficial to subvert the Government, than
to uphold it; and if the Reward of Struggling with all Hazzards, and
Misfortunes, to preserve the Laws, must be either Reproach, or loss of
Preferment, to such as shall appear to have been undone in the Contest? Lastly;
Where Is the Faith, and Honor of the Nation; if, after a Parliamentary
Declaration for the Encouragement of Loyalty, People should speed the worse,
for being Published to have been the Eminent and Miserable Assertours of it? So
that the Community is clearly of us, With us, and For us. We Will now Advance
our Argument a little higher.

Shall we lose our Hopes; and Preferments, if we be once known to be Poor, upon
so Public, and Noble an Account? This Objection vanishes for ever, when we
Reply, that The King is the Fountain of all Considerable Honors, and
Preferments; and that He is a Pious, a Prudent, a Just, and a Gracious Prince?
What is our Unhappiness even at this Instant, but the want of such a Roll as is
now the Question? We do not speak of a List of Enquiry, which is only Previous
to Another, and serves but to Discriminate the Right and Wrong; but of a Tried
and Examined List of such Officers as have stood the utmost Test of Misery, and
Persecution Nor is this any new Thing:

Ro^ Parl. 11. H. 6. m. 6.
Forasmuch as there be many Old Servants, and feeble; that have Dispended their
Youth in the service of my Lords, my Grandfather, Father, and Brother, whose
souls God assoile; and also with my Lord that now is, whom God given good life
and long, some without any Livelihood or Goterdon, so that they be now in great
Mischief, and Necessity, and some but easily Guerdoned, and naught like to
their Desert and Service: Wherefore I desire that there may be a BOOK made of
all the NAMES of such as have so Served, and been Hnguer doned, or naught
Guerdoned like to their Desert, to the Intent, when Offices, and Corodies fall,
that they might be given to such Persons; they having Consideration to the
Ability of them, and to the time that they have served, in the same wise as of
Benefices to Clerks.

Henry the Fourth of France, did for the Relief of such as had been Maimed,
Wounded, or Beggered in his Service, Grant by an Irrevocable

EDICT.
Edict July 7. 1606. Jean de Serres Hist. Franc. page 1218.
The Royal House of Christian Charity, and the Money growing upon the Remainder
of Accounts of Hospitals, Almes-Houses, Leprous-Houses, and other such
Companies, and of the Usurpations, and Alienations of the Revenues thereof,
Revisions of the Accounts, and Abuses and Disorders committed in the
Government, and Administration of the said Places, together with the Money
which should arise of the Places, and Pensions of Religious Laymen, in every
Abbey and Priory of his Realm, being in his Majesty's Nomination.

The Consideration of the Horse was referred to the Duke of Montmorency; and of
the Foot, to the Duke of Espernon, who were to make A LIST of the Persons, and
to note in the Margin what Annual Pensions every man might merit, according to
his Quality, Valor, and Wounds.

Was a List of the Truly-Loyal, and Indigent-Subjects of the Kings Progenitors
thought so necessary, and Beneficial to Them; and is it not much more Expedient
for the Subjects of His Sacred Majesty now in Being? To suppose that ever any
Prince had more Tenderness and Mercy in his Inclination, were to Blaspheme the
greatest Goodness in Nature: and on the other side, Malice it self will not
pretend, that ever any Subjects made it more appear, that Their Duties and
their Souls were Inseparable, than That Party which are the present Matter in
Question. So that, in Fine, We want nothing in the world, but a List of our
Names, in the Kings view, to do our business.

Shall his Majesty but vouchsafe barely to look upon us in our Misfortunes? we
have His Natural Clemency to Plead for us. But when it shall descend to
Consider, that even These Rags had the Honor to Contribute somewhat toward
His due Establishment, and Glory; His Royal Justice will not (with Reverence)
Permit Him, having relieved, and fixed all other Interests, to suffer ours alone
to lie Disconsolate and Hopeless.

Does the King need Loyal Officers? Such a List as we propose, furnishes His
Majesty with Those that want Employments; and, Whom will his Royal Wisdom
rather trust, than such as with their Lives and Fortunes, first served his
Royal Father, till they were Commanded to Render and Disband; and after That,
with a Fidelity Inviolable, Pressed through all Hazards and Temptations, until
the settlement of His Sacred Majesty in His undoubted Birthright. In short,
upon the whole Matter, it is Impossible for us to be in His Majesty's Eye, and
not in His Care. But there is Another Objection, that

Object. 3.
IT would Reflect upon the King, to have it known, that so many Loyal Officers
are left without a Livelihood.

Answ. 3.
IF it would Reflect upon the King, to have it known that we are left without a
Livelihood; It will do his Majesty Right, to make it known that we are provided
for; and a Printed Roll of Their Names to whom the King has already Granted
something, and Promised more, is a Public Evidence both of His Majesty's
Present Grace and Favor, and of his further Bountiful Intentions.

Again, To that part of the Objection, that so many are left unconsider'd, A
Printed List will Lessen the Number.

3ly Without a Printed List, Our Distress will be Imputed to the King, though
it be our own Fault; for his Majesty is not Obliged to take notice of our
Particular Necessities by Divination.

Object. 4.
MOst of the Commissioners are Parliament Men, and the Publishing of this List,
is in a manner to Arraign the House of Commons, for having Certifi'd so many
unwarrantable Persons.

Answ. 4.
There Is a Great Difference betwixt Members of the House in a Committee of
Parliament, and Members of the House Joined in Commission with Others by Act of
Parliament; where they sit, not as Members, but as Commissioners. But to
something that is more Pertinent.

Let it be Noted, that the Commissioners are directed to Certify, as the
Matter appears to Them; and according to the best of their Knowledge: which
Certification amounts to no more, (unless they speak upon a positive Averrment)
than the Recommending of an Officer upon a Credible Information; wherein there
is neither required a Certainty of the Thing, nor an Infallibility in the
Person. So that the Crime lies Evidently in the Fraud of That Report, whereupon
each Respective Certificate was obtein'd; and without any color of Reflection
upon the Commissioner that Granted the Certificate. (for it is no Dishonor to
be Deceived, where it is Impossible to be Certain.)

Again, since to be Deceivable, is but to be a Man; it can be no Fault, or
Shame to be Mistaken, What will the Objector say now to his Own Argument, when
he perceives the Point of it turned upon Himself? It Is suggested that, A
Printed List Asperses the House of Commons; and yet it is manifest, (since
Mistakes go for nothing) that no Reproach can arise from This Matter, to the
Disadvantage of Any Man, which is not Grounded upon Express Confederacy, and
Practice.

We have said already what we conceive needful, as to our Opponent's General
Objections; but there are some Particulars yet behind, which we cannot
conveniently let pass without a Reply: and They concern, First, (in the List it
self) the Person that Composed it; and, in the Next Place, Those Officers for
whose Benefit, He has given Himself That Trouble.

Touching the Book, it is Whispered and Fomented that, There are many Officers
left out, and Misrepresented; that, The Method of it is not clear; and in
short, that, The whole Thing is Ineffectual. To which we Answer.

First, that we do not hear of any man left out, beside Those mentioned in the
Errata, save only (by the Clerks Fault in the last Transcript) Colonel WILLIAM
HAWLY, a Colonel of Foot under the Marquess of Newcastle; which Oversight, the
Gentleman that Disposed the Papers, Acknowledges with great Respect to that
worthy Person: But so, as taking upon Himself only the Order of the Copy,
without undertaking for the Corrector of the Press. It Is True, there are many
Field-Officers wanting, which some People are willing should be understood not
only as a Defect in the Book, but as an utter Exclusion to Those that are left
out: Whereas the Truth is This; The Officers are to be Tried by Their
Certificates; and this Printed List is Only to show Them in their Counties,
Qualities, and Regiments, for the more easy and open Inspection.

It will be fit likewise to Clear the other Mistake concerning the
Field-Officers that are Omitted; to whom it may be Given to understand, that
the Last Allowance for the Press did precisely Prohibit the Printing of any
Field-Officer, but such as should desire it. Whereupon, a Matter of a Hundred
Gentlemen (being at that time about, or near the Town, and taking Notice of
That Order) Entered Their Names, and are Printed accordingly.

To the second Exception, Concerning Mistakes in the Press; They are not much
versed in Books, that look for none; Especially in a Copy of This Nature; where
there is neither Reason, nor Coherence to Guide the Compositor; and where,
withal, there is scarce any one word that is not of a Nice, and Particular
Import: to which must be added, the Confusion, and Errors of the Papers whence
This List was Extracted; together with the Intricacy of the Thing it self, and
the necessary Have in the Dispatch of it. Nor must it be forgotten, that very
many of the Original Certificates are Interlin'd, and with a Differing Hand,
and Ink, from that which wrote the Body of them (which may fairly enough be
presumed to have been done since the signing, and sealing. These Circumstances
duly Considered, it is no wonder to find some Mistakes, and yet (saving those
which are Corrected in the Errata) we meet with few or none. Material, that we
can Charge upon the Transcript.

Touching the Obscurity of the Method; It will suffice that any man that can
but Read, may Enform Himself in the Advertisement: and that in the Alphabet of
the Book, He is to look for the Regiment he desires, as the Table directs him
to the Certify'd Officer.

The Last Exception is, that The List is Ineffectual; which is confuted by a
Demonstration of the Contrary, in the Discovery it has already produced.

In the Next Place, to the Folly of this List, comes to be suggested the Malice
of it; and That, without any Regard at all to Those Powers, that have both
Approved and Authorized it. It is Point Blank Affirmed, that This List is only
His Design that put it together, to cast an Odium upon the King, and to work
Himself into a Faction. Concerning which, the Gentleman Himself has Conjured
Us, not to put on so much as a serious Look, upon so Innocent a Scandal:
wherefore we let that Question fall, touching His Particular. But the Brand of
Faction upon the Generality of the Truly-Loyal and suffering. Party; the Charge
of Mutiny, and Disobedience, to the Authority of Parliament: (for This is the
Language that we are of late accustomed to; if we but Modestly solicit and
endeavor, that the Bounty which His Majesty Only Intended for His Friends; may
not be divided amongst His Enemies) -- These are Imputations which we cannot
but in Honor take Notice of, so far as Consists with our Duty to the King, and
to the Law; and rather than pass That Limit, we shall not Refuse to Lay our
Necks, at the Feet, even of our Meanest, and Unkindest Adversaries; with which
Caution and Modesty before us, we shall now Proceed to a Brief State of our
Case.

The CASE.
SO soon as His Sacred Majesty had Past the Two Bills for the Relief of His
Truly-Loyal and Indigent Party, and Prorogued the Parliament, The Commissioners
Appointed Act of Parliament, for the Menage and Distribution of That Bounty,
Applied Themselves with all Care, and Diligence, to the Advancement, and
dispatch of That Affair. Particularly, the Honorable the Commissoners siting
in the Star Chamber (by Virtue of the Aforesaid Act, and to the Ends aforesaid)
Observing, and being Enform'd, that Diverse Certificates were artificially
Introduced, and that many other Practices, and Forgeries had been Attempted
upon the Commissioners, found it Convenient to make use of a Certain Number of
select Officers, of known Integrity, and of General Acquaintance in His Late
Majesty's Armies, to Assist them in the discovery of Unqualify'd Pretenders;
which Officers, being both Nominated, and Empowered by the said Commissioners,
did accordingly Assemble and Proceed in Form, and under the Name of a Committee
for Inspections: Which Committee being afterward dissolved, and Their
Proceedings Vacated; It will not be Incongruous either to Order, or Good
Manners, if for the clearing of our Cause, we touch upon some Passages Then and
There in Debate.

This Committee was by its Constitution to Consist of a Chosen Number of
Commission Officers Additional to as many Commissioners of Parliament as should
think fit to be There. Their Power was only Preparatory, and their first Order
was to Consider of a Method to prevent the passing of undue Certificates; and
to Report their Proceedings therein upon the Tuesday following to the
Star Chamber. Instead of Framing This Method (which in Course was the first
thing should have been done) some Considerable time was spent upon
Certificates; effectually, without any Method at all, save only that the
Colonels were to be first, and the Rest to follow in their Turns; and All to be
put to a present Vote, Whether they should Stand or Fall. This manner of
Proceeding begat: many Heats, Disorders, and Delays, for want of an Impartial
Rule, whereby to Judge of every Man according to his Respective Glayme, and
Qualification: till in the End, Experiment and Prudence moved the Gentlemen to
Consider of a Certain Standard, that should determine all Niceties in Question:
which was no sooner Agreed upon but it was Regularly submitted, and Reported to
the Star Chamber, Consisting in substance of These Particulars following.

He that has not Any way deserted his Loyalty and Duty to the Late King, or his
present Majesty in Their Wars (which are the words of the Act,) or (as in
another Place) that has served the Late King, and his present Majesty through
the whole Course of the Late Wars; * That Person is within the Meaning of
[Truly-Loyal.]

The Standard for [Indigence,] was Four hundred Found (in proportion to an
Annuity of Fifty or Threescore.).

A Real Command] for a Colonel of Horse, was stated at Two-Hundred; for a
Captain, at Thirty Horse: For a Colonel of Foot, at Three-Hundred men; for a
Captain, at Forty. They offered likewise, what Officers they conceived to have
a Real Command of Soldiers according to their Commisions, and proposed a
Regimental Order, as the aptest Method, in their Opinion, for Inspection.

While Matters were in Motion toward this hopeful Period, there Intervened
another Question not to be omitted, and it was occasioned by somewhat that fell
from the Lips of a worthy Gentleman (having at that time the Chair) which was,
that There were Seaven-Thousand and Five-Hundred Officers Certify'd, upon which
Computation (Reckoning Those that are probably Dead since -- 46, and Those that
are known to have Deserted, together with Those that do not Claim) the late
King must be supposed to have lost his Crown at the Head of above
Twelve-Hundred Thousand men. The Effects which This Overture wrought upon the
Truly-Loyal, and Suffering Party (especially proceeding from a Person that
spoke with Authority, and upon Knowledge) were no other, than as so many Lines
drawn to a Point; Every man pressing (though with various Reasons) to the same
end [PRINTING,] as the only means to Purge and Reduce that Prodigious-List; and
which way soever they looked, they met with Arguments, both of Honor, and of
Necessity to Pursue it; and still the more narrowly they Considered, the more
forcible they found those Arguments. The Case They Reasoned Thus:

THe Kingdom has presented His Majesty, and His Majesty has, at their Request,
Graciously Bestowed upon His Truly-Loyal, and suffering Officers, a
Considerable Sum of Money, with an Express Limitation of it, to the Use and
Behoof of such Persons. Shall Cromwell's Guards now be Admitted to the Reward,
and Character of Loyalty? or shall His Majesty's Bounty, that was directed
singly to His Dutiful Servants, be Applied in Common to the Murderers of His
Father? Shall Treason, and Loyalty, be supported by the same Hand? Or shall
Those Gentlemen that ever Valued Their Honors before Their Lives be subjected
now at Last to mingle Their Names with men of Desperate and Infamous
Forfeitures? And yet all This must be done without a strict Examination of This
Blended List. Upon the whole, The King's Intentions are Frustrated, His Charity
Misemploy'd, His Loyal Servants Defrauded, His Enemies Supplied, Loyalty is
Disheartn'd, and Disobedience Encouraged: beside the Profusion of the Public
Treasure; the Hazard of His Majesty taking His Enemies, for His Friends; and
finally, beside the sad Consequence of Condemning a Party that has been Loyal
beyond all President, to be Miserable beyond all Example (which must needs
follow upon the Admittance of so many Sharers to This Money.)

To these Arguments (in Order to the Press). It was Replied, that the King had
Positively declared Himself against it. Whereupon, (in Confidence that if so it
were, it proceeded only from a Misrepresentation of the Thing) The Gentlemen
drew up their Reasons, and Tendered Them to the Star Chamber, with their
desires, that his Majestle's Pleasure might be more Particularly besought
concerning That Matter. Upon which they past a Vote, and a Person of Eminent
Honor and Modesty, Attended the King with the Humble Request of the
Commissioners; to whom, upon the first Overture, His Majesty was pleased to
express Himself, that there was much to be said both for, and against it;
Demanding withal, What Number the Certificates might amount to? It was
Answered, that They were Reputed to be about Six or Seven Thousand. Whereupon,
His Majesty Replied, that it must needs be a great Abuse then; and that it
would be so much Money thrown away, if it came to be divided into so many
shares; in the Conclusion; remitting the Business wholly to the Commissioners.
Upon the Report of which Gracious Return, the Honorable the Commissioners past
a Vote for the Print, and soon after, Another for the Method, and Two more
after That, the One in Allowance of the Book, and the Other of the Praeface,
wherewith His Majesty was again Acquainted and Approved it.

So that at length, by the Mediation of all honorable Aids, Agreements, and
Authorities, we are possessed of the List; which we find, as we Expected; (save
that it falls nigh Two-Thousand short of the first Computation) In This List,
we meet with Diverse Officers that have been long Dead; several that never
served the King at all; others that left, and fought against Him. Beyond These
Gross Abuses we do not presume to Meddle; and These are a sort of People, with
Whom we should be very loath to appear in the same Livery. Concerning
Commission-Officers within the Act: whatshall be Reputed a sufficient
Livelihood; what a Desertion; or what Measure Those Pesons are to receive, that
claim to a Higher Command then in strictness they Executed: Touching These
Particulars, we Interpose no further then in our wishes, that there may be no
Point strained, to the Disadvantage of any Man that has faithfully, and
Honorably served His Majesty: for it is not our desire to augment our
Particular Shares, by Grating upon our Fellows, but rather (so far as Consists
with the most Favorable sense of the Act,) that all such as joined, and
Continued, in the same Cause, and Service, may likewise be Joined, and
Considered in the Reward. Within This Compass we Reckon it our Duty to Contain
our selves; and thankfully to acknowledge the Prudence, Justice, Tenderness,
and unwearied Pains of Those Honorable Persons, who are Commissioned for our
Relief; by the Benefit of whose Favors, being now brought within View of what
we have so long, and so earnestly desired; we find at last Another Scruple
Injected; Which is; that All Certificates signed by Five Commissioners at a
Public Meeting, are Concluding; which Nicety is Principally Urged by such as
have no other Title to the Benefit of the Act; and the Delicacy of it Rests
upon the Construction of the word [TRUE] [according to the Number of such TRUE
Certificates] which [TRUE] if understood, Only as Opposed to COUNTERFEIT, there
may be still a True Certificate, though of a False Matter.

This Opinion will not sink into Us for many Rea- which we shall only Offer,
with submission to Better.

First, we conceive the Commissioners Nominated in This Act. (and sitting in
the Star Chamber) to be the Competent and Proper Judges of the Meaning of it;
and we have the Honor of Their Practice for Our Authority. As for Instance; It
is put to the Vote, what Officers should be Reputed Commission-Officers within
the Act, and which not? How come the Commissioners in the Star Chamber now to
be Judges of That Qualification, more then of the Rest? That the Person
Certify'd be a Commission-Officer, and that being a Commission-Officer, He be
likewise Truly-Loyal, and Indigent, are Conditions Equally Requisite, by the
Letter of the Act: and Five Commissioner's Hands can no more Conclude a
Revolted Captain to be Truly-Loyal, then they can Authorize an Armourer to be a
Commission-Officer; which being Overruled in the one, holds every jot as
strong in the other.

Further; In the Praeface to This newly Printed List, the Honorable
Commissioners have Expressly Promised, and Invited an Inspection: that is, an
Inspection of Persons, rather than of Certificates; for which Express Reason
They are rather Entered in Regiments, than in Counties.

Again; The Conclusiveness of Five Hands at a Publique-Meeting Engages the Act
in a Contradiction: (and we have heard that an Act Repugnant to it self, is so
far void) The Distribution Made according to the Certificate, Contradicts the
Distribution Required according to the Act.

To This, it is Urged, that the Certificate is an Act Executed, and that though
the Body of the Commissioners cannot totally Rescind such a Certificate, they
may yet suspend the Issuing of the Money.

We Reply; that if the Distribution were an Act Executed too; such a
Certificate were much a Better Plea, for a Mistake Unforeseen, and past
Prevention, than it would be in This Case; where, upon Proof, the Person that
demands the Money, is but the Counterfeit of the Person that ought to Receive
it. Again; may they suspend the distribution after the Money is due, and not as
well Refuse it utterly where it can never be due? If it be due, they are to Pay
it at first; if it be not due, they are to Refuse it: for delay will not make
it more due, and the Reason of stopping it for a moment, holds for ever. So
that if they can neither Reject the Person because of the Certificate, nor
Allow of Him because of the Act; the Money must Eternally Rest where it is, and
never come to a Distribution.

It may be also Considered, that the Case is Clear concerning the Persons, and
doubtful touching the Certificates.

But We Will suppose more Force in the Objection then perchance there is, and
that in Extremity [such TRUE Certificates] may be so Rendered, as to bear it.
See now how Many Reasons, and how Weighty, what Troops of Inconveniences appear
Against the Color of That single Argument.

There Is first, The Ground of the Act, [a Consideration of services done to the
Kingdom] There Is Next The Scope of the Act; [The Honor and Relief of That
Loyal Party that did Those Services.] Thirdly, The Political Prudence of it
[for the Encouragement of Loyalty to Future Ages.] Fourthly, The singular Care
of Applying That Bounty aright: [The Threescore Thousand Pounds must be
distributed among Persons precisely so and so Qualify'd]. To Conclude, All
These Clear and Noble Ends must be disappointed; The King's Favors scattered
among His Enemies; The Honorable Intentions of the Parliament Frustrated; and
the Bread Taken out of the Mouths of Honest Men, and Given to Another sort of
People; in favor of one dubious word, Notwithstanding above Twenty Positive,
and Explicit Declarations in the same Act to the Contrary.

We do not undertake to be Magisterial in This Opinion; but we trust that for
the General Good and Honor of the King's Party, no Other Persons shall be
Knowingly Admitted to this Dividend; and we hope likewise that in some Other
Cases, no Person duly Qualified shall be shut out by the strictness of the Act,
to whom Manifestly the Fruit and Grace of it was Intended.

Touching the Reason, and Modesty of our Proceedings, enough is said (as we
presume) to Acquit Us either of direct Folly, or Faction, we shall now lay down
certain Humble Proposals suitable to the Rest of our Actings.

The Humble Proposals of the Truly-Loyal and Suffering-Party.
THe Two Points wherein the Truly-Loyal, and Suffering-Party find Themselves
most sensibly aggrieved (next to That Influence which Their Misfortunes may
have upon the Nation) are their Necessities, and their Honors; for they would
not willingly appear either Ridiculous to the Age they Live in, or Infamous to
Posterity.

Touching their Wants; They are as Great, as the Rapine, and Merciless Cruelty
of a Twenty-Years-Oppression has been able to make Them, and They are at Once
(without Charging their Private Scores upon the Public) both the Memorials of
their Loyalty, and the Punishment. Briefly, Such They are, as His Sacred
Majesty, at the Request of His Two Houses of Parliament, has been Graciously
Pleased to Take into His Particular, and Princely Care, by a Late Act for their
Present Relief; wherein their Modesty Rests so Amply, and so Thankfully
Satisfied, that they do not so much as Wish for any further Consideration, then
what may Rationally arise from the Emprovement of That Grace, and Bounty.
Concerning which

It is their First and Humble Proposal, That the List of Certify'd Officers may
be Inspected, and Purged (Allowing a Convenient time for the Work) before any
Distribution of Moneys; and that an Advertisement of the Printed List, and of
the Intent of it, may be Published in the News-Book (which has been already
twice Refused) and Copies directed to the Respective Commissioners, of each
several County, for the Ease, and Dispatch of the Discovery.

The Fruit of This Inspection will be, at least, the Doubling of every Man's
share; beside the saving of Forty-Thousand Pounds to the Public, and the
Reducing of Those Gentlemen, who are hitherto Unprovided for, into a Number,
and Condition more capable of Compensation.

The Second Proposal, is This; That a Provision may be made as well for the
Benefit of all Persons clearly within the Meaning of the Act, as for the
Exclusion of Those that have no Title to it. As for Instance, There are some
Persons that have been Called away: either upon His Majesty's Service, or
Particular Business; and committing the Care of their Certificates to Private
Friends, they perceive, at last, that they are either Miscarried or Forgotten.

There are Others likewise, That had Employment sufficient for a Livelihood,
(when they ought to have Entered their Certificates, and therefore did not put
in) who are now left Destitute, by the Disbanding (for Example) of those
Troops which They Then Commanded (as in the Case of Duynkirk, etc.) -- Under
These Two Misfortunes are some very Worthy Officers Engaged, that have an
undoubted Right to the Equity of the Act.

There are a Third Sort of unhappy Persons, whose Certificates are declared
Invalid by the very Letter of the Act; be the Officers Claim never so
Unquestionable, upon all Honorable Accounts; and These are such as are
Excluded, for want of Five Commissioners Hands at a Public Meeting, to make
their Certificates Authentic; which was not to be had in Those Places, where
either the Commissioners did not Meet at all, or the Officer had no Notice of
Their Meeting: which Case (with the Rest) is most humbly Recommended to a
Supplemental Act; (if any Supplement shall be thought Necessary.)

A Third Proposal, in order to the Effectual Clearing of This List, is, That in
Case any Commissioners shall be Appointed to Enquire into the Matter, they may
be Empowered to Examine Witnesses upon Oath, for the Credit of the Proof, and
for the Preventing of Frivolous Enformations.

It is humbly Proposed in the Fourth Place, That after a thorow-Examination of
the Certificates, there may be a Second List made of the Names of all such
Truly-Loyall, and Indigent Officers, as, are found Allowable according to the
Act: This Inspect'd List to be Humbly Offered to His Sacred Majesty; and His
Royal Favor Implored on the behalf of the Loyal Officers therein contained;
To the End; That being in His Majesty's Eye, They may lie the more open to
Those Vacancies, and Employments for the future, whereof His Princely Goodness,
shall vouchsafe to think them Worthy, and Capable.

Consonant to the Reason of This Proposal, is the Tenor of the Act, wherein the
Lords and Commons have been Pleased to Declare their Purpose to Transmit an
Encouragement of Loyalty to future Ages. Which Encouragement is in Part made
Good already; to such as Desire to enter into Hospitals, or other Charitable
Foundations; by Requiring and Appointing that They Themselves, their Widows,
and Children, may be Preferred before All Others, except the Founders Kindred.
And a further Provision is likewise Enacted by a Kate upon Parishes, for the
Truly-Loyal and Suffering Soldiers in General. So that only Those Persons of
Quality are left in Distress to whom it cannot be Supposed with Justice to the
Public, that these Allotments were ever Intended. Wherefore, as a Thing most
suitable to the very Profession and Method of the Act; It is with Reverence,
and Submission Proposed, That something may be done also by way of
Recommendation, for the Encouragement of the Loyal Nobility and Gentry, that
the Event of all their Hazzards and Services, may not seem to Terminate in an
Hospital.

To Pass now from matter of Necessity, to point of Honor. The Truly-Loyall
and Indigent-Officers have but These Two Things to Desire.

First, That the List may be exactly Purged, for the Honor both of the Cause,
and of the Party.

Secondly, That upon Sifting the Certificates, what Persons soever shall be
found Guilty of Forgery, Subornation, or Corruption: They may be Subjected to
such Punishment as belongs to the Quality of the Offense.

THE END.

