IMPRIMATUR,

July 8. 1685. C. Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sacris Domesticis.

SOME ANIMADVERSIONS Upon a BOOK Entitled THE THEORY OF THE EARTH.

BY THE Right Reverend FATHER in GOD, HERBERT Lord Bishop of HEREFORD.

JOB xi. 12. Vain man would be wise, tho man be born like a wild asses colt.

LONDON: Printed for Charles Harper at the Flowerdeluce over against S.
Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1685.

THE PREFACE.
MANY years ago I chanced to be in a Stationer's-shop, where lay a Pamphlet
with a Picture in the Front, reprefenting the Moon on one hand in the top, and
below on the other hand a Chariot with a Gentleman feated in it, and three pair
of flying Gaunces (so he called them, that is, Geese) fastened to this Chariot,
and taking their straight course up toward the Moon, whither this Gentleman
was hastening: how he finished his course and what became of him, I staid not
to look. There is a Gentleman of late come into the World, which I have not
seen, but by many circumstances conclude it to be the same man: and to assure
you that he has been there, he tells you of a Deluge and wonderful Fraction
that has been in that World, much like the same which he has represented unto
us of our World; with feveral other such rare Moonish Inventions, set forth
unto us in a Book called, The Theory of the Earth: which he daily contemplated
during his remain there, being frequently wheeled round about it. And by such
violent circumferences daily made, his head became so giddy, as he is not well
recovered thereof since his return from thence. But I fear this Gentleman's
displeasure, otherwise I would tell you more of him: For I remember toward the
end of his Book he desires that if any man undertook to answer it, he should
forbear extravagant excursions, and stick close and seriously to the business.
I may ask him then why he would trouble the World with more extravagant fancies
in his Book, and talk to us Christians of a certain Chaos and Fluid Mass, and
several Particles moving therein; and how from thence an Earth was framed in a
perfect Spherical Form, with a Sea contained in the bowels of it; and how that
this Earth was so fertile, as to produce all the several Animals in the World;
not only Worms, Snails, Snakes and Adders; but Horses, Bears and Lions, Ravens,
Swans and Eagles, all grew out of this fat and fertile Mass. And here you might
have seen their heads first peeping out of the Earth, and then their bodies,
legs tails and all, thus frisking forth and taking their carreer. And so Fowls
coming forth by degrees, at last to grow complete, take wing and fly abroad in
the Air. And then he tells us how this whole frame of Earth, like a great
Pitcher, heated sixteen hundred years together by the Sun, at length the Water
in its bowels sent forth such violent fumes and vapors, as burst the whole
frame of it to pieces, and so boiling up overflowed all the Earth, with the
several Creatures in it. May I not now conclude for certain that this man has
been in the Moon, where his head has been intoxicated with circulating the
Earth, and is now come down to us with these rare Inventions; which he very
gravely calls Philosophical Speculations, and Rational Deductions, whereby he
has framed this admirable Theory, which he has pulbished as a new light come
into the World to enlighten the understandings of all men. This is just as
Seneca says, Sobrie insanire, and per gravitatem furere, a grave and sober
madness.

And these his wild Inventions he would have pass in the World, as I said, for
Philosophical Truths, and says, If a Prince should complain of the poorness of
his Exchequer, and the scarcity of money in his Kingdom, would he be angry with
his Merchants if they brought him home a Cargo of good Bullion, or a Mass of
Gold out of a foreign Country; and give this reason for it, he would have no new
Silver, neither should any be current in his Dominions, but what had his own
stamp and image upon it? So we complaining of the great ignorance of mankind,
should be no less fantastical if we should refuse any new Hypothesis or Theory
proposed unto us. To this I Answer, first, That setting aside the Divine
Truths, which we have by Revelation from God, in all other matters we complain
of our want of knowledge, because we cannot acquire in this Life the sure
knowledge of any thing with all our contemplation, study and enquiry; and the
more we study, the more we come to know our own ignorance, as that Wise man
said, Hoc unum scio, me nihil scire. I know this one thing that I know nothing.
And therefore the Preacher says, Eccles. 1. 18. He that increases knowledge,
increases sorrow, to find himself so ignorant notwithstanding all his study
and endeavors for the gaining thereof. Secondly, I Answer, That I believe no
King would be so foolish as to suffer that little Gold he had in his Kingdom to
be transported out and exchanged for a great deal of brass or leather Coin: So
we will be very wary how we suffer our selves to be deluded and cheated of our
Scripture-Truths, and receive this man's fabulous Inventions. And I pray you
observe in his Discourse the Method he uses: In one Chapter he confidently
says, such a thing is an old gross Error, or that in this the Ancients were
much mistaken, but proves neither; and sometimes cites a Scripture nothing to
his purpose: And then in some following Chapter tells you with all confidence
he has proved that in a former Chapter; and thus goes on deducing one Error
from another.

Yet this rare Man, notwithstanding all his confidence, seems somewhat to doubt
whether this his Theory would have a current passage in the World; and
therefore to take men off from any Opposition to it, in his Preface does
brow-beat them, calling them Narrow-spirited Men, that do not approve his wide,
wild, and extravagant fancies. Some he calls giddy and hasty Spirits, because
they will not spend time to consider and weigh his light and trivial
Inventions. Some he calls such dulspirited Men that they would not receive his
Theory, tho an Angel from Heaven had delivered it unto them. And I confess my
self one of those dull Souls which should have rejected it, tho an Angel from
Heaven had brought it; and S. Paul to the Galatians would have been my
sufficient Warrant, it being so contrary to Scripture in several parts. He
tells us also of some that think themselves witty in calling his Book a
Philosophic Romance: I wonder much he should be displeased at this Title; for
certainly it is the most honorable Title that could be affixed to it. And there
is great reason to suspect that this Gentleman fearing some meaner and more
reproachful Title might be given it, to prevent the worst, found out this
himself: for how could any man else, who had not seen his Book, give so proper
a Title unto it? supposing that before it was published with this Preface, he
had not imparted it to any, but some private Friend. And if he would take my
poor judgment in this matter, I conceive he had done far better if he had
published it under the Title of a Romance only: for several Persons would then
have read it as a pretty invention to pass away their idle time, and perchance
have taken much delight in it; and I might have done the same my self. But in
reading his Book, as soon as I found him to put a serious countenance on the
business, and that he would have us receive his vain Fopperies as Real,
Rational and Philosophical Truths, I began to Stomach at them; and farther,
when I found he had put the stamp and face of Scripture Truth upon such vain
fancies, I more and more detested them, just as if I had seen a Camel or some
such foreign Beast with a Man's Head and Face placed upon his Neck, which I
looked upon as a hideous Monster, and abhorred it: whereas ifthe Camel had had
his own proper Head, I should have looked upon it a while as a Novelty with
pleasure, considering the rare and extraordinary shape thereof. This I confess
has much exasperated my mind against his Theory, seeing him so strangely abuse
and force the sacred Scriptures from their natural sense to make them carry
some color for his Fopperies.

Yet I must acknowledge there are some very serious and solid discourses in it
here and there, where he has a good ground for them: And he seems to be a Man
of very good natural parts, and to have studied and read very much. So that
considering all, he has put me to a great stand, what to make of him; and has
given me cause to suspect that he has some very ill Principles, contrary to
the Religion we profess, and has cloaked them under his Theory, to see how the
World will first pass this; and if well, then to venture at something beyond
it. For it is impossible that a Man of his Parts and Reading should so mistake
and misinterpret those places of Scripture which he brings to maintain his
Theory. And I think he gives me sufficient ground to affirm, that either his
Brain is cracked with over-love of his own Invention, or his Heart is rotten
with some evil design: For I have heard of certain Men whose Brains have been
disturbed with some one particular thing, tho in all other matters very sober
and Rational. It Is plain this Man has taken a wonderful deal of pains for some
years at least, in perusing several Authors to find out what was in them to
countenance his Theory, which he so much adores in his Heart: And that it might
carry some color of Religion also, pretends to believe the Scriptures; and so
applies several parts of it to his Theory, which have not the least ground for
it. Or else blinded and in some measure distracted with the Love of his own
Invention, fancies he sees in them much more than really there is, as Children
frighted with Hobgoblings, fancy they see upon a Wall Figures of Devils with
Horns, and Feet, and the like. So Love, which is said to be stronger than any
other Passions, may have the like effect, and make him see that in Scripture,
which no Man else can perceive. Sometimes he savours much of the Heathen
Humor: For you may observe he is very much taken, and enlarges himself with
great Delight, when he speaks of their Golden Age, Elysium Fields, the Gardens
of Hesperides, the Youth of Greece sailing with Jason to gain the Golden
Fleece, their fabulous Fiction of a Chaos and all things produced by that.
Otherwhiles he seems to be a kind of Deist, acknowledging God as the supreme
Origin of all: But after his first Creation, he takes all out of his hands, and
would have Nature only to act by a constant course in all things contained in
this sublunary World. And what he understands by this Nature, is hard to say:
For tho Page 289. he seems to give a tolerable Definition of it; yet I pray you
observe him Page 183. where he speaks of the several Animals in the World, and
says, It is below the Dignity of the Superior Agent to act in their
production; and would have this to be the business of Nature; as if this Nature
were some distinct person subsisting and acting by it self, and could do any
thing of it self, without the concurrence of the Supreme Agent: For if the
Supreme Agent does concur, then it is not below his Dignity to Act in their
production. But the Scripture says A sparrow does not fall from the house top
without our heavenly father; and so doubtless a Sparrow cannot arise from an
Egg without our Heavenly Father particularly acting therein. This savours very
much of the Epicurean Opinion, who thought it below the Dignity of the Godhead
to trouble itself with the minute Affairs of this lower world. But Believers
know it is no trouble at all to God to act in infinite things, more than in
one: Less trouble than it is to the Sun to shine upon every Grass in the
Fields, and every Sand of the Sea. And therefore whatever this Man is, whether
a half or a whole and true Believer: Yet he does so much magnify Nature and
her Actings in all this material World, as he gives just cause of suspicion
that he has made her a kind of joint Deess with God in the Affairs thereof;
Just as the Papists have made the Blessed Virgin to have a joint Power with
Christ in conferring Graces upon Men; and so by degrees Men are come to that
pass as to make Ten Prayers unto her, for one they make unto God. Yet if you
ask the Papists whether the Blessed Virgin be a Goddess or a Creature, they
will answer, a Creature, but in their Actings make her a Goddess. And so this
Man gives a tolerable Definition of Nature, but talks so much of her Actings,
that God is very near justled out of all.

And now who can choose but admire to find not only shallow and giddy Persons,
but many serious knowing Men (as I am very credibly informed) who have the free
use of the Scripture, which teaches them so plainly the Creation and Deluge of
the World; yet receive and commend this Man's vain Inventions so contrary unto
them; which I hope to make evidently appear. And I cannot attribute this to any
thing else, but to their being so intent on their worldly Affairs or Pleasures,
that they look very little at all into the Scriptures; much less remember what
is their contained. It is a sad and lamentable condition of our depraved
Nature, that we are so apt to embrace any Error more than Truth; and that like
Children, we are so tossed to and fro with any wind of Doctrine, and catch at
Novelties ever so erroneous. And I know not what can be proposed more erroneous
and contrary to the Scripture Truth, which we should be so zealous to retain,
and not suffer our selves to be delighted with any thing contrary to it. For,
as S. Paul says to the Thessalonians, If we like not to retain the truth, God
shall give us up to strong delusions, that we should believe a lie. And truly
we well deserve to be given up to any Delusions, seeing we are so little
concerned in all matters of Religion; whether Papist or Atheist, Turk or Jew,
we are very indifferent in all. And certainly this Man has not a little
gratified both Papists and Atheists; the Papists by his strange and forced
Interpretations of Scripture, making it (as they Blasphemously call it) a Nose
of Wax, to be shaped and fitted not only to their vain Superstitions, but even
to this Man's ridiculous Inventions: The Atheists, by making the Word of God,
whereon the truth of our Salvation depends, so uncertain and questionable, that
no Man can find any assurance to depend upon, seeing the first Principles of it
so variously interpreted by this Man; and from those Principles a Fabric
raised of a New World so different from that which all Believers from the
beginning to this day have asserted.

Wherefore I shall now address my self unto the learned Men of the
Universities; and desire to know what Lethargy has possessed them all, that
not one of them appears in Writing to confute the Fables of this Man: For I
have diligently enquired and cannot hear of any one yet come forth in Print. If
they answer me that they are so vain and extravagant in themselves, that they
need no other Confutation; Iconsent unto them that it is true. But if they
prevail so far in the World, as to get Reception and Applause, the next step
may be, for ought I know, to be approved and believed. This has engaged, me,
tho now in the Eighty Second Year of my Age, to put some stop to this Current,
and to awaken some younger, abler and fitter Person to undertake this Man, and
encounter him in every point; which I am not able to perform, my Memory being
much decayed, my sight also being gone, one Eye quite, the other very dim, so
that I can neither write my self, nor easily read the writing of another. Yet I
was resolved to show my endeavor by this short Essay, hoping it may raise the
Spirit of some younger, as I said, and learned Person to set upon this business.

And lastly, I shall address my self unto the Governors of our Church, who sit
at the Helm, humbly and earnestly beseeching them to have a watchful Eye, at
least, over this Person what he sets forth (if they think it not fit to
question him for what he has published already) for in this Book he
sufficiently declares his intention of Publishing another part of such like
discourse as this. And you see by this how he wrests and forces the Scripture
from its own sense unto his purpose, beyond the Manicheans or Marcionites; and
how boldly he sets himself to maintain a new Hypothesis so contrary to all the
World that were before him, Heathens, Jews or Christians. And truly it may be
well doubted, whether he has any great reverence or value for the Scriptures,
tho he makes use of them to gain some credit, or at least, toleration for his
vain Inventions. For I pray you look into him, Page 270. at the lower end,
where speaking of America how it was peopled, he there declares his Opinion;
That it is more probable that when Adam was removed from America into our
Continent, some of his Posterity was left behind, and in the Deluge were saved
some other way, different from Noah, tho not mentioned in the Scripture, and
after that increased and multiplied to People that Nation: And says, That tho
he believes all Mankind proceeded at first from Adam: Yet he is not bound to
believe that all the People now in the whole World proceeded from Noah and his
Generation; and that he thinks it not a breach of any Article of Faith not to
believe it. I would ask this Man whether it be an Article of his Faith to
believe the Scriptures: and if it be, I am sure he is bound to believe that all
Mankind now in the whole World proceeded from Noah: For it is repeated, Genesis
c. 7. four or five times over, that all Mankind, except Noah and his Family,
were destroyed in the Flood: And it is impossible he should pretend ignorance of
this, for he mentions several passages in that Chapter. From hence it is plain
this Man has the confidence to set himself against the whole World, and to
make good his own vain Fancy, will oppose them all, tho they bring Scripture
never so plain and easy to be understood. And when he has thus abused and
called all Men living Dunces, he concludes his Book, desiring Peace and Love
with them all. Thus I have showed my endeavor, desiring all my defects herein
may be excused by my great Age and many Imperfections.

I Think it fit to inform the Reader, That after my first reading of this Man's
Theory, I wrote unto Mr. Kettil by, the Man that Printed it, to enquire what
kind of Person the Author was, who it seems informed him of what I had written;
and he thereupon writes a Letter himself unto me concerning his Theory: By
which I understood how to address a Letter unto him; and so began some
correspondency with him in Letters, hoping that I might thereby reclaim him
from his Errors; but found him so stiff and pertinacious in them, that I was
soon out of all hopes to do any good. And in this our correspondency by
Letters, several passages came from him, which are here and there mentioned in
the following Discourse; which the Reader may wonder at, finding nothing of
them in his Theory.

The following Discourse is divided into Three Sections.

I. Contains the Exposition of several Texts of Scripture mentioned in his
Theory. Page I. II. Contains the Narration of the Deluge. p. 53. III. Contains
the Fabric of his New World. p. 154.
SECTION I. CONTAINS The Exposition of several Texts of Scripture mentioned in
his Theory.
I. I Told you in the Preface that I had not meddled with this man's Theory,
unless he had given me great offense to see the Sacred Scriptures so abused, as
to be made props to support such a rotten tottering building, as his Theory.
And therefore I think it fit, before I enter upon the discourse of that, to
show you wherein he has abused the Scriptures, by giving you a right
interpretation of them; lest you seeing with what confidence he cites them, may
from thence suppose they bear such a sense as he puts upon them, and so
inconsiderately pass over his Theory as a well grounded Truth.

II. He makes use of Moses sometimes, but chiefly St. Peter, and tells us often
what they say in their Philosophy, as if he did them a great honor in giving
them that Title: but truly they may well scorn the Title, as too mean for them;
for they came not by their knowledge in Divine matters by any such Philosophical
way as from Human Principles, making Inferences and Consequences after the
manner of men (in which way this man much admires himself, tho he as often
fails therein as others, guided by their own shallow and deceitful Reason) but
by Divine Revelation from God, and Infusion of his Holy Spirit; and spoke as
that Spirit gave them utterance. And tho Moses was learned in all the Wisdom of
the Egyptians, yet he made little or no use of that Wisdom; nor could ever
from thence have found out how the World was at first Created: which many great
Philosophers were wholly at a loss in; and tho they labored much in it, yet
could never attain to a right understanding therein, but left to the World
their vain and idle opinions as a perpetual testimony of their foolery, tho
much admired by men for their Wisdom.

III. I should begin with Moses first: but I shall be necessitated to interpret
him as we go on in the Discourse of his Theory,; and therefore pass him by
here, and come to St. Peter, whom he so often cites as his main support: And
after we have done with St. Peter, we shall clear some other Scriptures which
are cited in his Theory. It Is the second Epistle of St. Peter our Theorist
would make use of; and therefore I think it not amiss to acquaint the Reader,
that this second Epistle of St. Peter was not received in the Church for many
years, and that there are some Reformed Churches that do not yet allow it as
Canonical and Authentic. But this second Epistle of St. Peter having no
material point of Belief, but what is contained in other Scriptures expressly or
circumstantially, and our Church receiving the same, I readily submit unto it;
and let our Theorist make what advantage he can from thence.

IV. This man tells us that the present World is quite of another form and
nature than it was before the Flood: then the earth was of a smooth perfect
Spherical form, a fat and delicious Surface, the Air serene and temperate,
without storms, tempests, or any boistrous winds coming from the Regions above,
or arising from the Sea; for there was no Sea at all in it: all that vast Water
was included within the Earth, and the Earth in a perfect Sphere round about
it: but this Earth was at the great Deluge broken all to pieces, and the Sea
rising up overflowed it, and put it all in that confusion as now it is, with
broken Rocks and Mountains, with deep Valleys and Caverns in many places under
it; and pieces of this Earth scattered in several parts of the present Sea,
causing innumerable Islands small and great all the World over. The Air also
now boistrous and turbulent with various Heats and Colds; so that for one calm
and serene day, we have ten, if not twenty quite otherwise. And for this his
Assertion he has no Scripture at all: but something to color the business he
would fain scrue out of St. Peter's 2 Ep. 3. 5. etc. where he tells us that S.
Peter sets forth an evident opposition or diversity betwixt the old World
before the Flood and our present World. Now, good Reader, I desire you to view
this Chapter from v. 1. to v. 9. or 10. and see what you can find there to this
purpose without either his or my Comment upon it: and when you have done, hear
what he says of it page 48; especially of v. 5, 6, 7. viz. That this is so
pregnant a place to his purpose, as he should do an Injury to Providence, had
he neglected to take notice of this passage; and that the Apostles discourse is
so plain and easy, as every one at first sight must needs discover the meaning
of it. These expressions of his would make a man expect to find in St. Peter
his whole Theory and description of his Antediluvian Earth set forth on the one
hand, and the different state of our present Earth as plainly set forth on the
other.

V. The best way to have a good understanding of any man's Writings, is to
consider the business that he is upon, and what he designs: and then if we meet
with any difficulty or obscurity in his discourse, we may be sure from his
design to discover the right meaning of them. Let us then consider what the
business of St. Peter is in this second Epistle: It Is not a Philosophical
Discourse to teach us the nature and constitution of the Heavens or the Earth;
but to teach wicked men the nature of Sin, and to show them the Judgment and
Danger that constantly follows it: this is the business of this Epistle, and
therefore he brings several examples of fearful Judgments that befell wicked men
for their obstinacy in Sin. And his design is to bring them to Repentance, and
so to avoid the grievous Punishment that will certainly fall upon them, if they
persist. Now let us come to the words of St. Peter cited by our Theorist, which
are these, c. 3. v. 5, etc. For this they are willingly ignorant of, That by
the word of God the Heavens were of old, and the Earth standing out of the
Water and in the Water; whereby the World that then was, being overflowed with
Water, perished. But the Heavens and the Earth that are now by the same Word
are kept in store, reserved unto Fire against the day of Judgment. This passage
I have Read full often, but could never yet see at the first sight, nor at the
twentieth, any thing relating to his new fancy. And if it were so easy to
discover at first sight, what need he so enlarge upon it for four whole pages
together, turning and wresting the words with many ambages to bring them about
to his bent? I shall now in few words lay down the meaning of St. Peter. It is
an Answer, as he truly says, to certain Scoffers, who made a mock at the
Apostles threatening the coming of our Savior to Judgment with fiery
indignation at the end of the World, and saying, Where is the promise of his
coming? for since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were
from the beginning of the Creation. To this St. Peter answers That they were
willingly ignorant of this, That by the Word of God the Heavens were of old,
and the Earth standing out of the Water and in the Water; whereby the World
that then was, being overflowed with Water, perished. They are willingly
ignorant, or wilfully ignorant, how that God by his Word made the Heavens of
old, and the Earth standing out of the Water and in the Water; whereby the
Animate World, that is, all Men and other living Creatures of the Earth, being
overflowed, perished. They willingly forget this Judgment of God executed upon
the old World, and therefore will not believe That the Heavens and the Earth
which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against
the day of Judgment and perdition of ungodly Men. But this they may be sure of,
that as by the Word of God they were warned then of the Deluge, which came upon
ungodly Men: So now we give you warning that by the same Word of God this World
at our Saviors coming shall be destroyed by Fire; not only the Earth, but the
Heavens also shall melt with fervent Heat. This is the plain and full meaning
of St. Peter's words, and this indeed is obvious to any understanding Person at
first sight. And this is St. Peter's business here, to set forth Gods Judgments
upon Sin, and not the diversity of the old Heavens or Earth from the present:
for here is nothing mentioning any such diversity or opposition in the former
Earth to the present Earth, no more than in the former Heavens to the present
Heavens: where he would have a perfect Antithesis forsooth, and a direct
opposition between the former Heavens and Earth, and the present Heavens and
Earth. Now let us hear St. Peter's words in the Original Greek. (...) They are
willingly, or wilfully, ignorant that the Heavens were, that is, Created, of
old, and the Earth situated out of the Water and by the Water: but the present
Heavens and Earth by the same Word are kept in store against the day of
Judgment. He does not say here, (...), and (...); This might be an
Antithesis:but (...) follows (...) and so it is (...). The Heavens were Created
of old by the word of God. and so sure were the present Heavens. And for the
Earth, he says it was situated out of the Water and by the Water. He does not
say the Heavens and the Earth were both so situated, but (...) a participle of
the Feminine Gender and Singular number agreeing with (...) the Earth: whereas
had he meant the Heavens also were so situated, he should have used another
Gender and the Plural number: so that this situation belongs only to the Earth.
Then follows, But the present Heavens and Earth are by the same Word kept in
store, reserved unto Fire. What opposition is here? The Heavens and the Earth
were Created of old by God; But the present Heavens and Earth are by God
reserved unto Fire. Here is no diversity or opposition experst betwixt the old
Heavens and Earth, and the new Heavens and Earth; but only the diversity or
opposition between the two Judgments: the one was only of the Earth by Water,
and the other is to be of both Heavens and Earth by Fire. Not one word here of
a disposition in the old Heavens to Water, and the present Heavens to Fire; nor
any disposition in the Earth to the one of old, or to the other now: but that
the former Earth was situated out of and by Water, and is now reserved unto
Fire. Let our Theorist, if he can, show me how the Heavens, or how the Earth is
now disposed for Fire: I see not a word in St. Peter signifying any such thing,
tho he with his wonted confidence does affirm it, page 233, and say that St.
Peter does formally and expressly tells us that the old Heavens or the
Antediluvian Heavens had a different constitution from ours; and particularly
that they were composed or constituted of Water; and in the margin sets down 2
Epist. Pet. 3. 5. Now to say that a thing is formally and expressly told us,
sure you will expect to find that thing in the same formal or very words. I
pray you now look back upon the very words and see if you can find any such
thing there. Are there any such particular words there as he affirms, that the
Heavens of old were composed or constituted of Water? Nor of the Earth is it
said that it was composed of Water, but that it was (...), which signifies as
well, and as usually situated or settled, and (...) is often taken for (...)
out of: And so the sense runs thus, The Earth placed out of the Water and by or
in the Water, which cannot relate to the Heavens; for then the participle (...)
should, as I said, have been in the Plural number. Nor can it be truly said
that the Heavens are situated out of the Water and by the Water, whatever may
be said of the Firmament. But he does not use the word Firmament here, but
(...). The Heavens which were of old Created by God, in the Plural number, all
the Heavens, the highest as well as the lowest.

VI. S. Peter having thus expressed the diversity of the Judgments, he goes on
and infers from the former Judgment, that as they found by experience That the
word of God threatening them with a Deluge came really to pass and all
perished: So the word of God now threatening them with a Conflagration, will
assuredly consume them. This seventh Verse is a consequence inferred from the
first and sixth Verses, which were the Antecedent: and the fifth Verse is so
far from being Superfluous or Redundant, as our Theorist would have it, that
from thence the Apostle takes the Rise of his Argument, and begins, That by the
word of God the Heavens were of old, and the Earth standing out of the Water
and in the Water. Whereby (that is, by which Waters) the World (of the ungodly)
that then was, being overflowed with Water, perished. The Earth standing out of
the Water and by the Water, those Waters commanded by the word of God
overflowed the Earth with the ungodly. The Waters which were before
miraculously restrained by the Word of God, beingnow let loose by the same Word
overflowed the world, and would do so again, were they not restrained: for
there the same disposition, or rather situation of the Earth now, as was of
old; but the Word, Will, or Promise of God is now otherwise than it was of old.
Whereof I shall speak more by and by. The word of God goes along in all this
Discourse, and is set forth as the only cause of the Deluge of old, and the
Conflagration to come. Which follows in the seventh verse, But the Heavens and
the Earth which are now, by the same Word are kept in store (by no disposition,
nor any natural cause preparing them for it) reserved unto Fire against the day
of Judgment and perdition of ungodly Men. For their sakes this Judgment is to
be then brought upon the Heavens as well as the Earth; And so there will be a
total end of this World: and then will follow, as it is v. 13. (according to
Gods promise) new Heavens and a new Earth; whether literally or figuratively
this Epistle does not declare. Let this Theorist with his strange Confidence
declare what he pleases, I am ready to declare my Ignorance herein. But these
Scoffers, as they were willingly ignorant and forgetful how the Deluge came
upon the Old World: So now they are willingly heedless and will not believe
that this Conflagration will assuredly destroy them. No man can discover more
from these words of St. Peter, unless his head be so filled with this man's
Theory, that neither sleeping nor waking he thinks of any thing else.

VII. I said a little before that in the Flood, The Animate World was
destroyed: But our Theorist will needs have it that the Natural World, as he
calls it (that is, the Body and Frame of the Earth) was also destroyed by this
Flood: And for the ground of this his assertion, he desires us to take notice
that St. Peter in the former Chapter, speaking of the Flood, says, that it was
brought upon the World of the ungodly; but does not mention the ungodly here. I
pray you what need was there to mention it here, having in the former Chapter
declared particularly what he meant by the World, the World of the ungodly
destroyed by the Flood. And so here he says (...), in the Singular number, the
World perished; not the Heavens and the Earth perished in the Plural number:
But after he had mentioned the Heavens and the Earth, had he meant their
perishing, there had been no need at all to add (...), but should have said,
they perished. It had been very superfluous or redundant to repeat the same
again which he expressed immediately before by (...): and therefore the Apostle
must needs mean somewhat more by (...), the World of the ungodly; and moreover
adds O` (...), the World of the ungodly that then was in being, or then lived,
that World perished. And farther, to show you that he here meant the World of
the ungodly, he ends the following verse (...). The World which perished in the
former verse, in the next verse is reserved unto judgment and perdition of
ungodly men. (...) and (...).

VIII. But if there were any doubt, the business would be cleared by looking
into Genesis 6. 5. where Moses tells us, God saw that the wickedness of man was
great in the Earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his Heart was
only evil continually. v. 7. And the Lord said I will destroy man, whom I have
created, from the face of the earth, both man and beast and the creeping
things, and the fowls of the air. Here God plainly declares what he will
destroy, viz. Man and Beast: not a word mentioning the Earth, or Frame of it,
to be destroyed. And therefore we may well conclude, that the addition of the
Earth it self, is this man's invention only, no intention of Gods. And again v.
17. And behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth to destroy
all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under heaven; and every thing
that is in the earth shall die. Here likewise is no mention of destroying the
Earth, or Frame of it; but all Flesh shall Die: nor is any thing else mentioned
in the Chapter following, where he plainly describes the Flood, and what was
destroyed by it. Wherefore we may well conclude that St. Peter intended no more
than the World of the ungodly, which he himself mentioned in the second Chapter
upon the same Subject, and repeats the same in the third Chapter.

IX. But he objects, That the ground that these Scoffers went upon was taken
from the Natural World, its constancy and permanency in the same state from the
beginning: therefore if the Apostle answers ad idem, and takes away their
Argument, he must understand and show that the Natural World has perished and
been changed. The first part of his Argument I grant is true, That the ground
these Scoffers went upon was taken from the Natural World, its constancy and
permanency in the same state from the beginning: yet I deny the second part,
That if the Apostle answers ad idem, and takes away their Argument, he must
understand and show that the Natural World has perished and been changed. For
I shall take away their Argument without any change in the former World, and
Answer more ad idem than he does. For notwithstanding all things continued as
they did; yet by the Word of God a Flood came upon the old World: And so, tho
all things continue now as they did from the beginning, a Fiery destruction
shall come upon them. For, as I said, in all this Argument of the Apostle, The
Word of God is declared to be the Cause of all. By the Word of God the Heavens
and the Earth were of old. By the Word of God a Deluge came upon the World of
the ungodly. And so, by the Word of God a Fiery destruction shall come upon
them, notwithstanding the Heavens and the Earth and all things continue as they
did. This was the Scoffers Argument, and S. Peter thus confutes it.

X. Secondly, our Theorist argues that these Scoffers could not be ignorant of
the Deluge; and therefore it was the change in the old World that they were
ignorant of. This man will not attend to what St. Peter says, when it does not
serve his turn, no more than those Scoffers did attend unto the old Testament:
for St. Peter tells them, that tho they had the old Testament read frequently
unto them, yet they were willingly ignorant, that is, wilfully, and would not
attend unto it. But such a change, as this man would have in the old World,
they were wholly (not wilfully) ignorant of, and could not understand from
Moses any such change; for Moses has not a word of it. And therefore this is a
plain Argument that there was no change at all in the old World. But they were
willingly ignorant of that which they might have plainly learnt from Moses,
both the Creation and the Deluge.

XI. Thirdly, he says St. Peter takes his Argument from the Conflagration,
which was a real destruction of the World; and from thence must infer the
destruction of the old World. I say St. Peter does not take his Argument from
the destruction of the Heavens and Earth by the Conflagration; for then the
Heavens must have been destroyed in the old World, as well as the Earth: I say
the Heavens; not the Firmament or the Air altered, but the whole Heavens all
quite consumed by Fire. But St. Peter takes his Argument all along from the
Word of God, as I said before, That as by the Word of God the Deluge came
unexpected; so by the same Word the Conflagration shall come unexpected.

XII. His fourth Argument is the redundancy of the Apostles discourse making
the fifth verse wholly supersluous. But there is no redundancy in it, if you
take the Argument, as I lay it, from Gods Word. And that he says, I make the
Apostle Tautological, if he mean in this Chapter the World of the ungodly, for
he mentioned it in the former Chapter. To this I say, that it were more
Tautological, if he did use the same words here: but he does not express it
here at-large, having expressed it in the former Chapter. And if he did use the
same expression here, as he did in the former Chapter; Have we not very many
repetitions of things in Scripture mentioned in a former Chapter, and in the
same Chapter also?

XIII. His fifth Argument is much the same with the third, comparing the whole
destruction of the Heavens and the Earth with the destruction of the Heavens
and the Earth in the former World. To this I answer, as I did there, that if he
will needs compare both, then the Heavens as well as the Earth must be
destroyed in the former: for you see he speaks in the Plural number (as I said
before) the Heavens: not the Firmament or Region of the Air, as our Theorist
would have it, but the Superior Heavens, that of old at the Creation were made
by the Word of God; which certainly are the same now, as they were at the
beginning, and did not perish: Neither did S. Peter mean this perishing of the
Earth or Air; but after he has named the Heavens and the Earth; he does not
say, they perished, but the World, that is, the World of the ungodly mentioned
in the former Chapter. Nor can it be properly said that the Earth perished, if
it were broken, and the fashion of it changed, as our Theorist would have it.
We do not say, if a man has broken his Legs or Arms by a fall, that he
perished; but when he dies and all his Body perishes. Perishing implies a total
destruction. But of the World of the ungodly it was properly said, they
perished, being wholly destroyed. And the main business of St. Peter was, to
Preach perishing and destruction to these Scoffers; and for their sakes, and
suchlike Sinners, the Heavens and the Earth shall be consumed together with
them.

XIV. I know St. Austin and some others have applied these words of St. Peter
to the perishing of the Firmament, or Region of the Air (yet very few in
comparison of those that have thought otherwise) but I wish him to observe a
Rule that St. Austin gives of distinction between the Scripture and other men's
Writings (as well as a Rule he shows us) ut quantalibet sanctitate, doctrinaque
praepolleant, non ideo verum putem, quia ipsi ita senserint, sed quia, etc.
That how holy or learned soever Men are, I do not therefore believe it to be
true, because they say so; but as far as they bring Scripture for it, or some
very probable reason. And I am sure the words themselves in Scripture are the
Heavens in the Plural, and not the Firmament in the Singular: and therefore we
may more surely adhere to them, than to the words of some few Men: And yet they
allow no such perishing of the Earth or Air, as our Theorist would have, but
some small alteration. It was the World of the ungodly, the Animate World, that
wholly perished.

XV. I think it sit to answer here an Argument that our Theorist seems mightily
to boast of, the Rainbow, which he affirms never appeared in the World till
after the Flood; and from thence would prove an alteration in the Airy Region.
What tho it do prove an alteration, yet it proves no perishing, which St. Peter
affirms of the old World, that it perished. And how does he prove this
alteration? He assirms it, it is true, but proves it not by any other Argument,
but that God set his Bow in the Clouds to assure Noah of his promise that the
World should never be destroyed by Water again. No doubt a most clear proof. I
would fain ask this Theorist whether a Man of years being Baptized does not
take the sign of washing in that Sacrament for an assurance of his regeneration
and forgiveness of his Sins, tho perchance he has been often washed before.
And thus, tho Rainbows had often appeared before the Flood; yet God might
afterward appoint it for a sign unto Noah, to assure him that he would never
destroy the World again by Water. And so you see what becomes of this Man's
convincing Argument he much boasts of. But to return to St. Peter.

XVI. Having thus expounded his words, and showed (as I humbly conceive) that
our Theorist has little, or no ground for his vain siction, I shall be bold to
tell him further, that it is very impertinent to talk to the Apostles of an
Antithesis and Apodosis, Tautologies or Redundancies, and suchlike terms of
Rhetoric, or Grammar-Rules, fitter for Schoolboys to learn, than for them,
whom our Savior chose, as unlearned and poor Fishermen, to Preach his Gospel
to the Learned and Wise men of this World; and by the Foolishness of Preaching
(as St. Paul calls it) that is, by plain and simple Preaching, which the World
calls Foolishness, to confound all their Learning and Wisdom: for the Apostles
observed no such curious method, and exactness of discourse; but in their
Preaching or Prophesying, out of Zeal, spoke sometimes very abruptly and
incoherently; sometimes relating to one matter, sometimes to another, as the
Spirit gave them utterance.

XVII. And now I shall prove from these very words of St. Peter the clean
contrary to what he affirms, viz. His Antediluvian Earth without any Sea. For
St. Peter here in plain words affirms, that the Earth, before the Deluge, stood
part out of the water, and part in the water. These are his plain words,
without any such long Comment, as he has brought upon them. But he objects,
that this our English Translation does not accord with the original Greek,
which does express it otherwise, saying, The earth standing Out of the water
and By the water, not In the water. However these words of St. Peter express
two distinct situations of the Earth, Out of the water, and By the water. Let
our Theorist tell me what those two distinct situations are, out and by, and I
will presently show him how that they cannot agree with his newfound Earth,
where the Waters were all in one manner situated within the Earth, and none at
all without. But I shall now show him from Genesis 1. (which these words have a
relation to) that the words of St. Peter agree very well with the exposition of
our English Translators, Out of the water, and in the water: for, Genesis 1. 9,
10. it is said, God gathered the waters together unto one place and made the
dry land appear. And God called the dry land earth, and the gathering together
of the waters called he Seas. Here you see the Earth out of the Waters in one
place. And I pray you let our Theorist tell us where the other part of the
Earth was; Was it not in the Waters? for the Waters covered it. It may be said
also it was by or near the Waters, as St. Peter has it: but yet more properly
in the Waters. And the Author of this Epistle (whoever he was) must needs
intend the same (if he intend aright) whether he call it in or by, both must
signisie the same thing. And therefore his cavilling at our English Translation
is very frivolous and captious without ground. And thus St. Peter and his
Philosophy, as he terms it, plainly contradicts him, and is a pregnant place
uttered by Providence (if I may say so) to confute his new invention. And Moses
in his Philosophy plainly contradicts him also. Whereby it is evident that the
Antediluvian Earth and the present Earth are one and the same: for that had a
Sea covering the Earth as this has. Neither Moses, nor St. Peter make any such
Philosophical distinction, as he would prove from them, but clean contrary.

XVIII. And that this present Earth is as subject to a Deluge, as the former,
is evident by that passage in Genesis 9. 8. where God promised to Noah, that he
would never destroy this World again by Water; and confirmed the same also by a
Sign: All which had been very superfluous and vain, if the present Earth were
so shaped and fashioned, as it could not by destroyed by Water. Noah might well
have smiled at Gods assurance that it should not be, when, says this man, it
could not be: there is not Water enough in the whole Universe (as he affirms)
to cover it again. Wherefore, as by Gods promise a clear possibility is
implied, that it may be; so by Gods promise also we are assured, that it shall
not be. Unto this Scripture you may add that formerly mentioned, Psalm. 104. 9.
Thou have set a bound that they (the Waters) may not pass over, and turn again
to cover the Earth. And that most remarkable passage, Jer. 5. 22. Fear ye not
me? says the Lord: Will ye not tremble at my Presence, which have placed the
Sand for the Bound of the Sea by a perpetual Decree that it cannot pass it; and
tho the Waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; tho they roar,
yet can they not pass over it? Where God so plainly expresses a possibility of
the Seas overflowing the Earth again; or else we must make Gods threatening
very vain. And that this Command of God for the restraining of the Sea was not
given after the Flood (tho it continued then also) but before the Flood, even
at the very first Creation, appears, Prove. 8. 29. where it is said, God gave to
the Sea his Decree, that the waters should not pass his commandment, when he
appointed the foundations of the earth. I shall speak more of this passage by
and by, when I come to enlarge more on this Chapter.

XIX. I have showed you before how that St. Peter declares that both the Deluge
was, and the Conflagration will be by the Word of God, not from any Natural
Cause. But our Theorist will needs ascribe all unto Natural Causes, and the
disposition which was in the Earth and Heavens for the Flood. So likewise he
will have a disposition and frame in them for the Conflagration. We shall be
very glad to learn from our Theorist what that frame or disposition is, wherein
it consists. At the Deluge he has a rare knack of invention, the Suns so
heating the Waters in the Bowels of the Earth, that just at such a nick of time
the Waters and Vapors from them boiled up and burst the whole Frame of the
Earth to pieces. But I would fain be satisfied concerning this Fiery
destruction to come, and know how the Heavens and the Earth, they both being of
so very different constitutions should both take Fire at once. I know Gods Word
has said they shall, and therefore I believe it. But how this shall come to
pass, our curiosity desires to know from his Philosophy, which tells us so
exactly how the Deluge came, and may, I hope, as exactly set forth the future
Conflagration, and tell us the Natural Causes and Preparatory means to dispose
the Heavens and the Earth unto it: for I suppose he will stick to his own
method of having Natural Causes for all things, and will not allow God the
liberty to use any extraordinary means, tho upon such an extraordinary occasion
as the Deluge or Conflagration. Nature must act in all these, and his
Philosophy must find out the means whereby she acts, and will discover it unto
us; and will also show us how it comes to pass that in three thousand years
time and upwards since the Flood, we find no visible change or disposition in
the Heavens or Earth to a Conflagration more now than formerly. If this be too
hard a task for him to tell us of the future destruction of the whole World:
yet, methinks, he should be able to declare unto us that which is past, and
show us the Natural Cause of Sodom and Gomorrah's destruction; how those Cities
came to fall on Fire, and the rest of the World escape; what disposition there
was in that patch of ground, or in the Heavens over it, to send down Fire upon
them.

XX. I will trouble him no more with Questions of this Nature at present. But
yet I shall desire leave to give him a short Admonition. This way of
Philosophising all from Natural Causes, I fear, will make the whole World turn
Scoffers, such as St. Peter met with: for men supposing and expecting the World
to be consumed by Natural Causes, as this man would have it, and seeing no
visible Cause or Alteration in the Heavens or Earth in three thousand years
space, may conclude, that in three thousand years to come there may be as
little or no Change; and so may ask, as those Scoffers did, Where is the
promise of his coming? for since the Fathers fell asleep, all things have
continued as they were from the beginning. To conclude this matter; Let me
advise him to trust to Gods Word only, that assuredly there will be a
Conflagration of the whole World, and lay aside his curious vain and endless
Philosophising labor to find out the Natural Causes thereof. And thus I have
taken a great deal of pains more than I intended, to show the little or no
ground this man has so much to boast this second Epistle of St. Peter; which
first is doubtful, and secondly does so little prove that which he would have,
tho so frequently made use of in his Theory, as if he had proved his whole
design from thence. Having thus dispatched his principal Text, on which he so
much depends, I shall now briefly examine some other Scriptures made use of in
his Theory.

XXI. In the ninetieth page of his first Book, he has these words. There
remains a remarkable discourse in the Proverbs of Solomon, relating to the
Mosaical Abyss; and not only to that, but to the Origin of the Earth in
general: where Wisdom declares her Antiquity and Preexistence to all the Works
of this Earth, chap. 8. 23. etc. I was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, 'ere the earth was. When there were no deeps, or Abysses, I was
brought forth; when no fountains abounding with water. Then v. 27. When he
prepared the heavens I was there; when he set a compass upon the face of the
Deep, or Abyss. When he established the Clouds above; when he strengthened the
fountains of the Abyss. Here is mention made of the Abyss, and of the Fountains
of the Abyss: And who can question but that the Fountains of the Abyss here are
the same with the Fountains of the Abyss which Moses mentions, and were broke
open, as he tells us, at the Deluge. Let us observe therefore what form Wisdom
gives to this Abyss, and consequently to the Mosaical: and here seem to be two
expressions that determine the form of it. v. 28. He strengthened the Fountains
of the Abyss, that is, the cover of those Fountains: for the Fountains could be
strengthened no other way, than by making a strong cover or Arch over them. And
that Arch is expressed more fully and distinctly in the foregoing verse. When
he prepared the Heavens I was there, when he set a compass on the Face of the
Abyss; we render it Compass, the world signifies a Circle or Circumference, or
an Orb or Sphere. So there was in the beginning of the World a Sphere, Orb, or
Arch set round about the Abyss, according to the Testimony of Wisdom, who was
then present. Thus far our Theorist. And in this last part he faith very true,
that in the beginning the form of the Abyss was in a Circle or Circumference;
for it encompassed the Earth round about. But our Theorist would have the Earth
to encompass the Abyss round about, and the Abyss included within the Earth:
which is clean contrary to Moses, Genesis 1. 9. where God said, Let the Waters
under the Heavens be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry Land
appear. In which words you may observe two things: First, that next unto the
Firmament, or the Heaven, were placed the Waters: for v. 7. it is said, God
made the Firmament and divided the Waters which were under the Firmament from
the Waters which were above the Firmament: So that the Firmament was in the
middle of the Waters; Water above and Water below it. But our Theorist in his
new World makes the Earth to divide the Waters; for all the Abyss was
encompassed by the Earth, clean contrary to Moses. The second thing I desire
you to take notice of, is, that when the Waters thus encompassed the Earth, God
said, Let them be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry Land
appear. So that until this Command of Gods of gathering the Waters together
unto one place, no dry Land appeared, but all was covered with Water. But our
Theorist, clean contrary, orders his matters so, that dry Land only appeared in
a perfect Arch round about the Waters, and no Water at all appeared. And thus
you see how rarely he has interpreted this compass of the Abyss mentioned here
in the Proverbs. His following interpretation of v. 28. is as rare; He
strengthened the Fountains of the Abyss. That is, according to Wisdom, he made
them run with a strong Current; or to abound with Water, as Wisdom expresses
it, v. 24. I was brought forth when there were no Fountains abounding with
Water. But our Theorist in his new Earth will have no Fountains at all
abounding or flowing with Water, no Fountains at all; but says that the
Fountains could be strengthened no other way, than by making a strong cover or
Arch over them; and that Arch was the whole Earth, which had not one Fountain
in it abounding with Water. So that he makes the Fountains of the Abyss to be
only the Abyss, without any Fountains appearing; and the strengthening of the
Fountains of the Deep must be, to make no Fountains at all of the Deep. You see
now how little this place of the Proverbs is to his purpose, but rather quite
contrary to his new Spherical Earth; where he would have neither Mountains,
Hills, nor Sea: whereas in this Chapter v. 25. there are both Mountains and
Hills plainly declared, Wisdom saying, Before the Mountains were settled,
before the Hills was I brought forth. And again v. 29. when I gave to the Sea
his Decree, that the Waters should not pass his Commandment: when he appointed
the Foundation of the Earth. Here you see Mountains, Hills and a Sea confined
to its bounds at the very beginning of the World, when the Foundations of the
Earth were first settled. All which is, as he says, a remarkable passage
indeed, to confute his newfound World; far from confirming it.

XXII. There is another Scripture also which our Theorist makes use of to prove
that the Earth was above, and the Waters all contained in it, and brings for
this, Psalm. 24. 1. The earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof, the world
and they that dwell therein. v. 2. For he has founded it upon the seas, and
established it upon the floods. So our Translation has it, upon the Seas. But
the Word in the Original is Al, which signifies as well near or by, as upon; as
you will find it, Psalm. 1. 3. where it is said of the Righteous, he shall be
like a tree planted by the rivers of water. Here the same word, Al; is put for
by or near the Rivers of Water, which Psalm. 24. is translated upon. And thus it
is interpreted by several Authors, He has founded it, juxta, by the seas, and
established it by the floods. But perchance our Translators might have regard
to another thing in this expression, upon the Seas: because the Earth has very
great hollows and Caverns in it full of Water from the Sea; over which the
Earth does stand, and so may be said to be founded upon the Seas, the Waters of
the Sea passing under the Earth, and running through it to the tops of the
Mountains; and there springing forth with great Fountains run down the Valleys,
as it is expressed, Psalm. 104. 8. where it is said of the-Waters, they go up by
the mountains: they go down by the valleys unto the place which thou have
founded for them. And so, Psalm. 33. 7. it is said, He lays up the depth in
storehouses: in those great hollows under the Earth, from whence Fountains
arise to water it all over. And in these Storehouses also he reserved Waters to
overflow the whole Earth at the Deluge, when the Fountains of this great Deep
were broke open, and made to run in that excessive manner, as together with the
forty days Rain, caused an universal Deluge.

XXIII. Another place he makes use of is Psalm. 136. 4. where David speaking of
the Wonders of God, says, To him who alone does great Wonders: for his mercy
endures for ever. And then v. 6. To him that stretches out the earth above
the waters. This David recounts as a great wonder: for the Waters by their
natural situation should be above the Earth, and were so at the first Creation,
the Abyss or great deep encompassing the Earth round: But God gathered all the
Waters together and made the dry Land appear: and in many parts of the Land
there are by the Seashore great Rocks and Mountains placed, which seem to us
to stand much above the Sea: and therefore it is said, To him that stretches
out the Earth above the Waters. But for this and other Poetical expressions in
the Psalms or Job, or such like Poetical Sacred Authors, I may say in general
as he does page 87. at the lower end, That they seldom are so determinate and
distinct, but that they may be interpreted more than one way. Wherefore I
desire the Reader when he meets with some such expressions to remember what our
Theorist himself confesses, and to take the pains to consult some other
Interpreters, and then he will find the truth of what is here acknowledged.
These are the most material Scriptures he depends upon, which I have mentioned;
and therefore I will now pass to discourse of his Theory more particularly.

SECTION II. CONTAINS The Narration of the Deluge.
I. GOds providential Care of, and Favor to Man is very wonderful, that he
should make poor man, who is not able to create or produce and give life to the
meanest creatures, absolute Lord over them all: and not only for his necessity,
but for his entertainment also and pleasure to dispose of the life of the
noblest and best of Creatures at his will and command: And besides all this
great power and authority given him in this World, has prepared for him a life
of eternal happiness in the World to come in the presence and full enjoyment of
this his great benefactor. Yet ungrateful man so degenerated, as soon to forget
his maker and manifold benefits; and at length all flesh had so corrupted his
way, that the Justice of God resolved to destroy them all by an universal
Deluge, saving only Noah and his Posterity, who had found favor with God by
his more righteous Life; And from him began a new and righteous Generation: but
in process of time they also degenerated as far in all sorts of wickedness. Yet
God having promised unto Noah never to destroy mankind again by another Flood,
made good his Word and chose unto himself righteous Abraham and his Wife, and
from their Son and succeeding Generation to sever from the rest of the wicked
World a peculiar People that might serve him aright four hundred years together
in the Land of Egypt: and when he brought them out from thence into the Land
of Canaan with other adjacent Countries, which they were to possess and
multiply in, he gave them several Laws, and Ordinances very different from the
rest of the World; and Moses their chief Captain and Leader, inspired by God,
wrote them all down in five Books; beginning at the very Creation of the World,
and punctually declaring the manner, the time, and all other circumstances, how
and when every thing was Created, and how Man was made Lord of all. He sets
down likewise the several Generations of men until the Deluge; and as
punctually declares how the Flood came upon the whole World, and how God
preserved Noah and his Sons in an Ark, the manner and form of which he exactly
sets forth; and how God commanded Noah to take into the same Ark some of all
the sorts of Creatures upon Earth to preserve them from perishing: And so goes
on to describe how the Flood came upon all the rest of the World, and the
Waters increased by degrees, till at length they lifted up the Ark from the
Earth; and by the Waters still increasing, it was born up fifteen Cubits above
the tops of the highest Mountains; and how it decreased likewise and the Earth
became habitable again: and so continues his relation of all the Posterity of
Noah till he comes to Abraham and his Generation; unto whom at their coming out
of Egypt God gave by this Moses Laws and Ordinances, as I said before: which
was his peculiar favor to the People of Israel. As for the rest of the World,
God suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways. Nevertheless he left not
himself without witness, in that he did good and gave them Rain from Heaven and
fruitful Seasons, filling their hearts with food and gladness, as it is, Acts
14. 16, 17. And he also wrote a Law in their Hearts, a Law of gratitude unto
his infinite goodness for all these benefits, That they should seek the Lord,
if happily they might feel after him and find him, as it is, Acts 17. 27. And
he wrote a Law likewise in their hearts for their demeanor and conversation
one with another: Whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, even so do
unto them. And as their knowledge was but little, so God required little at
their hands; only to observe these Laws written in their hearts. And the times
of this ignorance God winked at, as it is v. 30. And thus both Jews and
Gentiles continued until the fullness of time was come that God sent forth his
Son into the World, a light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of his
People Israel. Then this his Eternal Son manifested the glory of the Father
both to Jews and Gentiles, and sent Apostles abroad into all the World to
Preach the same: who kept nothing back that was profitable unto them, but
declared all the counsel of God, as it is, Acts 20. 20, and 27. Who can now
doubt, but that the Son of Righteousness has so enlightened all the World by
himself and his blessed Apostles, and taught us all things, not only things
necessary to our Salvation, but all knowledge required to perfection? Certainly
then no man can think that the infinite goodness of God, who has thus
enlightened us with all knowledge to perfection, should leave his People unto
this day ignorant in the first Principles of Religion, even the very Creation
of the World, and of man with all other Creatures; of the Universal Deluge, and
Noah's preservation in that Deluge, and suchlike rudiments, which our Children
learn in their Minority.

II. What then shall we say to the man that after several thousand years, now
in the end of the World, steps forth, as a new light come into it, to show us
how that the whole World has been mistaken unto this day in the true knowledge
of the Creation, Deluge etc. and pretends to deliver to us a new and strange
interpretation of Scriptures, which neither we, nor our Fathers before us, ever
heard of; and by his Philosophy would not only confute all other Philosophers
before him, but also Christians in their Divinity; and would make it as plain
unto them as the Sun at Noonday, that they have not yet had a right
understanding of these things: And tho David says, The heavens declare the
glory of God, and the firmament shows his handiwork; he would be so bold as
to tell David, that neither these Heavens, nor this Earth are the same which
they were at the Creation and so continued till the Deluge, but quite another
thing: and therefore neither these Heavens nor this Earth can declare unto us
the glory of God or his Handiwork; for this present Earth is a strange
misshapen thing, full of broken Rocks and Mountains, Hills and Valleys, Lakes
and Seas; the ruins only of a former Earth which carried a smooth spherical
form, a beautiful and rich Soil delicately adorned with Fruitful Trees and
pleasant Flowers, without Seas or Lakes; and, in a word, all over a very
Paradise: The Heavens also were then of a temperate Serene Air, no Storms or
Tempests, no Scorching or Freezing Weather, but pleasant Seasons throughout the
year, fit to breed and nourish all things; which now, clean contrary, is filled
with boistrous Winds, Storms and Hurricanes, Heats and Colds, distempered and
infectious Airs: so that men are now cut off in the beginning or midst of their
days: or if they fulfill the whole number of them, it does not amount to half a
quarter of their former longevity. This he undertakes to set forth to us in a
Book entitled, the Theory of the Earth. Which I shall now examine, and pass
some brief Animadversions upon it.

III. The whole Discourse of this man's Theory arises from the great
dissatisfaction he had in two things: the first was concerning the common
belief we have of the Deluge, that the Earth was wholly overflowed and quite
encompassed with so much Water all at once, as to extend to the tops of the
highest Mountains, and fifteen Cubits over; fo so we understand Moses's
description of it: This seems to him a thing not intelligible, and consequently
not credible, as we shall see hereafter. The second thing that troubles him is
the misshapen form of our present Earth, as he thinks, not becoming the
Omnipotent Power of God, who Created all things, and after every Work affirmed,
that it was good; which no man can say of this imperfect World: for it has
scarce any thing in it of form or order, but lies like a confused Mass of
Ruins. But tho the Creation was the first thing in order, yet in his Book he
puts it in the second place, and begins with the Deluge, as most to his
purpose; showing the impossibility of it, according to his Scheme of
Philosophy: for by that we are to rule our thoughts and words in all things
appertaining to the Natural World, as he calls it. But the plain truth is, both
these difficulties are but pretended to bring in his new devised fancy of
making another World, very different from that which Moses describes in the
Creation: This is his beloved Darling, which he would gladly compel us to
receive, by showing us first the impossibility of such a Deluge in this World,
as now it appears: And from thence he introduces a World of his own framing,
and shows thereby his admirable Wit and Parts, as he conceives, in its
composure: which we shall see when we come to it. At present we will follow his
method, and begin with the Deluge; the common opinion whereof he rejects,
because it is not Intelligible.

IV. He lays down this Rule, That in all things appertaining to this Natural
World, which consist of matter and form, we must not allow of any thing that is
not agreeable to the ordinary course of nature; which he supposes may be
conceived in a rational way. As for example, That two material bodies cannot
penetrate the one into the other: this is against the Principles of his
Philosophy. And therefore we ought not to allow that the Blessed Virgin
continued a Virgin in bringing forth our Savior into the World. And that
Accidents cannot subsist without a Subject to support them: this also is
unintelligible; and therefore we allow not the Popish Transubstantiation. So
likewise we reject their Purgatory, because it is unintelligible how the Soul
separated from the Body, being a pure Spiritual Substance, can suffer by
material Fire; and suchlike their Tenets. Yet we believe the first, that the
Blessed Virgin continued a Virgin in partu, that is, in bringing forth our
Savior, as well as in conceiving him, because we have a sufficient ground for
this in Scripture, both in the Prophet Isaiah, and in the Gospel. A Virgin
shall conceive and bear a Son. Her Virginity is jointly affirmed both of her
conceiving and bearing: And therefore all the Christian Church have ever
affirmed it, and say (according to the Creed called the Apostle's) born of the
Virgin Mary. But we find no compelling Scripture to make us believe the Popish
Tenets we mentioned. If the Papists could show us as plainly in Scripture their
Transubstantiation, as we can that the Virgin both conceived and bare a Son, we
should as readily believe the one as the other. Wherefore our Rule of Belief is
the Scripture; and whatsoever is plainly declared there, we presently submit
unto, whether the manner of it be intelligible or not intelligible; whether it
relate to the material World or the Spiritual World: for I know no reason why
we should make that distinction of Material and Spiritual, if Gods Word plainly
declares it: for by reason we are more assured that Gods Word must be Truth,
than that any material thing can be, or can not be so. Who does understand the
union of Man's Material Body with his Spiritual part the Soul? Where the
faculties of the Soul are lodged, his understanding, Will, and Memory? and how
they are distinguished? How material accidents of the Body work upon the Soul
and disorder sometimes the understanding, sometimes the memory? Nay in things
wholly material: How little does man understand, or can give a reason why a dry
yellow Seed of Wheat should spring up in a green moist Blade, and that grow
into an Ear, and become Wheat again? Or who does understand the various
flowings and ebbings of the Sea? These are things our very Senses tell us are
so: yet our Reason does not at all understand how they came to be so. Shall man
then, who understands not himself, nor the mean works of God, by his shallow
weak Reason examine and determine the great and wonderful Works of God? God
forbid.

V. But this man perchance will say that he has found out an explication of
Scripture in this business of the Deluge, which never was found before; and
such as may accord as well with Moses's relation, as that we commonly receive.
To this I answer, If his way of interpreting the Scripture be extravagant,
Romantic and ridiculous in it self, not any thing becoming the gravity of
Scripture; and also put a sense extremely forced, and even contrary to the
words, as they have been understood by the whole World hitherto, we have reason
to reject it. And now let any knowing serious Person (not light and giddy
Persons, who are pleased with any novelty) consider and weigh the Arguments he
brings, and the Answers herein contained, and then let him judge of the whole
matter: wherein we will now proceed.

VI. His first Chapter is only by way of Introduction to bring in the rest. And
in his second Chapter he endeavors to show us the vast quantity of Water which
is requisite to make such a Deluge: and, according to his computation, makes up
a sum of eight Oceans, that is, eight times as much Water as all the Seas in
the World contain. You must suppose this man a rare Hydrographer, and can tell
us exactly to a fathom the depth of all the Seas in the World, not only near
the shore, but in the main fathomless Ocean; nay, his skill reaches above the
Heavens, and can tell you the quantity of Waters there. By what Art or
Instrument this is computed is best known to himself, but not intelligible to
any body else. But let us hear the rest. He then affirms, that all the Waters
upon or under the Earth, together with the Waters above the Firmament would not
amount to much above one Ocean; so that there would be above six wanting to
fill up the Valleys to the Mountain tops and fifteen Cubits upwards. You must
know this man is a rare Geographer also, and has taken the height of every
Mountain, and the depth of every Valley in the whole World, and can tell you
what quantity of Water is requisite to fill them up, and make an even Sphere
with the whole Earth. And then concludes, That it is not intelligible from
whence so great a quantity of Water should be produced, and whither it should
be conveyed after the Deluge. Well, let it be unintelligible; Is it a good
consequence therefore to say it is Incredible? This man professes to believe
that God created all this whole World from nothing; not only the Earth, but
the vast incomprehensible Heavens, with Sun and Moon and all the innumerable
Stars; and believing this, could not doubt, but God having a mind to overflow
this whole Earth, could far more easily find Water enough to make such a Flood.
And should I say he did create Water on this occasion, what can he say to
confute it? Where has God in Scripture confined himself from any new Creation
for ever? No where, as I know of: for to say that God rested the seventh day
from all his Work, certainly cannot imply that God must never work more, John
5. 17. Christ faith, My Father works hitherto and I work. We find in the
Gospel our Savior fed five thousand men with five loaves and two fishes. I may
as well say this is unintelligible, and consequently Incredible: yet no good
Christian doubts of the truth. And why then might not God multiply the Waters
in that Deluge, as well as multiply the Loaves in the Gospel? Wherefore if we
say that the Waters in this great Deluge were multiplied, methinks a true
Believer should rest satisfied with such an answer: for this way of
multiplication better satisfies an Objection of his, made Page 19. That Moses
says, the Waters increased by degrees: for when our Savior multiplied the
Loaves, he did not at once create as many as would satisfy the five thousand,
but multiplied them by degrees, as the Disciples distributed them, and when
they returned they still found more to distribute. And so the Waters by degrees
increased, and decreased likewise by degrees. But, says he, What became of all
these Waters after the Deluge? Where were they disposed? A strange Question for
a Believer to ask! as if the same Power that multiplied could not also lessen.
And thus he may have eight, or eighteen Oceans, if it were requisite, to make
up his Deluge; which, says he, is unintelligible: yet is very intelligible to
any true Believer, tho the means whereby so much Water was produced be
unintelligible. And I would gladly know of any man what absurdity, or what
inconvenience there would be to Religion in this way of multiplication: I
profess I cannot see why any one should scruple at the unintelligibleness of
this, if he believes the other of multiplying Loaves in the Gospel. And
therefore I require our Theorist to show us some inconvenience or
unintelligibleness in the one more than in the other.

VII. But he brings a Rule out of S. Austin, That in the difficulties of
Scripture we should not easily make use of Gods Omnipotency for their
interpretation. Let it be so, we are not easily to make use of Gods
Omnipotency. Must we therefore never use it? Are there not a hundred Miracles
in Scripture, which neither St. Austin nor this man, with all his Philosophy,
can show how they could be done in a Natural way? And therefore when our Reason
cannot find out how such a thing can be effected by any other means than by
Gods Omnipotency, we aseribe it unto that. This, says he, is to make God march
forwards and backwards, create and annihilate, multiply and lessen according to
our will and pleasure: Not so, but according to his own Word. When he tells us
such a thing was done by him, and we cannot in reason find out how it was done
by any other means, than by Creation or Multiplication, we do not then vainly
make use of his Omnipotency, but only to make good his own Word. And I conceive
we can never fully satisfy our Reason, and answer every Objection that may be
made in this matter of the Deluge, and in many other things contained in
Scripture, without some such way. And give me leave to say further, We do in
this deal much more mannerly with the Deity than he does; for we leave God to
his own liberty to Create or multiply, when he sees occasion: but this Man
would bind up Gods hands and manacle them so, as he must not by any means
Create anew or Multiply, be the occasion ever so great, even the Deluge of the
whole World. And truly this Man seems to me, and, I believe, to all Men else, a
very Miracle, who allows no Miracle in the Deluge, but will needs have all done
by Intelligible and Rational ways, as he calls it; but we may rather call it a
fictitious and Romantic way, as we shall see by and by when we come to it.

VIII. But I think it fit at present to give an Answer to an Objection made by
him, I shall make bold to say, very frivolous. Moses, says he, in the
description of the Deluge, ascribes it unto two express Causes, the breaking
open the Fountains of the great Deep, and opening the Windows of Heaven; and by
these two means the Deluge arose and overflowed the World. Here you may see
Moses tells you the means whereby the Deluge was effected: Moses makes no
mention of Creating or Multiplying power. And what of all this? Was there
therefore no extraordinary power made use of in the Deluge? Job. 9. 6. It is
said, our Savior spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and
anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay, and said unto him, Go wash in
the Pool of Siloam; he went his way therefore and washed and came seeing. Here
you see the means expressed whereby this man's eyes were opened, viz. by
anointing his eyes with clay and washing in the Pool of Siloam. Were this man's
eyes opened by a Rational way, or by a Miracle? So likewise at the Pool of
Bethesda, John 5. an Angel went down at a certain season into the pool and
troubled the water: whosoever then first after the troubling of the water
stepped in, was made whole of whatsoever disease he had. Here we see the means
expressed how they were cured; yet without all doubt a miraculous means, and
far above the Reason of this Man, and beyond his Philosophy to find out, be it
ever so great. And so it is related by Moses himself, when God caused the
people to pass through the Red Sea, Exodus 14. 21. Moses stretched out his hand
over the Sea, and the Lord caused the Sea to go back by a strong East Wind all
that night and made the Sea dry Land, and the waters were divided; and the
Children of Israel went into the midst of the Sea upon the dry ground, and
the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand and on their left. Here we
see a means used, Moses stretching out his hand over the Sea, and the Sea went
back by a strong East Wind all night: So that the Sea was not dried up of a
sudden, but by degrees. Now will this Man with his Philosophy show us a
Rational way how this was done without any Miracle? most absurd. And just so,
though Moses ascribes the Deluge to a means, the breaking open the Fountains of
the great Deep, and the Windows of Heaven to be opened, and the Rain to descend
and the Fountains to run forty days and forty nights, and so the Flood
prevailed till it overflowed the whole World; to say there was no Miracle at
all in this is as absurd; and especially in his way of his newfound World,
where were neither Seas, Rains nor Tempests whatsoever till the Flood, but a
constant, calm, serene Air perpetually: which must needs cause them to think
such a Deluge miraculous indeed, never having any such thing as Rain before,
and of a sudden to see Water poured down in such wonderful abundance for forty
days together. If we should see Fire descend from Heaven in like manner forty
days together, no Man would doubt to affirm it to be a Miracle not
Intelligible. And thus you see what wonderful unintelligible difficulties this
Man has raised out of his Philosophy in this matter of the Deluge which he so
much stumbles at.

IX. But because he is a Man so desirous that all should be done in a Rational
way, we will endeavor a little to make this Deluge Intelligible in his own
way, and show him how we may find Water enough for it in the vast great Deep
below, which he says is fathomless, and from the vaster Heaven above (which I
may call Boundless in comparison of the lesser body of Earth) to overflow that
little circumference, though it be taken fifteen Cubits above the highest
Mountain, and so make up his eight Oceans, which he says is requisite. Genesis 1.
We find that when God created the Heavens and the Earth the Waters covered the
Earth, and then God divided the Waters and placed some above the Firmament, and
left some remaining under it: Where or how the Waters above the Firmament were
placed the Scripture does not mention, and therefore I acknowledge my ignorance;
and I find very knowing persons have much disputed, whether in his Atmosphere,
or in some higher place: but I rest contented in believing it, because the Word
of God has said it. Yet, if I may propose my thoughts, I conceive they might
be placed in some upper part of the Aerial Firmament, (and not carried up above
the Heavens, as some have fansied) and there extended to a far wider
circumference, than they were in here below, whilst they compassed the Earth:
for a great depth of Water here, when carried up and enlarged to that mighty
extent, would make a far thinner Orb, and as clear as Crystal, all earthly
parts being extracted; and no way hinder, but rather increase the light of Sun,
Moon and Stars, as we see glasses of like nature do. If this Philosopher tell
me that immediately above the Air lies the fiery Region (an ill neighbor for
the Water,) I shall make bold to ask him how he knows that: Has he ever been
there to see it? As for Philosophers talk, I think it much like Physicians,
many guesses, but no certainty of any thing. But if he like not this place for
the Waters, let him find out another: for I hope he will not deny Moses's plain
words, That the Waters were divided and part placed above the Firmament. If
this Philosopher ask me farther, how the Water, being a heavier body than the
Air, does there subsist and not fall down again; I shall ask him how the
thickest and heaviest Clouds sometimes pass away without any falling Rain, and
sometimes thin and far lighter Clouds fall down in showers? How at the Prayer
of Eliah, it rained not on the Earth by the space of three years and six
months; and he prayed again and the Heaven gave rain, James 5. 17. Will this
Philosopher say this was done by the course of Nature, and ordinary means? I am
sure S. James ascribes it to Eliah's Prayer, which withheld the natural course
of the Rains descending: for presently when he prayed again, the Heaven gave
rain. All Elements have no other station, than what God has appointed them. We
know the fire came down from above when God commanded, and burnt Sodom and
Gomorrha. And we are likewise assured that, God commanding, the Waters ascended
up on high, and that the Firmament is betwixt those above and those below: this
the Scripture declares. Wherefore the first Principle of my Philosophy is, To
believe the Scriptures, and that God governs all things; and that every Element
keeps that station which God has appointed, until he determine otherwise. But
if this Theorist be unsatisfied with this kind of discourse, as not agreeing
with his Principles of Nature, let him place the Waters above the Firmament
where he will, it matters not to me. Yet if he allow the Scripture, he must
join with me and grant, that God had a great reserve of Waters in some
Storehouse above to make use of whenever he pleased. As for the Waters under
the Firmament, first they covered all the Earth after they were divided; then
God gathered them together unto one place and made the dry land appear: and God
called the dry land Earth, and the gathering together of the Waters called he
Seas. For the reception of which Waters he had prepared a Channel (how deep, or
how great a part of the Earth is filled with them, I suppose is beyond this
Man's skill in Philosophy or Hydrography to determine) yet so that they were not
all contained in the depth of that Channel below the Earth: but part within the
Channel, and part remaining yet higher than the Earth in a wonderful manner, as
David expresses it, Psalm 33. 7. He gathers the waters of the Sea together
as an heap: He lays up the depth in storehouses. Which seems to express that
which I said before, That the Waters were partly above the Earth, and partly
below the Earth, as in a Storehouse. But though the Waters stood, as he says,
on an heap above, yet God set them a bound that they may not pass over, and
that they turn not again to cover the Earth. Which Jeremiah expresses also
Chap. 5. v. 22. Fear ye not me? says the Lord, Will ye not tremble at my
Presence? which have placed the sand for a bound of the Sea by a perpetual
Decree, that it cannot pass it: and though the waves thereof toss themselves,
yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can they not pass over it. This
passage also of Jeremiah is very remarkable; Will ye not tremble at my
Presence, who have placed the Sea in that wonderful manner, as it hourly
threatens you with an overwhelming destruction, and would certainly confound
you, did not I restrain it and keep it back by a perpetual Decree? And whereas
our Philosopher says that God has set Rocks, Hills and Mountains, and decreed
those for bounds to the Sea, I desire him to take notice that here Jeremiah
speaks not of any such bounds, but the Sand only, where the Waves roar and toss
themselves, yet cannot pass over it because of God's Decree; He gives that as a
reason for their restraint from overflowing the lower ground, and not the
highest of the Land; above which the Sea can as easily pass over, as the lower
Sands, were it not kept in by Gods Decree. For, as I said before, this great
Abyss did once cover the whole Earth before God gathered it together, and there
settled it by a Decree; and might as well again cover it, were there no Decree
to hinder it. Now David's expression and Jeremiahs also were very vain, if the
Sea, as this Man would have it, were so much below the Earth, that it did not
need any restraint from God to keep it from overflowing; and therefore let the
Waves roar and toss themselves never so much, yet without any Decree of God it
is impossible they should overflow the Earth, and men need not at all tremble
at Gods Presence in that regard, but may sleep secure from any danger of a
Deluge. Which Blasphemy I hope he will not presume to speak or think. And if to
avoid this Blasphemy, he should say that Gods threatening was not in vain,
because by his Omnipotent Power he could take away all those bounds of the Sea,
Rocks, Hills and Mountains. And what then? he has brought the ground level to
such a place as Jeremiah spoke of before: yet there Jeremiah says the Waters
were not able to overflow it. But he will farther extend God's Omnipotent Power
to raise the Waters, tho they are below the Earth and make them come like
flying Rivers (such as he mentions in his Deluge) and overflow the Land. Mark
you now: This Man would not allow God to do the least Miracle to make good the
common interpretation of Moses's words; no, by no means, he must not alter the
course of Nature; and therefore he has taken so great pains to invent his
Fraction to save God from doing a Miracle. But now God must do Miracle upon
Miracle, pull down Mountains, and raise up the Waters and make them come
flying, as I said, over the Earth, if he will destroy these obstinate Jews. So
that the whole fabric of his Design and Fraction is wholly spoiled: And the
Jews being assured by this Philosopher that God would not do such Miracles to
destroy them, were safe enough; and Jeremiah's, or rather Gods threats would
still be in vain. And thus by avoiding one Rock, he falls upon another, and a
greater. Incidit in Scyllam.

X. And so let us return to Moses, who says, the Waters first covered all the
Earth, and then that God gathered them together in one place, where they might
lie together as a swelling Mountain: for, as David expresses it, Psalm. 33.7.
He gathers the waters together as an heap: He lays up the depth in
storehouses. This Opinion then of the Seas being higher than the Earth, is no
such old and foolish Opinion, as he expresses it: for we shall not take his
Ipse dixit for any Confutation, though ever so magisterially spoken. And if he
argues against this, That the Land and Sea make up one entire Globe, and
therefore the Sea must not swell out so far as to spoil the fashion of it. Sure
the swelling of high Mountains so far above the Valleys quite spoils the
spherical form of his whole Globe, let the Seas swell or no. But by what does
he find us necessarily obliged to confess the Earth and Sea to be in such a
perfect Globe, as we may not allow the Sea to swell above the Earth? Perchance
he will say all must run in an equal line round about the Center. How then does
the Earth it self run in so unequal a line, as from the highest Mountain to the
lowest Valley? And the Mountains, for ought I know, might have been as high
again, and yet the whole Globe subsist in the same place that it does. Again,
If every thing must lie in an even line, how comes the Sea in its deepest
Channel to lie so much below the Mountains, or any thing at all below them, the
Earth being so much a heavier body than it; and the Earth according to its
gravity should lie so much below the Sea, and that encompass it round about, as
it did at the first Creation. Wherefore his Philosophical Suppositions and
Reasons signify little: Gods Creation and appointment are according to his own
Will and pleasure, and every Element sinks and rises and keeps that station he
has appointed for it. And if he comes now to confute me with his Mathematical
Instruments, and pretends to show me that the Sea is not higher than the Earth
by standing on the shore and taking a level, I shall not at all hearken unto
him: for tho by his Instrument no considerable rise of the Sea may be discerned
in one short view; yet in many thousand miles a very great rising may be
discovered, when he comes into the main Ocean: and therefore I shall desire him
to assure me that he has walked with his Instrument upon the grand Sea and
taken an exact level from England to America, and that in a most perfect
absolute calm (for the least commotion of the Sea will spoil his measuring) and
so go on into the other Ocean beyond America, and take the level likewise of
that Sea. A hard task I lay upon him, but yet very necessary, seeing he goes
about to confute me and Scripture too with his Mathematical Instrument: and
therefore it is no wonder if I require him to walk upon the Sea being in a
perfect Mathematical level. Nor is this rise of the Sea a vain and useless
thing, but kept up by God in this form by his perpetual Decree for the use and
benefit of Mankind, and done by the same Power by which he created the whole
World for the benefit of Men: that is, that Fountains might run from thence
unto the highest Hills, and there spring forth to water the whole Earth, as
David says, Psalm 104. 8. They go up by the Mountains and down by the Valleys
unto the place which thou have founded for them. And v. 13. He waters the
hills from his chambers: the earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works.
And for this purpose, though the Sea lies ever so high in the main Ocean, yet
descending by degrees toward the shores, it lies there very low, that the
Rivers may exonerate themselves into it. And from hence we may gather the
meaning of Moses, when for the Deluge he mentioned the breaking up the
Fountains of the Great Deep, that is, the Fountains and Springs which flow from
the great Deep by several passages contrived by God under the Earth to convey
the Waters of the great Deep, and make the springs run among the highest Hills,
as David says, and there break out in the tops of the Mountains in such
flowing streams, as I have been amazed to see it, and have seriously considered
whether the top of the Mountain, sometimes very small above the Spring, could
possibly contain vapors enough to engender so much Water as flowed from them:
for a great quantity of vapors being condensed will make but a few drops of
solid Water. And our Theorist being a Man of observation, I doubt not but he
has concluded (as I have done) That tho the top of the Mountain had been
filled with solid Water, it could not cause the Spring to run at that rate very
many hours. And whereas in Autumn Springs that are raised by Vapors condensed
into Water, at the foot of Hills or in lower grounds, do generally cease after
a dry Summer, or, at best, run low: these from the Mountains continue to flow
plentifully. And from all this I conclude, that when Moses says the Fountains
of the great Deep were broke open, he means by the great Deep the same he
mentioned in Genesis at the Creation, which in the second Verse he calls the
Great Deep: And the same Waters being gathered together in one place, he calls
them by the common name of Seas, v. 10. which of it self might afford Water
enough to cover the whole Earth; for it is evident by Moses that the Waters did
cover the whole Earth before God gathered them together in one place, after
they were divided from the Waters above the Firmament.

XI. Now if he take into his consideration all the Waters that were created at
the beginning, which Moses says did cover the Earth; and how deep they covered
it, I suppose no man will presume to affirm, whether fifteen or fifty Cubits.
And no man can think that God created abundance of Water to annihilate any part
of it again presently without any Cause: and therefore we may be assured that
the same quantity of Water still remains. This then is clear, that as these
waters did once cover the Earth, the same quantity of Waters may do so again.
Now let him take all these Waters, both them above the Firmament (which God
certainly could as easily bring down as carry them up, let the place of their
abode be where it will) and those under the Firmament, he cannot possibly want
Water abundantly to serve for a Deluge over the whole Earth. Peradventure he
will say, as he did above; That in this carrying the Waters up and down, we
make God to march backwards and forwards according to our will: And I answer
again, as I did before, That we do not make God do any thing: but only show
unto this Theorist (who will not allow God either to Create, or Multiply the
Waters that were created, upon so great an occasion, as this Deluge) how God
might do it without either Multiplying or Creating anew. I do it then to
satisfy his curiosity rather than our own: for we rest satisfied with God's
affirming that there was such a Deluge, and that it was caused by the breaking
open of the Fountains, and opening the Windows of Heaven; whether partly or
wholly by those means which Moses sets down, we do not positively affirm. And
yet if we did affirm the Waters to come down from above, and the Fountains to
run below for the increase; and so likewise to be taken up again and the
Fountains to run back for the decrease, it were no more than we find in
Scripture to be done upon a far smaller occasion. For God made that mighty body
of the Sun which wheels about the Earth with such incomprehensible speed, yet
at the command of Joshuah, that he might have the longer day to obtain a full
Victory, to stand still, Josh. 10. And 2 Kings 20. we find by the Dial of Ahaz,
it went back ten degrees to satisfy Hezekiahs doubt whether he should recover
or no, according to the words of Isaiah. If on such occasions God did such
mighty Miracles, What wonder is it if we suppose him to do far greater Miracles
upon so much a greater occasion as the Deluge? If he will show me how this was
done without a Miracle, I will undertake to show him how the Deluge was made
without a Miracle. And if God wrought a Miracle then, Why not before at the
Deluge? I hope these Scripture-reasons and examples, which I have brought, are
far more considerable than his trivial experiments of a Mathematical Instrument
or Cubical Pot, which he mentions also Page 13. as to tell us of such a Vessel
receiving the Rain when it falls for several hours together, and how little a
body of Water is found by it, and consequently how little this would conduce
toward the Deluge; I conceive it signifies nothing, unless he had been present
at the Deluge and seen in what measure the Rains did then descend: for upon
that occasion, who can doubt but that the Waters were poured forth in a strange
and wonderful manner, the Windows of Heaven being opened so as they will never
be again to the Worlds end? Wherefore to depend so much upon trivial
Experiments and his weak Reason in such extraordinary, wonderful and
supernatural things, as no man can doubt but this Deluge was, his Faith may be
much damnified, though his Reason, or rather Fancy, may be much delighted with
inquisitiveness after them: And when he has done all, and spent his whole time
(to say nothing of things more precious) in searching after the Causes of
things, and wearied himself with busy and toiling labor therein, he will find
that to be true by experience, which weak and deluded Reason will not easily
believe, That he knows only this one thing, that he knows nothing. And
therefore it is a strange presumption for vain man, who is born as ignorant ant
as a wild asses colt, as Job says, c. 11. v. 12. to take upon him to be so
wise, as to examine and determine the works of God by his brutish Reason; nay
more than brutish in comparison of the Divine Infinite Wisdom. Wherefore S.
Paul with great reason bids us, Col. 2. 8. Beware lest any man spoil you
through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. Not that true Reason, or true
Philosophy can spoil any man, but vain and deceitful Reason and Philosophy,
such as the tradition or experiments of the World commonly make use of.

XII. This pains I have taken to satisfy this over-inquisitive Man in the
Works of God, which he says God has given him Reason to employ in: but yet to
be done with Reason and Moderation, which he does not. Having thus, as I humbly
conceive, sufficiently declared where the quantity of Water may be found to
make up such a Deluge as Moses mentions, either wholly by Waters already
created; or, if you please to take in the Divine Power of Multiplication (which
sure we may allow here, as well as we believe it to be done in the
Gospel-loaves) then I am sure it is easy to find out Water for it. And I think
no sober man will deny in this Deluge a Miracle was wrought in the
extraordinary manner of the Rains descending and the Fountains flowing, let
this Man deny what he pleases, for some men cannot be confuted but by
Club-reasons. I desire him to remember what he says Page 297. concerning
Lucretius. Though his suppositions be very precarious, and his Reasonings all
along very slight, he will many times strut and triumph, as if he had wrested
the Thunder out of Joves right hand; and a Mathematician is not more confident
of his Demonstration, than he seems to be of the truth of his shallow
Philosophy: Mutato nomine de te.

XIII. We will now proceed to the manner of this Flood, how Moses describes the
beginning, rise and increase of the Waters; and likewise how he describes the
decrease: which I desire you to observe very well, that when we come to compare
it with this Man's invention and manner of it, you may see how strangely he
prevaricates from the Truth related by Moses, Genesis 7. 11, etc. where he says,
The same day that Noah entered into the Ark were all the fountains of the great
Deep broken up, and the windows of Heaven were opened; and the rain was upon
the earth forty days and forty nights. And ver. 17. he says, The Flood was
forty days upon the earth, and the waters increased and bare up the Ark, and it
was lifted up above the earth; and the waters prevailed and were increased
greatly upon the earth, and the Ark went upon the face of the waters; and all
the high hills that were under the whole Heaven were covered, fifteen cubits
upwards did the waters prevail and the Mountains were covered. And then
concludes the Chapter at ver. 24. And the waters prevailed upon the earth a
hundred and fifty days. Here you see how the Waters swelled first to that
height as to reach to the place where the Ark stood: and the Waters rose more
and more, till at length the Ark was lifted up above the Earth: and as the
Waters prevailed and covered all the Hills and Mountains under Heaven, the Ark
went upon the face of the Waters, which continued in that manner a hundred and
fifty days over the Earth. Now can any sober, rational man understand these
words of Moses otherwise than that the Waters increased so far, as at one time
they covered the whole Earth; not any particular part of it: for Moses says
they prevailed upon the Earth in general, as he had described it before,
Valleys and all Hills also: So that the Ark moved upon the face of these
Waters, which thus continued many days. And thus the whole Jewish Church and
Christian Church, in a word, all Believers, have understood these words of
Moses in this very sense. Had the words of Moses been any thing obscure, and
some men had raised doubts upon them, he might have had some ground for his
understanding them otherwise: but the words of Moses being esteemed very plain
in themselves, and never any doubt raised upon them; what other argument would
this Man have to prove the sense of them, unless he can prove all the World
were such Dunces before him, as they could not understand plain words? Yet
notwithstanding all, this Gentleman has the strange confidence to affirm, Page
80. That without doubt it was a great oversight in the Ancients to fancy the
Deluge like a great standing Pool of Water, reaching from the bottom of the
Valleys to the top of the Mountains, every where alike with a level and uniform
Surface. If it were so great an oversight in the Ancients, Why does not he
prove that oversight? Does he think any man takes his overconfident affirmation
to be a proof? All the World hitherto understanding them in this sense, he
should both have showed and proved particularly wherein this mistake does lie;
and set down the words of Moses which our Narration varies from, without
wresting or laboring to put on another sense, than is evident: for certainly
no man would be so rash and heady, as to contradict the whole World without a
full and clear Demonstration. Yet he neither offers a Demonstration, nor any
Argument to confute this Opinion, but his overgreat confidence; so great as
not to be paralleled in any Writer that I ever heard of.

XIV. Now let us go on to Moses in the description of the decrease of this
Flood in the eighth Chapter, where he says, God made a Wind to pass over the
earth, and the Waters assuaged; the Fountains also of the Deep and the windows
of Heaven were stopped, and the rain from Heaven was restrained, and the waters
returned from off the earth continually. After the end of the hundred and fifty
days the waters were abated, and the Ark rested in the seventh month upon the
Mountains of Ararat: and in the first day of the tenth month were the tops of
the Mountains seen. Here you find how after the Waters had continued several
months, they sunk by degrees till the Mountain tops were seen, and the Ark
rested upon the Mount of Ararat. Is it not evident also by this place that
while the Ark moved upon the face of the Waters, all the Mountains under Heaven
were covered, until the first day of the tenth month, when the Mountain tops
began to appear. No other part of the Mountains was then discovered, the
standing Pool mentioned before covered all. And after this, ver. 8. it is said,
Noah sent forth a Dove from him to see if the waters were abated from off the
face of the ground; but the Dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and
she returned unto him into the Ark, for the waters were upon the face of the
whole Earth: So that this Pool continued above forty days after the tenth month
began. Yet all this will not suffice to convince this Man of his Error.
Notwithstanding all this particular description of Moses (which is so plain, as
I do not know how he could speak plainer) telling us how the Deluge was caused,
this Man has the confidence to make a very different relation of it. Job 28.
God asks him a question, Where wast thou when I laid the foundation of the
earth? Declare if thou have understanding. So I may well say to this Man, Where
wast thou when I brought a Deluge upon the Earth. Declare if thou have
understanding. Sure this Man was not then in being, and therefore can discover
no more unto us of that Deluge, but what he received from others. And I desire
to know of him, whether any of the Ancients (except the fabulous Heathens) have
delivered unto him any different narration from Moses concerning this Deluge:
the Christians sure have no other: nor had the fews any other before them, who
are the men most likely to retain such a Tradition, written or unwritten: for
Abraham had Sem the Son of Noah to instruct him in all things during his whole
life of a hundred and seventy years, Sem dying after Abraham as all conclude by
a just computation. Is it not then a strange thing that this Fraction of the
Earth, being the principal Cause given by this Man for the Deluge, and without
which there could be none, as he affirms? I say again, Is it not very strange
that Sem should not relate so wonderful a matter to Abraham, unto whom
doubtless he delivered the narration of the Flood with all its circumstances?
The other Sons of Noah, Ham and Japhet, lived also many years after the Flood;
and it is as strange that none of them should mention it to their Posterity:
and so it might have been conveyed unto Heathens also: Yet no man in the World
hitherto has uttered one syllable of it. And therefore I think I may safely
affirm, and he will be very well pleased with it, if I say, no Author in the
World ever understood the Deluge, or related it in such a manner, as he has
found out; and consequently may challenge to himself the glory of it, if it be
true; but must bear the shame also, if it be false. But if you will have
patience, I will tell you in short the whole substance of this Deluge, as he
sets it forth.

XV. First, he presupposes the World to have been before the Deluge of a smooth
uniform surface of Earth (as I shall show hereafter) without any Sea appearing,
but all the Sea was enclosed within a compass of Earth round about it, and this
Earth inhabited by all Mankind; whose wickedness grew to be so great that God
resolved to destroy them all, except Noah and his Family, who found favor with
him. And God foreseeing that the people of the World would grow so wicked as to
deserve a destruction, he so fashioned this World, as at sixteen hundred years
after the Creation, it should in an instant fall all to pieces of it self. And
in this he admires God's great Wisdom (but it is his own invention) setting it
forth by the comparison of an Artists making a Clock with so rare an invention,
as not only to strike at every hour, but exactly at the end of a hundred
hours, it would all of it self fly asunder and break; which would be far more
admirable, faith he, than only to make it so as to strike at each hour. But
now I pray you observe the rare Invention whereby this was effected. This Earth
at first, you must suppose, was a very Paradise: but in process of time the Sun
with its mighty heat so parched and filled it with chops and chauns which
descended very far into the Earth, and prepared it for a rupture: and so heated
the Waters within the Earth, as it made them boil, and send forth such violent
furious vapors, that the whole body of the Earty by their struggling to get
forth was put into a terrible Earthquake; and at length broke out in that
raging manner, as shattered this lower World to pieces: which falling into that
gulf of Water underneath, great bodies of Earth tumbling down at once into it,
did so force the Waters up, as to mount even to the very Heavens, and so down
again: And by this means the Waters being cast up into the Air in several
places one after another as the Earth tumbled down, covered the Earth part
after part as he supposes, and thus made a Deluge; for so he would fain have
it. Is not this a rare Romantic way? and far exceeds all that ever has been
written of Sir Amadis de Gaul, or the Knight of the Burning Pestle.

XVI. Before I proceed farther, I shall make some Remarks upon this his rare
Invention. First, this whole body of the Earth, like a vast great Pitcher, was
heating by the Sun sixteen hundred years together; a wonderful thing. One would
have thought the Sun in six hundred years time, or a thousand at most, would
have tried the uttermost of its strength, and have set this Pitcher a boiling.
I pray you how thick was this Earth, that it could heat the Waters under it? He
supposes a mile, at least: and yet in the hottest part of the World that we can
now find, do but make a Vault in the Earth twenty yards deep, we shall find the
Earth rather cold than hot, and 'twill yield a refreshment to any one that goes
into it: And sure our Torrid Zone is as hot, as the Temperate Regions were in
his fine World. How then came his fine Earth to break into so many parts? For
we find when fumes or vapors are in the Earth and cause an Earthquake by their
struggling mightily to get forth; as soon as they have made a breach in one
place to get out, the struggling cease, and the Vapors come out in a
Whirlwind, Hurricane, or some such thing. And therefore had his Earth broken in
some few places toward the Torrid Zone, where it was most likely to break,
being thereabouts much more parched and chopped, than in other parts; methinks,
those vapors going forth at liberty, his great Pitcher should cease from it
boiling fury, and the remaining body of the Earth might still have continued
its dainty spherical form: For certainly those parts under the Torrid Zone and
nearit, would have been more chopped and made ready for a breach in the first six
hundred years, than the Northern parts in the whole sixteen hundred, especially
considering the Earth (as he would have it) was set in that posture to the Sun,
and was so unfufferably hot thereabouts, as no man living could endure it: For
so he sets it forth when he comes to treat of Paradise, and dividing the World
into two Hemispheres by the Torrid Zone; and that men could not pass from one
to the other by reason of the excessive heat. Wherefore, as I said, it must
needs be that this part must break many hundred years before the Northern part:
and the vapors got out, the struggling and breaking of the Earth should cease.
But he will say, The Water coming out from thence might overflow all the Earth,
especially there being also great Rains at the same time. To this I Answer,
according to his own Rule in his first Book, Chap. 2. That all the Vapors in
the upper Region condensed and become solid Water, do not make up the hundredth
part of what it was before. To this he adds another Reason there, an Experiment
made by a Cubical Vessel set forth to receive the Rain; in four and twenty
hours the Waters received do not make up an inch and an half; and then computes
how much Water forty days rain would cause: all which he concludes would amount
to very little toward the Deluge, for which he requires eight Oceans. If this
were so little, as he would have it, he must have all the rest from his Sea
under the Earth. But then he comes upon us with his Romantic flying Rivers (as
he expresses it page 75.) which like the great Dragon in the Apocalypse, with
their wonderful tails swept away a great part of Mankind: Yet the greater part,
for ought I know, might still remain and escape the Deluge: For I would ask him
how far these flying Rivers could reach. We find when a mighty stone dashes
into the Water, the greatest part of the Water which is raised by it flies
upward, though some may rise obliquely on either side. Let us now consider when
two or three Mountains, or half a dozen, fall into his Gulf at once, they might
raise the Water oblikely a great way on either side: I pray you how far? Shall
I yield unto him a hundred miles, or five hundred miles? (sure I yield a great
way) yet this would come very far short of the Northern Poles. And thus many
men might have escaped the Deluge and been saved from it, as well as Noah with
his Ark. So that this Deluge would have been but a partial Deluge over a small
part of the Earth (a thing which he mightily argues against in the first Book
of his Theory Chap. 3.) for as I showed before, the Earth must needs break in
those parts next the Torrid Zone several hundred years before the Northern. And
thus the greater part of his habitable World would have escaped the Deluge.
Again, I pray you consider what Moses says of the Flood, and this Man urges
also upon other occasions, when it seems to serve his turn, as when he argues
against the Creation of new Waters; for that would make a sudden rise of Water;
against which he urges the words of Moses, who says, That the Flood increased
by degrees, till at length it lifted up the Ark above the Earth, and carried it
upon the face of the Waters; and so decreased by degrees: but now the case is
altered, and the Waters must dash up and turnble down on a sudden. Is this
increasing by degrees forty days or forty hours? when the Water could not be
four minutes in dashing up and so tumbling down again. And thus he does in
several places of his Theory, now Pro, and then Con.

XVII. And now comes a thing very admirable: He endeavors to screw out the
ground of this Romantic Rupture from those few words of Moses, The Fountains
of the great Deep were broke open. Mark you, says he; Here Moses first speaks
of breaking open. From whence he concludes a great breach: And of what? The
Fountains of the great Deep. And this great Deep he supposes was all included
within the Earth, and, had no Fountain at all issuing out (for he allows no
Fountains in his new Earth) and therefore by Fountains you must conceive Moses
does not mean such flowing Fountains, as we have, but the breaking or cleaving
the Earth asunder, when the Water with the Vapors forced its way out. But all
this fancy of his is quite spoiled by himself, he giving us a Rule, and a true
one, Page 82. That Moses relating unto us the Deluge as an Historiographer,
ought to use common words, and such as may express his meaning to the people,
to whom he delivered this relation. Surely then the people, who knew no other
Fountains, but such as usually we have flowing with Water, must needs
understand the like unto them, and not such Fractions and breaches of the
Earth, as they never heard of before, nor any man ever called Fountains. Then
he makes another Observation, That Moses uses here the word great Abyss,
mentioned Genesis 1. 2. and not the common word for the Sea. But I shall show him
that Moses does call the same Abyss the Sea. For Genesis 1. 9. those Waters which
covered the Earth, ver. 2. were gathered together into one place, and ver. 10.
God called those waters Seas. And so we find that the Fountains of the great
Deep, and the Fountains of the Sea, are both one and the same in the first
Chapter of Genesis: and therefore we in our Earth understand them so. Moses
calls them Fountains of the great Deep, or Fountains of the Sea: and by
Fountains of the Sea we understand those that run from the Sea, which were
broken up (whether Literally or Metaphoricaly, as he pleases) that is broken up
and enlarged that they might flow in great abundance. All this proves nothing
to us, nor to any man that has not his head already filled with such a vain
fancy, as the rupture of the whole Earth. But passing over all this, let us
now consider whether this be the Deluge that Moses meant.

XVIII. He says the Flood was forty days upon the Earth and the waters
increased and bare up the Ark, and it was lift up above the earth. Here we have
an increase of the Waters forty days by the flowing of the Fountains from the
great Deep and the Windows of Heaven being opened, both in the same day. But in
his description of the Flood he puts the Rain forty days before any breach of
the Earth. And when the Earth brake, what became of the Ark? Moses says, it
was born up and lift above the Earth by the Waters prevailing: but in his
description, the Earth must first break under the Ark, and so the Ark
necessarily must fall along with it into the Waters which were under the Earth:
And this he would have to be the same with lifting up above the Earth. But poor
Noah with his Sons and Daughters found it otherwise, and surely were mightily
amazed to find themselves so much deceived in God's Promise, having taken so
great pains to make an Ark to save them by swimming upon the Waters; yet were
now tumbled headlong down, Ark and all into the Abyss: A rare way of lifting
up! Then another great part of the Earth falling into the Abyss flounced the
Waters up with a mighty force even unto the Heavens, and made there, as it
were, a flying River, as his own words express it in the end of the sixth
Chapter. And so one piece of the Earth after another falling down into the
Abyss, there was such a commotion and tempest raised, and the Ark with it
tossed up so often into the air with his flying Rivers, and carried headlong
again down into the Abyss, that the preservation of it must be a far greater
Miracle, than any we require in Moses's Deluge. And thus is that Chapter framed
in so wonderful a Romantic way, as exceeds all that ever yet was written of
that kind. Is it not a strange thing that Moses should not have one word
mentioning such a Fraction of the earth, and so horrible a Tempest as ensued?
To this he Answers, Page 70. That, it is below the dignity of Sacred Penmen, or
the Spirit of God that directs them, to show the Causes of things, and their
manner of proceeding: but Providence leaves that to the exercise of our Wills
and Inventions. And truly he has exercised his Wit and Invention in a most
ample manner. But though it be below the dignity of the Sacred Penmen to show
Causes upon our Enquiry, and to satisfy our Curiosity: Yet when they
condescend so far as to express the Causes, and manner of their proceeding, as
Moses here does, showing us the Cause from whence the Flood came, viz. the
excessive flowing of Fountains, and the great abundance of Rains falling; and
how these Waters prevailed by degrees upon the Earth, till at length they
reached the place where the Ark was; and swelling yet higher, lifted the Ark
above the Earth, and prevailed so far as to carry it upon the face of the
Waters fifteen Cubits above the tops of the Mountains: and so on to the
decrease. Now Moses describing so punctually the whole business of the Deluge;
yet, as I said before, not to have one word of this horrible Fraction (which
this Man puts for the main Cause of the Deluge) nor of this Tempest; and for
him to say it is below the dignity of the Sacred Penman to give a Cause, when
they particularly relate the Cause, is very absurd, and also quite contrary:
for Moses expressly declares the Cause of the Flood to be the running of the
Fountains of the great Deep, and not the breaking of the Earth, which he could
not call Fountains, Fountains being quite another thing. Wherefore it is evident
this Man makes use of Scripture only to give some credit to his Theory with
inconsiderate people that mind Scripture very little. Moses goes on in his
description of the Flood, and says, that all the Hills and Mountains under the
whole Heaven continued covered many days, until the beginning of the tenth
month, when the Waters began to decrease; and then decreasing forty days by
degrees the tops of the Mountains began to appear, all the other parts were
covered still with Water: for the tops only appeared. But this Man would have
it clean otherwise, The Waters did not prevail and ascend to the tops of the
Mountains (in his spherical Earth) but the smooth body of the Earth fell down
into the Water with such a mighty force, as dashed the Water on a sudden up
into the Air, even to the Heavens; and the Water must needs fall down again on
a sudden; for nothing was there to hold it up, but down it must. How then did
the Waters continue to cover and prevail upon the Earth a hundred and fifty
days? for part after part falling into it in all places, the Water dashed up
and fell down on a sudden. And sure Moses would not call the dashing of the
Mountains, the covering of the Mountains. But suppose it to be so: I ask, Did
all the whole earth fall down or no? If not all, then the parts remaining were
not covered with Water, and so the Deluge was not universal: The men then that
lived upon those parts of the Earth might escape the Deluge: But Moses says,
the Flood destroyed all flesh living, except Noah and his. And if the whole
Earth did fall into the Water, then the whole Earth was covered all at once, by
his own confession, and the Deluge was universal in that manner as we affirm,
but he denies. Now whether all the Hills in this World were made by the Flood
or no, we will not question: But, says he, They were all made by the breaking
of the Earth: there were no Mountains nor Hills in his fine World. Well, let it
be so, they were all made by the breaking of the Earth, which he calls the
Flood: yet when they were made, all were covered by Water, and many Cubits
higher. Let this Man ask Moses whence he had all this Water: for that is the
Principle on which he depends for his whole Theory: which this of Moses plainly
confutes.

XIX. Now the sum of all this Discourse lies here. Moses, as plainly as a man
can express it, declares that the Waters wholly encompassed the Earth, all at
once, to the height of fifteen Cubits above the highest Mountain. This
quantity of Water, says our Theorist, is unintelligible: I say, it is very
Intelligible without making use of God's Omnipotent Power in Creating new
Waters for it, or in Multiplying any before Created (though we may upon such an
occasion do it) But I hope we may make use of all those Waters which God
Created the first day of the World. And I have plainly showed how that those
Waters are fully sufficient to make up that mighty Deluge, which to him is
unintelligible: For the first day of the World God Created a deep Abyss to
encompass the whole Earth; and this deep Abyss God divided, and placed part
above the Firmament, and the other part remained under the Firmament; which
still did encompass the whole Earth. Now if this Water which remained under the
Firmament did once encompass the Earth, Why might it not again in the Deluge
encompass the same Earth, overflowing all, yea and fifteen Cubits more? If he
say the Waters were not so deep after they were divided: I desire him first to
prove that, if he can; and after he has proved it, I have yet a great reserve
of Water to make the Deluge, viz. the Waters which God carried up above the
Firmament. I do not mean mists and vapors in the Firmament or in the Air
below, which, says he, being condensed would make up but a small quantity of
Water to contribute toward a Deluge; let it be so: I speak not of such
vapors, but of real solid Water, part of that deep Abyss which encompassed the
whole Earth at first, and God divided and placed above the Firmament. If he ask
me in what place they were settled, I freely confess I do not know: yet God's
Word has said it, and I very easily believe it was done, tho where he placed
them I will not take upon me to determine. I hope he believes it was done as
well as I; and then, if he please, let him with his Philosophy determine the
place where they were settled. And when he informs me, I will presently again
inform him and show him how there was Water sufficient to make up this grand
Deluge: And thus the business will be very intelligible which I hope may give
satisfaction. And so we will end this matter of the Deluge, though there be
many other extravagancies contained in his fanciful way.

SECTION III. CONTAINS The Fabric of his New World.
I. I Have entertained you long enough with the wild and vain fancy of this
Man concerning the Deluge, that was but a Praeludium to usher in his rare
Conceit of a new World, which is the Masterpiece and very Quintessence of his
Philosophy: And by this he means to set up a new Sect of Philosophers,
something like Epicurus and his Atoms, but far exceeding him; and therefore
hopes that his Name will be much more famous than his, or any other
Philosophers of old, and will be a Monument aere perennius, more lasting than
any brass, and a Fabric far more sumptuous than the men of the old Worlds
great Babel, which they thought should have continued to future Ages: But by
God the builders were soon dispersed, confounding their Language and scattering
them all the World over. And it is much to be feared this Man's Tower may have
the like success from God's Word confounding him: for he begins his building
with a very ominous foundation, a Chaos of Confusion; and from thence hopes to
raise a Monument everlasting: which does not hang well together. But he
undertakes the work very confidently, and, as he faith himself, makes a bold
step into his new World; a very bold step indeed, for the World that Moses
describes, Genesis 1. was nothing to it, that had only one spot of delicious
ground in it, which he called Paradise: But the World this Man has framed is
Paradisiacal all over, as he terms it, a very Garden of Delight. It wants
only one thing; There is not a Mountain in all his World to carry you to (as
the Devil did our Savior) from whence you might have a large prospect of this
delicious Land: for then doubtless you would fall down and worship him for his
admirable contrivance of it.

II. But before we examine the Fabric of it self, let us confider what motive
put our Philosopher upon this rare contrivance, and admirable Design: why, he
was much unsatisfied with the misshapen appearance of our present Earth: it was
so rude and deformed a Mass, as it looked like the ruins of some goodly
Structure, and a confused heap of rubbish, rather than the complete workmanship
of a Master Builder, consisting of parts so unproportioned; here a Mountain,
there a Valley; here vast broken Rocks, there smooth and pleasant Plains; here
great Promontories shooting out into the Sea, there the Sea running into the
Land in sinus's and creeks, without any order or regularity: but lying in a
confused manner, as happening by chance, rather than contrived with any Method
or Order. Such is the outside of it; and the inside also as irregular with
dismal Vaults and Caverns, such as fright a man to look into it; far from
affording any pleasure to the beholders: and therefore our Philosopher cannot
think this to be a piece of workmanship and perfection becoming such a
Master Builder as that great God who made the beautiful Heavens with all those
Stars and glorious Lights: but rather like the broken ruins of his magnificent
Building. Thus he describes the present Earth. But what if it do appear that
God was the framer of such a confused heap, as he represents this Earth to be?
Will not then a strange confusion surprise this hasty and rash Philosopher for
thus censuring the workmanship of God?

III. I defire him to give me leave to set forth our Microcosm, Man, in some
such deformed way, as he does the Megacosm, or great World. I might affirm him
to be a most misshapen creature also; and his Head to be like a Jug or Bottle
with the neck turned downwards, much deformed in it self, one side all rough
and hairy, the other bald, as it were, all battered and broken; a broad
forehead at the top, under that two holes dented in for Eyes, then a great and
hollow Trunk of a Nose standing forth, then a gaping mouth filled with bones
and a lump of flesh between them, with two flaps for lips hanging over; then a
Chin, as it were a great Promontory, stands out beyond a small dwindling neck,
at the bottom whereof stretch forth two mighty overgrown shoulders, and at each
side of them Arms as small hanging down, fastened on, as it were, with strings
to move up and down, and at the end of them two Hands ragged and jagged with
Fingers; down his Back runs a great ridg of Bones with Ribs encompassing his
Breast: next unto that a great Potbelly with hips and buttocks swelling out far
larger than his Wast; and all this divided into two Thighs, as if some wedges
had been driven in to rend his Body from the twist downward. And his inside as
deformed as his outside, his Breast and Belly all hollowed with Caverns, and
filled with diverse disproportioned parts of heart, liver, lungs, guts and
panch, as if they had been tumbled into him in confused heaps; so that a Bears
unlick'd whelp is of a far finer, smoother and evener shape. Yet we believe
this misshapen Body was framed by God himself, and our Philosopher acknowledges
the same: Yea, we are mightily taken and in love with our own form; and
although the parts seem thus uneven and disproportioned, we greatly commend the
beauty of them altogether; and much admire the wonderful structure and
usefulness of every part, as several Physicians and Anatomists have set it
forth. And so this great body of the Earth taken all together has a wonderful
beauty and admirable structure, even in those parts which he sets forth as most
disagreeing and deformed. The high and rocky Mountains immediately adjoining to
the boundless Seas, quite of another nature, represent unto us the infinite
Power and Majesty of God, as he himself speaks Page 39. saying, The greatest
Objects of Nature are the most pleasing to behold; and next to the great
Concave of the Heavens, and those boundless Regions where the Stars inhabit,
there is nothing that I look upon with more pleasure than the wide Sea and
Mountains of the Earth: there is something August and stately in the Air of of
these things that inspires the mind with great thoughts and passions. We do
naturally on such occasions think upon God and his greatness, etc. Surely he
much forgot his fomer thoughts of the rude Earth, when he uttered these words:
for what can be more agreeable with the goodness and greatness of God, than to
set forth this lower Earth in such a form, as may lift up our minds to
contemplate that Divine Omnipotent Power, which wrought these mighty works,
such as strike our minds with a pleasing astonishment? And surely all men who
behold these things have the same delightful contemplation, as he acknowledges
to have felt, when he beheld them; and yet we never looked upon them as broken
ruined fractions of a former Structure, which we poor Souls never dreamed of,
till his Theory gave us notice of them. And then, if we turn our Eyes from the
Hills down to the pleasant Valleys below, what variety do we there discern of
great Plains and Fields chequered with diverse colors, and adorned with several
beautiful Flowers and fruitful Trees! All which we are deprived of in his
smooth spherical Earth, where we find all to be of one even uniform shape,
without any variety to raise up our minds to the contemplation of God's
Greatness and Goodness, or to invite us to move a foot from our own Habitation
to see the rest of the World, all being but one and the same, a smooth Earth
without any Sea; which gives occasion to men of the boldest and noblest
Invention that is in the World; when in a small Vessel they lanch out into a
boundless Ocean many thousands of miles together, seeking out new and unknown
Countries. Really I should grow an, extreme dull Creature to be confined to
such a smooth uniform Habitation, and should desire to be transplanted into
this misshapen irregular World he finds us in, where we have the variety of
delightful motions and prospects both by Sea and Land. Now if we further
consider, That from Moses and several other Writers of Scripture, it appears
that God created this World in that form and fashion, as now it is, which this
Man has so boldly called Rude and Deformed; Will not he, as I said before, be
strangely confounded at this? But I shall not at present disorder him in the
Fabric of his new World, as he sets it forth in his Theory.

IV. In the first place he tells us that all originally proceeded from a Chaos,
and says, All the Ancients were of Opinion that such a thing there was from
whence the World did arise. I desire to know whom he means by those Ancients,
whether Heathens or Christians? If Heathens, Is he then to learn from them how
the World was made? Sure all Christians take Moses to be the only true
Historiographer for the Worlds Creation, and are no way concerned with the
several vain opinions of Heathen Poets or Philosophers, but thank God we have a
better light to guide us than those Ignes fatui. Yet I desire him to tell us
whether all the ancient Heathens were of this opinion: sure not all, but very
different among themselves; and some said the World was made of Fire, some of
Water, some of Atoms, and I know not what; some that it was never made, but
eternal: And therefore we shall conclude this Chaos, especially in such a
manner as he describes it, to be an Idea framed out of his own brain, and
reject it as we do Epicurus's Atoms. We desire him then to declare unto us who
was the framer of his Chaos; for he does not plainly express whether he thinks
his Chaos was the workmanship of God or no, or when it had beginning And if he
says that God created it, methinks he should have thought such a rude confused
Chaos far more improper and unbecoming Gods perfection, than this rude World we
live in, but he finds fault with, as unbecoming the perfection of God; for God
doubtless could as easily have made the Heavens and the Earth in a perfect
form, as leave them to his Chaos to produce. I see he is strangely in love with
Nature, and Natural Productions, and God must produce only a rude fluid Mass,
and from thence Nature must work it out in her orderly way into delicate
Heavens and Earth.

5. But where does he find that God created this Chaos? He says Moses mentions
it in his description of the Creation. Let us then look into Moses, and fee how
he relates the framing of this mighty World. Moses says, Genesis 1. In the
beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth, and the Earth was without form
and void, and darkness was upon the face of the Deep. Here we find within the
time of one day the Heavens, and the Earth, and the Waters above the Earth all
framed. But our Philosopher tells us of a strange Chaos to be in the beginning;
such a one as came not to the consistency of Earth in many days, or rather in
many years, I know not how many: we find not a word in Scripture of any such
thing: Yes, says he, Moses does affirm such a thing in saying, The earth was
void and without form. If the earth was without form, there was then an Earth
the first day, though without form: But this Chaos was a confused mass of
several parts intermingled together, which came not to the confistency of earth
in a long time, as I said before: so that this is wholly contrary to Moses's
description, which says both Heaven and Earth were created the first day, firm
solid earth; and farther tells us how that the earth, though rude the first
day, was clothed with Grass, Herbs, and Trees the third day: which more fully
confutes his fluid intermingled mass of all things. But let us proceed.

6. He tells us, Page 53. That by the Chaos he understands the matter of the
Earth and Heavens without Form or Order intermingled in a fiuid Mass, wherein
are the materials and ingredients of all Bodies, Earth, Water, Fire, Air, yea,
and Oil also, all confused and mixed together; And of these were composed the
Earth with all its Creatures, Fishes, Fowls, and Beasts. I have often heard of
four Elements whereof all things are framed: but I never heard of this fifth
Element of Oil before, which in framing his Earth is the principal: for it
seems it was composed mainly of that. But he says, it was not Oil, but of an
Oily substance, as Cream may be said to be of an oily or unctuous substance:
and such this fifth Element was, (for so I must call it, it being neither
Earth, Water, Fire, nor Air) or else it must arise from somewhat else, as Cream
does from Milk: and so this must arise from one of the four principal Elements.
And sure it could not arise from Fire or Air; they are of too thin a substance
to produce such a thick, fat, and unctuous matter: And for Water, that is too
barren in it self to produce such a creamy substance: The Earth likewise is
originally a dry, heavy, and cold substance, very unfit to produce it. So that
I cannot find out whence it should arise: And therefore, for ought I see, it
must be a distinct Element of it self. But whencesoever it did arise, or
whatever it be, it is a main principle in his mass, of which consists the
Fabric of all his newfound Earth. So that here we have the ingredients of all
sublunary things whatsoever, all intermingled; and, for ought I find in his
Theory, all above the Moon also: for he does not tell us of what the Heavens,
with all those glorious Stars, Sun, Moon, and Planets were composed, or when
Created; or whether Nature had a hand in the framing of them from some other
kind of fluid Mass. Surely these things were worth his mentioning: for Moses in
his relation of the World mentions all particularly; and how that the Earth
with the great Abyss about it was framed first, and some days after that,
mentions the Creation of Sun, Moon, Stars, etc. And therefore it is a strange
thing that this being done in the middle of the Creation, he frames his World,
and takes no notice of them, when or how they had their being. But this is a
mystery we must be ignorant of, and pass it over in silence. However, if he
thought not sit to meddle with these things; yet methinks he might have told us
something more plainly of the Creatures below, how they were produced. And
first for Fishes, he passes them over in silence, as not sit to be mentioned
in his black Sea under the Earth. And as for Fowls and Beasts, he seems not
fully resolved whether they were produced all at one stroke or no, as he
phrases it, that is, all at their full growth; but seems rather to believe that
the Earth of it self spawned them forth in their first Seeds, and that in time
they grew up to more strength and perfection. Here he mentions not (...) all
Gods command impowering the Earth to produce them; that is contrary to his
course, who will needs have. Nature alone act in all things. And truly for my
part I have not faith enough to believe that his fine fat oily Earth, ever so
fat, was able to produce Creatures of it self alone. And as far as my old head
can remember, I take it to be against Philosophy also, that vegetating power
alone can produce Animals: and I should wonder much to see a Horse grow out of
a Tree or the Earth. But let it be, his Earth produced Animals. If then the
Earth naturally of it self produced these various Creatures, methinks the same
Earth, having the same principles of life in it, should still have gone on to
produce more and more Creatures, till at length the whole Earth should be
covered by them. But I leave him to confider more of this matter.

VII. We will rather hearken to Moses, who plainly tells us that both the Earth
and the Water produced these Creatures by God's special Command; and when his
Command ceased, their production also ceased. And farther tells us, God
commanded the Sea to produce all sorts of Fishes, among others the great
Whales: Did all these swim up and down in his Sea under the Earth, and the
great Leviathan take his pastime therein, as the Scripture says? He had but a
dark place to sport himself in, nor any room to spout up the Water into the
Air, as he has in our Seas: Sure he rejoiced much when this Earth broke, and
let the Waters go abroad to flow over it: but doubtless many of them were
knocked in the Head by those great Mountains of stone falling into his Deep.
Yet we will let all this pass, and be it so that the Fish were all imprisoned
in his dark Sea under the Earth. But I must needs tell him, though he past this
over in silence, this business of Fishes loudly and fully consutes his Sea
under the Earth. But we will proceed to Fowls. We find ver. 20. God said, Let
the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that has life, and Fowl
that may fly above the earth in the open Firmament of Heaven. Were then all the
sorts of Fowl under Heaven produced by his Sea shut up under the Earth? Truly,
I can as little believe that Water of it self should produce an Eagle, as the
Earth a Horse: yet we must believe Nature can do all things. But if Water
naturally produced Fowls at the beginning of his World, why should it not go on
to produce to this day? I have heard indeed that there is in the Sea about the
coast of Africa a kind of flying Fishes, that are able to raise themselves up a
spirt from the Sea: but I never met with any Traveller who told us that either
Sea, Lakes or Rivers produced Eagles, Swans, Kites or Ravens, or any other
Fowl. The Earth, perchance he will say, is grown more barren since the
Fraction: but the Waters sure must be the fatter, that fat oily Earth having
fallen in to enrich it: Besides, it has now the warmth of the Sun to help
forwards its production. But he will have it otherwise, and we must submit. Yet
I desire him to tell us how the Fowls being produced by his Waters under the
Earth, how they got out. Certainly they could not get out till the Deluge, when
the Earth brake and let them also fly abroad at liberty, his Earth being firmly
closed up on every side, not one loop-hole to fly out at: for he will not allow
so much as a Spring in his Earth to arise from the Sea; and by this means they
must needs have been drowned as soon as they were made, having no place to fly
abroad under Heaven; no nor any space of Air between the Water and his oily
substance. I believe these things will make any serious man stumble much at his
Theory: And I desire him to consider that men will expect to be satisfied in
these great seeming absurdities.

VIII. In the mean time we will proceed to examine his fluid Mass in it self,
without any relation to the Animals beforementioned; and how the parts divided
themselves and by degrees separated one from another, till at length the
heavier sinking downwards and the lighter mounting upwards, it settled in all
these distinct bodies of Earth, Water, Oil, Air, Fire, and the Heavens above
(which he never told us yet what they were made of, therefore we go no farther
than Fire) And when all these were distinct, then this oily substance to
settle, concrete and harden, and make up a new-fashioned Earth. I desire him to
tell me how many years this was in doing. We find a Tun of new Wine having a
great deal of foul and heavy lees in it mingled with the body of the Wine,
requires two or three months time to settle in: How much time then would it
require for such a vast Vessel as the wide circumference from the uttermost
Circle under the Moon round about the World to the very Center, which is many
thousand miles: I say for such a Vessel full of his fluid Mass to divide it
self and settle in? I leave him to consider the time, I am not concerned in it.
But I think I may securely affirm it could not settle in one, two, or three, or
thirty months time; much less in one, two, or three days time; in which Moses
relates the Heavens and Earth with the Sea to be framed, and the Earth to be
clothed with Grass, Herbs and Trees. And therefore were there nothing else
different in his Production from Moses's Creation, this alone would make a
believing Christian throw his Theory aside, Moses so plainly telling us, God
created the Heavens and the Earth, part dry Land, which he called Earth, and
the gathering together of the Waters he called Seas.

IX. But we will go on with his Mass, which became an Earth by certain
particles falling down into it that helped toward a concretion. I beseech him
of what nature were these Particles that sunk down into the Oil? If they were
of an airy substance, they must still have remained in the Air, their proper
Region; If of a watery substance, they would have sunk clean through the Oil
into the Water, and not have rested till they had come to their own Element; If
of an earthy substance, they would have sunk down below the Water; If of an
oily substance, Oil added to Oil makes it never the harder, and so it would
have remained Oil still, and never congeled or concreted into an Earth. I wish
he had told us of what nature these Particles were, and given a Philosophical
Reason how they came to stick in the Oil and go no farther. But put the case
they sunk no farther at first, yet methinks before they came to be a hardened
Earth, they must needs have so much weight as to make them sink down into the
Waters: for we find if you scatter dust upon the face of the Waters, though it
lie on the top a while, yet as soon as it is thoroughly moistened, it will sink
down to the bottom. And thus his fine Earth had been wholly spoiled in the
concreting, and we should have had a Deluge over the Earth before there was any
Earth.

X. I have yet another scruple, and desire him to tell me of what nature those
heavy bodies of his fluid Mass were that sunk down below the Waters unto the
Center; If of an earthy substance, then certainly they constituted an Earth
there, their nature inclining unto that; and so we have two Earths in one Mass,
one below at the Center, another made up of Oil, and certain Particles, I know
not what. And I would fain know how long this Surface, which he calls Earth,
was in congeling and hardening to make it a perfect and habitable Body: sure no
small time; and yet we have very far outgone already Moses's time of three
days, in which he tells us God made the Earth complete with form and
comeliness, with Grass, Herbs, Trees, etc. Yet we must have time to bring it
into an Earth, and a longer time to harden it so far, as to turn it into Stone
also: of which the surface of his newfound Earth seems to me rationally to
consist: for we generally find, the higher we ascend up to the Mountain tops,
the more stony and rocky they are; and consequently we may well suppose the
Surface was the most rocky of all. And yet he tells us that his Antediluvian
Earth was of a delicate, fine, and fat substance, fit to produce any thing,
even living Animals; which a man can hardly believe that sees the ruins of it,
the higher we go, all being, as I said, the more rocky and barren, unfit to
produce any thing: And yet this is the same Antediluvian Earth in substance
with the former, though broken and ruined, as he would have it. From whence we
may conclude his fine fat Earth had no other being, but in his brain and
fancy: for the nature of it could not be so altered by his imaginary Flood,
which was but the dashing of Water by the fall of the Earth into it, and
tossing it up, and in an instant down again, there being nothing to support it.
And as this rockiness in the highest parts proves his fine fat Earth to be but
a figment: so do the several sorts of Mines confirm the same, as Mines of Gold
and Silver, Lead, Brass, Sulphur, Alum, and such like. Wherefore I desire him
to show by his Philosophical Reason how his fluid Mass, wherein all things were
confusedly mingled, and settled only according to their lightness or gravity,
the higher keeping above, the heavier sinking down, how it came to pass that
these heavier bodies of Gold and Lead rested in the same parts where his oily
and lighter Particles subsisted. Methinks those Particles which were of so
heavy a substance should have sunk quite through the fluid matter of Oil and
Water also, and never have stopped till they had gotten to the very Center.
Besides; How came it that Particles of so different a nature, as Gold and Lead,
Sulphur and Alum, should be found in distinct places within the same body of
the Earth, not far asunder one from another; for he must still remember that
his Particles, which constituted his Earth, had nothing else to distinguish
their natures, but lightness and gravity. And therefore, as I said before, all
the heavier must needs hasten quickly and equally toward the Center, and could
not make up so various bodies in the same parts of the Earth, as here Gold,
there Sulphur, hard by Lead, near that Alum, in another place pure earth; and
so Stone, Coal, and suchlike: all which are found in our present earth; and
were undoubtedly in the Antediluvian earth, and could not possibly be so
variously altered by the breaking of it, the substance being the same, though
the former fashion of the earth might be altered. We will yet consider his new
fine spherical Earth a little farther.

XI. He says, and that very truly, That all fluid bodies must run in a smooth
and equal Line round about the Center, and it is contrary to Philosophical
Reason for any fluid body to rise up into a Hill, unless kept in by force,
contrary to its natural propension. Let him then tell me by Philosophical
Reason how this fluid, spherical body came into an Oblong, and settled in the
form of an Egg, as he supposes it does extend at each end toward the Poles;
and so he has made two vast exorbitant Mountains in his Sphere: he might
better have allowed a great many little Hills, as we find in our Earth: Nay, I
dare say the highest Hill in the world does not extend above the Valley from
whence it arises by many degrees to that height from the Center, as his Oval
Poles must needs surmount the rest of his Sphere. And if he once allow me but
two Hills to be in his Sphere, I shall by consequence bring in two hundred, or
two thousand, there being no more reason against many, than one. To this he
answers, That all fluid Bodies do settle in a perfect Sphere, unless there be
some other cause to hinder it: But for our Earth he give this reason for its
settling in an oblong form, viz. That this being one of the Planets, is pressed
down by another adjoining Planet, and so forced out of its own natural form,
and compelled to extend it self toward the Poles. We desire to know whether
this our Planet has two other adjoining Planets pressing it together on both
sides, and they likewise others pressing them: and if so, yet there is no
reason for its stretching out into an oblong; for make two spherical Balls of
Wax, or Dough, or the like, and let one press the other, they will both extend
into a spherical Circumference, as Cakes do, being made round at first and
pressed down. So that unless this our Planet be surrounded quite about with other
Planets, no force can make it extend into an oblong, but it will, as I said,
extend into an equal Circumference. And if they be so placed round about, then
all the Planets must be equally oblong on their pressing side: yet none of them
do appear unto us in an oblong, but in a round form. And further, he himself
acknowledges the Planets all to lie one above another; and so they can only
press one another into a round Circumference, as I said before. We find yet no
cause for an oblong form. And how knows our Theorist of what matter the other
Planets are composed; whether they all proceeded from such fluid Masses as ours
did, and settled all alike at the same time; and whether their outward
Circumference be of Air or Fire? And if they be, then those outward parts would
yield one to another, and stretch out very far before they came to operate upon
the more solid body of the Earth. Many more are the difficulties which would
arise from this his Planets pressing one upon another: but I will not trouble
my head to object any further, than only to show him that this his Planets
Pressing one upon another cannot possibly cause an oblong form in this our
Earth; it can only force it into a flat Circumference.

XII. But I will pass from this to another matter in his Newfound World, which
he has made void of Fountains, or any other means to water and refresh it; and
has brought in a new invention of Rivers toward the Poles, caused by vapors
descending from the superior Region, and running toward the Torrid Zone, by
degrees branching themselves out with several, as it were, Veins; and thus to
afford moisture to all the parts of his New Earth. I observe that he mentions
several Pools and Lakes made by these Rivers, as they run Southward: for so he
describes them, and sets them forth in a Map, page 231. I have now a great
difficulty which I desire him to resolve me in, How these hollows for Lakes,
and Channels for so great Rivers as they must needs be, when one River divides
it self as it goes into so many parts toward the Torrid Zone; I say how these
Hollows and Channels came to be in his perfect spherical World? For I hope he
will not desert his own Principle, That all fluid Bodies being congeled or
concreted, rest in the same form as they were in before concretion. Who then
made these Channels for the Rivers to run in, or Hollows for his Lakes to
settle in? Truly this does not seem to me coherent with his new form of Earth:
for the vapors coming down from above upon his new Earth, supposing it to be
perfect spherical, must needs either disperse abroad, or sink equally in all
places where they fall, and can have no descent to carry them any way; and thus
cannot make up so great a body as we suppose his Rivers must be toward the
North, where they fall. Nor will I allow any declivity from his Poles toward
the Torrid Zone, having showed him already, that it is impossible by his
Principles to shape his Earth into an oblong form, but all must be spherical.
Besides, when Rivers run in a Channel, they never part, but meeting with some
obstruction of higher ground that forces them to divide: and then his Rivers
dividing into so many several parts, plainly shows his Earth has many Hilly
obstructions, which force them to divide into several branches. And this
business of Rivers will wholly destroy this new Fabric of the Earth: for there
can be no running of water, where the Earth, by reason of its spherical form,
can have no Channels to receive the Rivers, nor any declivity or sinking ground
to convey them from the place they were in. If he answers to the business of
Channels, That though there were none at the first framing of his new Earth;
yet the falling of those vapors which arose in the South and came flying into
the North, and there descended, might in time work down Channels into it, and
so make a Current for Rivers to run in. I grant a strong fall of water
continuing in one place, might make the earth sink into a hole, and so flow
over the parts adjoining: but I cannot see any cause that should make those
vapors descend any otherwise than in mists and foggs upon the Earth: for there
being no fierce winds to drive them in his temperate air, they must needs fall,
as they rise, universally and gently, scarce sensible in one place more than
another; and thus falling equally upon the spherical ground, would water all
the Earth alike, and make no Channels in it to convey them into the Southern
parts, there being, as I said before, no declivity to help them forward toward
the South. Moreover Channels are not made, but by great falls of water, when it
descends from much the higher ground into the lower, and with such little banks
of earth on each side keeping it in, as forces the current to carry the earth
away before it. And I pray, whither should this earth be conveyed in his
Spherical World? So that of necessity the mists, as I said, falling gently upon
such a perfect round, must equally distend themselves into all parts alike, and
sink into the ground, rather than make a current to get away. But suppose a
Current might be made by gentle falls in a very long time; yet how should all
Mankind, and all Beasts live without Water during the time of making so great
Channels for such mighty Rivers, as to convey Water enough to disperse it self
into several Veins for many thousand miles, till they reached the Southern
parts, and make new Channels still by the way as it runs to water the whole
Earth. There is much more untouched than I have handled, which I leave unto
others, my old Head being wearied with following him thus far.

XIII. I shall conclude all with that which our Theorist concludes his Preface
with, viz. His sincere intention of his Theory was, To justify the Doctrines
of the universal Deluge and of Paradise, and protect them from the Cavils of
those that are no well-wishers to Sacred History: and how that upon this
account he may well expect fair usage and acceptance with all that are well
disposed. And truly for my part, could I find but the least appearance of
sincere intention in him, or that he had any way cleared these Doctrines, I
should upon either account have passed over in silence any, or all, his
extravagancies. But in my poor judgment he has neither showed sincerity of
intention, nor cleared any Doctrine of Scripture: For he has not handled the
Scripture sincerely in any one place of moment; but in some places flatly
contradicts them, as I have showed; Others he has wrested and turned from
their own plain and easy understanding; obscuring all, and forcing from them a
most remote and difficult sense, far different from the common understanding of
all Learned and Sober Men: And talks in so high a strain of the Key that he has
brought into the World to open Men's Understandings for many dark and obscure
places in Scripture, making them facile and easy to common sense, as if his
Key were the very Key of David, applied by all unto our Savior himself. And as
for his explaining the Doctrines of the Universal Deluge and of Paradise, I
pray you let us a little consider each one apart.

XIV. And first for the Deluge. I do not know any one Doctrine of moment in the
Old Testament that seems to me more easy than that of the Deluge, which Moses
has described so exactly and plainly, as it is fitted for any vulgar capacity.
But by our Theorists Interpretation it is made most obscure and difficult, and
set forth in such Romantic terms, that it is ridiculous to understanding Men,
and not intelligible to the Vulgar.

XV. As for the Doctrine of Paradise, I confess I do not know a more dark and
difficult matter in all the Scripture: and I must needs say with S. Austin, it
is ab hominum cognitione remotissimum. But terrestrem esse Paradisum, seems to
me certissimum. There is nothing more remote from the knowledge of Men, than the
particular place of Paradise: yet that there was such a particular place, is
evident by that particular description which Moses gives of it, speaking of
several Rivers that branched out from that of Paradise: Whereas our Theorist in
flat contradiction to Moses, makes Paradise to be the whole Antediluvian Earth,
which he says was Paradisiacal all over; and would needs have Adam to be
placed at first toward the Southern Pole, and from thence to be driven toward
the Northern; dividing his Antediluvian Earth into two habitable parts by the
Torrid Zone: but does not tell us how he was conveyed through that scorching
Region. Nor can I understand why he should be put to so long a Journey, and so
dangerous a Passage, when; according to him, the Earth was as much Paradisiacal
on one side of the Torrid Zone, as the other. And therefore concerning these
two Doctrines of the Deluge and Paradise: he has made that of the Deluge much
more difficult; and that of Paradise he has left, if not more, yet full as
unintelligible, and less credible, because less agreeing with Scripture.

XVI. I could enlarge much more upon either of these two Subjects: but my
business is not to say any thing of my own, but to show in a short and
compendious way the absurdity and audacity of this Man, who so confidently sets
himself to oppose the whole World, being so besotted with his own vain and
heathenish Opinions; and not resting satisfied with Moses's History of the
Creation, nor with his plain and easy description of the Deluge; pretending,
forsooth, the Sincerity of his Intention: whereas it is in reality the Pride
and Vanity he takes in his own Philosophical Invention.

FINIS
ERRATA.
Page 16. line 3. for First read Fifth; and at the bottom insert the word The.
p. 84. l. 1. for pleased r. pleases. p. 86. l. 13. for Highest r. Highness. p.
116. l. 11. for it r. its. p. 126. l. 13. for Wills r. Wits. p. 127. l. 20. for
Penman r. Penmen. p. 136. l. 12. leave out the word of. p. 155. l. 20. insert
the word and after the word brake.


