A SERMON PREACHED upon the Anniversary Solemnity OF THE Happy Inauguration OF
Our Dread Sovereign LORD King JAMES II. In the Collegiate Church of Ripon,
February the 6 th. 1685/6

By THOMAS CARTWRIGHT, D.D. Dean of Ripon, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, and are to be Sold by Walter Davis, in
Amen-Corner. MDCLXXXVI.

To my LORD, THE Lord HENRY, EARL of PETERBOROW, Groom of the Stole, and First
Gentleman of the Bedchamber to His MAJESTY, one of the Lords of the Honorable
Privy Council, and Knight of the Most Noble Order of the GARTER.
My LORD,
HOmilies are by our Rubric (and the Statute) to give place to Sermons, where
they may be had; and therefore the Minister who Officiates on the King's-Day,
is obliged rather to Preach a Sermon of his own Composing upon the same
Argument, than to Read the Homily concerning Obedience to Rulers and
Magistrates. This, I doubt not, was cheerfully done by Persons and in Places of
the greatest Eminency; and we in the Country thought our selves bound to be as
Dutiful as those in higher places; as Affectionate to his Majesty's Service,
though not so Eloquent: And though many of Richer Parts, have of their Abundance
cast much more into this Treasury; yet Men of Meanest need not despair of His
Majesty's Gracious Acceptance; Mar. xij. 42.
whilst, like the poor Widow in the Gospel, they come to Express their Pious
Officiousness to Support his Crown, by their Oblations; though they betray their
Poverty by the Meanness of them, and show how much greater their Zeal is than
their Abilities to serve Him.

This I did (as well as I could) in His Majesty's Collegiate Church of Ripon;
nor is it Ostentation, that makes me Preach it over again from the Press, but
pure Charity toward the Cure of the Leprosy of those Rebellious Principles,
which every Priest must needs see tokens enough to discern to be that Plague in
the Head, which renders too many among our People so utterly unclean, as that
they are only fit to dwell alone, and without the Camp of Israel. Lev. xiij.
44. ves. 46.
And as the Priest under the Law, who attempted the Cure of any other Leper,
was by God's Direction to begin at the Right Ear, xiv. 14.
and from thence to proceed to his Right Hand; so, I thought my self obliged to
Print what I had Preached, that they might Handle what they had heard, and be
the more perfectly Convinced, how much it concerns us to Endeavor their Cure,
and them to join with us in our Prayers to God for the Perfecting it.

The Subject Convinces me, how ready some will be to take Offense at the Author
and Argument of this Sermon; and though I neither fear the Censure, nor court the
Favor of Men so disaffected to the Government; yet I thought my self obliged
to make Choice of such a Patron, as had been a Pattern of Loyalty to others,
and was Himself Able and Willing to Protect both; and to Maintain that Truth,
which has been the Rule of Your Life: Your Lordships Devotion to Your Prince,
and Zeal for His Service being as well known as Your Person. And though there be
little in this Discourse Worthy of Your Judicious Eye, or Owning; Yet the Cause
which it Pleads, being That for which Your Honor has always Expressed so
Great a Concern, as to venture Your Life and Estate in it, makes me not Despair
of its Acceptance: And Your Eminent and Undeserved Goodness, of which I have
had so long Experience, secures my Pardon for Prefixing Your Name to it.

If my Abilities had born Proportion to my Will, it should have been as far
beyond, as it now will fall short of Your Lordships Expectations: But my
Comfort is, That as it gives me an Happy Opportunity to Testify my Gratitude
for Your former Favors, so there will be a Power in Your Acceptance to make
Plainness an Ornament, and to Oblige others to think well of the mean but
sincere Performances of him, who accounts himself obliged to be, as well as to
subscribe himself,

My Lord, Your Lordship's, In all humble Duty, and Unfeigned Observance, THOMAS
CARTWRIGHT.

1 KINGS viij. 66. On the Eighth day he sent the People away: and they Blessed
the King, and went unto their Tents joyful and glad of heart, for all the
goodness that the Lord had done for David his Servant, and for Israel his
People.


WE are now happily Assembled in the Collegiate Church of Ripon, (endowed and
conferred upon us by the Bounty of our Royal Founder King JAMES the First, of
ever blessed Memory, in the Second Year of his Reign) to Celebrate, Aug. 2.
1604.
according to the Laudable and Religions Practice of good Subjects in former
Ages, the Joyful Inauguration of his Grandson, our Gracious Sovereign Lord King
JAMES the Second; on the First Day of the Second Year of his Reign. And we may
now remember, with Comfort and Satisfaction to our Consciences, how the Men of
Ripon (or our Friends of Ripon, as they Ironically called us) were singled out
and traduced, not many Years since, by Julian Johnson, Ferguson, and other
hot-spurs of the same Faction and Sedition, (who were then carrying on an
Accursed Conspiracy against the Crown and Church of England) and Exposed to the
Madness of the People, to be Ridiculed and Reviled for our early, and then
unfashionable Loyalty, expressed in our Address; in hopes that they might
either have Laughed or Frighted us out of our Duty and Religion.

Now that we may testify to the World our unmovable Steadiness, and the
renewed Evidence of our Fidelity to the Crown in all unshaken Principles and
Practices of Loyalty; let us do the proper Work of the King's Day in its season.

Let us Bless God for the miraculous Disappointments of all the malicious
Hopes, and infernal Designs of those Blood-thirsty Men, being not only
agreeable to their Anti-Monarchical and Anti-Episcopal Principles; but, in
truth, inseparable from them. Let us be joyful and glad of heart, for all the
goodness that the Lord has done for David his Servant, and for Israel his
People. Show your Love to his Person, and your Zeal for his Government; resign
up your selves (as you have done your Charter) to Him, not doubting of a
proportionable Favor and Encouragement: and as you have stood to your Prince
in his severest Trials (according to your bounden Duty) so let it not be in the
power of any Discontented Persons whatsoever, to Taint you with the least
blemish of Disloyalty.

We want nothing (blessed be God and the King, as to our External State) but
what to wish for. Do we not enjoy Peace, Plenty, and Liberty; nay, and the Best
Religion in the World? and why then should we disquiet our selves or others,
with the fanciful Imaginations and unreasonable Fears of future Evils, for
which in reality, there appears no Foundation, but in our own distempered
Brains? Let us do our Duty, and the King his Pleasure; let us not prevaricate
with God or him, but be as obedient to his Commands, as Israel was to
Solomon's: Whose Excellent President I have chosen to set before you, to Copy
after.

A Text which you must needs by this time see, to be proper and pertinent, and
such as by the Blessing of God, is made very seasonable and suitable to this
Day's Solemnity: Which, if it had fallen into the hands of one, whom better
Parts and more Leisure had fitted for this Service, might have afforded you a
Discourse, not Inferior to what this great and first Anniversary Solemnity,
might teach you to expect. But the happy Occasion of our meeting, and your own
obvious Meditations upon it, will easily draw out the Parallel between this
People in my Text, and your selves, without the help of a Preacher.

The main Ingredients, which concur to the completing the happiness of any
Kingdom, you will find to meet here in my Text, A Wise and devout King, a Loyal
and Religious People, and a good understanding between them.

Solomon takes care to build and adorn the Temple of God, and the People
contribute freely and largely to it: He brings the Ark of the Covenant into the
City of David, they attended it with all due Solemnity, he established Religion
by a Law, and the People take special notice of the Honor and Welfare of
Religion, under his Government, Verse. 11.
of the Glory of the Lord filling the House of the Lord, as a testimony of his
owning what the King and they had done; Verse. 30.
and of God's harkening to the King's and their Prayers in the House, which he
in their sight had newly Dedicated to him. Prove. iij. 9.
He honored God with his substance, and with the First Fruits of his Increase,
he Sacrificed Two and twenty thousand Verse. 63.
Oxen, and an Hundred and twenty thousand Sheep: They were well pleased with
his Royal and Religious Performances, and his Peace Offering to the Lord; this
was the Joy of their hearts, and they feasted themselves with the Remembrance
of it, to see Holiness and Happiness meet together, Piety and Prosperity kiss
each other. Verse. 65.
Solomon held a Feast, and all Israel with him, (a great Congregation) Seven
days and Seven days; and on the Eighth day he sent the people away, and they
Blessed the King, and went unto their Tents joyful and glad of heart, for all
the goodness that the Lord had done for David his Servant, and for Israel his
people. God has blessed us with a Prince at this time, not inferior to him in
my Text, for his Knowledge and Conduct in Government; one who has been brought
up most part of his Life, in the School of Affliction, which has wrought
Patience, and Patience such Experience in him; such knowledge of Men and
Business, that if he do not by Judgment Establish this Kingdom, the fault will
not be his, but our own. For we cannot expect, either from God or the King, to
be made happy, whether we will or no; we may pull down Destruction upon our
selves and our Posterity, by the very same methods that we did in his Father's
time; we may be Destroyers of our selves, and the established Religion, and
make our selves Examples of God's and the King's Justice: But if we will take
Example of this people in my Text, the Sons of Zerviah shall never be too hard
for our David, nor will he ever be out of love with us, or our Religion.
Loyalty is the King's Joy, the Kingdoms Happiness, and the Subjects Glory; and
if all people would be Loyal, no Kingdom could be miserable; I am sure not
ours. All the ties of Duty and Gratitude do at this time indispensably oblige
us to it, and to give his Sacred Majesty the best assurance we can, that we
know our Duty, and that we are firmly resolved to act according to it, as did
this people in my Text, On the Eighth day he sent the people away, and they
blessed the King, and went unto their Tents, joyful and glad of heart, for all
the Goodness that the Lord had done for David his Servant, and for Israel his
People.

In which words there are Five Particulars observable: I. Regia populi
Dismissio, the Royal Dismission of the People: On the Eighth day he sent the
People away. II. Populi Benedictio Votiva; the People's dutiful Valediction;
They blessed the King at parting. III. Populi Submissio; the Peoples ready
Submission: They went unto their Tents. IV. Populi Exultatio; the People's
Satisfaction and Triumph: They were joyful and glad of heart. V. Exultationis
ratio; the good Ground, and just Reason of their Triumph: 'Twas for all the
goodness that the Lord had done for David his Servant, and for Israel his
People.


I shall endeavor to Explain and Apply each of these Particulars in its order:
The first whereof is:

I. Regia Populi Dismissio; the Dismission of the People; when, and by whom it
was made: Arab.
Octavo a septem postremis post solennitatem die; On the Eighth from the latter
Seven days Solemnity, of the Dedication, or Encoenia, (such as our Wake-Days,
and Church-Feasts are) for in both Solemnities there were Fourteen Days; Seven
for the Dedication, and the other Seven for the Feast of Tabernacles; which
began on the Fifteenth of September: After the exact Termination whereof,
Solomon informed the People, then Assembled, from the Eastern to the
Western-borders of his Dominions, of their Duty to God and the King; and having
made a Collection among them, to defray the charge of the Sacrifices which had
been offered; when they had done the business for, and unto which he called
them, he lets them know, That he was not willing to detain them any longer from
their private Employments; and that he dispensed with their farther Attendance,
and gave them leave to depart on the morrow: Which they accordingly did, on the
23. of September, with their Hearts as light as their Purses; they carried away
little Money, but much Mirth along with them into the Country; and were so far
from grudging what they had so piously spent, in God's and the King's Service,
that they gloried in its Acceptance, and thought their Moneys well bestowed,
and their Journey well paid for. The Subjection of the People to their Prince,
was then thought as natural as that of Children to their Parents; they never
dreamed of a State of natural Freedom. When he called them, they came; and when
he dismissed them, they went away. I wish the same Prudence, Temper and
Moderation had always been in all our fellow Subjects; then would not that wild
Notion, and seditious Opinion ever have been broached among us, That the King
cannot Prorogue or Dissolve his Parliaments (in which his People are
Representatively Assembled) till their Petitions be answered, and their
Grievances redressed; or that they may tarry till they dismiss themselves, and
not depart when the King thinks fit and convenient, as Solomon's People in my
Text did, with great Submission and Satisfaction; which they intimated to the
King, when it was his Pleasure to dismiss them, by taking occasion to bless him
at parting; which was their dutiful form of Valediction, and the Second part of
my Text: To wit,

II. Populi Benedictio Votiva. Verse. 14. and 55.
King Solomon blessed the people both before and after his Prayer; and now they
make bold to let him know, That they will not be indebted to him in any good
Offices, and that he shall not outvye them in such acts of Piety: They blessed
the King, and blessed are they for so doing, and blessed are all they that do
like them. It Is an Excellent thing, when in an happy Emulation the King and his
People do strive, as much as in them lies, to out-bless one another; it is pity
that a Contention so Pious as this should fall, or that any other should arise
between them, then who shall contribute most to each others Happiness: For the
King's and People's Interest can never be separated, without indangering the
Ruin of both.

The King labored their Profit, they his Honor; they received Security from
him, he Service from them; he designed their Good, they his Glory; he was
Bountiful to them, they Thankful to him; he prayed for them, they prayed for
him; he blessed them, and they now blessed him; as if they mutually contended,
who should be forwardest, in the discharge of their trusts and obligations, the
King or his People. But though he had a Commission from Heaven to bless them,
because he was their Sovereign and Supreme Governor; yet how durst they be so
bold as to bless him, for without contradiction the lesser is blessed of the
greater? Heb. vij. 7.
I answer, There is a twofold Benediction, the one Patriarchal, Ministerial
and Authoritative; and this the King might, but they could not pronounce; they
could not give, but receive it: The other Supplicatory, and (if I may take up
the Word) Charitative; and such a blessing as this, Inferiors may bestow on
their Superiors, which is called Benedictio Votiva, or Bonae Apprecationis; and
so Benedicere is no more then Been precari, and seems to be the pious Result of
their Gratitude to the King, in their best Wishes and Prayers to God, for his
Peaceable and Prosperous Reign over them, in such common and Religious
Acclamations, as God save the King, which is a Tribute of Loyalty and
thanksgiving, which all his Subjects owe him; Interlin. Gloss.
Agentes Gratias propter Opera quae fecisset, and Orantes Solomonem longaevo
tempore regnare.

It was not it seems the Religion of those times to Curse the King, no not in
their Hearts, but to bless him: not to censure his Actions, upon the bare
Credit of the flying Reports of lightheaded and disaffected Persons (which are
always full of Uncertainty, and many times of Malice:) Not to quarrel with him,
because he will not suffer them to take his Sword out of his Hand, till they
could be strong enough, by his own Concessions, to cut off his Head with it:
There was no speaking evil of Dignities, no petulant Girding at their
Superiors, no loose Lampoons, no bitter Invectives against them; they neither
despised them themselves, nor tempted others to do it, that they might in time
destroy them: For they knew that Shimei's Railing would end in Sheba's Rising;
that Detraction was the ready Road to Sedition, and accordingly Slandering of
the Footsteps of God's Anointed, was joined with Blasphemy against God. Psalm.
89. 50.
They durst not think any Evil of him, much less desire any the least Evil to
befall him; but as Jacob blessed Pharaoh (who was none of the best Princes, nor
yet his own Prince) so did they conceive themselves, much more indispensably
obliged to bless their Solomon, their Wise, their Religious and most gracious
Sovereign. And I heartily wish, that the Generation of Vipers, who have spit
out so much of their Venom against Authority in our Age, would bring forth
fruits meet for Repentance, least Cham's Curse come upon them, for not hiding
their Fathers Nakedness from the Scornful. Will you be led by none but those
Vile Men, who have nothing to render themselves considerable, but by being
troublesome? Are you resolved to have no prudential regard to the present State
of Affairs? Will you neither be reconciled to his Majesty, nor his Friends,
till they are of your complexions and persuasions, though Subjects as Loyal as
your selves? If the old Pharisaical Leaven of Acrimony and Sourness were purged
out of your Hearts, you would be of more amicable, charitable, meek and quiet
Dispositions; nor would you suffer your Zeal to be such a Cormorant, as to
devour your Charity; nor to grow so fierce, as to fly upon every thing, which
Custom and Education has not rendered familiar to you? Will you not suffer
others patiently to see with their own Eyes? Or must you needs be angry with
them, for not being Wise enough to be of your Opinions? Will you fly in your
Neighbors Faces for every Trifle? Nay, in his Majesty's Face too, if he favor
some few of them, of whose good Services he has had so long Experience,
because they are not of your Persuasions in all things? Is it not possible for
Men of two Minds, to be of one Heart? Cannot we carry it fairly and amicably,
with Meekness and Innocence toward them, with whom our Principles do not
incline us to be so free and familiar? Divinity is no Stranger to Humanity; it
Tolerates what it cannot Remedy, and the most Christian Man will be the most
Complaisant to his Brethren; he will give no unnecessary Provocation, nor will
he move any needless or endless Controversies: There being a great many truths
of so small Importance, that a wise and good Man will part with them all, for a
Grain of Charity. Has not the Incontinency of disputing rather divided, than
reformed the Church? And would not our Congregations be more edified by a
Catechism than a Controversy; and a Minister of the Gospel be better employed,
in approving himself to be a Christian, than in proving the Pope to be
Antichrist? It Is Practical Divinity, of which there is no dispute, that must
bring us all to Heaven. Have you no value for the Gracious Character which his
Majesty has given, of the Exemplary Loyalty of the Church of England? Or are
you grown such Children, that if you may not have every thing that you fancy,
you will throw away every thing that is offered you, and fall out with your
Meat, and the Father of the Country under whose Protection you Eat it? Does not
this savor of the old Presbyterian Temper?

Let me Conjure you all, who hear me this Day, by the Respect which you owe to
the Truth of the Gospel, to our Mother the Church of England, to the King,
whose Day it is, that you now Celebrate, to the Public Peace without, and the
Private within you, Romans xij. 18. xiv. 19
If it be possible, and as much as lies in you, to live peaceably with all
Men. Follow after the things which make for peace; go along with them, as far
as you can, with Truth and Charity; and where you part, let it be like Friends:
So shall we Edify one another in our most holy Faith; make the Pleasure of his
Majesty's Government, abate the Burden of it; 1 Timothy ij. 2.
and lead quiet and peaceable Lives under him, in all Godliness and Honesty, as
did this People in my Text, under Solomon; whose dutiful Submission to him, is
the next thing to be considered, and recommended to your Imitation, to wit;

III. Populi Submissio; They went unto their Tents. They knew 'twas fit for
them to depart, when it was the King's Pleasure; but yet to tarry, till it were
so: They resolved not to continue longer, nor yet to leave him sooner: They
would have been glad to have enjoyed the Blessing of his Presence longer; but
having received his Commands to be gone, they departed, and went unto their
Tents, every Man to his own Habitation, without any Dispute or Regret, to abide
in his Calling to which he was called, as a Member of the Commonwealth; to
meddle with nothing but his proper business, and left the Administration of
Religion to the Priests, and the Government of the Kingdom to Solomon.

Not from the Court to the Camp; not from waiting on him, to war against him;
but from the Temple, to their Tents. For St. Paul says, That Kings are, not by
God's Sufferance, Romans xiij. 1.
but by his Ordinance: and therefore, even supposing them never so bad, they
are never to be resisted. Verse. 2.
You may take up the Buckler of Patience; but you must not take up Arms against
them: for Rebellion is such rank Poison to the Soul, that the least Scruple of
it is Damnable, Ibid.
the very Intention of it in the Heart is Mortal.

Our Religion will never suffer us to dispense with our Loyalty, to serve any
worldly Interest or Advantage; no not for its own Defense. It sets the Crown
fast and easy upon the King's Head, without Catechizing him: For be his Heart
inclinable to any Religion, or none, it leaves him no Rival; none to Insult or
Lord it over him: It disclaims all Usurpation, Popular, or Papal; neither Pope
nor Presbyter may control him; none but the great God, the only Ruler of
Princes, can overruled him; to whom it is his Duty, Glory, and Happiness to be
subject. Though the King should not Please or Humor us; though he should rend off
the Mantle from our Bodies (as Saul did from Samuel;) nay though he should
Sentence us to Death, (of which, blessed be God and the King, there is no
danger;) yet, if we are living Members of the Church of England, we must
neither open our Mouths, nor lift up our Hands against him; but Honor him
before the People and Elders of Israel. 1 Samuel xv. 30.
We must imitate Jeremiah in Prison; Daniel in the Lions-Den; Amos, struck
through the Temples; Zachariah, Murdered between the Porch and the Altar; our
blessed Savior, living under Herod and Tiberius, and Crucified under Pontius
Pilate; His Disciples, under Caligula, Claudius, Nero, and Domitian; Christian
Bishops, under Heathen Persecutors; none of which ever Reviled their Princes,
or Resisted them.

Who questioned Saul for slaying the Priests, and revolting to Idolatry? Who
questioned Joram a Parricide, and Murderer of his Nobles? or Joash, for his
Idolatry, and slaying the High Priest? Did the Sanhedrim do it? Who questioned
Theodosius for Murderdering Six thousand innocent persons? Who questioned
Constance, Valens, or Julian the Apostate? Who traduced their Persons, or
Dignities, or offered them any tumultuous Affronts, or Remonstrances? So that
unless we, in these latter days, do understand the Mind of God, better than the
Jewish Church, and the Primitive Christians did; we must not ask our Prince,
why he Governs us otherwise, than we please to be Governed our selves. We must
neither call him to Account for his Religion, nor question him for his Policy
in Civil Matters; for he is made our King by God's Law, of which the Law of the
Land is only Declarative: It Is God alone who can take Vengeance of him, if he
does amiss; and proportion Punishments to his Person. Upon his Providence are
we obliged to depend, who never fails to help Religious Men and Kingdoms in
their Distresses, Romans viij. 28.
and makes all things work together for their good. But I need not plead for
Submission unto Evil Kings; since God of his infinite Goodness has bestowed so
Good and Gracious a King upon us: Who though he be not of our Religion, (had we
but thankful Hearts to acknowledge his Favors) his Kindness is as great to us,
as if we were of his: for he is not a Nero, but a Constantine the Great to us.

The Jews say, That the Keys of the Temple were not hung at the High Priests
Girdle; but laid every Night under Solomon's Pillow, as belonging to his
Charge. To establish Religion by a Law, is the King's Province: To uphold, and
maintain the Church, and her Legitimate Children; this he has freely
undertaken, beyond our Expectations, (if not Deserts:) And if he be not so good
as his Word, at last, I pray God the Fault be not ours.

The Ark of God was not shaken, as many feared it would have been, at the Death
of our late gracious Sovereign Lord, King Charles the Second; but continued
steady, without the least Commotion. No Cry in our Cities, no Complaining in
our Streets, no Tears but those of Love and Loyalty: The Lord is still with us,
and has set another gracious King over us; and the presence of God's Ark is
once more secured to us, even in Verbo Regis, in the Word of a King, which is
as sacred as his Person, and as current as his Coin; for in his Word, there is
Truth, as well as Power: Eccl. viij. 4.
And those early and most gracious Assurances of his Princely Piety, and
undeserved Goodness toward us, made in his Privy Council this time
Twelvemonth, have been still renewed, repeated and multiplied to us, in
despite of all our Ingratitude; which would make a passage to Men's Hearts
through their Brains, (if they had any) and teach them; first to admire his
Goodness; then to be confident in it, and thankful for it; and to say as
Mephibosheth of David, My Lord the King is as an Angel of God: Do therefore
what is good in thine Eyes. 2 Samuel xix. 27.
Was he ever worse than his Word to any Man? Or what ground has he given any
of us, to apprehend that he ever will be so? Who was ever so exceeding tender
of his Honor as he? so Just to all; so Kind beyond example to his Friends and
Servants? How can we ever trust our Lives and Fortunes in safer Hands than his?
He has done more, than ever any of us durst ever venture to look for, to give
us Confidence in him; enough to puzzle our Understandings, as well as our
Gratitude: And how can he give us better security than he has done? Shall we
suspect him without cause, or remain dissatisfied, when he has given us the
best Security that our Cause admits of? Or quarrel for more, when we have
enough? Or how can we ever hope to be the better, by provoking him, in whose
Pleasure we are so Happy? Why should we endanger the losing of those
substantial blessings we have, by snapping at the shadow, which we can never
catch, and does not belong to us, if we could? To suspect, our Prince, where we
cannot help our selves, is of all Fears the most unreasonable. It Is not safe,
by Insolence and Peevishness, to provoke a meek and merciful Prince, to
Severity and Rigor. Princes must not be upbraided with their Promises, much
less threatened and menaced with audacious Expostulations, if they do not
perform them; for their Promises are Donatives, and it is reason the Doner
should have the explaining of his own mind; when they to whom he promised it,
owe it chiefly, if not only, to his Grace and Favor. It Is therefore our
interest, as well as our duty, to use our King with all the submissive
Entreaties imaginable: Irreverent Reproofs not becoming Subjects to their
Sovereign.

And how can we declaim enough then against those Juggling Hypocrites among us,
who talk of nothing but their Zeal for Religion, whilst they design nothing but
Rebellion? Who, to get a misunderstanding between the King and his People, use
all the Black Art and Industry, which quick-sighted Malice can teach them, to
Poison the unthinking People with strong Suspicions of his Majesty's Truth,
Honor and Justice? We must be wanting to our Religion, King, Church and State,
if we should tamely suffer our People to be seduced into such groundless Fears
and Jealousies; and not tell them, That if these Profligate Wretches, did not
transgress all the bounds of Truth, Reason and Modesty, they could not possibly
render him suspected, much less odious; and that if their Impudence were not
equal to their Malice, they could never make such false and scandalous
Reflections upon his Person and Government, as they daily do. They would make
us believe, That we are upon the very brink of those Dangers, which Wiser Men
cannot see; and complain of those Greivances, which no body feels or suffers.
Did our Religion ever Flourish more than now? Were we ever more Considerable
either at Home or Abroad? Would you fain see another Rebellion spring out of
the Ashes of the Two last; if not sit still, Trust God and the King; let them
Govern the Kingdom, and be thankful to his Majesty for keeping such Guards
about him, Romans xiij. 3.
as may be a Terror to Evildoers, and a safeguard to them that do well.
Consider well, Whether the greatest Sticklers for the Church of England at this
time, be most conformable to it themselves; whether they themselves are
obedient to the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws, which they seem so Zealous to
maintain, that they fear we shall all be undone, if any one of them be broken.
Take heed there be not Anguis in Herba. Look well about you, before you leap
into their Snares. May not a Private subject, by their good leave, break Twenty
Laws with less Noise, than their Sovereign one? Do not they act like Men, who
have a design to beget a Misunderstanding between the King and his People, and
hope to gain something of both; if they could inflame the Crowd into an
Insurrection? Do they not long to set the Kingdom on Fire, to warm their own
Fingers, and to enrich themselves, as some once did, with the Spoil and Plunder
of their Neighbors? Will you tamely suffer them, to pull down the goodly
Fabric of Church and State, to mend their own Fortunes, which are as
desperate, perhaps, as their Designs? And will you venture the spoiling of all,
in hopes of mending your selves in One Circumstance? Did not God ordain Adam to
rule over his Wife, without giving her, or her Children, any Commission to
limit his Power? What was given to him in his Person, was also given to his
Posterity; and the Paternal Government, continued Monarchical from him to the
Flood; and after that to the Confusion of Babel, Genesis x. 10, 11.
when Kingdoms were first erected and planted over the Face of the Earth: And
so what Right or Title the People can have, or what Commission, either of
Limitation or Mixture, to restrain that Supremacy which was as unlimited in
Adam, as any Act of his Will, (it being due to the Supreme Fatherhood,) or from
what time it commenced, the Scripture no were tells us. Where is the Peoples
Charter extant, either in Nature or Scripture, for invading the Rights of the
Crown? Or what Authority can they have from either, to introduce their Devices
of presiding over Him, whom God and Nature has set over them? Nay, how vain
and void of Sense, are all these Popular Projects? Who can set such bounds to
his Prerogative, as to impose Penalties on him, if he exceed, or put those
Conditional Limitations in Execution? Nor can the King himself divest himself
of his Supremacy, or discharge his Subjects of their Allegiance. And if any
Monarch will be so free-hearted, as to lay down his Lawful Power at his
Subjects Feet; if he will throw up that Commission, which he had from God,
independent of any other, and take a New one from his Subjects (as some
Inferior Magistrates do from him) quam diu se been gesserit, or durante
beneplacito populi, during the Pleasure of our Sovereign Lords the People; he
forgets that it was a Divine Hand coming out of the Clouds, which set the Crown
on his Head; and that when there was but One good King upon the Face of the
Earth, (only Solomon,) their Original was derived from God above, and not from
the People beneath. For 'twas God himself who best knew it, that said, By me
Kings Reign. Prove. viij 15.


Be their Religion, and Administration of their Office what pleases them; they
are of God's making, and must not be of the People's marring.

Our King comes to his Crown by Lineal Descent, from the Loins of our David: He
is no Alien or Stranger to the Royal Race; nor does his Promotion come either
from the East, or from the West: But it is God who has set him over us; with
his holy Oil has he anointed him, and set him on his Father's Throne. It Is to
God's Grace alone, that we owe our King; and by the Royal Concessions of him,
and his Ancestors, do we enjoy our Liberties and Properties: And the Duty of
Subjects to their Princes, of Servants to their Masters, and of Children to
their Parents, is obliging to them, though they never swore to do it; for it is
not the Result of Christianity or Policy, but a principle of Nature, which
Religion does not alter, but establish. Though Darius were an Alien, and an Enemy
to his Religion, compelling to Idolatry, and kept the People of God in
Captivity as Slaves; yet Daniel paid him the Homage of a good Subject, after he
had been shut up in the Lions Den. He acknowledged him to be his King, and
honored him accordingly; Dan. ij. 24.
O King live for ever: And the Primitive Christians wished Julian himself,
Length of days and prosperity.

And as our Religion is not Evangelium armatum, nor will suffer us to rise up
against our King, Vi and Armis, not to be done without the Violation of all the
Laws of God and Man; so neither shall we ever have occasion to do it, as they
had Precibus and Lachrymis, those pious Weapons, with which the Primitive
Christians overcame the Tyranny of their Persecutors: Prove. xxi. 1.
For the King's Heart is in the Hand of the Lord; and he who can turn it
whithersoever he will, has inclined it hitherto, (and I trust will always do)
to the Protection of the Church of England: Wherein we have his Royal Word for
our Security; and if that be not sufficient, to allay Men's Fears and
Jealousies, I know not what will. We can appeal to his Sacred Majesty, how we
adhered (as became us) to his Right for Conscience Sake; though against that,
which some short-sighted Politicians, and worse Christians, would have made us
believe to have been our Interest: We cannot but glory in the Reproaches and
Injuries we sustained, on his account, from the Outrages of the Mobile. He is
of too generous and gracious a Nature, to use the Power, which God has given
him, to procure their Ruin, who were always ready, and ever will be, to do
their best to prevent his. And therefore the Venient Romani, the groundless
Jealousies of Popery's coming in, which alarums the Rabble, shall not be such a
scar-crow, as to fright us out of our Wits and Religion; nor shall it ever
exasperate or enrage us, to do any thing that is wicked upon the apprehensions
of it; nor to abandon our Loyalty, Justice, and moral Honesty, to prevent it.
For it would be a Contradiction to maintain, advance, or establish Religion
upon the Ruins of Justice, which founds all Religion; nor must God's Ordinance
be secured in one point, by endangering it in another.

No doubt but the King will gratify his own Persuasion, without any severe and
cruel Methods on the other hand; for he naturally abhors Sanguine Sacrifices:
Upon which consideration, he has been pleased, by his own Royal and voluntary
Declaration, to renew and confirm to his Subjects, the best Magna Charta that
every they had: A Blessing obtained without a Rebellion, and which calls for a
suitable Veneration and Return from his People. He knows, that ours is a
Religion, that has always asserted the Rights of the Crown, with Life and
Fortune: And how cheerfully the Members of it, have spent their Blood and
Treasure in his own, his late Majesty's, and his Father's Service: And how they
stand affected to his Prerogative, upon which they know all Popular
Encroachments to be as fatal, as Inundations of the Sea: And that loose Reins,
cast upon the Neck of a Resty People, will teach them a trick to throw their
Rider, till none can sit them: And that none can live in the Communion of our
Church, who does not solemnly renounce all rebellious Principles and Practices,
and disclaim all Usurpations whatsoever, upon Sovereign Powers. He can never be
overruled, by any designing Men (of what persuasion soever) to put off his own
generous Nature, and innate Kindness to his old Friends: He is very well
content, we should be as faithful to God, as we are to him; as true to our
Religion, as to our King: God Preserve and Prosper him for it.

Alas! We do but flatter our selves, if ever we hope to be Governed, without
that which is commonly called an Arbitrary Power, (let the Word sound never so
harshly:) The only question is, Who shall have it? Whether it shall be in the
King, or the People? In one or many? And the Denial of necessary Powers for the
safety of the Kingdom; which (call them what you will) are the Regalia, the
Inherent Rights of the Crown; for Fear of Mis-Government, is the ready way, to
lose all the Fruits and Benefit of Government it self, for want of those powers
to support it. For it is impossible for any Commonwealth to subsist, without
that dreadful thing, called Arbitrary Power; (if by Arbitrary you mean, as I
do, Supreme and Absolute.) True it is, That if this be vested in one, the
People are over-apt to call it Tyranny; but if in many, they are pleased to
christen it, by the glorious Name of Liberty: Though if Tyranny consist not in
the abundance, but abuse of Power; not in the uncontroulableness, but
unreasonableness; not in the exercise, but excess of it; it will be as unjust
and Tyrannical in them, as in him, so to use it: Nor are Commonwealths more
secured from this sort of Tyranny than Monarchies.

Our own Statute Laws acknowledge, 16. R. 2.5. 25. H. 8.21 24. H. 8.12
That our King is subject to none but God; and that he has an Imperial Crown;
and they call his Kingdom an Empire: And by the Common Law, the King is neither
inferior to the Three Estates, nor coordinate with them; but is Major
Vniversis, as well as Singulis; Greater than all of them, as well collectively,
as singly. The Parliament does but propound, prepare, and present the Project
of the Law; it is the Royal Stamp that makes it one: The sole Legislative Power
is lodged in the King; and to him (says Bracton) belongs the interpretation of
all Laws, when made; (not in plain Cases, but in New Questions, and Emergent
Doubts:) of which the King was the first, and must be the last Judge too: For
if the People be Judge, he is no Monarch at all; and so farewell all Government.

There is no State, in which there is not an ultimate Judicature, which is not
to be accountable; and Queen Elizabeth used to say, That she was to be
accountable to none but God: Nor did the Protestants call this Tyranny, or
Arbitrary Government, in her Days: And therefore let not the Dragon's Tail
pretend now to lead the Head, least after much fruitless Toil, it draw the Body
of Three Kingdoms into the Ditch. Things are not always in themselves, as they
appear to us: We see them but on the Dark side; the King has more Wisdom than
to lay open the Arcana Imperii to us: And if an Implicit Faith be due to the
meanest Artificer in his own Art, how much more is it due to the King in the
profound secrets of Government? His Actions are manifest, but his Reasons
sealed up in the Cabinet of his own Royal Breast. And if Bodinus says true,
Lib. 1. de Rep. c. 8.
A Sovereign Prince may Derogate to the Law, which he has promised or sworn to
keep, if the Equity thereof be ceased, and that of himself, without the consent
of his Subjects. Suppose there were a Law, That the People should pay no Taxes,
or Contributions to the public Good, but what every Man himself pleased; or
that none should be pressed to fight against a Common Enemy; this would look
like a Glorious State of Liberty indeed, through a pair of Popular Spectacles:
But if the King, who is the best Judge of public Necessity, should see this,
would presently ruin his Kingdom; he were not true to his Trust, which God
has reposed in him; if he should suffer them, to keep their Money, for his and
their Enemies to make merry with, and not call them, both in their Purses and
Persons, to defend him and themselves, against such Invasions. So that the King
may, it seems, make use of his Prerogative, as God does of his Omnipotence,
upon some extraordinary Occasions: For as my Lord Hobart well observes, Colt
and Glover against the Bp. of Litchfield
The Statute Laws are made to ease him of his Labor, not to deprive him of his
Power, and that he may make a Grant with a Non obstante to them: And indeed the
Power of Dispensing with particular Laws, in some Emergencies, is such a Lex
Coronae, such a Prerogative, without which, no Kingdom can be well Governed,
but Justice will be turned into Wormwood. For there never was yet, nor ever
will be, any humane Law, framed with such exact Skill and Policy, that it might
not, on some occasion or other, be burdensome to the Subject, and obstructive to
the public Good of the Commonwealth: There being particular Cases and
Exigencies, so infinitely various, that it is impossible for the Wit of Man to
foresee or prevent them. And therefore in all Government, there must be a power
Paramount to the written Law; and we have good reason to bless God, that this
is lodged but in one, and in him whom he has set over us, to be his
Vicegerent; by whose Authority, they who break the Letter of the Law, in pure
Zeal and Loyalty, to serve the ends of Government, and to uphold the Crown on
the right Head, that does and ought to wear it; may be releiv'd, and pardoned,
and rewarded too. Suppose a Statute Law made in Heat, when the Nation was in a
great Fright and Ferment, and upon the false Suggestions and Depositions of
them, who were afterward judicially convicted of being Perjured Villains,
should happen to run the Kingdom into one Mischief, out of pure Zeal to avoid
another: Or suppose it should rob the King of his Rights of Government, or his
Subjects of their Birthright; or incapacitate them to serve him, (as by Oath
and Duty bound,) even to the Quelling of an Invasion, or open Rebellion, which
he could not do without their help: Must the Kingdom be consumed in a general
Conflagration, as the greatest City of it once was, by Law? If Contra Hostem
Publicum quilibet Homo Miles, be as true as it is a Common Maxim, That every
Man is in Commission, to suppress a public Rebellion; then why such an
Outcry, as if we were all undone, or, might be so by force of Popish Arms? Why
should Protestants only be at liberty, to spend their Blood for the King and
Kingdom's Safety, and the Papists sit still, and look on? Or why may not the
King suspend such a Law, when there is Hannibal ad portas, as the Diseases of
State, and the various Exigences, and posture of Affairs require, and his own
Prudence and Discretion shall direct him, or invite him to it? I do not see
what irregularities might not be fairly excused in such Exigences, by that
Supreme Law of Necessity, which bears down all Transgressions.

The King has indeed promised to Govern by Law; but the safety of the People
is an Exception, implied in every Monarchical Promise: Nor must Policy, or
Popularity, prevail against Piety. And I am afraid, that some of them, who
object this so smartly against the King, have forgot how many Statute-Laws they
themselves have broken; and never yet called to account for them: For which
they have reason to bless God and the King, and to be so very well pleased with
his Clemency to them, as not to grudge others, to be sharers with them, in the
like Indulgencies. We enjoy enough, and we have no reason to desire, that Men,
of as unquestionable Loyalty as our selves, should be starved, because they are
not of our Religion; when we neither deny them to be God's Israel, nor the
King's People. We do not say, That the Church of Rome is not a True Church,
though we affirm it to be a Corrupt one; we like their Body well, but not their
Ulcers; nor have we left Them, but their Errors. It Is the same Naaman, and he a
Syrian still; but Leprous with them, and Cleansed with us: Which we speak, not
out of censure, but grief; for we pity their Errors, pray for their Conversion,
and long for a Reunion, upon Terms of Faith, Truth, and Charity: Nor indeed,
were we Catholics, or Christians, if we did not. And that the King may be
convinced, that we do it from the bottom of our Hearts: Let him see, that we
envy none of his Persuasion, any Expressions or Marks of his Royal Favor,
which he thinks fit to confer upon them; and that our Eye is not Evil, because
he is Good.

We live, I know, in an unhappy Age, wherein every Man is made to pass for a
Romanist in Masquerade, who will not be a bore-fac'd Rebel: He must break all
the Ties of Faith, Truth, and Justice, and tamely subject all the Laws of God
and the King, to the imperious Dictates of some sly popular Incendiaries; or
else he is condemned without Mercy, for a Betrayer of his Country, and one who
is willing to part with his Birthright, Privileges, and Religion. But I have
not so learned Christ; nor am I afraid, or ashamed of any Nicknames, that
shall be given me for doing my Duty. A good Conscience never wants courage; nor
does the Owner of it care more, what Men say, than what they dream of him, when
he discharges it. And my Prayer to God shall always be, That the People of
England (those especially committed to my charge) may prove themselves as
Loyal, as did the People in my Text: Who left the Government of the Kingdom to
Solomon, and went unto their Tents, joyful and glad of heart; which is the
Fourth part of my Text; to wit,

IV. Populi Exultatio; the People's Triumph; They were joyful and glad of
heart. The Wiseman tells us, That there is a time to Weep (for the sins and
sufferings of our selves and others; and such was that, which we celebrated on
Saturday last) and a time to Rejoice, (for the light of God's Countenace lifted
upon us, and our Relations:) For this, we never had a more seasonable time,
than that which gives a Being and Authority to our present meeting. Which
affords us as much reason to rejoice, as the People in my Text had: Joy being
an Echo, a Religious Repercussion, arising from the enjoyment of God's Mercy;
and a fullness of joy, a dutiful Correspondence to the fullness of God's Mercy.
Our returns must be answerable to our receipts. Nor will true Gratitude, be
either sullen, or silent: If God gives us an Harvest of Mercy, he expects a
Tithe of Joy.

The People in my Text thought themselves infinitely happy, that they had been
any ways serviceable to their Sovereign's satisfaction: And his gracious
acceptance of their performances, filled their Hearts so brim-full of Joy, that
it ran over at their Mouths; as it is expressed in the Fifth part of my Text:
To wit,

V. Exultationis Ratio; The just Cause of their Triumph, which is also the
cause of our present Assembly; All the Goodness which the Lord has done for
David his Servant, and for Israel his People. God's Goodness is never
entertained, as it ought to be, if not with Joy and Gladness of Heart; the very
end, at which his Benefits aim, being to make glad the Hearts of Men. And if
such strong Cordials as these, which are now Administered to us, will not revive
our drooping Spirits, and make the Life of Joy return into our Hearts; it is
because we are dead in Trespasses and Sins. Either we are not sensible of his
Favors, or think them not worth our Regarding; if we strive to smother them,
and will not give our hearts leave to enlarge upon them, as the Jews here did,
who were truly sensible of what great things the Lord had done for their
Nation, and how little they deserved them.

1. Regi. The first thing at which they seemed so transported, is for the
Mercies of God shown to David, in Himself, and in his Posterity; to Him, and to
his Son Solomon, who succeeded him; to whom he had given such an extraordinary
Gift of Wisdom and Understanding, as no mere mortal Man could plausibly pretend
to: For which his People do not force a smile in their Faces, but their Joy was
Real and Cordial, it kept their residence in their Hearts. Not like some in
this Kingdom, who were never more merry, then at his Majesty's Afflictions; and
yet now, upon the Turning of the times, fashion themselves to show a Mirth (as
well as they can) from their Teeth outward; and pretend to be affected with
Joy for that, which (if their former Words and Actions are to be credited,) is
their greatest Grief, that they are not able to hinder: They are now Joyful, as
they were before Loyal, only in Hypocrisy. But though the King and his People
may, God is not to be deceived; he searches the secret Corners of your Hearts;
and if this Days Joy be not rooted there, he will never accept it.

As your Satisfaction is, so will your Rejoicing be: Joy being but an
Expression of that Pleasure, which we take in the Enjoyment of what we
intimately wished for: And if we understood either our Duty, or our Interest,
our Necessities or Convenience, must needs concentre in the happiness of our
Gracious Sovereign, which is Essential to our own. For unless God's Goodness be
shown to David his Servant, Israel his People must never expect it. And
therefore, when they alleged the Cause of their Joy; they give the King's
Happiness, the Pre-eminence which it ought to have, and assign that for the
First and Greatest.

It is now seasonable for us to consider, how Gracious God has been to that
Glorious Martyr, King Charles the First, in preserving and recalling his
Posterity, to their own People and Inheritance, in setting his Two Sons upon
his Throne. Those Stones, which the Builders rejected, have since been made the
Head of the Corner: This is the Lord's doing, and it ought to be mavelous in
our Eyes, and matter of Joy to our Hearts.

His late Majesty of Blessed Memory, knew full well, that he was obliged by all
the Ties of Honor, Justice and Conscience, to maintain the Crown, in its due
and Legal course of Descent, (as he did) against that Traitorous Bill of
Exclusion, which some restless Men would have Intruded upon him; who used all
the Black Arts of Hell to rob his present Majesty of his Birthright and
Succession, and would have perverted the universal Principle of all Nations,
and acted contrary to the express Word of God, to compass his Ruin; as if any
unnatural Injury might have been done, that good might have come of it; Tantum
Religio potuit suadere Malorum.
Not considering, that the securing of Religion, could not have been that way
attempted, but with open Violation to it self and Justice.

But Liberty and Religion are two such powerful Words of Enchantment, that the
very noise of them produces real effects in the World, and terrible ones too:
For the unthinking and easily-deluded Multitude, are by the sound of these,
made Instruments to destroy the things themselves, which they so eagerly
contended for; and cheated of all their golden Expectations at last, of which
they dreamed at first.

Next to this, we are obliged to bless God for the many perils, which his
Majesty has escaped by Sea; Ps. cxxiv 4.
If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side, the waters had overwhelmed
him, and the streams had gone over his soul: For his last miraculous
Deliverance from the sinking Gloucester-Frigat, that he did not then lose his
Life with his Ship; whilst a great part of his Retinue perished in his sight:
But that the God of our salvation, who shows his wonders in the deep, saved him
out of many waters, for our preservation, and this days solemnity. We are
likewise to bless Almighty God, for snatching him out of the Jaws of
Destruction, by delivering him miraculously from that Unnatural, and Hellish
Conspiracy and Rebellion; which was the natural Product of their Black Bill of
Exclusion: For they who would have Excluded the present King, confessed with
their last Breaths, That they would have Murdered the former, as well as him:
From whence God's almighty Arm did rescue them and us; even because he had a
favor unto us. The Enemies of our Sovereign Lord the King, are brought down
and fallen; but we are risen and stand upright: Nor shall any Weapon, which is
formed against the Lord's Anointed, prosper.

Lastly, We are to bless God, for his deliverance from Two Rebellions in the
First, and his Peaceable entrance on the Second Year of his Reign; to whom,
next to God and his good Angels, we are most beholden for our national
Happiness; for all those miraculous Concurrences of his Providence, which gave
the Consecration to this glorious Day. All which comprehensive Mercies, call
aloud upon us to sacrifice our unfeigned, hearty, Public Thanks, with one
Heart and Voice to God, for his transcendent Favors to David our King, and
Israel his People.

2. Populo: To Israel his people, who by Solomon's means were freed from their
Enemies, and Bondage, and kept in Peace and Safety. Great is the goodness of
God to the Land of our Nativity: He has made it both the envy and glory of the
World: Never had any Nation greater Evidences of his loving Kindness, than we
have had; nor more at any time, than this: Conceal them we must not: Repeat
them we cannot, they are so many in number: Forget them we dare not: Disown
them we will not. God has made us the very Darlings of Heaven and Happiness;
and courted us to Obedience by all the fair means imaginable; and, as if he
meant to make us a president of Mercy to Posterity, like Gideon's Fleece, we
have been full of the Divine Bounty; when all the World besides, was dry in
comparison of us: We came into no misfortunes like other Folks, nor have we
been plagued like other Men, round about us: Our Mess has been like
Benjamin's, Five times bigger than the rest of our Brethren; and we have plenty
of all things richly to enjoy: He has not dealt with us after our Sins, nor
rewarded us according to our Iniquities; and therefore let the unspeakable
Goodness of our God, lead us to Repentance; or else the more he has indulged
us hitherto, the greater reason have we to expect his severity for the time to
come.

Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, (when all the Malice and Power
of Hell was raised to destroy him) for keeping our gracious Sovereign, under
the shadow of his Wing, to this day; in assisting him by extraordinary Supplies
of his Grace, to undergo, not only with Patience, but Cheerfulness, the many
Indignities they cast upon him, and the Extremities to which they drove him;
and in giving him, now at last, the hearts of his Loyal Subjects, and the necks
of his Enemies: Which I therefore mention under this Head, because it is a
Mercy to us, as well as to him, who are necessary Sharers in it. And we were
the most ungrateful Monsters in the World, if we should not remember it; and
consider seriously, how happy the People are who are in such a case; yea, how
blessed are that People whose God is the Lord.

Let us hang up our Votive Tables, and manifest our public and cheerful Sense
of these Mercies on this solemn Festivity; and lest the more God in Mercy
remembers us, the sooner we forget both him and our selves, let the rejoicing
of our Lips, be seconded with the reformation of our Lives: 1 Samuel xij. 25.
For if we still do wickedly, we shall be consumed, both we and our King.

Let us love God, and one another, from this day forward, more than ever we
did, for the King's sake. The better Christians we become, the better Subjects
we shall be; and the better Neigbours too.

Let us therefore forsake all those wasting sins, which rob us of our Peace and
Joy; and remember that all outward formalities of Rejoicing, are but
insignificant Ceremonies, if not accompanied with innocence, and integrity. To
what purpose do we Ring our Bells; Isai. v. 18.
if we resolve to draw Iniquity with Cords of Vanity; and Sin, as if it were
with a Cartrope, till we pull down God's Judgments, upon the King's, and our
Heads? To what end shall we kindle Bone-fires, if we resolve to enkindle the
Flames of God's displeasure, by our provoking Sins to devour us, into whose
Hands it will be a fearful thing to fall; for our God is a consuming Fire? Heb.
x. 31. Heb. xij. 29.
To what purpose do we please our selves, if we resolve likewise to gratify
the King's, and our Enemies; nay, and the Enemies of God, and all goodness too?
For God's sake, for the King's sake, for the Church of England 's sake, be
dutiful Subjects to the King of Heaven in the first place; and next under him,
to the King of Great Britain; that God may never repent of his loving Kindness
to him or us.

The Lord of Hosts, who has kept him in the day of trouble, of his Infinite
Mercy to him and us, preserve him from it, for the time to come; the Lord help
him from his Sanctuary, and strengthen him out of Sion: Let the Ark of his
Presence be always precious to him, and let the Presence of that Ark evermore
preserve Him: Let thy Hand, O Lord, be upon the Man of thy Right Hand: Make him
a constant Patron of thy Church and Truth: Protect his Person; and prosper his
Government. Bless him with wise and safe Councils; and give him courage and
constancy to pursue them. Bless him in his Royal Consort, our gracious Queen
MARY; the partner of his Afflictions, as well as of his Glories; and in that
good time, which shall be best for her and us, fulfill her Joys; and make her a
fruitful Mother of many and happy Children; and the King a Father of a numerous
Posterity, to Rule these Nations after him, by Succession in all Ages and
Generations. O Lord, Grant the King a long Life; give him his Hearts desire;
and fulfill all his mind; that we, his Subjects, under thee, may see with joy
and gladness of Heart, That thou, of thine infinite Goodness, do help thine
Anointed; and that thou will hear him from thy Holy Heaven; and continue thy
Loving Kindness to our David thy Servant, and Israel thy People.

AMEN.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
AT the Instance of many Eminent Persons of both Churches, Superiors are
consenting that, of the English Sermons Preached before Their Majesty's since
the First Sunday of October last, some be made Public. And because that which
opened the Preaching at Windsor has been much desired, and the longest
expected, I Present the Reader with it in the First place. The Author bids me
Apologize for it as a slight Thing run up in haste; But since it was well
received, it would be to question the Judgment of that most Honorable and most
Learned Auditory, to make any Excuse, or to give it you with any Alterations or
Amendment. You have it therefore as it was spoke, and will be followed by
others of the same Hand, he hopes, more Correct.


