Imprimatur,

Jan. 20. 1678. Guil. Jane, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sacris domesticis.

THE LEGACY OF THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, HERBERT Lord Bishop of
Hereford: To his DIOCESE. OR A SHORT Determination of all Controversies We have
with the PAPISTS, By Gods Holy Word.

JOHN xvii. 17. Thy Word is Truth.

LONDON: Printed for Charles Harper, at the Flower-de-luce, over against St.
Dunstans Church in Fleet Street. 1679.

To All within my Diocese, especially those of the City of HEREFORD.
Dearly Beloved in the Lord,
IT IS now a year and half since in my Cathedral I told you my sad apprehensions
of Popish designs, to destroy both us and our Religion: for though no
particular discovery could then be made, yet the discourse and actings of
several Papists in these parts did plainly show they were then preparing that
which is now discovered: for they were then providing Horse and Arms, they
posted about day and night, they threatened many that they must ere long turn or
burn, and some told their friends that if it came to cutting of throats they
should be saved; which made it evident that not only they had some bloody
design, but thought themselves also sure to effect it. Whereupon I besought you
to arm your selves for the day of Trial, and preached a Sermon to that effect:
and afterward the better to strengthen you against the incursion of Popish
Superstitious Doctrines, I preached several Sermons how you were to stick close
to the Scriptures, Gods Holy Word, which was our only Rule of Faith, and not
knowing what kind of Pastor you might have after my death, whether a Protestant
Pastor not well verst in such matters, or a Popish Pastor wholly devoted to
them; I resolved at my decease to leave you these Sermons as a Legacy: for my
great age of seventy five years past assuring me, according to 2. Pet. 1. 14,
15. That shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle, I will endeavor that you
may be able after my decease to have these things always in remembrance. But
now I have a new and farther reason to hasten this my Legacy to you, because I
hear my bloody Enemies the Jesuitical Priests are resolved as soon as they can
find opportunity, to hasten my death. This has made me speed these Sermons to
the Press, lest I and they fall into their hands who will give the same speedy
end to both. And the truth of what I now deliver to you I trust by Gods
assisting grace to seal with my blood, if he call me to it; for then I know he
will enable me for it. And though I am a weak carnal worm, of my self not able
to do any thing, yet by Gods powerful grace I may, and I hope I shall be
enabled to do all things: for he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee. And therefore I most humbly and most readily commit the keeping of my
Soul to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator: His will be done.

Amen.
TO THE Christian Reader.
THere being so many Books of our Controversies with the Papists both learned
and unlearned already printed, this may seem both useless and vain, yet I hope
it may prove otherwise; because I humbly conceive, you may find some useful
things here not uttered before, and if but one, yet considering the great
concern of the matter in hand, our right faith and our salvation thereon
depending, no conscientious man will repent the spending five or six hours time
(in that short space the whole may be perused) in the pursuit of it: and I
heartily wish more hours were not spent in things as useless sometimes even by
good and learned men. But put the case there be not one good thing here, but
what has formerly been better set forth, yet this little Book may be useful:
Experience shows man to be so affected with novelty, as soon to grow weary of
the best things and for variety take up worse: and so this meaner discourse may
have better effect by being new. And if I may any way contribute to the
establishing my Diocese and others in the true, primitive Catholic Religion, I
shall not repent my labor, though you do yours.

Considering with my self that the greater part of men are illiterate, and can
reap but little benefit by learned Treatises; and of the more literate, some
not so zealous in Religion as willingly to spend much time in the search of
truth, I resolved on such a plain and compendious way as might satisfy and
settle the greater part of men, not troubling their heads with many (or scarce
any) quotations out of several Authors, which (pardon me if I say) can be
useful but to very few men. For such small scantlings as are there set down can
give little or no assurance of the sense of the Author. We see that Christian
Writers taking here and there pieces of heathen Virgil, make him speak
Christianity: so taking small parcels of any Orthodox Father, you may make him
speak Popery. Wherefore such short quotations can serve only as Indexes to
guide men to the Tracts from whence they are taken: and before you can have the
clear meaning of the Author, you must observe the main business in hand, and
the scope he drives at; you must also know his usual way of expression, whether
allegorical or plain literal, rhetorical or concise, with several other
circumstances; and it will be often necessary to compare one place with another
of the same Author: all which not one man of a thousand has ability, leisure
and will to perform; and he that has and does so, yet after all his labor, he
has but human assurance in a matter of his salvation, which is no better than
a bank of sand to build his eternal ill or welfare on; which sure no wise man
will do, but only on that Rock Christ Jesus and his Holy Gospel: hold fast to
that, and be sure to observe our Saviors way of encountering the Devil and his
deluding ministers with a Scriptum est, thus and thus it is written, you will
be sure to drive them away and overcome them. But if you once quit the Word of
God, and hearken to the doctrines of men, your unstable heart, like a wave of
the sea, will be tossed to and fro with diversity of doctrines: For you will
find one Father say this, another that, yea the same Father say diversely in
diverse places. St. Austin wrote a whole Tract of Recantations, with great piety
and ingenuity, acknowledging his former Errors, had he dyed before he wrote
those Recantations, then all those Errors, by the rule of the Papists, had past
with great Authority for Truths. I heartily wish the other great Doctors of the
Church had seriously reviewed in their riper Age what they wrote in their
Youth, as St. Austin did: doubtless some of them would have found things to
recant as well as he. Whoever has a mind to see more of this, let him read
Daillee of the true use of the Fathers: but by this and the following
discourses you will find the doctrine of man is no sure ground to build your
Faith and Salvation on, but only on the Word of God. Moreover, were the
Doctrines of the Fathers of far more Authority, yet among their Writings there
are many spurious Books foisted in by idle Monks, who were the common
transcribers of the Fathers Works before Printing. Bellarmine the great
Champion of the Papists does acknowledge this, and has written a Book to
distinguish the true from the false, yet has reserved some in his Catalogue
for true (making for their Doctrines) as spurious as those he has cast out.

You see then it is very difficult to know which are the genuine Books of the
Fathers; and when you know that; it is as difficult to know what is the clear
sense of their Writings, and thirdly, to know which are their Orthodox
Opinions, which their Errors, (for there is no learned Papist but will
acknowledge they had Errors) and after all this we have no warrant to build our
Faith and Salvation on their Doctrine. Wherefore to save all men this great
labor both needless and fruitless, I resolved on this short, easy, plain way
to prove, That in the Scripture alone without any other Book in the world, we
have clear, full, and complete instruction for matters of belief and practice,
in sum, all things necessary for our salvation in Scripture, and that there is
no need to consult any other Book but the Bible alone for all. And Secondly, I
do here further prove, that it is both dangerous and impious to affirm the
Scriptures are not complete in themselves for our Salvation. And Thirdly, that
it is both irreligious and idolatrous to believe in any man, or assembly of men
in matters of Salvation: which saves all men the labor of looking farther than
the Bible for it.

And because the Papists pretend Scripture (which we acknowledge to be our Rule
of Faith) for some of their Opinions differing from us, I have here (I hope
fully) Explained and Answered those Scriptures, especially what they pretend
for Transubstantiation and Corporal Presence of our Savior Christ in the Lords
Supper: which I shall add at the end in a short Tract by it self, because it is
not at all contained in that Text whereon my three Sermons depend.

And thus I hope this little Book (if not confuted) subservient to Scripture,
may without any other, satisfy and settle any one in all the Controversies we
have with the Papists: First, by having proved we are not to believe any thing
with divine Faith, but what is plainly contained in Scripture: Secondly, by
having Answered what they pretend from Scripture: Thirdly, because for all
other differences with us they have no Scripture. Now if any Papist can confute
me in any one of these material principal things, I shall heartily thank him,
and promise in the word of a Christian, I shall readily acknowledge my Error
and embrace his Truth: But if he only cavil, or scurrilously scoff at trivial
things (as some to their own shame and reproach have formerly done) I shall
thank them also for this, for thereby they prove their own Errors and confirm
my Truths.

I have this one thing more only to trouble the Reader with: The first of my
three Sermons on that Text Search the Scriptures, was Preached in September,
1677, and in June, 1678. comes out a little book to the same intent of that
Sermon expressing several things in it, and in the very same manner, by what
means I know not, but this I and many others know, that my Sermon was Preached
almost a year before that Book came forth, and therefore I could not have them
from that Author, called, The same Author that wrote the whole Duty of Man, who
it seems must countenance Books to the worlds end. However, I thought it fit to
Print that Sermon with the other two, first because it contains several things
not in that Book, and secondly, the other two would be very defective without
it.

And now, good Reader, I beg your favorable Censure if you find any small
Mistakes or Errors: for you know, and I confess, being a man I may err, humanum
est errare, sed in errore perseverare belluinum est, therefore I abhor it. I
conclude all with my Prayers for you, and begging your Prayers for me, that God
in his great mercy by the light of his holy Word and holy Spirit would guide us
all into all saving truth. And to his Divine Majesty from whom comes every
good and perfect gift, be ascribed, as is most due, all Honor and Glory for
ever and ever.

Amen.
A SERMON ON JOHN V. Ver. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye
have Eternal Life.
WHEN I last appeared here, my business was to arm you with Christian Courage
and firm resolution to fight manfully the good fight of Faith, with full
assurance of a glorious reward from the sure hand of our most gracious God, who
never fails to reward those that seek and serve him. And this our fight must
be, not with the arm of flesh and sword of steel, which is often subdued and
broken by a stronger, but with the power of the Word and Sword of the Spirit,
which no power upon earth or under the earth can subdue, because he that is
with us is stronger than all that are against us. Now for the present, I shall
endeavor to show you what we are to fight for. And this we learn from the
Apostle St. Jude, who commands us to contend for the faith once delivered to
the Saints, once for all; the faith which was delivered by our Savior and his
Apostles, once to remain to all future Generations for the Salvation of all
Mankind. Which Faith is contained in the Holy Scriptures, and written there for
our Learning, as the Scripture it self tells us. Search therefore the
Scriptures for it, for in them ye have Eternal Life.

In these words we have two things set forth unto us, First, A Command;
Secondly, The Reason of the Command. The Command, to Search the Scriptures;
then the Reason of this Command, for in the Scriptures we have Eternal Life.

Both these things are so plain in themselves, that they need no explication.
But the perverse wits of evil men, who can find nodum in scirpo, have invented
some difficulties in them to excuse their pernicious practices clean contrary
to them. The Governors of the Romish Church guilty of such practices, have
invented these difficulties. For they having many things in their Church
Devotions quite contrary to Scripture, (as I shall show you, e're this business
be ended) find it necessary to shut up the Scripture from the Laity, who would
not so blindly be seduced into them, had they the light of Holy Scripture to
discover the grossness of them. And therefore, First, They will have it, that
this command of our Savior to Search the Scriptures belongs only to the
Clergy, and they are to teach the people out of them. Secondly, As to the
reason of the Command, That in them we have Eternal Life, the Romists add, that
you must take along with you the explication of the Church, and such other
additions as the Church shall propose; for the Church (say they) is guided by
the same Holy Ghost as did guide the Apostles and Evangelists to dictate and
write the Scriptures, and therefore the Doctrines of the Church are equally to
be held, and as necessary to Eternal Life.

But, Beloved, these are mere juggling mists cast before the eyes of men to
lead them blindfold into their superstitious gainful practices. And, God
willing, I shall prove unto you that both these their assertions are groundless
and false. First, I shall prove that this command of our Savior, Search the
Scriptures, belongs to all that are capable to understand matters of Salvation,
whether Clergy or Laity, Men or Women, or even Children, and that it is not only
lawful but pious to search into the Scriptures. Secondly, I shall prove that
the belief of the Scriptures alone is sufficient to Eternal Life, without any
addition, and that we are not bound to believe any Doctrine the Church shall
teach, but what is fully contained in Scripture, or so clearly deduced from
thence, that any man of common understanding may plainly see the evidence of
that deduction. And farther, I shall prove that it is a damnable thing for any
man or Church to teach any Doctrine as necessary to Salvation, but what is so
fully contained in, or so clearly deduced from Scripture, as I now mentioned.
And seeing both these points are matters of Salvation, wherein all mankind,
learned or unlearned, high and low, are concerned, I think it necessary to
handle these matters in so plain a way as may suit with the capacity of all,
even the unlearned, who are most easily seduced into error.

I begin with the first part, the command of our Savior, Search the
Scriptures, and to prove that this belongs to all. And for the more methodical
proceeding in this business, I shall divide all sorts of men into three ranks,
and show that to search the Scriptures belongs to all three, Priests, Princes,
and People. And first, for Priests there can be no doubt. The only doubt in
this point is, whether they do search the Scriptures so diligently and
studiously as they ought, that St Paul's objection be not laid to their charge:
Thou that teach others, teach thou not thy self? Wherefore I beseech you
of the Clergy, that are present, to consider what a shameful and scandalous
thing it is, that a poor mechanic tradesman should be more ready in quoting
Scripture for his error than you for the truth: and you that should be able, as
the Apostle says, with sound Doctrine to stop the mouths of all gainsayers,
such weak silly gainsayers should stop your mouths with corrupted Doctrine and
mistaken Texts, and you not able to show their gross mistakes: and so with the
noise of Scripture-proofs they go away triumphant, confirmed in their errors,
by reason of your neglect of reading the Scriptures, or not understanding what
you do read. I beseech you consider it well, and let this brief admonition
suffice without any farther enlargement on this matter.

And now I may proceed to the second sort of men that are to search the
Scriptures, that is, Princes and all Magistrates: for Deuteronomy. xvii. 18, 19, 20.
we find a command for them: And it shall be when he sits upon the throne of
his Kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of this Law in a book, out of that
which is before the Priests the Levites. And it shall be with him, and he shall
read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his
God, to keep all the words of this Law and these statutes, to do them: That his
heart be not lifted up above his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the
Commandment to the right hand or to the left. This command was given hundreds
of years before the Jews had any Kings, which shows great providential care and
earnestness in God, that Kings should be studious in his Holy Laws. And it is a
very pertinent note that learned Grotius has on this place, That the King is
to write himself a Copy of Gods Laws, which is the best way to imprint a thing
in a man's memory; for when a man Copies out any thing, he insists upon every
word the time of writing, and so makes the deeper impression in his mind to
remember it. Whereby you see that Kings are required, as well as Priests, to be
very conversant in the Scriptures, to read them all the days of their life. And
the reason of this is given by the Prophet Isa. xlix. where, speaking of the
Church of Christ which was to be set up among the Gentiles, he tells the Church
that Kings should be her nursing-fathers, and Queens her nursing-mothers. And
sure Fathers and Mothers should be able to teach their Children, and not their
Children teach them. From whence I might infer, that Kings should be more
knowing in Scripture than Churchmen, Kings being as it were their Fathers. And
so it was with King David, he did so meditate on the Laws of God both day and
night, that he thereby became wiser than his teachers, I suppose he means the
Priests who taught him in his minority. But let this pass, and let us take
nursing-fathers here as Protectors only and Governors: yet as such they ought
to be very knowing in Scripture, that they may distinguish between sound and
corrupted Doctrine, for sure they are not to protect and nurse up Heresy,
which they may chance to do, if they have not a right understanding of
Scripture, but are led away by false and deluding teachers, as the Arrian
Emperors were, and so proved oppressing Tyrants over the Orthodox Church. Thus
you see it is necessary for the Spiritual Government of the Church that Kings
should observe this command of God, and have the Bible before them, and read
therein all the days of their life, And it is very necessary also for the Civil
Government of the State, as it is there in Deuteronomy. expressed, that their hearts be
not lifted up above their brethren, and that they do not multiply to themselves
wives, nor silver, nor gold.

What is here said of Kings or great Persons concerns all you that are in
Authority under the King at present, or are like to be hereafter. For seeing
that Kings cannot be personally present in all parts of their Dominion, they
are constrained to appoint others under them to perform that which they cannot
do themselves. From whence it necessarily follows that this command of God to
Kings belongs to all those who act by their Authority. And as it is in the
business of Godfathers and Godmothers, that inferior persons are often
substituted to perform the parts of great ones: so is it in Church-fathers and
Church-mothers, and their Substitutes are to be Nursing-fathers to the Church,
to countenance and protect the Orthodox Teachers. They are likewise to read
daily in Gods Holy Word for the very same ends, that their hearts also be not
lifted up above their brethren; that they do not multiply to themselves silver
nor gold; which all in Authority are by nature prone unto, and inferiors
probably more than Kings themselves: for Kings being born to great dignity,
power and revenue, are not so transported with it as persons who from a low
condition are exalted unto them; commonly their minds also are exalted. And so
we see on the contrary part, men who are tumbled down from dignity, power and
wealth, are far more dejected with it, than those who are born and bred in low
and poor estate; these are as contented and cheerful in that condition, and
commonly more than great ones in theirs: and just so, born Princes commonly are
less arrogant, and less covetous than those risen to great dignity. Now reading
daily in Gods Holy Word, especially in the Gospel, does very much abate all
exorbitancy in these matters, when there we contemplate the poverty, the
humiliation, the meekness, the affability of the King of eternal glory. Yet
this hindered him not in showing his Authority when it was needful: for he
sharply rebuked the vices of the Jews, and with a scourge whipped out of the
Temple the money changers and other Mechanics that profaned it. The severity
of justice mingled with meekness and affability in due time and place, has a
wonderful commanding authority over the hearts of all, and makes Government
both beloved and feared. Besides, reading the Scriptures has another great
effect conducing very much to Government: for it is very powerful in operation,
making great impressions of all virtues in the minds of men; the practice
whereof in the Magistrate gains him great reverence to his Authority, and is
also a great inducement to the people to follow him in the way of virtue: and
then the Government will be so easy to him, as he may lead them with a twine
thread, as commonly we say, to whatsoever he pleases. Virtuous persons never
resist Authority, knowing it is the Ordinance of God, but will rather defend it
with their lives: whereas all vicious persons hate Government as a restraint to
their licentious appetites, and a curb to their covetous and injurious
oppressions of others, and are therefore ready on all occasions to mutiny and
rebel against Authority; but then the Magistrate having by his just and
virtuous proceedings possessed himself of the hearts of all good men, and
increased the number of them by his pious example, shall be sure to have all
their hands ready to assist and protect him in the due execution of his Office.
No laws in the world can preserve Government long without the operation of Gods
Laws on the consciences of men: for when evil men have conceived and nourished
up wicked designs in their hearts, their passions will be so blown up and
enflamed by mutual discourse, and animating one another, and their reason so
blinded by their passions, that they will venture on the most irrational and
desperate attempts, and proceed to some sudden mischief, though it be to their
own ruin and loss of life. But the Laws of God principiis obstant, give a check
to the first motions of wickedness; the all-seeing eye of God, and his severe
avenging hand with eternal flames strikes a terror in the heart, and there
suppresses all evil designs before they go farther, securing the Government in
continual peace and safety. And thus I have showed you the obligation that lies
on Princes, and all Magistrates that are under them, to be studious in reading
the Scripture, and in acting according to Gods Holy Laws, considering how
advantageous it will be to the ease and happiness of their Government.

There remains now to treat of the third rank of men, the People; and to show
you, that they also are included in this command of our Savior to search the
Scriptures. And this I shall prove unto you by the whole current of the Bible.
I begin with the Old Testament, the Books of Moses and the Prophets. Did not
Moses deliver all his Laws and Ordinances to the people, and that by Gods
express command, as you may see, Exodus xix. and several Chapters following;
where it is often repeated, Call all the people. Tell the people, etc. twenty
times over and more. And so again in Deuteronomy. vi. 7. and again xi. 18. When Moses
repeated unto the people all the Ordinances of God, he called all the people
together, all Israel, and commanded them to teach their Children all the words
of the Law, and to expound to them the meaning thereof: and farther, that they
should write them on the posts and gates of their houses, that they might have
them always before their eyes; and to wear them as frontlets on their
foreheads, and on their arms as bracelets, for perpetual remembrance; and to
talk of them to their children, when they sat in their houses, when they were
in the field, and when they walked by the way. All this you have set down at
large in those Chapters mentioned. I beseech you now, can any thing be more
earnestly required, more strictly commanded? And then again for the Prophets,
as you will find almost in every Chapter. Go to my people. Speak in the ears of
all this people. Cry unto this people, and say, I have sent unto you all my
servants the Prophets, rising up early and sending. Sure I have said enough and
enough for the Old Testament.

Now for the New, from the very beginning to the end. Were not the very first
glad tidings of the Gospel declared unto the people, the meanest of the people,
Shepherds, and by them to others of like condition? and when John the Baptist
came out of the Wilderness to preach, Was it not to the people? And when Christ
himself went forth to preach, Was it not to the people, and those of the lowest
degree? And he gave it unto the Disciples of St. John as a special sign of his
being the Christ, That the poor had the Gospel preached unto them; as if it
were chiefly intended to them. And accordingly St. Paul tells us 1 Cor. i. 26.
Ye see your calling, Brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many noble are called. And as our Savior himself preached
unto all, and for the most part to those of the lowest degree: so when he was
to leave this world he gave the like charge to his Disciples, That they should,
preach the Gospel to every creature, as you may see in the last Chapter of St.
Mark; to every creature, that is, to every humane Creature: which expression of
our Savior carries great energy, as if he had said, In the preaching of the
Gospel, do not go the way of the world, and make your application to the great,
to the rich, to the powerful; no, but to those of low degree; as I have done;
to the poor, to the despised of the world, to every creature, ever so mean,
ever so contemptible; be sure you preach it to them. Thus much for the Gospel.
Then follow the Acts written to Theophilus one of the Laity. And so the
Epistles of the Apostles. That to the Romans is directed all that are at Rome,
to all. That to the Corinthians, to all that call upon the name of the Lord
Jesus, to all in every place: and so the rest. And it is observable, that there
is no mention made of the Clergy in any of his Epistles, but in that one to the
Philippians, where he expresses the Bishops and Deacons; and yet even there he
puts them in the last place: first, to all the Saints that are at Philippi, and
then adds, with the Bishops and Deacons: so that this Epistle is primarily
directed to all the Saints.

But perchance some ignorant people may stumble at the word Church in some of
his Epistles; as if those Epistles directed to the Church, were intended to
Churchmen, as we call them, meaning thereby the Clergy, the Ministers of the
Church. But, Beloved, this word, in the Original Greek (...), translated by us
Church, does not at all signify Churchmen, but the Laity assembled together,
which we properly call the congregation of the faithful: and so in Scripture,
the Church of such a town; the Church in such a house, that is, the faithful,
or the Saints of that town, or in that house: those that use there to assemble
together for the worship of God. But we use the word Church by corrupt custom
promiscuously sometimes for the Congregation, sometimes for the house wherein
they meet, sometimes for the body of Churchmen, and so we say the Canons of
the Church, that is, the Canons composed by Churchmen. But (...) in Scripture
is never so placed, but only for the Congregation of the faithful. This is more
expressly declared Rev. ii. 1. where the Bishop is called the Angel, and the
Congregation, distinct from the Minister, is called the Church: The Angel of
the Church, that is, the Bishop, the Pastor, or chief Minister of the
Congregation. And therefore St. Paul's Epistles directed to the Church of such a
place, is just the same as to the Congregation, to the faithful, or to the
Saints of such a place; which consisted of the Laity: and not only of men, but
Women also and Children, they were likewise to read the Scriptures. And
according to this, he gives it as a great commendation to Timothy, that of a
Child he had learned the Scriptures. And we know that this was the practice of
the Primitive Christian Church many Ages. For St. Hierome, one of the four
eminent Doctors and Fathers of the Church, who lived 400 years after Christ, in
his Epistle to Laeta a Roman Matron, sets down a method for her to teach her
little Girl the Scriptures, what books she should read first, and what next:
first the book of Psalms, then the Proverbs, then Ecclesiastes; and after other
books named in the Old Testament, he concludes, Ad Evangelia transeat, nunquam
ea depositura de manibus. Acta Apostolorum, and Epistolas tota cordis imbibat
voluntate. Let her then pass over to the Gospels and never let them go out of
her hands. And as for the Acts of the Apostles, and the Epistles, let her apply
her heart to learn them with all diligence. And St. Gregory, another of the
four eminent Doctors, who was the last of them, and lived 600 years after
Christ, and was Bishop of Rome; who for his great sanctity and learning was
called Gregory the Great: he, in his book of Morals written for the instruction
of all, gives this Rule, Divinas Scripturas saepius lege; imo nunquam de
manibus tuis sacra lectio deponatur. Read often the divine Scriptures; yea,
rather let them never go out of your hands. And in another place, he tells us,
Dictis obscurioribus fortes exercet, and parvulis humili sermon blanditur.
There you will find obscure sayings to exercise strong men, and lowly sayings
for little ones. Here you have the Doctrine and Practice of the Primitive
Church for many Ages. And yet the Romanists will most impudently affirm, that
we are the deserters of Antiquity, and they only follow the practice of the
Primitive Church. But let us return to St. Paul, who, as I have showed you,
directs his Epistles to the whole Congregation of the faithful. And as St.
Paul, so St. James, to the twelve Tribes, who were the faithful. So St. Peter,
the first Epist. to all the Elect: the second to all the faithful. So St. John,
St. Jude; all written to the faithful in general. And I pray you observe what a
strict charge St. Paul gives at the end of his Epistles to the Colossians and
the Thessalonians. I charge you by the Lord that this Epistle be read to all
the Holy Brethren, to all. It were very superfluous to add more for this
business.

But notwithstanding all this the Governors of the Roman Church shut up the
Scripture from the people, and with very great reason, they teaching the people
so many things clean contrary to Scripture. The Scripture severely forbids the
worship of images: the Governors of the Roman Church teach the people to
worship them. The Scripture commands exact performance of all vows made unto
God: the Pope takes upon him to dispense with the most solemn vows that can be
made, even though the blessed Sacrament be received upon them. The Scripture
commands obedience to Kings and all that are in Authority: the Pope dispenses
with all obedience and oaths made unto their Kings, and often commands them to
rebel, make war, and murder them; yea, the Son to rebel against his own
Father, as the Son of Henry the fourth, Emperor. The Scripture forbids
marrying with many near Relations: the Pope dispenses with all. The Scripture
commands the Service of the Church to be in the known language of the people:
the Pope commands it to be in a language the people understands not at all. The
Scripture tells us God only can forgive sins: the Pope says he also can; and if
you will give him largely, he will forgive you largely. The Scripture tells us
there is but one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus: the Roman
Church teaches there are thousands of Saints and Angels; and pray unto them and
the blessed Virgin much more than to Christ or God the Father, ten Ave Mary's
for one Pater Noster. Good reason then have the Romanists to add unto these
contradictions of Scripture and many more, that grand iniquity of shutting up
the Scripture from the people, lest they should discover these contradictions.
They do wisely in their Generations.

But now that some Protestants, who teach none of these things, should think it
fit to shut up Scripture from the people is wonderful; and the reason they give
for it is as bad as the thing: because, forsooth, ignorant people reading the
Scripture it causes them to fall into very extravagant Opinions and Heresies.
How horrid a thing is it to affirm this! Really it appears no less than
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost; whereof our Savior pronounced that dreadful
Sentence, That it should never be forgiven neither in this world neither in the
world to come. For to say the reading of Scripture causes the people to fall
into Heresy, is the same in effect as to say the Holy Ghost is the Author of
sin: for I have most clearly proved unto you that the Scripture dictated by the
Holy Ghost commands all to read the Scripture. But I hope they intend no such
matter as blasphemy, but think they have some color for what they say from 2
Pet. iii. 16. where St. Peter speaks of the unlearned and unstable, wresting
the Scriptures to their own destruction. But I pray you mark how St. Peter
joins unstable with unlearned: the want of stability is the main cause of their
wresting the Scriptures. For I shall show you by and by, that they who abound
in learning, yet wanting stability, wrest the Scriptures as well (I should say
as ill) as the unlearned. But first I desire my pretending wise men to advise a
little with St. Paul, Romans vii. 10. where he tells us that the Commandment
which was ordained unto life, he found unto death: did he therefore lay aside
the Commandment? God forbid: the Commandment was Good and Holy: how then came
it to pass? He tells us, verse. 8. that sin taking occasion by the Commandment,
wrought in him all manner of concupiscence. And again verse. 11. Sin taking
occasion by the Commandment, deceived him, and by it slew him. Thus, Beloved,
you see 'twas not the Commandment that wrought death in St. Paul, but sin, that
is, concupiscence, the corruption of nature that was in him, this caused all
the evil. And just so it is in our case. It Is not the Scripture which causes
Heresies, Schisms, and Divisions amongst us. God forbid we should say so, but
sin taking occasion by the Scripture works all these: the corruption of men's
natures blinds and deceives them; the pride and wilfulness of their heart, the
conceit of their own holiness and godly understanding sets them forward in
opposition to the common received Doctrine, and to affect singularity and
applause by teaching some new thing. Then they tumble over the Scripture to
find out Texts that carry some color for it, as they fondly conceive; and
having found such, they presently blaze abroad their new Doctrine, which the
giddy unconstant people, always fond of new things, presently catch at and
follow. This puffs up the Teachers and sets them agog, and makes them ready to
suffer any thing in that behalf; for this increases the reputation of their
Sanctity, as suffering imprisonment and the like for the truth; and at length
by large Contributions, this comes to increase the wealth of their purse also:
and then there is no reducing them to obedience and order. Now, as St. Paul
says, It Is not the Scripture which causes all this, but sin: the Spiritual
pride of their heart takes occasion by the Scripture to work in them Divisions
and Heresies. And though the Scripture were wholly shut up from them, yet the
same sin, their Spiritual pride of heart, would cause the same Divisions and
Heresies. Do not we see this daily happen to them who reject the Scripture, and
walk by their new inward lights, which they pretend God infuses into them? This
makes it most manifest that all our Divisions, as St. Paul says, proceed from
sin that is in us. And does not St. James agree with St. Paul in this, when he
says, From whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, even
of your lusts that war in your members? So, from whence come these Divisions
and Contentions? come they not hence, even of their lusts that war in their
Members. Now I beseech you to consider, were it not as senseless as wicked to
shut up the Scripture, the word of life, from the whole Congregation of the
faithful, because the sin and corruption of some turn it to their death. But as
Job xi. says, Vain man would be wise, though a man be born like a wild asses
colt. Yea, he would be wiser than God, who well foresaw these Heresies and
Divisions, and forewarns us by St. Paul, 1 Cor. xi. 18, etc. not only that they
would come, but also must come for the trial of the Elect. Our Savior also
tells us, that he came not to bring peace on earth but a sword; to set a man at
variance against his Father, and the Daughter against her Mother, Matt. x. 34,
etc. And does vain man think by his wisdom to frustrate the Divine Decree; yea,
to stop our Saviors mouth from preaching the Gospel, and say, I beseech you,
Sir, hold your peace, you set men at variance, even Father and Son, Mother and
Daughter one against another. What think you, Beloved, were this wisdom, or
desperate sinful folly? It is just the same, or indeed far worse, than to
desire God to withdraw the Sun from shining on the earth, because it causes
evil weeds to grow up in evil ground. Wherefore, my Beloved, I beseech you let
us hearken to the true wisdom of God, and not to the vain deceivable wisdom of
man born as ignorant as the wild asses colt. Yet he will be so wise as for the
preventing of Errors and Divisions, to shut up the Holy Scripture from the
people, which God has commanded to be delivered to the people. But I shall
show you yet farther the perverseness of these pretending wise men. Is it not
well known to all men verst in the writings of antiquity that the most
dangerous spreading Heresies which infested the Church for several Ages, and
whereof some continue to this very day, sprang not from the people, but from
learned eminent men, Priests and Bishops, Monks and Abbots, and diverse others
famous for learning, as the Arian, the Nestorian, the Eutychian, the Pelagian,
the Macedonian, the Manichean Heresies and several others, which have mightily
disturbed the Christian Church in all Nations, East, West, North, and South.
And then by the rule of our rare wise men, the Scripture must be shut up from
these also, Bishops and Priests, as well as people, from all. Seal it up and
bury it in a Cave till the Resurrection of the dead; and before that time all
Religion may be dead and buried also; and in the mean time we may take the
Alcoran for our meditation, or Ovid de Fastibus, and so all become Turks or
Heathens; and the Kingdom of Satan set up instead of the Kingdom of Christ.
Satan himself could not have found out a better exploit to do his work.

And really, my beloved, I must in all seriousness tell you that the Christian
world was very far degenerated and declining into Heathenism by shutting up the
Scriptures in later Ages, before it pleased God in his great mercy to stir up
Dr. Luther, Bucer, Melancthon, Calvin, and several others to open again the
Gospel unto us, and by the light thereof to discover the Heathenish
superstitions of the Church of Rome, who had again revived many practices of
old Pagan Rome: the Pagan had their purifying Waters called Aquae Lustrales; in
imitation whereof the Papists have their Holy Water to sprinkle themselves
withal when they enter the Church. So, instead of the Pagan Vestal Fires, the
Papists have their lamps continually burning day and night before their Altars.
The Pagans had their Tutelary gods as Protectors of this and that place: so
have the Papists their several Saints for several Countries; St. Dennis for
France, St. James for Spain, St. Peter for Rome, St. George for England, St.
Patrick for Ireland. The Pagans carried the Idols of their gods about in
Procession with great pomp, burning Incense and singing Hymns unto them: the
Papists do the very same to the Idols of the blessed Virgin and Saints, to the
reproach rather than the honor of their memory, as if they had been Heathen,
and not Christian Saints, Many many more are their superstitious fopperies,
forsaking the body Christ, and follow the infatuating shadows of humane
inventions, Teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men. God only knows what
a Chaos of confusion we had been sunk into before this, had not God stirred up
those Worthies I mentioned; when the Pope like a God upon earth, had usurped
that Antichristian power as to thwart the commandments of God and Christ our
blessed Savior, as I have already showed you in many particulars. But there is
one I have not yet mentioned more remarkable and detestable than any of those,
I mean the countermanding that solemn and last command of our Lord and Savior
Jesus, at his last Supper after he had instituted the blessed Sacrament of his
body and blood to our endless comfort, and commanded his Apostles to do the
same in remembrance of him. And I pray you take notice of one circumstance
therein, which perchance you have never yet observed, and it is this. When our
Savior delivered the Bread unto the Apostles, he said, Take, eat this, and no
more: but when he delivered the Cup, he gave a more exact command for it,
saying, Drink ye all of this. As if he had said, Be sure that every one of you
partake of the Cup; let no one omit it, And why so particularly command the Cup
more than the Bread? Truly with great reason, He divinely foreseeing the
sacrilegious dismembring of this blessed Sacrament, which the Roman Church
would make, in depriving the people of the Cup. Whereas one would think this
Command of our dying Lord and Savior for us should of all other Commands be
most exactly performed to a tittle in every point: Yet the Pope, as
ungratefully as insolently, presumes to command to keep the Cup from the
People. Who could have believed such an insolency, had not the whole world seen
it? By the same rule he might, and perchance before this time (had not his high
presuming power met with such opposition in Germany) would have taken away the
Bread also, and made the People only gazers on, and admirers of the great
dignity of the Priests, who alone were admitted to that Holy Supper: for so it
is among them now for the most part, the Priest saying Mass every day, but the
common people generally receive the blessed Sacrament but once or twice a year.
Now had the Pope taken away the Bread also, he might have given the very same
reason for that as he does for taking away the Cup. They give two reasons:
First, because it may happen that in delivering the Cup to many people, the
Wine, which they call the Blood, may be spilt: Why so? in giving the Bread some
crumbs may fall, and they affirm that Christ's body is entirely contained in the
least crum. Secondly, They say, the People have the Blood of Christ in his
Body, when they receive that, and therefore they need it not again in the Cup.
Though it is apparent in Scripture that our Savior gave it in the Cup apart, to
signify his bloodshedding from his body, saying, This is my blood which was
shed. But it is no matter what our Savior said, the Pope says otherwise, and we
must hearken to him; he says it is sufficient for the People to receive the
Blood in his Body. And so should he say that he is the Head of the Church, and
if he alone receive the Bread and Cup, and no other, neither People nor Priest
receive either, it is sufficient, if the Head receive them; the Head stands for
the whole Body: the Pope guided by the Holy Ghost says so, and then who dares
say otherwise? And thus you see, that if we once let go the Scripture, farewell
all Religion; all the commands of God are to small purpose: what the Pope says
must be a Law. Good Lord deliver us.

The time is welnigh past and I must hasten to an end. Wherefore I shall now
add only a short reflection on what has been said, with a word of Exhortation
in the close: You have heard Gods Command to the People of Israel concerning
the Old Law, That all should read it, teach it their Children, write it on the
doors and posts of their dwellings, discourse of it in their Houses, by the
way, and in the fields. You have heard also Gods Command to the Prophets, To go
to all the house of Israel, to all the people, and cry aloud to them all the
day long. You have heard our Saviors Command to the Apostles, To go and Preach
the Gospel to all Nations, to every creature. You have heard how the Apostles,
guided by the Holy Ghost, directed their Epistles To all the Faithful, to all
the Saints. You have heard Saint Paul strictly command his Epistles to be read
to all the holy Brethren. And now shall any man be so insolently, so
desperately wicked, as to dare to control the Command of God, so often
reiterated; and countermand the Scriptures to be shut up from the People? Man a
worm of the Earth thus to oppose his Creator! Nay my beloved, hearken yet
farther: The Romanists declare it to be a sin for the people to read the
Scripture. And you know the wages of sin is death, eternal death: so then the
Romanists declare it to be Eternal Death for the people to read the words of
Eternal Life. Stand amazed, O ye Heavens at this! If this be not transcendent
madness and transcendent wickedness too, tell me what is? To say the Sun is
darkness, is ten times more tolerable than to say the word of Eternal Life is
Eternal Death to him that reads it. But now, I beseech you, mark what a
ridiculous Salvo they bring for this their horrid wickedness. O say they, but
you may have leave of your Confessor to read the Scripture, if he find you fit
for it; that is, if he find you a dull tame Ass ready to bear all the burden
of his imposed Superstitions, and zealously embrace them; then perchance you
may have leave, as I said, of your Confessor to read the Scriptures, and then
it is no sin. Your Confessor your Confounder! thus insolently to usurp over your
Christian Liberty. You that are called to the glorious liberty of the Children
of God, and have heard God the Father speaking unto you in the Law, God the Son
speaking to you in the Gospel, God the Holy Ghost speaking to you in the
Apostles; three Persons one Almighty God commanding you to read the Scriptures,
and teach them your Children: must you now ask a silly blind worm of the Earth
leave to read them? Can you ever suffer your selves thus to be blindfolded,
fettered, and enslaved under Popish Tyranny? Thus to be deprived of the Gospel,
the Word of Life, the Power of God unto Salvation? No Beloved, I hope you will
never be so infatuated by deluding words, nor so terrified with any threatening
powers upon Earth or under the Earth, as to quit this Heavenly Food of your
Souls. Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God: Earthly Food enters into the belly and so passes out into
the draught: but this Heavenly Food the Word of God abides for ever, and shall
nourish up our Souls unto Everlasting Life. This ought to be our daily bread;
herein we should read and meditate day and night, and say with David, I have
more delight in thy Commandments than in thousands of gold and silver. For here
we find a Heavenly Treasure for our Souls: here we learn all things profitable
for our Salvation: this is the Book which teaches Priests that blessed work of
gaining Souls unto Christ by sound Doctrine and godly Example, which will make
them shine in this World as Stars in the Firmament: Let your Light so shine.
This is the Book that teaches Princes and all Magistrates their duty to God for
the People, to administer justice with uprightness, to show mercy with
prudence, to subdue the rebellious, to protect the oppressed: and this will
make them feared, loved, and even adored as Gods upon Earth. I said ye are
Gods, this Book will teach the People their duty and piety toward God, their
duty and loyalty to their Sovereign, reverence to all in Authority, love and
peace with their fellow Subjects. Here great ones learn humility, rich men
charity, poor contentedness, the oppressed patience, the afflicted comfort; it
works all in all to Gods glory and our own eternal happiness: Happy are the
people that are in such a case: yea, blessed are the people who have the Lord
for their God, and his Holy Law for their instruction in all things as we have:
other Books may be helps to Devotion and give us some instruction for life; but
all come much short of this Holy Book. When you would have a Tree thrive and
bear fruit, you dig about it, you manure it with soil and water it; all these
are good helps, yet all these without Sunshine upon it effect little; it is the
Sun that fetches up the sap, causes it to budd, blossom, and bear fruit. And so
it is that Sun of Righteousness who there speaks to us and sends the powerful
rays of his grace upon our hearts, it is he that works in us, and causes us
to bring forth fruit. The Law of the Lord as David says, converteth the Soul:
it does not only instruct the Soul as other Books, but also converts the Soul,
gives life unto Souls dead in sin, for it is the word of life, the power of God
unto salvation. And blessed be the infinite goodness and mercy of God, who so
freely imparts this Heavenly Blessing to us all. Come, come hither all ye that
hunger and thirst ofter Righteousness, come Clergy, come Laity, come Male and
Female, come Old and Young, come Rich and Poor; come and ye shall all be
satisfied; Come buy without money and without price, for our God is a most
gracious God, he will not send any one away empty, no but gives liberally to
all men. And to this our most gracious God be ascribed, as is most due, all
honor and praise, majesty and glory now and for ever.

Amen.
The Second SERMON ON JOHN V. Ver. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye
think ye have Eternal Life.
THE former part of this Text, Search the Scriptures, I have already treated
of, showing you that this Command of our Savior belongs to all conditions of
men and women; and that it is not only lawful, but pious also and profitable for
all to read the Scriptures, and to teach them their Children, that from their
very infancy they may suck in the sincere milk of the Word, that they may grow
thereby. And this I proved unto you by the whole current of the Bible, both Old
and New Testament: And therefore it is a strange presumption, very foolish and
very impious, for vain man born ignorant as the wild Asses Colt, to pretend to
give reasons for shutting up the Scripture from the People, God having so
expressly and so often commanded all to read the Scriptures. And consequently
it is a blasphemous speech to say, that the peoples reading the Scripture
causes them to fall into schisms and heresies, for it casts a reproach upon
Gods Command, making him the Author of Sin. But now put the case that the
peoples reading of Scripture were the real cause of their falling into Schisms
and Errors (which God forbid we should say in earnest) but only let us suppose
it, and then consider, whether or no it be not far worse with them that shut up
the Scripture from the people, than with us that let them read it. For first,
none of our Sectaries that depend on Scripture fall into such damnable Errors
as the Papists Idolatrous worship, and dismembring the blessed Sacrament, and
some others. Secondly, we have but few in corners here and there run into
Errors, not one of a hundred, or scarce of a thousand: whereas their whole
Church from the lowest to the very highest, People, Priests, Bishops,
Archbishops, Pope and all, as it was with the Jews in their fits of Idolatry,
all run into the same: Nay it is worse with these than with the Jews, for these
have not recovered themselves out of their Errors many hundred years together,
but most obstinately persist in them, notwithstanding the many learned
Protestant Writers that have so palpably discovered them: yet like Demetrius
the the Silver-Smith with his Crafts-men, so the Pope and his adherents animate
one another, saying their Craft will be in danger to be set at naught; their
Idol-Temples would be despised, and their wealth and magnificence utterly
destroyed. And thus, Beloved, you see the miserable and desperate condition of
these poor blinded and fettered Christians: the Pope has got them fast within
his enchanted Chain, and it is his interest never to let them go; and all this
by shutting up the Scripture. Lord have mercy upon them, and send them the
light of his Holy Gospel to shine amongst them. Amen. So much for the first
part of my Text, Christ's Command to search the Scriptures.

Now we come to the second part, the reason of the Command, For in them ye have
Eternal Life: a most weighty reason; there cannot be a greater than the gaining
of Eternal Life. We all find by experience in our selves the truth of that
saying, Job ii. 4. Skin for skin, yea all that a man has will he give for his
Life. For which there is great reason according to nature, for all that a man
has affords him no content or comfort in death, which takes away the sense of
all things: If therefore life be so dear unto us, because it gives us a
capacity to enjoy these poor earthly delights that have so great and drossy an
alloy of intermingled cares and troubles which always attend them: or if it
were possible to enjoy them with more ease and tranquillity, yet are they but
momentary: surely then Eternal Life, which always brings with it the enjoyment
of heavenly pleasures, free from all solicitous care and fear, and full of all
imaginable delight, yea far beyond all that our narrow brain can now imagine;
for eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man
the things which God has prepared for them that love him. And this
unconceivable delight being to continue beyond Methusalem's Age, or the Age of
the whole world, to have an eternal duration for ever and ever; I pray you then
consider at how high a value we should esteem the means whereby we are to
attain such an excessive weight of glory.

For the present then, my business must be to show you that the Holy Scriptures
contain in them completely without any additional requisite, the means to
attain Eternal Life: and then doubtless there will need small exhortation to
move you to put a high value on them. Let us then fall immediately on this
business: Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life.

Though I doubt not to make out this matter absolutely clear unto you, yet I
fear some weaker persons may stagger a little at one word in my Text, and may
erroneously fancy that it gives great cause of doubt, and that is the word
Think, ye think ye have Eternal Life. Our Savior does directly say that in the
Scriptures we have Eternal Life, but only tells the Jews that they thought they
had in them Eternal Life: and perchance they thought amiss, Who can tell? Who
can tell? certainly he could tell who gave them this counsel to search the
Scriptures; which you may be sure he would never have done, did not the
Scriptures contain in them Eternal Life: if not, it had been a vain thing to
search the Scriptures for it, and our Saviors Advice had been vain; which God
forbid we should say or think: wherefore we may assuredly conclude that our
Savior who advised the Jews to search the Scriptures, he both could tell and
would have told them, had they thought amiss: for he came down from Heaven for
this very end, namely to teach them and us the way to Eternal Life; and
therefore says of himself, I am the Way, and the Truth, and the Life: I came to
teach this unto you and all the world. And as St. Paul declares, Acts xiii. he
came to teach first the Jews, verse 26. To you is the word of Salvation sent.
And again, verse 46. It was necessary that the Word of God should first have
been spoken to you. And our Savior himself preached only to the Jews, and in
their sight he wrought all his Miracles. All which makes it most evident that
he used all means possible to inform them aright in the way to Eternal Life:
who then can doubt but that if the Jews had been mistaken in their opinion of
the Scriptures, our Savior would most readily have corrected their error. So
that this manner of speaking in our Savior, In them ye think ye have Eternal
Life, is far from intimating any doubt in this matter; it is rather a fuller
conviction of the Jews: it is a way of arguing which the Schoolmen call
Argumentum ad hominem; which is the shortest and plainest way to confute
another: You think, you your selves confess that the Scriptures contain Eternal
Life in them; this is a truth you cannot deny. And our Savior Luke x. 25, 26,
27, 28. fully declares this to be his sense likewise, where being asked by a
Lawyer of the Jews, Master, what shall I do to inherit Eternal Life? He said
unto him, What is written in the Law? how read thou? And he answering, said,
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbor as thy self.
And he said unto him, Thou have answered right: this do, and thou shall live.
Here you see our Savior directs him for the gaining of Eternal Life to look
into the Law: and when the Lawyer had declared what was written in the Law, our
Savior presently concludes, This do, and thou shall live: thou have no need to
be instructed farther; the Law fully declares what thou art to do for the
gaining of Eternal Life. And this Evangelist, St. John, who wrote my Text,
tells us toward the end of his Gospel, that he omitted to write many things of
our Savior, But these were written that we might believe, and believing that
we might have Life. Now if we can have life by believing these things, it
follows most evidently that there is no necessity of believing other things.

If you answer, That the belief of other things may prove great helps to
Eternal Life; and who would not be glad to have all the helps he can to obtain
Eternal Life. To this I reply; That the belief of other things may prove
hindrances, for ought we know, and not helps. Were it not then most desperate
folly for me to venture upon other things which may prove hindrances to my
Salvation, when God tells me that he has revealed unto me by his holy
Prophets, Apostles, and by his own Son all things necessary to Salvation? Was
not this the business for which our Savior came into the world, as I said
before, to teach us the way to Eternal Life? And when our Savior went out of
the world, he left his Apostles to finish the work he had begun, promising
them, that he would send them the Holy Ghost, who should lead them into all
truth. And as the Apostles received the knowledge of all truth, so they
faithfully delivered it to others: for so St. Paul, Acts xx. assures the Elders
of Ephesus, whom he sent for to Miletus, That he had declared unto them the
whole counsel of God, and that he had not kept back any thing that was
profitable to them, verse. 20. Mark, I beseech you, he declares not only
necessary things, but all things profitable, all; kept nothing back that was
profitable. Does not this, I pray you, fully confirm what I said, That the
belief of any thing more than what is declared in Scripture may prove rather a
hinderance than a help to Salvation? Nay, it is not only may be, but probably,
if not certainly will be a hinderance and not a help, since the Apostle assures
us that he declared all things profitable, that is, all things helpful. And
does not St. Peter, 2 Epist. i. 8. and following verses discourse to this
purpose? For there he tells them that in doing those things which he had taught
them, they should make their calling and election sure, and that thereby an
entrance should be ministered unto them abundantly. Were it not then as senseless
as dangerous to venture on any other means, or helps (as they call them) than
what the Scripture shows for our Salvation; for if we follow that, it makes our
Salvation abundantly sure.

But, say the Romanists, all that the Apostles declared was not committed to
writing, but some by word of mouth, and so passed by tradition from hand to
hand: and for this they bring us a Scripture, 2 These. ii. 15. My Brethren,
stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word
or our Epistle. From whence say they, it is evident, that all things the
Apostles taught for man's Salvation were not delivered in writing, but some by
tradition from word of mouth. The answer to this is very easy: for though St.
Paul did not teach the Thessalonians all things by writing, but some by word of
mouth, yet it does not follow but that his Epistles to the Thessalonians, with
other his Epistles, as also the Epistles of the other Apostles, the Acts, the
Gospels, all together did contain in them all things necessary, and profitable
also, to Eternal Life. For this reason St. Paul commanded his Epistles written
to one Church to be read to other Churches, as I formerly showed you. And so
St. Peter in his Epistles commends to the people likewise the Epistles of his
beloved Brother Paul. And therefore I did not say that any one Epistle, two, or
three did contain all things necessary to Eternal Life. Nor did our Savior
tell the Jews that in any one or more Prophets they had Eternal Life; but in
the Scriptures they had Eternal Life: in Moses, Psalms, Proverbs, Prophets; in
the whole Scripture. And if the Old Testament were so perfect and so glorious,
as to contain in it all things necessary to Eternal Life, which glory was to be
done away, as St. Paul says: shall not the New Testament, the Ministration of
the Spirit be much more glorious and perfect? 2 Cor. iii. 7, 8. Would God be
less careful of his Church established by his own Son in Person, which was to
remain to the end of the world, than of that erected by Moses his Servant,
which was but a shadow of that to come? Can any man be so simple as to think
this, though perchance so perverse as to affirm it? This and such like things
they may whisper in a corner to silly women, or men as silly: but certainly
none can have the face to say this to any man of understanding, it is so absurd,
and so fully confuted by St. Paul, not only in the places before cited, but
also in 2 Timothy iii. 16, 17. where he tells him that all Scripture is given by
inspiration from God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Observe, I beseech you, That
the man of God may be perfect: perfect in Doctrine, in faith, in good works, in
all things. Oh! my beloved, God send me and you the perfection of Scripture,
the Doctrine and Works there taught, and let the Papists follow their Doctrines
of men, their perfection, their works of merit, yea, and of supererogation too.
Whereas we learn from Scripture, that when we have done all we can, we are
unprofitable Servants: but their Doctrines of men teach them, that their great
Saints Bennet, Francis, Dominick, Ignatius, and many hundreds more are such
profitable Servants, and have done such mighty works of perfection, as not only
to merit Heaven for themselves, but also to gain Heaven for others by their
superabundant merits; which the Pope has power when he pleases, to apply to
Souls scorching in Purgatory, and dismiss them away presently to Heaven. (Sure
a hard hearted cruel man that will let any lie long in those raging flames, if
he have power to release them.) Who can but pity those poor silly Souls that
are led into everlasting flames by these seducing Teachers, so flatly contrary
to the Scriptures cited now, and others, That no man may deliver his brother,
or make agreement unto God for him: For it cost more to redeem their Souls; it
cost the blood and death of our Savior Jesus. For our sins being trespasses
against the infinite majesty of God, none but our Savior who is also of an
infinite Majesty, both God and man could make a just satisfaction for them. Had
a thousand Bennets, Dominicks, etc. and ten thousand thousands more been
sacrificed on Crosses, all had been in vain, we should all lie for ever in
everlasting flames. These Scriptures are shut up from the eyes of poor
blind-folded Papists. But, Blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears,
for they hear, Matt. xiii. 16. Your eyes, and your ears, see, read, and hear
these Scriptures daily preached unto you. Hold fast these, the words of Eternal
Life, which alone will make you wise unto Salvation, and thoroughly furnish you
unto all good works, make you perfect without any Doctrines of men, as you
shall hear more particularly by and by.

What then? must we lay aside all the Writings of the Holy Fathers and Doctors
of the Church, even in the purest times? by no means: for they may be very
helpful to us in expounding obscure places of Scripture; for which several
sorts of learning are very useful. First, The perfect understanding of the
Original Languages in which the Scriptures were written, as the Hebrew, the
Syriac, the Greek Languages. Now many of the Primitive Fathers were either
born, or much educated when those Languages were naturally spoken; and thereby
could much better judge of the propriety and full signification of many words
which we are much to seek in: and each Country Language has several proverbial
sayings and ancient forms of speech, which in process of time grow out of use
and very hard to be understood: we see that very few now are able to understand
old Chaucers Language, English being very much altered since. Secondly, History
and Geography are very necessary for the understanding of several passages in
Scripture. And certainly those Primitive Fathers living near the times and
places when and where our Savior and the Apostles taught and acted, may be
able to inform us of several circumstances, and give us great light in many
passages which otherwise we could not well understand. Thirdly, Where a passage
of Scripture may have several significations, and thereby make it doubtful what
is the more proper meaning of it there, those Primitive Fathers can best tell
us in what sense it was received in the Primitive Church. And surely in
doubtful places every modest man will think it fit to incline to those
Primitive Godly men, whose nearness to the Apostles gave them great
opportunities of knowing the true sense; and whose godly lives give us great
assurance of their fidelity in delivering unto us what they received from their
godly Forefathers; some the very Disciples of the Apostles. Several other
reasons might be added for our regard and reverence to these Primitive Fathers
in their Expositions of the dark or doubtful places of Scripture. Yet I humbly
conceive, nothing of all this is necessary to understand those matters of faith
which are necessary to Salvation, as, that God created and governs the world,
or the incarnation, death, and resurrection of Christ. These and such necessary
things are so plainly set down in Scripture, as that men of ordinary capacity
may understand them without any Comment of the Fathers.

But what if any one or more very learned and very godly Fathers, even such as
laid down their lives for the faith; what if they teach me a Doctrine, in which
the Scripture is wholly silent? Ought I not to believe in them? To this I small
give you an answer from Tertullian one of the first Christian Writers, who
lived in the second Century about a hundred and fifty years after Christ's
Ascension; He tells us in his Prescriptions against Heresies, that this was the
rule among Christians, That they were not to believe any thing, but that which
Christ and his Apostles had delivered unto them in the Scripture. Hoc prius
credimus, non ess^ quod ultra credere debemus. And a little after sets down a
Creed, which very little varies from that which we have amongst us, called the
Apostles Creed: This, says he, is our rule of faith, and we believe Nihil esse
ultra quod credere debemus, That there is nothing more for us to believe: for
this rule here set down is a compendium of all. I do not cite this out of
Tertullian, as if I would prescribe unto you from him what you are to believe
by his Authority: for he does not tell us this as his own opinion, but only
relates what was the belief and practice of the Church in his Primitive days,
who was so near after Christ. And this Tertullian is generally believed by the
Learned to be as faithful a relater as any ancient Writer whatsoever. And he
was of so great a credit with that learned and godly Father and Martyr of the
Church St. Cyprian (who lived not many years after Tertullian) that he always
called him Master; and daily read his Works, calling to his Servant, Da
Magistrum. Give me my Masters Book to read. Which shows he was of great credit.
But Tertullian after the discourse I now mentioned out of him, confirms what he
had said by Scripture Authority (which is of far more weight than Tertullian
and St. Cyprian both) citing that place of St. Paul to the Galatians, Chap. i.
verse. 8. Though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you,
than that which we have preached, let him be accursed. Now you must know that
the Original Greek, from whence our Gospel is translated, has this more
effectual to our purpose, (...): which more exactly in English is rendered thus:
If any man preach unto you any thing besides what we have preached: he does not
say, contrary to what we have preached, but besides, which is the same in
effect as to say, any thing more. And Arius Montanus, a learned Papist in the
University of Sevil in Spain, who translated the Greek new Testament word for
word, sets it down just as I have done unto you: Praeter quod evangelizavimus:
Besides what we have preached. St. Paul means, If they shall preach any more as
necessary to Salvation: for this is to make the Word of God of no effect, he
having in his Holy Word given us a rule of Faith for our Salvation: and then
for any one to say you must believe more, is in effect to say, Gods Word is not
sufficient. This is an accursed saying, according to St. Paul. Now, if neither
St. Paul, nor an Angel from Heaven had any Commission to preach any thing
besides what is already set down in the Scripture, certainly we may shut up our
ears to any one, or to all the Doctors of the Church preaching unto us any
thing more than what is there contained. As for Example, If they shall preach,
it is necessary to obey the Pope, to believe Purgatory, or the like things which
are not expressed in Scriptures; let them be accursed as St. Paul says.

A second Question may be, what you are to do when any Father or Fathers
expound a place of Scripture contrary to what you believe is the plain meaning
of that place. Must you quit your own judgment and believe in them? This is
just like the Prophet whom God sent to Bethel with an express command not to
eat bread there: he hearkened afterward to the old lying Prophet, who
pretending to have received a contrary message from God dissuaded him from what
God had commanded, for which he was slain by a Lion in his return. And surely
all men have great reason to expect the like recompense for their disobedience,
who forsake that which they verily believe is Gods Command, and hearken to the
Doctrins of men. To this my Answer, I shall give you another from a person of
great Authority, St. Austin, a most eminent Doctor of the Church. In one of his
Epistles to St. Jerome he gives a clear judgment in this case. First, He tells
us that when he reads the Holy Scriptures, he entirely submits his own judgment
to them and absolutely believes every thing there to be true, merely because it
is contained there: Gods Word is truth, it cannot be otherwise; therefore
whether he understands it or no, yet still he believes it truth. But as for all
other Writers, he says, Alios autem ita lego, ut quantalibet sanctitate
doctrinaque praepolleant, non ideo verum putem, quia ita ipsi senserint, sed
quia mihi vel per illos autores canonicos, vel probabili ratione quod a vero
non abhorreant, persuadere potuerint: Other Writers I so read, as that be they
ever so Holy, ever so Learned, I do not therefore believe their opinion to be
true, because they thought so, but so far only as they prove it true by
Canonical Scripture, or by such reasons as seem not to be contrary to the
truth: And then tells St. Jerome that he doubts not but he is of the same mind.
And as for my part, I am fully of Saint Austins mind, and farther, think it to
be great impiety to be of another mind: which I shall show you by a familiar
example. Put the case an authentic Book of the Laws of England, confirmed by
Act of Parliament, tells us, There is one King of England, namely, Charles the
Second, and that we must all obey him: who would not from hence undoubtedly
conclude, there is but one King, Charles the Second, whom we ought to obey? But
now come two or three esteemed great Doctors of the Law, and tells us we are
quite mistaken in the meaning of the Law, which though it tells us there is one
King, yet from hence it does not follow but that there may be more than one;
and we assure you there are a hundred Kings whom we ought to obey. Were not
this very absurd and contrary to all reason, that the Law should formally
declare unto us there is one King, if there were a hundred, or twenty, or two?
yet forsooth we must quit our reason, and believe these Lawyers there are a
hundred. Were not this directly to believe these Lawyers rather than the Law?
Just so, the Scripture, the Word of God, tells us, There is one Mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, and that we ought to present our
supplications to God by him: from whence we undoubtedly conclude according to
reason, that there is but one Mediator. But we meet with some great Doctors of
the Church who tell us, we are quite mistaken; for though the Scripture name
one, yet notwithstanding there are a thousand Mediators, Saints and Angels, by
whom we ought to present our supplications, but show us no other Scripture to
make this good, yet require us to believe it merely, because they tell us so:
were not this to forsake Gods Word and believe in man rather than in God?
which, I say, is downright Idolatry.

For the better understanding this my assertion, I must show you what Faith is
Divine and Human. Divine faith is the gift of God, says St. Paul, Ephesians. ii. 8.
a grace infused into our minds by God, whereby we believe his holy Word to be
so true as that it is impossible it should be otherwise: and though it seem
contrary to our reason, yet it captivates our understanding in obedience to the
faith, and makes us believe it merely because God said it. Human faith is when
we believe upon the Authority of another man who tells us such a thing, because
we believe him an understanding and honest man; he will not easily be mistaken
or deluded, nor will he tell a lie. Yet we know the wisest may be deceived, and
the truest may tell a lie. So that all Human belief still supposes a
possibility at least that it may not be true. Herein then lies the difference
between Divine faith and Humane. That there is no possibility of untruth in
Divine faith. Therefore we say that we believe in God: we entirely submit and
captivate our understanding to Gods Word; he is truth it self. But when we
speak of man, we say that we believe man, not that we believe in man: for this
implies an impossibility of untruth in that man, and we undoubtedly believe the
thing merely because he spoke it. Such a belief is due only unto God, and is
called Divine Faith, and is a supernatural gift of God unto us. There is no
such thing in nature; the natural man receives not the things of God, neither
can be know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. ii. 14.

Having thus informed you what Divine and Humane Faith is: I come now to the
business of Idolatry. I say then, To believe in man, that is, to believe any
thing to be infallibly true, merely because such a man said it, and to venture
your Salvation on it, is directly Idolatry, yea, though an Angel said it. For
in so believing in man or Angel you make him God; I mean, you worship him as
God: Yea, it is the greatest Idolatry you can perform; for you give him the
principal and greatest worship of God. To offer incense, to sacrifice Rams and
Bulls is nothing to this Idolatry: nay, to sacrifice your own body to man is
much inferior to it, for it is but sacrificing so much dirt. One Soul is worth a
hundred bodies of beasts or men: and therefore to sacrifice your Soul, and your
reason, the principal highest faculty of your Soul, to captivate your
understanding in obedience to faith in man, is the highest act of Divine
Worship; and consequently to give this to man, is most abominable Idolatry. And
contrariwise, to worship God with our Soul, and captivate our understanding in
obedience to faith in him is the most acceptable service we can possibly
perform: this is the justifying act, the saving grace: this alone acquires
Heaven, and without this the whole world cannot purchase it: Without this faith
it is impossible to please God, Heb. xi. 6. and with this Abraham so pleased
God, as that God thereupon promised to multiply his seed as the stars of
Heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and that all the nations
of the world should be blessed in him, Genesis xxii. 17, 18. I hope you are now
fully satisfied, that to believe in any man, ever so learned, ever so holy, is
great Idolatry; for therein you make him God. God has three peculiar
Attributes, Unus, Verus, Bonus; God is one, God is true, God is good. Our
Savior questioned that man that called him good, Why call thou me good!
there is none good, but one, that is God, Mark x. 17, 18. As if he had said,
Why call thou me good? do thou believe me to be God? otherwise thou
ought not to call me good. So we may say, Why call you this man true? Do you
believe him God? for there is none true but God: no man perfectly true, so
true, but he may be deceived or false. And therefore the Psalmist says, All
men are liars; that is, all men have by nature the vice of falsehood in them, as
well as other vices: and so it is not only possible, but probable also that any
man may tell a lie, if God give him not the grace of truth. Much more is it
possible and probable for any man to be deceived and speak a falsehood, though
he intend it not. God only is perfectly true; he can neither deceive nor be
deceived.

But now perchance you think to wave this Idolatry which I have laid to your
charge, by answering, that you do not believe in the Fathers of the Church as
you believe in God; you do not worship them with Divine faith. Say you so? what
then? with Humane faith only? Why then I am sure your Humane faith shall never
save you; you were as good lay it by: we are saved only by Divine faith, not of
our selves, it is the gift of God.

But what if your Saints in whom you believe, work miracles? then you will say
you believe in them with a Divine and saving faith, their miracles being
wrought by the power of God to confirm their Doctrine: for we have no other
assurance of the Doctrine delivered by the Apostles, but the miracles which
they wrought in confirmation of it. Excuse me, for herein you are foully
mistaken: we have our Saviors command given them to preach the Gospel to all
the world, and we have his promise made to them, that he would send the Holy
Ghost unto them to lead them into all truth; which we are assured did descend
upon them, working miraculously in diverse and sundry manners. Wherefore to
speak properly, we say, That we do not believe in the Apostles, but we believe
in God the Holy Ghost, speaking to us by the Apostles. And which is yet more,
our Savior himself which was both God and man, yet he does not require us to
believe in him as man, but as God, assuring us so. Ioh. viii. 28. I do nothing
of my self, but as my father has taught me, I speak these things. And again,
xii. 49. I have not spoken of my self; but the father which sent me, he gave me
a commandment what I should say, and what I should speak. By which we are fully
instructed, that we are not to believe in any man living, but only in God
speaking to us by man: and therefore we are not to give Divine Faith to the
Doctrine of any man the greatest Saint that ever was, unless we are as fully
assured that he has God the Holy Ghost speaking in him, as we are that he
spoke to us by the Apostles. And certainly we have no such assurance of any man
since the Apostles; no special command given by Christ to preach any new
Gospel; no promise of the Holy Ghost to lead them into all truth; no visible
descension of the Holy Ghost in after Ages; no gift of tongues, nor prophecy.
But it may be you think that at the end of St. Matthews Gospel where Christ
sends the Apostles to preach, and says, Lo I am with you always, even unto the
end of the world; this promise must be intended to the Apostles Successors
also, the Fathers of the Church, that Christ would be with them unto the end of
the world; for the Apostles themselves were not to continue unto the end of the
world, but their Successors. All this I grant, that Christ will be with the
Fathers of the Church, the Successors of the Apostles to the end of the world,
who succeed the Apostles in their Doctrine as well as in Office, Christ will
bless them and prosper that Doctrine unto the end of the world. Wherefore I
pray you consider the whole context of that place, Verse. 19, 20. Go ye
therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever
I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you always even unto the end of the
world. So long as you teach the things I have commanded you, so long I am with
you, even to the end of the world. The promise then of being with them to the
end of the world is conditional, viz. If they teach the things that Christ has
commanded either by himself or by his Apostles, who were guided by his Spirit,
all which commands of Christ and his Apostles are delivered unto us in the
Scriptures On this condition the promise was made, in teaching the things
commanded, and not otherwise. What is this to teaching of new Doctrine not
commanded by Christ, not contained in Scripture? Not one tittle of promise made
for that, nor any commission given to teach new Doctrines, but rather a curse
for the person teaching any other Gospel than what was already preached, be he
man on earth, or Angel from Heaven: Gal. i. 8. Why? because the Doctrine
preached by Christ and his Apostles was complete for our Salvation. And
therefore we do not find that any one of the ancient Holy Fathers does pretend
to any such infallible guidance of the Holy Ghost, and thereby require
submission and obedience to his Doctrine, but rather declares quite contrary,
as I have newly mentioned unto you out of St. Austine, one of the four
principal Doctors of the Church; who gives us a general rule, Not to give any
assured belief to any the most learned and most Holy Fathers farther than they
can prove their Doctrine by Scriptures; that is our complete rule of faith. Is
it not then a strange, disobedient, wilful, blind submission to their Doctrine,
expressly contrary to the rule of faith given by themselves?

And great reason had St. Austin to give us this rule, when he had found, as he
expresses in another place, that St. Cyprian a preceding Father of the Church,
most eminent for learning and sanctity, who laid down his life for the faith;
this great Doctor, Saint, and Martyr, taught and maintained an error even unto
death: which error of his was condemned afterward by the whole Christian
Church. And not only St. Cyprian, but all the great Bishops of Africa joined
with him in this error. And long before St. Cyprian, Papias Bishop of
Hierapolis, whom that famous Bishop of Lions, Irenaeus, affirms to have been a
Disciple of St. John the Evangelist, (and very probably he might be so, for St.
John dyed in the hundred and second year of our Lord, and Papias was then a
Pastor of the Church,) He taught, if not began (as most ancient Writers
conceive) the error of the Chiliasts, That Christ should come again to reign
here on earth a thousand years. Irenaeus Bishop of Lions mentioned before,
learnt this error of him, and did propagate it farther, till at length it
infected most Writers of that Age. And this Irenaeus himself was the Disciple
of St. Polycarpus, and Polycarpus the Disciple of St. John: and therefore 'twas
no wonder that this error was taken up by many Doctors of the Church, having
two such famous men the Authors of it. Yet this error was not long after
rejected by the whole Christian Church. Good reason then had St. Austin to give
us that rule, not to subscribe to any Doctrine of the Fathers, but such as they
proved by Holy Scriptures. And it was a seasonable caution to future Ages
against his own Doctrine; for he himself taught the error, that it was
necessary to administer the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to Infants: and this
was an opinion generally believed in the Christian Church for many years,
though afterward, and to this day concluded a gross error. And I beg leave to
say this as true as free, That whoever reads the Doctors and Fathers of the
Church writings of the erroneous customs generally practiced in their times,
but afterward rejected by the whole Christian Church (as well by the Papists
as others) shall find these Fathers as zealously maintaining by forced
arguments and wrested Scriptures those their erroneous customs, as the soundest
truths. God is my record, I say not this out of any reproach to them, whereof
many have been great Champions for the fundamental truths, and great examples
and leaders to piety and godly life: but I say it only to prevent our being led
into errors by their Authority, who though they were very learned and godly
men, yet still were men, and being men were subject to error: and for this
cause no assurance can be had in the word of man alone, but of him only who was
God and man, for God only is truth.

And as for the miracles pretended to be wrought by the Fathers of the Church
in confirmation of their Doctrine: I answer; First, We find in no authentic
Author any miracles wrought by the prime and principal Fathers of the Church in
confirmation of any Doctrine taught by them, St. Cyprian, St. Ambrose, St.
Jerome, St. Austine, St. Chrysostom, St. Gregory Nazianzen, and such like.
Secondly, For the pretended Fathers of the Church in later Ages, and Mothers
also, it is sufficiently known what gross and ridiculous impostures have been
in later Ages noised abroad for great miracles. Our learned Dr. Stillingfleet
has sufficiently set them forth in their proper colors. These fine devices
began about the six hundredth year after Christ, and in a few years after they
grew as familiar as juggling feats, especially in the female sex, of whom I find
none that wrought them in the Apostles days, when true miracles were frequent
among men; and when there were women certainly as holy as any whatsoever in
future Ages. We do not find that the blessed Virgin her self ever wrought any
miracle, though now the Papists will tell you of a thousand wrought daily by
several images of hers. But this we know, that in the later days lying wonders
shall be wrought to deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect: and we also
know, that whatever seeming miracle is wrought contrary to the word of God is a
lying wonder; for Gods word is truth and all liars that speak against that. But
these miracles which they pretend to be wrought at the images of the blessed
Virgin and other Saints, are apparently contrary to the word of God, which
commands us not to bow down to, nor worship any images; and consequently these
must needs be lying wonders wrought to deceive the people, who are thereby
induced to worship those images, and do daily visit them and prostrate
themselves before them with as much reverence and devotion as if Christ himself
were there present. This is fully known to every man that has traveled those
parts. But the Popish Priests here (surely ashamed of their own Devotions) will
boldly deny it: and finding us too strongly fortified with Scripture truth to
be seduced by their supposititious Saints, with their lying wonders, and too
quick-sighted to be catched with such stauking horses, they come upon us with a
whole Army of the Church Militant, the Universal Catholic Church, (meaning the
Romish Church, falsely so called) yea, and backed with Scripture too, and so
fight us at our own weapon; and thence thunder out irresistible Cannon Shot: He
that will not hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen man and a
Publicane, Matt. xviii. 17.

Beloved, my time would fail me should I now engage in a fresh battle, I shall
therefore refer this to another time, and for the present add only a few words
of direction for those who take comfort in reading the Scripture, and desire to
improve their knowledge therein, but meet with many obscure and difficult
places which exceed their capacity; in which they would gladly be farther
instructed. To this I answer, first, That I conceive it fit to advise with some
learned, orthodox, sober and godly Divine, if they have any such in their
Neighborhood; for give me leave to say, men so completely qualified are not
every where to be found in these unfortunate days: But if they can find any
such, let them desire his assistance; and if this godly person can by other
plain places of Scripture and clear reason make the sense of that doubtful
place evident to his understanding, then he may well conclude that to be the
true meaning of the Holy Ghost. But if this godly Counselor makes use of any
human Authority, that is, any one or many Fathers of the Church, or Councils,
or the like, to make good his exposition, and cannot do it by clear places of
Scripture, or such circumstances as make that doubtful place clear to your
understanding, but require you to submit merely to their Authority, then you
are to afford him no more than a human belief, which helps you nothing forward
to your salvation, for that wholly depends on divine faith and belief in God,
not in man, as I have showed you. And as for the doubtful places, pass them
over as doubtful, and the clear knowledge thereof not necessary to your
salvation: God requires of no man beyond the talent which he has given him;
and in his infinite goodness has so provided, that all things necessary for
salvation may be understood of all. What can be more plainly set forth to
common understanding than it is in Scripture, That there is one God Creator of
Heaven and Earth; one Savior Jesus Christ the Son of God, who dyed for all
men, rose again the third day, ascended into Heaven, and shall come again at
the last day to judge and reward every man according to his deeds. And then for
the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper and such like necessary things,
they are also plainly set forth in Scripture, even to vulgar understandings.
And lastly, for our course of life, what can be more plainly prohibited than
fornication, adultery, all lasciviousness, murder, striking, railing,
cousening? What can be more plainly commanded than to do justice, show mercy,
charity, etc. and in sum, to do unto all men as we would have them do unto us?
Now whosoever shall believe and practice all these plain things, my Soul for
his he shall never miss of his Salvation, though he miss the understanding of a
hundred places of Scripture; many whereof the most learned understand very
little better, though they can talk more of them. When our Savior represents
unto us the great Judgment day, Mat. XXV. He does not call any to his right
hand because they understood these and these dark places in Scripture; nor
curse any on his left hand because they understood them not: but the whole
Judgment depends on doing or not doing. Come ye blessed, for ye have fed the
hungry, clothed the naked, etc. and go ye cursed, for ye have not done so.
Wherefore the question in the Gospel is, Good Master, what shall I do to
inherit Eternal Life? and our Savior's Answer is, This do and thou shall live.
And S. Paul tells us, though we understood all Mysteries, yet this profits
not without Charity. Charity and the deeds thereof, with a firm belief of so
much of Scripture as God enables us to understand, would undoubtedly bring us
to Christ's right hand in that great day. Were but our practice according to
the measure of our knowledge, it would be happy for us: but hence comes our
misery, that instead of practicing what we understand, we fall to disputing of
that we understand not; and so we grow into passion, from passion into faction,
from faction into schisms and heresies. Were our passion laid aside, there
would be no need of laying aside the Scriptures, but we should read them to our
edification: whereas we now read them to our destruction and confusion: and
thus the word of Eternal Life becomes unto us the savor of Death unto Death.
Wherefore my beloved, when you take the Scriptures into your hands to read, let
your main intention be to observe the Instructions there given for your
behavior and course of life, and then labor to stir up your affection and
desire to practice it. As for matters of belief, as much as is necessary will
quickly be attained: but for practice that will require the whole study of a
man's life. Neither does this consist so much in reading as in meditating on
what we do read, and striving to subdue our hearts in obedience to it, and
sending up also short, but fervent ejaculations to Almighty God for the
powerful assistance of his holy spirit to enable us to perform, that is the end
of all, to perform, This do and thou shall live. And if we thus read the
Scriptures, they will be unto us as the words of Eternal Life, and the power of
God to our Salvation. Which God of his infinite mercy grant.

THE THIRD SERMON ON JOHN V. Ver. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye
think ye have Eternal Life.
THE last thing we were upon in handling this Text was, that the Scriptures
wherein we say we have Eternal Life, tells us that we are to hear the Church,
and he that will not hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a heathen man and
a publican. Mat. xviii. 17. Here, say the Papists, we have a plain, easy, and
safe rule to guide all in matters of Faith, both learned and unlearned: this
cuts off all disputes and prevents all errors. Hear the Church, what the Church
believes we must believe, and if we will not hear the Church we are heretics,
heathens. If this be the safe and only way to heaven, what man in his right
wits would not take this safe and easy way? Doubtless a very easy way, and
truly I think that is the reason why many so much incline to it: most men love
an easy way to Heaven, and few are found willing to take much pains for it.
And those few that are conscientious in their way, are often scrupulous also
and fearful, and being wearied with anxieties and disputes, in their melancholy
moods may be willing to lie down on this specious bank, not considering Latet
anguis in herba, the lurking Adder that there lies concealed. For certainly
this way is as dangerous as easy, far from safe. Can any man think it a safe
way to forsake the God of truth and his holy word, and hearken to vain
erroneous men and their doctrines, whereof our Savior bids us beware? No, Let
God be true and every man a liar, Romans iii. 4. But you will say, what the
Papists here urge is not the Doctrine of men, but the Word of God, Hear the
Church. I grant it is the Word of God, but strangely abused by the
interpretation of men, and wrested very far from the clear meaning of the Text,
as I shall now show you.

Look, I pray you, a few verses before, and see what is the business here
treated of, and to what this saying relates. V. 15. If thy Brother shall
trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if
he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother. V. 16. But if he will not
hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or
three witnesses every word may be established. V. 17. And if he shall neglect
to hear them, tell it unto the Church: but if he neglect to hear the Church,
let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican. I beseech you what is
this to our purpose? to the determination in matters of Faith? Are trespasses
matters of Faith? No, but they will prove from hence by necessary consequence,
That if you are to hear the Church in matters of fact, such as trespasses, much
more are you to hear the Church in matters of faith. They will prove? I thought
we had laid aside all proofs and consequences: for they produce this Text as a
clear evident rule to cut off all doubts and disputes, a plain and safe way for
all men learned and unlearned. What is proposed as a plain rule to clear all
doubts and determine all controversies, ought in it self to be as clear as the
Sun; so that whosoever is not stark blind must needs see it: and then doubtless
I am stark blind, for I cannot see one word here tending to matters of faith.
But they will argue thus, If we are to hear the Church in temporal matters,
much more in spiritual matters: for the Church being a spiritual body, has
more to do in spirituals than temporals. As blind as I am, I plainly see as
gross a mistake here in the word Church, as before in the word Trespasses. Did
not I fully show you the other day, that this word (...) in the Text, which we
in English translate Church, never in Scripture signifies the Clergy, but the
Congregation of the people, the assembly of the faithful, though we in English
use the word Church very variously, which is often the cause of great mistakes:
and therefore I pray you remember it well, that in Scripture it still signifies
the Congregation of the People. And would the Papists have the Congregation of
the People be our Infallible Guide to give rules of Faith and determine all
controversies? If so, I see a sure and fatal consequence to their Infallible
Head the Pope; he and his triple Crown would soon be tumbled from his Throne to
the ground, and all his power under foot. But put the case we would take the
word Church here for the Clergy, as the Papists would have us: yet this gives
no commission farther then to determine trespasses. And as for their
consesequences, it is very absurd to infer, that because God leaves unto men to
determine the small matters of this world, therefore men may determine matters of
that infinite weight as the eternal salvation of Souls. For though the Church
(that is, the Congregation) should make a wrong judgment in the case, yet the
party suffering may, if he please, make great advantage by it; for the patient
suffering the loss for peace sake, as God has required, he shall gain a
hundred fold in Heaven: but the party that forsakes Gods W^^d, and hearkens to
the wrong determination in matters of Faith, shall suffer a hundred fold damage
in Hell. This therefore God reserves to himself and his Holy word, unto which
we are not to add any thing, nor subtract from it, under a severe penalty there
declared. Wherefore we must take this Text as it lies without any human
addition, and so it is evident that it contains nothing but the determination of
matters of trespass between Neighbors; of which our Savior would have the
offender privately admonisht, and if no amendment, than appeal to the
Congregation in public. Not one word here concerning matters of Faith. And
thus beloved, you see what a vain empty sound this great clamor is which the
Papists make of this Text, Hear ye the Church, and whoever will not hear the
Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican. Every part of it
most grossly mistaken and wrested from the true meaning: matters of fact, such
as trespasses and injuries, wrested to matters of Faith: the word Church
wrested from the Congregation to the Clergy, contrary to the whole current of
Scripture. Wherefore, my beloved, you see how necessary it is for you to follow
this counsel of our Savior, and search the Scriptures; and advise also with
the more learned Pastors of our Church to arm you against these seducing
teachers. I hope this Text is sufficiently cleared, and so I pass unto another.

1 Timothy iii. 15. There it is said, The Church is the Pillar and ground of truth:
This Scripture (say the Papists) plainly relates to matters of Faith, for truth
is the object of our Faith; we readily grant it. What then? Why then we are to
hold fast to the Faith of the Church, for that is the Pillar of truth, ergo she
cannot err. This is another of their feigned consequences, far from the meaning
of the Text: let us then peruse the Text it self with the circumstances there
set down, as we did the former, and you will not find any such thing here as
the Papists pretend. That thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self
in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and
ground of truth. First, That thou may know how thou ought to behave thy
self in the house of God. There is nothing more frequent in Scripture than to
set the word House for the People: the house of Israel for the people hundreds
of times. And so Moses was faithful in all his house, Heb. iii. 2. that is,
among all his people. And so 1 Pet. ii. 5. tells the Christians, That as living
stones they are built up a spiritual house to God. And again, iv. 17. If
judgment begin at the house of God, that is, the people of God. Wherefore here,
Behave thy self in the house of God, signifies the household, the people of God.
That place where a man dwells is commonly called his house? and God being said
to dwell among his people, 2 Cor. vi. 16. I will dwell in them, and walk in
them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people: therefore the
people are called the house of God. Next follows, Which is the Church of the
living God, that is, the Congregation of the living God: for it is the same word
(...), which I showed you, always in Scripture signifies the Congregation. Now
I pray you put this together, that thou may know how to behave thy self
among the people of God, which is the Congregation of the living God, the
pillar and ground of the truth: This last part of the verse, the pillar and
ground of the truth, is metaphorical and may be interpreted several ways
according to several men's apprehensions. But in the first place, I conceive all
must grant, that no metaphorical saying can be a clear, evident and general
rule to explain and determine other sentences, but rather in it self needs an
exposition. But however you take this place, it is evident that the Papists
from hence can never have any proof for the infallibility of their Church, as
they would have it: for S. Paul calls the Congregation of the people, the
pillar and ground of the truth: But to show you how little this Text will serve
their turn; though (...) never in Scripture signifies the Clergy, yet for their
greater conviction, let it pass. The Clergy are here called the pillar and
ground of truth: What then? Why then the assembly of the Clergy must be
infallible. Hold there, I beseech you: Why? can truth be fallible? no
certainly, but the pillar of truth may fail: the pillar may decay and go to
ruin, but the truth of God endures for ever, 1 Pet. i. 23. What then is meant
by these words, The pillar and ground of the truth? I will show you.

I suppose you have seen pillars set up in high ways at the meeting of several
ways together, and inscriptions written on the several sides of the pillars,
This way leads to such a place; That way leads to that place: some pillars have
arms in them, and hands pointing to the ways. The pillar is only that which
bears the inscription, it is the inscription that gives you the true information
which is the way. Now St. Paul says, Romans iii. 2. speaking of the people of
the Jews, and the great advantage they had over other Nations, For unto them
were committed the Oracles of God. And so St. Stephen Acts vii. 38. tells his
brethren the Jews, that their fathers received the Oracles of God to give unto
us: So we may say of the Christians to their great honor and advantage above
all other people in the world, To them were committed the Oracles of God, the
Holy Scriptures, to give unto us. As then of old the people of the Jews were
peculiarly the people of God, the house of God, which was then the Church of
the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth, and they bare the Oracles
of God, the Holy Scriptures: So St. Paul now calls the Christians the
peculiar people of God, the house of God, which is the Church of the living
God, the pillar and ground of the truth; for they now bear the Oracles of God,
the Holy Scriptures, the word of truth, teaching us the true and perfect way to
the Heavenly Jerusalem. This my Exposition is strongly backed and confirmed by
another Text of Scripture, which is accounted by all men the best way of
expounding Scripture. Rev. i. 20. The seven Churches or Congregations are set
forth by seven golden Candlesticks: and you know candlesticks give no light of
themselves, but only hold the candles which give the light: so the Churches are
to hold forth Christ; he is the light of the world, and his Doctrine contained
in the Scriptures; they give the light, they teach us the way to Eternal Life.
As in the former place, the pillars bear and hold forth the inscriptions the
Oracles of God: so here the Candlesticks hold forth the light of Gods Holy
Word; this teaches us the way, herein lies the infallible truth; not in the
Church, the Congregation, that consists of fallible men: Gods Word is truth,
all men are liars. And as the Jews, people and Priests also erred, and so
grossly erred as to become Idolaters, yet the Oracles they bare never erred: so
we may too truly say to the proud boasting Papists, their whole Church, Pope,
Princes, People have and do all err, and so grossly err as to be guilty of great
Idolatry, worshipping and praying, and thereby giving Gods glory to Saints and
Angels, to Pictures and Images. This is most rationally and learnedly proved by
Dr. Stillingfleet, now the Reverend Dean of St. Paul's, and most practically and
palpably showed in a small Book, Entitled, A Letter to a Friend concerning
Popish Idolatry; which in one hours reading fully declares it. Of which Letter
I will say only this, That I am sure all there set down is truth; for with my
own eyes I have seen all, having lived many years abroad amongst them. But I
grant they are not all practiced here in England, for two reasons. First, They
would be ashamed to set up Pictures and Images here publicly to worship in the
face of the Gospel-Sunshine, where very Children would deride them. And
Secondly, the Laws and Government would not suffer them. Wherefore to conclude
this point, whoever reads the Gospel, and by that examines the Doctrines of the
Romish Church, shall see that she is not the infallible Church she is pretended
to be, as plainly as you see the Moon is not the Sun: you will discover such
foul black spots in her face, as may assure you, she is not that beautiful
beloved Spouse set forth in the Canticles: for she has so foully erred against
the truth of the Gospel in several things, which I have formerly laid before
you, as makes it most evident that she is neither truth, nor so much as the
pillar of truth, but the pillar of error, stiffly mainteining several errors:
and does not so much as hold forth the Gospel of truth to teach the people the
way to Heaven, but shuts it up from the people, that she may lead them
blindfold into error. And so much be spoken concerning this Text, The Church is
the pillar and ground of the truth. If any man can give a better exposition of
this Text, I shall be glad to learn it of him; but I am sure the Papists have
not yet, by all that ever I saw or heard of.

They bring us another Text much like this, Matthew. the last Chapter: where
Christ sends forth his Disciples to teach all Nations, promising to be with
them in teaching unto the end of the world. This Text I fully answered in my
last Sermon. Moreover, these words being spoken by our Savior to all the
Apostles in general, and their Successors, of necessity gives equal Commission
to them all; and therefore makes more against the superiority of the Romish
Church than for it: for by this all Churches planted by other Apostles have the
same promise.

The Papists therefore have one Scripture more which they urge particularly for
their Church; but it has been so often disputed, and so fully confuted by whole
Volumes of our Writers, as a man would wonder to see them like Cats knocked down
and quite dead in all appearance, yet rise up again with this Text in their
mouths. It is this, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church:
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, Matt. xvi. 18. As to this,
I shall give you the heads only of several answers as plainly and briefly as
may be for your more easy remembrance. But I pray you still remember what we
are searching Scripture for, and that is, a plain easy rule to determine all
doubts that may arise in matters of faith. And certainly this Text is not such,
but as far or farther from that than the former, for it is a figurative speech
all along; it speaks of building on a rock, and the gates of Hell; of binding
and loosing; almost every word a figure: and the greatest Doctors and Fathers
of the Church have disputed very variously about it; the Papists cannot deny
it: and therefore this cannot be a plain easy rule to clear doubtful matters,
it being so doubtful in it self. Let us now hear what the Text it self says,
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church: and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it. Is here any one word, that the Church shall
be infallible and cannot err? The gates of Hell shall not prevail against the
Church, therefore, say they, she cannot err. The veriest dunce in the
University would be ashamed to make such ridiculous consequences. Put the case
God had promised the King of England, that the French King should not prevail
against him; must it therefore follow that it is impossible the French King
should set foot upon English ground, or kill any one of our Kings Subjects, or
take any of his Ships? Rare nonsense! Many Princes after several battles lost,
much of their Country invaded, yet have prevailed and driven out the Enemy:
many a man after several wounds received, has prevailed and killed his
Adversary. Let then the Papists go and learn what that means, The seed of the
woman shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel, Genesis iii. 15. The
seed of the Woman crushed the Head of Satan and prevailed against the gates of
Hell, though the Prince thereof bruised and wounded him in the heel. Many
errors and Heresies have bruised and wounded the Church, yet have not prevailed
to destroy it; the vitals, the fundamentals have still been preserved. That
profession of Peter whereon Christ built his Church, was, Thou art Christ the
Son of the living God. This says has still been preserved in the Church, the
gates of Hell never could prevail against it. This is all our Savior here
promised, and this he has ever to this day made good, and will assuredly make
good to the end of the world. But put the case these words, The gates of Hell
shall not prevail against the Church, did imply some infallibility promised to
the Church in general, yet how come the Papists to challenge this insallibility
to the Church of Rome and deprive all other Churches of it? Why, say they,
Christ here promises to build his Church on St. Peter. It Is false; the Text
does not say, Thou art Peter, and upon thee will I build my Church: but, Upon
this rock will I build my Church; and that rock was Christ, 1 Cor. x. 4. Christ
the Son of the Living God whom Peter professed; on this rock was the Church
built. But suppose yet farther, that our Savior had promised he would build
his Church on Peter, what then? Yet not on him alone, for St. Paul tells us,
Ephesians. ii. 19, 20. That the House of God (which is the Church of God) is built
upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ Jesus himself being
the chief corner stone: built upon other Apostles and Prophets also as well as
on Peter, but chiefly on Christ himself. And then for those words, Binding and
Loosing; the same that is said here to Peter, is said to all the Apostles,
Matt. xviii. 18. Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven:
and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. And again,
Ioh. xx. 23. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them: and whose
soever sins ye retain, they are retained. And what a silly childish noise do
they make with those words said to Peter, unto thee will I give the keys of
heaven: for the whole sense of those words is fully contained in those, Whose
soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them: and whose soever sins ye
retain they are retained. For it is sin that shuts us out of Heaven, and when
sin is remitted, Heaven-Gate is again opened. Whoever then has power to remit
and retain sin, he has the keys of Heaven to all intents and purposes. Where
is then I pray you, S. Peter's pre-eminence over any other Apostle? for the
Church was built on all the Apostles, as well as on Peter; and they all had the
keys of Heaven given unto them.

But now mark what goes before in John xx. 21. As my Father has sent me, even
so send I you. This cuts off all manner of pretense to the least precedence of
power given to Peter before the rest of the Apostles; for our Savior here
says unto them all, As my Father sent me, even so send I you; Even so, in the
self same manner. And sure the Papists are not so desperate as to say St. Peter
had a higher and more powerful Commission than Christ himself: and as you see,
Christ here gives all the Apostles Commission equal with himself: As my Father
sent me, even so send I you. So that it is impossible Peter could have a
greater. Is it not then a strange presumption for the Papists to boast of such
a transcendent power and pre-eminence given to Peter above the rest of the
Apostles, as to make him Lord and Master over them? which doubtless would have
raised no small indignation in the rest of the Apostles. We see when James and
John desired only the precedence before the rest, no Lordship, but only to sit
the one on his right hand, the other on his left, they were greatly offended at
it. Wherefore to make Peter their Lord and Master, must needs offend them far
more: yet we find not the least murmuring at it, because they found no
precedence at all given him: And do not we see how St. Paul, though a late born
Apostle, out of time, took the boldness to resist him to the face, when he
walked not uprightly: which you may be sure St. Paul would not have done, had
he taken St. Peter for Christ's High Priest, Lord over all: for St. Paul
repented for having too severely reproved the High Priest of the Jews, though
he did it unwittingly, and for his cruel injustice.

Certainly whoever reads the two first Chapters of S. Paul's Epistle to the
Galatians, if he be not much possessed with S. Peter's pre-eminence before hand,
must needs see that S. Paul gives him no such thing, but rather the contrary:
mark I pray you, S. Paul's design there, it is to show that he received not the
knowledge of the Gospel, nor the Commission to preach it from man, but from
Christ only. And therefore as soon as Christ had revealed himself to him and
sent him to preach, Immediately I conferred not, says he, with flesh and blood:
neither went I up to Jerusalem to them that were Apostles before me, but I went
into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus. Then after three years I went up
to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days: But other of the
Apostles saw I none. As if the seeing the other Apostles James and John, whom
in the next Chapter he calls Pillars, had carried more appearance of his
receiving Commission from man, than his seeing Peter and tarrying with him
fifteen days. Now had Peter been (as the Papists would have it) Head of the
Church, Lord over all; the seeing of Peter Head of the Church, and tarrying
with him so long, had signified far more toward his receiving Commission from
man, than had he seen all the other Apostles and tarried with them fifteen
months: for Peter being Head, he and not the other Apostles, was to give him
Commission. And then again when he names the great Pillars of the Church, who
seemed to be somewhat more than the rest, he puts James in the first place: But
though they seemed to be somewhat, yet whatever they were, S. Paul tells us, it
makes no matter to him, he gave them not any subjection: how! not any
subjection? no, not for an hour, for they who seemed to be somewhat, in
conference added nothing to him; but contrariwise, mark I pray you, contrary to
all subjection, they gave unto him, yea and unto Barnabas also, the right hand
of fellowship; far from any Lordship over Paul, or over Barnabas either, though
he were none of the twelve, for he and they were all fellows in preaching the
Gospel, dividing the work betwixt them; Paul and Barnabas to preach unto the
Heathen, and they unto the Circumcision. Is it not then most evident by all
this, that S. Peter was no Lord, nor Head over the rest of the Apostles? nor
did he outlive all the rest, and so become Head of the Church by survivancy: S.
John that great and beloved Apostle outlived him long, and it is thought all the
rest: and then by survivancy he should be Head, and consequently his Successor
Head of the Church, not S. Peter's Successor: for S. Peter himself was not
Head. And then I pray you tell me, when S. Peter was dead and S. John remained,
Who was then Head of the Church? Was S. Peter's Successor (whoever he was,
Linus or Clemens) was he Head and Lord over S. John, or S. John over him? Speak
I beseech you: No, your modesty will not suffer you to say that your Pope Linus
was Head and Lord over S. John the beloved of our Lord. I dare venture my life
on it, Linus never assumed any such Lordship to himself: for Eusebius tells us,
that when Polycarpus a Successor of S. John, came to Rome to treat with
Anicetus a Successor of S. Peter, about the time of celebrating the Feast of
Easter (which was then much disputed: the Church of Asia holding it at one time
and the Church of Rome at another) Anicetus S. Peter's Successor did not assume
any Lordship over Polycarpus, nor require him to submit unto the Roman Custom:
No, he was so far from it, that he gave the honor to Polycarpus and the
precedence, to celebrate the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper in his own
Church at Rome. This was a mark of great honor and precedence, for in those
days the Chief did always celebrate. If then your Church had no Headship over
the Asian Church in the time of S. John, nor in the time of Polycarpus, many
years after: I beseech you tell me from whence sprang this mighty Headship of
the Pope to be Lord of the whole World? Successors, as Successors, can
challenge no more Authority than their Predecessors had. If the present Bishop
of Salisbury has no Authority over the Bishop of Lincoln, certainly
Salisburies Successor can have none over Lincolns Successor. And so Saint Peter
having no Lordship over S. John nor any other Apostle, Peter's Successor can
have none over their Successors: this is clear. How then? Did Christ ever come
again upon Earth to establish this Headship? or, Did an Angel come from Heaven
to do it? Though I must tell you, should an Angel come from Heaven and preach
any other Doctrine than what is in Scripture, we are fully warranted not to
receive it. But if neither Christ, nor Angel, nor any one Scripture declare
this Headship, is it not a most unreasonable thing to require us to believe
this as a matter absolutely necessary to Salvation? and to believe it with as
full assurance as we believe Christ was born of the Virgin; or that Christ was
Crucified, and that he rose from the dead. Let them show us then in such plain
Scripture words, that the Pope is to be Head of the Church, that the Church of
Rome shall be Infallible unto the worlds end, that we are to receive all her
Doctrines as the Oracles of God: or, that in the Church of Rome we have Eternal
Life. Let them but show us some promise, some command, plain like this, and we
shall readily submit: really we should be heartily glad to see it, it would
save us much trouble. But, beloved, you all know, there is nothing like this in
all the Scripture: How then dare any man venture the eternal salvation of his
Soul, and in obedience to the Church of Rome, practice things so apparently
contrary to Gods Commands, as to worship Images, pray unto Saints, receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper in one kind, and such like as I mentioned
formerly.

I know there are in the writings of several Fathers many expressions which
highly magnify the Authority of the Church in general, and some for the Church
of Rome in particular: all which signify very little, if you consider the
circumstances and motives for their so speaking. When the Church was infested
with Heresies, the Orthodox Fathers disputing with them used all the Arguments
they could to reduce them to the Truth: but perverse men not hearkening to
their reasons, their last and pressing Argument was, the Authority of the
Church; which they set forth with great luster to make the Argument more
powerful and force their submission unto it. And because the generality of the
Church in those days by Gods blessing was not yet infected with errors, they
urged the Authority and true belief of the Universal Church, to reclaim the
particular Heretical Churches from their Error: and the most general Language
being then Greek, they used the word Catholic, which in that Language
signifies Universal: and hence arose the phrase of the Catholic Church.
Moreover, it pleased God to preserve the Roman Church in the true Faith, with
great Zeal and Piety for many years, their Bishops being successively Martyred
by the Heathen Emperors and their Officers at Rome: And their true Faith being
celebrated also in Scripture by S. Paul, it was magnified by the true believing
Fathers of other Churches, as Antioch, Ephesus, Constantinople, Alexandria,
etc. that it might the more move the Heretical Members of their Churches to
conform unto it: telling them how S. Peter and S. Paul, the two great Pillars
of the Church were Martyred there, and therefore they ought to believe no Error
could enter that Church which was so sanctified with the blood of those two
great Apostles and diverse other famous Martyrs. All which they uttered with
great zeal, that they might make the unbelievers to reverence it the more, and
submit unto it: As when two of our Lawyers differ in opinion, he that has the
Lord Chief Justice Coke on his side, will magnify him as such an Oracle of the
Law that could not err, and say all that his wit can invent to set it forth; it
does not therefore follow that he seriously thinks Coke to have been
infallible: no more do these sayings of the Fathers conclude the Roman Church
to be infallible: as I shall now show you by one Example sufficient to satisfy
any man without farther trouble.

S. Cyprian was a Bishop and Martyr of the true Catholic Church, as famous for
Learning and Sanctity, as for his Faith and Martyrdom; he wrote a zealous Tract
for the unity of the Church, wherein he uttered those sayings which the Papists
have so frequently in their mouths. Habere non potest Deum Patrem, qui
Ecclesiam non habet Matrem: he cannot have God for his Father, who will not
have the Church for his Mother; And, As no man was saved out of Noah' s Ark:
so, no man can be saved out of the Church. Which being spoken by so great a
man, seem to carry great Authority with them: But, if I might freely speak my
mind, I would say of them, that they are fine flourishing sentences sounding
handsomely to the ear, but cannot much satisfy a man's reason, unless he had
clearly expressed what he means by the word Ecclesia, Church. I know full well
what the Papists mean by it; they mean the Bishop of Rome and his Clergy, and
all those that are of his Faith and Communion, and believe that no man can be
saved that is not in that Communion: And this is with them the Mother Church
and Noah's Ark. But I shall now plainly show, that S. Cyprian meant no such
thing: for in the beginning of this Tract he declares that St. Peter (whom the
Papists would needs have to be the Founder of their Church) had no Authority
over the rest of the Apostles and Churches founded by them: but that all the
Apostles were of equal honor and authority, Pari consortio praediti and
honoris and potestatis. Which saying he fully confirmed by his practice, which
is the clearest exposition of a man's meaning; for a great dispute arising
between him and Stephen the Bishop of Rome about Rebaptizing those which were
Christened in Heretical Churches, S. Cyprian declared, his Judgment was for
Rebaptizing; Stephen declares the contrary: and both parties adhering stiffly to
their own opinions, the dispute grew so high that Cyprian held a Council of all
the African Bishops, and there Decreed, that they ought to be Rebaptized; for
there being but one Baptism, which was to be had only in the true Church, the
Heretical Baptism being done out of the true Church, was no Baptism. Here it is
plain, S. Cyprian meant by the word Church, his Church and all that were in
Communion with him. Stephen on the other side calls a Council at Rome, and
there Decrees, that the Heretical Baptism being performed in due manner, though
the Priest Baptizing were an Heretic out of the Church, yet the Baptism being
in the form of the true Church, was a true Baptism. But Cyprian notwithstanding
the Decree of Stephen, with his Bishops, persisting in their opinion of
Rebaptizing them, Stephen Excommunicates them; which S. Cyprian valued not a
straw, but called Stephen his obstinate Brother, and a favourer of Heretics,
Marcion, Valentine, Apelles, and other Blasphemers against God; as is set forth
in his Epistle to Pompeius writing of this business. And Firmilianus another
Bishop of the African Church, writing to S. Cyprian of the same matter, says,
that the Roman Church vainly pretend the Authority of their Apostles (meaning
St. Peter and St. Paul) seeing that they did not observe those things which
were delivered them from the beginning by their Founders. Eos autem qui Romae
sunt non ea in omnibus observare, quae sint ab origin tradita, and frustra
Apostolorum authoritatem praetendere. And a little before expressly affirms,
that as the Heretics are persons condemned of themselves: so the Romanists
favoring and approving their Baptism, did adjudge and make themselves
partakers of their damnable Heresies. By all which it is most evident, that S.
Cyprian and the other Bishops of Africa did not mean the Roman Church for the
Mother Church and Noah's Ark, out of whose Communion there was no Salvation:
for though they were Excommunicated by the Bishop of Rome and his Clergy,
persisted in their Opinion and slighted very much his Excommunication, and
esteemed their own Church to be that Mother Church and Noah's Ark, out of which
there was no Salvation. And in like manner I conceive all other Fathers, who so
magnify the Churches Authority, mean that Church who are of the same Faith and
Communion with themselves, supposing still their own to be the right, though
ever so wrong. So that before you can with reason submit your self to the
Faith, and put your self into the Communion of any Church, it is requisite for
you to be assured which Church has the true Faith and saving Communion: which
must be found out by that only safe Rule of Scripture, by which all Churches
ought to be examined and tried. And now I shall proceed a little farther with
the Papists, and here challenge them to bring me any one sentence from any one
ancient Father of the Church, who with all his magnifying the Authority of the
Church of Rome, or the whole Church in general, does yet ascribe unto it power
to propose any new Article of Faith by their own Authority, without
Scripture Proof; much less to countermand any one Scripture-precept. And unless
the Papists can show this, they show nothing for their belief and practice of
those many things I have formerly mentioned; and for which they have not one
tittle of Scripture proof: And this I have said for the fuller confutation of
the Papists: for we take the Scripture for our only rule of faith, and conceive
our selves bound to believe nothing more than what is there declared, as I hope
I have fully proved.

The conclusion then of all must be, That we can have no infallible assurance
for our faith to rest upon, but the Scriptures, the word of God, and not of
man. In the Scriptures we have Eternal Life, and therefore are commanded to
search them for it; and there we shall find all necessary saving truth plainly
set forth, as I showed you. The humble searcher and fervent Prayer cannot fail
of it: He that thus seeks has our Saviors never-failing promise to find. And
thus the beginning and ending of our discourse must be one and the same, Search
the Scriptures, for in them ye have Eternal Life.

Having at length finished the several parts of my Text, I shall now in as few
words as may be, declare unto you my motive end why I undertook this work. No
man is such a stranger in our Jerusalem as not to know what is daily discoursed
in all places. Many timorous Zelots cannot hold in their fears; many insulting
Papists cannot hold in their hopes, that Popery will again bear rule in this
Nation. For my own part weighing things according to reason, I mean such a
measure of reason as God has given me, I cannot see any great probability of
it: for the great goodness of God has given us so gracious a King and so
averse to Popery, as that when it would have been a very great advantage to
him, he could not by any means be brought to embrace it. We may be then assured
he will not hearken to it now, when in all probability, it will dangerously
shake, if not overturn also the very foundations of Regal Government in this
Nation. Besides, the Sunshine of the Gospel, for ever blessed be God for it,
has so long appeared in our Church, and so discovered the grossness of Popish
errors in matters of faith, such foppish superstitions in their practice, as
that men, women, and children, plainly see and deride them. So that Scripture
and Reason being so prevalent against Popery, and the Universal genius of the
Nation so averse to it, in reason I should think we are pretty safe from it.
But when I consider our course of life is so contrary to Reason, and so
bestial; so contrary to Religion, and so atheistical; so contrary to Gospel
light, and such deeds of darkness daily committed; it seems too probable we may
soon become of any or no faith, who are already become such beasts and devils
in practice. Have we not then great cause of fear, that God, after so many and
so great blessings to draw our hearts unto him with cords of love, and (these
failing of effect) after so many chastising judgments to fright us from our
sins by smarting Rods; and all these also rendered vain, and God daily provoked
more and more by our loud crying sins for vengeance: Have we not great cause of
fear, that God will bring upon us that sinal and severe judgment, as to take
from us the light of his Holy Gospel, which we have so desperately abused and
profaned, and leave us to our own blindness, to work out our present confusion
and future damnation? Hence, and hence only, arises all my fear. This makes the
whole head sick, and the whole heart(...), Isa. i. 5. For this cause I did
resolve to advise you, That whilst you have the light, you would walk as
Children of the light; and whilst you have the Scriptures before you, you would
search into them, and arm your selves against the assaults of the world and the
flesh; against the powers of darkness, and cunning craftiness of those that lie
in wait to deceive. What God pleases to do with us, he only can tell: I will
never cease to hope in his infinite mercy; nor can I cease to fear our own
wickedness almost infinite, certainly never so excessive in this Nation.
Whether God for this has determined to bring upon us the evil day, I know not;
but this I know, that if he has so determined, now is the time to prepare for
it before hand, and not when it is come; for then men's hearts will be so filled
with fears and cares to avoid the present evil, and to preserve what they have
in this world, as that they will not be able to make a right judgment of things
relating to the world to come; but their reason will be so biassed by their
affections, as then to think those Arguments for the Popish Religion rational
and plausible, which now they think very simple and absurd. Wherefore now in
this time of peace and calmness, when your reason is not disturbed with
tumults, nor your conscience awed with dangers; I here ask you in the presence
of God, Are your judgments convinced by those Arguments which I have laid
before you in Gods Holy Word, that the Scriptures contain in themselves
completely Eternal Life; and thus you ought to take them alone for the only
rule of faith; and that you are not to hearken to any Doctrines of men, ever so
holy, ever so learned, farther than they can make their Doctrine evident to
your understandings by plain places of Scripture; and that whatever miracles
are pretended to be wrought by them, if they tend to prove any things which
you, according to the best of your understanding, verily believe are against
Scripture, you are to take them for lying wonders, wrought by that great
deceiver and tempter of mankind, the Devil. Are you now fully persuaded of all
this, or no? For your fuller satisfaction I repeat it again, and do you
consider it well. Are your judgments? etc. If you doubt of any part of this, I,
as your lawful Pastor set over you by God and the King his vicegerent, require
you to repair to me, and propose your doubts, and I hope, by Gods assistance to
give you full satisfaction. And if you are already satisfied, then in Gods
name, I require you to hold fast to the Scriptures, his Holy Word, and not to
suffer your selves to be carried away with any wind of Humane Doctrine. And
when, if ever, times of change and danger come, and your judgment begins to
alter from what now seems to you apparent truth and fully agreeable to Gods
Holy Word, you ought to conceive that alteration proceeds from the delusion of
the devil, the world and the flesh, not from any new inspiration from God, for
he is the same to day and for ever; he cannot change, it is you that change. But
perchance some will say in those days, This Papist tells me things I never
heard of before, new and better arguments; and upon better information, I may
and ought to change to better resolutions. Oh, my beloved, take heed; it is not
better information, but the old man loves to have it so, for it will then make
better for his enjoyment of this world. But I will now take from you this
subterfuge, you shall not 'scape me so: Go now to the ablest Papist you can
hear of, consult with such; see what new and better arguments they can now give
you: and if you think you have met with such, come to me, I shall take any
pains to give you better satisfaction. But if you come no more at me now, but
in the change of times your heart and reason change, I shall (if I so long
live) and you ought infallibly to conclude, it is not Reason nor Religion, but
the blindness of your heart and the corruption of your flesh that leads you
blindly away from the God of truth to follow the Doctrine of erroneous man. For
no doubt you may now in times of settlement and quiet make a far better
judgment of things, than in times of bustle and danger. No man, whilst he
carries this house of clay about him, can mount to that high pitch as to be
above the reach of storms and combustions, but will undoubtedly be shak'd and
disordered with them. The stiffest Oak will bend with boisterous winds.
Wherefore now, as I said, is the time to make a clear rational judgment of
truth, and to make also firm resolutions to adhere to that. And then if danger
comes, and your heart be besieged by powerful enemies, be sure to observe the
counsel of good King Hezekiah, 2 King. xviii. 36. Hold your peace and answer
not a word to any deluding Rabshakeh who shall endeavor to withdraw you from
our Heavenly King Christ Jesus, and his holy Word, and revolt to the proud
Prince of Babylon, the Pope of Rome. Disputing is dangerous when interest is
the Argument, that takes captive the hearts of most men: silence then will be
the safety. And be you assured, that in that great and terrible day of the
Lord, the word that I have now spoken unto you (for it is the Word of God) shall
judge and condemn you if you, swerve from it.

Lastly, for a Conclusion, let me advise all those who are not thoroughly settled
in their Religion, to endeavor it with all speed: no man ever so young, ever
so strong, has any assurance of life for a day, we see it by daily experience:
and it would be a very sad thing for a dying man to be then to choose his
Religion. I advise you therefore not to delay this necessary work: and when you
are on serious mature consideration, well settled in the Faith, admit no more of
debates, for it is a great artifice of the Devil so to busy men's heads in
matters of Faith, as wholly to neglect good Life, without which Faith is
fruitless and dead: for though we are justified by Faith, yet it must be Faith
working by Love, Gal. v. 6. And he that loves God keeps his Commandments, John
xiv. 15. and 21. And therefore it is mere Hypocrisy in those who seem so
zealous for the truth of Religion, but take no care to live the life of
Religion; of which sort there are too too many: they wear out their Life and
their Bible in tumbling it over for Texts to oppose the Papists, but pass over
all those Texts wherewith they should be armed to oppose the temptations of the
Devil. These ought you to have done, and not to leave the other undone, Mat.
xxiii. 23. These persons will be ranked with those who in that final day shall
come and say, Lord, Lord, we have Prophesied in thy Name, cast out Devils, and
done many wondrous works; and yet shall hear that dreadful Sentence from the
Lord, I never knew you, depart from me all ye that work Iniquity, Mat. vii. 23.
You are then to search the Scriptures both for true Faith and good Life, and to
captivate yo^^ hearts in obedience to Gods Commandments, as well as your
understandings in obedience to the Faith; both are equally requisite to Eternal
Life, and both are plainly and fully declared in the Scriptures; they make us
wise unto Salvation, and thoroughly furnish us unto every good work: so that we
are lest without excuse in either. You know these things, and happy are ye, if
ye do them, not otherwise.

And thus, Beloved, having laid plainly before you out of Gods Holy Word, the
way of Truth and the way of Error, the way of Godliness and the way of
Iniquity, the way of Life and the way of Death; I most humbly and most
earnestly beseech our most Gracious God for his Son Christ Iesus's sake, to
give you a right understanding in all things, and to preserve you continually
in the way of Truth, Holiness, Righteousness, and Life Everlasting.

Amen.
THE END.
A SUPPLEMENT To the PRECEDING SERMONS. TOGETHER WITH A TRACT concerning the
Holy Sacrament OF THE Lords Supper. Promised in the PREFACE.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, HERBERT Lord Bishop of HEREFORD.

London, Printed for Charles Harper, 1679.

A SUPPLEMENT To the Preceding SERMONS.
IN the Preceding Sermons, I have proved these six things. 1. That by God's
special appointment all persons are to read and learn the Scriptures, for their
Edification in Faith and good Life; and therefore it is both foolish and impious
for vain Man to take upon him to give reasons why the People should not read
them. 2. The reason of this; because that in the Scriptures we have eternal
life, as our Savior tells us; which St. Paul explicates more particularly,
saying, That they make us wise unto salvation, that is, they teach us all
things necessary for our belief, and they thoroughly furnish us unto all good
works; that is, they teach us all things requisite for good life. And these
things the Scriptures completely contain in themselves, without any Humane
Doctrines; so that if there were no other Writings nor Instructions in the
World but the Scriptures alone, yet we should not want any thing necessary to
eternal life. 3. That we are not to believe any thing with Divine Faith, but
what is clearly contained in Scripture; for such a belief is a Duty belonging
to God alone: and it is the greatest and most acceptable Duty and Sacrifice we
can perform unto God, to captivate our understandings in Obedience to Faith in
God: and therefore to give this principal Divine Service unto Man, is high
Idolatry; and consequently to believe in the Apostles themselves had been great
Idolatry, had not Christ fully assured us, That they should have the Holy Ghost
to guide them into all Truth: So that to speak properly, we do not believe in
the Apostles and Prophets, but in God the Holy Ghost speaking in them. And for
this reason we find St. Paul very wary in distinguishing, and declaring to the
people what he delivered as from the Lord, and what he delivered as from
himself, though he was persuaded he had the Spirit of the Lord, even in that.
But yet no clear and full assurance that it was spoken directly by the Lord.
Nay, our blessed Savior himself, though God and Man, yet would not have us
believe in him as Man; and therefore assures us, That the words he spoke, were
not his, but the Father's speaking by him. 4. I have proved that we have not
any clear and full assurance from God, That any Assembly of Men or Church since
the Apostles, are infallibly guided by the Holy Ghost into all Truth; and
therefore to believe in any Assembly of Men or Church, without this full
assurance of the Holy Ghost's speaking in them, is Idolatry also; for by such a
belief, you pay them the greatest Divine Worship. 5. Though we should grant,
That some promise of Infallibility were made in Scripture to the Church, yet
this must include the Laity as well as the Clergy; for the word (...), which we
translate Church, is always set in Scripture for the Congregation of the
Faithful, and is not once set for the Clergy distinct from the Laity. But there
is no such thing as Infallibility granted to any, neither Priests nor People,
nor both together. 6. Grant yet farther, that the word Church in Scripture
should signify the Clergy, and a promise of Infallibility made to them as
Successors to the Apostles; yet the same Promise being made, and the same
Authority given to all the Apostles alike, the Successor of St. Peter and his
Clergy, cannot from hence challenge any more Infallibility, than the Successors
of the other Apostles with their Clergy and Church, But the Papists deny this
Infallibility to other Churches. Certainly then other Churches may as well deny
it to them. All these things I have proved.

But now for a fuller conviction of the Papists, and perchance for better
satisfaction to some others, I have a mind to grant yet farther, That Christ
made some particular Promise to St. Peter above the other Apostles, yea and to
St. Peter's Successors; also ('it is impossible from Scripture to prove either of
these, but let it pass so) let us now see how the Papists can from hence fix
this Infallibility to the Bishop of Rome, and his Churches. For I have showed
you from Scripture (which doubtless is of better Authority than any Writings
the Papists can bring for St. Peter) that Rome was comprised in St. Paul's
Jurisdiction, and that he lived, and preached and suffered there. But we will
pass over this also, and yield to St. Peter's Jurisdiction over the whole
World. What then? Then St. Peter was Bishop of Rome, and settled his Successor
there. And how do the Papists prove this? They answer, that many authentic
Historians tell them so: is this all their Proof? Humane Testimony from
History, is this a sufficient foundation for a prime Article of Faith, on which
depends the Salvation of all Christian Souls? Is this a sure Rock, or rather a
bank of Sand, to build their Infallibility upon? Do not the same Historians
relate, that St. Peter was Bishop of Antioch? and we have more reason to
believe History for this; because the Scripture tells us he was there, but not
one tittle of his ever being at Rome, but strong Presumptions to the contrary.
St. Luke in the Acts speaking so much of St. Paul's going thither, has not one
word of St. Peter's, who being (as the Papists believe) so eminent an Apostle
above all the rest, seems somewhat neglected by St. Luke, which makes me
suspect St. Luke was not of their Opinion. And shall we accuse St. Paul also
for want of charity or civility never to mention St. Peter in all those his
particular and numerous Salutations to and from others in his Epistles? we must
not think that their quarrel at Antioch, where St. Paul withstood St. Peter,
stuck so long in his mind as to omit all Salutation to him in several Epistles.
We ought rather in charity to St. Paul, to believe St. Peter was not at Rome.
And truly methinks the Papists themselves, who pretend so much to honor St.
Peter, do him no small dishonor in affirming him to be at Rome, when St. Paul
answered for himself before Nero the first time; St. Paul complaining that no
man stood with him, but all forsook him. And if those Historians, which the
Papists rely on for St. Peter's being Bishop of Rome, speak true in the
circumstance of time, then he was at Rome when St. Paul first answered before
Nero: And who would not rather distrust these Historians, than believe St.
Peter forsook St. Paul, when he answered before Nero. Certainly whoever
considers well all these weighty circumstances from Scripture, may think them
more ponderous, than the Relation of Historians, for his being Bishop there so
many years. In which Matter, if the first Historian was mistaken, others that
wrote after, perchance to save themselves the trouble of confuting him, and not
foreseeing any evil consequence arising thence, followed that track, and so
the Error ran on too far to be corrected.

For my own part, though I will not gainsay the Historians, yet I must needs
gainsay the Papists, That History-Relation cannot be a sufficient ground for so
principal an Article of Faith, especially seeing the Scripture-Circumstances
are so much against it. And they that will give full credit to Historians in
this, must consequently believe the same Historians, affirming, That St. Peter
was first Bishop at Antioch, that zealous City, which first took up that
glorious, but then dangerous, Name of Christians. And is it not a disparagement
to St. Peter, that he, like old doting Lovers, should so much prefer his second
Wife before his first, as to bequeath this his inestimable Jewel of
Infallibility to her? May not St. Peter be accused as Ephesus was, Rev. 2. 4.
to have left his first Love? Truly I will not so rashly accuse St. Peter,
neither will I so rashly yield unto the Romanists this Infallibility, damning
us all that will not sacrifice our Souls, and idolize it. I think I comply
fairly, in yielding that St. Peter had some pre-eminence above other Apostles,
and that he was Bishop of Rome; but that he gave all that he had to his second
Wife, and nothing to his first; so great partiality I will never yield to, but
require them to prove it, by producing St. Peter's Will, which I never yet
could see, nor ever yet fully understood, whom St. Peter appointed his first
Successor at Rome, to whom he bequeathed this inestimable Legacy. The Papists
themselves cannot agree upon it; some say Clemens, some Linus, some Cletus: Are
we not then at a rare pass for St. Peter's infallible Successor, when they
cannot assure us who was the first, to whom St. Peter gave this Infallibility?
For ought I know, this Jewel might be lost in the scuffle, and so none of them
had it.

Moreover, finding the Papists so uncertain in so prime a Matter, makes me to
doubt other things also. And therefore I farther require, to see the form of
St. Peter's establishment for his Successors: For this is a clear Case, That in
the election of any Officer, if the fundamental Rules of Election be not
observed, the Election is void. Let us then see the form of St. Peter's
establishment, for the election of his Successors. The principal Authors that
relate St. Peter Bishop of Rome, affirm, That he nominated Clemens for his
Successor: And it seems this Story ran for truth; for they who will needs have
Linus to be the first Successor, are forced to salve up their Story, by saying,
That Clemens out of modesty would not accept of it, and so Linus was put up,
and after Linus's death, Clemens came in. So that we are not only ignorant who
was St. Peter's Successor, but by what Authority also he succeeded; for it
seems St. Peter's Authority was not obeyed, but another came in, and how he
came in, is also uncertain; and which way soever he came in, I would know who
gave them Authority, that did put him in? If St. Peter gave it not, as it seems
he did not, but named his own Successor, who gave it? Or were they violent
Intruders without Authority? And if they were no lawful Electors, sure he was
no lawful Successor; and so, for ought I can see, the Church of Rome is at a
great loss for infallible Successor to St. Peter.

But which way soever this Business was carried at first, it is evident, that
it is carried clean otherwise now. For at first, either St. Peter named his
Successor (as most probable in Reason, and by History also,) or he was chosen
by the Clergy alone, as many think; for that Custom seems to have continued a
while in the Church; the People being but few, and bearing wonderful Reverence
to their Pastors, were wholly governed by them in all things. Or he was chosen
by the Clergy and People both; for after the People were grown numerous, they
grew also factious, and would not receive such Pastors as the Clergy elected,
unless they also approved them, taking upon themselves a share in the Election:
And this was so generally practiced in all Churches, that at length he was not
allowed a lawful Pastor, that was not thus chosen. Now which way of all these,
St. Peter's Successor was chosen at first, and afterward for hundreds of
years, this is evident, That the Election now is quite otherwise, than it was
for many hundred years; for now he is chosen by a select company of Cardinals,
an Order of Clergy never heard of in former Ages, all created by Popes, some in
Favor to their Kindred, some in Faction, to keep up their Party in Rome, some
in Policy, to get interest with foreign Princes, creating their Relations, as
fit for Clergymen, as St. Peter was for a Courtier; and these are the gallant
Men, that must choose us an infallible Successor to St. Peter; whereas doubtless
St. Peter would abhor such spruce, delicate, effeminate Clergy; I will say no
worse of them, though the World talks loud things of another-guess nature. But
let these Men be what they will in their Lives, I look upon them to be in no
Authority for Election, not being instituted by St. Peter, nor conformed to the
primitive practice, the Election being then, as before related, either by all
the Clergy (no Bishop being excluded, as now) or by all the Clergy and People
both. Moreover, put the case these Cardinals should be divided in their
Election, and set up several Popes as they have done, who remained so several
years, therefore may many more; whose Infallibility then must we rely on? If
you tell me, this may happen, how-ever he be chosen, pardon me, not if he be
chosen and nominated by his Predecessor, as in all probability, and best of
History, St. Peter's Successor was. But it may be again replied, That the
Predecessor may die a sudden death, and then we are to seek; or if other
Bishops choose him, they may be divided; or if Clergy and People are to make the
Election, they also may be dis-joynted and divided; and thus we are to seek as
well as in the Cardinal's Division. All this is true; and for all these
probable confusions, I cannot think God left his Church in this confused
manner, so as doubting Souls cannot tell to whom to make their address, to be
resolved in Matters of Salvation.

Again, their Council of Florence determined and declared, That the intention
of the Minister is requisite to the effect of every Sacrament: As for example,
If one of their Priests should pronounce the words of Consecration in the
Lord's Supper, and not intend to consecrate the Bread, then it is no Sacrament,
but the Bread remains bare Bread still; because he did not intend to consecrate
it. (I pray you, remember this, for I shall have occasion to mention it again
hereafter.) So when any Bishop says the words for ordaining a Priest, and does
not intend really to ordain, they say he is no Priest. So when an Archbishop,
seeming to consecrate another Bishop, says the words, but does not intend his
Consecration; then they believe, this Man is not hereby really made Bishop, the
words, without the intention, having no effect. From hence it is evident, That
if the Bishop that consecrated the Pope, did not intend to make him Bishop, he
is none; or if the Bishop that consecrated that Bishop that consecrated the
Pope, did not intend it, then he was no Bishop, and consequently could not
consecrate a Bishop, he being none himself. So that going back from Bishop to
Bishop, if one of a hundred in process of time has failed of intention, then
there can be no assurance that this Man is really a Bishop and Pope. Now
considering how many devilish wicked Bishops have been among them, it is more
than probable, some one of them has minded the business of his Consecration no
more than a Horse; nay, perchance in the wickedness of his heart, has laughed
at that thing as a mere foppery; as that blasphemous, devilish Pope, laughing,
said, O quantum nobis profuit haec Fabula Christi! What mighty advantage has
that Fable of Christ brought unto us! But whether he really intended
Consecration or no, that being in the secret of his own heart alone, is
impossible to be known by another. It Is then most evident, we cannot possibly
have any assurance that such a M^n is a Priest, Bishop, Pope, and St. Peter's
Successor, and if he be not St. Peter's Successor, then his Determinations
signify nothing, as the Papists confess. Where then is their assurance of any
Pope's ^nfallibility, having no assurance that he is Pope, Bishop, or Priest?
Can any Man think Gods infinite Goodness and Providence, would leave hi^ Church
in so great distraction, as the Papist s belief of their Pope's Infallibility
embroils us in? No certainly; but God has left us a short and safe way, his
holy Scripture, in searching of which with sincerity and humility, we shall be
sure to find eternal life; for God resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble.

I have a desire to go yet a little farther. And let us suppose there were
Infallibility settled in the Church of Rome; I desire to know particularly,
where it is to be found. Here we shall find the Papists at a great stand. Some
say, It Is in the Pope alone, some in a General Council alone, some say, in Pope
and Council together. Nay, some will farther tell you, That whether Pope, or
Council, or both together decree any thing, yet that Decree is not obligatory
in any National Church (as for example, in the Church of France,) unless the
Church of France have approved and received that Council. You see, at what a
loss we are still for Infallibility, they themselves are not agreed where it is
to be found. But certainly, of these three several Opinions (I pass over the
fourth) it is most rational, and coherent to their first Principle, That the
Infallibility is fixed in the Pope, whom they all grant to be St. Peter's
Successor; for this Infallibility being originally granted to St. Peter, it is
most coherent to this, that it should descend to his Successor. Besides, they
that would have it in the Pope and Council together, say, That the Pope only
has the power to call General Councils, and to confirm the Decrees of the
Councils; so that if he does not both call and confirm all the Decrees, they
are of no force, nor any obliged to submit to them. And thus, in effect, this
Infallibility determines in the Pope alone, the Council signifying nothing
without him. And then if this Infallibility be residing in the Pope, I pray you
remember what I told you but now, the impossibility of assurance of any man's
being rightly Pope, which requires so many assuring Circumstances.

But now after all these innumerable difficulties and perplexities to find out
where this Infallibility lies, I meet with another grand difficulty, yea, as
great as all these put together. For, if we consider what strange, horrid,
wicked Creatures have been Popes (since the Creation of the World there have
not been persons more abominably and devillishly wicked) what possible
assurance then can be found sufficient to make us believe the Infallible Spirit
of the Holy Ghost inhabits in such Dens of uncleanness and cruelty, as the
Breasts of such detestable Monsters of Iniquity. To believe the high
incomprehensible mystery of our Savior s incarnation, That the Omnipotent
Divine Nature, and the weak Nature of Man are united in one Person of Christ,
is sure a thing of very hard belief, and requires the express Word of God to
make us to submit and captivate our understandings in obedience to it. What
then can be sufficient to make us believe this, so extremely contrary to all
reason, That the Allglorious and All-holy Spirit of God, and the spirit of the
Devil should be united in the heart of such abominable Popes? What can
captivate our hearts to this belief? I confess we are to submit to God's Word;
though it seem ever so contrary to reason, I dare not say otherwise. But then I
beg leave to say, That I may require to see the Word of God for this as
plainly, and as expressly as we see the Sun in a clear Sky at Noon. Gideon, as
it is set forth Judge. vi. after that God had plainly declared unto him by an
Angel, That he should conquer the Midianites, and had confirmed his Word by
that miracle of Fire rising out of the Rock, and consuming the Sacrifice; yet
presumed to require of God a farther assurance, by a Miracle of Dew filling a
Fleece of Wool; yea, and after that a third Miracle of having the Fleece dry,
and all the ground wet round about it; and the great goodness of God hearkened
to him in all. I hope then the infinite goodness of God would not be angry if I
should desire one, two, or three evident assurances to make me believe a thing
to humane reason, far more impossible than his conquering the Midianites. God
was graciously pleased to assure us by his beloved Disciple St. John, of the
Incarnation of his Eternal Son, that he had heard, and (...), and looked upon
(the Original word is (...) which signifies consideringly to observe) yea, and
his hands had handled the Word of Life: all which put together, is as complete
an assurance as can be imagined; and all this to assure us of the Union of the
two Natures, Divine and Humane in one Person, as I said before; and yet the
Divine and Humane Natures are not so extremely opposite as the Spirit of God,
and the spirit of the Devil. May we not then in all humility desire to hea, to
see, narrowly observe, yea, and handle with our hands some fi^m Evidence of
this Union of the Spirit of God, and the spirit of the Devil in the heart of
Pope Alexander the sixth, guilty of Rapine, Murder, Incest, and all other
Abominati^ns imaginable? Let then the Papists show us from St. John, or some
other Apostle, some such full Evidence as this of St. John, for this incredible
Union, and I shall submit; but certainly never till I hear, see, and handle it:
let them believe what they please.

Having thus, as I suppose, given you sufficient reasons to take you off from
so long a Journey as to Rome, to consult his infallible Holiness the Pope:
Perchance you will ask me to whom then you are to make your address for the
determination of such doubts and disputes as may arise in matters of Religion;
Has God left his Church without any Head to guide and govern it? No certainly,
we have a Head and Guide Infallible, Christ Jesus our Lord. But he is in
Heaven, we cannot ascend thither, nor must we expect miraculous Voices from
thence to answer us: I grant it, for there is no need; Hearken to St. Paul,
Romans x. 6, 7, 8, 9. Say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into Heaven? (that
is, to bring Christ down from above.) Or who shall descend into the deep (that
is, to bring up Christ again from the dead.) But what says it? The Word is
nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart: that is, the Word of faith
which we preach, That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shall believe in thine heart, That God has raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved. You have Christ s Word at hand, God be blessed for it, it is
daily before you: If thou shall confess with thy mouth, and believe with thy
heart what is there plainly set forth, thou shall be saved: You have God's Word
for it in several places, as I have showed you, and that there is nothing more
necessary to be believed: and if you will not believe God's Word in this, you
will not believe though one rose from the dead, nor though an Angel descended
from Heaven. And as for doubts and disputes there is no need, lay them by; nay,
there is hurt in them, for they gender strife of words, from whence comes
envy, railings, evil surmisings, 1 Timothy vi. 4. I have often told you, What is
necessary, is plain, without disp^te: But you will say, The common people do
not understand half, no^ (...) quarter of the Scripture, as it there lies; What
then? Then it is necessary to instruct them further. In the Name of God do so:
make them understond as much as you can of Scripture, the more the better,
though not necessary. And I dare affirm That whoever believes explicitly as
much as he understands of Scripture, though it be not the hundredth part of it,
and believes all the rest implicitly, that is, believes all the rest to be
true, because God spoke it, and also practices according to that he does
understand, that man shall be saved: And this I will undertake to make good
against all the Wise and Disputers of the World: But if any man will be
contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God, 1 Cor. xi. 16.

It Is probable you may Object, It often happens, that Disputes do arise both
among the People, and among the Priests also, and though the things disputed be
not necessary, yet it is necessary to have some of Authority to determine and
compose them; otherwise great Disorders and Tumults may follow. No doubt but
restless and perversespirited men will raise Disputes and Troubles, where there
is no ground for them; yet there will be no need to determine the truth on
either side; but rather to compel both Parties to peace and quiet, that neither
cause disturbance to Church or State; and this belongs to the Civil Magistrate
and his Authority. For it is not the determination of Priests or Pope, will keep
such busybodies quiet; they will as readily dispute their determination. Was
it not so in the Arian dispute which was determined by that famous Council of
Nice, yea, and confirmed also by the Emperor's Decree? yet all without effect,
the Arians stiffly maintaining their Opinion hundreds of years after. We see
then that Determinations are as fruitless as needless. But in the first three
hundred years of Christianity there was no (...) of Faith, but the Scripture
alone; neither did any Man, or any Assembly of Men after the Apostles, take
upon them to determine any new matter of Faith, though there were several
Heresies started in those days. The Pastors of the Church only preached the
Scripture, and required Men's Obedience to that; they that refused, were
excluded the Congregation and Society of the Faithful: and they proceeded no
farther.

If it be answered, That all the Princes of the World were then Heathens, by
reason whereof no General Councils could be called to determine more, though
ever so requisite. I answer, let us then see, when that great General Council
of Nice was called under Constantine, a Christian Emperor, what they
determined. The Church then had three hundred years experience to find out what
was wanting, and composed another Creed for all the World; yet added no new
Article of Faith to that called the Apostles Creed; but only explained some
things in that more fully: and whoever believed and subscribed to that Creed
passed for an Orthodox, a true believing Christian. Doubtless so many Learned
and Godly Bishops would not omit any thing necessary to Man's Salvation. Let us
then hold fast to that, for now I hope all was completed: The Bishop of Rome,
as well as other Bishops, approved and subscribed to this. We all profess that
Nicene Creed: and if that Creed was sufficient to save all Christians then,
sure it will save all Christians now. Why then do they require us now to
believe more, Purgatory, praying to Saints, and a thousand other things,
whereof there is no mention in the Nicene Creed or Council. The Papists will
answer, Because many oppose them now, but nobody opposed them before the
Council of Nice. They answer most truly: no man opposed them before, and why?
because no man professed them before. These are new matters of a later
hatching; no man in these days so much as dreamed of such things. But it is not
at all to our purpose, whether any then professed them, or any opposed them:
for be they true, or be they false, there is no necessity to believe them. This
is true, or else all the Bishops of that Council were fowly to blame in not
putting them into their Creed: from whence it is evident, they thought them not
necessary then, and so may we safely think now. But the Papists farther Object,
Many damnable Heresies may arise, which the Fathers of that Council being no
Prophets, could not foresee: I grant it; What then? why then it will be
necessary to suppress them: I grant this also, and earnestly desire it.
Suppress whatever is new set up, but set up no more new as necessary to be
believed. This is the Point we still hold to: Men were saved, and may still be
saved without believing more. Till they can confute me in this, their talk is
vain and without weight.

And thus all, both Men and Women may be able to stop the mouth of Papists with
their own Argument; when they cry unto you in their absurd wonted manner, Hear
the Church. You must believe as the Church believes; answer, Yes, you do
believe as the Church believes, as the Church and Council of Nice believed; you
hold every Article of their Creed. It Is you Papists who believe not as the
Church and Council of Nice believed; you have altered the Faith, and have built
a great deal of Wood, Hay, Stubble upon the old foundation, which can never
abide the trial of Scripture. From whence it is evident you are the Heretics,
for you have wilfully taken up to your selves several Opinions contrary to
Scripture, which you profess to be the Word of God; and therefore you are,
according to St. Paul, (...), condemned of your selves; for you acknowledge the
rule, and yet go on in your will worship contrary to the rule.

Yet notwithstanding all that I have said here, I declare this, When there are
several Opinions and Disputes in a Nation about Matters in Religion, the
Supreme Magistrates and Church Governors may in Prudence think it necessary
for the peace of Church and State to require all that are to enter into places
of trust in Church or State, to subscribe to such Articles as they conceive
most conducing thereto; and he that refuses, they may refuse him: no man is
injured by this either in his Salvation, or Life, or Liberty, or Estate; he is
as free as he was before. I hold only to this, That no man be required to
believe any thing as necessary to Salvation, but what is plainly contained in
Scripture.

A Tract concerning the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which I promised
in the Preface.
Good Reader,
YOu must first understand, What it is to take a saying in a Literal or a
Figurative sense. For example: If a Man take a Stick in his hand, and say, This
is my Staff; you take this in a Literal sense, that is, you take it according
to the bare words, and usual meaning of them, that this Staff is his, he is the
owner of it. But if he say, This is my Horse; you see that Stick is not a real
Horse; therefore, you conceive, he means not a real Horse; but that as a Horse
is used for a help to carry a Man on his way, so this Stick helps to support
his Body, and carry him on his way. This we call a Figurative sense, that is,
signifying something otherwise than the bare words usually express: For the
word Horse is not here taken, as usually, for a real Horse, but for another
thing used as a Horse. Now all Men that read the Scripture, find it necessary
to take many things spoken there in a Figurative sense; for it would be
contrary to all Reason and Religion, to take them in a Literal sense. As when
our Savior said, I am the Door, no Man conceives Christ to be a real Door; and
therefore he takes it in a Figurative sense, by way of comparison to a Door;
that as a Door is the entrance into a House, so Christ tells us, he is the
Door, the entrance for us into Heaven; no Man can enter there but by him and
his Merits. So Christ said, I am the Bread that came down from Heaven; no Man
takes this in a Literal sense, according to the usual meaning of the word
Bread, for real Bread, but by way of comparison; as Bread nourishes our Bodies,
so Christ is come down from Heaven to nourish our Souls. Again, Christ taking
Bread in his hand, said, This is my Body: We know that Bread is not Christ's
real Body; we therefore conceive Christ means a comparison; that as this Bread
is broken and bruised under your teeth, and so passes down into your breast to
nourish your Body, so my Body shall be broken, bruised and killed, that by my
Sufferings and Death, your Souls may be nourished to eternal Life. In all
reason we must conclude thus, unless Christ had said something more, to make us
think otherwise; for we have no other way to understand any thing Christ spoke,
but according to the Rule of Reason, which God has given us to speak and
understand all things. But the Papists, who understand the former words, I am
the Bread, in a Figurative sense, merely because their Sense and Reason tells
them, that Christ is not real Bread, yet will needs understand these words,
This is my Body, in a Literal sense, That the Bread is made Christ's real,
substantial Body, though their Sense and Reason tells them, it is still real
Bread; for which, I desire them to give me a satisfying Reason; for in all
appearance, both Affirmations are of the same nature. Certainly then they must
show us some great Motive, that induces them to take the two forms of speech so
very differently, being in themselves both alike. First, From Reason no Motive
can possibly be found; for, by Reason, it is equally hard to understand Christ
to be Bread, as Bread to be Christ. Secondly, If, according to Religion, we
captivate our Reason, in obedience to Faith, it is as easy to believe Bread to
be Christ, as Christ to be Bread.

And it is very impertinent here to talk of God's infinite Power, how that can
effect things impossible to Reason; for we most readily grant it. And therefore
the Papists do as falsely as foolishly accuse us of Unbelief; and that we are
wholly guided by our Reason, and deny the Bread to be Christ's Body, because
our Reason cannot comprehend it. Do not we believe, God created all the World
of nothing, three Persons to be one God, God and Man to be one Person, Christ?
Sure these are harder to believe, than that God can change Bread into his Body;
and we would more readily believe this, than the former highest Mysteries, had
we this miraculous change as plainly set forth in Scripture, as those Mysteries
greater and harder to be believed. Let them then plainly show us in Scripture,
that Christ changed the Bread into his Body, and we shall as readily believe it
as they: but they barely tell us, Christ said of the Bread, This is my Body;
and we again tell them, Christ said, I am the Bread: They require us to believe
the first to be a miraculous change, and we likewise require them to believe
the second to be as miraculous a change; they refuse the second, so we refuse
the first, why not? This is the thing we still urge, to show us some compelling
Motive, why they make such an infinite difference between these two sayings,
when the forms of speech are both the same; yet the one must infer a mighty
miracle, the other none at all, but as familiar a Figure as may be. Had our
Savior taken into his hand a picture of a Face, and said, This is my Face;
what Man could imagine he intended, This picture is changed into my real
substantial Face? but rather undoubtedly conceive he meant, This represents my
Face. And just so when he took Bread into his hand, and said, This is my Body;
who can imagine but he meant, This represents my Body? And therefore, as I
said, it requires some urgent Reason to make us think otherwise. But in stead
of Reason, they return us Railing, that we are faithless Heretics; and we
reply, They are foolish Pratlers.

But now to show how willing we are to believe Christ in this or any thing
else, be it ever so much against our reason, we will narrowly examine and
observe all circumstances in the institution of this blessed Sacrament, and see
if we can find any considerable motive to incline us to this miraculous change
of transubstantiating bread into Christ's Body.

In the first place, let us reflect on the Original type of this Sacrament,
which was the Sacrifice of Melchisedek, King of Salem, when he met Abraham
coming from the Victory over the Heathen Kings, mentioned Genesis 14. 18. And
Melchisedek, King of Salem, brought forth bread and wine. This Melchisedek was
a Priest of the most high God. And Heb. 7. the Apostle at large declares, That
Christ was a Priest of the same Order with Melchisedek, in all things typified
by Melchisedek. Now what Sacrifice did Melchisedek offer up unto the most high
God? Bread and Wine, real, substantial Bread and Wine: Doubtless then from
hence we should conclude, That Christ being a Priest of the same Order with
Melchisedek, should offer the same Sacrifice with him, real, substantial Bread
and Wine. Surely this makes against the Papists Transubstantiation.

Secondly, Let us consider the Jewish Sacraments, which were also Types of
ours. The Jews had in their Church two Sacraments, Circumcision, and the
Paschal Lamb: and these were, as I said, Types of what was to follow in Christ;
who abolishing that Church and Sacraments, did introduce two other Sacraments
in his Church, Baptism and the holy Supper. As Circumcision was the initiating
Sacrament to the Jews; So Baptism is to us: And as the Paschal Lamb was the
commemorating Sacrament to the Jews of their deliverance from their bondage in
Egypt; so the holy Supper is our commemorating Sacrament of our deliverance
from the bondage of Hell. You see then that thus far our Sacraments resemble
those of the Jews. Was there any Transubstantiation in the Jewish Sacraments?
No: We cannot then from the Jewish Sacraments find the least hint of
Transubstantiation in ours.

Thirdly, Let u^ compare our two Sacraments one to the other. Is there any
Transubstantiation, or any real alteration in the element of water in the
Sacrament of Baptism? No: the water still remains in substance water. We cannot
then from that Sacrament find any ground for Transubstantiation in this.

Fourthly, Let us consider this Sacrament in it self, what was our Saviors
intent in the institution of it, which certainly should be a great, and the
best guide to us in this business. It Is evident by several Scriptures, that it
was instituted to commemorate our Savior's Passion and Death; Christ expressly
declared it so at the institution; Do this in remembrance of me; And St. Paul,
1 Cor. xi. 26. expressly declares it so; As often as ye eat this bread, and
drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death till he come. Now let us see if
Transubstantiation do any way help toward a fuller setting forth the Lord's
Death. Let the Papists show this if they can; it would somewhat incline us to
their Transubstantiation: for my part I profess sincerely it appears to me
quite otherwise. For in their transubstantiated Sacrament, there is no
representation of our Savior's Suffering, nor of his Bloodshedding and Death:
for they affirm his Body to be there a Spiritual Body impassible; no breaking
of it; no division of the Blood from his Fle^h: for they believe Christ's Body
to be entirely Flesh, Bones, and Blood, the whole Body under both forms of
Bread and Wine; so says their great Doctor Aquinas, in the third Part of his
Sums, Quest. 76. Art. 2. and there proves it in his School-way. So that in
their Sacrament there is nothing representing Christ's Sufferings, nor
Bloodshedding, nor Death: For, first, There is no real substance broken; for
the substance of Bread, say they, is gone, and it is now Christ's Body, which is
now impassible, cannot be broken. The Priest seems to break a Wafer, but it is
no real Wafer, it is Christ's Body; that is not broken neither: So in truth and
reality nothing is broken, it is broken, and it is not broken. And then for the
Chalice, there is no Wine, nor Christ's Blood apart, it is Christ's Body entire
(as they believe) so you drink the same, both Body and Blood together, which
before you have eaten; and you eat before the very same which you afterward
drink: So that eating and drinking is here one and the same (rare
School-devices). Let us return to our own Sacrament; there is real Bread and
Wine, the Bread is really broken by the Priest as it was by Christ, it is also
bruised under the teeth of the eater: So the Wine is received a part from the
Bread; both in a figure, representing unto us Christ's Sufferings,
Bloodshedding and Death, and buried in our breasts as in the Sepulcher.

And thus you see how much better our Sacrament of real Bread and Wine shows
our Savior's Sufferings and Death, than their transubstantiated Bread and
Wine. Now considering how many figurative Speeches there are in the Gospel, a
man cannot but wonder how this Transubstantiation with accidents only of Bread
and Wine hanging in the air, without any substance of Bread and Wine to support
them, how this could come into the head of the first Inventer; there being
nothing in the Types and Sacraments of the Old Law, nor in the Institution of
the New, to give us the least hint of it; Especially considering the simplicity
and plainness of the Gospel, preached generally to a vulgar Auditory, and
fitted for their capacity, and these Sacraments instituted for their use as
well as others. But the Papist Doctors have turned this into such an obscure
Scholastic Sacrament, that you must study Logic, Physic, Metaphysick, and
School Divinity many years, before you can understand what they would be at;
without any Scripture-foundation for this their Castle built in the Air.

How? cry the Papists, without any Scripture-foundation? Look, we advise you,
into St. John's Gospel, Chap. 6. v. 53, 54, 55, 56. Then Jesus said unto them,
Verily, verily I say unto you, Except ye eat the-flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my
blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. For my flesh
is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. What can be more plainly
expressed, even to the meanest capacity of men? Good Reader, I suppose you
conceive that here we are hard beset; for these words certainly carry far more
appearance for their transubstantiating the Bread into real Flesh, than the
bare saying, This is my Body; which, as I showed you, is a common figurative
way of speaking in Scripture. But yet, as our Savior says, If ye have faith,
ye may say unto this mountain, be thou removed and it shall be done: So you
shall see this their mountain of Objection presently removed.

Come then, my Papist Doctors, Will you have these words in St. John literal,
down right literal, without any figure? I beseeeh you then tell me, What
becomes of all the Laity in your Church? Will you send them into Hell, Body and
Soul for ever, to make good this newfound Transubstantiation? Does not our
Savior here expressly declare, That, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man,
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you: Eat and Drink, mark, and Drink;
And do the Laity eat and drink literally? no certainly: How then shall they
enter into life? Must none but the Priests be saved? Poor miserable Laity! I am
sure you must literally be damned for ever to save Transubstantiation; a sad
doctrine for you, whatever becomes of your Priests: I fear they will fare
little better, that thus blindly lead you into this fatal ditch of damnation:
Consider, I beseech you, how they delude and gull you. They press these words
of St. John upon the ignorant Laity, My flesh is meat indeed; to persuade them
it is real flesh in the Sacrament: but when we press them with those words.
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life
in you: thereby showing, That it is necessary for all to drink the blood, as
well as eat the flesh; then they say, all here is to be taken in a spiritual
sense, of eating and drinking by Faith. Wherein they say truly, but yet show
they deal falsely with you, making you believe all here is to be taken
literally; whereas in truth all is to be taken spiritually, and they compelled
to acknowledge it so by their unlucky Decree of taking the Cup from the Laity.
Had it not been for this, good God, how would they have dunn'd our ears with
this Chapter of St. John! there would have been no enduring their loud clamors
for their literal sense.

But now I beseech you calmly to consider this passage in St. John, Except ye
eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.
Who so eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will
raise him up at the last day. These words carry far more appearance of Christ's
real Flesh in the Sacrament, than those in St. Matthew, This is my Body: which,
as I said before, is a figurative way of speaking, very frequent in Scripture,
and no body startled at it: but when our Savior pronounced those words in St.
John, most that heard them were very much startled and disordered at them; yea,
many Disciples left following our Savior upon them, crying, This is an hard
saying, who can bear it? for really it sounds very hard, if you take the bare
words in themselves without our Savior's Comment upon them (whereof we shall
speak by and by.) This then is the thing I pray you to consider: if these words
in St. John, which carry so much a greater appearance of real flesh in the
Sacrament, yet may and ought to be taken, and are taken by the Papists
themselves in a Spiritual sense; Is it not a most unreasonable and senceless
thing in the Papists to cry out upon us for taking those words in St. Matthew,
This is my Body, in a spiritual sense? It is just the same as for a man that
refuses to take a gilded shilling for pure Gold; (...) out on me because I
will not accept of a piece of plain brass for pure gold. But setting aside the
Papists (who take all Scriptures right or wrong, as they serve most for their
turn; and as they blasphemously call the Scripture a nose of wax, so use it,
and shape all to their own ^ancy;) let us now see our Savior's own Comment on
his own words, that is the sure way to have the right sense of them. I pray you
then observe how our Savior in this Chapter, v. 47. just before he began this
discourse, prepares his Disciples for the spiritual understanding of what
follows by saving, Verily verily I say unto you, He that believes on me has
everlasting life. Which plainly shows, that the words he was going to speak,
were to be apprehended by Faith, and not in a carnal way: for as he says in
this 47 Verse with a double asseveration, Verily, verily I say unto you, He
that believes on me has everlasting life: So Verse 53. Verily, verily I say
unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you. Here he affirms the very same of eating his flesh, as
before of believing in him; showing that our eating must be by Faith, and not
carnally. And then again after our Savior saw that many were offended at those
words of Eating his flesh; to take them off from any gross carnal apprehension,
he tells them, The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are
life.

After that our Savior had thus instructed his Disciples, in the true
spiritual sense of his words, we find it so rectified their Understandings, as
that when he administered to them this holy Sacrament, and gave them, that which
figuratively he called, his Body, to eat, not one of them in the least scrupled
at it; which doubtless some one or other would have done, had they imagined our
Savior had given his real Flesh. They who startled at hearing it, would much
more at acting it; for their Faith was not yet so strong, as to believe such a
miraculous Transubstantiation, as the Papists fancy; and that his whole Body
should enter in at the narrow circle of their mouths. For we see how weakly
they staggered at our Savior's Resurrection, though forewarned of it several
times by him; and they had seen him also raise several others from the dead,
yet would not believe his Resurrection, till they saw him, and scarce then. All
which plainly shows, they took the Bread as real Bread, according to Christ's
Institution, in remembrance of his Passion and Death, and not as his very Body,
entering in at their mouths into their breasts; which doubtless some of them
would have startled at, as I said. And can any Man think, but that our Savior
would have more particularly instructed them in so high and wonderful a Mystery
(as the Papists make of it) before he had delivered them his real Body to eat?
he knew well the weakness of their Faith. Nor do we find St. Paul, when he
instructed the Corinthians concerning this Sacrament, say any thing, which
might give them any apprehension of so difficult and sublime a Mystery, as the
Bread to be changed into Christ's very Body; and that all which they saw, felt,
tasted, were only mere accidents remaining, no Man can conceive how; and 'twere
giddiness to believe, unless they had been particularly and fully expressed by
divine Authority; then, I grant, we ought to believe it, without harkening to
our Sense or Reason, as we do other Mysteries. Let the Papists show us in
Scripture their Transubstantiation, and accidents thus remaining, and we will
believe all as firmly as they. I do not require their fine School-word
Transubstantiation, but to show any expression which clearly imports it, and
that shall suffice. But to believe contrary to all Sense, to all Reason,
without divine Affirmation, were senseless indeed, not faithless, no Scripture
requiring this Faith. And that Scripture in St. John, which seems to say most
toward it, the Papists themselves take, as we do, in a spiritual sense, not
literal. What shall we say to these Will-worshippers, Will-believers! It Is mere
Will-godliness for gain. This newfound Sacrifice, with newfound Pargatory,
brings store of Mass-grist to their Mill. This we readily, and with cause
believe, and so do they.

The Papists then taking that passage in St. John, in a spiritual sense, as we
do, they have nothing in Scripture for their Transubstantiation but those
words, This is my Body; which taken barely in themselves, can signify no more
a substantial change, than, I am the Bread. And if we add to the words the
Circumstances of the Institution, or the relation to the former Types, or to
our present Sacrament of Baptism; in none of these we find the least Motive to
a substantial change of the Bread, but quite contrary, as I have showed you.
Yet, I pray you, let us see what strange stuff, and confused kind of business,
the Papists make with this their Transubstantiation. We will talk a little with
them in their own Language.

Well, my Friends, let us hear how you order this your Transubstantiation. Our
Savior takes Bread in his hand, and says, This is my Body. I desire you to
expound to me, in a plain Catechistical way, how you understand these words;
and to save you as much trouble as I can, I will tell you my weak apprehension
of them; if right, the Work is done; if wrong, I pray you instruct me better. I
humbly conceive, when a Man takes a thing in his hand, and says, This, if a
Staff, he means, This Staff; if a Stone, he means, This Stone. And so, when our
Savior took Bread in his hand, and said, This, I conceive, according to the
literal sense, he means, This Bread is my Body; how can I conceive otherwise?
No, say the Papists, Christ cannot mean so, for this would Logically infer a
direct contradiction; for Bread, whilst Bread, cannot be Flesh and Bones; Flesh
is not Bread. To say then, This Bread is Flesh, is the same as to say, This
Bread is not Bread, a flat contradiction. How, my Friends! do you stand upon
your Logick-Inferences, and deny the plain, literal meaning of Christ's words,
because your Logic tells you it cannot be? It seems, you are now become the
unbelieving Heretics. But how then do you understand, This is; What is? What
does Christ here affirm is his Body? The Papists answer, He means no real,
determinate thing, but something in imagination only. The word, This, must here
be taken as an Individuum vagum, that is, an imaginary Species of Bread, in
abstracto and communi, which is a mere School-conception, that has no other
being than in the brain of Man. This Individuum vagum (we know not what) is
Christ's Body. Good Reader, Do you understand them? I believe, no more than I
do, that is, not at all. What strange Whimsies are these to enter into the
heads of Men, that would pass for learned and serious, and in a matter of so
great weight? Beloved, Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and
vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and
not after Christ, Col. ii. 8. Did Christ ever instruct the Apostles concerning
this your Individuum vagum, or of accidents of Bread, appearing without the
substance of Bread? Not a tittle of i^. How then should these abstruse
Schoolnotions come into such men's illiterate Heads? They then must needs
understand our Savior, according to the measure of their capacity. Wherefore
when our Savior took Bread in his hand, showed it them, and said, This is my
Body; they having no notion of Individuum vagum, nor of accidents of Bread
hanging in the Air, without the substance of Bread to support them, (things to
be admired by all Men, understood by no Man, nor believed without express,
plain, and divine revelation, which they had not,) they must needs understand
this Bread, real Bread. And all M^n understanding, that Bread could not be our
Savior's real, carnal Body, when our Savior said, This is my Body; they must
needs understand, This represents my Body; their Capacity could not understand
it otherwise, nor their Faith believe it otherwise, unless our Savior had
before fully instructed them; which he never did, but quite contrary, Ioh. vi.
told them, The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life;
surely then to be understood in a spiritual, and not a carnal sense. Had Christ
said, This Bread I will change into my Body, that in a miraculous manner it may
enter in at your mouths, and pass down into your breasts; I hope, the Apostles
then would, and we now should, by God's Grace, readily believe it. I believe
Christ to be God, and can do whatever he pleases. And I humbly conceive,
Christ would have made some such necessary Paraphrase on his words, to make the
Apostles and us understand his meaning; for certainly without some such divine
Declaration, no Man could ever have conceived, much less have believed such a
Mystery, as the Papists make of it. I am sure, whatever we find in Scripture,
relating to this Sacrament, makes against the Papists. St. Paul instructing the
Corinthians concerning this Sacrament, had likewise a fair opportunity, yea, as
I humbly conceive, I may say a necessary obligation to declare unto them this
Papal hidden mystery, had he believed as they do, a real change of the Bread
into Christ's Body. I say, a necessary obligation; for St. Paul, Acts xx. 26.
expresses it to be blood-guiltiness, if he did not declare unto them all the
Counsel of God; That is, all mysteries necessary for the Salvation of their
Souls: it was necessary then for St. Paul to declare to the Corinthians this
great and hidden mystery, if there were any; But he declares the contrary,
telling them it was Bread which they did eat, 1 Cor. xi. 26, As often as ye eat
this bread; and the Bread is eaten after the words of Consecration. If then it
be Bread when we eat, there is no change at all. And I pray you, let us observe
also St. Paul's manner of Consecration: First he tells them, that he delivered
unto them what he had received of the Lord, to show his fidelity in the
business; then proceeds to the form of consecrating the Bread: And when he
comes to the Cup, he says, This Cup is the new Testament in my blood. Mark, I
pray you, He does not say, This Wine, but, This Cup. I here ask the Papists, is
this a literal, or a figurative Speech? If literal, then the Cup is changed
into the Blood, so says the letter; Wine is not here mentioned. And if you
talk of God's Power, God can as easily change the Cup into his Blood, as the
Wine. The Papists then will needs have a figure in this Consecration, so we in
that of the Bread; for it were absurd to take one literally, and the other
figuratively. And I presume the Papists will not dare to say that St. Paul here
prevaricated in delivering what he received from the Lord, yet St. Paul's words
differ somewhat from Christ's; but if we take them figuratively, they are in
effect the same: which plainly shows, all here is figurative. The Papists then
having no Scripture expressing any substantial change of the Bread, and we
having a Scripture clearly expressing that it remains Bread after Consecration;
I suppose their figment of Transubstantiation is sufficiently confuted; For had
we ten Scriptures declaring the same, they were of no more force than one. In
Humane Evidences, many are of more weight than one, because Man may err; God
cannot.

Yet there want not other Scriptures strongly implying a denial of Christ's
Corporal presence in the Sacrament. First, Our Savior at the Institution of
this blessed Sacrament, commands his Disciples to celebrate it in Remembrance
of him: and it seems very incongruous to desire men to remember that person who
is present before them. Secondly, Acts iii. 21. St. Peter tells us, That the
heavens must receive Christ, until the times of restitution of all things. And
therefore we see, Acts vii. 56. when he was pleased to show himself unto that
blessed Martyr St. Stephen, he did not descend from Heaven, but opened the
Heavens, and strengthened the eyes of Stephen to behold him at that great
distance. Thirdly, Ioh. xvi. Where our blessed Savior discourses largely to
his Disciples of going from them, and their great Sorrow caused thereby, he
uses several Arguments to allay it; and in conclusion, promises to send them
the Holy Ghost the Comforter, of whom they had then but a very obscure notion,
and could not receive any present comfort by it: But had our Savior promised
to return again presently, and be daily in the celebration of his last Supper,
(which we find was daily celebrated by the Apostles) this would doubtless have
been the greatest comfort imaginable to them. Who then can doubt but that our
Savior would have given them this great comfort by telling them so, had he
intended any such thing as the Papists groundlesly believe: But of this we find
not one tittle. It Is a common saying, Facile credimus quod volumus, We easily
believe the thing we desire. Wherefore, were there (I do not say a clear
expression, but) any good intimation of that the Papists would have us believe,
what Christian would not most gladly and readily catch at it, and believe it
with all his heart? For sure it would be a great and daily comfort to us to go
to the Altar of our blessed Savior Jesus that died for us, there corporally
present (as they believe) and there with Mary Magdalen adore him, kiss those
blessed feet that were pierced for us, wash them with our tears, and receive
them and his whole Body into our breasts. If it be said, All this may as well
be done now by Faith: I grant, a lively Faith of this, affords great comfort to
the Soul; but whilst our Soul is united to the Body, we cannot so refine and
spiritualize the affections of it, but that we shall still hanker after some
bodily comfort. And I verily believe the bodily part of the Papists Devotions
to this Sacrament; as also to the worshipping of Saints with their Shrines,
Relics, Pictures, and such like, is a great means to gain People to their
Religion. To worship God in Spirit and Truth only, though it be the only true
Christian Worship, yet it is a sublime and difficult thing, and requires the
Spiritual sublimation of Hearts by Grace. And this is the reason of the Jews so
often and so easily falling away to the gross Idolatry of the Heathens: And in
a great measure operates in like manner on the Papists. And could we find any
warrant in Scripture to save our Souls with such bodily worship, I believe very
few of us would be found so spiritual, as not to incline to it. Wherefore, Let
him that stands, take heed lest he fall.

All this while I have said nothing of their Idolatrous adoring their
consecrated Wafer, which they will needs have to be Christ's real Body. But if
it be not, then they themselves confess (an evident truth without their
Confession) That they are as great Idolaters as any Heathens, adoring a dead
Wafer for the ever-living God. And I desire them also to remember the
Determination of their Council of Constance (mentioned before in the
Supplement) That the intention of the Priest in Consecration of the Host, is
requisite to effect their supposed Transubstantiation: wherein, if he fail,
they grant that there is no substantial change in the Bread, nor any
Consecration at all. Now considering how many careless, dissolute, yea and
villainous Priests are amongst them; it is more than probable, that many of them
intend not at all this business, when they are about it; and some, as I said
before, in their Hearts laugh at it as a mere Mock show to gull the Spectators,
who notwithstanding, with all reverence adore the unconsecrated Wafers of those
villainous Priests. All which makes their case so dangerous, that no man of any
tolerable Reason or Conscience would venture, without clear Scripture-warrant
for it. Wherefore I beseech them to consider, that we have a plain text of
Scripture against Transubstantiation, viz. That it is Bread which we eat in
this Sacrament after the Consecration of it, besides many other Scriptures
intimating the same; we have both Reason and Sense also on our side; which two
latter, we are bound to follow, unless forbidden by some plain text of
Scripture; which they can never show, bringing only one figurative speech, viz.
This is my body; which they will needs have to be literally spoken: whereas
there are many more the like, which they themselves take in a figurative sense.
And our Savior's own comment upon this matter, Ioh. vi. declares it ought to
be taken spiritually and figuratively. But notwithstanding all this, put the
case that we were mistaken, and they were in the right as to this, yet
certainly our case is far safer than theirs; for they cannot deny that we have
great probability of Scripture for us, nothing directly against us; so that we
have a fair plea to God for our belief, though erroneous: whereas they have no
plea, not one tittle of Scripture or Reason for their erroneous Sacrilegious
dismembring this Holy Sacrament, flatly against Christ's Institution and
Command, reiterated again by St. Paul: Their case then is apparently damnable.
If they answer, They have the Command of their Pope and Church: I reply, That
if their Pope and Church have power to reverse any one part of Scripture, the
same power may reverse another, and another, and in sum, All. This is such high
Phanaticism, as it were as great madness in us, as in them, to discourse longer
with them.

But I hope they are not all so mad, and therefore I shall proceed farther to
gain such, and knowing that they are great admirers of the Doctors and Fathers
of the Church, especially the more ancient (though our Faith is built wholly on
Scripture without them, and therefore I did not intend to make use of their
Authority at all;) yet I shall here produce enough to give any moderate Papist
full satisfaction, That their Transubstantiation is against the belief of the
Ancient Fathers of the true Catholic Church.

First then I lay this ground: Their Transubstantiation plainly and necessarily
infers Christ's Body to be really and corporally present in many thousand
places at once, in all Parts of the World, where they celebrate Mass. Now if I
can bring clear proof from any one eminent Father of the true Catholic Church,
that Christ's Body cannot be in many distinct places at once, this Father
clearly proves Transubstantiation cannot be. St. Austin, an eminent Bishop and
Father, was always held not only Orthodox, but of great authority in the
Church, cited frequently in the Papists Schools to this very day. And his great
Piety and Modesty was a great cause of his great Authority; for he bore a
singular Reverence and Submission to Scripture, still captivating his
understanding to that; nor was ever known to begin or countenance Novelty, but
always reverenced the Doctrine of the Primitive Church; and therefore most
worthy to be hearkened to. This famous Bishop and Doctor of the Church, in his
57 Epistle to Dardanus, discourses at large of this point. An quia ubique Deus
sit, hominem quoque illum qui in Deo sit, ubique diffusum dicere possumus?
Whether or no we may affirm that God being every where; so the Man Christ being
in God, is also every where, or confined to a certain place? So that the Man
Christ cannot be affirmed to be both in Heaven and on Earth at the same time.
And in the discussion of this matter, he sets down this for a rule; Cavendum
est ne ita divinitatem adstruamus hominis, ut veritatem corporis auferamus, We
must take heed that we do not so establish the Divinity of the Man Christ, as
to destroy the truth and reality of his Body, which cannot be in several places
at once, nor so much as in two places at once, in Paradise, and on Earth;
though his Divinity fill all places at once, and is every where, and therefore
concludes thus, Christum ubique totum praesentem esse non dubites tanquam Deum,
and in loco aliquo coeli propter very corporis modum. Doubt not but that Christ
is wholly present every where as God, but yet is in some certain place in
Heaven, by reason of the reality of his Body. And as Saint Austin denies that
the Body of Christ, being a real humane Body, can be in several places at once;
so does he affirm that the Body of Christ must possess a place suitable to the
largeness and dimensions of the Body, with length and breadth in proportion to
every limb. Cum corpus sit aliqua substantia quantitas ejus est in magnitudine
molis ejus -- distantibus partibus quae simul esse non possunt, quoniam suum
quaeque spatium locorum tenent, minores minora, and majores majora. A Body
being a substance with quantity, this quantity consists in the bulk of it, with
parts distant one from the other, and not confusedly all together, but each one
possesses a proper place to it self, the lesser parts a lesser space, the
greater a greater; because amplior est quantitas in amplioribus partibus,
brevior in brevioribus, and in nulla part tanta quanta per totum. Because the
quantity of the longer parts is longer, of the shorter parts shorter; so that
the bigness of the whole must needs exceed the bigness of any part, and
consequently the space which the whole Body possesses, must needs be greater
than the space of any one part. Spatia locorum toll corporibus, nusquam erunt,
and quae nusquam erunt, nec erunt. The proportion and bigness of space is so
necessary to the proportion and bigness of a Body with its parts, that if you
take away this just space from Bodies, they cannot be said to be in any place,
and to say a Body is not in any place, is in effect to say it is not at all.
Now you must understand that all this discourse of Saint Austin in this place
is concerning immortal Bodies, and even Christ's Body now glorious in Heaven.
For the Question which Dardanus made, and to which Saint Austin answers, was
concerning the being of Christ's Body now immortal; Whether that could be in
several places at once, or is confined to one certain place? And to show that
Saint Austin thus understands this Question, his words declare, saying, Nam
ipsum immortale corpus minus est in part quam in toto, etc. For that immortal
Body is less in a part than in the whole, etc. and gives his reason. Cum corpus
sit aliqua substantia, etc. as before.

I shall endeavor to make all this a little plainer to lower Capacities. The
difference between a Body and a Spirit is this; A Body possesses a space
according to the quantity and bigness of the Body, each part of the Body
filling a space suitable to the proportion of it. A Body of five foot long and a
foot broad, takes up the room of five foot in length, and a foot in breadth,
and cannot be contained in a less space, each limb of this Body filling its
proper place, the Head in one place, the Arm in another, the Leg in another,
and so the rest; so that two Bodies cannot be in the same place, nor two parts
of the same Body in one place. But a Body having many hollow parts in it, as
the Belly and the Head, and in the most fleshy parts, as in the Thigh, there is
some hollowness, and porous parts in the flesh; so that these parts may be
crushed into somewhat a lesser space; and thus the Thigh of eighteen inches
about, may be squeezed into a compass of fourteen or fifteen; and so the length
of a Body may be crushed somewhat shorter. But when a Body is so crushed
together, as all the hollow and porous parts are quite filled, touch and press
one upon another, then you cannot possibly contract it into a lesser space; you
cannot contract a Man's Body of five foot, into the space of an yearling-Child,
without destroying the form of the Body; or should you chop a Man's Body all in
pieces, and put them all confusedly into a Sack, it is no more a Man's Body, but
only the substance and parts which did make a Man's Body, whilst the parts were
distinct, and each part possessed its proper place. Now a Spirit is quite
otherwise. An Angel has no limited quantity or bigness, is not five nor one
foot long, has neither length nor breadth, is neither round nor square, cannot
be measured any way, has no distinct parts of Head, Arms, Feet, and thus
having no distinct parts nor dimension, does not possess any place; one Angel,
or a hundred Angels, may be contained in the circle of an inch, as well as a
hundred foot, all alike. If you desire me now positively to tell you, what kind
of substance Angels are, and what kind of Being they have, when they descend
from Heaven to us, when I know, I will tell you. We that have no knowledge of
things but by our senses, can give no distinction of Spirits, which are not at
all discernable by our senses; we know what Bodies are, we see and feel that
they are bigger and lesser, have distinct parts, possessing places accordingly.
And so for distinction-sake of Bodies from Spirits; we call that a Body, which
has this bigness and parts, and call that a Spirit, which has no bigness nor
parts, nor possesses any place; so we know Spirits only negatively, that they
are not Bodies with parts; but what they are positively, or how they are, we
know not at all. This being premised in general, we come now to Christ's Body
in particular. There have been Heretics that affirmed, Christ had not such a
Body as other Men, but a kind of aerial, celestial, spiritual Body, such as no
Man can well understand; but all true Christians did and do believe, that
Christ, as the Scripture says, became flesh of our flesh, bone of our bone,
and had, in all respects, a perfect humane Body of the Virgin Mary, died and
rose again with the same humane Body, with flesh and bones, as he himself told
Thomas, the unbelieving Apostle, and made him feel and confess it was so: And
as he was perfect Man, so was he perfect God. Now St. Austin gives us this
Caution, We must not so establish the Godhead of Christ, as to destroy his
Manhood, but acknowledge both still to continue the same, as Christ was born of
the Virgin Mary. When he lay in the Manger as a humane Child, his Godhead
filled both Heaven and Earth, his Body was in one certain place, his Godhead in
all places, and the parts of his Body were in distinct places, the Head in one,
the Foot in another; had it not been thus, he had not been Man; had his Body
been in several places, or the several parts of his Body in one and the same
place, his Body had not been of the nature of our Bodies, which cannot be in
several places at once, nor the several parts of our Body in the same place. So
that if we affirm, That Christ being God, his Body can be in several places at
once, and all the parts of his Body in one and the same place, by the power of
his Godhead, we magnify indeed his Godhead; but, as St. Austin says, we
totally destroy his Manhood, we make his Body to be no more a Humane Body of
space and parts; but a kind of Spiritual Body, as those Heretics affirmed.
Wherefore if we will be of the Catholic Faith, we must acknowledge Christ to
be perfect Man, to have such a Humane Body as we have, which cannot be in two
places at once, in Heaven and on Earth, nor the head in the same place where
the foot. This was Saint Austin's Faith, and doubtless the Catholic Faith in
his days; he being acknowledged by all of his days, and ever since, a prime
Doctor of the Catholic Faith.

Notwithstanding all that has been said, I grant, and sure Saint Austin would
have granted, That as Christ by the miraculous power of his Godhead, fed five
thousand men with five loaves and two fishes, either extending the parts of
those loaves into five thousand parcels, or multiplying the loaves; so God can
take any humane Body and extend out the parts of that Body as wide as all the
whole Earth, or contract all the parts of that Body into the space of a pin's
head or point, or can multiply that Body into a million of Bodies; but then
that Body so enlarged or contracted, becomes a great or little Monster, is no
more a Humane Body; multiplied, becomes many Bodies, is no more one Body. And
so God can do with Christ's Body: but then multiplied in several places, there
are many Christ's, lo, here Christ, and there Christ; if so enlarged or,
contracted, then a Monster-Christ, no Man-Christ; which were horrid to affirm.
We deny nothing to God's Power, that is not a Sin or a Contradiction, which are
the effects of weakness not of Power; but supposing Christ to be as the
Catholic Church believes, but one Christ, and him a perfect Man, with a
perfect Humane Body, it is a contradiction to say there is but one Christ, and
there are many Christ's, here Christ, and there Christ; to say he has a
perfect Humane Body, possessing the proportionable place of a Humane Body, and
that he has a Body, not possessing the proportionable place of a Humane Body,
but is extended in proportion as big as the whole Earth, or contracted into the
proportion of a pin's head; these are contradictions and weaknesses, and
therefore we deny them to God as Saint Austin did.

Let any one now consider how it is possible for Saint Austin to be of the
Papist-Faith concerning the corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament,
believing Christ to be in so many thousand places at once bodily present, as
they have consecrated Wafers all their Church over; or that Christ's Body
should be wholly contained within the compass of a little Wafer, and in every
parcel of such a Wafer, divided into an hundred parts. Whereas Saint Austin
believed, that Christ's Body continuing a real Humane Body (as all knowing
Christians profess) could not be in two places at once, in Heaven, and on
Earth; and that a real Body cannot be in a less place than the quantity and
magnitude of that Body requires, allotting a distinct several space to each
part and limb whatsoever. Wherefore I cannot but conclude, that Saint Austin
was of the same Faith with the Catholic Church of his time, and that the
Papists are of a very different Faith from him and them.

I know full well that the Papists do allege another place of Saint Austin's,
where he seems to speak somewhat in conformity to their Faith, as in his
Explication or Paraphrase on the Thirty third Psalm. Where discoursing of those
words, Ferebatur manibus suis, He was carried in his own hands: He applies
those words unto Christ, saying, That they could not be literally meant of any
body else; because Christ only bare himself in his own hands, when he delivered
with his own hands his Body in the Sacrament to his Disciples. To this I could
answer. That if St. Austin does here seem to contradict what he had proved
before, it follows from hence that we cannot take the authority of any Father
for our Faith; because this learned and eminent Father, as well as many others,
seems to contradict himself. But I will not make so injurious an answer to so
worthy a Father of the Church; for in truth he does not here contradict in the
least what he said before, as I shall now make appear. Saint Austin in his
Epistle to Dardanus, does professedly discourse the point in a Doctrinal way,
and does not only give his Opinion, but the reasons that so enforce it, as that
it cannot be otherwise; But it is quite another thing to discourse by way of
Paraphrase, as Saint Austin does on that Psalm, we may well affirm that he used
the common paraphrastical liberty, which is very frequent among the Fathers,
especially the more ancient, and chiefly in Origin, whom I may well call the
origin of such Libertin discourse; that great luxuriant Wit, making flourishes
upon every word, often used Expressions too too light for the weighty sense of
Holy Scripture; but his great Wit and Learning having obtained great reverence,
these things passed pardonable in him, and became too much imitated by
succeeding Doctors: And therefore it is no wonder that Saint Austin, not much
unlike him in luxuriancy of Wit, was somewhat like him in the way of Allegories
and Paraphrases; wherein men do not so much intend the clear positive Doctrine,
as flourishing circumlocutions and variety of Phansies. But we may the better
excuse Saint Austin in this, if we take in Saint Austin's rule; That it is no
strange thing or false thing to affirm that of the signs which belong to the
thing signified, as he exemplifies in our Savior himself. Non dubitavit
dicere, hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret corporis sui. Our Savior doubted
not to affirm to his Disciples, and say, This is my body, when he gave unto
them the sign of his Body, which was the Bread he blessed, brake, and gave unto
them: And so St. Austin doubted not to affirm and say, That Christ bare his
Body in his own hands, when he bare Bread which was the sign of his Body. And
so those words, He was carried in his own hands may be said to be literally
verified of our Savior, secundum quendum modum, after a certain manner (the
Phrase St. Austin uses upon this very subject in another place) not literally
in the exact sense. And the meaning is only this, These words, He was carried
in his own hands, cannot be so properly, or so literally understood of David,
or any other man, as of Christ: for David in no sense can be said to carry
himself in his own hands; our Savior may, because he carried Bread, the sign
of his Body, in his own hands. And now for the clear conviction of the Papists,
and for the full satisfaction of every impartial man; It is evident Saint
Austin himself does in this very place plainly declare, He meant no otherwise
than I have expressed him: For after he had discoursed much of this business, he
concludes thus. Ipse se portabat quodammodo, cum diceret, Hoc est corpus meum.
He bare himself in his own hands, after a certain manner, when he said, This is
my body: which, as I said, plainly shows he meant not, our Savior did really
carry himself in his hands, but, as he says, Quodammodo; after a certain
manner; which Quodammodo had been very improper, had our Savior really carried
himself in his own hands. But put the case Saint Austin had not here added this
word Quodammodo, after a certain manner, yet any man that is the least verst in
matters of Learning, will certainly be far more moved in his Opinion, by what
Saint Austin Doctrinally and Demonstratively affirms, than by what he
Paraphrastically discourses, which is the slightest way of discoursing in the
world. I will not here urge against the Papists that place of Saint Austin I
mentioned but now, That Christ doubted not to say to his Disciples, This is my
body, when he gave them the sign of his Body; because he does not there
purposely dispute this business, but brings in that occasionally, to prove
somewhat else: Yet from hence it is apparent enough that Saint Austin
understood the Bread in the Lord's Supper to be only a sign of Christ's Body,
and not his real Body, as the Papists believe. But I return to the business in
hand.

There is a passage in Scripture, usually objected against this Argument of St.
Austin's, That our Savior came into the Room where his Disciples were, the
doors being shut: Which seems to imply, That a glorified Body does not require
such spaces and dimensions of place as mortal Bodies; because our Savior's
Body entered the Room, passing through the material Body of Stone, Wood, or the
like, as they would have it. This Objection is easily answered, That no Man is
able to affirm, How our Savior's Body entered the Room, it being not expressed
in Scripture* but this is clear, That our Savior might divide the Walls or
Doors, or Roof, or Floor, and so make way for his Body to enter, and yet his
Disciples not perceive it. As our Savior passed through the midst of the Jews,
and they perceived it not, when they carried him to the brow of the Hill, to
cast him down head long; no Man supposes from hence, That our Savior passed
through the Bodies of the Jews, but by them unseen. Wherefore it not being
declared in Scripture, how he entered, how can any Argument be drawn from hence,
of our Savior's Body passing through other Bodies? and consequently, how does
this confute or weaken St. Austin's Argument? Certainly not at all.

I will set down one passage more of another memorable Father and Bishop,
Theodoret, who disputing with an Heretic named Eranistes, that denied our
Savior to have a real, humane, substantial Body, after his Resurrection, and
affirmed, That his Humanity was wholly swallowed up in the Divinity. Theodoret,
arguing against him, Dia^. 2. Chapter 24. affirms, That as the Bread, after the
Consecration in the Lord's Supper, is not changed in form and substance, but
remains the very same which it was before Consecration; so* Savior's Body,
after the Resurrection, remains the very same both in form and substance as it
was before. Which words are as plain in themselves, and as flatly contrary to
the present Romish belief, as any Man can express. What I have here produced
out of these two Fathers, is found in those Books of theirs, which the Papists
themselves allow to be their own authentic Writings; not out of any
controverted Books, as the Papists often do cite many things out of spurious
Books, which bear only the Name of Fathers, but are not their own genuine
Writings, and acknowledged by Bellarmine, and other learned Papists, to be
supposititious.

And now, I desire the Papists, first, to produce any one cotemporary or later
Father or Doctor of the Church, that condemns St. Austin's or Theodoret's
Opinion or Arguments in this Matter; and what they wrote, was published to all
the Church. Certainly then, if they had published this flatly contrary to the
received Opinion of the Church, some, or rather many, would have reproved them;
but none ever did, ancient or later. Assuredly then the Church did not believe
Transubstantiation; for that expressly declares the substance of Bread to be
changed, and also necessarily infers, that Christ's Body is in many places at
once, and that his whole Body is contained within the compass of a little
Wafer; all which St. Austin flatly denies. It is most evident, that St. Austin
and the Church then believed directly contrary to what the Papist-Church now
believes. And I farther desire the Papists to consider, That what I have set
down out of St. Austin, is not a Sentence fallen from him, as it were by
chance, but a serious Affirmation, in Answer to a Question concerning this very
Matter; and the thing not only barely affirmed, but proved by many convincing
Arguments.

Secondly, I desire the Papists to produce any one Father or Doctor of the
Catholic Church, within four, (I may say five, or six, or more,) hundred years
after Christ, that by way of Doctrine, and in a continued Discourse, plainly
affirms, That the substance of Bread is changed into Christ's Body, or any
accidents of Bread hanging in the Air, without real Bread to support them, as
their subtle, fanciful Schoolmen now talk; or that Christ's real Body can be in
many distinct places at once; or that his whole Body can be contained within
the compass of an inch, as it is now believed by the Papists. And had the
ancient Church believed such strange, mystical things of this blessed
Sacrament, as the Romanists now do, who can doubt, but some one or other of the
many famous Writers in those days, would have some where explicated and
declared the same.

I know full well, that some of the ancient Fathers, have, in their Rhetorical
Discourses, expressions, that carry some color for them, and as many for us;
which truly I value not much on either side, for a very good Reason which
Valentia the Jesuit gives, (being urged with some Arguments out of the Fathers
against himself, concerning Transubstantiation;) That before this Question of
the Sacrament was agitated, it is no wonder, if some of the Fathers, minus
considerate and recte hac de re senserint and scripscrint, did not so
considerately think and write of this Matter, but took great liberty of speech,
not foreseeing the ill use would be made of it. And therefore to stir up the
People's Devotion to the Sacrament, which was fallen much from the primitive
zeal, to great coldness, they used high, Rhetorical expressions, such as the
Papists themselves will not allow of, in a literal sense: As when Chrysostom
tells the People, That their Teeth are fixed in the Flesh of Christ, their
Tongues bloudied with his Blood, and that the Assembly of the People was made
red by the same: Which strange expressions, in the Papist's behalf, and some
other as much against them, Bellarmine is forced to excuse by a Rhetorical
Hyperbole, but are really inexcusable. And if the Papists will not go home with
us, to the uttermost of their expressions, why should we be bound to foot it
just according to their measures? here to move, there to stop, just as they
please to lead the Dance. And I shall make this further Use of Valentia's and
Bellarmine's Sayings, That if the ancient Fathers did write so inconsiderately
of our Matters in Controversy, how is it possible for any Man to settle his
Conscience, and build his Faith upon the Writings of the Fathers, they having
so many Sayings so contrary one to the other? And still I pray you remember,
that not one of them writes directly of this Subject. All which will force us
to adhere close to that only true and safe Foundation of our Faith, the Word of
God, who is one and the same to day and for ever. I have written all this, to
give some satisfaction to those Papists, who are so inclined to hearken to the
Fathers, whom by Saint Austin's Rule, we are to believe no farther, than they
can prove what they affirm from Scripture.

Having, as I humbly conceive, fully answered the Papist's Pretense from
Scripture, for their Transubstantiation; I shall now very briefly answer two or
three Scriptures more, which they likewise pretend, for some other Errors. For
Purgatory, that of 1 Cor. iii. where there is mention of trying Men's Works by
fire, and saving by fire, etc. which relates no more to their Purgatory-fire,
than to a fire swilling a Hog, as appears most evidently by the subject Matter
in hand. Saint Paul discourses there of his own and Apollo's preaching the
Gospel, and building up the Corinthians in the Faith, whereof Christ is the
only Foundation. You must remember, that Apollo was a Jew, mighty in the
Scripture, as it is said, Acts 18. but converted to the Christian Faith,
mightily convinced the Jews, proving that Jesus was Christ; yet, it seems, did
somewhat adhere to the Jewish Ceremonies, and, as I humbly conceive, did
thereby cause some Divisions among the Corinthians; which Saint Paul does there
gently hint, not willing to disgust a new Beginner, yet a great Labourer in the
Gospel. For there Saint Paul accuses the Corinthians of Divisions, some crying,
I am of Paul; others, I am of Apollo: That is, I am with Paul, against Jewish,
superstitious Ceremonies; I am with Apollo, for them. Now Saint Paul, desirous
to unite all in Christ, tells them, that neither Paul nor Apollo was any thing,
but Christ must be all in all; for he is the only Foundation; and all Doctrines
to be preached, must be built on him, and all tend to Edification in the
Spirit; as Christ told the Samaritan Woman, that we are no more to worship God,
either at Samaria, or at Jerusalem; that is, we are not to worship God, either
after the Samaritan, or after the Jewish Customs and Ceremonies, (which Saint
Paul here calls Wood, Hay, Stubble,) but only in Spirit, and in Truth, which he
calls Gold, Silver, precious Stones: All those external, carnal Ceremonies were
to be quite abolished, not to be rebuilt again on Christ, (as the Romanists
do, yea, and re-build on Christ some of the old Roman Heathen Superstitions
also, as I formerly showed you;) for in the fiery-Trial at the Judgment-day,
the Fire should try every Man's work; that is, every Man should give a severe
account of what he had built, what Doctrine he had preached; if pure, spiritual
Doctrine; that like Gold, Silver, precious Stones, would endure the fiery-Trial
of that day, remain and be rewarded; But if Superstitious ceremonial Doctrine,
that like Wood, Hay, Stubble, would not endure the fiery-Trial, but would be
burnt, and the Builder thereof would lose his labor and reward; but because he
kept the Foundation, Christ, and was sound in the principal parts of the Faith,
he should be saved, yet so As by Fire; he should pass a severe examination and
check for building such gross carnal stuff upon so pure and spiritual a
foundation: Which little particle, As, like a small spark, sets on fire and
burns down to the ground all that stubble-building of Papal Purgatory: for no
man is so ignorant, but knows that this Particle As always denotes a
similitude, a likeness to the thing named; and how absurd were it to say, Fire
is like Fire? St. Peter in his first Epist. Chapter 4. v. 12. writes, Beloved,
think it not strange concerning the fiery-triall, which is to try you, as
though some strange thing happened unto you: Had they taken this, as the
Papists do, for real Fire, they would have thought it strange indeed. This
Phrase of fiery-Trial is so familiar in Scripture, that no man can without
wilfulness mistake it; especially here, where the whole discourse all along is
figurative. Is not Foundation, Building, Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Wood,
Hay, Stubble, all figurative, not one of them literally spoken? Yet forsooth,
this one word Fire alone must be taken literally. I pray you then take Wood,
Hay, Stubble also literally along with you into your Purgatory-Fire, it will
make such a blaze about your ears, as that the Pope with all his Holy Water and
Agnus Dei's will not be able to quench it. Really these are strange Men, that
will thus abuse Scripture to delude poor silly people; unless they repent, they
will doubtless meet with a far worse Fire, than that their invented
Purgatory-Fire, not As Fire, but a real and eternal Fire; from which, Good Lord
deliver them.

In like manner they abuse another text in St. James, Chapter 5. v. 14. where he
speaks of one of the miraculous gifts given to the Elders of the Church and
Preachers of the Gospel in those days, to anoint the Sick with oil, and so cure
them. This the Papists obtrude to poor ignorant Souls for their extreme
Unction, which they administer to Sick persons, not for their Recovery, but
when they are past all hopes of Recovery, as a Sacrament, to confer the grace
of Faith, and to strengthen them then for their departure out of this world; as
different from the Scripture meaning, as the Sunrising from Sunsetting, Life
from Death. And just so they abuse v. 16, Confess your faults one to another;
for their Auricular Confession to their Priests: which is a mere Exhortation to
mutual and charitable Reconciliation of all Christians one to another, by the
Offenders confessing and acknowledging the wrong they have done to their
Neighbor, and then both Parties praying for one another; as all good
Christians ought to do: for doubtless all men are bound in Conscience as well
to acknowledge and confess their faults to the party injured, as to pray for
him: And this St. James exhorts all Christians to do.

You see now what strange deluding Persons these Popish Priests are, who, if
they find but one word in Scripture that agrees with one word of their
superstitious practice, they pop this into the ears of silly people, and drive
it in with a Mallet, yet quite contrary to the meaning of that text from whence
they took it; which they cannot be so ignorant but to see. To whom, therefore I
cannot but say as the Angel did to Satan, The Lord rebuke them. Yet I shall not
cease to pray to the Lord also for their Conversion; for which, while there is
life, there is hope. I conclude then as blessed St. Stephen did for his
Persecutors, Lord lay not this Sin to their charge.

Glory be to God on high, and on earth Peace, Good will toward Men.

Amen.
FINIS.
Three Books written by the Right Reverend Father in God, Herbert Lord Bishop
of Hereford.
1. A Sermon Preached before the King, at Whitehall. 2. A Letter written to a
Friend, concerning Popish Idolatry, etc. 3. A Second Call to a farther
Humiliation, being a Sermon Preached at the Cathedral Church in Hereford, the
24th of November, 1678.
All three Printed for Charles Harper at the Flower de luce over against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street.


