THE General History OF THE QUAKERS: CONTAINING The Lives, Tenants, Sufferings,
Trials, Speeches, and Letters Of all the most Eminent Quakers, Both Men and
Women; From the first Rise of that SECT, down to this present Time. Collected
from Manuscripts, etc. A Work never attempted before in English. Being Written
Originally in Latin By GERARD CROESE. To which is added, A LETTER writ by
George Keith, and sent by him to the Author of this Book: Containing a
Vindication of himself, and several Remarks on this History.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in Jewen-street. 1696.

TO THE Truly Noble and Honorable, NICHOLAS WITSEN, Burgomaster and Senator of
Amsterdam, etc.
THOSE two very things, Right Noble and Honorable Sir, to wit, the greatness
of your Name, and the smallness of this Work, which might dissuade me from such
an Application, do both of them invite, and in some sort engage me, to
adventure, not only to make a Present of this Book, but also a particular
Dedication thereof unto you. And seeing that it is a thing most certain, and
that the very sight of the Book does immediately show it, that what I here
offer is a Piece that is altogether new, but yet neither over bulky nor prolix,
I was persuaded that this my Undertaking would not prove unpleasing to you,
because that as the Great are very much taken with the Novelty of other things,
even so they are of Books; and as a conciseness in speaking is very agreeable
to them, a short and compendious way of Writing is found to be no less so,
which has given occasion to that old Proverbial Adage, Little things are
pretty. To this I may add, that this Book briefly treats of things transacted
up and down, and for some time in that Nation, where in the Name of the
Renowned States, you have been first Envoy to the Most Potent, and most Serene
Princes, King William and Queen Mary (to that great and glorious Queen, alas,
lately ravished from Earth by inexorable Fate, of whose Virtues there are at
this time so many Testimonies in the funebrous Orations of great and most
Eloquent Men, who for all that, had they never so much exhausted their brains,
and been profuse of their Abilities in declaring and magnifying the
Excellencies of this Queen, had yet never been able to form a true Idea of them
in their Thoughts, much less represent them as they ought to be, to their
Auditors, than which nothing more can be said of Man) and after that, for some
time Resident there, where you were to Congratulate Their Royal Majesty's
Accession to the Throne, and the Deliverance of so many Countries and People,
as also to confirm that Ancient League and Amity that was between both Nations:
In which Time and Place, seeing that perhaps some but not all these things came
within the Verge of your Knowledge; this new and small Treatise, but (Pardon
the Expression) (...), may gratify that desire, which your Honor, and even
most Men have, who have lived or come from abroad, of having a perfect
Knowledge of such Transactions, as have happened in those places during their
time, or near unto it, by exhibiting as in a little Table Book, the first Rise,
Progress, and End of all these doings: But yet this is not all the Reason I had
for such an Undertaking; I must confess, Illustrious Sir, that as to the matter
of this Work, it is such as may seem to them that are not very curious,
needless and unnecessary, and that it is such a way or method, as may easily
induce some who are not over-skilful, but given to scoff and chatter, to look
upon it as very mean and contemptible, because that having regard only to the
single Relation of Things, and to Truth, I treat thereof in a Style and
Language that is plain and ordinary, free from all manner of Affectation, and
do not (which is a thing very common, and much approved of and prevalent among
the Vulgar) either ridicule, or proudly scoff at and prosecute in Writing,
those things which (...) the Religion and Manners of those Men, who are treated
of her^en. Neither do I, though there may be some among those very Persons, who
look with an evil Eye upon, and bear ill will unto us, for that Reason,
retribute the same, and make the like return unto them, as some are pleased to
do, who think such reciprocal doings ought always to be. But seeing that it
many times so happens, that they who write with such Moderation, are liable to
fall under I know not what Suspicion of cracked Credit from these Men, so as
that I found my self under a necessity of seeking out for some Patronage and
Refuge-place upon this Account, I was fully satisfied, I could meet with that
principally in you, Great Sir, who know as well as any Man alive, what, amongst
such a multitude of Writers, and itch of Writing, is most fit to be writ, what
an Historian's scope ought to be in such a Work as this is, and over and above
that, what on the one hand Religion, and what in the mean time also Nature and
the Power of Humanity require and call for. And because I have fallen upon this
Head, I earnestly wish the Temper of the present Times was not such, that this
were not the sad distinguishing mark of the Age we live in, as that there
should be so many Men, such strangers to and devoid of Charity and Modesty, and
hurried with that unruliness and outrageousness of Mind, that as soon as they
discern any Heterodox Opinion in matters of Religion, and especially if any
Heresy be smelt in the case, they immediately suppose that it is the Property
of Religion to scoff at, persecute, and afflict such Men; some going so far as
to urge, there ought to be a precision or a cutting off of the same, by violent
Methods, Fire and Sword, Imprisonment and Bonds, Racks and Torments, and even
by the most dreadful and cruel Deaths. For the Good and Peace of the Church and
State (for so they Argue) cannot otherwise be preserved, nor the Christian
Faith and Humane Obligations subsist. Were it not for this, we should not see
against so many Reformed Churches, so many Hundred Thousand Christians, such
and so great and nefandous Violences contrived and offered, such lamentable,
yea, unheard of Calamities and Slaughters, (and even if they could, make entire
Extirpation, Rulne, and Destruction) by those who go by the Names of Christians
and Catholics, but are in truth the most bitter and implacable Enemies of the
True Religion. I Will go yet further; I heartily wish there were not sometimes
amongst others, and even among them, who have withdrawn themselves from the
Papacy, that immoderation of Spirit, that even where there is no manner of
Heresy, no Fundamental Error, yea, not the least difference but in words and
way of Expression only, men's Minds become forthwith divided thereupon, an
Interruption of Fellowship, and at last a s^^^ssion into Parties does ensue.
And that those, who lay these things to Heart, who shun them, and who being
mindful of Humane Frailty, and of their Duty enjoined them by God, and being
intent and building upon the Lord Jesus Christ alone, bear with such things as
are to be born with, and study to promote Peace and Unity, and hate every Name
of Distinction imposed by Man in the Church of God, and desire neither to make
nor follow Parties, are branded as if they were ignorant and slothful, having
no regard to their own Matters and Concerns; so far forth, as if to be
indifferent, and of neither Party, were become now as it were a new Sect, and
that Law of Solon revived, who commanded him to be punished, who in the time of
Sedition joined himself to neither Party. Which sort of Men are (...) lovers of
themselves, puffed up, (as they are called in Scripture) turbid, and boiling
hot (neither is this a Foreign Appellation, but such as is also applied to them
in the Sacred Code) when they raise more Commotions about a thing of nothing,
than there are Storms in the Aegean or most boisterous Seas; but hereof there
is fully enough said to the wise, but to you, Great Sir, too much. And this I
judge my self obliged further to say, that perhaps there may be some, who,
having a just Esteem, and right Judgment of this Work, would for the further
Estimation thereof, have me here and there quote and set down in the Margin of
the Book, the Authorities and Testimonies whereon I ground each Particular, to
which Persons seeing their Conceptions hereon are not without Reason, I make
this Answer, That if I should not do it, I do not thereby swerve from the usage
of Historians in all Ages, neither is there indeed any need that a Man should
gain a belief of what he offers, this way, when he is not conscious to himself
of any falsity, and that there is nothing that can derogate from or lessen his
Credit therein: Neither was I willing in this Work, which I was desirous should
prove acceptable as much for the Brevity as Truth of it, so without ceasing to
interrupt and break off the Thread of my Story, or to disorder and delay my
Reader. But yet I do not always omit such sort of Testimonies. But otherwise I
can be bold to affirm, that there is nothing of any moment, throughout the
whole Work, that has not been done in the face of the Sun, that is, either in
the presence of Men, or in Solemn Judicatories, even where there has been no
exclusion of the Populacy, and such as has not been frequent in the mouths of
many, laid open by the chief Magistrates, and Printed, for the Knowledge of such
as were absent, and to perpetuate the same to Posterity; as for other things, I
take but little notice of them, and if at any time I recount any such, I do it
in such a way as may gain certain Credit: But no more of this; to return
therefore to you, Right Noble and Great Sir. As to the Reason that induced me
to Present and Dedicate this my Treatise to Your Honor, it was this, That
there might remain some sort of Testimony upon Record, not so much of the
knowledge I have had of you, which is as far backwards as I can remember, as of
the Favor you have always showed me, and of those Benefits you have made it
your Business to heap upon me both at home and abroad, and which I have deemed
both Just and Honorable for me to accept, being freely offered, and by no
means to reject, and withal of the Gratitude, Propensity, and Devotedness of my
Mind toward you. And though I have here a great Opportunity offered to me to
Celebrate your Virtues, yet I shall forbear, lest I should incur the censure
either of being unskilful in Praises, or what is base, the Name of Flatterer;
besides that your Name has long since gained such Esteem, and is so Famous
among all, that it has no need of any Encomiums and Embellishments of mine, the
things themselves bespeak it. For to say nothing of the Endowments of your
Mind, as being such, though most rare, especially in so propitious and
agreeable a Fortune, as are not conspicuous to all Men, and are more private;
those Famous Monuments that you have partly published even in your blooming
Years, and which do yet in part lie hid within the more secret and inner
recesses of your Study, which all of the Republic of Learning that have seen
or known them, have so approved of, as to judge them no ways inferior to what
has been extant of yours, but to deserve as much you to the Protection of the
Almighty, praying to him, that while you Rule in his Name, submit to and obey
the Divine Majesty, he would heap upon you more and more all manner of
Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly things in Christ Jesus, and beg leave to
subscribe my self

Your Honor 's Most Humble, And most devoted Servant, Gerard Croese.

Reverendo admodum Viro GERARDO CROESIO, Cum Historiam, quam vocat, Quakerianam
luci exponeret.
O Insularum gloria, plurimas
Experta turbas! O variantibus
Subjecta fatis, and tremendi
Tot furiis agitata belli.
Britanna tellus, dissidiis quoque
Sanctam tuorum dilacerans fidem:
Vt volvit, incertosque long
Oceanus glomerat furores.
Vicinas acri turbine fluctuum
Versas frequenter fluxa subit vic^^.
Exempla non vanis supersunt
Indiciis. Memoret vetustas
Inscripta fastis. Relligio gemet
Divulsa Sectis. En specimen recens.
En callidos Foxi sequaces,
Quos Tremulos patrio vocavit
Sermon Index Derbraicae Domus
Enthusiasticas, insolito genus
Quod spiritu raptum piorum
Christiadum stupuere turmae.
Horum involutas narrat origines
Qui jure primas Croesius hic tenet,
Lateque divisum disertis
Prosequitur populum papyris.
Vel digna tanto saecla Saturnia
O si redirent illa! forent viro.
Vel dignior natas recenter
Croesius incoluisse terras
Adrianus Reeland.

The Contents of the First BOOK.
THE beginning and scope of the whole Work. The Name of the Quakers; as also of
Enthusiasts. What Antiquity these Men assume to themselves. Their Opinion
concerning the Doctrine of the Fathers, and of the Reformation of the Church.
England their Country. G Fox their first Author and Leader. His condition when
a Boy. His Youthful Studies. Fox a Shooemaker. Fox his love to the Holy
Scripture. A Voice to him from Heaven. His Endeavors. He is raised up with the
hopes of becoming a Minister. His Expostulating continually with the Preachers
of the Word. He enters upon the Office of Preaching. People flock to hear him.
He is put into Prison at Nottingham. The Miracles of the growing Church of the
Quakers. Their meanness. Fox thrust into the Correction House at Derby: There
the Name of Quakers was given to the Sect: Fox is solicited to enter into the
Wars. His Speech upon that occasion. Fox his perseverance in Preaching. His
first Letter of the many he wrote to his Party. Elizabeth Hooton the first
Woman that preached. Who were Fox his first Disciples and Colleagues. What sort
of Men did more especially join themselves to the Quakers. Fell, Fox his
Patron. Whose Wife, having afterward married Fox, did with her whole Family
turn Quakers. Others of Fox's Scholars. The Quakers Sect dispersed through the
Northern Parts. Some others of Fox his Companions. The rare History of ap John.
Buroughs goes to London. His engaging with the London Champions, his Speech
unto them, and the event thereof. Fox brought before Cromwell. Cromwell's
Affection toward the Quakers. The Circumspection of the Quakers among
themselves. Fox his new Companions. The going of the Quakers into Ireland. And
into Scotland. The causes of so many Progresses. The Quakers hatred to the
Episcopal Men, and to the Presbyterians. To others. To the Ministers of the
Word. Their Judgment concerning all Protestants. The Doctrine and particular
Opinions, Life, and Conversation of the Quakers. Why so many Men joined with
them. How the People came to envy and disturb them. ^he ways whereby they were
persecuted. Singular Examples. The strange Boldness and Impudence of some
Quakers, and hence Men became enraged against them. Naylor's History. These
things pursued till Gromwel's Death. New Instances of Persecutions. The Quakers
Affairs in Scotland. In Ireland.

THE General HISTORY OF THE QUAKERS From their first beginning, down to this
present Time.
BOOK I.
AMongst the many and great Conflicts of the Church while sojourning here on
Earth, there is none more usual, and withal more difficult and hazardous than
that she is engaged in for Vindicating the Truth of her Religion from the False
Doctrines of her Insulting and Impudent Adversaries. The Reason of all which
cannot be unknown to any who considers that those who are lovers of, and
zealous for the Truth delivered by God, neither ought, nor can conceal and hide
the same, but make it known to the Praise and Glory of God; whereas others who
are fond of Falsehoods, that they may the better compass whatever seems good to
their own Appetites, or conducive to their Interest, do not usually fail to
propagate and defend their own Inventions, and to accuse and condemn the more
Pious and Honest Doctrines of others, as being too opposite to them and their
Designs. It is likewise manifest that the Truth being of it self clear and
evident, is content with a simple discovery, dealing heartily and openly with
all; whereas Lies and Falsehoods, as having no solidity or weight in themselves,
must be adorned with a multitude of fair and boasting Expressions, using a
hundred little Tricks and Cheats for ensnaring the unskilful and unwary; in
which they are oft-times so successful, that even the wiser sort of People, and
those who on other occasions are circumspect enough, do sometimes chance to be
entangled, and do find it a matter of difficulty to extricate themselves from
the same. Moreover though it be Natural for Mankind still to complain of the
Iniquity of their own Times, insomuch that all Men are ready to fly out in
Panegyricks upon the Ages past, while they condemn that they live in, yet I can
scarce think that there are any who are not convinced that the days in which
our Lot is fallen are such, as in them all manner of Errors and Falsehoods are
broke in upon Religion, all sorts of mad and unheard of Heresies, the most
terrible and foulest Blasphemies, have overrun, and (as it were) deluged the
Church. Insomuch that she is now obliged not only to encounter Profane and
Wicked Men for the defense of the Truth and Integrity of her Religion, but to
oppose her self to the Arms of her Bloody and Cruel Enemies for the maintenance
of her Liberty and Freedom: It is not sufficient for her to engage with Men,
but she is constrained to fight even with Beasts. But there is no Affliction
can overtake the Church of the Living God, that does not admit of some Relief
and Comfort. Wherefore since this is now the condition of the Church in these
evil days, it is likewise her great Happiness that so many able and skilful Men
have in these same very days bestirred themselves on her behalf for opposing
and confuting the Erroneous Sentiments of wicked Men, occasioned partly by
Ignorance and Folly, partly by a resolute and furious Madness; and thus
assisting the distressed Church, have successfully employed both their Tongues
and Pens, furnishing her not only with means of Knowledge, and Spiritual
Weapons for instructing and confirming her self against the Assaults of her
Enemies, but even for gaining, convincing, and vanquishing the same. In
prosecuting this their laudable Design some have contented themselves with the
bare mentioning the horrible and monstrous Assertions vented by those cunning
contrivers, as accounting it a sufficient Confutation to have named them, which
bewray their weakness at the first view. But I cannot guess at the Reason why
so very few have for so long a time made mention of the Quakers, whose rise is
dated from a little before the middle of this present Century, and have since
that time wonderfully increased in number of Proselytes, beyond what is
commonly thought of; these Men, I say, accounted by some Superstitious and
followers of Old Wives Fables, by others the worst sort of Fanatics, and in
the next degree to Lunaticks and Madmen, have been quite past over in silence
by most Writers, so that not so much as the History of their Rise and Progress
is yet on Public Record; at least wise if any there be that have touched upon
this Sect, they have done it in so slight and transitory a manner, that they
would rather seem to have made Public their own Ignorance, than to have left
on Record the Actions, Doctrine, and Religion of these Men: Unless perhaps this
may be imagined for a Reason of the silence of Writers, that they account of
these Men so little, as that they think it fitter to pass them in a negligent
and disdainful silence, than to spend words or time upon them: Others there are
indeed who have wrote something of them, but to no purpose, who being
themselves altogether ignorant what manner of Men they be, and having only
heard of them by Report, as being Prodigies and Monsters of Mankind, chose
rather to put in Print whatever they heard, than to have just nothing to say of
'em; reckoning the danger not to be great, whether the Relation proved true or
false; for if true, it is well; if false, it falls upon such a Tribe of Men
(think they) of whom nothing can be said so ill, that would not Quadrate to
them. My Judgment upon the matter is this; that, while I consider that England
(the Native Country of these Men) Scotland, and Ireland, abounds so much with
those called Quakers, since their number in those Countries does daily
increase, nay, and elsewhere they have propagated their Doctrines, making and
gaining Proselytes; (for that it is they bend all their force to, having for
this purpose for a long time published many Books, and these not little small
Treatises, but large Volumes, well digested, and handsomely dressed with fit
Expressions.) Since we may observe that others (no despicable Sects) having
discovered in them their own Image, have embraced them for Brethren and Kinsmen
(such as the Quietists, that not so long ago did first appear in Campania in
Italy, and the Pietists, so lately sprung up in Germany; of which last we know
certainly they are daily insinuating themselves and their Doctrines into the
hearts of the People, and influencing their Minds even in this our own Land)
and since it is uncertain what may be the issue of all this: I say, upon all
these Considerations I count it absolutely necessary to make a narrow search
after them, in order to understand what manner of Men they be, what Actions
have been done by them, from what beginnings, and by what progress they have
risen to this height, and what are their Tenets and Sentiments that have so
long lain in Obscurity. And this is the more necessary to be done now in this
Interim of time, while the Memory of these things are fresh in our Minds, lest
by the progress of time that being worn out and defaced, there be no means left
of attesting what went before; and thus should we remain doubtful and uncertain
of their Actions and Tenets, not knowing where to fix the Controversy; and
whoever would pretend to examine any of these Matters, must after the manner of
the Andabatae, fight hood-winked; of which sort of procedure arising from the
same defect we have a great many Instances both in the ancient and later
Churches. Since therefore I have had the Fortune of a long time to be
familiarly acquainted and much conversant with these Men called Quakers, and
that in many places; and have thus had occasion to know so much of them both
from themselves and their chief Teachers, and also from Men of our Profession
who were well acquainted with all their Deeds and Actions; and besides many of
their Writings and Manuscripts, of which some are in Print, some not, having
fallen into my hands, I thought it would be an acceptable Enterprise,
calculated for the exigency of these our Times, and also useful to Posterity,
to write upon this Subject. In performance of which I shall pick out what seems
most necessary and directly conducive to the management of the same, and that
with all brevity and conciseness imaginable; not determining any thing through
Precipitancy, Love to a Party, Prejudice of Opinion, or the influence of any
Passion whatsoever; leaving it for every Man to judge as he thinks fit of their
Actions, Tenets, Customs, and manner of Worship.

These Men are called Quakers in the English Language. Which Name was given 'em
by their mocking Enemies as a note of Ignominy and Contempt, for that when they
are about contemplating Sacred things, that same very moment that the Spirit
overtakes 'em, through the commotion of their Minds, and agitation of their
Bodies, they presently fall a trembling, throwing themselves on the ground,
oft-times froathing at the mouth, and scrieching with a horrible noise. And
though they seem to resent* this Reproachful Title, yet they are not so averse
either to the Name or to the Thing it self, but that they will acknowledge that
both do in some measure quadrate to them. For they confess themselves to be
Quakers; nor do they deny that while they go about Sacred Things, submitting
themselves wholly to the Divine Will, and quietly waiting upon God, praying
within themselves for the Breathings and Operation of his Spirit, and with deep
sighs and groans are importunately waiting the Effusion of the Spirit; that
upon his first approach they fall a trembling, and are hurried out of
themselves by the commotions of their Minds, and disturbances of Body,
occasioned by the resistance of the sinful stubborn Flesh; which when they have
overcome, and are returned to themselves again, and begin to be sensible of the
Illuminations and Comforts of the Spirit, then they are transported into
Raptures of Joy, which occasion these Quaking and Extatical Motions of Body and
Mind. They add likewise, that the Spirit of God while speaking in the
Scriptures, denominates the sincere fearers of God, and lovers of his Spirit
and Word, Tremblers, requiring of them so to be, and pronouncing them blessed
if such. Wherefore since they do not reject this their Name, but rather account
it honorable, if rightly understood, I shall define them after the same
manner; especially since they have not yet obtained a peculiar and proper Name
whereby they can be distinguished from all others.

Another Name generally given to them is that of Enthusiasts. Where it is
likewise to be observed, that many do reckon them among the number of those
Enthusiasts that in Ancient History are mentioned to have been among the
Primitive Christians, as also in the last Century. But these Men are not
satisfied to be so called in any sense; for besides, say they, that this name
of Enthusiasts is often given to those that by the Calumniators themselves would
be accounted Men of Worth and Dignity, and that even those who are so busy in
fixing this Ignominious Name upon them, do oft-times come to be branded with
the same themselves* Besides all this, say they, this Name tends openly to the
discredit and dishonor of all Christians, whom the Spirit of God in his Word
declares to be influenced by the Spirit; nay, and requires it so strictly of
them, as that without this irradiation of the Spirit they can be none of
Christ's. Now these Enthusiasts that were of Old Times, and likewise those that
have been since, did arrogate to themselves a peculiar familiar Spirit, and
contrary to the dictates of the Holy Spirit, would under the conduct of that
break forth into Tumults, Seditions, and Wars; whereas these Men called Quakers
pretend to be possessed and guided by no other Spirit than what is common unto
all Christians; nay, and are so far from bringing Evil upon any Man, that they
will not so much as resist force by force, asserting all manner of Self-defence
to be unjust, except what is merely Verbal; and even that must be free from
Anger. For this is usual amongst all, that even those who have invented a new
Model of Doctrine and Life, though what they maintain be never so new and
lately invented, yet they publish it for an Opinion of the Ancients, or at
least, founded on their Doctrines; for though none pretends so to confine the
Truth, and set such Bounds to Goodness, that no new thing should be accounted
true or good; yet Antiquity adds a value and respect, for that we commonly
judge the ancientest Opinions to be the truest and best; and hence it is that
even those Tenets that are of themselves intrinsically good, do purchase more
respect, and a better reception by pretended Antiquity and Custom, than by all
their real worth. The Quakers therefore say, they derive their Name (though not
very sollicitous what Name be given them) Doctrine, Religion, and way of
Living, from God himself (whom his own Infallible Oracles term The Ancient of
Days,) and from his Word first delivered from Heaven, and then committed to
Writing by the inspired Men of God, which is the only Rule and Ground of all
Truth.

They likewise Appeal to the Ancient Fathers, or to the Testimony of those
Books that we hold for true, unanimously consenting to and asserting the same
very things that they with the Holy Scriptures maintain. When I say, Fathers, I
speak after our way of speaking, not after the manner of the Quakers, who admit
no such Names; But by those, called by us Fathers, they understand the Writers
who lived in the first and second Centuries after Christ. For they conceive
those who lived nighest to the Times of the Primitive Apostles that compiled
the Holy Writings, to have delivered their Doctrine with more Integrity than
those who lived later, who the further distant they be from the Times of the
Apostles, the more is their Sincerity and Integrity to be called in question;
like Water, that the further it runs from its Fountain, the more muddy it
grows. And therefore it is that they pay but little deference to those who
lived in the later Ages of the Church, freely acknowledging many things to be
contained in their Writings that are justly to be rejected; nor do they ever
quote their Testimony, except it be very conducive to the establishment of what
they advance. If therefore at any time others who are unacquainted with their
Doctrines and Conversations, or possessed with Prejudice, Envy, or Hatred
against them, do at any time go about to brand them with these ignominious and
opprobrious Names, they, if called to give a distinct Account of themselves, do
assume the Names of Christians; Evangelick, Apostolic, Catholiek Men; as if
the Doctrine and Religion preached by them were the same as was delivered at
first by Christ himself to the Apostles, published throughout the whole World
by the Ministry of these his Apostles, and embraced and retained by all the
Faithful and Godly of all Ages, whom Custom has termed Catholic. And upon this
Account in all Debates they recur to the Scriptures, not declining the
Comparison of their Tenets with those of the Ancienter Fathers, nay, nor those
of later times.

It follows next, that unto what I have said, I should subjoin some Account of
the Sect that these Men so much follow, inviting all Christians to do the same.
Their Sentiments therefore run in this strain; That since the Doctrines and
Manners of all Christians, as also and consequently of those called Protestants
likewise, have been for so long a time corrupted and perverted, it would seem
that Apostasy and Defection from the Apostolic Doctrine and Discipline had its
first beginnings in the Times of the Apostles themselves; and from thenceforth
did by degrees increase till it came to its perfect height in the Sixth and
Seventh Centuries; and from that time forth having confirmed and hardened it
self through the firm and constant continuance for so many Ages, so that no
hope of its removal was remaining, did so continue till this very Age we now
live in. Though (add they) in all this Series of Time there was always one or
other in every Century that appeared and declared against this their General
Defection, but without any Success, as also to their own disadvantage and
detriment. And thus do they imagine of those great Men, called by us the
Reformers, that all their Endeavors for the Restoration of Religion and
Purity, tended indeed to overthrow the Falsehood, Lightness, and Vanity of Men,
but not to establish Truth, or introduce Gravity of Life and Manners, by
restoring these Virtues to their Primitive Luster and Splendour; much like unto
those that throw down their old Habitation, and never think of building up a
new one. Moreover, their Opinion of those who came after the First Reformers,
is, that while they imagined to themselves that what they did tended to the
advancement of a Reformation, it proved diametrically opposite to the same; for
that in lieu of the Vices and Errors which polluted and defiled the Church,
that were corrected and rooted out by them, they introduced other new ones of
their own Invention, like Men cleansing a House, that cast out the Filth so as
to let more come in. So that these Men Preach up their Religion for the
ancientest, as having flourished in the first Golden Age of the Church; which
was afterward from the very first rise of the Christian Name, even unto this
our Age, miserably mangled and corrupted, and in fine, quite demolished; until
at length it was retrieved and restored to its Ancient Purity by them, being
incited and raised up by the Divine Spirit to recover fallen Religion, for the
Salvation of all Men. Wherefore it is that in all their Writings this is
distinctly treated of, having prefixed as a Title to their Chapters, that, They
as the Servants of Jesus Christ, are called and raised up by God for dispensing
the Gospel, which after so long and dark a Night of Apostasy, is now again come
to light, to be preached unto all Nations. And thus do they Accuse, Condemn,
and set at naught the Doctrines, manner of Worship, Rites, Ceremonies, nay, the
whole Life and Conversation not only of all these general Christians, but of
the Protestants, who boast so much of their departing from that great Apostasy,
and cleansing themselves from the Babylonish and Papal De^ilements. Unto whom
they oppose their Doctrine, Worship, and way of Life, which indeed are such,
that their Doctrine is for a great part of it new, or taken from some Ancient
Opinions condemned and rejected by the Church, which having lain so long
dormant, are revived anew by them; and as to the rest, it is a Medley or
Hotch-potch of the several Opinions of Protestants, though not radically
agreeing with them, their Worship is diametrically Opposite to that of ours;
and their manner of Life so singular, that between their Conversation and that
not only of Protestants, but of all Christians, there is as vast a difference
as possibly can be. And these are the Tenets they have so busily spread abroad
both at their first rise, and in the further progress of the Sect; and all of
'em that are capable either of speaking or writing Publicly, do diligently
apply themselves in all places to the Explaining, Defending, and Propagating
their Doctrines, inveighing and railing against the contrary Opinions of
others, with as bitter and reviling Expressions as they can invent; and such
their Accusatory Libels are dispersed abroad into all Countries, especially
those where they expect to meet with ready Compliants with their Doctrine and
Way, or at least such as would be fond of new Reformations and Changes in
Religion, being thus in some measure predisposed to receive and entertain their
Advances.

Having thus spoken in General of the Conditions of these Men, I come next to
give a more particular Account of their Rise, Progress, various Vicissitudes,
and Events befalling them. The Original Mother and Nurse of the Quakers is
England, a Country once Famous for banishing and extirpating Heresy, now the
Seat and Center of all manner of Errors. The Quakers themselves Date their
first Rise from the Forty Ninth Year of this present Century; and 'twas (say
they) in the Fifty Second they began to increase to a considerable number, from
which time unto this day they and their Party have daily acquired more
strength. For while that Kingdom before the middle of this Century was engaged
in an Intestine War, occasioned by the Differences of Church Government, in
that confused and dismal Juncture, when both Church and State were miserably
shattered and rent, and Religion and Discipline were quite overturned,
innumerable multitudes of Men did on all hands separate from the Church; and
afterward when their greatest Eyesore, and the imaginary Source of all their
Evils, the Episcopal Government of the Church, was abolished, and the
Presbyterian Form of Church Government (which was what they so impatiently
wished for, and grounded all their hopes of Comfort and Peace upon) was
established in its place, yet even there were some whom nothing would satisfy,
that divided themselves into an innumerable Company of Sects and Factions, of
which this of the Quakers was one.

The first Ringleader, Author, and Propagater of Quakerism was one George Fox.
Some of that Party have not stood to give that Man after his Death) the Title
of The first and glorious Instrument of this Work, and this Society, the great
and blessed Apostle. So that, as the Disciples and Followers of any Sect derive
their Names from their Masters, so might we call these Men Foxonians, were it
not unbecoming Christians to denominate themselves or others professing the
Name of Christ from the Names of Men. I have many Accounts of George Fox in
Writing in my hands, partly dictated from his own Mouth to his Amanuensis a
little before his Death, partly obtained from his Friends and Followers, and
partly from others that were strangers both to George Fox and all his Society.
Which because they differ among themselves, I shall only pick out what seems to
be most probable, and generally attested, for it is difficult in such a case to
distinguish between what is true, what false.

George Fox was Born in the Year One Thousand Six Hundred and Twenty Four, in a
Village called Dreton in Leicestershire. His Father, Christopher Fox, and his
Mother, Mary Lago, were of no considerable Fortune, but gained their Living by
Weaving: They lived devoutly and piously, were of the Reformed Religion, and
great Zealots for the Presbyterian Party, which then obtained in England. And
this their Zeal for Religion was accounted Hereditary to the Family, especially
on the Mother's side; whose Ancestors had in the days of Queen Mary given
Public Testimony to their constant and unmovable Zeal for the Truth and
Purity of Religion, not only in giving their Goods and Possessions to be
confiscated, and patiently undergoing the loss of the same, but in yielding
their Lives for a Sacrifice to the flames of devouring Fire, preferring the
undefiled and lasting Crown of Martyrdom, to a sinful Life. This George Fox,
while yet a Child, discovered a singular Temper, not coveting to Play with his
Brethren or Equals, nor giving himself to any of those things that take with
Children, but shunning their Company, and disdaining their Childish Customs; he
loved to be much alone, spoke but little, or if at any time he chanced to
speak, both his Countenance and Speech bewrayed a sadness of Spirit; his words
were more Interrogatory, showing a great deal of Attention and Consideration,
and making many Observations; unto all which was added Modesty in all his
Actions, and a diligent pursuit of the early Rudiments of Piety and Devotion;
so that even in his Infancy his Actions and Demeanor seemed to presignifie
those Qualities of Mind, which in progress of time he discovered on the Public
Stage of the World. Having spent his Infancy at home, he was then sent to
School to learn to Read English, and to Write. In which Study he succeeded as
the other Country Boys and those of the meaner sort use to do, having attained
so much as that he could read Print pretty well; but Writing he could read but
little of, neither could he write, except very rudely. And this was the only
Piece of Learning the attained to all his Life long. For neither then, nor any
time after when arrived at greater Maturity of Years, did he ever apply himself
to any Liberal Study. So that he not only knew no other Language save his
Mother Tongue, but even in that he was so little expert, and so ill qualified
either for speaking or writing, all the whole course of his Life, that what he
understood perfectly well he could not explain or enlarge upon in any tolerable
good English, and far less could he deliver it in Writing; in so much that he
oft-times made use of Amanuenses and others, who being well acquainted with his
Thoughts, and greater Masters of Language, might put them into a better Dress.
And this I thought worth the Remarking, because a great many Books are extant
in George Fox's Name, writ not only in terse English, but also in Latin, and
interlarded with Sentences of many other Languages, which are but little known
to the Learned World; the Names of the Interpreters or Methodizers being
concealed. Which whether it was an effect of great Simplicity in him, or of his
Ambition and Ostentation, I shall not determine; only it is plain that he had
not the gift of Tongues. George Fox having spent this part of his Life at
School, began then to look out for some way of Living, and providing for the
future part of his Life; and accordingly concluded to betake himself to some
Mechanic Trade, that being necessary for the use and accommodation of Man,
could never be wanted, and consquently never fail of answering the end he
undertook it for; such as making the Ornaments, and clothing of Humane Bodies.
Amongst which he chose to himself the Making of Shoes, applying himself to
that Art the remaining part of his Life in Nottingham, the chief Town of the
County of Nottingham, bordering upon Leicestershire, the place of his Nativity.
He being then a Young Man, did behave himself Honestly and Modestly amongst
Men, walking devoutly toward God, keeping close to that sense of Religion and
Worship taught him by his Parents. He dwelt much upon the Scriptures, and when
at leisure from the Exercise of his Trade (as also when about it, taking this
advantage of his sedentary Work) he Meditated upon, ruminated in his Mind, and
recollected what he had read. He had an Infallible Memory for retaining any
thing he knew, especially what he read in the Bible never slipped out of his
remembrance. And having thus incessantly continued in the Study of the
Scriptures from his Infancy to his latter end, he became so exactly versed in
them, that there was no Remarkable Saying in all the Holy Writings that escaped
his Knowledge or Remembrance. I have heard some of his Friends say (and those
not of the Vulgar size, but Men of Learning and Knowledge) that though the
Bible were lost, it might be found in the Mouth of George Fox. Hence it was
that as every one's Perfection and Talent discovers it self in their Discourses
and Writings, so all the Discourses he ever had to his People, and all the
Writings left on Record behind him, were nothing but a train of several Texts
of Scripture sewed and patched together. Now after he had thus spent so much of
his time in studying the Scripture, Meditating on Religious Things, and
seriously weighing the condition and state of his own Soul; he could not
contain himself within the Bounds of his Trade and Station, but began to aspire
after higher things, and transgressing the limits of his Sphere, would needs
attempt some nobler Enterprise, that might be Serviceable both to himself and
others. And accordingly, not contenting himself with the private use of what he
had acquired, he took occasion oft-times to Discourse of these Matters to his
Fellow-Tradesmen and Acquaintance, exhorting and admonishing them to be much
taken up with these Concerns. And in these his frequent Exhortations he was so
officious and importunate, that he would never give over, till at length it
came to such a height, that neither they would any longer give ear to his
severe Discourses, nor could he any longer bear with the Contradictions,
Reproaches, and Affronts he met with on that account: Which obliged him then to
withdraw himself from all manner of Society, either Working alone in some
hidden corner of his Shop, or (because even then there was frequently some
curious Fellows coming to hear of him what he had to say, who since his severe
Discourses could never please them, were still creating more trouble) when he
had done with Working, he presently forsook the Shop, getting up into some
Garret or other, where being removed from all manner of Company, he might both
be free from the Molestations of others, and give Offense to none.

It happened in the Year of our Lord 1643. that this George Fox, being then in
the Nineteenth Year of his Age, was walking alone in the Fields, profoundly
Meditating upon the Nature, Mind, Manners, Institutions, and Discipline of
Mankind; of their Societies and Converse one with another, but especially
bending his thoughts upon the condition and state of Young People; considering
what Duties were required at their hands, what Diligence, Care, and
Circumspection was necessary in one and all of them for leading Lives while
here worthy of the Gospel, and becoming Men, and for obtaining an Everlasting
blessed Life when this is come to its Period. All which things he seriously and
frequently pondered in his solitary Breast, fervently applying himself to the
Throne of Grace, that it might please the Almighty God to Teach and Instruct
him, a Young Man, in this state of Humane Affairs, furnishing him with the
knowledge of his Duty, and ability to perform the same; upon which there came a
Voice from Heaven, dictating unto his Spirit, that, All Mankind was only and
altogether Vanity, that Children and Young People grew up in Lies and Vanities
as they did in Years, those of middle Age advanced still more and more in the
same manner of Vices; so that when arrived at Old Age, they were hardened and
confirmed in the Customary Practice of the same; and when they come to be
stricken in Years, and their Blood and Spirits to fade, they lose all Knowledge
and Sense, becoming again mere Children, having extinguished that light of
their Minds which should then be shining most brightly, and giving themselves
up to nothing but Doteries and Childish Trifles, Death creeping upon them
insensibly, which Cites all before the Universal Judge and Lord of all things.
Therefore it was his Duty and Interest, as being a Young Man, to separate
himself from that polluted Multitude, keeping no Commerce with them, but
sequestrating himself to a solitary Life far removed from all manner of evil.
This Divine Response did he many times report to his fellows. Whether it was
really a Voice from Heaven, or only the Reasoning of his own Breast, I do not
say; only this is to be remarked, that both this Fox and his first Followers
did at their first appearance, and for a long time after, account all the
Motions of their Spirit, or Inclinations to Good, which they found in
themselves upon serious Meditation, or upon any new Occasion, to be the effect
of the Holy Spirit of God working the same within them, and whenever they were
sensible of this Commotion within them, they used to say, that a Voice was sent
down from God by his Spirit unto them, uttering such and such Discourse; and to
this purpose they ushered in all their Discourses to the People with a, Thus
says the Lord and his Spirit, by his own mouth, (this was, that they might
seem more nighly to resemble the Holy Prophets and Apostles, that were inspired
from above by the Divine Spirit, and sent by it.) But of late they abstain from
such high-flown Pretenses, calling what thus comes upon them, the Impulse and
Motion of their Minds. Fox used to tell how that Heavenly Oracle did so
effectually recommend it self to his Youthful Spirit, that presently he betook
himself home, not being able to express what he had heard. Nay, the Image of
this Voice was always so before his Eyes, not only all that day, but all the
succeeding Night, that he could not go to bed. And from that time he obeyed
this Heavenly Admonition. And though he had always been diligent in Reading and
Meditating on the Holy Scriptures, and had frequently set times apart for
Fasting and Praying unto God; yet then being engaged in so difficult and
important a Design in compliance to the Divine Will, he went about the same
Christian Duties with more Application, Fervor, and Frequency: Especially
having by Experience learned that there was no means more effectual than these
for taming Man's vicious Nature, and suppressing his unruly Appetites, so
enclinable to Humane (though hurtful) Society, and the Corruptions of a
polluted World. And though before this he had abstained sufficiently from
Converse with Men, yet from that time forth he was more strict in shunning all
manner of Humane Conversation, being only intent upon the Exercise of his Trade
as much as was necessary for purchasing a Livelihood, and spending all the rest
of his time in Holy and Religious Exercises. Nor did he only shun the Company
of, or meeting with those he knew or suspected to be given up to the Vanities
and Lusts of this World, but even those that made large shows of Religion and
Virtue. For he did not deny that there were many who seemed to be very
Religious and Devout, pretending the Scripture or Word of God for the Rule and
Ground both of Faith and Manners; but this he complained heavily of, that there
was so many who extolled the Holy Scriptures, paying all Honor and Deference
to the same, who yet would cry up and extol that Profession of Faith and
Manners that they had sucked from these very Scriptures: And that they were so
destitute and ignorant of that Holy Spirit that endited them, and so great
strangers to that Purity of Life and Conversation which is so often recommended
in the Scriptures. Fox in this his Solitary Retirement proposed nothing else to
himself but doing Service to others, designing and purposing some time to be
useful in Informing and Instructing not a few, by undertaking a Public
Ministry for the Salvation of many. And thus he reasoned with himself, (nay, he
said, it was demonstrated to his Spirit from God himself) that though School
and College Learning, the Natural and acquired Qualities and Gifts of the Mind,
those Arts Men call Liberal and Ingenuous, and the Knowledge of Tongues, were
very useful Accomplishments and Adornments for a Theologue, or any invested
with that Sacred Office, yet the Spirit of God was to be their chief Teacher
and Conducter; and the Operation of this Divine Spirit, though without
Learning, is of more avail, than Learning without the assistance of the Spirit.
However he did not so totally banish himself from all Company, but that he
admitted sometimes those that came to him; nay, and would sometimes of his own
accord go to those he thought Men of Integrity, and who seemed to walk
reverently toward God, and confer with them. Sometimes he called on the
Ministers of the Gospel, such as he thought fit, or that he heard did excel in
Doctrine and Piety, and communicated to them his Sentiments. He always so
ordered his Discourse, that what he spoke was about the condition or state
either of Men in general, or of Christians; and this was the whole, and the
only Tenor and Context of all his Discourses, that the condition of all those
we call Christians was such, as that all their Religion was in their Tongues;
in so much that their Ministers and Pastors who dispensed unto them the Divine
Word, were Men that minded nothing but making a discovery of their Learning and
Knowledge, and a slight discharge of their Office; nay, that proposing nothing
to themselves but the bare external Reward, were very Hirelings unto Men. This
his way of Discoursing occasioned his unwelcom Reception among many.

There was at that time one Nathanael Stevens, Minister of the Church at
Dreton, where George Fox was born, who used not only to exspect George's coming
to him, but oft-times prevented him, looking on him as one of his Flock, and
subject to his Discipline. Whom therefore Fox, as his Custom was, had made his
Reflections on him and his Parish, accusing both the Minister and the Flock,
for being ignorant of Christianity, and far estranged from it in their Lives;
vindicating himself to be the Restorer and Conducter appointed for the Recovery
of fallen Religion. Mr. Stevens would nevertheless leave him to himself, as
being neither grieved nor angry at him. This same Year George went up and down
from Town to Town, supplying his Necessities in every place he came to, with
the Exercise of his Trade, contenting himself with a little, and not
apprehensive of Poverty. He was much troubled with Melancholy, a Disease very
incident, and in a manner Natural to all that Nation; which at that time
increased mightily among them, and was now become very common. George
complained that he was tormented without intermission with the terrible and
mighty Tentations of Satan, which drove him almost to despair, insomuch that he
sometimes wished for Death rather than Life. And in every place he came to he
made his Address to the Pious and Godly, and sometimes to the Ministers of
Churches, complaining of his miserable condition, imploring some help and
comfort from them. But when he had thus made known to them the anguish of his
Soul, some were not willing to undertake so difficult a Cure, or thought it
necessary to use Medicine for his Body as well as his Soul; others advised him
to have recourse to the Word of God, Faith in him, and serious and frequent
Prayer for the removal of his Malady; in fine, he could meet with none that
could give him any Satisfaction or Relief; then would he (as all such afflicted
People use to do, when they cannot meet with their desires) rail against them,
brand them for unskilful and ignorant Physicians, spreading Slanders and
Reproaches against them up and down the Country.

From this time forth he wholly withdrew from all Society or Communication with
the Visible Church; and on Religious days went alone into the Fields, or some
retired place, carrying along with him his (...), and spending the day in
Reading and Meditating. Nay, he spent the best part of his time in Study and
Contemplation. And both at that time, and in the succeeding part of his Life,
he frequently told how he was at sometimes possessed with the Divine Spirit,
how many Dreams and Visions came upon him, what Answers he had from Heaven to
his Petitions; as also that many things foreseen by him, and foretold to him*
were locked up in his Breast. And that he was daily taught from above, and
instructed in what relates to the Doctrine and Life of a Christian; sometimes
in one part of it, sometimes in another; sometimes what was wicked, and
disallowable; at other times what was good, and to be sought after; and all
these things was he to teach and explain to Men, as being sent of God for that
purpose. After this he grew and increased daily.

It happened, not precisely at this time, but a little after, when he was
Teaching at Nottingham, (for some things though distant in time are to be
connected together, having designed to comprise this History in as compendious
Bounds as is possible) that he was ravished into Paradise by the Spirit with a
Flaming Sword, where he was formed like unto Adam, such as he was while yet in
Innocence, so that he clearly perceived and understood the most profound and
obscure things, having the whole Creation laid open and explained to him, how
that Names were given to every Creature suited to their Natures, Virtues, and
Perfections; which made him advise with himself, whether or no he should
undertake the Profession of Medicine, bending his thoughts and care to the
exercise of the same for the good and benefit of Mortal Men. For it happened in
Leicester that God discovered to him, how far the Galenical Tribe was estranged
from Divine Wisdom, that Wisdom which contrived and framed all things, so that
it was impossible for them to understand the Natures and Constitutions of
things. But withal the Heavenly Oracle did likewise insinuate that it was
possible to reform this corrupted Art, and settle it on a surer Foundation, if
so be that Artists, before they undertake to Administer Medicine to the Sick,
would first apply themselves to Divine Wisdom, and then accommodate their
Remedies according to its Rules. Fox did in every thing give shrewd Evidence
that he was one of those sort of Men who covet to have both themselves and all
things belonging to them taken notice of; and that he accounted it no disgrace,
but rather matter of glorying, to be pointed at, and observed by every body. So
far was he from hiding or concealing these his Revelations, and the singular
Eminency of his Gifts, or imagining that they might be contemned and derided as
vain empty shows in the Eyes of an ill-temper'd Mind; so far was he from such a
strain as this, that on the contrary, as being impatient of such wonderful
Secrets, he never ceased to relate and communicate them unto his familiar
Friends and Followers, and that with the greatest strokes of Confidence, and
huge expressions of Joy, but withal not forgetting to return unto God thanks
for such singular Mercies. And these his Friends and Followers did no less
believe them things to be true, and propose them to the World, as worthy to be
accounted true by all; taking all care to Trumpet forth the Praises of the
Renowned Author: All which was very acceptable to George, so that if any body
gave a favorable and respectful Judgment of him and his Enterprises, he
presently applied it to himself with a great deal of Self-applause. Of which we
have an evident Instance from a saying of one Brown, on his Deathbed,
concerning George Fox, That he would be an Instrument in the hand of God for
doing great Works; which George interpreted and affirmed to be a Vision or
Prophecy foretelling Infallibly what great things were to be verified in him.
All his Friends were of the same strain with himself; for they gave it out (to
Instance in one thing) that Nathanael Stevens (whom I formerly mentioned as
Pastor of the Church of the place of George's Nativity, and Tutor and
Instructor to him in his Childhood) did give this Testimony unto him before a
Remarkable Person; That England did never produce such a Bud as George Fox,
that he began to be suspicious of his falling upon some new Methods, and
carving out new ways not hitherto found out: As also that another time, in
presence of all the People, and of George himself, the same Person said, That
George Fox had penetrated to the Light of the Sun, but that he went busily
about to Eclipse and darken the Light of his old Pedagogue Stevens, by the
greater Light which through the Sun was in him. Which these Men accounted to be
the highest Elogy could be given. And it seems very wonderful to me while I
consider that Fox himself did at this time complain, that Stevens, who formerly
expressed so much Love and Kindness to him, and was in a manner a Father to
him, (for it is true indeed, that he commended his Piety and Ingenuity at the
beginning) was now become his Adversary; having publicly proclaimed out of the
Pulpit in his own Presence, that he was a Young Man tossed about with mad and
unruly Fancies. It would seem that these Commendatory Expressions were rather
spoke by Stevens with Indignation and Disdain, ironically insinuating that
Insolence and Haughtiness that reigned in him, which by the People were
ignorantly understood to be properly and truly designed for Proclaiming the
Merits of George Fox.

Having for a considerable time addicted himself entirely to his Studies, he
now began to try and make the Experiment, whether he was able to compass what
he wished and hoped for; to which effect he attempted to Methodize and Collect
his Thoughts and Meditations, that at several times had possessed his Mind,
concerning the General Corruption and Degeneracy of Man's Nature, the
Restoration of fallen Mankind, the Love and Grace of God, the Illumination of
Men by the Holy Spirit, and several other Heads; in order to make a Treatise or
entire Work of the whole. In this state he continued for three Years, which was
to him as an Academical course, he spending that time with no less Industry and
Diligence, both in Nocturnal Lucubrations, and Morning Exercises, (sitting up
late, and rising early to compass his Design) than is usually given by those
who spend all their time upon University Learning, and dedicate their whole
Lives to the prosecution of their Studies. But so soon as ever he began to peep
out from his lurking Solitude (which was in the Year One Thousand, Six Hundred,
and Forty Seven) and to Publish unto the World what he was, and what Design he
was upon; it is incredible to think what a conflux of People followed after
him, and after having heard him frequently, and became acquainted with his
Thoughts, with what Unanimity and Concord they all joined issue to what he said
and taught, and that in a very small compass of time. Wherefore looking upon
the desire and nod of the People as the Voice of God, inviting him to dedicate
himself wholly to them, and take upon him the Office of a Teacher, that so he
might freely communicate and impart to all Men whatever was in him, bending his
Wit and Abilities to their use and advantage, he thought himself obliged to
give ear to this Heavenly Command. And accordingly from that time forth he
abandoned the Shooe-maker's Trade (in which he had never been as a Master, but
as an Apprentice or Journey-man; not purchasing any magnificent things, but
withal not living sordidly or too meanly) and now all his care was to undertake
the Office of a Teacher in this new Church. And because he was thus destitute
of a Livelihood, which he formerly had by his Trade, there was not wanting of
his Followers who afforded him whereupon to relieve his Necessities, lest his
being reduced to straits had crush^d so glorious an Enterprise in the bud. But
withal it is not to be omitted, that he never either asked any thing of his own
accord, nor when he got, did he ever take more than was simply necessary for
his sustenance; nay, nor afterward when his condition was better^d, in so much
that he could have afforded a splendid and costly Entertainment, did he ever
allow himself a larger abundance of good things; but continued all along very
moderate both in Diet, Clothing, and all other things belonging to the Body.
And, as if either he could not, or would not forget his Ancient Trade of
working in Leather, for a long time he clothed himself altogether with
Leather; and in this Garment he went about Preaching and Teaching, which gave
ground to the Name given him, viz. The Leathern Man.

Thus he daily converted many to be of his Sect, and was accounted amongst the
People for a Man of singular Piety; his Name and Fame was spread round in the
Counties of Leicester, Nottingham, and Darby; so that People came on all hands
to hear and be taught of him, who when returned to their homes, extolled him
among their Neighbors for a Heavenly Man. But there were at this time others
who became Colleagues and Partners with him in the work of the Ministry; and in
all corners of the Land were Men to be seen going about, and Preaching up this
New Doctrine, either severally, or collectively in one Body. These Accessory
Preachers made it their business first to Preach unto those who had already
made defection from the Church; and afterward to them who continued embodied
in the same, whose Religion and Manners were more oppugnant to and different
from theirs, which made them testify their abhorrence of that Church both in
words and deeds. But they unanimously purposed among themselves, that they
should endeavor to persuade all Men, that all Christian Churches were long ago
quite overturned; that nothing either of Doctrine, Discipline, Life, or
Manners, was uncorrupted or sound; and that therefore a new Church was to be
reared up from the Foundation, according to the Model and Platform carved out
by them. This they all set about, taking all occasions of speaking with the
People, talking of these matters, complaining of and expressing their grief for
the Corruptions of Religion, tatling this and that privily into the ears of the
Vulgar; nay, when their number increased, they became bolder, going into
Peoples Houses, when not invited, intruding themselves into Companies either of
more or fewer, and presently without any Introduction beginning some new
Discourse, either advancing something new, or opposing the Sayings and
Discourses of others, litigiously starting Controversies, without any preceding
dissension, or any previous Enquiry into the state of the Question; thus would
they under the pretense of discovering and vindicating the Truth, beleh out
ignominious Reproaches and Slanders against the Religions of Men, and
especially the Ministers of the Church. Others there were who only moved
Questions in Company, and affirmed nothing themselves, or of a sudden turned
the Discourse another way, cunningly designing by their tedious repetitions,
turnings, and windings, and frequent interruptions of Discourse by bringing in
a new Subject, to irritate their Antagonists, that when they through Passion
should chance to speak roughly and loudly, they themselves might continue calm
and moderate with a slow severity (as it oft-times happens, and is easily
compassed) which might occasion their Adversaries either not to speak last, or
to be passionately silent at their Obstinacy; from whence they conclude
themselves Victors, and amongst the Ignorant pass for such.

And now would they publicly appear on the Highways, standing in the
Marketplaces, or any place where multitudes of People use to assemble
together, promiscuously Admonishing and Exhorting all they met, bystanders,
and others, to a Religious pursuit of Repentance, Frugality, Justice, and
Equity. Nay, they came to that length that they did not stick at entering into
the Churches, not only of those who dissented from the Public
Church-Establishment, but even of them who were conformed to it; some of 'em
casually falling into the Church, and appearing as if afraid; others designedly
and boldly went into them, finding fault with the Discourses and Prayers of the
Ministers, disparaging and defaming both them and their Actions with all manner
of Insolence and Impudence.

These were the first beginnings. But in the subsequent part of this Book I
shall show that many (nay, most) of 'em have afterward by degrees omitted,
changed, or reformed many of these Initiatory Principles. Fox, as he was the
first Author of this Sect, so was he the chief Actor, Counselor, and Conductor
of others in all Affairs relating to the same. His first Success was in the
Town of Nottingham, from whence his Doctrine did issue forth into all corners
of that County, and afterward the whole Kingdom. For having confidently
appeared in the Church, and boldly vindicated his Doctrines in Face of the
whole Assembly, he was thereupon cast into Prison; but was not so closely
confined, but that Liberty was given to his Friends to visit and converse with
him: So that many of the Citizens went frequently to Prison to Discourse him,
and among the rest John Reccles, Mayor of the Town, with his Wife and whole
Family, with whom George did sharply Expostulate, treating them with some
severity of words; however they became his Proselytes, associated themselves to
his Sect, and began publicly to Preach his Doctrines among their own People
and Neighbors. This Imprisonment of George Fox was of a very short
continuance. This was in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand, Six Hundred Forty
Nine, in the Five and Twentieth Year of his Age. Which Year was Sacred to him,
for that in the same he both commenced the state of a Man, being come to
perfect Age, and also the Office of the Ministry: This same Year was also
Memorable amongst the Quakers, for being the Year of the Nativity of their
Church, which now began to increase and be confirmed. And from this Year it is
that they commence all the Miracles of the Newborn Church. Fox remained yet a
while longer in Nottinghamshire, and resided for some time at Mansfield, where
having entered an Hospital, he spied a Woman, who besides the distraction of her
Mind, was miserably tormented with intolerable Pains: The Physician ordered her
a Vein to be opened, that by taking away some of her Blood, her pain might be
abated, for which end her hands were bound up. Fox opportunely draws nigh,
views the Woman, and what they were about to do to her, presently affirms and
maintains, that she was afflicted with an Evil Spirit; which he did not say, as
the Vulgar use to do, who when they are ignorant of the cause of any Evil,
assign the Devil for its Author: He continues steadfast in affirming what he had
said, and orders the Woman to be untied, which being accordingly done, and she
being over-wearied with the Torment, and Resistance she had made, he desires
her to Rest and be still. She obeys, recovers her lost Reason, and is restored
to her former and so long interrupted Temperature of Body. Upon this, Fox
Taught, that the Sick were cured, and unclean Spirits cast out by that Divine
Virtue which works in his People. His followers, who were as Rattles and
Cymbals to blaze about his Fame, disguised the matter thus, That the Woman was
possessed with a Devil, who had troubled her for the space of Two and Thirty
Years, that being brought unto him, after many hideous shrieks and outcries,
and motions like to the bellowing of a Cow, and a most noisome stink breathed
from her mouth, she was freed of that Malignant Spirit in presence of a great
multitude of People. Fox did likewise boast that he cured a certain Man in a
Village called Trikossio in Leicestershire, after he had been given over by the
Physicians, only by uttering some few words to him, and stretching forth his
hand to Heaven. His Friends added yet another, that having ended his Discourse
to the People, he happened once to meet with a Woman (accompanied by her
Husband) all over Scabby, Ulcerous, and covered round with Cataplasms; upon
which he enquired of the Husband if he had the Faith of Miracles; but while he
was hesitating, and delaying to answer, he asked the same Question of the
Woman, and she having answered affirmatively, he immediately pulled off the
Cataplasms, and she was forthwith restored to her Health. Both himself and his
Followers do likewise pretend that on some occasions he performed the like
Miracles by the simple touch of his hand.

But besides Miracles, the Quakers did after this time pretend to Visions and
Prophecies, which they said was a singular Gift vouchsafed only to them. Yet
they were more sparing in their Discourses on this Subject, and except one or
two Examples which are very special, and depending on the distinction of
Places, Times, and Persons, they allege nothing but General Examples, which
therefore cannot be of any certain Authority, so as to merit our belief; and I
do not find their special Instances of such weight as to be worth our
inserting. Nay, this I choose rather to say, That the Quakers who succeeded
these first beginners, do not make so much noise either of Miracles or Visions,
nor do they willingly speak or write of those of their Sect that preceded them,
unless very cautiously and warily; acknowledging and owning that since the old
Gospel preached by Christ and his Apostles was sufficiently confirmed with
Miracles and Predictions, this new Gospel which they now advance, being in
substance the same with that of old, does not need these Helps and Miracles:
That they do not make their Religion depend upon them; that they neither hope
nor wish for Praise and Glory from Men, nor expect to procure a favorable
Reception from them upon any such account. So that it seems this is their
intention to boast of some of the Signs of the Primitive and Apostolic Church,
but withal to take care, lest if these Signs be not clear and manifest to all,
they should come to be despised and laughed at: Unless they propose to
themselves the Example of our Savior, who sometimes took pains to conceal his
Miracles and Prophecies.

The Quakers commemorate it that their Sect did so multiply and increase after
this Year, and maintained so much Concord and Unity among themselves, that now
they became an orderly and settled Church, conspicuous not for external
Splendour and Magnificence, but for eminent Innocence and Simplicity. And
whereas most of them had heretofore continued still Members of the Churches
they were formerly joined to, or if at any time they went aside to follow their
New Model of Worship, it was very privately, and with a few Companions; but now
they separated from them in great numbers, and with open and undaunted
boldness, joining into one Body among themselves with one Voice, and one Mind,
professing themselves to be all incorporated into one common Society, entering
into an Ecclesiastical Covenant one with another, that as often, and in whatever
place, as an Opportunity offered it self, they should join and assemble
together for going about Religious Matters. And all their Religionary
Confessions were of this Nature, that they insisted more on the received Tenets
of other Churches which they were to reject and condemn, than in delivering
positively what Articles they were to believe and maintain. As to other things
their Doctrines were short and plain: They contained few necessary Articles of
Faith; none of them related to the contemplation and speculation of abstruse
and difficult things, which are more curious than useful to Piety and Goodness;
they were all concerning the Light which shines in every Man's Soul, and the
Word of God within them; of inward Communion with God; of the Reverence, Love,
and Obedience due to him and his revealed Will; and of the Relative Duties of
Men one to another. When they assembled together for Divine Worship, their
manner of Worshipping, and all sort of Sacred Exercises were free from any
External Accoutrements, Rites, or Ceremonies; all was wrapped up in a deep
silence, and tacit waiting upon the Spirit, till it raised them up to speak;
and when they spoke, their Discourses were Exhorting of every Man to
Self-Examination, and a serious consideration of the Operations of the Spirit,
the Light within them, and the Word of God which was in their Hearts;
admonishing them to study to deny themselves, subject themselves to God, and
endeavor to Repent and amend their Lives; to be Modest, Temperate, True, and
Constant in their Words and Actions; and to be diligent and cheerful in
performing all such Actions as became Men to do, and were fit for reconciling
Men to one another, and advancing Peace and Concord in the World. And so far as
could be observed by the strictest Enquirer, they seemed to lead Lives conform
to their Principles; for both in their promiscuous Conversation, and likewise
in one another Company, their Moderation and Temperance was such, as that it
became their Character, whereby they were distinguished from all others. In the
Management of Commerce and Trade with the rest of the World, they were Meek,
Mild, and Moderate; in their Countenances severe, and slow in speech; they were
but mean in their Clothing, and their Houses not richly furnished, though
there was among them Men of large Substances. The most conspicuous Virtue of
all was a diligent Love, Care, and Watchfulness over those of their Faction,
especially as to their Religious Concerns; for they narrowly enquired how every
one behaved himself in Religious Matters. As to the ordinary Actions of Humane
Life, they were free from Pride or Ostentation, Affable, Familiar, Bountiful to
those of an inferior Station, so that it was no singular or new thing among
them to see the Rich and Powerful Courting and Caressing the Poor. They were
Merciful, Liberal, and Compassionate to the Miserable and Afflicted, either in
Body or Mind; every one helped another, either with his Substance, Counsel, or
Assistance, as his Capacity allowed, and the Necessity of his Neighbor
required, so that none of them wanted for any thing. Their chiefest care and
business was so to accommodate all their Actions, as that they might seem not
to introduce any new upstart Religion, but to resemble the Ancient Primitive
Church, imitating their Simplicity, Gravity, and Virtuous Demeanor. By all
which it came to pass that many were added to them, every body being astonished
at the singularity of their Carriage. I my self am acquainted with a very
learned worthy Man, who having heard such great things of them, had the
Curiosity to undertake a Voyage to England, in order to satisfy himself of the
verity of what was reported; and after having arrived there, and conversed with
them, and seen their Actions, which far surpassed his expectation, he was so
much taken with them, that he forthwith yielded himself a Member of their
Society. But the rest of the World who did not join with them, abhorred them
and all their Actions, believing all their fair Pretenses to be but vain shows
disguised with smooth countenances and deceitful words, insomuch that they
would not hear, nor be witnesses to any of their doings, of which they could
not entertain the least favorable thought; nay, they inveighed against them
with the most reviling Expressions, spreading this Report of their Life and
Manners (though without any Author to attest it) that they were the veryest
Rogues of all Men alive, Exorcists and Sorcerers (as the Vulgar calls them) who
under the covert of such specious Doctrines opened the Gates for all manner of
Wickedness and Roguery, designing only to catch and ensnare simple Men by their
^uggling Enchantments. Unto which Injurious Reproaches, all their Reply and
Comfort was, That this their Treatment was nothing worse than what the Ancient
Christians and Holy Men of all Ages have unworthily, and unjustly met with on
the same Account. But now I return to George Fox.

He remained for some time at Mansfield, where he went into the Church, while
the Minister was Preaching, and begun to oppose and contradict him publicly;
upon which the People being incensed, fell upon him with Hands and Feet,
dragging him out of the Church into Prison; and that same very day toward the
Evening he was set at Liberty and dismissed, and the Mobb again encountered him
with Affronts and Stripes, beating him out of Town. The same Treatment he met
with elsewhere. But he continued still the same Old Man, becoming rather more
constant and confirmed (as it were) in defending and maintaining his Doctrine
and Discipline, not refraining from that Tumultuating Method he had now begun
of appearing in the Public Churches, and opposing the Ministers of the same;
not suffering either the remembrance of his past pain and trouble, nor the fear
of what might ensue, to abate his Fervor and Zeal in prosecuting his Design,
for one Minute of Time; and thus undauntedly he pushed on for the two or three
subsequent Years.

But before I proceed further, it is requisite that I first give a distinct,
though short, Account of the chief Articles that he litigiously wrangled about
(I do not say disputed, or discoursed) in the Public Assemblies and
Congregations, the Sermons being either ended or interrupted through his
Impertinency. These Articles related either to the Ministers themselves, who
(as he said) were only induced by love of a Reward or Hire to Preach the
Gospel, which should be Preached gratis unto all Men; or to the Instrument or
Source from which they sucked the Doctrines they taught their hearers, viz. the
Sacred Scriptures, or Word of God, which he thought an improper name; or to
this part of their Doctrine, that the Saints, while in this Life, cannot attain
to that fullness and perfection of Sanctity and Holiness which the Law of God
requires; which he said was a Principle that encouraged Men in their sins,
patronizing and defending the same. But in all these Controversies he never
considered how near akin his own Case was unto theirs who maintained these
Doctrines; for though he pretended to take all this pains and trouble in
running about to Preach the Gospel gratuitously, and without any Reward, yet
those he preached to supplied his Necessities, before he asked it of them; at
leastwise he was never denied the Liberty of coming uncalled for (as the
Flies) and (like Mice) feeding upon others Provision: He might have also
remembered his usual Preface and Introduction to all his Discourses, when about
to inform the People of some Secret hid from the World, This is the Word of the
Lord; and that he seldom discoursed to his People of the Internal, Spiritual
Force and Obligation of the Law, but only of External Virtues; thus omitting
many real sins repugnant to the Law and Perfection of God.

In the Fiftieth Year of this Century, he being in Derbyshire, in the Town of
the same name, went into a Presbyterian Church, where, after Sermon ended, he
boldly discovered his Thoughts and Sentiments to the whole Congregation; upon
which he was brought before the Magistrate, who after some Debates past betwixt
Fox and the Ministers of the Churches, ordered him to be taken and put into
Gaol, as being a troublesome Fellow, putting all things into Confusion, where he
remained for Six Months.

Moreover it is to be Remarked, that these Men are not altogether averse or
unwilling to be denominated Christians; though they say, that Name was at first
given to Christ's Disciples by the wicked Jews and Gentiles out of Contempt and
Derision; others say, it is of too narrow a compass, not including all the
Godly, who are worshippers of God, and partakers of his Grace, being confined
only to those who acknowledge and profess the Name of Christ. But because the
Quakers have always in their mouths the name of Light, Preaching Christ as a
Light enlightening every one; and exhorting all Men to walk in that Light, as
Sons of the Light, they were called by some Mockers, The Confessors and Sons of
the Light; which denomination did not altogether displease them. And at this
time the opprobrious Nickname of Quakers was first given them, the occasion of
which was this:

Fox being detained in Prison, was sometimes called before the Magistrates to
be examined; where he took occasion oft-times to admonish the Judges who
examined him, to reverence and fear God, to Tremble at his Word, and to work
out their Salvation with fear and trembling; (which was not only an usual
Expression to him, but to all his abettors) one of the Judges, by Name Jeremy
Bennet, hearing him talk so frequently of Trembling and Quaking, gives him and
all his Sect the denomination of Quakers. Besides, all the People having
observed that in performance of Sacred Services they trembled and shook,
thought this new Name the more proper, so that ever since they have been known
all over England by the Name of Quakers. They by a certain dexterity they have
of putting favorable Constructions on Names, apply this and all other
Nicknames formerly mentioned, to themselves, in their own sense and meaning; as
I hinted in the beginning of this Treatise. But the Quakers tell us, that this
Judge Bennet, in the mean time that he was so severe and troublesome to him, was
afflicted by God with a Remarkable stroke; that the Keeper of the Prison, or
Jailer, who had formerly been fierce and severe against him as a Lion, after
having understood what sort of Man he was, became meek and peaceable to him as
a Lamb. Now six Months being expired, he is let loose from Prison, and was
carried to the Marketplace to those that were there levying Soldiers (for the
Difference betwixt the King and the Parliament was not yet put to an end) in
order to enlist himself a Soldier; and being brought thither, he was tempted of
them by large offers to engage in the Service, but he was so far from yielding
to their desire, that he accosted them with this short, but tart Discourse:
What! do you think to wheedle me into your Service by your large Promises? I
would not give my self for a Soldier, though you should threaten to inflict the
greatest Evils upon my refusal. What! am not I now a Soldier already? Do not I
now wage War and Fight? But the War I am engaged in is not such as brings
certain Destruction both to the Conqueror and conquered; to the former the
certain ruin of his Soul, and to the latter a risk of losing his Life; but my
Fighting is to abstain from all these Quarrels, Wars, and Arms; nay, not only
to abstain from them, but to conquer and subjugate those Passions and Lusts,
from whence they arise. I am a Soldier, waging War, and fighting, but so as to
provide for the Peace and Safety of my self, of you, and all Men, both here in
this Humane Society, and also with God. Which Practice would to God both ye and
all the World would study to imitate. Wherefore I desire of you that ye give me
no more trouble of this Nature; and that ye be aware of running your selves
into a worse condition than ye are in already, lest by indulging your selves
this liberty of sinning against God the Emperor of the World, his wrath be
kindled against you, and when the time for Vengeance shall come, and the Door
of Mercy shut up, ye perish for ever. This Discourse was so far from putting a
stop to the fury of his Adversaries, that it spurred on their fierceness and
cruelty the more, which they expressed not in Imprisoning him as before, but in
casting him into a nasty, stinking Dungeon, dug under Ground, where Thieves
and Malefactors were kept. But after other six Months he got out from thence
also. And this Affliction did not in the least scare him from prosecuting his
Design, but he still became bolder and brisker, Propagating his Doctrine, not
only in the Counties of Nottingham, Darby, and Leicester (which were the
Theater and Stage where this great Engine did first appear) but through all
Yorkshire, Lancaster, and the vast Tract of Lands called Westmorland; in all
which places he unweariedly preached his Doctrine and Discipline, being
followed by vast numbers of the People. This is certain, that none of all the
Quakers ever preached or discoursed so often, and unto so many different
Hearers, as George Fox; and he himself never made so many Discourses as in
these places, and at this time. But because he could not be present every where
to speak Face to Face, he now began to write Letters to several Societies, and
likewise to particular Men; Instructing and Admonishing them in what he
imagined most necessary to be known and practiced. And to this day are to be
seen in many peoples hands whole bundles of Letters wrote by him to the same
Persons: Though he did not express any great strength of Discourse or Reasoning
in these his Letters, for that he both wrote such Characters as were not easy
to be read, and also in so rude and simple a Style, sometimes most difficult
and intricate, that it is a wonder any Man so much exercised in speaking and
discoursing, should have been the Author of them.

The first Letter he wrote was in the Year Fifty, to his Friends, which I shall
here insert. It was wrote Originally in English, and is translated from the
Original into Latin, which done from the Latin into English again (for the
Original is not in our hands) runs thus. The Lord is King over all the Earth;
wherefore all ye Nations praise and magnify your King in true Obedience,
purity of Holiness and Sincerity. O! consider in true Obedience, how ye should
know the Lord with Understanding; mark and consider in silence, in submission
of Mind, and ye shall hear the Lord speaking to you in your Minds. His Voice is
sweet and pleasant. His Sheep hear his voice, and will give ear to no other.
And when they hear his voice, they rejoice and obey, and also sing for joy. O!
their hearts are filled with Eternal Triumphs. They sing forth and praise the
Eternal God in Zion. Their Joy shall none take from them. Glory be to the Lord
for ever. G. F.

In this same Fiftieth Year Elizabeth Hooton, born and living in Nottingham, a
Woman pretty far advanced in Years, was the first of her Sex among the Quakers
who attempted to imitate Men, and Preach, which she now (in this Year)
commenced. After her Example, many of her Sex had the confidence to undertake
the same Office. This Woman afterward went with George Fox into New England,
where she wholly devoted her self to this Work; and after having suffered many
Affronts from that People, went into Jamaica, and there finished her Life. But
I return again to Fox.

While he thus continued so forward and zealous for Preaching his Doctrines,
his condition was very various; strange Events and Accidents falling out, of
which I think it convenient to give you a short Account. It happened in
Yorkshire, in a Town toward the East Part of it, called Beverlar, that he went
into the Church, being mightily moved in Spirit: where he first kept himself
silent, till the Minister had finished his Sermon; then before all the People
he thundered out his extemporary and reviling Harangues, and presently conveyed
himself away; thus he escaped safe and unpunished. Some few days after that, at
Crantsick, as the Minister had just read the Text of his ensuing Discourse
(being a Man of considerable Worth and Fame) he fell upon him with a Discourse,
the only purport of which was to express his contempt of the Dignity, Order,
and Religion of this worthy Divine. Which Action might have brought him into
extreme danger, for every body almost accounted it a signal of so great
Impudence and Insolence, that they thought no Vengeance too great, nor no
Resentment too high for so villainous and injurious a Crime, yet he escaped
unpunished. But I come to give you a larger Account of a certain Sermon of his.
Being in Leicester, his Native Country, he had occasion to Travel in that
Country with some of his Friends. He spies from afar a certain Town, not
knowing which it was; but having asked of his Friends, comes to understand that
it was Lichfield. Thither he presently resolves to go, and pronounce Curses
against all the Citizens, high or low, or of whatever degree; for they were all
equally unknown to him. While I call to remembrance the Ancient Annals of the
British Affairs, it comes into my Mind, that at this very Town, in the time of
Dioclesian the Emperor, there was a great many Christian Martyrs miserably
afflicted, and tortured with all manner of exquisite Torments: And then in the
Reign of Henry the Sixth, King of England, there was a Battle fought betwixt
the King and the Earl of Salisbury, near to this place, in which great numbers
of Men were slain on both sides, and the King's Army almost totally routed. So
that on both these occasions this Ground was covered with the Blood of so many
Men. And besides, in Fox's own time, while that Fatal Civil War was raging in
England, betwixt the King and the People, in the same Fields, and this very
same Town, there was a great deal of Humane Blood shed; all which Fox was not
ignorant of. Thither (I say) did he presently direct his course; and because he
did not know the right Road (for he had now parted from his Friends) being
impatient of delay, he followed the sight of his Eye, moving in a straight
line, without winding or turning to either hand, leaping over rugged uneven
places, Hedges, Ditches, and all that came in his way. But before he arrived at
the Town, he sees some Shepherds, to whom he approaches, and stays a little
with them. It was now the Winter Season, and very cold, yet he was burning like
a Fire: Therefore he throws off his shoes, leaving them with the Herds; and
thus barefooted (without his Shoes) he made haste to get at the Town, where
running up and down, he cries, Woe! Woe! to this bloody City, Lichfield; not
adding why or to what purpose he had said so, or what had been done there, or
what was to come to pass; or with what Design and Signification he had said so,
what Exhortation he would give them for amendment of their Lives, or what other
Caution was fit and seasonable on such an Occasion. Of all these he could give
no Account, neither then, nor any time afterward; neither would he ever
interpret or explain this any further, than that God had revealed it to his
Spirit. But a little after, he came to know of some Friend of his, that in this
City, and adjacent Country had been seen some Bloody Spectacle. While he thus
continued running up and down, crying the same words, the Citizens suffered him
to pass, imagining him to be a Madman, rather to be pityed or laughed at, than
called to an Account. At length becoming cold all over his Body, and his Joints
stiff with cold, and being weary with running, he goes out of Town, and returns
to the Shepherds; and when he had come at them, he was now so inslam'd with a
Heavenly and Divine Fire, that he mattered not whether he put on his Shoes
again or not. But being admonished of God, he puts them on, and leaves that
place. It frequently fell out, that Men believing him to be a Madman, suffered
him to go unpunished. But his Confidence and Constancy did not always escape
so. For in other places he was forbid access, or Lodging, or Refreshing himself
in his Journey, to satisfy Hunger and Thirst; so that he was sometimes forced
to lie whole Nights in the open Fields, without Meat or Sleep. And if he came
to a place unawares, or of a sudden, he was sometimes repulsed with threats and
hard words; and if he adventured to enter a Church, and make any Public
Discourse, or contradict the Preacher, the Congregation frequently rewarded
him, not only with words, but with good hard blows, and that sometimes very
cruelly: As it happened in Yorkshire, at Warnsfort and Doncaster.

At Tickhill, while he was yet speaking in the Church, they beat him so
severely, that the Blood sprung out of his Face; then having caught him by the
Neck, they dragged him out of the Church, Caning him, till at length he got
into some House, and from thence conveyed himself privily out of the Town. But
he was no where so hardly and cruelly dealt with, as at Vlverstown in
Lancashire; where he entertained a sharp Debate with the Minister for some
time; after which the Mobb (not all the Congregation, but the ignorant and
meaner sort, Youths, Children, and such like) did immediately attack him,
thumping him with their Fists while in the Church, then dragging him from
thence, they trampled him under foot, so mangling and tearing him, that he was
in danger of his Life; but in the mean while neither did he refrain from
beating and wounding some of them; which, though against his Conscience, yet
was not much blameworthy. The rest of the Congregation endeavored by words to
mollify the enraged Mobb, and to rescue the distressed poor Man from their
merciless hands. At another place in this same County, when he was making
toward them, they assembling together into Companies, and being slightly
armed, came out and met him, denying him access into their Bounds. But he still
remained constant, with an unmovable Patience, doing the same Actions still,
maugre all the danger that surrounded him. And while these Evils and Sufferings
were ready to grieve and pierce his Soul, he took it to be an Admonition and
Exhortation from God to adventure upon every thing; he imagined that God showed
him large Countries in the top of a high Hill, in which he had chosen a
peculiar People to himself. He boasted that he found in the declining of that
Hill a Fountain, whose Waters were most comfortable and effectual for quenching
Thirst, after he had wanted Meat and Drink for some days; that a little while
after he saw a multitude of Men clothed in white Raiment approaching unto God,
toward the gentle and gliding streams of these Waters. All these things he
diligently remarked, writing them down in his Papers, and communicating the
same to his Friends.

Now was the Year of our Lord, One Thousand, Six Hundred, Fifty Two, after
which this Sect did wonderfully increase, having been ever before but (as it
were) in its Birth and first Appearance. There be two things that usually
concur to procure an easy Progress and honorable Reception to any new
Undertaking: The Dignity and Fame of those who engage in it, and the
Convenience and Opulency of their Place of Meeting and Assembling together.
Now, whereas heretofore Fox with his Adherents and Followers had none to be of
their Society save those of the meanest and lowest Rank; nor any to Preach and
Teach, save those of the Vulgar, Ignorant sort of People; now were added to
them many Opulent and Considerable Men, of good Reputation and Dignity in the
World, who not only made up the number of their Hearers, but likewise supplied
the place of Doctors and Teachers. And, whereas before they used to Assemble
themselves together promiscuously in any place, whether in Town or Country; and
he of 'em who had a mind to speak or discourse to the People, was obliged to
take occasion of the casual Conflux and Congregations of the People, either in
Churches, Courts, Marketplaces, Fields, Streets, or wherever occasion served;
from which oft-times followed Insurrections of the People to beat and stone
them; sometimes to cast them in Prison, and bind them with Irons and Chains;
now they began to Meet in Houses, and there to Teach and go about Sacred
Things, which was a much safer way, for that thus they were freed from many
Inconveniences, particularly that of lying open to the Fury of the Mobb. Both
these Advantages accrued unto them by degrees, and sometimes by wonderful
chance.

I have already told what Countries Fox did mostly resort to at this time,
Yorkshire, Lancashire, and Westmorland. The first in Yorkshire that became his
Disciple, and afterward his Colleague, was William Densbury, born in that
County, who had once been a dealer in Wool in Wakefield, and afterward a
Trumpeter in Oliver Cromwels Army. This Man heard Fox Preach one day; and when
toward the Evening of that same very day Fox went out into the Fields to
Meditate, he followed after him, and told him, that of a long time he had
bended his Mind upon the same Design that he had undertaken; and that now he
was so moved with his Discourses, that he wholly gave up himself to be his
Disciple: Upon which Fox and he consulted seriously together about their
Design. A little while after, Densbury became a Preacher, performing the Office
of a Trumpeter of the new Doctrines to this new Church with a great deal of
Applause. And though he spent the best part of his succeeding Life in Prison,
because of his Boldness and Confidence in sounding this Religious Trumpet; yet
this Affliction he patiently endured, not suffering Trouble or Anguish to
invade his Mind, but continuing constant and cheerful in receiving the Injuries
he suffered for the sake of a good Conscience, and of that Holy Office he had
undertaken for the Salvation of Mankind. His very Enemies acknowledge that he
was Eloquent, and every way fit for managing what relates to that Society.

The next that followed him in this Office was James Naylor, once a Country
Boor not far from Wakefield, afterward a Soldier in the Parliament's Army, who
not long after he had undertaken this Office, met with wonderful Accidents, as
I shall relate, when I come to that Period of Time. After him followed Thomas
Aldham, who oft-times coveted the Company of Ecclesiastical Men, for to
Discourse and Dispute with them; nay, he affected also to converse with the
Politicians, and Cromwell the Protector himself, whom he went to, partly to
manifest his Learning and Knowledge, and partly to obtain his Consent and
Belief to their Articles; so great Confidence and Hope he placed in that Man.
Next to him was Philip Scafey, Minister of a Public Church at a little Village
in this same County, near to Whitby, called Robin Hood's Bay* upon the Seaside.

In Lancashire, the first that applied himself to Fox and his Society, was
Richard Hubberthorn, born in the Northern Parts of that County, of good
Parentage, and liberally Educated, who was at that time a Captain in the
Parliament's Army; and so over-Religious, that oft-times at the Head of his
Company he would make Discourses to them, as if he had been a Preacher. And not
long after he became a Preacher among the Quakers, which Office he discharged
so well in their Eyes, that they all unanimously gave him a very high
Testimony. His Writings left behind do testify him to have been no
contemptible Disputant, but too violent and tart, and sometimes bitter and
reviling. Next were Thomas Tailor, and his Brother Christopher Tailor, both
Public Ministers in that Country. Next was Richard Farnsworth, Author of a
Book which treats of the Pronouns Tu and Vos, or Thou and Ye; wherein he proves
by Examples picked out of the Holy Writings, that it is unlawful in our
particular Discourses one with another, to use any other compellation than Thou.

In Westmorland, the first that joined to this Society, and became Preacher
among them, was John Adlance; then Francis Howgil, formerly a Tailor at
Appleby, at that time a Sectary Preacher to an Independent Congregation, who
returned the Money he had formerly received of his Congregation for a Reward of
his Service; a Man of Learning, and as well qualified as many of that Sect.
After them came Edward Borough, a Young Rustic Fellow, of Sixteen or
Seventeen Years; but equaled to a Man, and designed for great things. Last of
all, I shall mention one George Whitehead, who at this time joined himself to
this Sect, taking upon him also the Office of a Teacher; he was then Minister
to the Church of Lancaster, talked of among the Learned for his skill in both
Tongues, his Piety and Modesty; and Famous at this very day, though stricken in
Years, for his dexterity of Disputing and Managing Controversies, both with
Tongue and Pen. I omit the Names of others. But it is material here to Remark,
that the chiefest and greatest part of those who engaged in this Society, were
such as were either Members of Presbyterian Churches, or Independants, or
Brownists, or Baptists; of which latter a great many bore Arms for Cromwell and
the Parliament; for the most part of their Army consisted of such kind of Men:
And not only these Sectaries themselves gave themselves to this Society, but
even their Doctors and Teachers, whose Example and Influence induced many of
their Congregations to do the like. So that the first Congregation of Quakers
was a multitude of People, not so extravagant or faulty in their Manners, as
fluctuating and unsettled in their Religions, which were very various and
discrepant one from another; and of which England had now great store, Those of
them that were better accommodated than others, fitted their Houses, and other
Private places for receiving their Assemblies when congregated for Divine
Worship. They did not exclude even those who were not of their Party, if they
came in Peaceably, only to hear and see, without intermedling with any thing;
unless they suspected or understood 'em to be Spies, coming upon some ill
Design to trap them, or hatch some Mischief against them.

Fox was very diligent in insinuating himself and his Doctrines into the
Affections of those who were Men of Dignity and Power; who though they were not
fitter to Judge of his Design, yet were more capable to advance and propagate
that Interest, and he gained not a few of them. Among whom were some
Magistrates greater or lesser, who like Loadstones drew many of their underling
Inferiors after them. But there happened likewise at this time a memorable
Instance of the Progress and Advancement of Fox and his Adherents in
Lancashire, which is not here to be omitted. There lived in Lancashire Thomas
Fell, (one of the Judges) who with his Wife Margaret Fell, were famous and
renowned for Religion and Piety. Fox having made himself acquainted with them,
became so Familiar in their House, that it was always open to him, when he
pleased to come there, and all things in it at his Service. But the Husband
continued still steadfast to the Reformed Church, being a true Lover, and
sincere Practiser of the Reformed Religion all his Life long; so that he was
not fond of Fox's Church-Conventicles, nor would he join himself to his
Society; yet he was not so averse from it, but that he thought it should be
suffered, and enjoy its Liberty; so that he resolved to defend and vindicate
the same from all Injury. And afterward when Fox was accused by many Ministers
of the Church before the Judges at Lancaster, for having used some horrible
Expressions in his Discourses to the People, such as, That God taught Lies and
Fallacies, and that his Word, the Holy Scriptures, contained many Lies; this
Judge with some others defended him, asserting all these Slanders to be
injuriously affixed upon him, and maliciously feigned without any ground: Thus
he relieved him, not only from the danger of his Life, he had otherwise been
in, but also from all fear and apprehension; and after this time he always
appeared a great Enemy to the Opposers of Fox and his Society, rendering all
their Efforts against him ineffectual. But when the Hatred and Envy of Fox's
Antagonists grew to so great a height, that he could no longer restrain them,
and fearing they should become his Enemies likewise, he seldom went to the
Public Meetings, shunning to hear their Voices, whose different Manners,
Designs, and Contrivances he so much abhorred. So much for the Husband: But as
to the Wife, she totally forsook the Reformed Churches, dedicating her self
entirely to be a Member of the Quakers Society, and spending all her time in
their Company. Her Husband loved her exceedingly, and was much taken with her
Piety, so that she could easily obtain of him this favor, that her House might
be a Receptacle for Fox and his Colleagues, and also a place of Meeting for all
the Society to Assemble in together, as often as they would, for the Public
Performance of Sacred Duties; as indeed it was, and continued so after his
death, till the death of Fox her second Husband. Not long after her Conversion
to this new Religion, she began to abandon her Distaff and Womanly Instruments,
betaking her self to Preach and Teach, Instructing the People not only Viva
Voce, but by several Books wrote and published by her; by which means she
gained many Proselytes. And after this time her House and Family became, as it
were, a School and Nursery for all that Sect, both Hearers, Preachers, and
Students, of both Sexes; and accordingly sent out about this time one William
Caton, a Young Man of Pregnant Parts, conspicuous for his Modesty and Learning,
whom Judge Fell had taken into his Family, for a Companion to his Eldest Son,
that by his good Example he might Encourage and Conduct him to a Virtuous
Behavior. This worthy Young Man became afterward very Famous and Renowned for
his great Accomplishments, both at home and abroad (in Holland.) But this was
not all. Leonard Fell, a Son of the Family, followed his Example, as one
Comrade imitates another, or a Disciple traces the footsteps of his Master;
being fondly loved and caressed by his Father, for that he introduced into his
Family that Sacred Office of a Minister: His Brother, Henry Fell, imitated his
Elder Brother. They both became Great and Famous Teachers, and tenacious
defenders of that Sect. After the Males of the Family followed Sarah Fell their
Sister, undertaking the same Office; whom these People do so much extol, that
they say, she was not only Beautiful and Lovely to a high degree, but
wonderfully Happy in Ingeny and Memory; so stupendiously Eloquent in
Discoursing and Preaching, and so effectual and fervent in her Addresses and
Supplications to God, that she ravished all her beholders and hearers with
Admiration and Wonder. She applied her self to the study of the Hebrew Tongue,
that she might be more prompt and ready in defending and proving their Doctrine
and Principles from the Holy Scriptures; and in this study the Progress she
made was so great, that she wrote Books of her Religion in that Language. This
is that Family which Fox came afterward to be a Member of, when upon the Death
of Fell, the Husband, he married Margaret his Widow; of which I shall have
occasion to speak afterward. I now return to the Order of Times and Places
that corresponds to the Actions of Fox and his Colleagues.

While Fox is propagating his Doctrine in the Countries abovementioned in the
Year Fifty Two, of a sudden there appeared some in Cambridgeshire (a place
considerably distant from the Countries where Fox was now residing) who owned
themselves Members of this New Church. Among whom excelled James Parnel, a
Youth of Fifteen Years of Age, well skilled in the Tongues, and of no obscure
Birth or Condition. Because the History of this Youth's Life and Actions is but
short, I shall here insert the same in one perpetual thread of Discourse. This
Young Man having so boldly adventured in so tender an Age on such an
Enterprise, was disowned, disinherited, rejected, and shut out of Doors by his
Parents, Friends, and Relations, all upon this Account. Being thus forsaken and
left to himself, and receiving but sorry assistance from his new Friends, he
was obliged to live sparingly and meanly; yet nevertheless he continued
steadfast and eager in pursuing the same Design. And after having frequently
debated with his Condisciples and others concerning their Religion and his own,
and in this condition of Life spent two Years, he comes into the County of
Essex, and Clothes himself with the Office of a Preacher, which accordingly he
performed in the Fields. Then in the Year Fifty Five he goes to Colchester, and
the next day after his arrival Preaches there, and entertains many Disputations
and Dialogues with the Doctor and Reader to that Church, both publicly in the
Church, and in his own Lodgings, and elsewhere; by which one day's work he
converted many to his Religion. Having staid here some few days, he goes to
Cogshall, where he went to Church, and heard the Minister Preach a Sermon
against the Quakers; upon which when Sermon was ended, he answered and resuted
him in Public Church. Then retiring from Church, he was caught, and brought to
Colchester, and there put into a Castle or strong Prison. Afterward he was
taken to Chelmsford, to appear before the Judges, but they, because they could
not finish and conclude the Business, remitted him back to Colchester, where he
was blocked up in a Cave, in some high craggy place, where having endured
Hunger, want of Sleep, and Cold, for a long time, becoming benumbed in this
nasty Dungeon, and at length misfortunately falling, and bruising his whole
Body, he finished his unhappy days, notwithstanding all the Complaints and
Addresses he made himself, and all the Entreaties and Solicitations made to
the Magistrate by his Friends for relieving him out of all these Miseries. It
is reported that before his Death, he sometimes was heard to say, One hour's
sleep shall put an end to all my Troubles. When Death approached, he said, Now
I go away; then he fell asleep; and about an hour thereafter he awaked, and
yielded up the Ghost. His Body was tumbled away to the place where Malefactors
are executed, and interred

In this same Year this Doctrine and Scheme began to diffuse it self beyond the
Countries where Fox was now making his Terms with the Neighboring County of
Cumberland; in which great numbers associated themselves to this Party. Amongst
the more Remarkable of these new Converts, the first was one Thomas Lawson, at
that time Public Minister to a Church at a Village called Ramside in
Westmorland; afterward he continued both the Exercise of this Function among
these People, and likewise gave himself to the study of Herbs; and after he
came to London, became the most noted Herbalist in England. Next after him
followed John Wilkinson, Pastor to a Church at Embleton in Cumberland, who
afterward proved a Famous Preacher among the Quakers, both in Scotland and
Ireland. All his Hearers had deserted him, and joined to the Quakers; upon
which being forsaken, he followed after them, and became of the same Profession
with them. And now both in Cumberland, Northumberland, and the Bishopric of
Durham, a great many of all Ranks and Degrees embraced this New Religion. So
that having thus overrun all the North of England, it began to spread it self
toward Scotland. But as the multitudes of their Followers increased, the Envy
and Malice of their Adversaries was spurred up the more against them. For they
were not only laughed at and derided every where, but many Reproaches and
Calumnies were also thrown upon them, and many Wicked and Impious Principles
and Practices imputed to them. In some places Orders were given to the
Constables and Officers to detain Fox, or any other Quaker, in firm Custody,
whenever they could meet with them, or else to hinder them access into their
Precincts. Accordingly Naylor and Howgil of Appleby are taken and put in
Prison: As also Fox is apprehended and imprisoned at Carlisle in Cumberland;
whom they looked upon as an Heretical, Blasphemous Arch-Impostor and Deceiver;
the Head and Ringleader of this deceitful Crew. And it was confidently
reported, that the Judges were consulting among themselves, whether they should
put this Man to Death for his incessant Frauds and Enormities. But it happened
quite otherwise, for Fox was absolved and dismissed, without any other Affront
or note of Ignominy, save that they severely checked and reproved him. William
Caton and John Stubs were whipped at Maidston in Kent.

In Lancashire their Meetings were opposed with great violence. At length
because the Doctrine and Sect of the Quakers was not yet known in the other
Parts of England, especially in London, the chief Seat and Compend of the whole
Kingdom, where they knew nothing of this New Religion, save what they heard by
the wandering Reports that were murmured about: Those who were the principal
Administrators and Managers of that Church, thought fit to select some of their
Number that excelled for dexterity of Speaking and Teaching, who should go into
these other Parts of the Kingdom, and perform the Office of Converting and
Convincing the People. These were the Evangelists and Apostles of the New
Church, who were sent out in the Year Fifty Four. Accordingly they directed
their course first into Wales; first, North Wales, then South Wales, and the
adjacent Countries; and at length to London, the Capital City (though far
distant from the places of their first Pilgrimage) from whence, as from the
Head, they might diffuse their Doctrines through all the Members, and infect
the whole Body of the Kingdom with their Religious Tincture. Howgil and
Borough were at that time Men of great Authority and Esteem among them. These
were the two chief Ministers appointed to Preach their Doctrines in Wales, and
at London; though Borough went afterward to London alone, being invited so to
do by a strong itch and desire he had to be there. When they came together to
Wales, and had begun to sow the Seeds of their Doctrine, they found some who
received them readily. Among those who embraced their Religion, in that
Country, and even among the first, were several Justices of Peace, particularly
one Peter Price, a Famous Preacher among them from that time to this very day.
Moreover there happened a very wonderful Conversion of one John Vp-John, a
Member of an Independent Congregation, who was sent by his Pastor, Morgan
Lloyd, into the North, to inform himself, both by seeing and hearing, what sort
of a Man Fox was, (who was then in those Countries) what for People the Quakers
might be, and what were the Doctrines they Taught, and to bring him certain
word of the same; for he had heard many things of them which he doubted to be
false. He performs the Journey, and returns possessed with their Principles;
and shortly thereafter undertakes the Office of a Preacher among them, opposing
himself vehemently to his Ancient Pastor and Doctor, and to all the
Congregation, reproving and accusing them and their Religion, exhorting all to
follow him; and persuaded many to separate from them. Some few Years after, he
traveled through all Wales, Preaching and teaching every where he came to, in
Towns, in the Fields, in the Public Roads and Streets, Marketplaces, Inns,
etc. exhorting Men to Repent; sometimes he had Fox for a Companion and Witness
of his Actions. And though he was sometimes cast into Prison, yet when released
again, he set about his old Trade as vigorously as ever. Howgil stays in that
Country for some considerable time; but in the mean time that he is Preaching
there, and the other Evangelists busy at the same work at their respective
Posts in the several places of the Kingdom, Borough goes for London, where few
of his Sect had gone before him, that being the place he loved and longed
mightily to see. The time of his abode there, though he went sometimes to other
places and returned again, yet he mostly confined himself to the City, till at
length in the Year Sixty Two, when blocked up in Prison, and having patiently
and constantly grappled with many Tormenting Evils that surrounded him, and
with a Grievous and Mortal Disease, he yielded up the Ghost. While he was in
London he bended all his Thoughts and Cares how to be most Serviceable to that
Interest, and so to discharge his Office, that he might not disappoint the
Hopes and Expectations which his Associates had conceived of his Success. And
because he could not always meet with fit and opportune Places and Occasions of
Preaching, he sometimes promiscuously improved every occasion (whether
seasonable or not) to that effect, thinking no time or place unseasonable or
improper for promoting the Salvation of Mankind, of which I subjoyn one
Example. All that are acquainted with the City of London, cannot but know that
vulgar and frequent Custom among the meaner Tradesmen, Shooe-makers, Tailors,
etc. their Apprentices and Journeymen, of getting together into some byplace,
where they struggle and wrestle with one another, till either by pulling them
down, or tripping them up, they throw them. Borough accidentally passes by the
place, where a whole Band of them were at this Exercise. He draws near, looks
on, and waits to see what the issue of the Spectacle would be. At length a
lusty Young Fellow, and dextrous Wrestler, appears in the Field, who throws
them all round; first one, then another, and at length a third; yet even then
he unwearied, challenges any fourth to encounter him. The whole Company stands
amazed at the boldness and dexterity of the Fellow, none of them daring to
enter the Field, save Borough; who steps into the Ring, and moves toward the
Triumphant Victor, who was insulting over all the rest. He thinking Borough
meant also to try his Skill in Wrestling, makes ready to receive him. But
Borough looking austerely and gravely upon him, in some few severe words
checks his Fury and Fortitude, so that both his Courage and Strength were
overcome and vanquished. Then turning himself to the Circle of the Bystanders,
addresses himself to them thus: It is a barbarous and cruel Spectacle to see
Men delight so much in this Exercise, fitter for and more becoming Brutes than
Men; which the wildest of the irrational Creatures abstain from, unless
provoked and irritated to the same. We have another Conflict to mind, which is
more consonant to our Natures, and allowed of God; nay, which both the Law of
Nature, and the Common Law implanted within us by God, and his Divine Word
revealed from above, do Approve, Command, and Encourage. I mean that fight
wherein we are all engaged, as being the Soldiers of Jesus Christ, and
fellow soldiers one with another; striving with all the endeavors of our Souls
and Bodies to encourage and invite one another to pursue this fight of Faith
and Piety, that at length we may become Victors, and obtain Eternal Life. Which
being spoke, though most of the Multitude gave little heed to what he said, yet
some of them being moved with a sudden heat of Reverence and Fear of God, and
afterward bethinking themselves more diligently of these words, began to
understand their Duty aright, and abstain from such vain Exercises and
Spectacles, altering the whole Scene of their Lives, and afterward conforming
to the Doctrine and Religion of the Quakers, incorporating, themselves into
their Society. Thus was it that Borough by his indefatigable diligence picked
up so many Followers and Adherents both in City and Country. The number of the
Proselytes at London was afterward much increased when Fox came to that City:
For he was the Man among them all who pursued his business with the greatest
Application and Diligence, maugre all the Difficulties and Dangers stood in his
way. I may freely say, that there is not one Church in any County Fox came into
(from the beginning of his Ministry to this very time) nor any place of
Religious Worship frequented either by those of our Profession, or others, that
he did not visit, taking occasion there to disprove the received Principles,
and advance his own; not one day on which they used to Congregate for Religious
Service, that he did not punctually observe, betaking himself to some
Congregation or other, and disturbing their Services with his Accusatory
Libels. Nor did he refrain from using the same Importunacy with the Military
Men, among whom, though the greatest part of them differed vastly from our
Common Soldiers, since they only carried Arms for the Liberty and Religion of
their Country, and lived innocent and harmless Lives, yet there were many light
vain Fellows, dissolute and corrupted in their Conversation, who loved rather
to be enjoying themselves in Taverns or Alehouses, than hearing Religious
Discourses. Fox used to be running among them, boldly and freely reproving them
to their faces, not only for what he found faulty in their Religion, but for
the Vices of their private Lives. So that by his courage and boldness he
overcame all that stood in his way; neither did he take it ill to be called
bold and forward, but rather gloried in being such. Nay, he came to that
length, that oftener than once or twice in midst of great crowds, he would brand
some Women, that he had never seen in his life before, for being Witches and
Sorceresses, which he pretended to do by a discretive Spirit within him. But in
all these his Accusations, I do not find that ever there was any Experiment
made of the Art of these Women, or any Trial made of it, or any Credit given to
him, unless by some that were prepossessed with the same Fancy of the Women
before. Wherefore it is no wonder that he met with such Indignities and
Affronts every where, insomuch that sometimes several of the People would join
together and Assault him openly; others would lie in wait to take Advantage of
him. It is much more wonderful that he who was so often sought after,
apprehended, imprisoned, and delivered into the hands of his Enemies, should
have escaped so often, or survived so great and many Troubles. However he always
acknowledged and returned thanks to the Almighty for that Divine Assistance
which he said he never wanted in time of his bitterest and severest
Afflictions; nay, which appeared so often in his behalf, taking Vengeance after a
wonderful manner of his Injurious Enemies, and such as contrived or executed
such Wickedness against him. Among many Examples which might be adduced, I know
none more wonderful and worthy to be related, than this following, which he
used so often to make mention of among his Brethren, and confirm with many
words. At Olican in Yorkshire a Band of Men had combined together to kill him,
and for that end came rushing into the Convention where Fox was; but so soon as
they cast their Eyes upon him, they were all so astonished, and filled with
Fear and Confusion, that none durst to move or attempt any thing. Not long
thereafter one of these Men happened to kill another Man, and was seized as
guilty of Murder: Another of them, who used as he passed by the Quakers, to put
out his Tongue and ridicule them, exposing both himself and the Quakers to the
Derision and Laughter of the Multitude, had his Tongue swelled so big, that it
hanged out of his Mouth, and he could not draw it in; which new sort of Disease
in a short time cut the Thread of his miserable Life. But I return to speak of
Fox's coming to London.

There happened a Memorable Accident both at Weston in Leicestershire, and at
London. Fox was yet remaining in that Country, and chanced to be in that place;
where he was in a Congregation of his Brethren going about Sacred Service, when
in the mean time some Ministers to Independent and Presbyterian Congregations
Address Francis Hacker, an Officer in the Army, desiring of him that he would
send of his Soldiers to suppress that irregular Meeting; accordingly the
Soldiers are sent, and Apprehend Fox in the middle of the Assembly, bringing
him Captive to the Officer; who having examined him, sends him away Prisoner
for London, to be Judged there, and undergo the condign Punishment of his
Offenses. After some Years Hacker acknowledged that he did this by the
Instigation and Influence of these Ministers; which Confession he made the very
day before he was hanged, having been found guilty of the Murder of the King.
Fox arriving at London, is laid up in Prison; and after having lain some time
there, is carried to Court, to appear before Cromwell, then Protector. Cromwell,
after having entertained long Discourses with him backwards and forwards, and
given many Evidences of his Benevolence and Good Will toward him and his
Faction, absolves him; ordering him to go into a large spacious Closet, whither
he sent some of his Domestics to entertain him with Discourse, and to invite
him in the Protector's Name to Sup with him. But he refuses, and as having now
obtained all the Liberty he sought after, went away. Unworthy he was to have
such an Opportunity put into his hands of Engaging and Obliging so great a Man,
and of promoting both his own, and his Church's Interest, and also inconsistent
with himself, who could not observe the same Measures with Superior People
that he did with those of an Inferior Rank. When the Protector's Domestics
told him, that Fox had refused to stay, he expressed himself after this manner:
It seems therefore that this People is a Sect which no fair means, nor
courteous dealings can gain, whereas by these I have subjected all other Men to
my self. In this course of Fox's Life and Ministry, which was properly nothing
but a perpetual Pilgrimage, he began now to publish Books, in which he was more
intent upon overturning the Religions of other Churches, than in building up a
new one, or explaining and confirming those Doctrines that he pressed all Men
to embrace: He wrote also many Letters, some to his Colleagues, admonishing and
stirring them up to their Duty; others to those of a different Persuasion,
inviting and exhorting them to receive and entertain the Doctrines which he
taught. And he carefully dispersed both the Books and Letters (which he
likewise caused to be Printed) through all the Counties of England. But as Fox
was constant and diligent in his Office, so his Adherents and Disciples
imitated their Master, Preaching up and down with the greatest servour and
alacrity, converting great numbers of Men, who not only associated themselves
to them, but also signalized their Courage and Constancy in the patient
endurance of all manner of Labor, Fatigue, and Persecution it self, that they
might not seem to recede from the Example and Pattern of their Ringleader Fox.
They met frequently together in every City or Town, either in Houses in the
Nightime, or in the Fields, Desert Places, and Mountains, where the top of
some rising Ground served for a Pulpit to the Preacher. Being therefore that
they thus persisted in their irregular courses, the Magistrates, whose Duty it
was to prevent them, caused them to be Apprehended, cast into Prison, and kept
there for some time. In the mean time Cromwell the Protector by an Edict
discharges the Quakers to Assemble or Congregate together Publicly, having
observed that to be the mind of all the Public Churches; but withal forbids
either the Ecclesiastics, or any other Men to do the least Injury or harm to
them, while they committed nothing against the Government and Public
Constitution of the Kingdom; and when any solicited him to use greater
Severity against the Quakers (as Hugh Peter's his Chaplain frequently did, that
Famous wrangler, that thought he could not exercise his Function of the
Ministry aright, unless he filled all with Confusion and Disorder by his
Tumultuous Complaints) he returned this Answer, That, That Sect the less it was
persecuted, the sooner it would fall and decay of its own accord. But this
Order of the Protector had little or no Effect, for their Adversaries never
wanted occasion of Accusing them of this Crime, and they themselves became
daily more bold and resolute in celebrating these forbidden Assemblies. Hence
ensued many Miseries upon the Quakers, and oft-times Bonds; which they endured
with the greatest Constancy imaginable, of which I give you one Instance. Fox
continuing to disperse his Books and Letters, and keeping Conventicles and
Meetings notwithstanding the Protector's Edict to the contrary; choosing rather
to undergo the greatest Miseries, nay, the loss of Life it self, than to desert
his Office, or desist from this his wonted Course; is cast into Prison at
Launceston in Cornwall, and bound with Chains, under which Affliction he
continued for a long time, as I shall afterward show, designing now to treat
in order not only of the Actions of Fox, but of all the Society. While he was
thus con^ined, and incapable to do any Service to his Church, one of his
Friends and Relations, who preferred the public Good of his Sect, and of his
Friend in particular, to his own Safety and Peace, goes to the Protector while
sitting in Council, and desires of him that Fox might be exempted for his
Captivity and Bondage, and he himself put into his stead; engaging himself to
answer for his Crime, as if he were guilty of it himself. Though Cromwell denied
the Request, yet he could not cease to wonder, and looking to the Council,
says, Is there any of you would do so kind an Office to his Neighbor, though
it conduced never so much to his and the public Advantage? But neither did the
Adversaries of the Quakers want Occasion of accusing and arraigning them for
being guilty of raising Tumults, and rebelling against the Civil Magistrate,
and Public Government, as this one Example can instance. There was at that
time a great many foolish silly Men who were great pretenders to Religion, that
used to raise their Spirits by wonderful Motions of their Bodies, and antic
Gestures, calling it Piety and Sanctity: But on the other hand there was also
many turbulent and factious Spirits striving to innovate and confuse all
things, either upon a religious or civil Pretense; and if any such kind of
Crimes were committed against the Government by these turbulent Fellows, the
Quakers were accused as being the Authors, or at least Abettors and conscious
of the same. But the Quakers did so enervate and nullify this Calumny, that
all Judges pronounced them innocent. It was true indeed, nor did they deny it,
that many who professed to be of their Society, were simple and foolish, morose
and impertinent, and not so polished in their Temper and Conversation, as their
Doctrine and Profession required; who made it their Business to run up and down
the Streets, and frequented Roads, shouting and crying with a hideous Noise and
Clamor, exhorting the People to such Endeavors as they themselves knew nothing
of; and who oft-times committed many Incivilities and Impertinencies. But they
denied that this was peculiar to their Sect or Discipline; for they who had
Authority among them reproved and severely checked such as were guilty of the
like Enormities, and threatened to expel them from their Society, unless they
amended their Ways; of which more afterward. About this time many Converts of
various Stations and Professions were added to this new Church, and were
afterward invested with the Ministerial Function among them, who became
famous, not only enlarging their own Credit and Reputation, but that of their
Sect, both in the Island of Britain, and in the United Provinces of Holland; so
that it shall not be improper in this place to give some account of them, such
as the designed Brevity of this Work may allow. William Ames flourished at this
time, a Man of an acute Ingeny, and indefatigable Industry both in Teaching,
Preaching, and Writing; and so much admired by these Men in this Country (
Holland) that they do not stick to proclaim him a perfect Doctor. He was born
in Somersetshire, near Bristol, but was ill educated in his Infancy and Youth,
having applied himself to nothing that could be useful to humane Life. So that
being of a lazy Temper and dissolute in his Life, he betakes himself to the
Soldiery, that common Refuge for Sluggards, and Covert to all manner of
Wickedness, joining himself unto the King's Army, which in those days was the
most debauched and wicked Crew upon Earth. He first served therefore in the
King's Army till the Death of King Charles I. Then he becomes a Marine Soldier
under Prince Rupert, in the Admiral's own Ship, in which were many Dutchmen, by
whose Converse he acquired Knowledge of that Language: In the mean time he
begins to return to his right Wits, and repent of his bypast Actions and
manner of Life. But because he was not capable of exercising any other Trade
for purchasing a Livelihood than that of being a Soldier, though he now
despised a Military Life, as being liable to many Inconveniences; yet he
continued in the same Condition of Life still, even after his Mind was thus
altered, joining himself to the Parliament's Army then in Ireland, in which he
was made Sergeant to a Company of Foot in one Ingoldsby's Regiment. He
preferred being in this Army than elsewhere, because he thought there was many
good Pious Men in it, and Military Discipline better observed. Moreover, many
in that Army, both of Officers and Sentinels were of the Sect called Baptists,
(who do not differ from the Presbyterians save only in this one Point, that
they do not Baptize the Members of their Church, till they give public
Confession of their Faith, and engage for their own behavior) of whom Ames
entertained very favorable Thoughts; and having joined himself to their
Church, became first an Elder, and then a Minister in the same. It happened,
that while Ames was residing at Waterford, a Town in Munster, Francis Howgil,
and Edward Borough came into Ireland, and to that same very Town, in order to
meet and converse with the Baptists, whom they they thought, of all Men, the
most accommodated and disposed for reception of their Religion, and accordingly
came into their Meetings, and discoursed unto them of those Matters: Ames gave
great Ear to all their Discourses; for his Mind was yet fluctuating and
unsettled in his own Religion, the Cares and Thoughts of his bypast Life
afflicting and distracting his Mind; and in a short time apostatizes from his
own Church to the Quakers, among whom he became a Preacher, discharging that
Function to the great Satisfaction and Contentment of that Party. He wrote a
Tractate entitled A true Declaration of the Witness of God in Man; in which he
relates and explains what Sense he had of the Divine Light within him from his
Infancy to his Conversion, and what Resistance he gave to the same.
Contemporary with him was Stephen Crisp, an acute and polite Meeter, who if he
had added the Study of those Arts and Sciences called Liberal, to the
Promptness and Agility of his Wit, he had given wonderful Specimens of
Learning: He lived in Colchester in Essex, a Weaver by Trade; he served in the
Parliament's Army some Years, having abandoned his Trade, not so much for love
of a Military Post, as for the Defense of his Liberty and Religion; so that he
did not suffer himself to be tainted with the Vices of Soldiers, but lived
honestly and devoutly; at length wearied with Fatigue and Labor, he returns
again to his old Trade, having professed himself a Baptist; at which time James
Parnel came to this Town (he was the first of the Quakers that preached their
Doctrine in this Place) where he taught and disputed publicly. Crisp and his
Father hearing him and being moved with his Discourses, turn Quakers; but the
Son becomes a Preacher: He died at London in September 1694. Contemporary with
them was Thomas Green, in his youth a Coachman, but now a Dealer in Merchandise
at London, and John Higgins a Cobbler at Dover; both Men of brisk Ingenies, and
much esteemed by their Associates: Also John Crosby, a Gentleman of
Bedfordshire, and Justice of the Peace, famous for all manner of Learning, an
eloquent, neat and accurate Man, both in his Discourses and Writings: Also
Josiah Coaly of Bristol, a Gentleman, who in his youth having come with his
other Companions to a Quakers Meeting to ridicule and mock them, was so taken
with their Discourses, that he forsook that Course, and was afterward so much
affected and moved by the Counsel and Advice he received from two of their
Preachers, that he incorporated into their Family, undertaking the same Office
with them of teaching others, while he was yet but twenty Years of Age: It is
said of him, that in Prayer and Supplication he did it with so much Efficacy,
with such a Grace and Mode of Speech, though without Affectation, that he
infinitely surpassed many of his Brethren. He spent most part of his Life in
Travels, extending his Doctrine to several parts of the New-World, resolutely
encountering all Dangers, even that of his Life it self. Another Contemporary
was Isaac Pennington the younger, a Gentleman also of good Birth, whose Father
was Mayor of London, and a Man of eminent Virtue, civil and humane to all, and
much beloved of the Citizens, had not he by his Consent embru'd his hands in
the Blood of the King. His Son had added to the Splendour and Nobility of his
Birth, a diligent Study of all Liberal Arts, and was much exercised in
Learning, not that he might gain or live by it, for he had whereupon to live
with a handsome and magnificent Port; but that he might adorn and beautify
himself, and be capable to help and assist his Brethren. He spent not his Youth
as many do, whose Fortunes and Expectations are l^rge and magnificent, in
Idleness and Debauchery, or in pampering his Belly, and living intemperately;
but in pursuing eagerly and diligently his Studies, exercising his Ingeny with
such Exercises as might be profitable both to himself and others. He had wrote
and published many Books, full of Learning and Eloquence before the Name of a
Quaker was so much as heard of. After he became a Quaker he wrote several
Theological Tractates in a grave, plain Scriptural Style. The last, I shall
mention, that lived about this time, was Charles Marshal of Bristol, a noted
Physician then at London. These were the Men that have overrun all Britain and
the Netherlands, not as Emissaries, but as Ringleaders and Heads of the Party.
I forbear to mention the Carews, the Bailzies, the Smiths, and many others. I
have selected these, not as the Periods and Order of Time conjoined them, but
as they were noted and famous both among the Quakers and others. But I cannot
pass by Samuel Fisher, whom they all extol for the Credit and Pillar of their
Church, and never speak of but with the greatest Panegyricks: a Man singularly
learned, and wonderfully eloquent, because of his accurate Knowledge of the
Greek and Latin Antiquities, which stuck so to him, even after he changed his
Religion and Life, that the Writings which he published since that time, relish
much of the same; though I believe it fell out so contrary to his Will and
Design; at leastwise it is repugnant to the Natures, Customs and Practices of
these Men. His Parents had designed him for a Minister to the Church of
England, and kept him (while a Boy) at Schools and Colleges, in which his
Diligence and Progress was so great that he surmounted most of his Fellows. His
Mind led him mostly to the Study of Eloquence, Rhetoric and Poetry, which were
the Sciences he put the greatest Value upon; so that, as the Roman Orators used
to say, he kept Commerce with all the Muses, that is, he read and perused all
Orators and Poets. Having ended this Academick Course, he was made a Presbyter
of the Church of England, and became Pastor to a Church in the House of some
Nobleman, who was likewise a Man of Eminent Piety and Virtue: He demeaned
himself in this Function so well, that the Report of his Fame invited those who
knew how to Judge of his Ability and Skill for greater things to advance him
higher, to some more dignified Place; accordingly he obtains a Living in Kent,
of five hundred Pounds a year. While he lives there, one of his own
Acquaintance and Friends, called Howard, solicits and disturbs him frequently
about his Religion and Profession and many Rites and Ceremonies used in the
Church: This made Fisher begin to doubt and fluctuate within himself, what he
should make of his Hearers. There came to him, much about the same time, a
Baptist, (a Man of no Learning, at least what is properly accounted Learning,
but of a sternly Countenance, and supercilious Looks, of a ready but flattering
and deceitful Tongue, which knew how to brand all the World besides with an
infinity of Vices, but to conceal or disguise those of his own Society;
extolling and commending all their Actions, gilding over their Errors and
Delusions with counterfeit Glosses) who seeing him waver and fluctuate in his
Mind, accosts him with many fair and specious Words, and those frequently
turning over the same Crambe, till at length he could endure his Discourses no
longer; as we see it frequently fall out, that when Men cannot enervate the
Objections of their Adversaries or discover their Fallacy, they yield to them,
and forsake the Truth; and accordingly he cast off his Religion, divests
himself of his Office, and returns to the Bishop Diploma, which he had got for
to confirm his undertaken Office, and joins to the Church of the Baptists,
becoming a Diphabus, or true baptized; believing That the only true Means to be
incorporated into the City of God, and numbered among his peculiar People. Being
thus destitute of so good a Living, he contented himself with a little he had
of his own, and Farmed a little piece of Ground in the Neighborhood, by which
he had enough to live upon, exercising this innocent and pleasant Trade of
Life, till at length he became a Baptist Minister. About which time Caton and
Stubs came to that Country, and went to visit Fisher, who received them in his
House very kindly, treating them as his Friends and Intimates, though he had
scarce known them before. But they did not press him much to comply with their
Desires for this first time, lest by their preposterous Haste, they had seemed
to encroach upon his Liberty; yet when they returned again a second time, they
inculcated and repeated more vehemently, and frequently what they had spoke to
him before: Upon this he began to waver and consulted his Colleague Hammond upon
the Matter, who was much wrath with him, expostulating the Matter very sharply
before the whole Congregation: At length Fisher forsakes both the Baptists
Society and the Office he was clothed withal, becoming, in a short time, not
only a Professor but a Preacher and a zealous Propagator of Quakerism. He wrote
many Books in Defense of that Religion, among which is a noted one entitled,
The Countryman to the Vniversity-Scholar; in which he refutes the Arguments of
his Adversaries with many pretty and cunning Expressions. So much for this Man.
But because I have already spoke of the Writings of this Man, it is to be
remarked, that all these Men I have hitherto mentioned from the beginning of
this Treatise, did write many Books, nay, great Volumes, if they were all
gathered together, which were published after their Deaths: For it is a Custom
among the Quakers, that when any famous Writer dies, they pick up all his
Writings and print them together, prefixing for a Preface the Testimony of some
noted Men of their Society, of the Integrity and Worth of the dead Authors;
that so those who are bereaved of their Natural Life may still live in the
Memories of their Followers.

These new Ministers, and many others not mentioned, divided themselves into
several Provinces, some of them going up and down England, others traveling
into Foreign Countries, all diligently soliciting and inviting Men to be
Converted; while, in the mean time, Fox the Head and Prince of that Society,
was incessantly proceeding in the Exercise of his Ministry in England, not
daunted or discouraged by all the Evils he grapled with. He had a Custom, when
he designed a Visit for any City, Town, or Village, to premonish and advertise
them, by Letters and Emissaries, of the Time of his coming, and Place of abode,
that all who had a mind to hear him might have timous Advertisement to resort
thither. In the Years fifty six, and fifty seven, he traversed Somersetshire,
Wiltshire, Dorsetshire, Devonshire and the neighboring Counties. At Bristol in
Somersetshire, there was at one time a Meeting of above a Thousand of the
Inhabitants and Neighbors of that Place, in some Woody Place near-by. A little
thereafter, above Two Thousand assembled in one Place in Wiltshire. So much
Footing had this Sect taken in these Countries; and so many Followers and
Adherents had Fox in all the Countries he had been in, among whom were many not
ordinary or mean Persons, but noted and conspicuous Men; some of them Men of
Authority and Trust in the Nation, who shook off that Dignity and the Honor
that attended it, and part of whom became Ministers to the Sect. And the more
Resistance or Opposition was offered to them in their Meeting and Congregating,
the more resolute they were in pursuing their wonted Course. So some were
ordered to watch and observe them, keeping Watches and Guards in the Streets
and Roads near to the Houses and Places where they used to assemble; and as
many as were caught were imprisoned, insomuch that the Number of the Prisoners
and Captive Quakers was seldom under a Thousand. By this time Fox had purposed
to go for London, and communicate the Light of his Doctrine to the great Crowds
and Confluence of People in that great and populous City, thinking that the
most probable way of promoting his Design. And in his Journey thither, stayed
some time upon the Road, losing no Opportunity of propagating his Religion;
taking Advantage in the Inns and Taverns, to apply himself to the other
Lodgers, admonishing them to take good heed what Religion they profess, also to
send hither and thither to invite all that feared God to come into the Inn and
hear him speak or dispute about religious Matters. In which Course he gave the
People Occasion of putting Tricks upon him, and was several times so served, as
the following Examples can Testify; which I should have taken for Fabulous,
and thought unworthy to be here inserted, were they not confirmed, not only by
the Relations of People that were present, but by his own Mouth to his
Followers, and handed down to Posterity by his own Writings, as memorable and
true. At Farnham, after having preached somewhere in that Town, he retires to
an Inn, desiring the Master of the Inn if he knew of any pious, good People, to
give them Advertisement to come to him in the Inn: Accordingly many came, some
Men of Honesty and Religion, others more subtle and cunning than good or
religious. They all heard him preach and express himself with a great multitude
of Words. After he had ended, most of them go away; and some few stay, desiring
the Master of the Inn to cause a Fire to be made in the very same Room, (where
he had preached) for it was now cold Weather, and to bring them something to
drink. In fine they sat there drinking all the rest of the day,
notwithstanding all the Entreaties and Solicitations Fox used to persuade them
to be gone, and demean themselves as good and sober Men; and at length went
away without paying their Reckoning which they left upon Fox who had invited
them thither. The Tapster came and called for the Reckoning from Fox, who
declined such an unjust thing, using many Reasons to the contrary. The Man, who
minded his Money most, pressed him the more to pay it. At length, Fox seeing
that he could not persuade him to desist, paid the whole Sum, writing a Letter
to the Magistrates, full of Wrath and Indignation, warning them to take notice
what manner of Citizens they had, and to take some Measures for reclaiming them
from the like Insolences. The next day he lights at an Inn in Lemnan, which he
found full of Stage Players, Musicians, and Quack-doctors: After he and his
Companions had put up their Horses, and refreshed themselves, they agreed upon
some Problems among themselves of the Natures of Diseases, and the use of
Medicine, and toward the Evening presented the same to that Company, in order
to be considered upon and answered while they lodged in the House. They
rejected their Proposal, flouting at them for Madmen; but Fox and his
Companions took this ill, and caused the Theses to be stuck upon the
Mercat Cross, to be subjected to public View after they were gone. At London
Fox was not so forward as elsewhere, for he did not disturb the Public
Churches, nor raise any Tumult or Crowd in any place, but behaved himself more
cautiously than he used or desired to do. Before his coming thither, many of
great Note had been converted by the Ministry and Influence of Borough: And
these frequently assembled together with Fox, who had many Discourses among
them, and to the People; but after all his utmost Efforts he gained but very
few new Proselites, which was much contrary to his Expectation, having filled
himself with great hopes of the Success of this Journey. However he contents
himself to stay a while longer in this City, where he could see and hear so
many things, and be informed of every thing done in the whole Kingdom; as also
see and observe what opinions Men entertained concerning the Progress and State
of his Religion all over the World. At length having viewed enough of that
City, and satisfied himself, he makes for the Country. There was about this
time a great Multitude of People in Wales, who being of an unsettled and
fluctuating Temper, and fond of every thing New or Singular, abandoned their
former Religion, and professed Quakerism; which Conversion was chiefly wrought
by Howgil, Vp-John, Wilkinson, and others. Thither did Fox direct his Course,
though quite ignorant of the Welsh Language. At first when he came and happened
to preach separately from his brethren, his Labor was all or most part in vain
since so many of his Auditors either understood not his Dialect, or were quite
ignorant of his Language (for his Mother Tongue was the only Language he knew.)
But afterward, when he took into his Society some of the Natives of that
Country, all the Progress he could make, was, that he preached sometimes among
those of his own Persuasion; and those of his Associates that understood
English explained it in Welsh to the rest. So that these his Interpreters were
more Instrumental in propagating this Interest than he; among whom the chiefest
was Vp-John, who had for a long time resided in this Country, applying himself
diligently to the Conversion of those People, of whom he persuaded not a few to
be Quakers. These Interpreters were Fox's Predecessors in this Country, who
being backed by him, run up and down in the Country, the Cities, the Streets,
the High-Roads, etc. inviting and exhorting all Men to repent, and these their
clamorous Harangues had so much effect upon these People, that no Country in
England was so fertile of New Converts to Quakerism as Wales.

And thus did the Sect, Doctrine, and Religion of the Quakers in so short a
time spread over all England, to the year one thousand six hundred and fifty
eight, in which Year these Men proceeded to that height of boldness that they
appointed a General Assembly out of the whole Realm to be held in the House of
John Cross, being a Place that was large and capacious for that purpose, in the
County of Bedford; thereby, as it were, showing and upbraiding their Enemies to
what increase both of Number and Strength they were now arrived, and seeing
that they had not before despaired of the Progress, and Improvement of their
Affairs, that they were also now full of hopes to bring them to perfection, and
altogether assured thereof. There did the Messengers of each particular
Congregation meet, being accompanied with a great number of others, who came
not to speak, but to see only* Here were such Matters transacted as referred to
their spiritual Laws, and tended to the upholding of their Communities; and the
Council was celebrated for three whole Days: I have said a little before, how
Howgil and Buroughs were the first that brought the Opinions of the Quakers
into Ireland, and particularly to Waterford: This was done in the Year fifty
five. In the very same Year were these Men followed toward the carrying on the
same Work by one Man, whose Name was Lancelot Wardal, and three Women, Rebecca
Ward, Elizabeth Fletcher, and Elizabeth Marshal: But those for a long time made
so little Progress in their Affairs, that the Religion of the Quakers was
universally unknown there, that the very Name it self came not, or at leastwise
nothing but the Name within the Verge of their Knowledge. The foresaid
Buroughs was now the first Man that introduced these Opinions into Scotland,
who a little while after was followed by Alexander Parker, who before he took
upon him this new Function, exercised the Trade of a Butcher; which came to
pass in the Year fifty four; but by the Means of these Guides and Teachers
there appeared a greater Concourse of People in Scotland that espoused the
Quakers Cause, and consequently frequenter Meetings of them, whom when the
Nobility and Magistrates, who from the disposition and usage of the Nation, do
not easily admit of a strange Religion, opposed them, they did the more firmly
and intensly hold to it; until at length a Persecution ensued, and that Persons
were ordered into their Houses, to disturb their Meetings, and hale the Men to
Prisons, and some they detained and handled severely for a long time; but for
Brevity's sake I shall add no more hereof: But of Fox I have this further to
say; in the year fifty seven he lived in Cumberland, upon the Borders of
Scotland and so went thither, who, though he were ignorant of the Tongue, yet
knowing and confiding in his Companions, which he took along with him, and whom
he was about to meet with there, he made use of them for his Interpreters; this
man with his Friends have frequent Conferences in Houses about the Unity of
Religion, often preaches amongst them, and goes about all Places, seeking to
find out, or to make known, if he could, more of his Mind. The which he
endeavored to effect with much Labor and Toil, yet he failed of his purpose;
for when he sometimes sent out his Messengers to invite Men to hear him Preach,
and appointed both Time and Place for that purpose, it so happened now and then
that there was not one Man came near him: Besides this, he made it his business
here and there in the Streets where he found a concourse of People, to allure
Men to him, but with the like success. Fox also with a few Followers directed
his Course to the Highlanders of Scotland, who are Men of rude and unpolished
Natures, which when they came to hear, they came down from the Hills to meet
them, and drove them back with their Weapons: Upon this, Fox goes to Edinburgh,
the Capital City of the Kingdom, which when the Council came to know, who were
not ignorant of Fox's Methods, and foreseeing he would not be wanting there
also to play his usual and giddy Pranks, they cite him to appear before them,
and gently require him, if he had no Business in those Parts, thence to depart.
Fox withdraws, but very slowly, visiting in the mean time other Towns and
Places, and trying to bring over Men to his Party, but, as I said, to no
effect. Fox and his Companions during the time of his sojourning in Scotland,
endeavored both by Libels, which Fox together with his Followers and
Associates wrote, and by their Railleries to render the Doctrine and Articles
of Faith of the Scottish Church as odious and hateful to Men as possibly they
could. Wherein they so demeaned themselves, that the Scots thought nothing
enough to be said concerning the Impudence, Revilings, and Cheats of those Men;
for they charged the Ministers of that Church, and persuaded their Followers,
that that Church taught such Articles of Faith, particularly concerning Divine
Election and Reprobation, and the Providence of God, concerning the sins of
Men, according to their ungrounded Opinions and fardled Consequences, as that
Church not only never taught, but such also as she abhorred. Moreover as the
Scots, as well as the English, and also diverse of the Reformed Churches, called
the Lord's Day, whereon Christians abstaining from their daily Labors, give up
themselves to the Worship of God, as it is vulgarly phrased, the Sabbathday, or
day of Rest, according to the Appellation of the Ancient Sabbath of the Jews;
and seeing it did manifestly appear, that all the Scotch Churches did strictly
observe that day, and during the whole time abstained from their Labors, and
demeaned themselves as reverently and decently as they could, Fox and his
Companions wrote and preached every where, that the Scots did wickedly Profane
the Sabbath Day, by keeping of Fairs, and doing of many other momentous things
appertaining to their daily Labor and Business; the which when they were
enforced to explain themselves, they did it in this manner: That the Scots did
those Works on the last day of the Week, but that that day was truly the
Sabbath Day, according to God's Command delivered to the Jews. Moreover, Fox
had this up in the whole course of his Ministry and Peregrination even to this
time, in what place, at what time and part soever of the day he sat any where,
and discoursed with Men of his own Sect, though there were but two or three
present, and that they only saluted one another, this he called, to have had,
to have found an Assembly, as it were of Men, for the Professing of their
Religion; and that the number of their People had so much increased. But if
there were any of his Auditors who did not cry out against them, but were
attentive to what was delivered, and took any thing under consideration, them
he called convinced Persons and Associates; and when it happened that at any
time he met with some who pressed him with some ingenious and sharp Answer or
Question, or Argument; when he was not able to make Answer again, or resolve
the Question, or enervate their Arguments, he went his ways, or thus put off
the matter; That it was a weighty and dangerous Disquisition, that there were
some Persons who made it their business to wrangle, that it was a thing he did
not care for, and that he was very unwilling to Discourse with such Men: And
whereas there were not a few of the number of those that joined with Fox and
the Quakers, who were part of that vast multitude that dissented from the
Public Church of England, and such also as exercised the Functions of
Preachers, and that some of these Men were of scandalous Lives, Tiplers, and
Alehouse-keepers, Fox when he acquainted his Party with his Progresses among
Men, all these without any distinction did he call by one and the same name of
Professors, Presbyters, Teachers, and by such other names, as were commonly
used to be given to the Members and Ministers of the Public Church, thereby
drawing no small Envy and Scandal upon that Church. And all this Fox has
carefully set down in his Journal-Books, and wrote to his Friends, who
believed, approved, and published it all. Moreover, Fox as often as he made
mention of any business that was transacted conjoyntly by himself and Friends,
if any thing was well managed therein, there was no Name so much celebrated as
his own, and he was more especially a great Publisher of his own Affairs; but
these things I shall not pursue at large, nor the History of Fox, as studying
brevity; the Order both of the Thing and the Time requires that I should show
more particularly, what has been the Cause, Occasion, and Original, wherefore
so many Men should so suddenly, which is a very hard thing, fall away every one
from his own Church and Religion to that of these Quakers. The Principal Reason
hereof seems to be, in that Men, among whom there were really many who were
desirous to live Piously and Religiously, and to lead a truly Christian Life,
did imagine, that they saw so much Corruption every where, if not in Doctrine,
yet in Rites, and most assuredly in the Manners of all Societies, that would be
accounted and called Christians, and even Protestants, that if any one
persisted in Communion with any of them, he might very well diffide and despair
of his Salvation; and that indeed there was at this time either no Church, or
that this Church which these new Teachers pretended was that wherein a Man
might and ought to render his self secure, and come into a saveable state. And
though many who joined themselves to this new Sect, did not give such exact
Accounts of their Thoughts and Affections, yet they who were found to be more
wise and intelligent than the rest, judged they were able to give such Reasons
as were most valid for this their departure and new Confederacy. And seeing
that those who had never been without the Bounds of their own Native Country,
entertained so ill an Opinion chiefly of the English Churches; those who also
passed into and traveled Foreign Nations, passed the same Judgment upon the
rest of those other Churches; therefore did these chiefly and in the first
place charge the English Churches with such great depravedness and corruption;
and of these they did more especially reprehend those, that to this time under
the Kingly Government did prevail by Public Authority, which from the Bishops
their Authors and Rectors they called Episcopal; that is, they did so blame and
revile this Hierarchy, or Spiritual Power, Order and Degree, Rule and Lordly
Jurisdiction; yea, their Harshness and Tyranny toward those who dissented from
their Religion, or seemed to be in the wrong, who yet out of no Obstinacy, but
only from a tender Conscience, could not join with them; the Magnificence and
Pomp, gross Idleness, Remissness, and Delicacy both of their Prelates, and all
the rest of their Clergy or Ministers of the Word that were under them;
moreover such a bundle of Ceremonies or Rites in their Churches and Sacred
Communions, and Collection of Lessons, Singings, and Prayers, the forms whereof
to be so strictly followed, with the Observation of Holy Days. Lastly, besides
this, the Sloth, Incontinency, and Lasciviousness of the whole People in words
and deeds, that from hence it came, that not only the Quakers now at length,
but many other Societies of Men, long before the Quakers were born or known,
separated themselves from the Communion of that Public Church. And thus did
they heap up as much suspicion of Corruption upon that Church as they could,
and stirred all Men to Envy and implacably to hate her: Now as these Men did
chiefly by this blot and censorious Discourse vilify the Episcopal Churches,
and so fiercely and violently inveigh and bellow against them, so did they next
fall upon accusing of them, called by the name of Presbyterians, in as severe
and harsh a manner, who notwithstanding had not only long since withdrawn
themselves from under the Government, Order, Rites, and Methods of the
Episcoparians, but also sharply opposed them, and were now after the Abolition
of Episcopacy, and the taking away of all that Ceremonious Worship, and after
the beheading of the King, and almost an entire extinction of the Regal Name,
intensly bent upon the Reformation of the whole Church: These from the first
beginning of their Church they did own to be no bad Christians, and that some
of them did excel, and continued to be such, as all ought always to be, both in
the Faith and Rule of Life, but that afterward they became by degrees more and
more changed, and that for some time neither that Care and Attention to God's
Spirit, no, nor to the Word which they professed to have, was to be met with
amongst them, but that they were found to be puffed up with much confidence,
hope, and assurance in their own even External Performances, and that many of
them had more the shadow than real Virtues of Christians, and more Vices under
a show of Virtues. Now, though among all the Parties they entertained the most
esteem for those Independants, which they call Brownists, yea, and for those
whom they call Baptists, yet they objected against these, that they had indeed
great Love and Affection for their Religion, but that they were very much
wanting in a Spiritual and true Love to God, and in Unanimity and Agreement
amongst themselves; and that they were very rash and morose toward such as
dissented from them, and sometimes full of Cruelty and Harshness. For as to
those others, who also would be accounted Independants, them they looked upon
as Hypocrites, who had a show of Religion in their Countenances, and at their
Tongues ends, and who while they saw many Vices with great clearness, and
resented them in others with much clamor and a scornful contempt, were
themselves inwardly full of the most secret and worst of Vices. Moreover, as
the Quakers did censure so hard of the Churches of England, they did most
grievously inveigh against those, whom these Churches looked upon as their
Guides, Teachers, and Pastors; and did conclude that the Original Stock and
Seed of all that Calamity did arise from them; to wit, that while they professed
it to be their business to discharge that Office of Teaching and of Guiding-Men
in their Spiritual Concerns, and seemed to give up themselves entirely
thereunto, did some of them desert their Work, others were slothful and
negligent, others did indeed publicly discharge their Office, and many times
with a loud Voice, but had privately no regard to their Work, but only
consulted their own Profit, and served their own Turn, preferring the same
before the Common Good of the whole Church, and that so indeed they fed their
Peoples Ears with words; but in like manner to stick to their Manners, and to
that which comes to pass by their Examples, this they thought by the same
Doctrine to be honest and not unlawful. There were more especially two things,
which these Men could not bear in those Rulers and Ministers of the Public
Churches; one of which was this, In that they in lieu of their Labors in
Preaching of the Gospel, and discharging of their Office amongst their People,
did not only receive a Reward, which they did indeed bear with, but such an one
as was certain and by Compact, almost always a great, sometimes a greater, now
and then the greatest Sum, not only from the Public Annual Profits, but also
from the Incomes of Private Persons, and that even of such, who had scarce of
their own whereon to set their Foot; from the Fruits, Cattle, Services, Annual
Profits, Marriages, Christenings, Funerals, and other things; which same if any
alike were not, yet some in gathering of those Profits, were so severe and
hard-hearted, that they reduced the poorer sort to beggary; such as were able
and not willing, and whom they could not bring to Reason, they subdued by
Force, of whom they said, they were driven thereunto from the only desire of
Lucre and Gain, and so lived upon their Ministry, worse than Porters, Watermen,
and such sort of rough Fellows; and that they were always craving, and that
they went as often as they could to other Assemblies of Men, and to them
especially from whom they hoped to receive most Advantage. Another thing
against which these Men were very Angry, and highly complained, was this; That
there was, and is still, such among those Men, who some of them cannot endure
some of their own People and Citizens, differing from them in Matters of
Religion, though very docible, and upon better Information, ready to obey, but
throw them out, and eject them; others they vexed, tormented, and fined; and
those same Persons did this, who for such severity had themselves called upon
God and Men to bear Witness, and when they were able shook off that Yoke from
their Necks, and esteemed, and do still esteem this Liberty as a great Blessing
of God; of which two things the Quakers did so much the more complain, because
they were at this time most touched and afflicted therewith. To this came to be
added afterward the Complaint and Lamentation of their Fellows and Companions
in New England, That there were Brownists there, who injured them various ways,
and put some of them to Death: These being the same things, which these Men did
more particularly discommend, and so much charge upon the Churches of England,
their Native Country: But those things which they generally and universally
blamed, as well in these same, as in other Protestants abroad, were these: That
this indeed is the Doctrine, Faith, and Profession of all those who are called
by this specious Name, and love and take delight to be so called; that upon the
differences being taken away by the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
bright appearance of the Gospel, that was between the beloved Nation of the
Jews, and the rest of Mankind, whom by way of singularity and distinction, they
called Gentiles; the Grace of God has shined upon all Men, and that this
coming of Christ, and those desirable and saving Tidings ought now to be
preached throughout the whole World, and that this one thing was proposed unto
all Men, who are made partakers of Christ, and of the Gospel, that as much as
lies in them, both by Words, and good and pious Works, they gain over, and
present unto Jesus Christ and to God, and bring into a salvable state, all
those who are yet Christless. And moreover, that all would have and teach this,
that Circumcision being taken away from among the People of God by Christ
Jesus, which was of Old observed by the Jewish Nation, and that the External
Worship of that Nation being overthrown, to which this same Circumcision was
annexed, that now these are circumcised, who have that which Circumcision did
then prefigure and typifie, and that which External Worship did represent, and
that which all the Law and the Prophets did presignifie and promise, should be
brought to pass and accomplished by Jesus Christ; and that there must needs
have been those then who were true and real Jews, and such as were in Covenant
with God, and that there are even now true Jews, that do heartily and sincerely
Worship God; and that these are truly Christians, chosen by Christ, and made
one with those Ancient Jews, that were so united to God, and therefore accepted
with him, who serve God in the Spirit, and glory in Christ Jesus, and put no
confidence in the Flesh; and that this now is pure Religion, and undefiled
before God and the Father, to bridle the Tongue, so as to speak ill of,
vilify, ruin no Man, but charitably to Teach, Edify, and Help ones
Neighbor; and besides this, to visit the Fatherless and Widows, and to help as
much as may be the poor, miserable, and distressed, and over and above to keep
ones self undefiled from the World. But here did these Men interpose, and raise
a clamor and noise, saying, That the Protestants did nothing less than any one
of these things; neither did they stick to say, that all that Multitude was a
dead Body, or a living Carcass, bearing only the name of Christians; and this
they said, they would demonstrate, thus pretending, That all Protestants, their
Rulers, each Member of their Churches, were so little concerned about that
Grace of God that was brought in by Jesus Christ, and is daily offered by him
in the Gospel, that they had scarce one serious thought of their own, and not
at all of the Salvation of others; and that they either declined to do any
thing, or did what they could most slightly toward the Instructing of their
own People, confuting of others, convincing of Strangers, and enlightening of
Foreign and Remote Countries and Nations, where a gross Ignorance of Mind, and
a debauched Life caused hideous Darkness, and for delivering of them out of the
Jaws of Death, for the destroying of the Kingdom of Satan, and promoting of the
Kingdom of Christ in all the Parts of the Earth, as if the name of a Christian,
which they avouch, were enough, and that that Happy Life were granted and tied
to them by a certain, private, and sure Law, and that others were to look unto
themselves. Moreover that all of them did follow in those things, which belong
to the Knowledge and Observation of Divine things, not the Holy Spirit, who is
the true and genuine Master and Guide, whom indeed they knew not, but their own
and others Instructions, or their own Understanding and Sense, drawn, if it
happen so well with them, from the single and bare Reading of the Scriptures;
moreover that they did herein flatter themselves, that they bare in their
Mouths the Name of Christ, held Communion with him, and partaked of his
Benefits, but were therein miserably mistaken, in that they knew not who this
Christ is, what it was to have Communion with him, and what his Benefits were,
or that they by no means spoke from their hearts those things they talked of,
neither were they actuated in those things that were done by them, or which
befell them, from an inward Principle, Motion, and Instinct; and moreover that
they put their trust in Ceremonies, External Rites, Sacraments, and bodily
Exercise, Public and Private, which profits nothing, and that so they
embraced a Shadow, neglecting the Thing it self. Lastly, That all of them,
laying aside the Love they owed one to another, and passing by that Pity and
Concern which they ought to have for the adverse and troublesome Concerns of
their Brethren and Friends, they were so divided and distracted among
themselves, as well privately, with wranglings, Strifes, and Contentions, and
that oftentimes for things of no moment, and often by reason of the difference
of ones Opinions, as Publicly with Wars and Devastations, and that many times
for Trifles, and now and then because of the Diversity of Religions, and that
they gaped after, and strove to accommodate themselves for the attaining all
Honors, Riches, Pleasures, and such sorts of Vanities, and were at the least
so conform to the Fashion of the Men of this World, that they could not be
acknowledged to be the true Disciples, and sincere Followers of Jesus Christ.
And these things, they said, were so clear and manifest, that if any one was
conversant among such sort of Men, he should presently find work to interrogate
his Eyes and Ears thereupon. Moreover they did blame, and lay this to their
Charge: That there was scarce any footsteps left among these Protestants of
that Ancient Ecclesiastical Discipline, as well in respect to the Rulers and
Ministers of the Church, as to the whole Church her self, and so from the
Practice thereof they have all swerved to depraved disuse of such Discipline;
so that now any Teacher that Publicly in his Pulpit does that work not
altogether negligently and undecently, is reputed a good Pastor; as to the
rest, as long as any one owns his Religion with his Mouth, and serves the
Shadows and Images of Godliness, though he be given to worldly and vain Lusts
and Desires, this same is accounted to be a good Member of the Church, and is
easily admitted to participate of all the Mysteries thereof. From hence they
went on to Doctrinals; and when they had particularly reproved many things in
single Persons, this came generally to be reprehended in all, as if it were a
common and received Opinion: That Christ did all things for Man, and that this
only is to be done by Man, That when any one sins most in the course of his
Life, he must lay hold on Christ as a Mediator and Savior, and lay claim to
him without Works, and do his endeavor to follow the Command and Example of
Christ in his Conversation according to the measure of his strength, and that
thus it shall be well always with every one, and when Death comes, that the
Bands of the Body must be loosened, there is a way opened for him into Heaven,
wherein he shall enjoy Life Everlasting, where are all things, and that now is
fully consummate, which was that very moment to be consummated. Finally, these
Men went up higher, and came to the Schools and Universities, those Seminaries
of the Church-Ministry, and future Props of the Church, of all which this was
their Complaint: That these Places were as vicious as might be, and that this
was almost the common Practice of all Students, that they either did nothing,
or but very little of those things that conduced thereto; and that they either
alone, or one with another, as much as they could, pursue Pleasures, or that
they who endeavored to excel the rest, were only taken up with more remote and
subtle Meditations and Disputes, and with the Methods and Arts of declaiming,
and exercised their Minds therein; and did not improve the domestic Knowledge
and Discipline of their own Minds, and cultivate their Thoughts and their
Affections with the true and absolute Knowledge and Use of Godliness and a
Spiritual Life; but that by such Methods and Occupations as these are, some
were set at naught, and looked upon to be Foreign from such Studies and
Scholastical Documents, and beneath the cares of such Wits and more Learned and
Eminent Places. And that from hence some apply themselves to Ecclesiastical
Offices, and attain thereto, others come in by begging of Suffrages, others by
other Methods, whose Promotion is rendered difficult through the dullness of
their Understandings, and want of Elocution. Others who have a distinct Voice,
and the knack of speaking, and are furnished with Oratorical Sentences, though
they have no other Commendable Quality, do prevail, and so the People are
indeed taught some things, yea, sometimes many things, but not such, or but
very carelessly and negligently, as ought mostly to be insisted upon, as
appertain to the Faith it self, tend to the amending of Life, and to Holiness;
and so the People are as it were thus defrauded of their just Right. But though
the Quakers accused and condemned all Protestants of Theft and such sorts of
Vices, yet they granted that the first of them, of whatever Profession, were
the best of all of them, as being such as were more upright than the rest, and
set themselves in Opposition to those Corruptions, and did most prudently and
gently advise and warn their Friends and Brethren, and studied to amend and
heal so great a Disease and Contagion as was crept into the Church, and for
this purpose gave in their Help, Counsel, and Assistance. But they said, that
this Diligence, Intention, and Study, fell but to the share of a few, and that
the multitude resisted, and forthwith made a noise, and gainsaid, gave them an
ill name, and endangered their Esteem, Business, and Fortune, and were so beset
and hemmed in, that all their Labor was in vain, and they neither could, nor
durst stir further. So things came now to that pass, that Men could easier and
sooner bear Vices, and all manner of Evils, than Remedies for the same; and
there was no way left then that those who were concerned for the Good and
Salvation of their Souls, seeing there was so great, insuperable, and deadly a
Plague, withdraw themselves and depart; from hence therefore sprung these
Quakers Grief, hence their Tears; first, by reason of the English Churches, and
especially of the Episcopal, then of other Reformed ones, and this chiefly
because of the Rule, Order, and Discipline, and the Lives and Manners of the
Men, not so much by reason of Doctrine, yet so, as that they themselves
acknowledged, that there were in these same Churches many Teachers, who
reproved, be^ailed, and endeavored to amend some things which the Quakers so
much carped at, so as that the thing which the Quakers wished for, was not to
be despaired of. And this was the occasion of the Schism of these Men, or their
withdrawing from the Church, and from an hatred sprung-up, heat and burning
against the whole Church of England, and afterward against the rest of the
Reformed Churches, and at length against all Protestants; which cause they so
laid hold on, not that every one should continue in his Church, no, not in
those whom they confessed to be less corrupted than the rest, and their endeavor
to set things to rights, as stated Reformers, who ought; and knew, would and
durst, as being of a great Capacity, and most patient of Labor, and also of
Injuries; but that they should forthwith forsake all the Churches, and as it
were, pluck down such as they could not change and renew, and leave nothing for
Charity, Hope, and Patience, as a persevering Good often overcomes the Evil.
But and after they had thus forsaken those Churches, many of them did not with
Grief and Compassion discover those Vices, neither did they as became
Christians, gently, and discreetly advise the wandering, and such as were out of
the way, and bring them kindly back again, but did most bitterly and
invidiously relate all things, and cast all manner of Reproaches upon those
Churches, and as it were set upon the Men in an Hostile manner, and drew
together and united into a Mutual Confederacy in this War, though no ways
injured, nor provoked, nor indeed entertained with an hard word; and this in
such a manner, as that all were frightened by them from the Community of such
Churches, and from the entrances into them, and set them such Examples, as were
much to be shunned, that there is no doubt to be made as concerning them who
thus raged, but that they acted more from a desire and study of Novelty and
Glory, than from a sincere and pious Mind; so that that Man who blames the
Works of another, ought to take heed lest he be deceived himself, and to see
(...) while he is applying of Remedies for one Evil, other Evils arise
therefrom; thus it was with the Brownists and Independants many years before,
who first separated themselves from the Church of England, because of the many
Defects and Abases therein, and afterward from the rest of the Reformed
Churches, by reason also of the unworthiness and want of Diligence which they
imagined they saw in them; and even so now the Quakers, supposing they had the
same Causes and Reasons for what they did, undertook the same thing, and that
in such a manner, that supposing those forerunners had not done enough; they
began a new Schism, and did altogether constitute and pursue a new Doctrine
among themselves, a new way of Living, and a new Church; these they testified
to be the causes they had, whenever they spoke of their Undertakings, or
conferred with others, or appeared before the Magistrates, and that in plain
and direct words; and upon this Head did many of them write Books and Pamphlets
(which upon such an occasion are much more efficacious and prevalent than
larger Tracts) among which the most remarkable were published by Fox the
Inventor and Introducer of these things, and Howgil, Pennington, and Whitehead,
which last three were however more moderate in their Writings, than Fox was, to
say nothing of the rest of them. These Pieces they also translated into other
Languages, and dispersed through other Countries. Now I am come to that which
has occasioned me to dwell so largely upon this Subject. And because I have
spoken of that Religion and course of Life, which these Men went about to
overthrow, I have also deemed it seasonable and necessary, distinctly to set
forth, what manner of Life and Doctrine that was, which they (after that they
were increased to a Multitude, and so much polished and instructed under so
many Masters and Teachers) then set up, and which is now maintained by all
their Followers: For the Tenor of their Doctrine was the same as that of
others, that they who framed it, should in process of time, from smaller
beginnings polish and reduce the same into a greater Decorum and Order.
Especially, in that they were more intent at first upon the destroying of the
Religion of others, than upon erecting any new one of their own, and that they
were at this time more given to an Active than a Contemplative Life, or than to
that which consists in much Meditation, Enquiry, and strength of Understanding;
thus judging with themselves, that to be a Christian, was not to understand
profound things, nor to speak of great Matters, but to live; from whence, as in
former times, so also now these Men can no otherwise be compared, than with
most Professors of Religion, be it what it will, that they are endued with
greater Love and Zeal for their Religion, than a knowledge of it, and even many
Teachers of the Quakers themselves not excepted: But yet there were some from
the beginning, as there are many at this day, that gave a good Account of their
Religion, and explained it. Now the Doctrine of these Men consisted chiefly of
four kinds; the first whereof was the Principle of Religion; another the
Subject of the Divine Benefits; the third, the embracing of them; the fourth
and last, the way and manner of Communion. The first sort therefore was that
which belonged to the Principle and Foundation of true and saving Knowledge,
this with them was a clear and distinct Revelation of the Holy Ghost, either
without the written Word, to wit, by Speech, or some Apparition, or Dreams, or
by the written Word, and either this or that which we call the Holy Scriptures,
or by some other; or else some certain way which is equivalent to the Word. For
the Holy Scriptures, as we take that Word, is not to them a perpetual Medium,
and such as is absolutely necessary, and the only and complete Rule and Form of
Faith and Manners; and here you may easily see, how far they differ from those,
who while they own the Scripture, take away the Spirit, and substitute Reason
in the room thereof; and how much from those, who acknowledge the Scripture as
the only necessary Instrument, and the sole Rule of Faith and Manners: And that
the Assistance of the Spirit is required toward our having a certain knowledge
of the Divine Will, and performing of the same. The Second Head contained the
Subject, on which the Divine Benefits are bestowed, concerning which they thus
judged and determined; That all Mankind, by the Sin and Fall of Adam, were
utterly depraved and lost, so destitute of strength, and in so desperate and
forlorn a condition, as that they were unable to think of that which is good;
but that God did so universally love Mankind, as that he gave his Son Jesus
Christ, and constituted him to be a Peacemaker between God and Man. Hence God
bestowed upon all Men a new Birth, Himself, his Son, his Holy Spirit, the Light
and Word within, and did by the same so stir up their Minds, even every one of
them in his true Way, and peculiar Measure so as to understand and perceive
their Misery, and did so excite them, as that they at length sought God, and
were converted unto him; which Light was yet effected sometimes by the Word
from without, and lively Preaching; but then it was (they said) that that Light
and Word was to be received of Men, when they did not resist the Divine
Operation, but received it, and being stirred up by God, they gave way to his
Impulse and Incitement; but here, seeing there was none to whom the Doctrine of
the purer Protestants upon this Head was known, and to whom the Opinions of
such as savoured of Pelagianism, or in some part inclined to them, were not
unknown, who did not think that the Quakers also pursued and imitated some such
thing as these last mentioned; the Quakers hereupon cried out, that they were
much in the wrong, since indeed their meaning was, that either the Humane
Nature was not so depraved, or that there was some Natural Light remaining,
whereby they may free themselves from that Vitiosity, and that God indeed joins
himself to such as do their endeavor, and helps them; so as that it is not the
mere Grace of God, but in some sort Merit in Man, and that either some Word, or
somewhat else is bestowed of God to this end, whereas the Quakers have no such
thoughts. The next Article consisted of such Benefits, which are peculiar to
those, whom they said did not resist the foresaid Illumination, but obeyed it;
for when this Article is known, and that which all Protestants teach concerning
this matter, none will deny, but that there is a great deal of difference
between the Opinion of Protestants, and these Men of whom I now speak apart;
for this is that which they would have, that Christ having performed his
Obedience, and suffered Death, obtained for all Men indifferently to be brought
into such a state, wherein they are capable of receiving of Christ into them;
which when it comes to pass, that then Christ, who is altogether Holy and Just,
exists in that Person, and lives, and operates, and that by that means the same
Person, the Justice of Christ existing and operating in him, becomes himself
Just, to wit, that the Depravation and Malice of his Nature is gradually
unlearnt and laid aside, and greater proficiency daily made in Justice and
Goodness, but yet so as that he may always sin, backslide, and fall into his
former Darkness: But he may also arrive at that Perfection, so as not to sin at
all, neither can that constancy in Good fail and cease; and seeing no one is
happy but he that knows himself to be so, this same Man is even then fully
conscious of his own Felicity. The last Division of this their Doctrine was
this, and which consists in the Measures and Mediums of receiving the Benefits,
by which how much also these Men differ from those of whom I have spoken, will
from hence be no hard matter for us to Judge: For they would allow no other
Mediums and Aids herein, than watchfulness of Mind, and attention to that
Light, which shines in the Heart of every Man, and to the Oracles of the Holy
Spirit in the Scripture, or the Admonitions and Exhortations of Spiritual
Persons. And thus indeed did they receive and admit of the Ministry of the
Gospel, but such a Ministration as every one ought to undertake, though in a
different degree, being impelled thereunto by the Holy Spirit alone, without
the Vocation of Men, without Price and Reward, and that even Women themselves
should not be excluded from Teaching: This they would now have and require,
that all Christians ought frequently to meet at certain Times and Places, to
the end that they might Worship God and the Father with Brotherly and united
Minds, and Instruct and Admonish one another to the Observation of the Laws of
God and Men, and to the exercise of Virtue and Modesty; but yet not so, as that
their Worship should be confined to those Places and Times, so as that it must
necessarily be undertaken, begun, and finished there and then, according to the
Decree and Limitation of those Men; for that Worship should be performed by the
Impulse and Assistance of the Spirit alone, who Acts freely, being confined to
no spaces or limitations; now they would admit of no Sacraments, Signs, or
Seals of the Grace of God that were perceptible by the Senses, whence they
assumed the Notion, that Baptism and the Lord's Supper is something that is
inward and Spiritual, and that those external Rites continued in the
Apostolical Churches but as Figures for a time, until the substance of the
thing it self was obtained. The Quakers spoke and wrote many things from the
very beginning of their Sect concerning God, and Christ, as they were in Men,
and that Men subsisted in them, and almost all their Discourse depended hereon,
but so as that it was hard, yea, impossible for a Man to understand what they
meant thereby, or to cause any other to understand it. They began in process of
time to explain their meaning more clearly upon this Head, and to be more open
concerning it, and therein as it were placed the Foundation of their whole
Doctrine, which shall be spoken of at a more convenient time: This therefore
was the first Form and Description of their Doctrine; but as the Doctrine and
Faith of these Men was admirable and singular, their Life and Conversation was
no less; for this chiefly consisted in Abstinence and Continency; they said,
all public and private Wars were forbidden by the Law of God, and they shunned
all Acts of Revenge, and Resistance also, neither would they when they had any
concerns with other Men, though before a Magistrate, and that the matter might
require it, confirm their Asseverations with any Religious Affirmation, much
less with an Oath, and such ways, they said, were altogether forbidden:
Moreover, they abstained from Pleasures, gay Clothes, and superfluous Attire,
and hated such ways and artifices as tended to Vanity and Pastime, as also
Shows, Playhouses, Plays, and all manner of Joking and Laughter; and besides
these, they declined to use such Voices, Faces, Gestures, Motions, Salutations,
Blandishments, Obsequiousness, and the like, which are commonly practiced in
the Societies and Interviews of Men, and go by the name of Virtues, or of Good
Manners and Breeding, and did require this, That every one look after,
practice, and perform, in a serious, prudent, sparing, sober, grave, and severe
manner, all that which the Dignity, Honor, and Excellency of a Christian did
require, and this both in words and deeds; and that they conformed themselves
as much as might be to that way of Living. This is that Method of Living which
the Quakers from the very first rise of them have retained constantly to this
very day; and they did indeed so extol this their Theology, as if this at last,
and no other, did agree to the Constitution and Condition of the New Covenant
between God and Man, and of the Instrument thereof the New Testament, and as if
it were the only one adapted to convince and lead all sorts of Men to the
Reception of the Christian Faith, and to ingenerate true Piety toward God and
Men. And as to what appertained to the Life and Manners of them, they were
themselves very sensible, how the Men of this World hated them, made a
Laughing Stock of them, and accounted them as it were the scum and
off-scourings of Men, for the austereness and severity of their Manners, as
being so opposite to the Conversation of Men, and as it were upbraiding the
Folly of all of them. But as they bare this Misfortune with great Constancy of
Mind, and said, that they shunned nothing, feared nothing, besides what was
really a sin, either against God or Men; so they also retorted this, that all
good Men, who own, that the Christian World has long since groaned, and as it
were, been fatigued with so many, and so great vitiosities, Fooleries, and
Juglings, ought to acknowledge their Virtue, in that they durst batter and
break through such common and inveterate Pravity and Perverseness with so much
Inconveniency to themselves; though these Men did not deny, as Experience does
now also force them to confess, but that some of them were not such as they
would have, and wished themselves, and all other Men to be, and that indeed
there were at first, and are at this day some among so great a confluence of
these Men, who hiddenly and craftily insinuate themselves into their Societies,
and do follow rather their words than deeds, and not only pass over the Limits
of that their so great Severity and Gravity, but do also themselves commit
those Vices, which they lay to the charge of others; and more especially do
carry themselves maliciously and fraudulently in their Negotiations and
Dealings with Men, and set their Profession to Sale, and serve Persons and not
Offices, and also accommodate themselves to the present times; but they say,
they hate, despise, and are angry with such Men, yea, that they are a loathing
to them, and that they make a diligent search after them, and if they find they
will not be reclaimed, nor repent, that then there are severe Chastisements
reserved for them, but and if notwithstanding, they do not return, they order
them to be cast out of their Community: But, as I have long before begun to
say, there was so great a concourse of Men to the Inventors and first broachers
of Quakerism, and after they had associated themselves unto them, there was
such a Zeal from time to time for this same Religion, and this Sect or way of
Living, and on the other side so great an Emulation and Strife of other Men
against these, that both sides seemed to strive, who should most fatigue and
soonest overcome the other; concerning which matter I have now at length
determined to speak at large. This is that which those Men have professed of
themselves, and such is the Testimony they gave unto them, who daily joined
themselves to their Communion, that they were, and indeed had been of the
number of those Men who had a great desire for and single Love to God, and
their own Salvation; wherefore as Birds of a Feather do easily flock together,
there were those of the multitude of every Religion, especially such, who had
most Piety toward God, and were most desirous of the blessedness of their
Souls, than which nothing is more desirable to Man, that betook themselves to
their Society; they did confess they were now sensible of and bewailed, with
what negligence, sloth, indifferency, and perverseness they had sought God
before, and studied their own Salvation, for which they should have been mostly
concerned, and that they were desirous now to make amends for and compensate
this Evil with so much the greater and more vigorous diligence in doing good.
Hence they had frequent Meetings together, and with united Minds turned to God,
they presented themselves unto him, and stirred up one another to do the same:
Thus they loved nothing so much as their Meetings, and did so exercise mutual
Offices one toward another, that they were resolved rather to suffer any
thing, yea, rather Death it self, than not do so. And now they affirmed that
they pitied others, the wretchedness of all, and the common destruction,
because that they were affected with no manner of care, no thoughts of their
Salvation, and that they had no other desire than to deliver them from such
great danger and hazard of their Souls; hence it was that they used many words
to such as they thought to be within the compass of such danger; whence many
were daily enticed and brought over by them, and several were taken by no Word,
but only Example; and seeing that all of them were of the same Mind herein,
there was none or rarely any Dissension between them in regard to their Sermons
or Speeches, no contempt of any Man's Parts, Condition, and Gifts; and thus
every one, as gifted one way or another, bestowed upon and dispensed to one
another, and divided his Talent among all, which is indeed the real Communion
of Saints; so also did the younger Men discharge the Offices of a full Age, as
did likewise Virgins and Maidens, and neither did Women confine themselves to
the discharge of their Duties toward their Husbands, which was only in use to
this time, but publicly Taught and Preached; wherefore many of both Sexes were
daily moved to betake themselves to this side, where they might have an
Opportunity to show what they were, especially Women, partly through the
Inconstancy of their Natures, partly from a super-abounding Zeal and Love of
Religion, and partly for to have a Public Trial of themselves, and also to
Instruct Men before the Church; which only thing seemed yet to be wanting in
this part of the World to make up the licentiousness of the Female Sex:
Moreover, as in England this Sex is looked upon as having a great power and
ascendency by their blandishing demeanors over their Husbands, and such as
belonged unto them, hence it came to pass, that many Families by their means
did often join and unite themselves to these Quakers, though they were not so
ready to receive and admit of these Men into their Society, and they did try
each of them with all the exactness they could; and though in the beginning a
less number of Men joined themselves to them, and that afterward, and at this
day, there is a much greater increase of them, that Custom of Women's Teaching
and Discoursing publicly, did then, and more and more by degrees, and at this
day almost universally wear out, and grow into disuse: Now their Assemblies,
and the Worship performed in them, were without any charge to them, and if
there were any of their number, poor and needy, these held the same Rank, and
were had in the same Esteem with them as the rest, and them they relieved,
according as their Wealth and Substance would bear, so as that laying aside all
Ambition and Pride, its Price and Reward might be equally distributed to Virtue
alone, and that every ones Probity might be only his own Commendation and
Praise; wherefore there were many, who were either not so much esteemed, or not
so well relieved among their own Societies, who fled to these; among whom there
were not a few found, who according to the old and common Contagion, made
Religion only a Cloak for their Humility and Obscurity, and the nourisher of
their Idleness; but there was a far greater cause than all this, and indeed
there is nothing so opposite to Religion and Godliness, so much an Enemy to
Reason, common Sense and Humanity, than to desire to Rule in such things as
appertain to Religion over the Consciences of Men, much more, to constrain Men
in a violent manner, not to follow their Religion, which they believe they have
received of God, and to compel and force them to embrace that Religion which
they loath and shun, and if they will do neither of these, to torment, oppress
and destroy, and not to allow them a being among Men; for another thing is, if
there are some, who cease not to be troublesome unto others, but are busy to
deceive them, to speak ill of their Religion and Ordinances, to disturb and
infest them, and to ruin and destroy their Churches; and these if they be
restrained and corrected; which not to do, and to tolerate such, especially if
they be such, who suppose this to belong to their own Religion and Church for
to overthrow the Religion and Churches amongst which they live, were the same
thing, as knowingly and wittingly to ensnare themselves, and to make way for
and run headlong into their own voluntary destruction; and a great many People
in former times in these Kingdoms have felt the smart of such a Persecution,
and an innumerable Company of the best of Christians have felt the same from
those very Persons, who had before undergone themselves that severe Tyranny
from others; but in reference to the manner how this befell the Quakers in these
Countries from the initiation of their Religion, Ways, and Manners, and by what
right or wrong, these Men did afterward so bewail their hard usage, we shall
take upon us a little more distinctly to set forth. For as the Doctrine of
these Men was so opposite to the Doctrine of others; hence the same was every
where charged with diverse Accusations and Reproaches, as also Calumnies,
especially by them, who, as it usually happens, followed only vulgar Reports,
and were in the mean time ignorant of the Doctrine that these Men held. And
since their manner of Living was so directly opposite to the Custom and Manners
of all, and more especially in that they appeared very sad both in gate and
countenance in the Streets, and in Company, and that some of them were very
nasty in their Habit, and all of them silent, or of few words, and when they
spoke, used many other unusual Expressions, and them delivered slowly and by
piecemeals, and as it were by points, and especially if they treated of any
serious matters, they made use of such sort of Protractions, Hesitations, and
Delays, and expressed every word by syllables, and did not only not salute Men
in the Streets, but utterly disused Salutation both in their approaches to and
departures from Men, by which things, being as it were the Ensigns of this
Sect, they were commonly known; hence it was that they were envied and hated of
all that had to do with them. The Principal thing which drew upon them much
Envy and great Calamities, was their first Violence and fierce Incursions both
in their words and writings against the Doctrine and Faith of others,
especially of them, who were within the Communion of the Public Church, even
because of certain names and words that were used by the whole Church, and that
for a long time, which if not literally contained in the Scripture, yet did
agree in the thing, and were consonant to other words and names in the
Scriptures, but such indeed as seemed to be foolish unto them. Another thing
was, their rashness and boldness in Judging, Condemning, Sadding, and Cursing
of all and singular Persons, who did not agree with them in their matters, and
such besides who were unknown had not been heard, made no defense, and so
innocent as to any Injury done them, in the doing whereof, they were most
forward, who held the first Rank amongst this Sect of Quakers; but besides
these, there were diverse others, but of a different condition, and who had this
Property, to have little Wit, and to be thoughtful of nothing, but furnished
with Imprudence and Impudence, that began some sort of Discourse in Public
Places, where there were most People, in a kind of clamorous manner, but with a
very unpleasing Noise, and even stood in the Churches (which now the Quakers in
general called Steeple Houses by way of Reproach) while Divine Service was
performed, with their Hats on, sometimes during the Sermons of the Ministers
and Common Prayers (but such as they called Divinations, disagreeing with
themselves, and not knowing what they said) and sometimes after they were
ended, suddenly uttered some uncouth words, and without showing any previous
Reasons, reprehended the doings of the former; yea, and detested them, as if
they were wicked and accursed; and thus did they do those things themselves
which they had blamed so much in other Men. There were some, who in a Mimical
and Fool's Habit and Gesture of Body, did as it were either describe the
Actions of Men in the open Marketplaces, or deride them, or did take upon them
to foretell the Fate that should attend them. These were commonly such as were
of meaner Parts and Fortune than the rest, and more especially of the Female
kind; and even they who did these things, said, they did them by the Instinct
of the Holy Ghost, and according to the Example of the Prophets, and of Christ
and his Apostles, whom they contended to have been accustomed to have done such
things openly in crowds of People, in the Temple, and other places, from whence
the Fame thereof might pass into all places, and that there never was any Law
made in England, that did forbid such things; thus over and above defending
themselves with their Quibbles and also Law-Sophistry, to which also others of
them, even their Leaders, added their Consent, there were others who neither
approved of this Practice, nor blamed it. But this in process of time they all
left and avoided; and hence it was that all Persons were not only alienated in
their Affections from these Men, but also most enraged against them, and as
often as they durst do any such thing, they were assaulted and had violence
offered unto them. Though they notwithstanding all, were by no means deterred
from it, but did continuedly repeat the same, having this their Opinion as a
Brazen Wall unto them, neither regarding herein the words and deeds of our
Savior Jesus Christ, and of those Holy Men, that we should beware of Men, and
should not provoke them, but so admit of those things which we may avoid, and
run our selves into danger. Now, when the Quakers were brought into Courts of
Justice, and put upon answering for themselves, they would not off with their
Hats, nor call the Judges by Names suitable to their station (which Honors
they thought unlawful to bestow upon Men, and that it was a Worship that
appertained to God alone) and when they were asked some things, as solemnly,
descreetly, and mildly as might be, many of them shifted backwards and
forwards, and made such Answers as were no ways to the purpose, and when th^s
without any further hearing of the Cause than this, they have been often thrust
into Prisons, the same Persons have slighted and blamed their Judges to their
faces, as the framers of such Laws, whereby they omitted what God and a good
Conscience dictated to them, or did that which was contrary thereunto; and
others of the same Kidney did every where in their Sermons and Libels cast all
manner of Reproaches upon those Magistrates before all Men, and imprecated all
Evils upon them, and did as it were pronounce them by the Command of God,
forgetting the Monitor and Author of that saying, That in such a case we should
not delay to confess all our own failings, and also love our Enemies, and bless
and do good unto them, and so be perfect as our Heavenly Father is perfect;
whence it came to pass, that not only they who were thus deservedly committed
by the Judges, but also such as thus maintained their Obstinacy, were laden
with more and greater Evils, and the same thing sometimes fell upon the Heads
of the whole Multitude. But those who were of a more moderate Temper, blamed
the immoderation of these Men; but the Quakers were never universally troubled
and persecuted at any time during the Interregnum and Cromwell's Protectorship,
in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and there was no particular Persecution of
them, by the appointment of Public Authority, unless it were that these Men
proceeded to Assemble together in too unwary and audacious a manner, or to
disturb the Public Assemblies of others with their chatterings, or lessen the
Reputation of them by their invidious Speeches, Invectives, and Writings, or
did some such thing by speech or gesture: Neither was there any of them
punished or put to Death either by Public Authority, or Tumultuously by the
Multitude; but such indeed otherwise was the severity of the following Times,
and the calamity of these Men, that all were commanded every where to abstain
from their Meetings; and when they urged that they could not do that for
Conscience sake, and that therefore they would do it in no wise; then there was
a very heavy Persecution, and not of one sort, raised as much as might be
against all of them in general, and in other places against each in particular,
as began to be turbulent and introduced any Novelty in the Churches. And this
afterward became an accessional Crime, in that they would not Swear before a
Magistrate, pay Tithes, nor do and suffer many more things, by reason of
scruple of Mind, and fear of God; by which Practice of theirs, though none of
the Quakers were at any time put to Death publicly or privately, by Officers,
Sergeants, and Executioners, by the Magistrate's Command, yet many of them were
so handled in Prisons, and so injured with Stripes and Wounds by wicked and
villainous Men, that they died miserably thereof; yea, and seeing the boldness
and constancy of these Men was such, that whatever they begun, that they would
go through with, and omit nothing of such things as I have spoken of before,
and the more they were chastised, the more obstinate they would be against such
as censured and chastised them. This was their daily Fate, that some of them
were committed publicly to Prison by the Magistrates, some fined, some
banished, and reproached sufficiently by the Common People, and were cuffed,
kicked, cudgelled, and stoned out of the places where they were. Neither were
there any of the Teachers and Guides of the People, who was not some where or
other imprisoned; and many times while they were gathered together they had
Information given against them, and thereupon Officers, Guards, and the like
Men were sent, who under the color of their Office, fell upon, beat, and
carried away all that were present. Again, there were many Private Persons, and
of the meaner and vulgar sort, born, brought up, and trained to Mischief and
Rapine, that either came under such Leaders as these now spoken of, whither
also without doubt their own greediness had led them without this, or alone and
of their own accord, like Theives and Robbers, and broke in where they hoped to
gain most Pillage and Plunder, and forced the Doors open, and first of all laid
hold on, stripped, and beat the People with their Hands and Sticks, and
scattered and dissipated all of them, and whatever they could not carry away,
they wasted and spoiled, the rest they stole away, and every one carried his
Booty to his own House; by which furious doings those mad and wicked Men did
oftentimes in a moment deprive as well the Poor as the Rich of all their
Substance, which they had been gathering for many Years, and of all the
Housholdstuff they had, and to that degree, that they did not leave the poor
People as much as their Tools and Utensils which they made use of for to gain
their Livelihood. Sometimes it so happened, while these Men did not meet
covertly, that these Villains all of a sudden rushed into the midst of the
Assembly, put out the Candle, and of those they caught, some of them they
dragged by the Hair of the Head, others, tied Hand and Foot, they carried into
the Fields, and there left them, where the People continued all Night, to the
endangering of their Lives; and thus many of them did at last perish, both in
Prisons, by Sickness, and the want of Necessaries, Stench, and other
Inconveniences, as also in their own Houses, because of the Miseries they
sustained through the rage and violence of the People; neither yet did these
things alone at once seize upon these People, but by degrees, and one after
another; in the mean time the Quakers suffered and endured all these things
from the very beginning, with so much Patience and Resolution of Mind, that
they not only wearied many of their Enemies, but also excited and inclined many
People to become of their Communion; thus judging with themselves, that Men
neither would nor could undergo and sustain such intolerable Troubles and
Miseries, unless they were very well assured in their Consciences of the truth
of those things for which they suffered, even as the Quakers themselves
pretended, that this their Patience for their Faith, which they turned to the
Glory of Martyrdom, joined with their singular way of Life and Manners, was the
principal Seed of their Church both then and at all times: Yea, I have heard
some of them Preach, that it would certainly come to pass, that their Religion
would be a new Reformation and Instauration of the World, but that this would
be very unlike unto that Reformation which happened in the Age before, as being
partly supported by an Arm of Flesh, whereas this would be the only Property of
theirs, to be perfected and accomplished by Faith alone, and the Patience and
Long-suffering of the Espousers thereof.

In the mean time the Quakers complained very much of the Ministers of the
Public Churches, as also of the Independants, but more especially of the
Baptists; (to which Baptists themselves there was at that time granted great
freedom both to speak and act what they pleased) that they above all others
were injurious to them, called upon the Magistrates, and stirred up also the
People to hasten their Ruin, by reason that they lessened their Number and
Dignity by shaking and meddling with them more than other Men. I have spoken of
these things in general; I come now to particular Instances, as being them
alone wherein the Proof, Testimony, and Truth of things do lie; for the Quakers
did not deny, but did Object, that there were many things which they
reprehended in the Doctrine and Religion of others, insomuch that they harped
much upon this string, That there were many and great Scandals and Reproaches
cast upon their Doctrine and Conversation by many, and that from hence it was
that great Injuries were offered unto them every where. The Quakers did indeed
Muster up several Petitions offered by the Public Priesthood (let me make use
of the public words of that People) who were in Public Power, which tended to
the expelling and banishing of the Quakers for those Reasons, which, if they
had been true, they themselves did confess that they deserved, having thus
carried it in respect to the Christian Religion, not only to be thrust out of
one Province, or the whole Kingdom, but from the face of the Earth, and the
number of the Living; if as these Men did deny, it was Lawful for any Humane
Power to inflict so severe and violent a Punishment upon any for any wickedness
whatsoever. Such an Humble Petition as this, if I mistake not, was presented in
the Year Fifty One, by several Pastors of Churches, and Citizens and
Inhabitants of the County of Westmorland to the Justices of the Peace for that
County, wherein they desired, That James Naylor, and George Fox, and Francis
Howgil, and the rest of their Companions, which Men, they said, were generally
unknown unto them, from whence they came, where they dwelt, what their business
was, and whom, they said, came by their own Authority into these Places, and
did miserably distract all sorts of Men, and set them at dissension, and
together by the Ears, and had wickedly seduced many People with great Efficacy
from the true Religion, into dangerous, pernicious, horrible, and damnable Ways
and Errors, and brought things to such a pass, as that they perverted and
disturbed all Peace and Order in the Commonwealth, when in the mean time they
are, notwithstanding any egregious and even Divine Reasons offered by them to
the contrary, wicked Men, Impostors, the Ministers of Satan; wherefore they
pray, they may be driven away, and commanded to go into their own Countries,
and confine themselves within those bounds to their own Occupations and
Employments: The Effect and Prevalency of which Petition was this, that Naylor
and Howgil were thrust into Prison, though one of the Magistrates, to wit,
Gervase Benson, did bear open Testimony against his Brethren, that Naylor did
not deserve to be censured for what he had done, as if he were guilty of
Blasphemy, and that he as a Criminal should be admonished and laid under such a
Punishment for violating of the Law against such Persons, and so great
Villains. To which this must be added, that the same Justice, Gervase Benson,
and Anthony Pearson, another that was Judge in that matter, did afterward turn
Quakers, and wrote several things for those Men: Another Example of this
Petitioning was, One two Years after presented to the Council of State (so they
called it) by many Noblemen, Justices of the Peace, Ministers, and Citizens of
Lancashire, in which Petition you have these words; That G. Fox, and James
Naylor, and their Associates and Companions, did not cease both to dissolve the
Bond and Unity that was between all sorts and ranks of Men, as also between the
People and God, and brought their own Followers to such a pass, that all of
them, Men, Women, Children, and little Ones were in their Conventicles agitated
with strange and ridiculous motions, trembled, foamed, swole with their
Bellies, and that some of their Teachers did not stick to say of themselves,
besides other abominable Heresies, that they were equal to God. To this
Petition was subjoyned a Catalogue of their Heresies, with the Witnesses hands
to it, in these words; That George Fox confessed, and did persist therein, That
he was equal to God, the only Judge of the World, Christ, the Way, the Truth,
and the Life; and so if that any one took upon him in his Sermon to the People
to explain any Text of Scripture, be was an Enchanter, and his Preaching an
Enchantment, and that the Scripture was carnal; that James Melver confessed
that he was God and Christ, and that the same Man gave out these Prophecies,
that the Day of Judgment was at hand, and farther, that there should be no more
a Judge in Lancashire, and that he would shortly pull up the great Assembly of
Parliament by the Roots; that Leonard Fell professed, that Christ never had any
other Body but the Church; that R. Hubberthorn had said, that the coming of
Christ in the flesh was only a Type and Figure. But though the Quakers did thus
determine among themselves, that these things which were laid to their charge,
were such, that even the thing, if they held their peace, would totter of it
self; but yet as they left nothing that was objected against them without some
Answer, so did they also confute this in their Writings in such a manner, and
with such Reasons, that it was very apparent, that they were wicked Men who
invented these things, and that those who believed them, were Fools, excepting
the Prophecies of Melver, the Vanity of whose words they willingly acknowledged
and reproved; yea, and seeing it was the Fate of these Men in all Judgments, to
have many Actions and Opinions full of Scandal and Disgrace laid to their
charge, besides their Doctrine and way of Living, they answered and overthrew
these charges, not in one Pamphlet only, and set forth what they had expounded
concerning any matter, what their Opinion was, and whose it was, but they also
sent these Pamphlets to all the Judges, and also to the Protector Cromwell, and
did moreover Publish them among the People, so that all and every Person might
be thoroughly acquainted with their Doctrine and Life, with the causes thereof,
and plainly weigh those things that might come to be controverted, and if any
suspicion insinuated it self into the Minds of some Persons, they might remove
it, and that they might no longer lie under such false Accusations as these;
but whether it came to pass from such an imputed Crime, or from Resisting and
Opposing in an over violent manner, or rather wickedly and imprudently
impugning the Doctrine and Fame of the Ministers of God's Word; Hubberthorn
from this time forward did not sustain one only Imprisonment at Chester, but
was also confined in Norwich, and that to the Year Fifty Five; but of this
briefly, and by the way: Let Us go on; there are some Instances of these Men
being accused by their Adversaries falsely, even then when they went to them for
to clear themselves of that Ignominy, either they challenged them to set
themselves in some place, and to hear how these Accusers proved and made the
thing good, after they had given them leave to speak, or they did suddenly and
at unawares, or after some foolish Expressions, ensnare them with some words,
and so haled them to Prison: This was the Lot of William Desborough, in a Town
of Northamptonshire, called Wellingborough. A certain Minister met him in that
Town (but what Minister it was, and of what Church, I pass over, and these
things I spare because I would spare the Order and Dignity) at a time, when he
was going to Church to Preach to his People; he sets upon the Man, threatens
and severely charges him to give over to deceive the People, before God's
Judgment overtook him; the Quaker asked him, wherein it was that he deceived
the People? To which the Minister replied, That Desborough taught, that there
was no Original Sin, and when Desborough would fain know, whether he had heard
him at any time say so, he, whether out of choice, or that he was unprepared
and straightned for time, held his Tongue, and went his ways into the Church,
Desborough follows him, and keeping close to the manner and way of his Party,
stood there all the time that the Minister Prayed and Preached, with his Hat
on, and waited for the end of his Sermon, and an Opportunity to speak himself:
Therefore when the Minister came down from the Pulpit, he drew nigh, and asked
him that he should now before the People prove and demonstrate what he had
before said to him to his face; but here the Minister went his ways, and left
the Man in the midst of his Congregation: And thus Desborough supposing that it
was his part now to speak, there he begins to make a sort of a Speech to the
People, in which they affirmed he should say, that all the Ministers of the
People were Hirelings, who, only for Gain gave their Labors to the People;
hereupon he was hurried away, first, before the Magistrate, and afterward into
Prison, and laid among Thieves, Murderers, and Cutthroats; in which place
after he had continued almost for the space of Seven Months, he was carried to
the Grand Assizes, then held at Northampton, the County Town of that County,
before Edward Atkins, a Man endued with great Modesty and Moderation of Mind:
But seeing there was no more but one of his Accusers present, and that the
Judge was now to determine the matter, he did it in these words; Common Fame is
indeed a good Accuser, but not therefore a good Proof: And thus far I am
satisfied as to those things I have heard of thee; but yet because thou art
brought out upon a Common Report, that you are a dangerous People, and the
disturbers of the Public Peace, I Will send thee back into Prison, unless thou will give in Bail, that thou will demean thy self well, and appear next
Assizes. But when Desborough said, that he looked upon that unreasonable, and
that he ought not to give Bail in such a case, he was again committed to
Prison; and when in the next Assizes, where Hales was Judge, the same Action
was brought against him, and that there was yet no Accuser there, the Judge did
also acquit him of the Charge in this Place, yet commanded him to be carried
back to the same place, and kept there till another time: Another Instance of
this kind was this; some of the Quakers had a Meeting together, and were at
their Worship in Manchester; a certain Minister of the Public Church goes in
to them of his own accord, and challenges all that would oppose him, and said,
that he would show that their Spirit they pretended to, was the Spirit of the
Devil, and so appoints both time and place, where, if they pleased, they might
hear him demonstrate the same by Arguments. There was then present there
Leonard Fell before spoken of, who, more especially being not able to hear, nor
endure such an heavy Objection and Charge, he promised to be present, and
having taken some of his Companions along with him, appears at the time and
place appointed: There the Minister being more animated, than ready and
furnished for the Work, protracts and defers the Business to another time, but
they did then offer themselves, and came briskly to the matter in Controversy;
which while that was done, some rude and impertinent Fellows break in, and fall
upon them with great violence and sharpness, give them many blows, and pull
them not only out of the Houses, but also haled them out of the Town, crying
that they were sent by the Officers of the place to do so. There were indeed
some wicked Fellows at Beverley, who while Isaac Gate was Preaching to his
Followers, set upon them in the House, crying out, that he vilified their
Ministers, and pulled him out by the hair of the Head into the Street. It were
a tedious, and almost an endless thing to declare how many Assemblies have been
disturbed, how many Men tormented, and what and how great Calamities they have
endured in their own Habitations, how many have been burdened and fined,
wearied with Imprisonments, forbid their own Homes, and driven into Banishment,
only for that cause, because they held their own Conventicles, some because
they stood about such places as those, some because they went to visit their
Companions and Friends, as they called themselves one among another, and named
themselves to other People, though they were otherwise free from any Offense,
and though there was no manner of Sect except the Popish one, which had not as
much freedom as they pleased to meet and come together. There is an Obsolete
Law in England, which contains, That if any one as a Labouring-man betake
himself some where to get his Living, and cannot show and prove who he is, from
whence he comes, whither he goes, and what his business is, by a Pass under
some Justice of Peace his Hand, that same Person as a Vagabond, an Idle and
Rascally Fellow, is Imprisoned among such as are so, and there made to beat
Hemp his belly full, and to earn his Livelihood. Wherefore as often as they
found any of the Quakers, when they met together, they haled them from thence
before a Magistrate, and if they were not so well known, or but Poor and could
not pay, these they punished in this manner; and this indeed seemed to
administer just matter of Complaint to the Quakers against their Adversaries;
for it is an Old Maxim taken from the very Marrow of the Law, That one should
not do to another what he would not have done to himself. And this is the
Golden Sentence of our Savior, fetched from the Holy Law of God, and from the
Prophets, That whatever any one would have done to himself by Men, let him do
the same unto them; wherefore he complains in vain, of having wrong done unto
him, who does the same unto another. And it is a most wicked thing, and not to
be endured, to deny that to another, which one would have to be given to
himself. Moreover, seeing that the Quakers seeking so much after the Severity
of the Old Laws, and the Primitive Religion, and Christian Faith, did complain
so much of the hard dealings of those whom they looked upon as their Enemies
and Adversaries, and as they could not deny, but that many of their own People
did oftentimes so demean and carry themselves toward them, who esteemed them
also in like manner to be their Enemies, of whom they so far complained, as
that if their Complaint were not unjust, even that Complaint which their
Adversaries made against them, was just and right also; and seeing that those
Men would be esteemed as altogether Innocent, they gave occasion for Persons to
believe, that there were wicked ones amongst them, who practiced Evil Arts, and
who intimated, they would do any Mischief, if they had Power to their Will.
Examples hereof were these, to wit, some of them cast Scandals and many vile
Reproaches upon the Ministers of the Gospel, and their whole Churches, at the
very time, wherein they were performing their most Religious Duties, and so
endeavored to stir up against them, yea, the whole Society, the Resentments of
the Magistrate, the Rage of the People, and the ill Will and Persecutions of
both, so that now those few Persons might deservedly be accounted the
Tormentors of all the rest, and the Betrayers of the whole Multitude; of which
outrageous doings, seeing they who were Authors and Actors thereof, or
doubtless their Friends and Favorers have in their Libels published by them
given us Examples, glorying in such their Actions, there is no doubt to be made
but that those which I shall gather and pick out of them, are such, as that
there cannot be had the least suspicion concerning them: One Boswel Middleton,
a Shoemaker in the City of York, was the first that cut out, and, as it were,
fenced the way for the rest of them, crying out against Edward Bowls while he
was Preaching in the midst of his Sermon to the People, and in the hearing of
all, Thou art the Servant of Antichrist, and so is thy Flock; for which words
he was forthwith put in Chains: The like bold and impudent Example we have in
the same Year done at Oxford by two Women, Elizabeth Havens and Elizabeth
Fletcher, these did first chatter and talk in their way of Cant to the Students
in the Streets, and then in the Public Churches, and last of all in the
Universities, but with more hazard, and greater danger than they imagined, and
yet they might easily have done it. For these Persons being as it were taken
with such Polite Conceits as these gave them forth, with a more pleasant
Entertainment, or that I may be in earnest, and tell the truth, as these Waggs
are more especially exceeding arch and wanton, they draw them into their
Colleges, Pump them, and throw them into the Privy, and did again afterward
take one of them, to wit, Elizabeth Fletcher, and threw her into a Grave, that
was opened for the burying of a dead Corpse, with such violence, that she
received such hurt by her fall, that she afterward died thereof: But when they
were got free from this hardship, they go again to the Church, and while one
was silent the other spoke there openly; so that both of them were taken away
and thrown into Prison amongst Rogues and Burglars; and afterward when they
were brought to a Trial before the Mayor, and that he had turned them over to
some other Magistrates of the City, and to the Vice Chancellor, they were by
their Command thrust out of the City as Vagabonds; but seeing we have many of
these strange Examples, and them done not in one place, nor at one time; it
will not be improper to set forth what have been done by these sort of Men all
this time in the City of Bristol, and which has been recorded by their own
Companions, and real Defenders, as being famous and worthy Performances; and
the rather, because that in this Relation some other things like unto these do
offer themselves unto us, and others also are not to be omitted and past over.
This City, after these men's Dogms and Opinions were broached in that Country,
was as it were the Seminary, Receptacle, and Refuge-place of these Sectaries,
and as it were the Theater of those things, which was proper and peculiar for
these Men both to do and to suffer. Which thing did very much nettle all Men of
all Religions, wherewith the City was full: And though these same Men dissented
one from another in respect to their various Religions, and many other
businesses, and were at very great and almost deadly Enmity among themselves,
yet they all agreed in this one thing, for to oppose and resist the Quakers: At
this time came John Audland and John Camie, and soon after them Francis Howgil
and Edward Buroughs, Names that were well known and dear there, into the City:
Audland and Camie in a short time after departed; but the other two tarryed and
were cited before the Magistrates; they appeared; the Magistrate commands them
to depart out of the City; they refuse, and added, that if the Magistrate would
exercise Power, they would not resist whatever was imposed upon them: Upon this
the whole City was so chafed, agitated, and exasperated against the Quakers,
that where ever they saw them, especially when they were gathered together, and
as they went to the place, and departed from thence, all People almost of all
degrees, kind, and Age, derided, mocked, threw dirt upon them, thumped, kicked,
and cast stones at them: But notwithstanding all this, the Quakers were not
repressed and diverted from their Undertakings; but some of them, even as if
they were intent upon that very thing, for to increase and heighten the Anger
and Rage of Men against them and all their Party, undertook also some new ways
and Methods, from which they could not only hope for and procure no good, but
from which they might easily know it might conduce further to their hurt; for
Elizabeth Marshal, during the time that the Minister of the Church, Rodolph
Farmer, and the whole Church were met together to preach and hear the Word of
God, to pray to him, and to celebrate the Lord's Supper, stood all the while
over against Farmer, and when he was going about to Administer the Lord's
Supper, she cried out, Woe, Woe, Woe, hangs over thy Head from the Lord, O Farmer,
who take the Word of the Lord into thy mouth when the Lord never sent thee;
at which words all the People being in an Uproar, and many of them enraged
against her, they fell violently upon her, and thrust out the Woman, dragging
her headlong out of the Church, and the Boys without threw stones at her, and
pursued her until she got into and saved her self in her own Habitation, and
there remained secure from more Outrages. This Fact might have been severely
punished by the Magistrates, but they chose rather to forget, or to defer it to
another time. But she, as if she had done a good deed, undertakes the same
thing on the next Lord's Day, and in the same Church, spoke these words against
John Knowles the Preacher, after he had pronounced the Blessing upon the
People: This is the Word of God to thee, Knowles, I command thee to Repent for
what thou have done, and to hearken to the Light of Conscience that is within
thee; and so being again punished with many blows, and thrown out of the
Church, she was first confined by the Watch of the City, and afterward
committed by the Mayor into the Common Prison, and had no heavier Punishment
inflicted upon her. From whence almost all sorts of Citizens grew enraged, and
cried out, that these Men sought nothing else by their Inventions and
Undertakings, but occasions of Reproaches, Disturbances, and Confusions, as
also matter of Enmities and Revenge against them. Now Audland and his Companion
were returned into the City, who when they were a going out of the City toward
a place where the Quakers intended to keep a Meeting, they were like to be in
great danger from the Boys that assaulted them; and its very like they had
perished, if they had not been saved by the Care and Industry of some of the
chief Men of the Place. Which when the Common People, and such like unto them,
came to know, and supposing those Principal Citizens had not done their Duty as
they ought, they broke out against them, and some threatened the Magistrates,
and made a Clamor, That this new, base, and partly flagitious and wicked
People, the Quakers, had passed over the Bounds of Modesty, and proceeded so
far; that they could not arrive to a greater Audacity and Impudence, than they
were come to; and that the Magistrate saw and bore with all this, to whose care
it was committed to maintain the Honor and Dignity of the Commonwealth, whom
they represented, and to take heed, lest the whole People should at last be
endangered in their Religion; so that seeing now, when so great a matter is in
agitation, the Laws are silent, Judgments dumb, Punishments ceased, all things
both Divine and Humane lie unregarded, and the extreme Fate of the Religion and
Liberty of the City was at hand; it was high time that the People themselves
should watch, and upon the neglect of the Magistrate, those whom it most
concerns, are to be Magistrates to themselves, and must seek after their own
safety, which they cannot otherwise procure. This, though it may not be Lawful
at another time, yet at such a time as this is, it is both right and just, and
ought, and there is need it should be done; but before they would enter upon
it, they desired that an Account of the whole matter might be transmitted to
Cromwell, who was the defender of the Common Law and Liberty. The which was done
without delay, for there were some who transmitted their desires forthwith in
this matter to Cromwell: And so while these Men thought that they acted the part
of Citizens bravely, yea, that they like so many Viceroys imagined they
discharged the Office of Judges well, the Magistracy winked hereat, or
contemned it, especially because things were brought to that pass, that the
Guard of Soldiers that was placed in the City, did no ways deter them
therefrom. This Tumult lasted for the space of two days, and then was appeased
of it self: But lo, while the Magistrates were studying to aslay this great
outragiousness of the Times, by reason of such Insolence in their own People,
(and upon this Consideration did not afterward call the heads of the Rioters
to an Account for such their doings) another Quaker, Henry Warren by Name, had
rather exasperate the matter, and was as it were the poisoned Nail in this
Altar of the City, for he had such a Lust, as I may say, for it, and proceeded
to such a height of boldness, that in the Church, and that even when there was
a very great Assembly, he spoke these words to the face of the Minister, after
he had made an end of his Office and Work, The Prayers of the Wicked are an
abomination to the Lord; with which opprobrious speech, than which nothing
could be more contemptible, all were stirred up and provoked so as that they
violently drove the Man from the Church, and lead him before the Mayor and
Sheriffs of the City, who, that they might not go unpunished, commanded them to
be thrust into Prison; but such was the intenseness and desire of these Men to
talk at this rate in these places, and they were so much tickled with the Glory
which they placed therein, that they seemed to deliberate one with another, and
to determine with Judgment for to pursue this matter, whatever Hatred, Trouble,
or Mischief befell them and their Companions; therefore it was not only one, but
many of them broke out in this manner, who were ever and anon assaulted and
violently beaten for it, and indeed wounded in the crowd, until they were
thrust into Prison. At last the Magistrate calls all these Prisoners to an
Account for their doings, which till then by reason of the Times and other
necessary Circumstances, was omitted, but so, even as now things stood, their
Examination was done in a mild, tender, and gentle manner, the Magistrate
supposing, that many harsh things might be alleviated by gentle Animadversion
and Forbearance; but those Prisoners made their Answers to the Magistrate not
at all more submissively, but in a sharper manner, and as often as their Crime
was laid to their charge, they would acknowledge and confess no Crime, and
stiffly vindicated what they had done, as what was Lawful and decent, and that
they did not do them things of their own will, but according to the Will of
God, and the Instinct and Admonition of his Divine Spirit, and the Examples of
Holy Men, insomuch that the Obstinacy and Obdurateness of these Men prevailed;
wherefore the Judges commanded them to be kept in Bonds by reason of their
causing these Molestations and Disturbances, and for their perverse Manners and
Obstinacy (and not for any other causes, as these Men by way of Complaint did
allege) Moreover the People were generally so irritated and exasperated with
hatred, wrath, and rage against them, that they set upon the Quakers every
where, laid hands on them, beat, knocked, and kicked them, and that so far,
that some of them rushed into their Houses, and haled Men out from thence,
ransacked all that was therein, and omitted nothing that might gratify their
incensed Minds. Of them that were at this time in this City, were Audland and
Camie, Howgil and Buroughs, and Naylor and Fox, whom we ought to have named
first, as being always the first and with the foremost, as if there had been a
Council called here, and that this were done about most weighty Affairs; which
when the Magistrates came to know, because there was a Report made unto them,
and that some had made Oath of it, that there were certain Franciscan Friars
come from Rome to London, who concealed themselves under the name of Quakers,
and deluded simple Men, and that there were many in this City of Bristol, who
under color of being Quakers, lurked there, and did pervert Men by their
Artifices, they commanded these Men to appear before them: But they declared,
that they did not know any thing concerning the coming of those Franciscans,
and had nothing to do with those sort of Men, their Studies and Cheats, and
complain grievously that they were laid under such vile Slanders and invidious
Crimes, and that such vile Personages as these were affixt upon them, who were
honest Men, and who had so far withdrawn themselves from those idle Monks, and
the whole Papacy; so they were discharged, till the Judges had got further
Cognizance of this Truth, than what they had heard from the Reports of others;
but because this Opinion stuck in the Minds of most of the Citizens, that it
was most certain, that such fallacious People wandered in these Places, the
City Guard, and also many of the common People, run about, and searched all
places to see if they could light on any of this new sort of Men. Which thing
did one day light upon many of the Quakers, among whom was Josiah Cole, a
Person of Note in that Country. But here it was on the very same day that
Christopher Birhead, an Inhabitant of this place, a Shipwright and Mariner, a
Man according as Time and Opportunity served, of a rude and rough disposition,
as those Men are wont to be, as if he were minded still further to stir up and
exasperate the Populacy, that were already sufficiently moved and observing all
things, and rather than extinguish their Fury, blow up the Coals, and raised it
up, goes to the Church, and stands and loyters during the time of Prayer with
his Hat on, which when a considerable Man of the City beheld, knowing what sort
of a Man he was, he takes care to have him conducted from the Church to his own
home, as fearing some Tumult might be raised by him; but he immediately
returns, and when all things in the Church were over, cries out with a loud
voice, pointing to the Minister, O thou Son of Pride, and so had gone on if
some had not seized upon him; they therefore carry this Rascal before the Mayor
of the City, who even for that time suffers him to go his ways, but commands
him the day after to come before him, and when he came, he asked him, why he
was yesterday so notoriously Impudent? He answered, That he had not done it
imprudently, but justly, and defends the Fact with many hard and rough words,
but winded them about that he might not come close to the matter in hand; so
great was the Clemency of the Magistrates, that they would have even pardoned
the Obstinacy of this Man, if he had but promised and received what they
required of him, that he would do no such thing any more. To which Proposals
when he had detained and illuded the Magistrates for a long time with many
impertinent words, and foreign from the matter in hand, and was no more moved
with gentleness than with threats, they would not suffer such great Impudence
and Obstinacy to go unpunished, and therefore they remanded the Man back to
Prison. And because the Actions of those that were now in use and ordinary
amongst them had escaped some time; others not content herewith, invented other
unusual and extraordinary ways and actions; thus did Thomas Murford, a Man
among the meanest degree of Men, of some account and understanding enough in
his own Concerns, but ignorant of all others, had made for himself a Garment of
Goats hair and Sheeps wool, and walked about in it up and down every where, and
this with a design to rebuke the Pride of the People in Apparel and Dresses of
the Body, and as a sign of the Punishment to ensue from God for it, unless they
said the same aside and gave it over. Such another Garment did Sarah Goldsmith
procure to be made for her self, to the end that being clothed therewith,
having her Hair dishevelled, dirt upon her Head, and so sufficiently nasty, she
might go to every Gate of the City, and pass through all the Streets, and
afterward sit in the Marketplace in the view of all People, and that the Truth
might be public and made known there, and the true and real cause of the full
and certain wrath of God, and an Example be given all People for the appeasing
thereof, and this for the space of six whole days: And so on the first very
early in the Morning, and being accompanied with two more, she goes to the
Gates of the City, and passes through several Streets, but finding many People
excited hereat, and pursuing of her, she turns home, and afterward at Nine of
the Clock goes to the Marketplace, being accompanied only with one of her
Companions before spoken of, and a great crowd of People at her heels, and
stands still as a stock for half an hour, saying never a word; all sorts of
Men, especially Boys, flock to her, and every one according to his Judgment,
wonders, conjectures, enquires, what Woman was there, what new Habit that was,
what she meant and would have by standing there, and by and by the mea^^r sort,
especially Boys, did every one together with their tongues use their hands, and
did so jeer and entertain this Spectacle, that was thus adorned and furnished
to receive the shock, (for such a Dress was of Old in use among Legier Ladies)
that she did not know what to do, or which way to turn her self. At length
comes a certain Person, who using all shifts, got her from the Marketplace and
Crowd into a Shop, from whence she was by the Sergeants carried into the Court,
whither some of the Aldermen came by and by, who, after they had examined her,
why she had done such ridiculous things? and when she had answered, That she
obeyed the Light of her Conscience; and seeing that she seemed without all
doubt to be Mad, and out of her Senses, and not fit to walk about in the
Streets, they commanded her to be shut up in Prison; but the Quakers did again
defend this Fact by the Examples of the Saints of the Old Testament, who
according to the Command of God himself, by various and strange Methods
informed the People of their Sins and the Divine Judgments: After this interval
of time, the Quakers did again, and as it were, strive to gainsay the Preachers
of God's Word in the Churches, some asked them Questions, and did interrupt
them in the midst of their Sermons; of these last Benjamin Maynard was one,
that brought up the Rear, in these words; In God's Name, Preacher, hold thy
peace; so that where before they stood the shock but of a few People, now it
became an Habit in almost all to Assault them, and all these were thrown into
Prison; with which Prisons some of them were yet not so far terrified, but that
they used their way of babbling and reviling even there also, and made it their
business to defame, and heap up scandalous Reproaches upon the Credit, Fame,
and Reputation of the Magistrates and Pastors of the Church, in their most
bitter Letters to their Friends; such Practices as these might also be seen in
other places; and these things did the Quakers of those Times extol as noble
doings, and glorious actions, and to be imitated by others, and on the contrary
did in their Pamphlets represent those things which these Men suffered for such
Practices, as the most Criminal and bloody deeds of their Enemies. And indeed
these things were done by Men of a depraved disposition, and not by the best of
them, who may justly be called Idiots, for all of them were not guilty of it,
they who were of better quality and disposition, their Leaders and Rulers,
saving perchance one or two, or the like, and saving always Fox, did neither
commit nor commend these sorts of little Fooleries, even as all this day, as
far as they can avoid it, neither do, nor admit of the same, and when they hear
of such things transacted by their Sect, they say, they do esteem such Actions
as the impulses and singular motions of those Men, and as it were the burning
sparks of their Zeal, Love, or Desire, whereof there have been many instances
in this kind in the Church, both in Ancient times, and within the memory of our
Fathers; these things were transacted in the Years Fifty Four and Fifty Five;
but some Quakers this last Year met at Evesham in Worcestershire, in the House
of one Thomas Cartwright, to Celebrate their Divine Worship; when this came to
be known, a certain Constable rushes into the House, and brings out Cartwright,
and together with him under one labor, Humphrey Smyth, and carries them before
certain Justices that were together in the same, and in company with Haphinch,
the Minister of the Church, these after a long Debate and Contention with them,
did at last promise to dismiss these Men, if they would engage and swear, that
they would not meet again, but when they denied that they neither would nor
could do so, but would meet for such just ends as they had in hand, and would
not confirm any manner of thing with an Oath; these Justices supposing they had
sufficient cause against them, they commanded them, as Persons intent upon
Rebellion and disturbance of the Peace, to be lead to Prison: But some Quakers
were so affected with the Misery of their own Imprisoned Friends, and mindful
of them, as if they had been in Prison themselves, that they betook themselves
to the Prison, and when they were not permitted to go in, they stand still
without mute, to see if they could at least by their Sighs and Prayers obtain
any relief from God; but whether Smyth by receiving of some sign, came to know
that they were there present, or that he was stirred up thereunto of his own
accord, he at the same time with a loud voice falls to Prayer in the Prison;
which when the Keeper and others that belonged to the Prison that were by
chance there present, heard, they run to him, and being ready to do the Man a
mischief, haled him from thence, and drive him down into another place under
Ground, of the Nature of a Dungeon; those who were without repeat the same
thing next day, and seeing that before they had held only a silent Meeting, one
of them now, Thomas Woodren by Name, began to speak; the same Keeper, when he
perceived this, goes out unto them in great Rage, and Commands them in a very
rough and angry manner all to avoid the place, and to depart: This they did,
not because of his words, but of their own will and accord, and return again
within a few hours after they had departed. The which as soon as Smyth in his
Cell came to know, he calls and speaks to them, and they Discourse together: It
was on a day wherein the Townsmen had been at their Religious Worship in the
Church, and the hour wherein they were to depart from thence to their
respective homes, and so some of them passed by that way where the Quakers were
gathered together, and Woodren was speaking to them about their Concerns; but a
certain Colonel lays hold on him, and brings him before the Mayor, and was
thereupon by his Command sent into Prison to Smyth, and this Magistrate was so
angered and enraged against these Meetings, that he threatened them, if they
offered to come together in that manner again, to Pillory, hang them, and what
not; and because they were afraid, lest the Quakers persisted in that their
purpose, they keep a Watch; but yet they proceeded to do as they were wont to
do, and therefore they also were punished with Imprisonment; Smyth had some
Pamphlets of the Quakers in his custody, these were taken from him, and burnt
in the sight of the People in the Marketplace. There had been a Law some time
before made by the Protector Cromwell, wherein it was enacted under a severe
Penalty, That none should Swear profanely, and more especially, not only to
swear falsely, but that none should swear slightly, and for no cause, and by no
means Profane the Holy Name of God. This Statute was read before the People,
but not set up, as the Custom was, on any Public Place; the Quakers hence took
occasion to Complain, that there were some among the Magistracy of this City,
and so of the Nation, who themselves did grievously offend more than one way
against so Holy a Constitution; for one was to be met with, who drove Men most
lightly to take an Oath, when he must needs know, how great the wickedness of
some Men was, and how that many might, and were wont to be brought to swear
falsely, and to Perjure themselves with no more Conscience, than if they told an
officious Lie; another there was, who himself had no Religion, but confirmed
ever and anon what he said, with an Oath, another that was a Drunkard;
wherefore a certain Quaker fixed that Decree of the Protector on the Post of the
Court, that it might be read by all; but this was plucked off by another: The
Quakers did hereupon send their Petition concerning these things to the
Protector, and then was a Letter sent by the Mayor, Subscribed by Forty Hands
besides, to him; they urge, that he would do them Justice, and that Cromwell's
Decree might be put in execution, in pursuance to which, both theirs and other
men's Vices might be punished; but their Petitions had no such Effect as they
expected, for they did indeed but disturb the Ears of the one with them, and so
irritated the Minds of the others, that they brought a new Misfortune upon
themselves, and did also render the Cause of their Friends and Familiars the
more difficult, and did besides aggravate the Burden of the same; upon which
they afterward chose rather to contain themselves, and stir the less, and so be
the less liable to danger. Toward the l^tter end of this Year, and almost the
whole Year following, George Fox and Edward Pyot, who had been a Captain
before, and a Person well skilled in the Law of the Land, and could Argue well,
and William Sault, underwent an hard and troublesome Imprisonment at Lanceston
in Cornwall, because they had dispersed some Pamphlets concerning the Religion
and Discipline of their Sect: For when at every Quarter Sessions they refused
to uncover their Heads, and to Swear Allegiance to the present Government
(though they said, they embraced the same in their Minds, and did not shun to
declare it in naked works) out of a scrupulous and merely an anxious care of
Conscience, the Judges for these slight matters commanded them as often to be
detained till the next Quarter Sessions. The Prisoners made grievous Complaints
of the Injuries done them by the Justices of that Country, by whose Commands
they were brought into that place, aggravating their words and deeds above
measure by their captiousness, calumny, and wresting of the same. In the mean
time, as if Prison had not been appointed for to confine Men, but to punish
them, the Jailer, a merciless and inhumane Wretch, that never was taught
Humanity, and always, conversant among Thieves, and for that reason stigmatized,
than whom there was no one fitter for such a Servile Office, did treat and
entertain these his Prisoners all the time in a barbarous and wicked manner;
for he did not only defraud them of Food, and hinder their Friends to come to
them, lest they should bring them any Victuals, which might seem to be the same
thing as if he designed to destroy them, but also when he was swollen and
frantic with Drink, would in a Rage fall upon them with his Hands, inveigh,
insult, give them blows, and threaten to kill them. There were many other
Quakers confined to this Prison, some because they came to Visit their Friends
that were detained and confined in this place, others because they carried
their own Prohibited Books either about them, or gave them to others; some
because they would not pull off their Hats with their own hands before the
Magistrates, for some of them were brought to that pass (but what did little
agree with their Doctrine and Discipline, seeing it matters not, whether a
Person does that himself, or suffers another to do it) that when they did
themselves refuse to uncover their Heads, they did suffer the Officers,
Sergeants, and others to do it: And these Quakers were used by this same Keeper
in the same manner as the rest of them. But when these Men complained to the
Magistrates of their Usage, and made known unto them the wrongs that were done
them, and that the Keeper did not only deny the whole thing, but brought a
quite contrary Accusation against them, as if the Prisoners studied to oppress
and kill him and his whole Family: It was he, and not they that was believed,
and so he went free and unpunished, but these were more strictly confined and
afflicted with more stripes, so that some of them, besides what they might have
done through want, the stench and filthiness of other nasty and unclean
Prisoners (for it was a Common Prison, full of such Nastiness, as is not to be
named without saving your Reverence, and had not been emptied for a Year's
space) contracted Sickness through these new Miseries, and one of them, called
John Iagram, fell so ill, that at length he died there. At last, when the
Quakers complained, that the Minds of the Magistrates were so prejudiced, that
there was no room left for their Lamentations, no entrance for Truth, and that
that Tormentor, the Jailer, dealt with them as he pleased; General Desborough
(by this Name alone do the Quakers, who have composed this History at large,
distinguish and notify the Man, being herein a little subtle or civil, and
officious, in that they have not rendered the Name of a Person that was most
kind to them, and one of their Patrons, more explicitly and at large)
interposes himself for the decision of the Cause and Controversy in hand, and
having searched into all Matters relating thereunto, he so unravelled the
business, that it was ordered, the Quakers should not be injured nor wronged,
and that they should have greater Enlargement and Freedom; and not long after
this, they were freed from their Bonds and Misery: But notwithstanding the
remembrance hereof among so great a multitude of People, there were not some
wanting, who through their Levity and Fooleries, contracted to themselves and
the whole Society of them great Envy, Trouble, and Affliction: For at London,
on the Morning of a certain day, there were some of them, but such as were of
the meaner and more abject sort, that went half naked, and only clad with a
Shirt, and preached to the People; from whence arose the Suspicion, Fame,
Discourse, and Accusation, that the Quakers were all of them such a sort of
wandering, naked, fantastical People, like unto the Old Anabaptists of Munster,
and this gave cause and occasion for their being handled severely more than
once, as such uneasy and turbulent Persons. Moreover, seeing there was in
these Times not a few besides the Quakers, that expected, though they scarce
knew what that Fifth Monarchy, and the new Reign of Christ alone was, which
should destroy all the Kingdoms of Men, and made themselves ready for it, and
who had their Arms in a readiness for to Invade this Kingdom (which sort of
Men, even our Country of Holland and Church has seen to spring up from it
self, and we do very well know and remember it) there were also some found
among the Quakers, who, whether knowingly, or unwittingly, began some such
thing as looked like such an Imperious Mode; from whence the Quakers were again
brought under Suspicion, that they also were such a sort of Men, and hence they
came to be called, if not universally, yet many of them, by the Name of
Monarchical Men, and if any such thing happened amongst them, they were
severely used for it. And that I may say this by the by, it is most certain that
the most learned Men in our Provinces have attributed and ascribed such Errors
as these the Quakers, and could not be driven from it, notwithstanding all the
Endeavors of the Quakers by word and writing to divert them from harboring
such an Opinion concerning them; but because I would pass over such Instances
of the Matter in hand as are of lesser note, I would give you a Narration of
the true History of James Naylor, which some have related not as an History,
but as a Fable, being used to lay hold on every twig, and to make a story of
the matter: The business happened in the Year Fifty Six, and thus it was.
Naylor had been first a Foot Soldier, and afterward an Horseman in the
Parliament's Army; when he was weary of this sort of Life, he began to look
about for an easier way of Living, and so retiring to his Native City, he
betook himself to the Communion and Fellowship of the Quakers, wherein when he
had in a short time, together with great Commendations of his Knowledge, gained
a great Opinion of his Probity among his Party, he became very dear unto all of
them: But such is the Weakness and Imbecility of almost all Men, that after
they have wished for and coveted the Applause and Observance of others, and
have obtained it, that they bear the same immoderately: Naylor, after he saw
the Love and Good Will of his Party unto him, was so much taken up with it, and
overvalued himself hereupon. He was invited by Letters from John Stranger and
Ann his Wife, as also by Thomas Simonson and his Wife Martha, to come into the
City of Bristol, and to dwell with them; in which Letters they dignified him
with these very Elogies, which every body knows to whom, and to whom alone they
do belong; which was to this purpose, That he was the fairest among Ten
Thousands, the only begotten Son of God, the Prophet of the most High, the King
and Judge of Israel, the Eternal Son of Righteousness, the Prince of Peace,
Jesus, in whom was the hope of Israel. Naylor with a few Friends go on
Horseback toward Bristol; and so these Friends coming to hear of his Journey
and Approach, as did also some other Men and Women, they, while the rest waited
for him in the City, and in their Houses, go out of the City full of Joy and
Gladness for to meet him, some on Horseback, and others on Foot, and so
marching both before and behind him on foot, bring him into the City; those
Women which I have named before, as also Dorcas Erbury, spreading part of their
Clothes on the way, and crying aloud, and repeating that Sentence, which the
Multitude used as the Scripture witnesses, to our Savior, as he entered
Jerusalem, Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed is he that comes in the Name
of the Lord; as also, The Holy Jehovah and Lord of Hosts; while one of their
Fraternity, Jurian Witgorley by Name, was in the mean time chiding and blaming
of the rest of them for their Ignorance and Folly, in worshipping of the Man;
Naylor being thus accompanied, is brought into the City, and goes into the
House of two Men, who were already before entered into his Brotherhood and
Society; there manifold Honors are done him by the whole Company, and Ann
Stranger with a few more, being forward to do their utmost in Entertaining of
the Man, fall down before him, and stretching out their hands in a suppliant
manner to his Feet, kiss them; all which doings Naylor was so far from
rejecting, that he took much Pleasure therein. When these things were known
through the City, and that a Concourse of People came to the House from all
parts of the Town, there were Persons forthwith sent by the Mayor, who haled
Naylor to Prison, as contemning the present Government, which must not go
unpunished, or affecting Novelty, and carrying the marks and semblance thereof
before him. And that I may pass over what intervened between, I shall rehearse
briefly what followed: Naylor was sent to the Parliament, who appointed a
Committee to make Inquisition into the matter. Naylor being summoned to Answer
for himself, and asked concerning the Epistles and Titles ascribed unto him in
them, as also concerning the Submission and Supplication of the Women to him,
being not willing to deny the Fact, he constantly and boldly answered as to the
way and manner how these things might be attributed to him, to wit, not as he
was a Creature, but as Christ dwelt in him, and maintained that God had so far
enjoined those Persons to do it, and that he had permitted the same to be done
to him; these things being over, the Committee bring him in Guilty in their
Report to the Parliament, which when they had expended the matter again with
great care and diligence, they adjudged Naylor to be guilty of great Blasphemy
against God, and of Seducing Men, and ordered the Punishment of such Wickedness
in this manner: Naylor was brought into the New Palace-Yard in Westminster, and
there aloft set in the Pillory, so as he might be seen of all that were there,
for the space of two hours, and then he was from thence carried to the Old
Exchange, and between both the places was well whipped; and then two days
after, was in this same place Pillory'd again for so many hours as before, and
had his Tongue bored through with an hot Iron, and his Forehead marked with the
Letter B. as a Mark and Testimony that might always remain there of his
Blasphemy; and after he had been thus handled at London, he was sent to
Bristol, and there in the open Marketplace set on Horseback, but with his Face
to the Horses Tail, naked, and whipped also as before; and at length after all,
was carried again to London, and there committed to Bridewel, where, if he was
minded to eat, he was obliged to earn it with his own hands: He had the first
day of his Whipping three hundred lashes given him, and them so severely, that
his Sides and all his Waste was so slashed and torn, that his Bowels did almost
gush out; for that very day wherein Naylor suffered his Punishment, the
Deputies of several Counties had put up their Petitions to the Parliament, that
the Quakers might be suppressed, as most troublesome and intolerable, wherever
they were, whithersoever they came, and disturbed all places. On the contrary,
many of Naylor's steadfast Friends in this uncertain Affair Petition the
Parliament on the same day, that they would be pleased to remit what remained
yet behind of their Sentence, in respect to the Punishment of Naylor: And thus
far they did prevail, that the Punishment he was to suffer the next day, should
be protracted. The Parliament sent to Naylor five Ministers, one of which was
Edward Reynolds, afterward the Famous Bishop of Norwich, to sound his Mind,
and to induce him to confess and acknowledge his Offense, and to recant it, but
he with the same Constancy and Fortitude as he had used before in making his
Defense, did now also persevere in his Opinion; from whence when he might
otherwise have procured Favor in the sight of the House, he was now by their
Command ordered to suffer the remainder of his Sentence; while these things
were transacted, there were some of Naylor's Friends, both Men and Women, who
were punished with Imprisonment at Exeter, because that all of them, as Naylor
had done, endeavored to divert the Crime laid to their Charge with their
frivolous Excuses and Exceptions. But to return to Naylor, the second time that
he stood in the Pillory, one Robert Rich, from among the great multitude of
Spectators, who was a special Friend of Naylor's, with two Women, get up to
him, and stand about him; then Rich pulled a Paper out of his Bosom, and set it
upon his Head, wherein was written these words, This is the King of the Jews.
Rich being thrust from that place with the Women who were his Companions in
that mad Prank, when Naylor was stigmatized with an hot Iron in the Forehead,
and not running of his own accord, but haled, held Naylor with his hand while
the Brand was a doing, and presently after licks the Wound with his Tongue, as
if it had been some Sacred and Religious thing; though indeed Naylor always
excused himself herein, that he did nothing to an ill intent and purpose, or
suffered to be done unto him; but did always, and particularly then, when that
was done unto him, condemn him for his Folly, that he had so much vain and
foolish Honor done him by the People, and that he suffered justly and
deservedly for that Crime and Offense, and acknowledged that he was under the
Vindictive hand of God for it; and it is a wonderful thing that amidst so many,
and such great Torments, he was not heard to pour out the least sigh or groan:
Besides, while all these things were doing, many of the Quakers sent Letters
daily to Naylor, and did incessantly rebuke him, that he would be so audacious,
as to do such a Wickedness, and to advise and exhort him, that he would do his
utmost to correct and amend his Fault, and at length forsake it. Though either
these very Advisers, or others of that Society, did again as well as Naylor,
defend all that was done of Naylor, by public Papers, and concerning Naylor by
his Friends, and for this purpose they alleged diverse Sayings and Examples of
the Holy Scripture, and would adapt them for the Proof hereof. And indeed
Naylor did continue all the remainder of his days in the same manner affected
toward the Religion of the Quakers, and also wrote Books, whereby he
endeavored to promote his and their Religion among other People. I have said
before, that George Fox and his Followers were clapped up in Prison, and
detained there for a long time, because of their publishing and dispersing of
their Libels and Pamphlets among the Common People: Fox in another Pamphlet did
so clear himself of all Crime herein, that he affirmed, that there was nothing
else taught in those Pamphlets, but that it was the Duty of all Men aright to
consider the Light that shone in their Consciences; and that he might extenuate
the Suspicion had of them, he so exaggerates and amplifies their Sufferings, as
if the cry of his and his Friends Blood reached up even as far as Heaven, and
drew on the Anger and Vengeance of the Almighty upon them for it. Just at this
time, when Fox was not yet set free from his Imprisonment and the Afflictions
he complained of, which he cried out were so hard, and not to be endured, came
a Pamphlet abroad at London, without any Name indeed to it, yet without all
doubt George Fox was the Author thereof. That Libel opened and explained the
causes why, and for which the Quakers ought to refuse, deny, and reject these
Earthly Teachers, by whom they meant the Ministers of the Public Churches: The
Author did in that Libel blame and accuse all Pastors and Teachers upon the
same foot without distinction, as of other Vices, so of Falsity, Deceivings,
Frauds, Lies, in as much as that they pursued Lies for Gain or Favor, and for
Covetousness sake brought Men to their bow with hypocritical words, and
adulterated the Holy Scriptures; yea, that they were guilty of Enchantment,
Magic, and Necromancy. The Accuser ought to have a good Memory, and take heed,
lest while he is falsely and foolishly Accusing of others, he do give occasion
for himself to be derided of Men, and be very nigh akin to the very same Crime
he lays to their charge. The thing it self manifests that the Author of this
Libel had an evil purpose therein, in that they also blamed, and severely
carped at these things in their Adversaries, because they said, that the
Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, were the Gospel; that they said, the
Gospel was light, the Scripture saying, that Christ was the Light; the Apostle
taught, that the Bodies of Believers were the Temples of God, and of the Holy
Spirit, but that they taught, that those Temples were Steeple Houses, and
material Buildings, which were made of Stone and Wood; and many such things
there were, not spoken, but written cunningly for to stir up the ignorant
Multitude, and provoke Men of a wicked and evil Disposition by these Practices,
which were not much different from a Malignant Spirit, and flagitious lust of
Mind, or furious Rage and Madness; and thus did these Men again and again stir
up the Envy, Wrath, and Hatred of their Adversaries. Moreover, seeing that the
same Men, especially being encited thereto by these Heralds and Enticers, did
not only not cease, but went on more and more in their rash ways, and
inconsiderate boldness, not only to Preach about, and to direct their
Discourses to People in the Markets, and such like places, but also to
interrupt the Ministers Preaching in the Churches, with their inveighing
Interruptions and Bablings, or afterward to make a noise, excusing themselves
at the same time, according to their usual manner, with this one Sentence
constantly, That they were excited by the Spirit hereunto. Hence all sorts of
Men increased in Indignation and Bitterness against them, and Severity in
Punishing of them. This happened from the Year Fifty Six, for the two following
Years. For so indeed it came to pass, that not only they who spoke what they
pleased in Public places, but even they also who were not wont to go hear the
Sermons usually preached in the Churches, or had Sermons of their own in their
own Houses, were some of them fined, some cast into Prison, some whipped, and
then forbid their Homes, and thrust into Banishment, of whom some were so stiff
and obstinate, being as it were Conquerors over Fear and Pain, that they
returned again (one was George Bayley, who came back twice) who were as often
whipped for the same; the same was done in the Towns of Sherborn, Longhorton,
etc. and in Dorchester, the chief Town of the County it self. The Quakers
wrote, that the Ministers of the Churches themselves did not only in their
Sermons that were adapted to stir up and inflame the People, excite the
Magistrates, and more especially the credulous and headlong Multitude, so far,
as that they should either drive away the Quakers, or hinder them to hold their
Meetings, but also that they did come themselves among those that were armed,
for to disturb their Meetings, as well among the Public Guard as the
Promiscuous Multitude; but there are no deeds so much noted and enlarged upon
by them in all the Monuments of their Writings, as those done by the Scholars
and Students of the University of Oxford against them: If the Quakers did at
any time enter into the Churches, they fell upon and severely treated them for
their boldness in coming to the sight of those Youths, who were themselves most
bold and ready for all wanton tricks. As often as the Quakers held their
Conventicles, and that it came to the Ears of these Students, they flew
thither, and hal^d and thrust the Men out of Doors, and there tossed them
backward and forward, and tormented them all the ways they could; but if they
could not conveniently get in, they broke the Doors and Windows, but when they
could not, or would not do that, they stood about the House, and there received
them as they came out as before; and this also was a small matter with them;
there were some of them who were furnished with Pipes and Tobacco (an Herb well
known, and so called from him who first showed the use of it) and Ale, of which
they themselves did not only sip often, but also reached the same to the
Quakers, and upon their refusing thereof, yea, saying nothing at all to the
matter, and as it were silently sipping up and digesting all that Affliction,
they poured the Drink down the Throats of the People, and upon their Clothes,
struck them, pulled them by the Nose, and tore their Beards, that they might
force them to speak something to them. But these vile doings were yet but
little in their Eyes; there were some of them, who run upon, and trod them
under their Feet, who discharged Muskets at them, and threw Squibs and
Serpents, as they call them, which flew and burnt their Clothes where ever they
touched them; others brought Mastiff Dogs with them, and set them on, not only
to bark at the People, but to fly at them, and bite them; some of them when
they went away, took the men's Goods along with them, and when the Quakers made
Complaint of these Mischiefs and Injuries done them to their Tutors and
Professors, they were deaf to them, and took them but as so many Tales told
them. And indeed they suffered such great and so many Evils, that unless these
Men had written concerning the same openly to the World, and that none did ever
refel and confute what was written by them hereupon, they could not be
believed: Such things also as these, they complained were done unto them by the
Students in Cambridge, and this they set forth in Print. While these things
were transacted, Oliver Cromwell died, being the Year One Thousand Six Hundred
Fifty and Eight, on the Third Day of September, at Three of the Clock in the
Afternoon, of a Tertian Ague, after he had had a severe Fit of it. This Man had
the boldness to arrogate to himself so great a Power in all the three Kingdoms,
that of Old were esteemed to be another World, that all things were governed
and managed according to his Pleasure alone, having rejected the Name of King,
and assuming that of Protector, that he himself might be the more protected
from all Hatred and Envy. Under the Government of whose Son Richard, which was
but very short, and not managed with that Industry as his Father had done, nor
administered with that Moderation that he showed, so as that neither his
Authority had lessened the Peoples Love to him, nor the Favor of the People
his Gravity, the Quakers Affairs begun daily to grow worse and worse, while
both on the one side and the other the Quakers were hurried on with greater
boldness; and those who opposed, with greater Cruelty. And seeing there are
very many Instances extant, and such as are very memorable, yet because we
would shun satiety, and that I find the same creeping on, I shall dispatch the
matter in a few words. Seeing there were now more Persons among the Quakers
than before, who uttered their vain Ribaldry and Bablings, even in the
Churches, and while the Ministers were in the midst of their Sermons, so there
were also other Men that were more animated and forward to do nothing with
Deliberation, so that the Quakers for that reason were much more severely
punished, especially in Wales, and some parts of Pembrokeshire. There was at
London a certain Man, whose Name was Solomon Eccles, a Man void, not of
Understanding, but of all Shame and Fear, who began such a deed, that it is very
strange that the same Quaker himself should be willing to Record it, and put
the matter beyond all doubt, and maintain it besides in the very same Pamphlet,
and thereby show that no Fact can be feigned, be it never so foolish and rash,
which some would not at least do, and not commend as a right and laudable
thing, to be committed against those whom they so much complained of, in
respect to the wrongs and injuries done unto them. I shall take the thing from
the beginning: This Man was a Musician, and could Sing and Play very well,
having been Instructed in this Art and Science by his Father and Grandfather,
and did by it maintain both himself and his Family very genteelly and
plentifully: It was believed he could Yearly by Teaching of others, and by
Playing, get no less than Two Hundred Pounds Sterling. But he had a mind to
change this sort of Life, and to get into the Fellowship of the Quakers, and so
experience another way of Living; and so he first sells his Books, and all his
Musical Instruments at a great rate, as being now useless and noxious to him;
but afterward bethinking himself, that they might be hurtful to others as well
as to him, and that he ought not, if he could avoid it, suffer any to be
injured at the expense of his Profit and Convenience, he buys them back again
of those to whom he had Sold them, for the same Money, and when he had so done,
he gathered them all together, and goes with them directly to Tower Hill, and
having there set up a Pile of Wood, and fired it at Noon day, he does in the
sight of many People commit to the Flames, and burn all these Excellent and
Precious Instruments and Books altogether, as being a means to draw Men to be
idle, to promote a Lascivious Life, and as stings to their Lusts, and commands
all Men to take Pattern by him, and shun and curse all such vain and profane
Arts. So great was the Zeal of this Man for his new Religion, and so great was
his Anger and the fervor of his Mind against the Public Religion of the
Kingdom, that he could not forbear, but must go upon every new, bold, and rash
Act, whereof above others this is a most memorable Instance.

When the People were met together in Aldermanbury Church, for to Celebrate the
Lord's Supper, this Man came thither, having furnished himself first with a
Sack full of Shooe-maker's Ware, so that now from a Musician he was turned
Shoemaker, and partly a Cobbler, to that end that he might go into the Church,
and there in the crowd, before that the Minister had got into the Pulpit, might
Act somewhat of the part of a Shoemaker: And so that he might not be put out,
he had taken care to get very timely and secretly into the Church, and hid
himself there in some place. Afterward when they were singing of Psalms, he
rushes up, and draws nigh unto the Table, and stood with his Hat on, looking
about to see how he might get up into the Pulpit; but when he could not find a
way to it, he determines with himself to get up to the top of the Altar, and
there to do his business; but as the crowd was also here in his way and
obstructed him, and that he in the mean time was diligently considering of
every thing about him, and standing all the time with his Hat on, while all the
rest were singing, some of them when the Psalm was ended take his Hat off his
Head, and deliver it into his Hand: He put it on again; another pulls him by
the Hair, and takes it off a second time; then comes the Clerk, and
notwithstanding his Refractoriness and Contempt of Religious things, leads him
away gently; but he believing, and being much assured that the Spirit of God
would have him do this, he had contrived and projected, seeing he had failed of
his purpose this day, returns thither the next Lord's Day, fully animated, as
he thought, with Divine and Heavenly Zeal, and when he was now come nigh, and
that the Minister was going up into the Pulpit, he drives forwards, and being
as it were stung with Fury, rushed headlong over the Peoples Seats, and briskly
gets up into the Pulpit, pulls out his Shooe-maker's Tools, and begins to sow:
Upon which comes up a strong hardy Man, and thrusts the Beast down, where being
received by many below better than he deserved, does notwithstanding struggle
and endeavor to get up again into the same place, until at length being driven
out of the Church, after he had been sufficiently insulted over by the Boys,
and received some blows, he was carried before the Lord Mayor, who orders him,
as being an Instrument of such notorious Impieties, and come not from the dregs
of the People, but from an Hogstye, and fit for such a place, into such
another, and as being unworthy the use of the Light, there to be kept in Chains
and Darkness. I shall say more of this Man in another place. And now seeing
that in the City of London, and every where else, the Quakers Meetings were
forbid, and constantly hindered, as is wont to be done to such Conventicles,
the Soldiers did many times, being accompanied with the next Neighbors,
between whom otherwise there is no strict Union and Conjunction commonly in
England, break into the Quakers Houses, even when they were gathered together
in a Religious manner, and without fraud, and took and carried away some of
them, spoiled others of their Clothes, others they punched, beat, and dragged
by the hair of the Head, and handled some of them in such a manner, that they
seemed to be left for dead by them. A great many Men with a multitude of Boys
got together at a place called Sabridford in Heresordshire, and twice set upon
the Quakers, while they were peaceably attending at their Devotion, and besides
the opprobrious words they used to them, added all the Obscenity and Wickedness
almost that could be: For they broke the Windows, Walls, and Posts of the Door,
laid hold on the Men, threw Stones at them, stinking rotten Eggs, Dirt, and
even Humane Excrements, which Men do not care to see, much less to handle,
risted them, and rent and tore their Clothes, and tormented them other ways.
And when the Quakers alleged these things, and made them plainly to appear
before the Magistrates, they complained that there were none of those Rioters
either called, much less made an Example of. Such things might be daily seen,
not only in some, but in all Counties; but while these things were doing, these
Men supposing that their Complaints would be to no purpose before these
Inferior Magistrates, they Address themselves to the Supreme Assembly of the
Nation, and set forth in their Petitions, That for six Years last past, there
were within the Kingdom of England, above a Thousand and Nine Hundred Persons
of their Society shut up in Prisons, and that there were yet this Year an
Hundred and Forty of them so confined, and that One and Twenty had died there,
adding the Names of each of them withal, the places where they suffered, and
the causes for which every one suffered; in demonstrating of which they could
not yet leave off their old way of Accusation, as well by concealing the
greater Crimes, and more notorious Offenses that had brought many of them under
such Confinements as by aggravating and exaggerating too much the many lighter
Evils which they suffered, and oftentimes taking and amplifying a light
Scratch, a Pinch, and blue Spot, for a grievous Torment, and bloody Wound;
which two things seem to me may be well observed in most of the Monuments which
these Men have left of their Sufferings, for indeed I cannot allow that these
Authors have been so often used by their Adversaries (as they say) so as that
they were left for half dead, for no Example can be produced by them of any of
their Deaths the same moment, or in a short time after, and when all of them,
even then when they are at best, seem to be half dead, and without their
Senses; nor this, that they should so often speak loosely and ambiguously, and
use those Forms, to which their Cases and Lawsuits are accommodated, which
they themselves also understand to be the Gins and Snares of the Fact and Law,
and which George Fox in such cases as these calls huge Monsters, whose Mouths
are as wide as Hell: It is a much greater sign of Community and Communion, to
make the Misfortunes of our Enemies one with our own, and to look upon their
Calamities as if they befell our selves; but seeing that in time some out of
such a Number of the Quakers as were shut up in Prisons, by reason of the
languishing of their Bodies, could not hold out as they would, and others grew
very sick, and besides very low in their Spirits, when this came to be known
among all the other Quakers, every one began to look upon, and take care, not
so much of himself as of another and the whole Society, and so every one
offered himself, if it might be allowed, to go and Ransom those sick and infirm
Friends and Companions from that wretched place, and to become Prisoners in
their room; and having at a certain time resolved hereupon, an Hundred and
Sixty Four of these Men, of their own accord, and without being stirred
thereunto by other Exhortations, go all together to the Parliament, and Present
this Humble Petition unto them, drawn by George Fox, (who was not yet himself
one of these Sureties) in this rude style, many of them at the same time
speaking to him against it, and desiring that some Words and Sentences therein
might be amended (which was told me by a Principal Man among, and one that was
of the number of those Sureties) and after it was written down as he dictated,
they subscribed every one their Names to it. Friends, You that are called the
Parliament of this Nation, we, out of the Love we bear to our Brethren, that
are in Prisons, Bridewels, and Iron Chains, beaten severely by merciless
Officers, fined, and punished to Death, and dying in their Imprisonments,
seeing that now many of them lie sick, lying upon Straw, we give up our selves
and ours unto you, that you may shut up us like Sheep in the Prisons,
Bridewels, Litter, and Sinks of those our Brethren, and we are ready as so many
Sacrifices to go into their places, out of the Love which we bear unto them,
for we cannot choose but be ready to lay down our Lives for our Brethren, and
take those Torments upon our selves, which you have prepared for them; neither
can we, when our Brethren suffer, choose but feel our selves the same thing,
even as Christ has said, he suffered and was afflicted; and this indeed is our
Love toward God, and Christ, and our Brethren, which we owe both to them, and
to our Enemies, who are also the lovers of your Souls, and of your Eternal
Salvation; and if ye will take our Bodies, which we offer for our Brethren, who
are Imprisoned because they have preached the Truth in many places, refused to
pay Tithes, met together in the fear of God, have not sworn, stood with their
Hats on, because they have been looked upon as Vagabonds, when they have gone
to visit their Friends, and such like; we whose Names are under written, wait
for your Answer in the great Hall of Westminster, to the end we may be
satisfied in this our desire, and manifest our Love to our Friends, and remove
the Judgment and Vengeance that hangs over our Enemies. The Parliament did
indeed reject this Petition, but seeing these Men were affected with so much
Pity and Concern for the Miseries of their Friends, and that they themselves
were so nearly touched with a sense of so many Evils and Miseries, it had this
further Effect, that other Men seeing such great Affection of Heart between
them, and so great Courage and Constancy in bearing any Miseries, they began to
judge more favorably of them, and many daily joined themselves to their
Society and Community. Moreover, what these Petitioners and Deprecators of
these Miseries and Dangers complained of in this their Humble Petition to the
Parliament, as also in that mentioned a little before concerning their
Brethren, that there was so many of them shut up in Prisons, and that some of
them were so severely and hardly used, some perished under the weight and
pressure of their Afflictions, was so true, that there was scarce any Common
Gaol, or such like places, wherein Felons and Criminals were kept, which could
not very manifestly bear Testimony to the Complaints of these Men. Now, for the
remainder of the Year Sixty, until King Charles the Second his Coming in, these
Men had no better Fortune; for during that time the Soldiers in many Countries,
following the heels of their Commanders, break into the Houses of these Men,
whilst they kept their Meetings, and drive them out with Muskets and Swords, in
some places discharging their Muskets upon them, and wounding them, or struck
them with their Hands, and kicked them, or pulled them by the hair of the Head,
and sometimes after they had haled them out of their Houses, drove them into
the Water. Sometimes the Soldiers came alone, and being asked, by whose Command
they came, and what Authority they had? And answering, That their Warrant was
in their Pockets, they fell upon them, and did them violence, ransacked all
things, or took them away, and turned them to their own Use, though many times
it was but little, that these Burglars and Sharers carried away, though they
did not only not spare the Household Goods of the richer sort, but also seized
upon whatever they had in their Possession of other things, seeing they had
mostly nothing of their own, but what was necessary for daily use for the
support of their Bodies. The Students in the University of Cambridge had not
yet sufficiently insulted over, and exercised their Rage against the Quakers;
they therefore at this time reassumed their former Licentiousness, Wantonness,
and Impudence, and did not alone, but accompanied with the Populacy and meaner
sort of People, that are ready for all audacious, facinorous and vile doings
several times, but more especially thrice break into the Quakers Meeting, and
Assault them, after they had broke the Locks and Doors with great Hammers, and
break all things with their Hands and Feet to pieces, frighten some of the Men
away, use others basely, and throw Dirt and such like filth in their Faces,
beat others with sticks tear their Clothes, prick and wound them with Knives,
till the Blood gushed out, others they haled cruelly by the hair of the Head,
and having so done, let them down and soaked them in Ditches, and the Kennels
of the Streets; neither did they spare any of them, had no regard to any Age,
nor Sex, nor Degrees of Men, for when an Alderman came to them the second time
they were engaged in this Work, to hinder them to proceed, they thrust him into
the Watercourse of the City, and abused not the Man only, but the Dignity
also; and so the last time, when some of the Justices of the Peace dissuaded
them from such Practices in the King's Name (because the King some days before
had been Proclaimed publicly) and that others also stood by, and urged them to
desist, they for all that go on. There were besides at this time also many of
these Men by the Magistrates Command haled from the Conventicles, and shut up
in Prisons, whipped, and sent into Banishment, as wicked Men and Vagabonds,
from which People they thought their present Danger might arise. In the mean
time the Soldiers, which were thus placed every where in Garrison, or wandered
up and down the Country, that the Quakers could reside no where but as it were
within their Camps, did so Ravage these Men at their pleasure, that no Person,
nor House, nor Goods could be safe, nothing so well fortified and defended,
that was not exposed to their Fury, and became a Prey to their Rage. And the
Quakers made no less Complaint of the Officers than they did of the Soldiers,
because they did not restrain their Insolence, and punish them for their
Wickedness; but they did more especially complain of General Lambert, whom,
they said, was a great Enemy to their Sect. Which Person however some Years
after, when we went to visit in the Company of an Honorable Person, being then
kept a Prisoner in a certain Castle in the County of Devon, we found he was not
so averse to the Sect of the Quakers, and such sort of Men. All sorts of Men,
both learned and unlearned, had to this time written and published Books and
Pamphlets against the Quakers; all these, which were an Hundred and Fifteen in
all, Fox in the Year Fifty Nine gathered together, and digested in Order into
one Book, and did partly refute them, and scoffed at the rest, as being some of
them not written in any serious manner: At the same time the Quakers put out a
Pamphlet, wherein they recounted, what every Minister of the Public Church
throughout England had done against every one of their Society, how they had
handled them, with the Name and Surname of every one of them, at what time
George Monk, General of all the Armies of Britain, put an end to this Evil by a
Proclamation, that none should injure the Quakers, provided they demeaned
themselves dutifully toward the Commonwealth; I have given an Account of the
Afflictions and Persecutions of these Men in England, and have produced various
Instances of every kind concerning their Troubles; and now these Quakers show
themselves in Scotland, behaving themselves here as in all other places where
they came, being oftentimes very vexatious and troublesome in the Public
Meetings and Conversations of Men, in the Markets, in the Churches, and that
either before, or after, or while they were at their Solemn Prayers and
Preaching, neither did they only confound Speakers and Hearers, and made them
dissatisfied with their Meeting together, or exercise of their Religion, but as
often as they were taken, and did not beg Pardon for the fault committed, they
were handled in the same manner as they had been in England, many of them being
Imprisoned, some whipped, and others banished: This was a thing very singular
and strange in this Country, and among this Nation; there was a Law made at
Glascow in the General Assembly, that no Quaker should be cherished and
relieved by any Member of the Reformed Church, and that no Person should have
any Commerce with them, or make use of their Labor, and Employ them, under the
Penalty of being Excommunicated; and by this means these wretched People were
forced to seek for other, though uncertain, Abodes, or else to perish through
extreme want. Notwithstanding which Law, which the Quakers cried, was by no
means made with a Christian Temper, but was a barbarous Rite, and the Effects
of Cruelty, when their Affairs seemed to have been brought to the utmost
danger, they did so struggle with these Difficulties, that they even increased
in Number day by day. Neither must we pass over in silence, that those two Men,
John Swinton and David Barclay, did at this time go off to the Quakers, who,
because both of them were very Famous and Renowned, first, among all the Scots,
and afterward among the Quakers, I cannot pass it over, but must here insist a
little upon it. John Swinton was of a good Family, and at first well deserving
of the Commonwealth, having his Name from the Place whereof he was Lord; when
King Charles the Second fled from England, and was received and crowned by the
Scots, this Swinton was a Member of the General Assembly then, as also of the
Parliament, and then it was that the said King Solemnly swore, he would
preserve the Church of Scotland as then established inviolable; but when the
King afterward changed his Faith, and endeavored to promote the Function and
Rule of Bishops, and that now both Nations were at deadly and Intestine Wars
one with another, and that the Members in Parliament took into Deliberation
what they should do with the King, Swinton said, it was his Opinion, that they
should reject the King's Interest, and be at Peace and Amity with the English,
by which Speech when Swinton found that he had much exasperated the Minds of
all of them, and being afraid of the Danger, withdraws from the Parliament, and
with all Expedition flies to his Estate in the Country, which was not far from
the Frontiers of England, and cunningly contrives it, that he had fallen into
the hands of the English Soldiers; these carry him to London: when the English
had overcome the Scots, the English Parliament appoint this Man, that was so
Faithful to their Church and Country, together with others, to Govern the
Affairs of Scotland. But while Swinton tarryed at London he contracted
Acquaintance and Familiarity with the Quakers, and afterward became of their
Society: When the King was restored and come over, Swinton, who was then at
London, though he was not ignorant how angry the King was with him, yet he
staid there, trusting to a good Conscience, that he had discharged his Duty to
the Public without any private Enmity against the King. There the King
Commands him to be seized and carried into Scotland, to the end that he might
be put to Death; when he was brought before the Parliament, and being allowed
the freedom to defend himself, he did so Plead his own Case, and by his
Eloquence allay the Anger and Fury of all the Members, that they did acquit him
from his Capital Crime, and only confined him Prisoner to the Castle of
Edinburgh, where he continued for some Years. David Barclay was a Gentleman of
Scotland, and descended from the Ancient and Illustrious Family of the
Barclays, of which these Men have not only reported of themselves, but it has
also been asserted by others, that they have not only proceeded from so Noble,
Great, and Ancient a Stock, but also that they were akin to the Royal Family;
this same Gentleman using his Nobleness not for a Veil to Sloth and Idleness,
but as fuel and an incitative to Industry and Virtue, after he had from his
Childhood given himself up to the Exercise of the Liberal Arts and Sciences,
and finding that in the doubtful Affairs of his Country he could not find room
for his Studies, he betook himself to the German Wars, and was first a Captain
in the Swedish Army, and in some time came to be a Colonel; but after that the
English had enforced their Government in Scotland, he returns to his own
Country, and he is together with Swinton and other Nobles appointed for the
Governance of it; and is sent for to London, that he might be present at the
making and establishing of the League between both Kingdoms; but in process of
time, when King Charles was restored, he is committed Prisoner to the Castle of
Edinburgh to his old Friend Swinton, and not long after gave himself over in
Company with Swinton to the Sect of the Quakers; this David Barclay was the
Father of Robert Barclay, who if not the only, yet was the most memorable of
the Latin Writers amongst all the Quakers. In Ireland, Howgil and Buroughs,
the forerunners of this Sect, were sent back from Cork into England by the
Command of Henry Cromwell, who then governed that Kingdom by the Title of
Lord-Deputy; and when after they were gone, Ames took upon him to propagate
Quakerism in that City, he was also thrown into Prison, from whence being
afterward set at Liberty, and seeing he could not forbear, but must speak
openly in the Church against the Preacher, he was again clapped up in the same
place; from which place, when he wrote a Letter to Colonel Henry Ingoldsby, who
was Governor of that same City, and under whom he was a Soldier, and
endeavored to make his Defense, and procure his Liberty, he was indeed brought
before him; but he was forthwith, and without any delay, in the presence of all
that were there, according to the Military Practice of some Men, so beaten and
kicked by the Colonel himself, because he ought above any other to have
desisted from such doings and practices, as he had then taken upon him, that he
made him bleed, and then was sent back to his old Prison, and tied Neck and
Heels there. But as there were many of Ames's fellow Soldiers, and also other
Soldiers, who by little and little became of the Quakers Sect; several of them
having taken Counsel together, and allotted their Work, did either use their
babbling Interruptions in the Public Assemblies, while they were at Prayer or
Preaching, or fell a Trembling there, or showed some such idle and foolish
Prank; this Example was followed by many others, both of the one and of the
other Sex, wherefore they were ever and anon, one after another, fined, driven
to Prisons, and in some places miserably harrassed, some of them were severely
lashed, but the Soldiers more than any; until the Year Fifty Six, when Colonel
Ingoldsby the Governor, commanded all, upon a very severe Penalty, to give no
manner of Entertainment to any Quaker whatsoever, and not suffer them to come
within their Doors, and that whoever did to the contrary, should be expelled
out of the City. But it was to no purpose; some indeed were driven away, but
their Number did even then and by that means increase; and so by degrees came
to hold their Assemblies. Officers were sent to break open their Doors, and to
interrupt and disturb them; some they fined, others were banished, but yet for
all this they increased and multiplied more and more; this happened at
Limerick, Cork, Waterford, Kingsale, and other places: And thus did this Sect
of the Quakers about the time of their rise and first Progress, struggle in the
time of the Commonwealth, under the two Cromwels, Father and Son, Protectors,
under the many Afflictions they were put to by their Enemies, and to the great
hazard both of their Religion and People.

The End of the First Book.
BOOK II. PART I.
The Contents of the Second BOOK.
THE Endeavors of the Quakers upon the King's Restoration. G. Keith, R.
Barclay. The Quakers vain hopes concerning the King. The Oath of Allegiance an
inexplicable Snare to these Men. Tithes also. The Cruelty of Keepers toward
them. Instances. The King and Parliament's Disposition toward them. A Letter
of Fox the Younger to the King. Fox his Book of many Languages concerning the
Pronoun Thou. Several Laws against the Quakers. Hence their various Trials.
Hubberthorn, Buroughs, and Howgil die in Prison. A vain Suspicion that the
Quakers cherished Popery. Their Persecution at London. The fall of Priscilla
Mo: The Burials of the Quakers. The Persecuting of them at Colchester. A
Council held concerning Transplanting of the Quakers into the American Islands.
This transacted and handled several times. The various and strange haps and
Adventures of such as suffered this Penalty. The Ecclesiastical Court. The Law
De Excommunicato capiendo. Several Examples made upon their refusing to pay
Tithes. The Death of Fisher in Prison. Fox's Three Years Imprisonment. The
Prophecy of a certain Quaker concerning the Burning of London. The Troubles of
the Quakers in Scotland and Ireland. Keith's Doctrine of Christ being in Man.
Helmont concerning the Revolution of Souls rejected by the Quakers. William
Pen's turning Quaker: A full Description thereof: His singular Opinion
concerning a Toleration of all Religions. The Ecclefiastical state of the
Quakers. The Order of their Teachers. A Meeting of their Teachers together.
Synods. Liturgies or Sacred Duties. How they observe the Lord's Day. Their
Complaint concerning the Protestants study of Divinity. Their Opinion
concerning a knowledge of Languages and Philosophy. Of the Sallary of the
Ministers of God's Word. What the Call of Ministers is among them. Their
Discipline. Their Solemnizing of Marriages. Keith's Imprisonment. Pen's
Imprisonment at London. Solomon Eccles's Fooleries and mad Pranks in several
places. Fox's Marriage. A great Persecution of the Quakers throughout England,
accompanied with the greatest baseness. Green's Fall. Pen again, and Mead with
him Imprisoned at London: They are Tried. Pen's Speech to the Judges. A great
Persecution in Southwark. The notable Zeal of these Men in keeping their
Assemblies. A short respite from the Persecution. G. Fox goes to the English
Colonies in America. His Imprisonment in Worcester, and what was done at that
time: He writes several Letters more elaborately than profitably. A Conference
between the Quakers and Baptists. R. Barclay's Apology for the Christian
Theology variously received. A Comparison between the Quietists and Quakers.
Several Persecutions of the Quakers in England. The Assaulting of them in
Scotland. All manner of Slanders put upon the Quakers Doctrine and Life. The
Persecution of Bristol. Of London. The Quakers state under King James the
Second. W. Pen's Diligence for the Quakers. The Quakers Affairs under King
William. Pen's Default. Freedom and Liberty given to the Quakers by the
Parliament. Pen's second Default. The Death of Fox. The great Book written by
him. A Description of Fox. The great Dissension between the Quakers themselves.
The present state of them.

I Have brought down the History of the Quakers to the Time of King Charles II.
in whose Reign, and even in the very beginning thereof, as great changes
happened, not only in the State, every thing being abrogated and taken away,
that had been Obstacles to the Kingly Power and Dignity, or that might be so
for the future, but also in the Ecclesiastical Constitution, for that Equality
and Conjunction that ought to be between the Brethren, Friends, and Disciples
of Christ, was taken away, whilst the Government thereof reverted to a few, and
for the most part to the King himself; so there was among those Persons who
were not dissatisfied with the Name, Splendour, and Authority of a King, but
with that turn in the Church, no small commotion of Mind, no light Care and
Diligence, not only that they might defend their own Churches, with the Orders
and Constitutions of them, lest they should suffer any damage any other way,
but also that they might further vindicate all their Practices from the Envy of
their Adversaries, confirm and trim up the same, and recommend them unto
others. Therefore this Study and Concern also seemed to be among all Persons,
who had as well departed from that same pitch of Religion, as from that public
Religion; in the very same manner did George Fox and his Colleagues, and all of
that Herd, even every one according to his Place and Station, diligently and
industriously apply themselves to this Affair; wherefore Fox, according to his
wonted manner, began his Peregrination in England, to visit his Friends, to
Preach amongst them, but did not take upon him as formerly to talk in the
Public Churches, Markets, and Streets, and there to stir up the People; and
seeing that he had before this attempted many things, more earnestly than
successfully, he took diligent heed from this time forward, as to what Places
he went, so with whom he conversed, and whom he should shun, and when he found
there were some who laid in wait for him to trepan him, and hale him to Prison,
he immediately hastened away. He did also moreover advise his Party by his
Letters and Pamphlets, that all of them should make it their business and
endeavor, to do nothing against the King's Authority and the Commonweal, and
allow of nothing in that kind which might be avoided by them. Besides this, Fox
proceeded to write many things even against their Adversaries, but in such a
manner, as not to set forth so much what his own Sentiments were, as what he
wrote, and in what place he wrote it. Which sort of Life Fox from thence
forward led, even to his Death, that all his Actions, both in the middle and
last part of his Life, might be like unto those he had practiced in the
beginning, so that I judge it needless to say many more words concerning Fox in
this Treatise, unless something that is altogether new and strange should
occur. And thus did almost all the Quakers behave themselves now more
cautiously and circumspectly among their Adversaries, neither did they so often
and constantly make a noise in the Churches and Public places, neither did
they Act those Fooleries where there was a Concourse of People, and utter such
ridiculous Bablings, neither when they were brought before the Magistrate, did
they talk so uncivilly, abruptly, and foreign to the purpose, as they had been
wont to do; neither did they Answer, when the Judges asked them, what their
Name was, what Countrymen they were, where they lived, that they were of the
Land of Canaan, and that they lived in God; so that as the Time, even so their
Manners changed; yea, from henceforward these Men wrote and published in
England, not only Pamphlets, but Books, in which they handled the Heads of
things not at large only and confusedly, but curiously and distinctly, and did
Argue in them, first, against the Opinions and Tenets of the Principal
Episcoparians, and then against those of other Dissenters, which they did not
approve of, and this in a neat and orderly way of Argumentation, not by
wrangling, but examining every Proposition, and coming up to the Merit of the
Cause, and by admirable Skill arriving at their designed Conclusion; neither
did they urge those things which they taught and believed, by a rude and
disjointed way of Reasoning, but clearly and openly, and explicated the same at
large, and strenuously defended it: Which Method was vigorously pursued by
Samuel Fisher, who was the chief Man, and the Ornament of the whole Sect.
Moreover, some of them were not afraid to Discourse, Argue, and Dispute with
the Adverse Party, yea, and when need required, with the very Ministers of the
Public Church, concerning their own and the others Doctrine and Concerns.
Which sort of Disputation was held this very first Year at Hereford, between
two City Ministers and three Preaching Quakers, Howgil, Buroughs, and Cross;
wherefore from henceforward these People the Quakers began gradually, and by
little and little to stand up, and to increase in number and strength, and to
be reckoned and used as one of the Sects of the Christian Religion. Things were
at the same pass with these Men in Scotland, saving that their Affairs did not
thrive so fast there until the arrival of two Men of great Fame and Reputation
amongst all the Quakers, Geroge Keith and Robert Barclay by Name, by whose
Labor, Toil, and Industry, the whole Doctrine of the Quakers, especially their
chief Dogms, Principles, and Fundamentals were very much illustrated and
confirmed; and because this is the first place where we meet with the Names of
these Men, and that hereafter mention will be made of them upon various
Accounts, we shall in a few words, acquaint those who do not know it, what sort
of Men these are; they were both of them Scots, but there is only one of them,
to wit, Keith, that is yet alive; Barclay the other being dead. George Keith
was at first of the Reformed Religion, and a Student of Philosophy and
Divinity; as soon as he commenced Master of Arts, and was more especially had
in esteem for a good Mathematician, he did afterward become a Chaplain or
Minister of God's Word in a certain Noble Family. But seeing that he was always
transported with a desire of searching after, and learning somewhat that was
new, and alighted upon these late Sectaries, he did in a short time embrace
their Doctrine, and arrived to be one of the chief Speakers and Holders forth
amongst them: This Man after many Toyls, Wanderings, and Perambulations, went
at last into that part of America, which from the Owner thereof is called
Pensylvania, and there in their Church and Latin School of Philadelphia
exercised the Office of a Teacher. Robert Barclay was a Gentleman of Scotland,
the Son of that same David Barclay, whose Book we have made mention of a little
before; his Father had sent him to the City of Paris, the Capital of France,
and there was brought up in good Literature, and after a manner that suited to
his Quality, and those Noble Youths that were his Fellow-Students. But this
Young Man had an Uncle in that City, that was Principal of the Scotch Popish
College there; to whose Precepts when Barclay had for some time attended, he
leaves the Reformed Religion, and turns Papist; which when his Father came to
know, he sends for him home, and as he himself in the mean time was turned
Quaker, he also endeavors to induce his Son to embrace the same way; but he,
seeing he had in all other things been Observant to his Father, refuses, and
says, he could not in so great and weighty a thing as that was, hearken to him.
But when he had, not long after, come to one of the Meetings of the Quakers, he
suddenly turns about, and becomes thoroughly one of them, being now Eighteen
Years of Age, and from thence forward for a great part of his Life, was as it
were, the Legate or Messenger of the Quakers in their weightiest Affairs; it is
also said, that he was descended from John Barclay, that notable Writer of
Heroic Verse and Satyr, and whose Name it is enough to mention. Keith wrote
many things in English, wherein he does clearly Teach, Explain, and Confirm
those chief Points of their Doctrine, which Fox and others had neither so
distinctly handled, nor so artificially and dexterously propounded, and
vindicates the same from the Objections and Exceptions of their Adversaries,
which afterward all the rest of the Quakers greedily snatched at, and would
appropriate and reckon among the Opinions of the Quakers, excepting two or
three Articles which they left alone, as peculiar to himself. He was indeed the
first of them all who taught, polished, and perfected those Principles
concerning the Seed and Light within, immediate Revelation, the Eternal,
Divine, and Spiritual Filiation of Jesus Christ (for so do all Divines, and not
the Quakers alone speak, as often as Latin words fail them) his Humanity, and
the Presence or Existence of him as of the Seed and Light, and his
Manifestation and Operation in Men, hitherto either unknown, or but very
obscurely delivered. Barclay betook himself to Write a long time after Keith,
and at last came out a large Treatise of his, written in Latin, Entitled,
Apologia Theologiae vere Christianae, Presented to King Charles II. A Book
highly praised by those Men, and very common among all that are curious of the
Writings of those Men of which Book I shall elsewhere more particularly speak;
so that as the Doctrine and Religion of the Quakers owes its Original and
Increase to England, so it does its Perfection and Completion to Scotland, And
now even in this Kingdom of Scotland, these Quakers, especially Keith, had many
Contests with the Presbyterians there, concerning the causes of their
Separation and Secession from those Churches, with which they had till this
time firmly united, and concerning their new Articles of Faith, which they were
said to have obtruded upon those Old Professors, and that by Conferences,
Disputations, and Writings, which gave occasion to Keith to write those Books,
wherein by examining seriously, all that was objected against them, and often
ruminating upon, and digesting all that he had before published or spoke, he
brought forth his Meditations in that Method and Form before spoken of. These
Men did in the mean time grow here also by degrees more moderate, and leave off
their rude and audacious ways that had gained them much Hatred, and many Evils,
and so by degrees being accustomed to the sight of their Adversaries, they
began to live more safely, and also to increase in number. Their Affairs went
on in Ireland but slowly, where they who presided as it were over the rest,
took their advantage in promoting their Doctrine and Religion from the
Institutions and Manners of their Friends in England and Scotland. And so from
this time forward was the Sect of the Quakers brought into form, and their
Doctrine and Faith consummated; to which this may be further added: Seeing that
a Public Confession of Faith made by all, is a great Bond for the uniting of
their Souls together, and an apt Symbol of Communion and Fellowship, Keith did
at a certain time propose this unto them, That it would be a most useful thing,
if such a Book were composed in the Name of all the People called Quakers, by
worthy and choice Men, with clear Words and Sentences, which might be an
Abridgment and Public Confession of all their Doctrine and Faith, and that the
same were Subscribed by all, even each one in his particular Church, who for
the future should be received into the Society of the Quakers, and join
themselves unto them. But their Friends were not pleased with this Advice, by
reason that they thought it to be a thing on the one side that carried in it
too much Authority between Equals, and on the other side an Obligation of
Servitude in a free Affair, and that they should be very cautious lest they
should be brought under any Inconveniency in that kind; for the avoiding of
which, they had all hitherto gathered together, and lived in the greatest
Union, as they had done in the greatest Freedom imaginable. But to return to
the beginning of the Reign of King Charles the Second, and Record the Facts of
these Men, and what befell unto them. Their Study and Endeavors did indeed
appear to comply with the Government of this King, as did those of other Sects
and Dissenters from the Public Worship, if not from their Judgment, yet better
by their yielding and giving way, and that because of the disposition of the
King to be Easy and Indulgent. Besides this King himself with all his
Followers seemed to have sufferd for so long a time so many, and such great
Injuries and Calamities, and so must be mindful of the Lot and uncertain state
of Man, that he would at length grant Rest to these Men from the many Troubles
which they had been exposed to. To this may be added, that the King at that
time, when they were debating in Parliament concerning the Restoration of him,
he himself being then at Breda, in the Court of the Prince of Orange his Nephew
by his Sister, writes very lovingly and tenderly of his own accord to that
Supreme Council, as also to the City of London, That he would give to and
preserve the Liberty of Tender Consciences and Opinions in Religion, provided
it were without endangering the Public Peace. Which thing was again repeated
by the King after he was Solemnly established in his Throne. Wherefore the
Quakers upon the King's Restoration conceived great hopes concerning their
Affairs. At last when in the beginning of the King's Reign, some of the
Quakers, full of good will toward the King, and of a good Opinion of his
kindness toward them, went to the King, and implored his Favor, Protection,
and Help against the Injuries and Cruelty of their Enemies. The King grants
them all they desired, and it is not to be doubted but that he did it of his own
accord, for he suffered them at first to live and act according to their own
Way and Mode, as also to Meet to perform their Religious Worship, and so also
did he sometime Promise, that for the future, he would not only not obstruct,
but also promote their Liberty; therefore these Men from the very beginning of
the change of the Government, did most Industriously proceed in their Affairs
and Exercises for the Common Good; neither did they do it unknown to their
Adversaries, but openly and in their sight, as it were not by the tacit but
express consent, and also Command of the King: But it will not be long ere all
this matter shall fall out much otherwise than this, and the Event deceive all
the Hope and Opinion of these Men. Yea, indeed it so happened, as if this
Letter, the Name and Power of the King, did not avail for the Liberty and Ease
but Ruin of these Men, that even from the first Decree of the Parliament
concerning the King's Restoration, in all that Interval till the King did
apply himself to the Administration of the Government, they who were the
Quakers Adversaries, amongst other Pretenses which they made use of for to
repress and ensnare these Men, they turned the Edict, Name, and Dignity of the
King to their Molestation and Destruction. Therefore as often as they met
together to Celebrate their Worship, they were apprehended and carried away as
disturbers of the Peace, and though they had not the least Weapon that might
give any Offense, they were treated as if they had been armed Men, and like
Enemies and Cutthroats, and stirred up one another and other Peaceable
Subjects to Rebellion, and to offer Violence to the Commonwealth. This I will
say to those who do not so well know what the Oath of Fidelity among the
English means, which they themselves call the Oath of Allegiance. After the
Discovery of the Gunpowder Treason, formed by the Papists against King James
the First, and all the Royal Family, and all the Peers of the Realm, such a Law
was made by the said King James and his Parliament, to wit, That for the
restraining of such Papists, who had much rather that the Pope should be
Supreme Lord of the Kingdom than the King, and were easily induced to Offer
such mad and abominable Sacrifices as these that are not to be named, and that
they might be known from other Men; that as God should help him, every one
should Acknowledge, Profess, Testify, and Swear, that the Pope had no Power to
Depose the King, or to stir up his Subjects to Rebel against him, and that the
same would perform all due Obedience and Fidelity toward the King, and
withstand all Plots and Contrivances against the Regal Authority. There was
moreover an Oath long since in use to this King's Predecessors, called the Oath
of Supremacy, first begun by King Henry VIII. whereby every one did Swear, That
the King alone was Supreme Governor of this Kingdom, in all things and causes
whatsoever, as well in Spiritual and Ecclesiastical as in Civil. These Oaths
from the beginning of this New Revolution being put to the Quakers by the
Royallists, they proposed to them, when they were taken, to Swear to these
words positively, that they might try how they stood affected toward the King.
But seeing they refused to Swear at all, as holding it an unlawful Act, and not
that only of the Abjuration of the Pope, and their Affection toward the King,
and that in the mean time they were always ready, in clear and distinct words,
truly to Affirm in the Presence of God, that they were such Persons as did
abominate and loath the Pope, and that Church, and the Power of those Men, and
their Tenets, as also their Pride and Treachery against Kings, and that the
King could fear no Danger and Inconveniency so little from any sort of Men as
from them, nor desire more Love, Obedience, and Good Will from any, as toward
their Lawful King; and that they were ready, if they proved false herein, to
undergo such Punishments as they who have violated their Oath, after they have
sworn in direct words; yet this Oath was always objected against them, as an
inexplicable Snare, wherewith to ensnare whom they were minded to catch; for
whether they did altogether refuse this Oath, or with this same Exception, that
they might give their Opinion concerning it, or the thing it self, and spoke of
their willingness to Promise Solemnly to be Faithful, and did not refuse to
Subscribe the same with their hands, they were presently looked upon as Men
either unfaithful or wavering, or treacherous in their Obedience to the King,
and to be deprived of all the Protection and Favor that the King could give
them. And as a Superaddition to the rest, when they to whom Tithes of the
Fruits of the Earth and the like were allotted for their Labors, and
especially the Farmers of these Tithes, were very sharp upon them for their
Returns and Profits, and the Quakers denied that they ought to pay them, they
were very severely and hardly used every where. Moreover, when they were shut
up in Prisons, had little or no Relief from without, those that served them,
used them for the most part as they pleased, neither was there any thing,
whereby they might defend themselves. Of which things as there are very
memorable Instances, and almost without Number, I shall give one only Specimen
of every sort, and that briefly. At Sherborn in Dorsetshire there were Thirty
Quakers got together into an House, for to Worship God in an innocent harmless
manner, who, as if they had been a knot of Men come together for to Drink,
Revel, Rebel, and Conspire against the Government, were haled out by the
Townsmen, Officers, and Schoolmaster of the place, followed with many Swords
and Clubs, and entertained with Curses and Blows, were carried before the
Magistrate, who blamed, sentenced, and condemned them, as vile Persons, bent
upon Rioting, and while they were met together, did only contrive and rashly
machinate Innovations; and this they did without any Proof, Judgment, and
Defense; the Quakers at the same time however crying out, that there was not
one Person that could make any such thing good against them, or that they met
upon such an Account, and urging the King's Promise in vain, that while they
were only met together to Celebrate their Worship to God, that none should
suffer any Injury because of his Religion. Some of the Quakers were shut up in
Dorchester Gaol from the sight of all Men, and even from the common Light;
others of them meeting the Danger, make their Appearance at the next Quarter
Assizes; where, when nothing that had been urged against them could by any
means be proved, but that these Men did now appear before the Court with their
Hats on, this was now objected as a Crime unto them, and looked upon as a
certain diminution of the King's Majesty, and so they were fined for their
Punishment to pay great Sums of Money, which when they did not forthwith pay,
they were all adjudged by the Court to be shut up in the same Prison of
Dorchester, upon Condition they should not be released from thence till such
time as they had paid the said Sum. In the Town of Shrewsbury, which is the
head Town, and finest in that County, when the Quakers were at their Meeting,
several Soldiers break open the Doors, and rush into the House, and take away,
and hurry into Prison One and Twenty of them: The Judges, when they did not,
and could not Accuse them of having done any Villainy or Wrong, require them to
take the Oath of Allegiance; which when they refused to do the same, as it were
condemning themselves by this their silence, as if they had been guilty of
Treason, they are forced to remain shut up in the same Prison. Edward Noell, a
Countryman of Kent, had taken from him of his Flock to the value of an Hundred
Pounds, for the Tithes of Twenty Pounds, for which he had not paid the Money;
and when he, according to his Country Rhetoric and Truth, had made a noise
about it, and sufficiently stung the Ears and Hearts of the Tythes-men and
Magistrates, he was commanded away to Prison, and there kept a Year and an
half. One Thomas Goodrey, at a place in Oxfordshire, called Chadlington, and a
Man of a good Nature and Disposition, having traveled through many Parts of
the Kingdom, turns in to see his Friend Benjamin Staples: This Man, the very
next Night after he came, was, together with his Landlord, carried away, and
led before the Justices; they tender to them the Oath of Allegiance, which when
they refused to take, so as that there was no way left for them to make any
Defense, they are led away, and committed to the Common Gaol of Oxford, and
were shut up there among some of their own Friends of their Religion, some
whereof had been there for Two Years and longer, because that they also refused
to pay Tithes, and to Swear; the Jailer put such thick and heavy Fetters of
Iron upon these two Men, that their Feet were wounded with them; which when
they desired might be taken off, the Keeper of the Prison demanded Money of
them for so doing; they did not show themselves very forward to do that;
whereupon he thrusts them into a filthy and noisome place, where they had
nothing either to sit or lie upon besides dirt; and so they desire they might
have a little Straw allowed them; and here the same Mercenary Wretch promised
he would give them some, if they gave him Four Pounds in Money; which when they
despised and rejected, the Keeper's Wife, who was even more wretchedly Covetous
than her Husband, and far more greedy of Prey, as often as she came to them,
would rail and revile them bitterly, pulling and haling of them violently at
her pleasure. In some time they were both ordered to appear at the Assizes of
Oxford, where when they were accused of various things, and that nothing could
be found against them that was worthy of Punishment, they were again asked as
before, to take the Oath of Allegiance, which when they now also said, they
could not do it, they are remanded back into the same Prison, among the same
Thieves and Cutthroats that were kept there; which before it was done, Goodrey
asked, whether the Judges did Command them to be laid in Irons? The Chief Judge
made Answer, That the Keeper of the Prison might do as he pleased, because they
were Persons out of the King's Protection. There does the Keeper put them again
amongst those Villains and profligate Wretches, and gives those wicked Men
leave, if they wanted any Clothes, to take off theirs, I mean, these two
Innocent men's Apparel, at which one of the vilest amongst the whole Crew made
Answer, That he had rather go altogether naked, than take any thing away from
these Men: And so it was, that while the Law was silent at the Bar of Justice,
and no Fence against Injuries in Prison and Darkness, these wretched Men
suffered all Violence and Cruelty. These few Instances, from among many, may
serve; but because the first Parliament under this King was yet sitting, the
Quakers supposing the Tribunals to be every where set against them, so as that
there was no hopes of Justice for them; they prefer their Supplications to the
King and Parliament, as being Supreme Magistrates, and the Authors and
Defenders of Liberty, Right, and Judgment, highly complain of the great and
many Injuries, Violences, and Troubles that they suffered from their own
Countrymen and Neighbors, and implore their Help and Assistance; and that
they might affect them the more, they produce a great Commentary, or rather
Catalogue in Writing, containing how that during the time of the two Cromwels,
there were no less than Three Thousand, One Hundred and Seventy Nine of their
Society that had been Imprisoned in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and other
Countries beyond the Seas, Subject to the King's Dominion, and that of them,
Thirty Two were dead. And in the close thereof they add, That from the King's
Coming in, to the present time, there had been, and were still kept in Prison,
Three Hundred and Seventeen of them. They name every place of their
Imprisonment, and give the Names of most of the People, and did also set forth
the Afflictions that most of them had suffered before, for what Causes, and
what those are also for which they were still Imprisoned; they did moreover the
next Year Present a Writing to the King and Parliament, wherein they set forth,
that their Number was now so increased, who since the King's Return had been
thrown into Prison, that they were no less than Five Hundred Fifty and Two,
many of whom had also even before their Imprisonment sustained many Afflictions
in their own Congregations, and did even now undergo many Miseries in the
places where they were detained; they did in that Writing confirm the Matter
with Examples and Testimonies, that the Magistrates themselves in some places,
came to them, and carried them away; that in other places they left them to the
management of Soldiers; and elsewhere, that the Commonalty and Rabble, who had
neither Fortune nor Good Name, set upon them with Swords and Staves, haled them
away, and after many blows, threw them into Prison. Moreover, that many
Ministers of Churches in several Countries, seeing there were some of the
Quakers who had not paid Tithes, and refused to pay any, that came and took out
of their Houses and Fields for these Tithes much more than they ought to have
done, neither did they afterward restore the Overplus; yea, that some of them
were so choused of their Money, that they had rendered them incapable of paying
any more, and needed take no further care of exacting the same from them. This
Writing, which was full of Truth, was partly neglected, and partly despised
both by the King and whole Assembly: For which there seems to be more than one
cause; for when the King, who was not yet well confirmed in his Kingdom, minded
his own and other Public Affairs, he did indeed think that these men's Affairs
were not yet seasonable and worthy of his Cognizance and Judgment, and had
entirely forgot all that he had promised to these Men, which they thought they
had fixed in his Memory with a Ship-nail. But as to the Senate of the Kingdom,
they did indeed seem not yet to have laid aside their Hatred and Enmity against
these Men, at leastwise the greatest part of them. They acknowledged indeed the
freedom of Religion given to them, but they thought, that under that Pretense
and Cloak, all wicked and abominable Sects and Opinions would creep in, and
that this Sect of the Quakers was of that sort; moreover, although the former
Endeavors of the Quakers, and their Insolent Attempts, and such as seemingly
were Turbulent, were now over, and that no Crime could be laid to their charge,
that tended to the disturbance of the Public Peace, yet as the good as well as
the bad of such as are once envied, are always hated, and that to those who are
afraid even false things are true, such an Opinion of them did continue, and
could not be removed, that the Quakers were still Men of the same Spirit and
Temper, and that all their doings tended to Discords and Disturbances. Lastly,
this Affair of the Quakers seemed to have been so often adjudged and decided by
so many Judgments, that it were unworthy to be brought upon the Stage again. So
that these calamitous Men were hereby deprived of the benefit of all Judgment,
of every Suit, and Complaint, there being no room left for the same. And so
those who were imprisoned, were like to be so always, and kept in greatest want
and misery, neither had any of them the least hopes of their Freedom, unless
they would comply with the wills and terms of such as were in Authority over
them, and would agree to pay Money for to be suffered to depart. Of which
Number there was not one to be found that would do so; though the King being
not long after asked and urged by some, That he should not suffer any such
thing, which did so much wrong to his Subjects, when there did appear no such
Fact, no, not so much as an Attempt or Endeavor in them to do that for which
these Men were so much accused, and whereby so much infamy was cast upon them,
but that he should by reason of his Royal Word given them, use them kindly, he
did at length Answer, That he would be Gracious and Merciful to the Quakers,
provided they did nothing that was against the King's Honor and Safety, and
did again give his Royal Word for it. It Is indeed manifest, that Richard
Hubberthorn, one of the chief Quakers, was at this time admitted to talk with
the King, in the presence of some Noblemen; in which Conference, when the King
with some of his Courtiers asked Hubberthorn several close Questions concerning
the Doctrine and Religion of the Quakers, and that he made Answer to every
thing that was asked; the King and those same Persons that had Interrogated
him, said ever and anon, It is so indeed as thou say; and turning themselves
about, or to one another, they said, He offers nothing but the Truth: And when
the King proceeded to speak, among other things he used these words to
Hubberthorn; I do assure thee, that none of you shall suffer any thing for your
Opinions and Religion, provided ye live Peaceably; you have the Word and
Promise of a King for it, and I will take care by a Proclamation to prevent any
further Prosecution of you. But seeing there were some Men, who put an ill
Construction upon this Conference, Hubberthorn himself did in a little while
after publish it in Print, and did therein explain the whole Matter to all. But
how the King did afterward perform these many Promises in many of his Actions,
the Event will soon show. Neither must we pass over in this place that
upbraiding Letter that was written and sent to the King by a Quaker, then lying
in Prison: George Fox was this Quaker, not he that was the first beginner and
Founder of the Society of the Quakers, who was indeed no ways related or akin
to that same, though most like and near unto him in Nature and Manners; but one
that had lately been a Trooper under O. Cromwell, or in the Commonwealth's
Army, wherefore that he might distinguish himself from the other and older
George Fox, he called himself who was not so old, Fox the Younger. His Letter
was to this effect. O King, he who is King of Kings, sees and observes all thy
Actions in the midst of Darkness, and seeing that they proceed from thence,
even thy most hidden Counsels can by no means escape the sight of God, so that
there remain no lurking places for thy specious and pretended words, and
therefore has he freely observed all thy Wiles and Treacheries, laid for
those, who did no hurt, and has also manifested them unto all Men, and that at
the very time when thou did make those great and fictitious Promises, and
only did play the Hypocrite; wherefore thou have angered God, when at the time
thou did promise Liberty unto us, thou did then suffer that outrage to be
done us, and the Imprisonment of so many Men for the Testimony of a good
Conscience: Alas, how has the Pride and Impiety as well of thy House, as of thy
Government sadded thee; for as often as I revolve within my self upon the
Injustice, Cruelty, and public Persecutions of this Country, and as often as I
think upon their Wickednesses, that are committed in Secret, so often is my
Spirit grieved and in anguish, and my Heart distracted by reason of the fierce
wrath of the great God against all Men. And I have had it often in my thoughts,
both before and after thy Restoration to the Kingdom, when I have considered
the fixed and established Idolatry of this Land, that it had been better for
thee that thou had never come hither, because I find it has been to thy Ruin;
and I have often prayed to God, that thou would become of that Mind, as to
depart again out of the Kingdom, that while thou have Life left thee, and space
to Repent, thou may Repent of thine Iniquities; do not, O King, suffer any
one to flatter thee; God will not be mocked, what any Man shall sow, that shall
he also reap; consider with thy self, how thy Brother the Duke of Gloucester,
was so suddenly, and unexpectedly cut off, who might have survived after thy
Death; and do not imagine, that thou can be preserved by Men, when God sets
upon thee; and God's Will shall stand, that his Kingdom may extend over all.
Ah! what shall I say as to what appertains to thy Salvation? God is burning
with Anger, and will shorten the days of his Enemies for his Elect sake; and Oh
that thou may be saved in the day of the Lord! for my Soul is even under
Horror and Amazement at the sight of the inevitable Destruction that attends
thee. These things that I write are true, and I would have thee to know, that I
write these things both godlily and lovingly; as for my own part, though I
suffer many Miseries from without, yet I have that inward Peace with God, that
exceeds all Earthly Crowns. It was said, that while the King was reading this
Letter, his Brother the Duke of York stood by him, and that he, after he had
read it also, advised the King to order the Quaker to be hanged; but that the
King had answered, That it were better that they themselves should have a
regard to their own good, and amend their Lives and Manners; that there is no
Understanding so great, but that many times is overtaken with Error, and
sometimes Folly. About this time came forth a Book, written in English, marked
in every Page with the form or note of a Child's Tablet, such as Children use
in England, as also in our own Country, out of which they learn to pronounce
their Letters in Alphabetical Order: This Book did in every Page show, that it
was in use throughout the World in all and every Language (whereof there were
no less than Thirty Languages recounted and set forth, and each of them
distinguished into its proper Table) that when any one spoke to a single
Person, to call him Thou, and not You, which the English used, if they talked
with a Man that they respected. The Work was neatly and ingeniously done, with
much Cost by John Subbs and Benjamin Furley; but Fox, who besides the English
Tongue, understood none of these Thirty, was so desirous to seem to be the
Author of this Work, and that whatever it contained of Industry and
Praise-worthiness had its Original from him, that he even here and there
subscribed his Name to every Page, and confirmed by his Testimony, that it
contained and taught every Language; by which Work and Labor Fox now showed
plainly the thing, not to Boys, but to all Men that were like Boys in Ignorance
herein, and untaught them that wicked way of speaking: But when some objected
against Fox his Ignorance in these Languages, and that he was upbraided
herewith, as if he were mad, he wiped it off thus with this new Joke, That he
knew only as much of Languages as was sufficient for him. The Year Sixty Two
was Remarkable for the Commotion and Change of many things, to the great
Inconveniency, Trouble, and Incommoding of the Quakers, and went so far in the
Times that followed, that the Ruin of the whole Party and Race of them seemed
to be at hand; for the Solemn League and Covenant between the King and People
of Britain, and between the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, than which League
there was nothing before looked upon to be more Holy, Just, and Desirable, no
greater Foundation both of the Regal Dignity, and the Peoples Liberty, nor a
greater Bond to gather and unite together the whole Body of the Church, and to
establish the Religion of both Kingdoms, was now looked upon as it were an
Antichristian piece of Work, and the Spring of all Evil; and there was the
preceding Year, even by the Parliament's Command, rased out of all the Public
Records, both in Church and State, and at London in several places burnt by the
hands of the Common Hangman. This Year was the Episcopal Order and Authority,
which had always been the Spring and Original of many Brawls and Calamities,
was every where set up and established, there being some, even of the
Presbyterians, who now were desirous of this Power and Glory, which they had
before withstood, or when offered them, did not reject them, upon this
Consideration, that seeing they would endeavor to be good Men in the discharge
of this Office, they were afraid if they did refuse the same, lest such should
be preferred who would not carry themselves in that Station with that
Moderation required of them. The King now, which had been the fear of good Men
a long time, and what was now looked upon as a new Prognostic, and sad Omen
upon the Kingdom, contracted a Marriage with the Infanta of Portugal, a Lady so
given up and devoted to the Religion and Ceremonies of the Popish Church, that
she was inferior to none of the Queens or Princesses of the Age for that
Superstition. At last, the King, after he thought he had established his House
and Kingdom, and made all things sure, did more and more, instead of the Care,
Labor, and Continency he ought to have exercised, give himself up to Ease and
Luxury, and left the Management of most things to his Counselors and Ministers
of State, especially to those who were mostly his Familiars and Companions; all
which change wrought no small Perturbation, Trouble, Fear, and Trembling in the
Minds of all those, whose Religion differed from the Religion and Constitution
that were now thus revived again; he who had persecuted another, did even now
persecute himself, and whom many were before afraid of, was not now without his
own fears, and had need to take care of himself; and therefore from such a
Commotion as this, others became also afraid, who were otherwise more to be
feared, and from this their Fear arose a Suspicion, and hence Discourses, and
at last a Rumor, that there was a multitude of Enemies and Conspirators in the
City and elsewhere, who laid in wait for the King, and were ready utterly to
overturn the whole frame of this new Government. Though many did believe this
to be an Evil Report, cunningly contrived by those, who looked upon such a
Report to be the best way for them to arrive at that which they could not hope
to obtain in Peaceable Times: Now, as there was nothing transacted by wicked
and profligate Men, of which the Quakers were not esteemed either the Authors,
Promoters, Parties, or knew of it, or consented to it; so here also these Men
came to be suspected of this Crime, when at the same time there was no certain
sign of any Conspiracy or Sedition contrived by any sort of Men, and not the
least Footsteps of it by the Quakers; and so there was a Report quickly spread
abroad, that these were such Men, as had embrued themselves in such great
Wickednesses, and that they had associated themselves, and daily met together
to that purpose. Of which things, when they did not of their own accord clear
and vindicate themselves, which they thought they ought not to do without
certain Accusers, nor could do without some Prejudice, thence the same
Suspicion and Report increased, and by this means the People, who were not
indeed called to answer at the Bar, because that would be done upon too slight
a Conjecture, contracted the real hatred of all, and became in great danger,
and were impunedly troubled all manner of ways by them, who, because they were
not hindered, thought they were allowed so to do. Now the King had commanded,
that the Quakers of London and Middlesex should take the Oath, which seemed to
be the strictest tie for the Testifying of their Affection, and engaging their
Faithfulness toward the King and Kingdom; and that the Judges should show
favor to none: But if the Quakers would not Swear, in pursuance to his
Proclamation, they should hold their Meetings no where; then follows another
Law for the prevention of Seditious Assemblies, That no Meeting should be held,
under a show and pretense of Divine Worship, that was not approved and ratified
by the Liturgy of the Church of England, nor more Persons meet together at one
place than five. But and if any above the Age of Sixteen Years and upwards, did
transgress herein, and being a Subject of the Kingdom, such an one should be
punished for the same. This Law seemed to have been enacted for the restraint
of all Sects, but did more especially appertain to the Quakers, and none could
but understand that it was a Snare for them, and rended to Shipwreck their
Affairs. So that it came hereby to pass, that such of these Men as were now
imprisoned, were for this reason more closely kept, and used more severely by
the Gaolers, even by those who before seemed kind unto them. As for the rest of
them, they had one Trial and Affliction upon another, and the same were every
where openly, not only when they were met together in the streets, entertained
with all manner of Ignominy and Reproach, but were also enforced to abstain
from their Religious Assemblies, and when notwithstanding all they proceeded,
they were harrassed by Soldiers, and fined, sometimes entertained with more
than an Hostile Fury, and thrown into Prison, and being required to Swear,
were, upon their refusal, detained in Prison, or thrust into Working-Houses,
among wicked and profligate wretches, who had wasted their Substance in
Drinking, Gaming, and Brothel-Houses, and among Thieves and Cutthroats, as if
they were their Associates, or alike infected with them, and so being in those
places enforced to Labor very hard, and thereby sustain their Lives, which
when they endeavored to do, some of them at length being in that manner
oppressed with many Miseries and Calamities, were freed therefrom by Death. This
was done in London, Worcester, and in other places: Some of them in other
places, whom either the Circumstances of Life, or the Clamor of many Persons,
did more especially expose to Envy, were seized and taken out of their Beds at
Midnight, and carried into Prison; by reason of which Practices, and seeing
there was no likelihood of any end of these things, the Quakers did again
Present an Humble Petition to the King, and did therein set forth, in what
Trouble, and under what great Calamities they all lived; and proved, that from
the King's Restoration to this time, there were Four Thousand and Five Hundred
of them imprisoned, and that Fifty Six were dead, through the Hardships and
Difficulties they underwent. But as to what effect this Petition had, it will
appear from hence, that he who wrote it, obtained from the King for his Reward,
a place where those Persons were imprisoned, concerning whom he made his
Complaint in that same Petition; so that that very thing was looked upon as a
Crime, in that they deplored and deprecated their own Miseries. But at length,
after that the King had found nothing by Deeds or Witnesses, whereby it did
appear that the Quakers were desicient in their Loyalty toward him, or that
they had done any thing whereby he might gather that the Crime of Rebellion was
not far from their Disposition and Manners; and that also the Accusation and
Clamor of the People, as being the most easy and lightest things, vanished of
their own accord, and that Time had allayed the Envy of the People toward
them, in respect to their ways, the King suffered this sting of Severity to be
removed from his Heart; and seeing that hitherto he had been forgetful of his
Promise made to this People, he now calls it to mind, and so orders his
Officers, and other Magistrates, that they should no further vex these People,
and set those that were imprisoned at Liberty; notwithstanding which Command,
such was the Severity and Hardness of some of these Magistrates, that though
they did not reject the King's Authority openly, yet they did indeed fulfill it
either not in earnest, or but slowly: Which thing even the Gaolers in some
places did not stick to maintain, when they offered that they were willing to
loose and free the Prisoners at last, if so be they would lay down Money,
either of themselves, or others for them, to be delivered from their
Imprisonment; the which when they affirmed they would never do, and that they
would choose rather to rot there and perish, and held stoutly to it; and seeing
that indeed some of them were so harrassed with dangerous Diseases, contracted
from the stench of the place, that they died thereof, and that the Cries and
Lamentations of these Men did reach the Court, and even the King's Ears, while
they were treated in this manner, the King at length Commands all of them to be
set at Liberty without any Money and Terms whatsoever. In this Persecution of
the Year Sixty Two, the Quakers recount several Examples of their severe Usage,
and great Constancy of these Men. I shall only mention two: Richard Payton, at
Duley in Worcestershire was thrown into Prison, because he would not take the
Oath of Allegiance; all his Goods were confiscated, and he himself so long to
remain in that place as the King pleased. Thomas Stourdey, of Moorhouse, a
Gentleman of Cumberland, was brought before a Magistrate, and the Oath of
Allegiance put to him, which he refusing to take, but at the same time
affirming, that he was otherwise one of them, who without Swearing, would obey
the King more than many that had swore to him, was condemned by John Lowther, a
Man in Authority in that County, to have all his Goods confiscated, and himself
to perpetual Imprisonment; who being thus shut up, not as the rest, that were
afterward set at Liberty by the King's Favor, but detained till the Year
Eighty Four, about the end of the same ended his Miseries by Death in the same
place. Moreover, these Men do more especially in this Year commomorate the
Death of two of their chiefest Leaders (who departed this Life at London) as
upon the score of Religion, so as being a very glorious and happy Departure,
and Guides to Heaven, and to God. One of them was Hubberthorn, who, we have
said a little before, was in esteem with the King, and so received into his
Favor, that even in him the welfare of all his Friends might seem to be safe,
and secured from all Molestation and Trouble; this Man resided in London, and
on a certain day having got the People together, he began to Preach; which when
the Lord Mayor came to know, whose Name there is no need to mention, the
Quakers know it well enough, he sent with as much immoderation of Power as he
had extensiveness of Authority, to fetch Hubberthorn away from that Assembly,
and so was brought before him, who, when the Man would not put off his Hat
before him, according to the usage of the Quakers in that regard, he used him
as if he had been the greatest Villain, and seditious Fellow, and taken openly
in the greatest Wickedness, beat him with his own hands, haled him by the hair
of the Head, and threw him upon the Ground, and after that, Commands him to be
put into Prison among Rogues and Malefactors, in which place Hubberthorn
obtained that Favor (that a Criminal desires most) of the Attorney, that his
Cause might be transferred to another Court; and seeing there was no Cognizance
taken of the Man's Religion, they now bent all their Accusations against his
Morosity, Irreverence, and Contempt of the Magistrate, and required he might be
severly punished for the same. Hubberthorn, after he had lain in this sad and
doleful place two Months, falls very sick and weak, and in a short time after
died; leaving this Memorial of himself with his Friends, That he had born
whatever befell him with an even Mind, and always ready to maintain his
Religion, and chose rather to die for the same than to live. The other was
Buroughs, who also in the City of London stood firm to his Religion, and died
for it in Prison, and whom the Quakers were wont to esteem as the Apostle of
the Londoners. Of him, they say, when a little before he had resided at
Bristol, that upon his departure from thence toward London, he took his leave
of his Friends with these words, as a Presage of his approaching Destiny: That
now he was directing his Course for London, that he might there together with
his Brethren suffer for the sake of the Gospel, and to lay down his Life. When
he came to London, he presently goes to their Meeting, and there Preaches,
esteeming he could not otherwise satisfy his Conscience, discharge his Duty,
and use the Gift which he had received; which as soon as it was told the Mayor,
who was the same before mentioned, away goes he with some of his Officers and
Followers, and lest he should do the same again, which is not very much
commendable in a Magistrate, he Commands them to hale away the Man, and
forthwith thrust him into Prison, which they do, and put him into an horrid
place, full of filth and stench, and so narrow, that he could not well stand
there; with which Miseries after Eight Months he falls sick, and his Disease
increasing upon him daily, he at length dies as he had lived, supporting and
comforting himself and his Friends, who were not hindered access to him, and so
were present at all times, with many words, the sum and substance whereof was
this: I have hitherto preached the Gospel in this City freely, and not to the
burden of any, and have often spent my Life therein, and now in the midst of my
Labors part with my Life for it; and how true it is, that I have truly and
sincerely both acted and dealt in this matter, is known to him who knows all
things. And thou, O God, have then loved me, when I was yet shut up in my
Mother's Womb, and I have loved them from my Cradle, and have served thee from
my Childhood and Youth to this very time, to some good purpose, and that with
the greatest Fidelity; and though this Body of mine returns unto the Dust, yet
I am conscious to my self, and assuredly know, that my Soul shall return from
whence it came, and that that Spirit which has lived in me, wrought in me,
ruled me, and has ruled in all, will be diffused into Thousands. I pray unto
God, that he would Pardon, if it be his will, the Sins and evil Practices of my
Enemies. And when he died, winking as it were with both his Eyes, he said, Now
my Soul rests in her own Center. Fisher does describe this Man's untimely
Death in a lofty style, and according to his way, in a Rhetorical and Tragical
manner. The Persecution of these Men was very hot the Year following in the
City of Worcester: Several Quakers were met together in the House of Rupert
Smyth, not for to Preach, but to the intent they might Advise together,
concerning four Children, the Death of whose Father had left them destitute of
Sustenance and Education; they chiefly considered what might be done, lest the
Children should come upon the Parish, and that then as the Parish should have
the charge of bringing them up, so it would also take care to have them
instructed in the Religion and Discipline of the same. Presently upon this,
some Soldiers get together, and having given no sign of their being sent, rush
upon them, as upon a Rabble withstanding or despising the Government, and with
much Clamor and great Violence take Twenty Four of the Company, and carry them
to the places where they were wont to be put, amongst Bawdy House haunters, for
this now was come in fashion, Ruffians, Thieves, and such sort of vicious
notorious Offenders; after some Weeks Smyth and a few other are brought before
the Magistrates, and examined; they ask them, whether they had taken the Oath
of Allegiance? And when they said, they had not; they ask them again, whether
they would now Swear, according to their usual way of Interrogating of them in
these Times? They Answer, That they could not swear for Conscience Sake, and
affirm a thing according to their forms, and in such a manner, but that
otherwise they could sincerely affirm, that they would discharge all their Duty
toward the King and Government, neither would they attempt any thing which
tended to their dishonor and Incommodity, neither would they do any thing for
which they might justly be blamed. But whilst that in this hearing there was no
dispute about the Thing, but the Mode and Circumstance thereof was only
controverted, and that the Quakers in the mean time held to their own way, and
stood covered; the Magistrates laying aside the Dispute about Swearing, they
take up the matter of these men's wearing their Hats before them, and urge, that
to stand covered before the Magistrate, as it did here manifestly appear, was a
great derogation from the King's Honor, and such and so great an Offense, that
it ought to be punished, and that severely by the Court. To which Smyth wittily
replied, Seeing that there was not only any appearance of no Crime, no, nor the
least suspicion against them, that they had lessened the Reputation of this
King, his Name, Rule, and Government, in words or deeds, it was a very trivial
thing for them to urge that as a mark of it, and seeing that the Hat is a
Covering to the Head; and that each part of the Body has his Covering, and that
none in his approach to others, though they be Magistrates, uncovers any other
part of his Body, and that his not doing so, is not for all that taken as a
mark of Contumacy and Disobedience; it is most strange Men should be bound by
this Law and Religion about the Bonnet. After this Reply, there was Sentence
pronounced against all of them, that they should be detained in Prison, because
they refused to obey, and be observant toward the King, and irreverent toward
the Judges. As for Smyth, they adjudged him to be out of the King's Protection,
to have his Goods Confiscate, and brought to the Exchequer; after this, the
rest of them were accused, and partly because of their Meeting together, and
partly because they refused to Swear, adjudged also to Prison; the thing from a
Hearing came to a Trial, the Evidence Swear to the Matter, in the absence of
the Criminals; but the Witnesses disagreed very much one with another; the
whole Action, of which the Accusation and Case was made up, is found to be far
otherwise, than was thought to be; the Judges hereupon were somewhat concerned,
what clear Answer they should give, and what to determine concerning the Men;
at last, they adjudge them to be carried back to Prison. At this time Francis
Howgil, a diligent Teacher among these People, was taken from the Marketplace,
where he attended his business, by a Traveller, and carried before the Justices
of the Peace, that were met together in the next Inn: These look askew upon the
Man, hesitate, question him, and at last come to that which they designed, and
require him to take the Oath of Allegiance; he did at first in like manner
delay, as knowing their Tricks, made no Excuse, lest his going about to purge
him of a fault might be esteemed as a fault, but he afterward goes on whither
they desired him, and denied, that he could with a safe Conscience take the
Oath. And so was committed to Prison; whence being brought before the Judges to
Appleby, and when they also required him to Swear, and that he could not be
brought to do so, he is led back to his former Prison. He was again the Year
following brought before the same Court, and the same Question put to him,
where he declares with great Constancy, but in much Modesty, That he, as to
what belongs to the substance and matter of the Oath, did not refuse to Declare
and Promise the performance of it, yea, and to subscribe it, but that he could
not affirm the same by an Oath, neither was that Lawful for a Christian, nor
Advantageous to Men; seeing that such an Asseveration would neither impose a
greater Obligation upon good Men in the preserving of their Faith, nor take
away fear from the wicked, and that the same was only an Encouragement to
Rashness, and Temerity in all false hearted Men, and a Cloak for Evil, and
sometimes for the most notorious Villainies. By which speech and moderation in
speaking, Howgil was so far from being freed from the Prosecution and Envy of
his Judges, that for all that, he was adjudged Guilty, and adjudged, as being
guilty of Disloyalty, to have all his Lands forfeited as long as he lived, and
Movables for ever returned to the Exchequer, and that he himself was out of
the King's Protection, and ordered to be shut up and detained in perpetual
Imprisonment; and so it came to pass, that the Man continued in that Prison for
five Years, when at length he fell very sick, and shortly after ended his
Miseries by Death, between the Arms and Lamentations of his Wife, and many
Friends, who were the Witnesses of his Exit, and of their own sorrow, for the
loss of a Man, who was not only dear and delightful to them, but to all of
their Society; at his Death he called God and Men to Witness, That he died of
thut Religion for which he had suffered so many Afflictions. While the Quakers
were thus disturbed, harrassed, and molested, the Parliament made yet a more
rigid Law, That the Quakers should, in direct words before the Magistrates,
take the Oath of Allegiance to the King, and own him for the Supreme Head of
the Church. But, and if upon any Account, they could not be brought to do this,
it was Enacted, That within a Year's space they should leave the Kingdom, as
refractary and rebellious Persons, that acknowledged no Authority of Rule, and
rejected, and laid aside all Bands of Humane Societies. By which Law they
seemed now as if they did not only raise up Arms, and Proclaim War against them
openly and simply, but design their utter Ruin and Destruction. Now, by this
Law there was an increase of these Peoples Misfortunes the following Year, in
that it made them to be much more suspected and hated by the People, but it is
uncertain whether this proceeded from the Opinion, and from thence the Rumor
of such sort of Men, who think what they do not comprehend, and say what they
think, or from them who believed cunningly enough that this was the best way
and manner for them to be quickly and readily rid of these Men. Or lastly, from
them who hoped that they might in these troublesome Times gain some Profit and
Advantage to themselves; the Mischief was this: These Men were more and more
blamed, that they cherished Papists, and even Jesuits, that certainly lurked
amongst them, which same Persons were so hateful to the People, and which took
upon them their Names and Persons, and preached amongst them, that sometimes
one and the same Teacher, on one and the same day, did first Celebrate Mass
among the Papists, and afterward Preached in the Congregation of the Quakers,
either without Hair, or with a Peruke on; neither was there any Notable
Preachment at any time had among the Quakers, the Author whereof was not
esteemed to be a Jesuit; and this was so rooted in the Thoughts and
Imaginations of most Men, that if any one knew it not, he was looked upon as
ignorant of the Public Affairs; if he denied it, as Impudent, or a Papist or
Jesuit himself, born to Lie, and to Cheat: And they offer this as an Argument
of such Practices, which made the same find a more easy belief; to wit, that
the Papists did so, as well, because that hereby, they might avoid Swearing, as
the Quakers were most averse to such Oaths, and so should swear nothing against
the Honor and Interest of their Religion, as that so they might catch and
allure the unwary by their Artificial and cunning Speeches. I remember I have
heard, a long time after being in Company with some Englishmen, and amongst
some Quakers, these Men complaining, that even then such Discourses were
bandied about concerning the Jesuits mixing with the Quakers, and that they
durst not contradict them. I Will go a little further; some time after, some, I
know not who, according to their Jesuitical way and disposition, that wrote
Foxes and Firebrarnds, urging that there was a certain Jesuit that had lurked
and taught among the Quakers for Twenty Years together; but as often as I have
put this thing to the Quakers, they have answered, That there could be nothing
upon this Head found more falsely, or more foolishly, and that they could never
find any thing that was like it, or smelled of it; but yet it is strange, how
much Envy and Hatred this Opinion contracted to these Men, who followed this
Sect and Constitution; and certainly there is no Year so Memorable and
Note-worthy for the Persecution of these Men, than this of Sixty Four; for
seeing that neither those who were in Prison, that they might be set free, nor
those at Liberty, that they might prevent their Imprisonment, could be brought
of that Mind, as to be willing to Swear; and that those who were free, would by
no means cease to hold their Assemblies, and that in greater Numbers than the
Law allowed, and that many times they went so far, that they left their homes,
and went out of the Bounds of the Kingdom. They were indeed in some places very
severely handled, and in other places, over and above their hard Treatment,
seeing that all places were filled with Prisoners, they ordered them into
Banishment, and drove them, as the noisome and horrible Pest of the Kingdom,
into the uttermost Parts of the Earth. The City of London had none of the least
share in this Persecution, where besides the Oppressions and daily Violences
offered by the meaner sort and scum of the People, as well as by the Soldiery,
who strenuously rejoiced in such doings, and as having no regard of their own,
so did more lightly set by other Men's Lives, and who every where waited for
them in their Meetings, and did ever and anon by the Magistrate's Command, hale
away many of them, yea, sometimes an Hundred together, and drive them before
them like a Flock of Sheep, and throw them into Prisons, but not into those
that were next at hand, and more at large, wherein however they might have been
safe enough kept, and that in a gentle and kind manner, but into one common
Prison, called Newgate, the Receptacle of Thieves, Rogues, Highway-men, and
Cutthroats, as if they had been their Companions and Associates in their
Villainies and Impieties, and the Scum and Offscouring of the People, where
they were crowded up like Beasts, ready to be stifled, and languishing with the
Infection of such a place: Whence some of them, being so straightened and
terrified with the place, and their pernicious and profligate Company, that
they might enjoy a freer Air, and the sight of the Heavens, stood Night and Day
either guarded in the Yard, or else got up to the top of the place, where,
being not sufficiently clad, were very much incommoded by the Cold and
sharpness of the Air; and so many of them, them, through the Inconveniences,
Troubles, Fatigues, and Stench they were exposed to, were much weakened, and
fell sick, some were wasted throughout in such a manner, as that they seemed to
be mere Sceletons, and lead a Life more intolerable than Death it self; and
others that could not endure the Misery, died, whose Corpse, when their Friends
and Kindred desired they might have to bury (though in vain) were privily
Interred by the Keepers. Some of them being sick, and discharged therefore out
of Prison, soon after, their Distempers increasing more and more upon them,
died. Of whom there were two, whose Corpse in the dead of the Night, soon after
their Decease, and when their Friends had scarce lamented their Death,
comforted one another, and gone to their Rest, were taken away by Guards and
Servants (having broke open the Doors for that end) sent by some of the
Magistrates, and against their Friends consent, gave them a Christian Burial;
and this induces me, designing otherwise to use not many Examples, to add this
one notwithstanding, especially because of the oddness of the thing, and not
unworthy to be known. Some Quakers at Scarborough in the Isle of Wight, met
together in the House of John Bishop, one of their own Communion and Society;
some of the Townsmen set upon them, and take several of the Quakers, and upon
this Condition would grant them to depart freely, that every one of them should
pay Half a Crown for his Offense; which Money when all of them refused to pay,
not for the Money, which was not much, but because that in so doing they might
seem to incur such a Penalty, and so acknowledge themselves to have been justly
amerced; they were all put into Custody; and seeing the Man's Name was Bishop,
in whose House they met together, there was from thence a Story raised in
England, and from thence dispersed into other Foreign Countries, that the
Quakers in that Island had pulled down the Bishop's House, to whom belonged the
Administration of all Matters in Ecclesiastical Affairs there. There was one
Priscilla More by Name, present in this Company aforesaid, a Widow Woman; of
whom Money being demanded, as of the rest, and she at the same, and in like
manner looking not so much upon the Sum it self, as that she should seem to
make her self Criminal, if she parted with it upon such an Account; and so did
steadfastly, as all her Friends had done, reject their Demand, she was with them
thrown into Prison, though she was very weak and infirm, where not long after
she died. Next day her Friends the Quakers prepare to carry away the Corpse, and
to bury it in their own Burying-place, they had purchased for that purpose; but
the Governor of the Town would not suffer it, and so Commanding them to leave
that to him, he takes care to have her buried in a Christian manner, to the
great regret, and sore against the will of those Men; for the Quakers did not
reprehend this, that they buried their own Dead so, but this they took very
hainously, and troubled them much, that they were not entrusted with the
Affairs of their Dead, whose Lives, and all their Concerns were within their
Care, and that they durst not discharge that last Office of Piety toward them,
according to their own Will and Mode, and that their Enemies carried their
Friends Corpse with so many Ceremonies and Circumstances of their own, Prayers,
and other Acts of such like Devotion, into hallowed and consecrated Ground,
which they then call a Christin Burial, and the just Funeral Solemnities of a
Christian; which concernedness and anxiety of theirs is indeed very strange, as
if the Quakers themselves did believe that their Chaste and Holy Bodies were
defiled with these Rites, and in these Places, and they so abhorred the
Superstition of others, as to favor another Superstition; for according to
their own Confession the Dead have no sense or feeling, neither is it any
matter where they rot. These Men moreover did more especially take ill, and
grievously complain of this; that seeing their Adversaries did so shun their
Friends that died before for their Religion, Faith, Manners, and Actions, and
detested some of them, and that now they were dead, they persisted in the same
Temper to the last gasp of their breath, and died so, yet that there were some
of them, who when they gave them Christian Burial, as they called it, did not
only judge them worthy of the Name, but also of the Honor and Memory of
Christians, yea, and in the reciting of their Funeral Rites and Solemnities,
praised them as Members of their own and the Christian Church. And this has
suggested another matter, of which I shall mention; this from the very first
rise of these Men, has seemed to them to be altogether unfit and unbecoming
honest and sincere Persons, and especially Christians, to make such splendid
Preparations in the Celebration of their Funeral Obsequies, that they seemed to
be more like unto the Pomps of fine Shows and Triumphs, than Funerals, wherein
together with Life all Worldly Glory passes away; and namely, that they are
often set off with so much Ornament and Company, with such Ostentation and
Semblance of Face and Habit, implying Sorrow, whenas they in the mean time
rejoice in their Bosoms, and sometimes when they return, Rejoice and Revel; and
that others who take Pleasure to see such days as these, follow the rest; yea,
some Sots and Gluttons, and such as have had no Invitation, come and glut
themselves, and very often poor needy People, who are in extreme want of Money,
indulge themselves upon such occasions, and spend the remainder of their
Substance: Whereas on the contrary, these Men have used, and do still use to
demean themselves modestly in providing for the Funerals of their Friends, to
wit, in conveying the Corpse into such places as are convenient and adapted for
that purpose, not into consecrated Ground, left they should be thought to
partake of the Superstition of their Ashes in the least; neither have they any
Ornaments, nor any Ensigns of Lamentation or Mourning, nor do they wear any
balck Claths, besides what they are daily wont to do; neither do they use any
Junkettings, but only both before and after think upon the Mortal state of all
Men, and every one of his own in particular, and how in a short time every one
must enter upon that Journey unto Eternity, from which there is no returning,
and commit this to their Heart and Memory, and excite one another to the study
of an Honest and Pious Life, that his Death may be answerable thereunto. And
that I may add this further, which is not to be omitted, but not therefore to
be extended to many: It Is a wonder, how much hatred also the odd and different
way of managing and carrying their Funerals, and what storms of Reproaches and
Trouble it brought upon the Quakers; they themselves Report, that the dead
Carcasses of their Friends were dug up again, and buried in other places; and
all this lasted till the next Year after this, wherein that Memorable Plague
raged, and when the Quakers had free Liberty to Bury in their own Places, and
perform their Funeral Rites as they themselves pleased.

And seeing I have said thus much concerning the Burials of these Men, I shall
take the Liberty to add this one passage more concerning them: There was a
certain Man, whose Name was Oliver Atharton, of the Parish of Ormskirk, who,
because he would not pay Tithes, was put into the Common Goal of Derby by the
Countess of Derby, where, after a long Imprisonment, the Man died; the Quakers
having Liberty granted them, carry the Corpse away, and passing through some
Streets into the place where he had dwelt, there bury him, and in the mean time
set up pieces of Paper on Poles in all those places, with this written thereon,
whereby they extolled. Oliver as a Martyr, but defamed the Countess, as being
guilty of Murder: This is Olliver Atharton, of Ormskirk, persecuted to Death by
the Countess of Derby, because he would not pay her Tithes: After which, when
that the Countess in a few days after died in like manner, and was carried the
same way to be buried, the Quakers made also a Miracle of this her Death, as if
it had been the Effect of Divine Vengeance and Displeasure, as all are prone to
Judge of the sudden, unexpected, and heavy Misfortunes of their Enemies. This
Year a new and odd Persecution attended these Men, which here we shall a little
largely insist upon. It happened in the City of Colchester; I have given an
Account in the First Book how the Quakers first came into this City, but by
this time having much increased in Number, they met together daily, and could
by no means be diverted from that their Practice and Custom; at which things
the Mayor of the City did at first wink, but afterward, finding them proceed in
their ways, he began to look upon this Connivance as a disgrace unto him, and
therefore bethought himself what he ought, and what he could do in that matter,
and at last, seeing that they still persisted therein, he was much grieved and
inflamed with Anger, and fully determined with himself to Prosecute them
severely. It Is a fearful thing to have an angry and an armed Enemy. It happened
on the 25th. day of October, being the Lord's Day, that many of the Quakers
were met together in a House, to Worship God according to their way, which when
the Mayor came to hear, being eager with a desire to Punish them, he hasted
thither with his Officers, breaks open the House, rushes in, and in harsh
Words, but with a grave Authority, said, he came, according to the King's Laws,
for to disturb this their Cabal and Conventicle, and immediately without delay,
charges his Followers to Apprehend some of them, and lead them to Prison, and
at the same time Commands the other Quakers to follow their Companions into the
same place, which they quickly and readily did, not in conformity to his
Command, but of their own will and inclination: After this, the same Officers
on the Nine and Twentieth Day of the same Month, in pursuance to their Master's
Command, return and repeat the same thing with great Care and Diligence. But
when the Quakers on the First day of the next Month and Week met together
again, the same Officer advises what to do, and does himself with his Guard
undertake the same thing as before, invades and sets upon the House, where many
Quakers again, not expecting his Command, knowing already what his Will was, go
away into the same Prisons; and because that the rest of them did for all this
meet again together on the Tenth Day of the said Month, there came either by
the Command, or certainly by the Permission of the Governor, part of the
County Troop, and these violently rush upon the Assembly, take some of them and
conduct them to Prison, beat and thump others, and besides ransacked the Place,
rent and pull down the Seats, Windows, and every thing else besides the Walls
and Rafters; when this was done, the Governor set one of the Gang, that lived
not far from the House where the Quakers met together, at the Door, for to
hinder them with Words and Threats for to Meet there, if they were not minded
to fall from one Calamity unto another; whom, when they would not resist, they
all stood in the Yard in the open Air, and pursue their Worship quietly,
according to their usual manner; the Porter and Keeper does the same thing on
the following days, and these same Men did the same as they had done before,
not caring to what Inconveniences of Air they were exposed, nor to what
Injuries and Reproaches of their Enemies, nor with what Danger they were beset
by liars in wait for them, and not knowing what great Evil and Misery was a
brewing for them at this very time for their Obstinacy and Perseverance: For
seeing they would not desist from their Method and Purpose, it came to pass, as
if the Law and Civil Power were too weak and feeble, that they had recourse to
the Law of the Sword, and the Force of Arms; there were Forty Horsemen well
mounted with choice Horse made ready, and these being furnished with Swords,
Carabines, and Pistols, as they are wont to be, they drew nigh, that if so be
they should again attempt any such thing, they were forthwith to fall upon
them, and put them under Military Execution, so as that they did not kill them
outright. The Quakers come again together on the Fifth of December, upon which
this Troop approach, and seeing the Quakers, did immediately with drawn Swords,
like stout Soldiers, as if they assaulted armed Men, but such as few of them
had ever done, gallop up with full speed unto them, and then crying aloud, as
if that were the Signal, What a Devil do you do here? They set upon them, beat,
knock, and wound some of them with their Swords and Muskets, sparing neither
the tender Age, nor Female Sex, nor the gray and wrinkled, and drove them from
one place into another; and some that met them, even far from the place, and
whom they took to be Quakers, were seized by them, and severely handled; some
who had escaped safe to their Homes from this terrible Usage, had their Doors
broke open, and were hardly used there; but neither did this also deter them
from Meeting together again, but they returned next day to the same place,
whither came again the same number of Horsemen armed some of them, besides the
Instruments already mentioned, with heavy-headed Clubs, and so set upon them,
throw them upon the Ground, beat them, and handle them with such a Violence,
that they drew Blood from many of them, some they left as if they had been dead
upon the Ground, and had died, had it not been for the Citizens, who being
moved with Compassion, received some of them into their Houses, and took care
of them; some were so used, that they could not lift an Hand to their Mouths,
yea, and could not use any Member of their Body for a long time after. There
was one of the Horsemen who struck at one of them with so much violence, that
he shook his Blade out of the Hilt, which when the Quaker perceived, he gives
it up to his smiter, saying, Take thine own, but as for me, that which is ours
and a Christian's part, I beseech and pray to God, that the work of this day
may not be laid to thy Charge. And so on the one side, Fury and Cruelty, and on
the other, Constancy and Gentleness seemed to outvie one another. But all this
Violence could not yet repress the Endeavors and Purposes of these Men: And so
they met again another day, whereupon the same Persons are sent to them also,
being now looked upon as the best and surest Chastisers and Punishers of these
Men, who set upon them, and handle them according to their wonted manner; and
while the Quakers endeavor, as every one best could, to escape, they pursue
them even to their very Houses. And when these Men could not still be diverted
from their way and purpose, but that they met together on the Twenty Seventh
day again, the same Troop came up with, and before they set upon them, they
placed Sentinels at the Passes to stop their going out, whereupon the Horsemen,
to the number of Thirty Six, break in upon them, and with their Clubs and
Muskets so beat and bruise the Limbs and Heads of these People, with such hard
blows, and some of them receiving even an Hundred, that there was scarce any
part of their Body free from Wounds and Bruises; and seeing there were some of
them who sought to escape their hands by flight, they fell in the Avenues into
the power of the Sentinels, and were as severely handled as the rest; and those
Punishers and Chastisers intermixed so many Maledictions and Curses with these
things, that the Quakers, who are a People of few words, and such as are awful
and modest, affirmed, that they were not so much hurt with their Swords and
Clubs in their Bodies, as they were troubled at their wicked Words in their
Hearts. These Men were now so hardened with all these Trials and Evils, that
they were not only not moved in the least thereat, but also looked upon
whatever they suffered as pleasant and glorious, being as it were a Martyrdom
for their Religion. They again Meet on another day, to the Number of Sixty
Persons, with a steadfast and firm Resolution of Mind, expecting to be put under
the bitterest Trials and Afflictions; at what time a Company of People, partly
on Horseback, and the rest on Foot, all of a sudden set upon them in a
Tumultuous, Boisterous, and Clamorous manner, and whomsoever they catched, they
knocked down to the Ground with their Arms, and did so beat and assail some of
them, and made them so weak and infirm, that they could not for a long time
stir their Limbs for the use of their Bodies. Yet this Outrage could not bring
these Men to take better Advice, and change their Purpose; wherefore the Forty
Troopers were sent again against them, who thinking they could not be forced by
the former Arms they had used, do now drive very sharp Nails into the ends of
their Clubs, wherewith they might repel them, and so when the Quakers returned
boldly to their Place of Worship on the Sixth of November, they set upon them,
and with horrid Curses and Railleries beat them all from all sides, and
separate some of them from the rest: Here a certain Widow, and an Old Woman,
received Twelve Wounds, and another Woman was wounded to her very Reins. This
Persecution lasted six Weeks. From thence forward the Governor took another
Course; and first of all indeed according to his former manner, but now
accompanied with the Recorder of the City, and some Officers, goes to the
places where the Quakers were to Meet together, breaks the Doors open, and goes
in, and as soon as any of the Quakers entered, dispersed them; at another time,
making use of gentler Remedies, he Commands them, and lest they should not do
it, in the King's Name, to be gone; to which they made Answer, That they were
full of Duty toward the King, but that they loved God, the King of Kings,
more, who commanded that no one should forbear to Worship him when they had
time and place. This the Governor interpreted either as the greatest Ignominy,
or the utmost Contumacy, and thinking neither of them was to be endured, renews
his former severe Methods against them, which he had for some time intermitted,
and sends Soldiers, who should drive them from the places where they were, by
thrusting, haling, and smiting of them. But when he still found that he neither
could by all his Devices, and so many Trials, do any good, nor was able to
bridle them, but that they were of that Mind and Disposition, either to live
with this Freedom of Meeting together, or to suffer Death for it, he chose
rather at last to cease, and give over taking any notice of them. These things
which are worthy of Admiration, and which might seem to be set forth at large
by the Quakers by way of Accusation, I take notice of not only from their own
Relations of themselves, but also from the Testimonies of others, and of the
most sober Christians of that City; moreover, there was no Citizen, who had any
sense of Pity and Humanity about him, that did not express his Indignation,
Dis-approbation, and also Detestation of the great Severity used against them.

THE Remaining PART OF THE Second BOOK OF THIS General History OF THE QUAKERS
Begins at [Aa] Page 1.
THE General History OF THE QUAKERS.
BOOK II.
SO Eager and Resolute they were for the maintenance of their Religion,
profession, and public meetings, that maugre all the severe Laws enacted
against them, all the miseries they had already undergone, and the future evils
impending on their heads, yet they never intermitted so much as one day from
assembling together, and managing religious concerns. Nay, so far were they
from being dispirited by the great calamities and miseries they lay under, that
from the lowest to the greatest they seemed to be hardened and confirmed
against the greatest punishments whatsoever: as if all their misfortunes and
disasters had been means rather to excite and encourage their boldness, than to
enfeeble or repress the same. So that now there was no remedy left to restrain
them, save close imprisonment. But because it was difficult and hard to detain
them all in perpetual prison; It was at last resolved that they should not only
be banis^'d from their houses and livings, but from the whole kingdom; and
commanded to the American Colonies subject to the English; where they should be
condemned to the same service and slavery that the barbarous natives of that
Country are; who are a people so stiffneck'd and stubborn that neither levity
of treatment can break them, nor severity of punishment scare from their
barbarous customs; so that by an inveterate and immovable despair they break
all the bounds of Temperance and Reverence among the Christians. Accordingly
there were several decrees made in several Courts and Judicatories at one and
the same time about the Captive Quakers: (that is, those of them that were
refractory and obstinate* when neither imprisonment nor any other manner o^
punishment could move to desist from their disallowable practices; for there
were some of 'em that after having been three, four, or five several times
dismissed and set at liberty, still returned to their former vomit) that they
should be severed from the rest of the English World by being transported to
Barbado's and Jamaica, where the Garrisons and Forts were strong enough to
oppose them and stiffle their designs; and where there was no great fear of any
danger that could arise from their commotions. And that they might be deprived
of any support or comfort from conjugal love or fellowship, they ordered the
women and men to be separated and transported to separate Colonies. But the
term of their banishment did not exceed seven years. And this favor was
likewise indulged them, that whoever would pay one hundred pounds English for
his offense should redeem himself from being transported. But it was never
heard that any of them attempted this manner of redemption. -- I shall here
mention only two examples, the one remarkable for insolence, the other for the
place and manner of Judgment.

The first Was in Hereford Town, where one and twenty of 'em were kept in
Prison, (of which sixteen were Married Persons, and very comfortably matched to
loving consorts,) because of their frequent meetings and Religious
^^onventicles; who had been before tried and condemned in a Convention of the
County, and were afterward sentenced to suffer the aforesaid Exportation, by a
Court held in every respective County. The Quakers relate that all things were
done very superficially in the latter, nothing of trial being made sure only
for fashon sake, as if they would not repine or reverse the Sentences formerly
cast against them in other Courts; or as if the matter had been so plain that
there was no further place left for the guilty to put up defenses; so that all
things were ready for passing Sentence. The Witnesses that had been Examined
before, depon'd that they saw the Quakers, assembled together at that place,
from whence they were brought to Prison; and that in this their assembly, they
were sitting quiet and mute without any speaker. The Quakers made no dispute
upon the matter, only replied, That as they used to do at all other times, they
had then met together, not tumultuously, nor after any unhandsom manner.
However, this was accounted a Crime sufficient to demerit such a punishment.
The Quakers say, That when the President of the Court, Henry Chany, was
pronouncing Sentence of Transportation against them, his Countenance bewrayed
great trouble of mind, and the words he spoke were very faint and languid, as
if the Injustice of the Sentence had struck him with fear and confusion. This
they observed; and indeed they are men very apt and ready to make their
Observations, and commemorate the same for infallible Truths. However, this
Judge having pronounced Sentence, interrogates them all, if they were willing to
redeem themselves at the price set, allowing them the next night to consider
upon it; Which night (as they write themselves) they spent not in consulting
one with another what Answer to give; but in secure and profound sleep, as
being conscious to themselves of no evil thing they had done, which self
conscious innocence devoided them of fear, and encouraged them readily and
cheerfully to undergo all the Afflictions that might befall them. In the
Morning, being called before (...) Judicatory to give answer to the question
put to them the preceding day, they replied to the Judge, interrogating them a
fresh, that they would pay nothing, and tho they had a hundred lives they would
not redeem them for a hundred pence; so far were they from offering or
promising so many pounds.

Some few days after that two Courts were held at London about the same
business, which may be accounted the Metropolitans of all the others held on
this account, as London is of that Kingdom. The Decisions and Judgments of
these Councils were very various, as the exit testified. The Quakers being
(...) up in Prison for having congregated themselves in public Crowds, and
obstinately persisting in the same irregularity; were arraigned before the
Court, and accused of having transgressed the Laws, in meeting and preaching to
more than five at a time, in contempt of the King and the Laws of the Realm;
that tho they met together for worshipping God, yet their manner of worship was
dissonant from the Liturgy and Canons of the Church of England; and that tho
they designed to advance mutual concord among themselves by their frequent
Conventicles, yet they tended to raise discord and sedition amongst the People.
The informers and delaters against them were mostly the Magistrates Servants
and Officers, or the Keepers of Prisons and suchlike, who yet testified nothing
against them, save that they found them assembled together, tho they did not
hear any speaking amongst them; or that they were delivered to them by the
Messengers who apprehended 'em; or that they saw them brought into Prison. Unto
which the Quakers replied, that they did not deny their being together; but
that they desired it might be proved that their Congregating together was upon
any such wicked design, as to show contempt of the King and Government; which
was the crime laid to their Charge, and upon which they were then called in
question. They added likewise, that they did not deny their meeting together in
greater numbers than five; which if it was contrary to the King's commands, was
excusable in them, since they were bound to obey the Commands of God, and give
ear to his voice alone, tho Kings and all Men on Earth should Countermand the
same; And as to the Liturgy of England, they replied, that if it contained any
thing contrary to the Divine Will, it was to be put in the same balance with
the Kings Laws, when of the same strain; and so could not be urged upon them as
a rule to walk by; Besides, that the Liturgy did not forbid, nay, commanded to
Worship God after the same manner that they did, viz. In Spirit and in Truth.

The Jurymen after having understood the whole matter how it stood, did not all
so freely tell their minds as they might have done; nor were they all equally
forward and ready to decide the matter; some pleading, that it being an
intricate case they were doubtful and uncertain how to determine it; others
refusing positively to Judge of it, as being a most important and momentous
affair. But all the Judges unanimously concentred in this sentence, that such
Religious Meetings as were not conform to the Modes of the Church of England,
or exceeded the number of five, were unlawful; and that these Quakers
(whatsoever was their design in Meeting, be it good o^ ill) had celebrated such
unlawful Meetings and persisted to do the same still; which they openly and
Judicially acknowledged, so that no place was left for attenuating the crime,
or alleviating the punishment; wherefore they were all guilty of a Capital
crime. And whereas some of these Quakers were married, others were single
persons, in some Courts the sentence was that the former should pay a fine of
so many pounds, or suffer a years Imprisonment; and the latter be Transported
to the American Islands, to do slavery in the English Colonies there: In other
Courts they were all promiscuously ordered to be Transported; Yet so as in some
Courts Liberty was given to those that had received sentence of Banishment, (in
some places to them all, but elsewhere only to the Boys and Girls) to choose
whether they would rather be Transported, or stay in England, and frequent the
public Churches to hear Sermon; which they all unanimously rejected; some of
'em returning this answer, that they wondered how the Judges should propose such
an offer, since they all knew very well that if any of the Quakers came that
length as to embrace their Proposal, it would not be from a sincere love to the
Church, or their Sermons, but through Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, which in
Religious matters is the most heinous and superlative crime that can be
Committed. In fine, since the Quakers continued so obstinate in rejecting all
offers made by the Judges, they likewise continued steadfast in ordering their
sentence to be put in Execution against them. The first Court that took this
affair into Cognizance, was held about the middle of October, William Proctor
being chosen president: The Jurymen were unwilling and refractory to meddle
with it, which Created a great deal of trouble to the Judges. At this time
there were twelve received sentence of Transportation, partly Men, of which
some very ancient, some very young, partly women, among whom was one Girl under
sixteen years of Age. Another Court was held the same very month, to which
Robert Hide presided. Differences arose betwixt the Judges and Jurymen, for
that the latter were slow and backward to decide the matter. At length after
they had reasoned and debated among themselves about the nature of the Crime,
the matter of fact, and the tenor of the Law, they with one voice gave in this
Resolution, that these men were guilty of having kept Conventicles; but that
they could not determine whether they kept such Conventicles as here repugnant
to the rites and customs of the Church, or what was their intention in so
doing. By which sentence they thought they freed themselves from any further
trouble in the affair: But the Judges began to debate with some of them about
the Religion of the Quakers, and at last to threaten them openly; and cited six
of the twelve to appear before the King to give an account of what they had
done; the six were not at all afraid, persisting in their opinion, in favor
of the Quakers, which they thought it their duty not to revoke from. Upon which
the Court was dismissed for that occasion; and the matter left undecided, yet
it sat again that same very day; but Judge Hide* did not sit, the Lord Mayor
supplying his place; and then it was determined ( nemine contra dicente) that
they were guilty of most heinous Crimes, unworthy to live in their Country, and
therefore to be banished to the outmost bounds of the Remorter Earth. Among
them was a Boy in Coats (being so very young) who being asked if he would not
swear that he was not sixteen years old, had not the Ripeness enough of
Judgment to give a grave and pertinent Answer, but replied, that no Man could
Remember the Day of his Birth, and that he was not born for, nor trained up in
Swearing. On this occasion Eighteen were condemned to the same punishment of
being Transported.

The next Court was held in December, Hide presiding; in which, without any
dissension, or variety of Opinions, they condemned Two and Thirty to be turned
out of all their Possessions and Enjoyments, and banished their Country. One
of these Two and Thirty boldly desired leave of the Judges to ask One Question;
which being granted, he tells them, That they were constituted Judges to
resolve him and others about dubious matters; which they acknowledged to be
true. Then he asks of them, since the cause of his Condemnation was his
frequenting the Meetings of the Quakers, and absenting from the Public
Churches; and since the Commands of God enjoined the former, and the Laws of
Men constrained the latter, which would they have him obey, or what would they
advise him to do? The Judges gave no answer, either because they durst not
answer contrary to their own Consciences, or because they would not seem by
their Judgment to overturn a Law established and confirmed by so many Judgments
passed upon the same Affair. Some of these condemned both in this and other
Courts, demanded (by their Solicitors, as well as themselves) to have a Copy of
the Judges Sentenco, that they might consider it, and answer distinctly to each
Article of the same: but it was denied them, lest by protracting and pretending
this for an Excuse of further Delay, they should seem to elude the Law.
Wherefore some of them, as soon as they opened their mouths in their own
defense, were instantly carried away.

Another Court was held upon this account that same month, Judge Hide
presiding; in which the Judgment was summary and compendious: For since the
Accused did not deny their congrega^ing together, the confession of this was
accounted an acknowledgment of the Crime, and without any further Enquiry, or
Proof, they were forthwith adjudg'd to undergo the same punishment. There was a
Widow among the rest, a Mother of Three Children, who (while the rest were
alleging, That they were not found guilty of any Illegality in the manner and
design of their assembling; for the Act it self they did not deny) cried out,
That she was most unjustly accused not only of the Crime, but of the Fact it
self; and that it would be a wicked and scandalous Action to inflict upon her
such a Punishment which she never deserved; fot that she was only standing at
the Doors of the House where the Quakers (her Friends and Neighbors) were
assembled, and had not yet entered in, when the Sergeants and Officers laying
violent Hands upon her, drew her into the House. Upon which, one of the Quakers
turning himself to the Jurymen (for they are upon Oath when they give Judgment,
and greater caution is to be used after the taking of an Oath) accosts them
thus, That they would think upon God the supreme Judge Omnipresent, and
Omniscient, and on Conscience the Judge within them; And not imagine to
themselves that the times, or the necessity of doing so, or so, would be a
solid excuse for 'em, or to take Encouragement from any other respect
whatsoever. Which injected some terror and scruple into their minds, some of
them answering, that things were now come to that length that they could not
help what they did. At this time they condemned twenty to the same punishment.
Another Court was held in January, in which also Judge Hide presided, for all
this affair was totally devolved upon him, as being the ablest and expertest of
his function in England. They condemned thirty two after the same manner as the
former, to be severed from their Friends, possessions and all Commerce with
their native Country, by being banished into these remoter Plantations. In
February there ensued two more, (only Counselor Wachlon presiding in the
first, and Windham in the latter. The former condemned twenty four; the latter
ten Men and Women; both to undergo the abovementioned proscription. There was
some among them who alleged that at that time, when the Conventicle was kept,
at which they were accused, and said to have been present, they were in places
far distant from it, but all Defenses and Allegations were in vain. So that in
this one City the Principal of the whole Kingdom, so many of this Society as
were Charged to be seditious, wicked, and tumultuating, were not allowed to
breath in their native Air; of which they were said to be unworthy, and
confined to these Solitary distant Colonies of the New World, to be there
hardly used, and obliged to truckle, with the native Barbarians to all manner
of servile work; this being accounted the most effectual way for allaying their
fury and quelling the restless Commotions of their Spirits.

The Quakers relate, that in some of these Courts, there happened a Remarkable
instance, as at Hereford; that while they read over the sentence given against
the Quakers, they did it with so much Consternation, Hesitation and Slowness of
Speech, that of all the multitude standing by, there was none could tell what
was read. They tell likewise of the first witness, or informer against them at
these Courts, that from that time that he appeared against them, he never
enjoyed either peace of mind, or health of body, but losing all appetite to
meat, shortly afterward pined away and Died. All these observables are
accounted by the Quakers to be a signification of the Divine wrath against
them, It being usual for Men when in Adversity, to make curious Observations
and Reflections upon those things, that in Prosperity might have past without
being taken notice of; which they then interpret favorably for themselves, as
tending to their comfort and support, and signifying the wrath and anger of the
Almighty, against the Actions of their Adversaries. I have not inserted the
Names of these persecuted Quakers, because it would have been tedious to
mention all their Names; and also invidious to name some of 'em, whether they
place their Glory or their shame in this their affliction. This severe and
intolerable Affliction had that effect upon them (As all afflictions have,
even upon Children, the most rude and unskilful of Eloquence) that those who
formerly were mute and incapable to say any thing to the purpose in their
Defense, now became talka^ive and ready in their discourses; Insomuch that both
the Afflicted themselves, and also their Friends and Relations who were touched
with pity and brotherly Compassion, for their hard lot, were heard frequently
to express themselves after this Manner; That it was just for Evil doers to be
ill treated; But they who offended no Man were injured by all; that what all
other People praise and applaud themselves in, was imputed to them as a
superlative Crime; what they accounted virtuous and worthy of a Reward in
themselves, they had severely punished and persecuted in them, viz. Constancy
in Religion and Faith. This seems (say they) to be such a Metamorphosis and
Renversement of things, as cannot but prove matter of Wonder and Astonishment
to all good and wise Men; that what of old was deemed for a heinous Crime,
should now be Crowned with the Testimony of virtue; what of old was branded as
Contrary to all Divine and Humane Laws, should now be established and enacted
in a Law. By this Law it is that such Numbers of M^n are accused, examined,
tried, and condemned by Witnesses, Jurymen, and Judges, all filled with Passion
and Revenge; excepting only a few who while they plainly insinuate, that such
unaccountable procedure is contrary to their mind, yet would not openly
disclose their thoughts, or oppose the rest of their angry and passionate
Companions. Moderate punishments are moderately endured; but this of theirs was
so intolerable and grievous that is surpass^d the tortures of Hangmen,
insomuch that Death it self (even the cruellest) would be welcome to them and
accounted a favor. That what God and Nature had most sweetly and strictly
Conjoined and Cemented together, could be severed and torn asunder without the
most ineffable pain of Torment. That of this nature were the Enjoyments they
were bereaved of, and despaired ever to Recover. That the dearest and most
loving Friends were separated from one another, cast out, and banished their
Country, their Houses, Families, and the Society of their Friends, Relations,
and Acquaintances; Nay, the Wives were Ravished from their Husbands, the
Parents from their Children; the Infants were snatched from the Bosom and
Embraces of their Parents; and Sucklings pulled from the Breasts of their
Mothers. That free Christian Men were reduced to Slavery and Bondage, and
thrust out among the Barbarous and cruel Indians, who were estranged from all
Religion toward God, or Humanity toward Man. So that the Common liberty
purchased with so much labor and pains, with the Blood and Lives of our
Ancesters, and delivered to us their posterity, as a most precious and
invaluable depositum, not to be parted with but with the loss of our Lives, is
now violated and trampled under, in these very Lands which boast of their
happiness in enjoying more freedom and liberty than other Nations. And thus it
decays a pace, lessening by degrees, and changing its face every day, so that
there is just ground to suspect, that what now is their lot, may afterward
befall the whole Nation, and that those who now rejoice and exult secure of
their own Liberty, may afterward come to bemoan the loss of the same when it
is too late.

But since, I have already given you a taste of their Condemnation, it will not
be amiss to trace their sentence to its Execution, and take a view of the
events that ensued thereupon. The first of all the Quakers adjudged to be
banished their livings, fortunes, and Country, and ordered forthwith to receive
the Execution of this their sentence, were the seven Condemned at Hereford;
from whence they were carried Prisoners to London, to embark in a Ship lying in
the Thames bound for Barbados. But when they came to bargain with the Master
of the Ship about their Transportation, he believing the Men to be innocent,
thought it not safe for him to carry away his own Countrymen against their
wills; and therefore denied to do it. This his rufusal was so heavily resented,
that he was forthwith cast into Prison. But afterward, being released and
respecting more the misery and Affliction of the poor innocent Men, than his
own disadvantage or Detriment, he again refused to do such an inhumane thing,
especially that reflected so much upon the fame and honor of his native
Country. But the owners of the Ship having engaged to carry them off, and
thinking themselves obliged to fulfill their promise, deposed the Master from
his Office. Upon which some other Merchants, when they saw these Men so
insens'd against the Master, that they had removed him from his place, and
thinking he had done as became a good and faithful Man, in refusing to
Transport his innocent Countrymen, made him Master of another Ship, better than
what he had before. However, a new Master being put in his place, the Quakers
are delivered to him to be carried to Barbados. But this New Master bethinking
himself afterward what manner of men they were, began to repent of what he had
done, especially considering that he could gain nothing by their
Transportation, but a Reproach and Scandal, east upon his Name; and in fine
sets them at liberty, giving them a Testimonial under his hand, that they had
not privily fled away, but were freely dismissed by him. The Quakers presently
sets straight homewards, and when they arrived, their Friends were so overjoyed
that they not only beat their Breasts with their hands, but likewise tolled the
Bell; which Alarmed the Magistrates of the place, who having met together and
understanding what the matter was, sent for one of the seven to appear before
them, who told them the whole series of the story; upon which they sent for all
the seven, ordering them to be carried to London, and delivered to another
Master who was bound the same course; who after having set to Sea began to
consider with himself that the Men he had on board, were Transported against
their wills, being Captives and Prisoners. The same consideration began to move
the Seamen; who are a sort of Men more merciful and compassionate than others;
and more exorable and ready to assist and relieve the miserable and oppressed;
which does not flow from their natural Inclination or Education, but from the
frequent use of encountering many dangers, and being accustomed to hardships.
They began all to call to Remembrance what they had often heard in England,
that there is a Law against exporting any Man from his native Country without
his consent, imposing a considerable fine upon any who should Adventure to do
the same; as also that in Barbados, there is a Law, enacting, that if any Man
imported an Englishman into that Island against his consent, he should be
liable to what punishment the Governor pleased to inflict. Wherefore they all
refused to be Accessory to any such Crime, which was Repugnant to the dictates
of their Consciences, and liable to the ^orce of both Laws, in England and
Barbados. It happened likewise that the wind proved contrary, and every thing
cross, as they were upon the Sea, for a long time. Which Alarmed the Seamen
mightily, inclining them to believe that it was a certain sign of Divine wrath
against them, for exporting their Countrymen (as the ignorant Vulgar are always
ready to presage some fatal men from the appearance of any thing that is
strange or unusual) in so much, that they assured the Master of the Ship, that
unless he would let these Men go, they would not manage the Ship, nor perform
the Voyage. And accordingly, as soon as they came to the Isle of Wight, they
took Counsel together to set them at Liberty there. And that their design in
dismissing them, and the manner of the same might the better appear, they wrote
a Letter signifying the Reasons that moved 'em to let 'em go, and withal
Testifying that they were men of unblamable Conversation in every thing; as
also that they did not flee away from them by stealth, but were freely
dismissed; which Letter was subscribed by some, and delivered to the Quakers,
who came straight away for London, (not going near their own Houses) where they
were brought before the Council, as Fugitives) to be punished by the Pains of
Death; for such is the penalty of that crime; but they showing their Letters,
which testified the contrary, were ordered to be kept Prisoners till another
opportunity offered of sending them to America.

Next to these seven, other three at Bristol were put on Board a Ship for the
same end; but the Seamen considering their case and doleful condition, and
being moved with that affection, called mercy, (which is Grief of Heart for the
misery of others) and also scared by the Laws against any such Exportations,
set them at Liberty again, giving them a Letter or Certificate to remove all
suspicion of their being Fugitives. These accidents were wonderful, and
accounted by the Quakers to be Miracles. Although all these, and many others, who
had received the same Sentence of Transportation, were put all together into
one Ship, that was strongly enough guarded, and secured from the lash of the
Law. This Ship, when set to Sea, was taken by a Dutch Privateer in the time of
War between Holland and England; and the Captive Quakers were set a shore in
Holland; which accident (whatever construction the Quakers may put upon it) is
a memorable instance of the vicissitudes of Human Affairs. Some of these
Quakers returned again to their own Habitations, as being afraid of nothing,
and desiring resolutely to undergo all manner of Afflictions for the defense of
their Religion. Others fixed their Residence in Holland, making that place a
Refuge and Receptacle of the Miserable; and thinking it safer to hear of the
miseries of their Countrymen, than to see them with their Eyes, and be the
feeling Subjects of the same themselves. Some of these men, Now Pilgrims in a
strange Land, had but very little to maintain themselves withal, but they
acquiesc'd in their Poverty very patiently, choosing rather to live a secure
(tho mean) life in a strange Country, than to try the uncertain Events of
dubious Fortune in their own. Some, in the progress of time, increased their
small Fortunes to a considerable bulk, so that their former Persecution, and
the Exchange of their Habitations, proved advantageous to them. Besides, there
were not wanting some among them, who, besides their domestic Affairs, took
care also of the General interest of the Sect even in that Country; and by
introducing New Meetings and constituting a New Society, there became the chief
Pillars and Ornaments of their whole Church; tho formerly they had been in no
repute amongst their own People, either for Riches or other Endowments; so that
their Friends and Associates did not stand to say publicly of them, that they
were tossed and harrass'd by many tribulations, and at length brought to that
Country by the Divine Counsel, that they might be obliged to Acknowledge that
Divine Assistance which enabled them to compass such great undertakings; the
same thing happening unto them that we observe in Trees and Plants, the which
the more they are shaken with the Winds, the deeper and faster Root they take,
and when pruned, bring forth Fruits better and in greater plenty; or when bare
at the Roots, or dug up and Transplanted to other ground, Fructify better,
and produce a more plentiful Harvest. A pious and laudable Action to put such
favorable Constructions upon adverse events, and to enlarge and magnify what
prosperously befalls 'em. The Quakers at this time complained hugely of the
cruel and inveterate malice of the Ecclesiastics and Ministers against them,
who should have been meek even to their Enemies, following in this the Example
of their Lord and Master, while on Earth, who was meek and tender to his
greatest Enemies. Their mouths were also filled with the cruelty of the
Bishops, who are the chiefest managers of all public concerns and the
principal Members of the Parliament, the supreme Judicatory of the Nation,
whose Authority is of so great weight and influence in the Nation, that they
were the Authors of all the s^vere Laws and Rigid constitutions made against
them; that they proposed nothing concerning the restraining and suppressing of
Sectaries (and consequently Quakers) that was not forthwith listened to by the
Noble Men and Statesmen of the Kingdom. Their complaint therefore was, that
Justice was done them no where, that they could not obtain liberty so much as
to display the injuries that were done them* that this persecution was
Universal and every where, insomuch that every Town, or whatever place was
frequented by People, ring'd with the persecution and affliction of the
Quakers. And because they are of this principle, that Resistance is to be
offered to none, nay, not so much as to ward off force by force; that whatever
fortune befell them, they should not only acquiesce in it, but receive it with
all cheerfulness and willingness of mind, while it was for Conscience sake;
that whatever evils they were oppressed with, they should undergo them with the
greatest Constancy, Patience and Fortitude of mind and body; they complained
that upon this account the world was the more jealous and suspicious of them,
that their wrath and malice was incited the more against them; that they lay
open to the snares and devices of all Men, such as could not be avoided by
simple and open hearted Men, and to the greatest Perils and Dangers that any
Mortals could undergo; not otherwise than if every thing alleged against them
had been proved, or if their patient enduring the Punishments inflicted had
been their crime, and this their constancy in suffering, accounted by some
stubbernness and contumacy, had called for a greater weight of punishment to be
inflicted. In opposition to which, when such like complaints came to the ears
of the Churchmen, they endeavored to purge themselves thus; that seeing the
Quakers did so obstinately forsake and separate from the public Religion,
Churches and Sermons; and neglected, despised and endeavored by all means to
render ineffectual the Laws and Constitutions of the Church; and stoped,
opposed and diminished, as much as in them lay, their revenues, incomes and
advantages; so that they designed and contrived to ruin them, and theirs, if
they could; there was therefore no remedy left for curbing and checking their
corrupted minds, irregular Actions, and unaccountble boldness, but the method
they had chosen for that effect; and the punishments they met with were no less
than they deserved; that as for them, they had done nothing but what was their
duty, and became them in the conscientious discharge of their function, which
was not to be their Enemies, (as they said) but to correct, punish and reform
sinners. But the Quakers chiefly found fault with this, that they always cited
them before the Ecclesiastic and Spiritual Courts, which after this year
became very frequent; this touched them so sensibly that they could not conceal
the grief and anguish of their mind, nor moderate their tongues from expressing
the same. This Ecclesiastical Court was after this manner: The Quakers being
most obstinate and tenatious to all the Articles of their Religion, and very
nice and insulting in the minutest Tenets of another, did by their obstinacy
and trouble mightily encourage the Ministers of the Churches, and (which of all
things here on Earth is most sensible) occasioned the diminution of their
revenues; They were then cited to appear, and if they either made any great
Resistance or refused to give surety, or to appear before the Court, they were
excluded from Communion with the Church, as being the Excrements and
Off-scourings of the world. This we commonly call Excommunication. Which
Excommunication was approved and confirmed by every Bishop in his Bishopric,
and also by the Bishop of the Diocese where it was done; after which any
Accusers or Actors had full power and liberty to prosecute them, as lewd and
wicked people separated from the Mother the Holy Church. Then being delated to
the Magistrates, and by their command apprehended and cast into Prison, were to
lie there till they had suffered all the penalty and paid the last farthing,
tho in the mean time none of them had began to pay the first penny. This Action
is called by Lawyers de Excommunicato capiendo. The crimes they were accused
of, that made them liable to this Thunderbolt of Excommunication were these,
That they did not frequent the public Churches, nor observed the set holydays,
in attending Sermons and public Prayers; that in holy days they and their
families did not abstain from profane wocking; that they withheld their
Children from baptism, and would not give surety for them, when they excluded
'em from the Number of Christians. That they did not receive the other
Sacrament; that they were not married by their Parish Ministers, nor any others
of the Church; that they were not joined together in the bond of Matrimony
according to Law, but lived together like lewd and debauched persons, making
their Wives whores, and their Children bastards and illegitimate. (This
deprived the Ministers of the Advantages they otherwise had by the fees and
allowances paid them on such occasions; which the Quakers were very refractory
to do.) That they sent not their Children to School to be taught by the Parish
Schoolmasters, who otherwise were straightened for a livelihood (for the Quakers
had Schoolmasters of their own profession, to whom they committed the
Education of their Children); that they refused to pay their quota for
repairing the Churches, and keeping them in order; that they omitted to give
the Easter-Offerings, or such other gifts as ought and used to be given to the
Curates, or Minsters of their Parish; and lastly, that they refused to pay the
Tithes of their Cattle, Lands, Trees, Honey, etc. to the Minister; this (say
the Quakers) the Clergy looked upon as their greatest Calamity, accounting it
their cloros (as they used to taunt them) or the loss and rottenness of their
honeycombs, and the product of their Bees. Thus the Quakers both in their
gestures, Speeches, and Writings sometimes, cunningly insinuated such ^art
bu^ter Reflections. Liberty was given the Quakers, before the sentence of
Excommunication was pronounced against 'em, to propose their Defenses and
Apologies for themselves, before the Bishops and Magistrates. But because they
were not allowed to do it themselves, but only by Procurators and Sollicitors,
which could not be done without giving Money, they declined appearing before
them; for they thus reasoned with themselves, that if their business succeeded
favorably, it was well; if not it would be the multiplying expenses upon
expenses in vain; and besides, they bethought themselves, that no faith would
be had to their Allegations without interposing their Oaths, which they were
very a verse to, nay, so resolute that they would rather run the hazard, of the
greatest persecutions whatsoever. So that none of them obtained any favor. Nor
were they excused who pretended to be sick, and so unable to attend the Court;
for this their pretended sickness was interpreted to be feigned and not real.
So that one after another, great numbers of them were Condemned, apprehended,
and put in Prison; some Rich, some Poor, some Citizens, some Country-Peasants;
several of the latter being Imprisoned for a very small sum, not exceeding ten
or six pence. Which small sums they all refused to advance, not that they were
so poor as that they could not, or so pinching and niggardly, that they would
not part with so much; but that they thought the pursuers had no right to them.
And the pursuers were so eager and strict, that they would not forgive such
little sums, nor abate the least farthing of their due, lest others should
have taken Encouragement from such a precedent, to expect the like immunity. So
they were all promiscuously Imprisoned. In the mean while the fomenters of the
Action, while they pretended to recover what was owing them, took by force from
their houses what (as they said) would amount to the sum; pillaging their
houses, Embezzeling and Spoiling their Barns, Stacks, Harvest, Vintage; taking
their Horses, Cows, and all other possessions they could be Masters of, so that
they recovered their Money with Interest, destroying all that the diligent Men
had scraped together by the sweat of their brows, and living sparingly, and
leaving nothing almost for the sustenance of their families. Yet the Quakers
continued still steadfast, and unmovable, resolving to suffer to the last
extremity, rather than recede from the course they had begun; so that some of
them were cast into common Goals, some into Castles and Places of strength,
some into stinking noysom Dungeons, where dogs could not live, being forced to
live at the Discretion and Arbitrament of their Keepers, and exposed for a
ridicule to the basest and meanest of the Vulgar Servants; some were put in
among the profligate and debauched, who had lived in all manner of wickedness
and villainy, and were justly punished for their evil deeds; who yet even then
could not abstain from their perverse and wicked courses, nor refrain from
calumniating and vexing their fellow Prisoners; and lastly, some of them were
banished into so distant Countries from their Wives and Children, and all other
Enjoyments that were dear or comfortable to them; which one Affliction crushed
some of them to Death, being overwhelmed with anguish and sorrow, for the loss
of their endeared consorts. Many of them died by the noisome smell and other
inconveniences of the Prison, or through grief, or being wearied out and
oppressed with long and tedious diseases arising from such causes. Some came
sooner to this unhappy end, some later; but others endowed with more strength
and firmness of Body, wrestled out for a long time. There were some of them set
at liberty, and freed from this insupportable weight of misery, through the
intercession and entreaties of their Friends with the Magistrates, who likewise
were moved with pity and compassion toward them; but were afterward remitted
to their old miserable habitation, not for any new debt or crime, but for that
same they were Imprisoned for before; where they continued till Death
alleviated their sorrows.

Some few years after this, the Quakers divulged all this severe usage to the
World by writings, which they presented to the King and Parliament. In which
they run thorough all the several Countries of the Kingdoms, amassing together
all the instances of the cruelty and barbarity used toward them. But I shall
here content my self with two of their most Remarkable Examples; adding unto
them a third, which tho omitted by them* upon what account I know not) is as
memorable and worthy to be remarked as any. The year that first affords us
these Examples, is the year sixty four. The first is this. There lived a
Blacksmith in a little Village in Hampshire, by name Thomas Penford, who was
Imprisoned at Worcester in the common Goal, by an edict of Excommunication,
because he would not pay three pence for Reparation of the Church; which he
obstinately refused to do; so that after three years and a half Imprisonment he
died in Goal. The next is, Thomas Rennes a Country Farmer, in some little
Village in Oxfordshire, was Imprisoned at Oxford by an Edict of
Excommunication, for not paying the Tithes, which he was avers^ to do. While he
was detained Captive, the Minister goes and seizes on his Horses; which were
much more valuable than the sum he wanted; yet the poor Man continued in
Prison a long time, and ends his days upon the place. The third Example, which
is a Complex and Image (as it were) of all the rest, was after this manner. One
Thomas Dobson lived at a little Village called Brichtnel in Berkshire, where he
maintained himself and his Family very honestly by a Farm he kept, and some
small substance he had scraped together by his labor and diligence. He refused
to pay the Tithes, not that he was so straightened for Money that he could not
make up the sum, but that he could not do it because of the dictates of his
Conscience disallowing the same. There was one Radulph Wistler who bought the
Tithes, and had an Eye for a long time upon this Man's substance, and was fond
of an occasion to terrify the rest from doing the like; he caused this Man to
be haled to Prison, where he smarted for his contumacy by fifteen weeks
Captivity; during which time, and likewise after that Dobson was released, and
returned to his own house, he pillaged and harassed his house and possessions,
taking off his Horses, Kine and other possessions, (which were prized and sold
for his benefit) till he made about forty pounds English. And afterward in the
year sixty six, and sixty seven, when the poor Man was secure, fearing nothing,
he attacks him again, takes from him his Horse, four Kine, and all the Cattle
he had of whatever sort, all the furnishing of his house, and the very beds
they lay upon, so distressing and empoverishing the poor Man, that he and his
Family scarce had wherewithal to cloth themselves. But some time after, when
he had almost overcome this disafter, having purchased two kine which gave
Milk, out of which, and the cheese made of it, he sustained his Family without
any other food; the Minister of the Parish Church (whose name I choose rather
to conceal) pursues him with an Edict of Excommunication, insomuch that not
only this small remnant he had for maintenance of his family was taken from
him, but himself, thus poor and empty, was cast into Prison; which was done in
the same year, from which time he remained captive till the year Seventy two;
when he was set at liberty by the King's special Command; at length having
returned to his former dwelling place, and beginning to improve his small
fortune a little by laboring the ground, and diligent working, this same
Tithe-master I have already named, so well versed in his exactory Discipline,
that no office of humanity withheld him from the same, falls upon him again,
and takes all the possessions he now enjoyed, leaving him nothing; so that the
value and price of what he took from him, was reckoned to be eighthly pounds
English, which is eight hundred and fifty eight Dutch Gilders. And moreover, to
give a farther instance of his unparalled Barbarity, he caused him to be cast
into Prison in the year seventy five, where he was shut up among Thieves and
Robbers, and those who were not only guilty of such Enormous Crimes, but even
of Whoring and Revelling; the Botches and Exulcerations arising from their
intemperate Venery, being yet running upon their bodies, creating a most
noisome and grievous smell, and all the whole Members of their body being
infected and corrupted with the same. But Dobson's greatest comfort was that he
found in Prison Men of his own Society, who were kept Captive upon the same
account that he was. Sometime after, when one of these miserable pocky
wretches, had rotted unto Death through the Corruption of that blackest and
foulest disease, the Keeper of the Prison (a Man inferior to none for
wickedness and excess of Rudeness and Inhumanity, who dealt so with these
Quakers, his Prisoners, that he showed to the World, that his humor and
constitution was fitted for tormenting mankind) gathered up the straw upon
which this Corrupted and Loathsome carcass was laid, bringing it into that
place where Dobson, with his fellow Quakers, and also the rest of these
flagitive miscreants were thronged up, where he burnt it in a fire, to testify
that burning hatred, and malice against the Quakers, which raged and flamed
within his Breast. And from the flames of this burning straw, there proceeded
such Exhalations and Contagious fumes, that the Quakers were all taken ill of a
most grievous and dangerous disease, which in a short time put a period to the
lives of some of them. Dobson recovered of this Distemper; but continued under
the same miserable Captivity, till the welcome day of his Death, which
happened in the last day of May, in the year of our Lord, one thousand six
hundred seventy and seven.

The Quakers therefore being grieved in soul for this insupportable affliction
of their Brethren, and apprehensive of the like Events about to befall
themselves, could not contain themselves from expressing the Estuations and
Boylings of their incensed Minds, nor restrain their extravagant Tongues and
Pens from complaining and lamenting every where, publishing Books and Writings,
Exaggerating the misery of their Condition, and demonstrating unto the World
what for Men these Evangelical Reformed Protestants (as they called 'em)
Evidenced themselves to be: Those who in ancient. Times cried out against
Persecution for Religion's sake, pretending that none but God had Power to call
their Religion and Conscience to account; and yet in these days are so fierce
and cruel with their own Countrymen upon the same Religious Account, sighting
against them with carnal Weapons, and oppressing them to such an high degree,
that tho they spared their Lives, yet in^licted* Evils far worse than Death it
self, introducing the same Tyranny that was used against the Church o^ Old, but
with a New Face and Name. The Quakers relate, and also some of the Chroniclers
or these Times record, That in the Time of that fatal and bloody Plague which
Raged so severely both in London and many parts of that Realm, the Bishops
besought the King, and boldly counseled him, That in Order to avert and
appease the Weath of God, which then so heavily afflicted them, he would free
and cleanse the Kingdom from that P^st of Quakers, and other Fanatics, the
Banishment and Extirpation of whom would be an acceptable and Propitiatory
Sacrifice for the sins of the Land. But the moderation of the King was too
great to give Ear to such Counsels; for though he would not countenance or
assist these men, yet he was not willing to use such inhumane Cruelty against
them; and accordingly chose rather that the Old Punishment should be continued
against them, than a New One of that Nature take place. This Year, which was so
fatal unto many places, destroying both the Quakers and their Enemies
promisouously, did likewise give the same deadly stroke to Samuel Fisher, whose
Fame among the Quakers, Acuteness of Wit, Learning, and Neat Polite Way of
Writing I have already mentioned. He died in Prison. The Quakers mightily
lamented his Death, being sensible what a great Doctor, and what a Skillful and
dexterous Defender of them and their Religion they had lost. Their Enemies, and
Ministers of the Church, on the contrary, rejoiced and congratulated his Death,
who had given them so much trouble while alive, being educated in the same
Colleges with themselves, and having been one of their own Tribe, taught the
same manner of learning, and invested with the same office, and well acquainted
with all their writings, ^^trigues, methods, and Ecclesiastical Policy; so that
he was more capable to use their own Weapons and Arguments against themselves,
which he did very dexterously. At this same very time they were likewise
bereaved of John Coughen, so famed and renowned among the Quakers, who tho he
was not taken out of the World, yet deserted his Station, and separated himself
from the Society of Quakers. This Man being born in Holland, of English
Parentage, went over into England, where he finished his Philosophical and
Theological course in the University of Cambridge, that Nursery of Learning
which boasts so much of her integrity, that she never emitted any Disciples
that proved corrupt or unsound in Religious matters: He afterward became
Minister to a Church in that Country, being ordained by Reynolds Bishop of
Norwich; but he had not long exercised this function when he made defection to
Quakerism, at the same very time that he was most busy in confirming and
fortifying himself and his hearers, against the influences of that sect. There
was a young Virgin among the Quakers, famed for her dexterity and skill in
Preaching, whom many of the people used to follow. Coughen having understood
that she was to preach in a certain place, goes thither himself in his
Canonical Robes, in order to preserve his hearers from being seduced by her
discourses. But so soon as he came to hear her, he was so moved and affected,
that he not only not opposed her; or her Doctrine, but appeared for its
defense, and spoke publicly for it at that same occasion, and returning home
abandoned his Ecclesiastic habit, joining himself to be a member of their
Society; in which he afterward became a Doctor and Preacher, and was much
caressed and applauded by them. But not long after this he returned to Holland
again, and meeting at Harlem with Edward Richardson, Minister to the English
Church in that place, and discoursing with him about Religion, he was so
influenced by his company that he forsook the Quakers and their Society,
betaking himself to Leyden, when he pursued the study of Medicine. Which where
he had finished he returns to England, and professes that Art of administering
medicine to the sick, sequestrating himself all along from that Society, till
at length some three years thereafter, he attempts to introduce a new Model of
Doctrine and Discipline, (which had been so often endeavored by so many and so
great Men) of obliging all Christians to concentrate in one common faith, and
interpose their interest and power, for reconciling the differences of Religion
amongst all who professed the Name of Christ. All this while Fox was not
Remembered or talked of, except amongst those of his own Profession and Society;
for he had been detained Captive for three successive years together, one half
of that time in Lancashire, and the other half in Yorkshire; he was first
Imprisoned for his frequent Conventicles, and also for refusing his Oath of
fidelity so often as it was required of him. During the whole course of his
Captivity, the Judges ordered and decreed many injurious and rough sentences
against him. The chiefest of his fellow Prisoners was Margaret Fell, whom he
afterward made consort of his marriagebed; both of them were mutually
assistant to each other in all duties of Religion, affording one another such
help and comfort, as people so intimately conjoined both in Friendship and
Religion, generally expect from one another. But after this, he was shut up in
a Dungeon full of filth and nastiness, and standing stagnating water, where he
underwent much misery, being forced sometimes to pass the night without having
whereupon to sup; upon which he was taken very ill, and was now but slowly
recovering his former strength. -- I have already told what havoc that
merciless plague had made, both in London and the Neighboring Countries; But
upon the back of this evil, there succeeded another in the ensuing year, sixty
six, viz. That terrible fire which did not indeed reach the whole Country, but
burned and wasted almost all that noble and populous City of London; so that to
this day all England has not been able to forget it, nor shall succeeding ages
ever obliterate such a dismal^ account of their Remembrance.

Having given you an account of the many hard and miserable conditions of these
Men, I shall now adorn this treatise with some pleasing variety, to divert and
refresh the mind of my Reader, perhaps now wearied with reading; It will not be
amiss therefore to take a view of what the Quakers wrote for these four years,
by way of Prophecy and Prediction, concerning the future State of the Kingdom,
and both these memorable afflictions of the City of London; for such kind of
Histories do much delight and charm the ears of Men; I shall only select those
that are most memorable and worth observation. The predictions of Men do
generally run upon some great and wonderful revolutions and changes; tho they
seldom come to light till the event be past. These people were so certainly
persuaded that some of their faction, had so distinctly and clearly foretold
the future scenes of affairs, and both these Calamities of London, that whoever
misbeliev'd 'em was concluded by them to have shaken off all manner of faith
and belief. A certain Quaker called Serles, a Weaver, in the year one thousand
six hundred and sixty two, saw these words wrote in legible Characters, upon
the Circumference of a Kettle, hanging over the fire; Woe to England for
poisoning of Charles the 2d, Cardinal. I understand Moloch. Twenty Nations with
him. Englands misery comes. The Man being afraid at the sight, calls the
Neighbors to come and see it; who coming, were ravished with admiration to
behold that wonder, which they could not guess from whence it came. The writing
appeared legible for a whole hour together, and then evanish'd on its own
accord. Many of the people, and those of considerable note, who were not
Quakers, attested the verity of this wonder. I my self have seen and read both
the story and the same very words, marked by John Coughen, whom I formerly
mentioned, in his Note-book, that same year; which book was kept in the Closet
of a certain great Man in this Country, from that year till two years after
King Charles's Death; all which time it was kept secret from any other body, so
that no doubt is to be made of the Authentickness of that Annotation. But what
the Quakers would have meant by these words, or that sight, and how they
Accommodated it to the manner of K. Charles's Death, and to the changes of
Religion, and Miseries to come after many years; and how the future event of
things happening about the King Charles's Death, that were told, reported,
known and seen through all England, did agree with these words, is not needful
to be determined in this place. The Quakers affirmed, that one of their
Captives at London, did clearly foretell the pestilence that was to overtake
that City, saying, that in a short time the streets, which then were
replenished with Men, and resorted to by many, should be seen covered with
grass, and wanting Men to tread upon^ them. But I shall not extend this presage
any further, lest I seem to recede from the designed order and brevity of this
treatise. -- This they relate of the fire of London; that there was a Quaker at
Hereford who before the burning of the Town, saw it clearly represented to him
in flames; not when dreaming, but when awake; and a voice from Heaven warned
him to go to London, and make public what he saw. He presently takes his
Horse, and rides thither; and when he came at the Town he discovers his head,
throws away his hat, and having girded up his Breeches, ^he looses all his
other Clothes, and pulls down his stockings. Having put up his Horse, he runs
to a Meeting, or Convention of his own Sect, in the same habit, two days before
these things had happened which he was about to foretell; He enters among them,
with a great commotion of Spirit, and an austere sadned Countenance, and tells
publicly in the Meeting, that it was predicted, and made known to him by the
Spirit, that in two days time London should be all in flames, and that all the
Citizens, lulled up in their secure beds in profound sleep, being awaked at
this terrible accident, and filled with Consternation and terror, should run
naked from their beds and houses, to save their lives, and not know what to
attempt for quenching of the fire. All the people wondered to hear him, taking
him for some prating fool, and ridiculing him and his prophetical Omen. But he
persisted in his asseveration, till at length, when they were expecting no such
accident, and accounting him a madman who went about to frighten people with
his Dreams, the lamentable event gave sufficient testimony to the truth of the
Oracle. And when the whole Town was now all in a fire, he being either too much
puffed up with the inspiration of this accident, which was but too too certain,
or being moved in his Spirit a-fresh, was so confident and presumptuous of his
own Power and Interest, that he would pretend to stop, and let bounds to that
fire he had predicted, running up up and down among the people, crying, That he
would repress the flames, and set Limits to them, beyond which they could not
reach: Then he goes to the Houses all beset with fire, and fixes himself among
them, and would have stood till the fire had consumed him too. The people, when
all their Exhortations and Counsels were in vain, to move him to retire from
the Danger, took him by the middle out of that place, removing him to some
safer station. Afterward he was sensible of his Fool-hardiness and Error, and
acknowledged the same. The Quakers add, That this same man foretold some such
thing of the Town of Hereford, which he had seen in his sleep; but in vain, for
the Event did not fall out as he had predicted. But this did not at all lessen
the Quakers Respect to the Veracity of this Oracle; for they said, such kind of
Variation of Prophecies is often times to be found among the Holy Prophets made
mention of in the Scriptures.

This Double Calamity of the City of London, which not only afflicted that
City, but injected a Fear and Terror into the minds of all men every where in
that Kingdom, so that they were more solicitous about their own Condition, and
the danger they were in, than busy to afflict and oppress others, did not a
little allay the Ardour and Fury of their Minds against the Quakers, at least
for some time.

While these things happened in England, the Quakers were not altogether free
from persecution in Scotland and Ireland; though it was not so hot in the
former as in the latter; for in Scotland there was but a small number of
Quakers in the Kingdom, so that they could not meet and assemble so frequently;
and besides, the Laws Enacted against them were not so many to be violated; and
they themselves did not give their Adversaries so great occasion of resisting
and opposing them: Wherefore if any of them were taken, who persisted boldly
and obstinately in congregating together, or enterpriz'd any forbidden Thing,
they were kept in Prison for a long time to terrify and frighten the rest from
doing the like. They were more numerous in Ireland, and that not in One County
or Two, but throughout the whole Kingdom; where they imitated the English
Quakers, in withdrawing from, neglecting and dispising the Public Ordinances
of the Church, celebrating Conventions and Assemblies among themselves, for
managing their Religious Interest; putting themselves out of the way when
called to pay Tithes, or contribute to the Reparation of Churches, or to give
Oath upon any occasion: Some of them would publicly do profane Work on the
Festival Holy Days; some run into the Churches, and Disturb the Sermons and
Prayers with their idle and bold Harangues: others stand in the Streets and
Marketplaces, exhorting People to Repentance, disparaging all their Actions,
and extolling their own; filling the Air with foolish and impertinent
Discourses. For which Reasons they were no less persecuted in this Kingdom than
in England, severe Penalties and Fines being indicted against them all, which
if they refused to pay (as they all did) they were cast into Prison, and so
hardly Treated, that some of 'em died of Sickness and Diseases contracted in
Prison.

In some places the people opposed their keeping Conventicles together,
Dragging them out of their Houses, Pursuing them in the Fields, apprehending
and imprisoning them and if they were assembled, they broke into the Houses by
Force, smiting and beating them; and stripping their very Clothes from off
their cacks. All this was done unto them in some plac^s by the Mob, and Refuse
of the People, and Vagabond Soldiers, (next akin to Robbers) who were clothed
with no other Authority but that of their Hands and Swords. Which was also
connived at by their Commanders and Masters, who not only suffered these
Outrages to be committed, but sometimes they themselves did things inconsistent
with the Dignity and Gravity of their Station; For if at any time the Quakers
spoke more boldly to them in Public Places, or when irritated, gave them Tart
Answers, they would presently set upon them, all in a Body, (for Revenge admits
of no Delay) branding them with the ignominious Titles of a cursed impious
Crew; Nay, Kaining and beating them soundly. And even among the Ministers of
the Churches, there were some, who not contenting themselves to have
Excommunicated them from their Society, delivered them up to the Judges to be
further prosecuted and punished. The only Moderation and Meekness used toward
them was by the Parliament.

I have already told, in the beginning of this book, what advantage and
improvement redouned to the Doctrine and Religion of the Quakers, by the
Diligence and activity of George Keith and Robert Barcley, who were more than
ordinarily Instrumental in advancing the Interest of that Society. And now
because the scope and design of this Treatise is to give a view of what are the
Opinions these men maintain, and so Religiously observe; and by what Authors,
and after what manner they were first invented and Published, for the Defense
of which they have undergone so many Miseries and Dangers; I shall here show
how that the Chief Cardinal Doctrines of these Men, which are Fundamental to
all the rest, were after this time taken into task by George Keith; and in
various Writings, partly handled and expressed more distinctly and politely,
partly changed and represented after the Image of the Idea's of the Ancient
Philosophers, not in that new Dress which the Quakers at first affected;
designing afterward to give account of George Barcley in his own time and
place.

Keith first applied his Mind to Write in the year Sixty Five, and continued in
that exercise for many years; all his writings were originally in English,
except some few sheets. He having observed that the Quakers wrote but very
obscurely and perplexedly, of that Divine light which is in every Man, and of
Christ dwelling in him, which they place for the principle and foundation of
all their Religion and Doctrine; and being a Man of a subtle and acute Wit,
has accurately represented, what they had but rudely and lamely begun,
concerning that Doctrine; displaying it in this manner: God has given a light
unto every Man, which he placed within him; Which cannot be the mind, or humane
reason; for that is innate, whereas the light is adventitious and given to him
from without, to command and govern his Reason. This same light is the Seed of
God, or Instrument whereby Men fallen and corrupted through sin, are born again
of God. And this is a substance, a part of that invisible and spiritual
substance of Jesus Christ the Son of God, that divine, invisible, spiritual and
heavenly Man. For Christ is so the Son of God, that he is made to be such a Man
by a Divine virtue proceeding from God. So Christ, and by him God dwells, and
is implanted in every Man, nay, in every Creature. But since Men have made
defection from God, corrupting and depraving themselves altogether, Christ and
God is dead, and extinguished in them; but not totally; So that Christ being
moved with pity and compassion toward Men, and remaining in some measure
within them, does so help and assist their miserable impotency, that he moves
from within, incites, and admonishes every Man, that they would give ear to and
follow Christ, their light; and that laying aside their wicked manners and evil
opinions, they would submit themselves to Christ, embracing and adhering to
him, thus expecting his divine virtue within them; proposing him for their
guide and conducter in going about duties, and maintaining the same, imitating
him in every thing as their Master. Which if they do, Christ revives and lives
within them, establishing and renewing an Union and Communion with them, and
becoming righteousness and salvation unto them. So Christ becomes meat,
heavenly and spiritual food unto Men. And thus in all Ages, the Godly did eat
the flesh and drink the Blood of Christ. And so indeed Christ is in the
ungodly, tho hiddenly, and as if he were quite away; from whence it is that the
Scriptures sometimes say, that Christ is not in them. But he is so far within
them, that when they are selling and enslavening themselves to sin, he suffers
and is afflicted by the same; and through the infamy and piercing of his own
Body, which ensues from this their wickedness, he is oppressed with grief and
anguish, as if he were again fastened to the Cross. This Christ is to be adored
and worshipped, as being that Divine, heavenly and spiritual Man, not as being
an External Man born of Mary. This opinion of Keith concerning these Articles,
was first invented and published to the World by Men of no good Name, (which
Keith was not ignorant of) Heretics, and such as were addicted to the Schools,
and Discipline of the Gentile Philosophers, especially the Platonicks; but it
was only scattered here and there, by parcels in their writings, not Collected
into one entire system till in the last Century, William Postell, a Frenchman,
published it openly in the same entire form that Keith has done, (tho I have
certainly informed my self that Keith knew nothing of it) in a particular book
set out on that occasion; but it was accounted so foolish and silly by the
Learned World, that none of them thought it worth their while to write against,
or confute him and his writings. And these were the positions so long invented
and retained before Keith, that this same Keith was advancing and proposing in
several books wrote by him, vindicating them from what objections were either
obvious to himself, or moved to him by others. But he took care that these his
books, should be Printed without the knowledge, or advice of those of his own
Society; and therefore sent them to Holland to be Printed, lest any of the
English should come to know it. Now there being two principal parts of this
Keithian Doctrine; the first concerning the presence of God and Christ, not
only in Men, but in all his Creatures; the second concerning the indwelling and
operation of Christ within Men; there was none found among all the initiatory
Apostles of this Society, who either maintained, taught, or publicly mentioned
that former branch of his Doctrine. Yet none of the Quakers wrote against him,
neither did those who assembled among themselves, upon such like occasions,
condemn that principle, being tender of his name and fame, and judging it
reasonable, that this one error should be past over in silence, because of his
other good Endowments and Accomplishments. But as to the latter part of his
sentiments, there was none among all those who professed themselves Quakers,
that did not embrace it for his own opinion, subscribing to it as the singular
and peculiar Doctrine of their Church; except some few insignificant thick
scull'd fellows, that lived in some remote and hidden Corner of the other
Western World. There was yet another Tenet which Keith was not averse to, but
he was unwilling to obtrude it upon any, for that those of that Society did not
desire it should be received or entertained, for their common Principle; it was
that of the perpetuity of Souls, and of their Transmigration and Variation
through several bodies; which proceeded at first from Empedocles, Pythagoras
and Plato; and was afterward variously trimmed and furbish'd about some
hundred years ago, by those prattling Jewish Masters, called Rabbius, who not
only tell but write when awake, whatever they have dreamed upon that subject
while asleep; particularly by R. Jitzhakus Loriensis, in a tractate wrote in
Hebrew; and in these our days is revived by Baron van Helmont, who has decked
it with all the necessary Ornaments fit to procure it Reception; an Author
famous for the splendor of his Nobility, and his insatiable desires after
Knowledge and Learning, which he accounted the most comely and laudable
Enjoyments he could be Master of; who because he lives well and has not
whereupon, is deemed by his friends to have found out the Philosophers Stone.
This Man living in England at that time, conversing among the Quakers as one of
their Society, had occasion frequently to converse with a Noble Countess, that
was a great admirer of Knowledge and Learning, and to reason with her out of
the Book of Plato, concerning this Platonical Doctrine, and came that length
with her, that both he and she embraced the same opinion for a truth; and
because Keith was oftimes present at their Conferences, they bring him in also
to take share in the same opinion.

Which being made known to the Quakers, Helmont, who was a stiff Defender of
his own Opinions, which they looked upon, some of them, as Dangerous
Innovations; others, as foolish Errors, and Distracted Notions, became
suspected and hated by them; upon which he bids farewell to them, and all their
Society, proceeding not only to Vindicate his Opinion, but because he thought
it yet rude and unpolished, to refine and adorn the same, instructing himself
again and again out of the Jewish Writings, of what might be serviceable to his
Design, digesting his Thoughts into this Form, which I give you a Draught of in
as few words as possibly I may:

Before the Souls are united to their Bodies, they exist in another World;
after they are united to the Bodies, each of them has its day of the Divine
Visitation, after One Thousand Years, given to it for this End, that by
absolute Holiness and Sanctification, it may prepare for Eternal Felicity; But
if it abuse the Goodness of God, that it may expect to be condemned to that
long and terrible Punishment which God has prepared for them at the expiring
of this their set Time. But this Space of a Thousand Years is not continued and
undivided, but distinguished and circumscribed by Twelve Revolutions or
Circnits of the Soul into the same Body, except unto some of the Saints who are
purged and sanctified enough in the first or second Cireuit. And these Returns
happen after Three Hundred Thirty Three Years and Four Months. But while they
are out of the Body, they do not advance or proceed in Piety; therefore if they
be good, it goes well with them; if ill, they fare the worse. Those Souls which
before the Death of Christ were translated from this Life, and were not saved,
when they return to their Bodies, may obtain Salvation through the Gospel of
Christ. But those since the Death of Christ, to the End of the World, that have
not heard of the Gospel, shall return again to their Bodies, all at one time,
and in one place, and then shall hear with their Ears the Tidings of the
Gospel, and obtain Salvation, if they believe. After that the Saints return to
the Earth, the First Resurrection shall be, and all the Saints shall live upon
Earth a Thousand Years without any Sin, even as Adam in the State of Innocence;
and after the Example of Adam, they shall be born of Virgins, being begot of
God their Father. Then the Second Resurrection shall follow, when the Saints
shall, after the Example of Christ the Second Adam, be made perfect, and
consummated in their Heavenly Bodies. And lastly, The Felicity and Bliss of the
Godly shall be Eternal, but the Punishment of the Wicked shall be Finite, and
at length terminate in an End.

But I return to Keith. I am firmly persuaded that Keith receives, and
entertains these Positions, if not all, yet at least the chiefest and most
material of them; though he would not discover his Mind, in these Points, unto
any, save those that are his Secretaries and Trustees, or that seem a little
wiser than the rest. But he is not the only Favorite of these Doctrines; there
be others among them that are as fond of them as he, tho very few; so that they
are far from being universally received by all the Society. Nay, the Quakers
shall not long tolerate any Abertors of such Principles to continue of their
Society, if it be true, what I have oftimes heard from some of their principal
Members. I have taken occasion to express my self more largely upon this point,
not only for sake of the Quakers, but also of those who when they hear, or read
of these propositions, and the books that treat of the same (as not a few are
curious to do) are ignorant what is the original and beginning of these
opinions, and thus are ready to Judge of the whole matter amiss.

After this time, William Penn joined himself to the Society of the Quakers,
who after his fathers Death becaine Governor of Pensilvania; a Man famous all
over England, and renowned even among foreigners, that are not quite ignorant
of the English affairs; by whose accession to that party, counsel, assistance,
diligence and activity, the interest of the Quakers was much enlarged and
amplified; not indeed all of a sudden, but by degrees; It shall not therefore
be improper, according to my method of describing these great Men, which we
have followed from the beginning, to subjoyn an account of the occasion and
manner of his Conversion to this Religion, his Love and Zeal for it; and of his
Wit and Conversation. William Penn, his father was Vice Admiral to the English
Navy, a prudent and grave Man, who behaved himself so, in the midst of the
Distractions and Dissensions in the Government, that according to the Divine
Religion he was faithful and honest to his Neighbor. This father having
designed his Son (who was not born to him but to his Country, and to the
Commonwealth) for some public Remarkable Station in managing public
concerns, not for being merely intent upon raising and increasing his private
fortune, took care to have him well instructed in all Divine and humane
Offices, and sent him afterward to the University of Oxford, that among the
rest of the young Gentlemen of that place, he might exercise his mind with the
study of Learning and liberal Arts. Then afterward he went to France, and
staying sometime at Paris, appeared frequently at the French Court. At this
time being yet very young, he gave great testimony both of his stoutness and
continency, defending his Life boldly from the assault of an Enemy and a
Fencer, who sought to slay him, but withal sparing the Life of this his
Adversary, when it was in his power to have killed him. Having returned to his
own Country he went into Ireland, where he heard many things of the Quakers;
and not being altogether an Enemy to their Doctrines and Conversations, he
freequented their Meetings. This was the year sixty six, and of his Age twenty
two, It happened that when he was present at their Meeting, the Magistrate of
the place came and took both him, and the rest of the company Prisoners. But he
was so far from being frightened by this sudden and unexpected accident, or
from being tempted to withdraw from their party and profession, that even in
Prison he applied his mind more eagerly to their opinions, after having
understood of them more fully what were the peculiar properties of these Men,
either in Doctrine of Conversation. The father was ravished with Admiration,
and not a little angry at his Son (who was the only hope and comfort of his
parents, and who on the other hand paid the greatest respect and reverence to
them, imaginable) who was thus become the disgrace of his family for ever, and
the reproach of all his kindred; and expressed his violent and severe
resentment both in words and deeds; and when after all he saw it impossible to
reclaim him, he discharged him his house, threatening to disinherit him. Unto
this his fathers anger were added the reproaches, revilings, and enmity of his
fathers Domestics, and his ancient Companions both at Court and else where,
with whom he was Educated, and had Conversed much before, and also of the
Ecclesiastics, who formerly rendered him all manner of Love and Friendship.
Unto all which disadvantages Penn opposed this one remedy; the integrity of his
Life, as opposite to the ill reports that were scattered abroad of him; and the
constancy of his mind and body, to counterballance that weight of afflictions
that surrounded him. And by these two properties he brought his affairs to that
pass, that his father not only received him into favor again, and became as
fond of, and kind to him, as ever he had been disgusted at him, comforting and
refreshing his afflicted and humbled Son; but also in his Will left him heir of
all his Riches and Enjoyments, encouraging and commending his singular piety
and fortitude of mind, exhorting him to persist in the same. Moreover, when the
father observed what heaps of envy and hatred his Son had drawn upon himself,
what evils were yet impending upon him, and what difficulties he might come to
grapple with; he, when lying upon a bed of sickness, and looking for certain
death, sent to the Duke of York. High Admiral, who (as Penn was by place next
to him) was in dignity next to the King himself; and if he survived his
brother, would undoubtedly, succeed him since destitute of a lawful offspring;
he sends, I say, some of his Friends to this Duke, to desire of him in his
Name, that he would recommend his Son to his brother the King, and that he
himself would preserve and defend him (who had already suffered so much) from
what persecutions and oppressions might attend him; and unto which both he and
all the train of his Associates were so subject to. Which both the Duke and his
Royal Brother the King granted him, because of his great merits toward his
Country; tho they could not so defend his Son always, as to prevent his
Imprisonment at sometimes. But it is not here to be omitted, that Penn, the
father, lying upon his Deathbed, and when drawing near to his last exit, which
he certainly knew to approach, took leave of his Son in these his last words;
My Son, remember to serve God the Omnipotent King, so constantly, and to prefer
the same to the service of Earthly Kings, and all things besides. Which if ye
do, and if you and your Friends persevere in your simple and innocent way of
preaching and living, verily ye shall make an end of all the preachers to the
end of the World. Which words of the dying old Man do not obscurely insinuate
what his opinion was of these Men, and how great affection he had for their
sect. Now as to what was the Wit and Spirit of William Penn (the son) from his
youth, what promptness and dexterity of discoursing attended the acuteness of
his wit, what knowledge of Tongues (such as are usual among the Learned) and of
things, what Temper and Conversation of life he was of; I had rather the
Quakers, or any body else, should give you an account than I. For I know well
how difficult and troublesome it is, for any Man to interpose his Judgment of a
matter, in which the Judgments of other Men are so various. But certainly, tho
my pen were silent of him, his own Writings will speak him forth to be the most
eminent member of all that Society; for while in his Writings he studies to
Accommodate all to the capacity and understanding of the Vulgar, yet the
variety and abundance of things therein contained, his language and style,
especially the gravity of words and sentences, which when he writes of
Theological subjects, are connected and intermixed with whole chains of
quotations, from the Holy Scriptures, do so evidently testify of him; that
unless one be maliciously envious of the virtue and praise of another, he must
acknowledge that he is an eloquent and well spoken Author. The Quakers fed
themselves with so great hopes of him, that presently they allowed him to do
the part of a teacher among them; and their esteem of him was so great that
they did not doubt to call him the perfectest of them all. Nor is there any
among them, who does not acknowledge that there was always an exact consension,
and agreement betwixt him and all the rest of the Quakers, about all the
Articles of their Religion. This was singular in him, that he always esteemed
more slightly of these things, which pertain to the knowledge and speculation
of sacred and divine matters; and chiefly opposed himself to the forcing and
constraining Men's Consciences to any Religion, or persecuting them upon a
religious account (than which indeed there can be no greater cruelty and
oppression used) pleading for a toleration and liberty to all Religions; so
that he would not only have the Quakers tolerated the exercise of their
Religion, but likewise all Men at least that are accounted Christians) to be
admitted to places of Authority and trust in the Government; not excepting the
Socinians with their wanton little tricks; nay, nor the Papists, a people so
inveterate against that his Religion, and all other Religions different from
their own; so bloody, cruel, and thirsty of Christian blood, that when they
have exerted their utmost and cruellest efforts, are yet never satiated. And
Penn was so sensible of the ill demerits of these Men, and so well acquainted
with their temper, that he used to say, That the Quakers had reason to fear
none so much as the Socinians and Papists, who would be last of all in the
field against them, tho they had vanquished all other Religions. It seems Penn
had a design to show himself an Abettor of all Religions whatsoever, or to
encourage that opinion of him, which then possessed every Man's mind, that he
was deceitful, and in his heart a Socinian, or (as others believed) that he was
a Papist, and not only so but a Jesuit: The Quakers did not agree with Penn,
about these Libertine Principles. His notions of the Christian faith was, that
in order to the maintaining of that, there was no more necessary than in
general to believe the Scriptures, and love them as the word of God; and
believe all the fundamental Articles contained in the same. By these
fundamental Articles (a term much in use among Divines) he understood such
propositions, as are expressly and in explicit terms delivered in the
Scriptures; or so evidently attested by them, that all Men who are honest and
sincere-minded, cannot but discern and comprehend the meaning of them. Which
being laid down for a Principle, he thought that whoever gave due respect and
reverence to the Scriptures, and acknowledged Jesus Christ for the Savior of
the World, might be truly accounted a Christian; and that all such Christians
both may, and should agree and write among themselves.

For which end he Recommended to all Christians, to write a general Confession
of their common faith, consisting only of some few general, necessary and plain
truths delivered in Scripture terms; but it is easy for any Man to Conjecture
what effect such a proposal would have had. Moreover, he reasoned further after
this manner; that the most part of Christians that imagined to themselves, that
they knew any thing, bended all their faculties only upon the Speculation and
Contemplation of what they knew; whereas a speculative life is not so becoming
and necessary for a Christian, as an active and practical life is, and that all
manner of knowledge is but a mere shadow that does not tend to action, a
solitary and wandering Planet, that produces no fruit for the good of the
public. Where he chiefly applied himself to the study of such Sciences as
treat of the manners of Men, what vices are to be eschew'd, and what duties
toward God and Man are incumbent upon us; and approved mightily the practice
of the ancient Christian in the first Ages after Christ, who made moral
Philosophers teachers and Masters to their Christians youths; and who accounted
none fit to be a Doctor among them, who was not instructed in the Philosophy of
the Gentiles, as being the best rule and method of living. He was very
serviceable to the Quakers by his Writings; being fitted and well accomplished
for that work by his acute Wit, and eloquent Pen; and also able to serve their
interest, because of his riches and affluence of fortune, together with his
favor and weight with the King; and as he was able, so he was very willing,
frequenting the company of the Quakers continually, laboring by all means to
advance their cause, defending it from all opposition and injury, demeaning
himself so forwardly, that he seemed more Sollicitous for them, than for
himself; but withal not forgetting to plead for the liberty and admission to
public offices, of other Sectaries, especially the Papists, insomuch that he
was suspected to be one of their Gang, and at last came to be envied and hated
by the Quakers on that account. But he was so bent and eager for this liberty
of Conscience, that he would have none professing the Name of Christ excluded
from the same; But of this I shall have occasion to speak more appositely
afterward.

When at this time the Adversaries of the Quakers relented and slackened their
persecution against them, the Quakers took occasion not only to assemble and
congregate more frequently and publicly, but to prepare and amass all things
necessary or conducive to their mutual help and establishment, or to the
Ornament and Splendour of their Churches. From that time they introduced a new
and more acurate Economy, Partition and Administration of all their affairs;
keeping some order among their Ministers, who likewise had their Meetings and
mutual Congresses; and began now to be orderly called and prepared for that
work; they introduced also a form of discipline for censure of Actions, and a
certain Solemnity for confirmation of Matrimony. The manner and form of all
which, is not so easily to be Learned from their Writings, which do not touch
upon these things, as from their own discourses and converse, for they do not
use to conceal any of these matters, especially if they be seriously and
gravely asked, without any suspicion of a design. These Men did always object
to the Protestants in England, and elsewhere, the Hierarchy of their Church
(accounting it a most vicious and sinistrous order) or the ordinary distinction
of persons, and distribution of Offices in the Church; particularly the
excellency and jurisdiction of some Persons, and the variety of Government and
Administration thorough so many degrees of places and dignity; for they
imagined the Church to be all one body, of which each particular Member has its
Office allotted to it, in defending and edifying the Church, according as they
are capable to be useful either to the public, or their Neighbor; pretending,
that since no gifts are given by God in vain, or which do not produce their
proper Fruit, there be as many Offices in the Church as he has given gifts;
even as in the humane body all the Members bear some proportion in advancing
the good of the whole, so it is in the Church; in which nothing of Government
or Authority is to be used, but only Ministry and Mutual service for the good
of the whole. So from that time the Quakers were of these thoughts; which they
maintain to this day; acknowledging an Association and Community, and also
direction and administration in the Church; desiring that those who excel
others in Wisdom and Virtue, should be had in greater respect and esteem, and
be accounted preferable to others in order and function; So that among them
whoever of either Sex, is eminent for Ingenuity and Goodness, excels in Dignity
and Office. They have also some who constantly addict themselves to the
Ministry of Preaching the Gospel. Those they call Ministers, or by a joint kind
of Speech, they say they are in the Ministry. Some of these Ministers do not
confine themselves to one place, but range up and down, trying what new
Proselytes they can gain, or designing to oversee and confirm those that are
already incorporated into that Society. These are as Apostles to the Sect,
others fix their abode at one place, and watch over their particular flock as
pastors. There be women also that follow the Example of the Men. It shall
therefore suffice to have given caution in this place, that whatever we have
said, or are about to say further concerning the Males of that Sect, is to be
understood according to that Regula juris, which comprehends the feminine Sex
under the masculine. Next unto the Ministers are the Presbyters or Elders, who
exceed the rest, as in Age and Experience, so in Wisdom. These take counsel
together with the Ministers for managing all their Religious concerns; who
together with them, or with others eminent for prudence and wisdom, are
carefully to observe all accidents that may fall out in the Church, and to see
that all things therein proceed right; as, if any make defection from their
faith, or commit an open manifest sin, or be suspected of any crime, or have
done any thing culpable against his Neighbor; if any thing be wanting for the
promotion of unity, concord, and peace among themselves; they presently come to
rectify it, or else send those they repose trust and Confidence in, to do all
that is necessary for advancing the good desired, or removing the evil that
incumbers them. Their office is likewise to visit the poor and needy, and
relieve their necessities; also to take care of those who conceal and are
ashamed to own their poverty; of the Orphans, widows, old people, the
afflicted and miserable, and the sick; unto whom they are to afford what is
necessary for their sustenance and relief; for which end the Quakers say, they
make Contributions of Money, putting it into chests, and distributing it as
they have occasion; These Men are also to allot every one their particular
offices and functions, which they are severally and distinctly to perform.
Stephen Crisp wrote a monitory Epistle, to all Churches concerning these
offices, which is very well worth any Man's reading. All the Quakers when asked
about these matters, do mightily extol and magnify the diligence, liberality,
and bounty of their Associates one to another. However, these Elders and the
Ministers, do frequently conv^^n among themselves, for deliberating about the
affairs of their Sect, and the necessities of their Church; which Conventions
are somewhat like, to what the English and Dutch call Presbyteries and Synods,
and the French, Consistories. There were of them in Holland, who, because no
Society could be laudable and permanent without Government and Laws, proposed
to have an Ecclesiastical senate constituted in every Church, consisting of the
ancient Elderly Men and such as were married (excluding Batchellours) who
should have the Government lodged in their hands, and order every thing
according to certain Rules and Laws, laid down by them. But others opposed it,
pretending that it would introduce a new Hierarchy, and interrupt their
Community, and restrain and suppress the gifts of the Spirit. They have
likewise Meetings like to those we call Classes, and provincial and national
Synods, or Councils. These conventions are Celebrated oftener or Seldomer, as
the number and variety of their Churches is; but so as to Allot each Sex (Men
and Women) their distinct and particular Meetings. Wherefore if the Churches be
more numerous or large, the Seniors or Elders with the Ministers meet
frequently, chiefly on the first days of the weeks, and also on other days, at
which time, after having Communicated their thoughts one to another, they
confer and consult together what is to be every Man's task, what part of the
charge he is to undertake, and what is incumbent upon him to do. Other Meetings
are appointed every fourth week, in which they deliberate of the affairs common
to the Church. Others every three months in which they consider of their
provincial affairs, and such as are remitted to them by appeal. In these they
inspect into, and Recognize all Books that are Printed, after they have been
perused and approved by the Censors appointed for that purpose. The Acts of
these assemblies are put into Registers, of which some are very curiously and
Elegantly done. They have Anniversary Synods in every considerable Kingdom, to
whom belongs the care and administration of all the affairs of that Kingdom. In
England, they have a fixed Anniversary Synod, on the 3d. day of Pentecost
according to the English calculation; which they pitched upon, not out of any
superstition, (for they are as averse and estranged from Religious observation
of days, as any people in the World) but that the time might be determined, and
every one have sufficient information of the same. This Synod continues sitting
for three or four days only, unless some extraordinary business be tabled
before them, which requires much debate, and is hard to be decided, as it
happened in the year ninety four, in the case of Keith, when it fate whole
twelve days together. Delegates also come to this Synod from the Churches in
all other Countries, or places where the Quakers obtain any footing; but these
must be such as are in the Ministry. At their first Meeting together, liberty
is given for all manner of people to come in and be present, which time is
spent in Preaching, Praying, and Thanksgiving. After which the Delegates retire
all into one room. They have no president to their Meeting, which place (they
say) is supplied by the Holy Ghost; but they have a Clerk who marks down every
thing, that is moved before the Assembly. It would be tedious and needless here
to insert any further account of their Councils; for there be stories enough
flying about of them; only I shall here remark what are the subjects mostly
treated of by them, when thus solemnly conveen'd. They take into consideration,
all that may pertain to the general good of all the Churches. They lay before
the whole assembly the State of every particular Church, especially if there be
any thing memorable, or worthy their consideration. They make a Catalogue of
the sufferers for Religion; describing what their sufferings were, or for what
causes they were inflicted. They examine all singular or rare events and
accidents. They decide all Controversies and Differences. They enquire into the
Lives and Conversations of their Ministers; and check those who perform their
tasks negligently or remissly; or who through officiousness and impertinency
affect to be Ministers of the word, forsaking the offices that become them
better, and are more indispensably required at their hands than this, which
they usurp to themselves without invitation or call, running up and down as
invested with this pretended function, and turning it to their private lucre
and gain. They admonish and exhort one another, to be careful and diligent in
the tasks alloted them, and to conform themselves to the dignity and gravity of
their respective offices. They settle a standard for these things, which relate
to Domestic cares of Christians in their Families, especially to the education
of Children; endeavoring and exhorting by all means to be aware of these two
destructive Evils, which are more Consequential than all others, viz. Indulging
their Children too great liberty, and decking and adorning their bodies too
gaudily; lest by so doing they occasion sin, and contract infamy to themselves.
They take care also for the redemption of Captives, and relief of the poor
(such of them as are known to be well and virtuously disposed) and consult of
many other things, for giving mutual assistance to one another. When the Synod
is dismissed, all their Acts and Decisions are enregistred by the public
Authority of the Synod; which are afterward copied from the Records, and
Printed, in order to be sent to all the Synods of their Associates throughout
the World, or to any particular Country Associated with them; of which Prints I
have several Examples by me.

As not a few before in England, so the Quakers did always invey against the
Liturgy (which was laid aside, in Cromwell's, a directory being substituted in
its place, and again restored in K. Charles's Reign) as stuffed with the
fopperies of Popish Darkness, superstitious and ill placed Lessons and Prayers,
Ornaments, Dresses, bodily Actions and Gestures, and many rites of observing
holy days. These the Quakers did vigorously oppose preferring the simple
Exercises in their Meetings. When they meet, after a long silence, and quiet
Recollecting of their thoughts, they make it their whole care and business,
earnestly to wait for the coming of the Spirit, till at length they be moved or
stirred up to hold forth; and then they pray, preach, or sing, according to the
Spirit's sudden impulse. In like manner the rest sits still to hear. For while
they stay in the place where they worship, bending their thoughts inwardly with
regard to the Spirit, they look what he does or Dictates within, and where they
perceive the speaker to be, thither they direct their minds and attentions,
searching themselves, they bring all home to their own Conscience; And thus
while the Spirit delays his coming, each of 'em prays inwardly unto God for
himself; sighing and groaning now and then deeply, for great striving, and
contrary affections. They sometimes move themselves, or are moved so far, as
issues in a great trembling of the body, not only of some but of most or all of
'em. This, it is said, does often fall out by the resistance of (...) secret
insinuations. I was told by one worthy to be believed, at a certain time they
fell all so a trembling, he himself being one, that the place was shaken as
'twere with an Earthquake. If it happen that none of 'em obtain the presence
of the Spirit, when he is not pleased to move 'em to speak, they sometimes all
go away as they came, without uttering a word among 'em. But even then they
say, they lose not their labor, for every one carries away some advantage for
himself, and while one prays for another, thence also some profit does result
to the rest; yea, while they pray for them who come only to look on, laugh,
sport, or scoff, they say, such receive a wonderful virtue; to better their
Life, and hasten their Conversion. Thus they do in their common and public
exercises: They worship God by praying, praising or preaching, according to the
various Agitation of the Spirit. Sometimes they worship in all three kinds; not
promiscuously, but one by one, unless it happen they sing all together. But
their chief and solemn exercise is the preaching of the word. This principally
consists in proposing a certain theme for Edification, or exhortation to some
duty. And because they think, the power of the preacher is not placed in words,
or bodily motions (unless the composure of his Voice and Countenance, be
suitably managed with simplicity and gravity) but only in the worth or weight
of things; they affect not form, or Method taken from Rules of Art, but make
use of plain and obvious words; not intending to gratify the itching of the
Ear, but to express the interior feeling of the Soul, and make an Impression
upon the hearer's mind, with an active Air not of gesture, but of face and
utterance. They sharply censure Theologues for becoming Ethologues or Mimicks,
whose Eloquence does wholly consist in Gesticulation. Their prayers are mostly
doleful Lamentations, the lower they be, they esteem 'em more dutiful. They
sing and praise, not by a regular pronunciation of words, or musical Melody,
far less by the Numbers of meter or verse (which sort of singing is never
lawful with them, but when one of 'em has an extemporary faculty to compose)
but in the collision, sound, and stretching of the voice, almost as the
Spaniards, or Moors in Afric, if you have ever heard 'em, as I have 'em both,
frequently singing in their own Countries. And thus not only one or two, but
all that are present do sing with a sweet and pleasant voice. In such exercises
the Ministers are the most frequent and chief Actors; tho none of the rest are
excluded but those that are foolish, troublesome, or strangers. They don't only
take heed what any of 'em says, but also what forms or words he uses. As many
if not all things among 'em are singular, so they agree to no other Communion
but their own^; hence if a Cunning or Insnaring mocker come in, and begin to
ape their discourse or carriage, with their words and looks they mark him as a
scoffer, and then forbids him or else thrusts him out. And this is their
public worship. In private they spend much time and pains in meditating,
praying, reading, especially the word of God, in teaching their Servants, and
Children, both in those Arts and Manners that concern civil Society; and also
in the worship of God, and Christian Conversation, with a lively instruction,
which they call Catechizing, to which use they have books very properly
adapted. Moreover, it is also their custom in their houses, never to express a
Religious duty with an outward voice, as praying to God, craving his blessing,
e're they take meat, or go to bed, till they feel the excitation or impulsion
of the Spirit; while they want this, they are content to think with themselves,
what they esteem convenient and agreeable, and talk silently with their own
mind, without External or vocal expression. From whence arises the mistake of
some, and malicious calumny of others, that the Quakers never pray unto God,
but like beasts rush upon every thing inconsiderately. Which they would bear
more patiently, came it only from the Rabble that is ready to swallow up the
belief of any thing; and not from a seeming better sort of Men, that pretend to
digest, speak, or write nothing but what they have put to the touchstone for
Confirmation.

Tho they are greatly devoted to the Public Worship of God, yet they are very
averse to all Superstition, which none but the unfortunate, unwise or
irreligious do ordinarily pursue: Thus they often meet for the service of God:
For that they have their Houses in some places very fair and large. Out of these
now you will seldom hear 'em disputing or discoursing with others, of those
things they are willing to teach concerning their Religion, or Duties of
Christians; though formerly in the Streets, Markets, and other's Churches, they
forbore not to declaim their petty preachings. When I asked the Cause of their
discontinuing that practice, the same Necessity and Occasion remaining, they
gave no other Answer than, That it is not now the Holy Ghost's Will. They agree
with some Protestants, in owning no Holy Days, but they disagree in this a
little, wherein some Protestants also herd with 'em, being displeased that the
First Day of the Week is observed, which from our Lord Jesus Christ we call the
Lord's Day, and that by the Force of the Fourth Command. They indeed
acknowledge it very necessary, that a time be set a part for assembling to
worship God in public, and that then Christians should refrain from working,
and that the Lord's day is very proper for that purpose; wherein the Apostles
and Primitive Christians met in one place. Therefore on this and other days,
they have public Meetings as occasion offers. In great and Populous Cities, as
London they often assemble almost every other day, and that with such a
confluence of people, that when there cannot so many be crowded together, so as
one may have way for another to get out, some of 'em in the throng are taken
with a ^unting; but by vinegar, they have for that use, are refreshed and
restored: This gave rise to that pleasant story, which, as every rumor, taken
from an ill resented Action of some one of 'em, overspreads the Minds and
Discourses of all, that the Quakers, at their Meeting have a bottle of liquor,
which whoever drinks of, is immediately made Quaker, As these with many other
unquiet Men, did most bitterly Tax some Protestant practices, as preparing
Licensing, ordaining and maintaining of Ministers, so of late they have begun to
jangle among themselves, and more and more draw one another to their contrary
Injunctions: On these they now more eagerly insist. They were, and as yet are
greatly offended, that those, who aim at a sacred function, should be formed
and imbellish'd with those previous studies. whereby they gradually arrive at
that province. And thus they reproach Parents and Friends, who devote Children
to the Ministry from their tender years, as if they were designed for some
Trade, Traffic, or civil business, that they may exercise themselves in the
Employment for a Livelihood, so that the office, Religion, Faith and Piety, are
made matter of, and not preferred to their gain; that Children should be thus
educated for offices of this Nature, and delivered to the tutelage of teachers,
however they be inclined, or whatever Spirit they be led by, tho they do
nothing but commanded and constrained, while as in other occupations, we
consider what a Child's Genius prompts him to, and our designs and purposes are
hitherto referred. That Boys are so posted to Schools and Colleges, without
time to consider and search their Inclinations, that they may direct their
Course according to the stream of their Temper, and after entrance are so
inveigled with study and desire to attain, what they have been forestalled with
advantageous thoughts of, that, being unconcerned for the inlightning, and
converting grace of the Spirit, when they arrive at some pitch of that sort of
Life, they are so tenacious, that nothing can occur to pull 'em from their
purpose; especially when the change would be late, and Age comes on, so that
they can scarce begin another profitable project: Besides, the rude and
unpollish'd younsters, whose minds are impressible as wax, and of so soft a
temper that they may be easily drawn out into any shape, whose prelections
they have once fixed their Attendance on, those, with an inconsiderate rashness,
they must ape and imitate, in all the thoughts and Actions of their Ministry
and Life: And yet many run also headlong into Gaming, Idling, Rioting, and
Wantoning. So at length they betake themselves to their Ministerial
Declamations, and many wholly stretch all the Nerves of their skill, to talk
only with a volubility of Tongue to the hearers, and some Courts complaisance
of voice and gesture, placing there the Power of Doctrine and stress of
Eloquence. When at this rate from prating Puppets they become perfect Orators,
and are reck'ned worthy, after a Specimen, to be preferred to the care of the
Lord's Vineyard, the Laurel's proposed to him that knows best to scatter words,
so as to feed the Ears and Eyes, with the grateful delight of Debonnair and
Oratry; Men taken with their chanting, like a Shepherd's pipe, choose 'em for
their pastors, while yet (say they) nothing that is spiritual or savoury drops
from their Lips, into the minds of the hearers, and they receive little but
words, sitting to hear the reading of a few dry sentences, as stones on stones,
and dead on the dead, which they then stand upon. This they say of Students
affectations in the Schools. They acknowledge the understanding of Languages,
especially of Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, formerly was, and still is very useful
to understand and expound the Scripture, yet they take 'em not therefore to be
necessary to the Ministry, which they would have to be managed by the Spirit
alone, nor so profitable, that one unacquainted with them, must be styled
Idiot, Illiterate and of no authority. But Philosophy as it is generally taught
in the Schools, and School Divinity from hence arising, they not only think
useless, but also pernicious, and a plague Destructive of sound Doctrine,
brought in by the Devil, as the Idol of Liars, and a hindrance to the knowledge
of God and Godliness. They despise the distinguishing Titles of Ecclesiastic
Dignities, as Masters, Licentiates, Doctors, Professors, etc. Saying they only
tend to make him, that is invested with the honor, taken notice of with greater
respect, and so to swell him to a further Caprice, and affect a Lording it over
his former fellows. They blame Protestants, for restraining Preachers, by
Diverse Constitutions, to a certain Number, and prescribing Laws of yearly
revenues, imposing, or suffering themselves to be imposed on, and not
endeavoring that through Churches, at least greater, more preachers and
teachers may be appointed, to teach and admonish all, publicly and privately,
and execute other Offices of the Ministry, or be sent to labor in Foreign
Nations, that these, that are strangers to God and Godliness, may be carefully
imbrued with the knowledge of both, that the Borders of the Kingdom of Christ
may be extended and enlarged to the utmost ends of the Earth. Lastly, they
charge the Protestant Churches, for maintaining their Pastors too profusely
with Salaries. They deny not the provision of Food and Raiment for such, and
other necessaries for a convenient life, nay, they own it to be suitable to the
Command of God. It appears then, they differ from the present Anabaptists, both
the open-hearted and more simple, and crafty and more reserved, who tho liberal
of their labors, under Color of Munificence, draws the unwary into their
Ginns, that they may gull 'em of a daily sustenance at their pleasure. They
would neither have the study nor office of the Ministry, so to confine the
Actions of ones Life, as to enforce the neglect of all other business, whereby
he may furnish himself with a competency. They won'd neither have sixth Stipends
given, nor pactions to intevrene twixt pastor and people, lest the latter be
forced to give superfluously and sumptuously to cherish the luxury, and
idleness of the former. They decry driving Ministers to their duty for gain, as
illeberal Mercenary, Sordid, and Conductitious, that they may only work for
wealth, which when got inclines 'em to do little or nothing, yea, gives rise to
Avarice, Lust, Idleness, Wantonness, Riotousness, perpetual Contention,
Ambitious, Domineering, and very grievous Iniquities. Whose houses seems dect
with an almost Royal Magnificence, who call themselves Preachers of Christ for
Christ's sake, when they become so pompous neglecting their Office, despising
their inferiors, oppressing with Tyranny their people, they show how Antichrist
of old got first entrance, and then footing in the Church.

These the Quakers oppose, by a bare mentioning the manner of their Ministry
which they constantly observe and reason for thus. Since all in the Church, as
Members of the Body, have their proper gifts, they may also have proper
operations and functions for the good of the whole. They say therefore, that
every Member of Christ should stir up and try the gifts of the Spirit in
himself, and Minister to others according to what he has received; If he feel
himself disposed and led by the Spirit, he may, and ought to aspire to be
pastor of a Church, and that when, or where the Spirit draws or invites: And
this they make his Call, neither here do they require any Preparatory exercise,
or particular Call from any certain Assembly, or Approbation of People, whether
they be properly enchurch'd or not. Yet say they tho one thinks himself fit
for, and by the Spirit called to, he must not yet rashly run upon the Ministry,
till, by a company or general Meeting of Ministers, entrusted therewith, by
whose invocation the Spirit may come, he be worthily approven. And so they try
if he be fit for the office, or if it be expedient to confer it on him, warning
him after he has taken it on him, so to labor therein that it it may be
equally, for his and the Church's Ornament and Safety. Thus he is Priested. They
admit no preparing, ordaining, or Ceremonies, which Protestants use at
Inaugurating Ministers, esteeming 'em foolish, fruitless and trifling. And that
those new Preachers may be more glib at their work, they give letters from a
general or particular Meeting, that remote Churches, where they are sent, may
receive 'em more readily, to which sometimes they Annex Commendatory Epistles
from other famous Friends or Churches. As for the Minister's maintenance this
is their Method. They order stipend to be taken, but what is willingly given,
and so computed, that every ones Estate may be regarded, and no more than to
Answer the occasions of Life to encourage Industry, not to kindle Luxury. But
if any Minister be pinched with Poverty, by the narrow-soul'd Penuriousness of
a People, they permit him to leave 'em, and shake his Shoo's dust against 'em.
So say they Christ commanded, and so the Apostles did. It falls out with
Quakers as with other Societies to insinuate themselves with others upon slight
Acquaintance, who, tho they carry themselves so and so in Company that know
them, yet afterward, with Men of never so good note, their Words and Actions
betray their Insolence; and time lets their boldness and importunity creep out
of their lurking holes. The frequent appearance of this foments the suspicion,
that the Quakers are all a dissembling Generation, and that they are so far from
that Simplicity, which pretending to be the best of Christians they make show
of; that they are the refuse gathered from the basest of Men. This the Quakers
know, and grant there are some, who do neither by the seign'd pretense of that
persuasion, nor cloaking the Motions of their depraved nature; but while they
adhere to their Fellowship, not knowingly nor willingly, but by common frailty,
unexpectedly fall into gross wickedness; and that there are others distracted
with the Blandishments of this World, as not being able to endure its shock,
who are so fettered with the thoughts of Riches, that they yield to the
Pleasure and Idleness of a more delicate Life; some also that are remiss and
careless of their Children: And lastly that there are some that revolt from the
best Examples and Institutions, as too harsh and rigid in the Eyes of the
World, who, breaking the shekels that before chained 'em, affect a more
beau-like attire, and a Courteous deportmentment in civil Conversation, as a
certain mark of a good Education; This is often the case of women and those that
are youthful. For those delinquencies the Quakers say, they have the Rod of
Ecclesiastic Censure and Discipline: Which by Christ's Rule, in the Gospel of
Matthew, they say they use gradually to practice. They condemn no Man till they
hear his defense. They write to those that cannot be present to Answer by
letter, what they have to say. They more meekly wink at the unfortunate Slips
of time and necessity, than the free faults of will and Inclination: As at
present in England and elsewhere they refuse to pay Tithes for War, or
maintaining the regular Clergy. But they have been so often vexed and harassed for
this, that they may not again incur the like danger, they pay it in its season,
not asking, why its gathered. Tho the Censors of manners think 'em here
peccant, yet they pass it as an unavoidable weakness. Now for their Marrying.
They often admonish the younger sort, not to rush on a matter of such moment,
without consent and advice of Parents, which here may prove their happiness, or
bane of their misery. They, that desire to be married, intimate it to their
Church Fellowship: They ask 'em if they be in earnest or have consent of
Parents, kindred or Tutors, or if formerly married, if they have ordered their
Estate according to the occasion of a Matrimonial Life. Then they ask the
Company, if they know any thing against 'em. After the Contract there is made
mention of the Marriage, twice on Lord's days, before all that are present: And
sometimes only on monthly Meetings. When the time is expired, the Bride and
Bridegroom with Friends and Acquaintances that are willing, come all to the
assembly. There they are asked if they do, and will love each other mutually,
and to promise to preserve their Marriage honorably, their Soul pure, and the
body clean as its vessel, and perform the Reciprocal incumbent duties, and
never to part till that fate divide 'em, which is the common and unavoidable
Lot of all Mankind. Then each of 'em opens their thoughts, according to what is
prescribed in the Commentaries, subscribing their Names with those interess'd
that are willing.

Thus their Marriage is consummated. There follows some Feasting and Mirth, if
the Company be for it but without the usual vanities at such occasions, which
only feeds the Guts, Ears, or Eyes, and awakens and nourishes Unchastity and
Luxury. In England and elsewhere, their Marriages are now less frequent, since
disapproved by the Magistrates as an illegal going together, and their Children
counted bra^^ of a spurious Birth: Having spoken of their Marriage, I shall
also mention how they treat their Children. A few days after the Child is born,
they call together the Midwife and other women, who were helpful to the woman
in her Labor, and desire 'em to testify the time and place when such an Infant
was born to such and such Parents, this they have recorded in a particular
book, kept for that purpose in one of their houses. Of their funeral rites we
have already. Discoursed; It is the general Lot of humane Affairs, to continue
short while in the same Condition, and have a short lease of Ease and
Tranquillity; After these people for a little had Rest, a new storm arose,
which fell first on their heads, whose coming over to that party I mentioned at
large, and then Raged against almost all the Members of the Society: For George
Keith in Scotland, in the year 67, was thrown into, and continued in Prison at
Aberdeen for many months: He then wrote a book of the immediate Revelation of
Christ in Man, which is a Summary of all their Doctrine; the next year, W. Penn
on the same score, was put in Custody at London, Penn and some of his
Companions had a Conference with the Presbyterians touching their Doctrine of
the Trinity, and Justification of Sins, wherein neither party could convince
the other by Argument, Nay at last, not so much as hear each other speak: When
this had given rise to a great Confusion, Penn being firm to his purpose, and
restless till he had effected it, betakes himself to a Retirement for Writing.
Shortly after he publishes a book, shaking these three Presbyterian Doctrines,
pretending to fight with the Testimonies of Scripture, and Reason* Implanted
into the knowledge and understanding of Men, viz. That there is one God,
subsisting in three distinct and separate persons; that there is no Remission of
sins without full Satisfaction, and that Men are Justified by imputed
Righteousness; I make choice of those words, which Penn does in English, as
suited to the proper Idiom of that Tongue, which now others, when they speak of
Theological Subjects, do use. These words I suppose he the rather pitched upon,
because the Presbyterians snarl'd at his former expre^^ions, about the first
Article; concerning the separate persons in the Trinity, as if Penn had been
more verbal than real in his Controversies. This did not only inspire the
Presbyterians, but also the English Clergy, with anger and hatred which broke
out into Reproaches, that his book showed his mind, and what he was, viz. A
denier of the Trinity, and so, not at all to be suffered amongst Christians.
Upon these Clamours Penn was Imprisoned, where he wrote a book called, The
Crown not without the Cross, handling the Actions of Life and not Articles of
Religion, not barren of things or swelled with words but fruitful of matter,
ponderous, and sententious for its phrases, and polished with the Ornaments of
orat'ry, so that his Enemies Scruple not to praise his skill and industry. Penn
was set free by the Kings desire; who also, because danger seemed to threaten
his fortune which he had Considerably in England, and Ireland, (by the
endeavoring of some so to shorten his wings, that they might never again grow)
did so protect him as to prevent the seizure and confiscation of his goods.
About this time by his Rashness, Boldness, and Impudence, Solomon Eccles felt
the smart of what he drew on himself, which he might have avoided. This Zealot
whom in the former book from a Musician we made Quaker, so Contemned the
sweeter Children of the Muses, as to expose their Instruments to the cruelty of
the flames; He was no sooner made Preacher, than he Acted his part with such
eagerness as answered the expectation of his own Party, and filled the Ears and
Tongues of the contrary. In the year 67 he wrote a Dialogue concerning the
excellency and use of the Art of Music, betwixt himself as opponent and the
Defendents of that Art, whom he brings in speaking and so silenced as to raise
himself Trophies of Praise, and Victory; The next year, he published a
Challenge daring Presbyterians, Independents, Baptists, Papists, and all other
Doctors and Pastors, to try by this Experiment with him, who were the true
Worshippers of God: That without either meat or drink for seven Days and
Nights, they might devout themselves to watching and praying, and they on whom
Celestial fire should fall down, might be esteemed to receive that Eternal
Testimony, for the true Religion that is acceptable to God: But there was none
found so frothy or vain, as to enter the Lists with so foolish a Challenger;
tho these words passed unresented, what followed the next year had not the same
success; For Eccles in a town of Galloway in Scotland, knowing of a Popish
Meeting at some distance, puts a Chassing-dish with fire and brimstone on his
head, and goes to their assembly with three of his Associates; and giving the
fire to his Friends who received it on their knees, on the blazing of the
flame, he denounces to all the sudden danger of being devoured with fire, if
they did not presently forsake their Idolatry: Returning from thence into the
City, and repeating his famous precept, and sign, that they might also learn
the wisdom to amend, who rewarded his Sermon and sign no better than with blows
and ill words, and then with a Jayl, upon his Enlargement, and return to
London, he Commences the like Admonition in Bartholomew-fair, to the whole
Crowd in the Ring of the Rabble, but, a sharp Man attacking him, had disarmed
him of his shield, and given him a mark, to put him in mind of that time and
place; had not another of some note and honesty defended Eccles with his naked
Sword, and delivered him from the hands of the enraged Multitude: The Quakers
themselves take such Actions to be unwarrantable and inconsiderate, not long
after, Eccles went to Ireland, and at Cork, in the great Church, the service
being ended, he thunders that solemn Scripture some so often abuse; The Prayers
of the Wicked are an Abomination to the Lord. Whence, being dragged into
Prison, and then whipped through all the streets by the common Hangman, he was
thrown out of the City as a Vagabond, and factious fellow, whose depraved mind,
ill custom, and foolish humor stirred him up to pervert and trouble the people.
Afterward Eccles went into New England, where, at a Sermon, being greatly moved
with anger, he Prophesied a Judgment as ordained by God to fall on a certain
person, within a time he prefixed; but the falsehood of his Oracle giving him
experience of his vanity, and afterward to confess, by a public writing, the
folly and error or his own Rashness; having at length imitated an Ingenuous Man
in this; for as it is best to do nothing to be repented of, so it is next best,
by Repentance to repair what is done amiss; Whilst the Don's of the Quakers were
thus punished; In England, Scotland, and especially in Ireland, their whole
Society met likeways with great opposition; for refusing to forbear their
assemblies, which having mentioned already what I find to be observable, I
shall here content my self barely to Name. Fox this year went into Ireland, yet
did little there, but visit his friends, and advise each of 'em to what he
Judged for their Advantage: Fox having thence returned in England, and till
then, by reason of troublesome Encumbrances, been obliged to lead a single
life, having now got some liberty, and ease, grew weary of the lonelyness of a
Solitary bed, tho otherways free, and pleasant in it self; and in this mind, he
addressed himself to Margaret the Widow of L. Fell, his old Friend, with whom he
had lodged; and afterward, by the advice of both their Friends, he married her,
neither to supply the beggary of the one, nor gratify the lust of the other,
(and therefore they were less anxious for dowry) but from mutual love: They
lived, tho without any common offspring, very lovingly to a great Age: I
thought it not unseasonable to mention this, considering what that Frenchman
has lately written of this pair (who is now if we may believe it a good
Catholic, tho twice before a grand Apostat) and of many honest Men in his
French Treatise, not unelegant, if we look to the luster of the Language, yet
stuffed with lies for the laughter of the people. The year 70 was more worthy
of our Remembrance: So many as persisted in haunting their Assemblies not
paying Tithes, abating informers of what they demanded, refusing to swear,
either lightly, or Solemny, were variously oppressed, and afflicted in England:
There were assembled to disturb, and suppress their Meetings, as extinguishers
of the common flame, in one place the Magistrates themselves, in another, their
Officers and Ministers; In another Soldiers, and in others Church Pastors,
with their Wardens, and Beadles, who coming upon them, when met in their
Assemblies took a note of their Names, that after a Warrant they might deal
with them according to sentence of Law; sometimes this treatment was with force
and rigor, It was mild to box and busset them with fists or battons, so
violently that sometimes the Cudgels were split into pieces; In Glocestershire,
one taking a Ladder from the lower to the upper parts of the House, threw it
down upon them with such rage and bitterness, that an old widow woman among
'em, having her shoulders broken, soon after gave up the Ghost; a few were
Incarcerated, a pecuniary mulct being laid on each of their heads, of five,
ten, or twenty, lib. ster. according to the quality, or Estate of the Person;
who had lent their houses to, spoken, or been present with them, were fined
more severely; In the mean time, much by covetous Officers, ignorant Soldiers,
and void of humanity, profane Citizens, the dregs of the World, who cloak'd it
from the honest sort, upon a faint suspicion, were snatched from the Quakers.
These Informers treated 'em most uncivilly, and basely; Sometimes they that
were not present were fined, who, in a supposition, they were never away, were
thought not to be absent now, but only to have hid themselves; and tho their
Meeting had been silent, without uttering a Syllable, it was held for certain,
that their holy duties could not be performed without speaking, and so the
speaker must needs have been present; The Quakers tell, in one of their
families, a friend, and stranger, being only present, Informers came to the
Master, in presence of the stranger, as desirous to talk with him of a certain
affair, and on his answering little, went away and informed, For having
preached in an assembly of the Quakers, so, a severe Mulct was laid on the
stranger and speaker: They say, many of 'em in the Country of Nothingham-shire,
was trepan'd by tricks of the like nature. I was told by 'em, certain Rogues
came among 'em compos'dly, and where the Quakers were silent, one of the
fellows got up, and began to speak, and then also the rest, and falling on the
Quakers, and goods of the house, Immediately carried all the latter away with
them. In this persecution, the destruction of their Estates might be easily
effected, since none of the Quakers redeemed what was taken from them, nor,
were they never so wronged, or hurted, would bribe or oppose their presecutors
violence; which might easily have been done, had their principles suffered,
when the unmannerly crowd, Claiming some thing due to each of them, instead of
money, took away what they could find, Oxen, and Cattle from their Lands, and
Instruments for Husbandry, from their Houses, Merchandise, Housholdstuff,
Featherbeds, Blankets, Vessels, and Raiment, yea, their very meat they spared
not, of what value soever: Some carried home wagons Loaded with their goods,
leaving nothing that was either portable, or movable; These goods were often
put to public sale, but some were so honest, that they loved not to buy what
had been lost with grief, and could only be purchased with shame; some of their
goods were taken secretly away by Night, while they are thus ravaged, the
Tythers were not asleep, but ready on foot; Thus, there is a threefold sum
exacted, one for the Exchequer, another for the Poor, and a third for their
purse, who pretended to have the charge of Executing the Law against the
Quakers. The Quakers Writings say they were Barbarously used, especially in the
Northern part of Yorkshire. Bark-shire, Clochester, Surrey, and
Notingham-shire. It Is incredible what Money these people did lose, only for the
sham Name of a Mulct; In this persecution, they raged most against the
greatest, and their friends, of a higher Note, and Degree; These Men being
thrust out of their houses where they met, stood often in the open Air before
them, sometimes saying nothing, and sometimes speaking; but always, either all,
or they whose voice was heard, were punished with a greater Mulit, or
imprisonment; sometimes they were treated as Enemies by the Law of War, even
when they never resisted: And having all already, in their hand and power, they
pretended to deal with them by the right of victory.

This being often practiced, I shall only name an Example of each sort: It
happened in Herefordshire, in a certain Village, that Thomas Green, whom in the
former Book I mentioned among the Leaders of the Quakers, having met with a few
of his own Persuasion, in a certain place, for performing their worship;
Informers hearing, runs presently thither, and with a bitter, and enraged mind,
falls upon Green, kneeling with others at Prayer, and carried him to the
Judges, who laid the usual Fine on him: Which while he (as they used) refused
to pay, alleging. and declaring, he was unjustly fined, they ordered these
Mercenary Messengers to distrein for it, upon Green's goods, which he had at
Royston; This they go about without lingering, catching at an occasion they
could wrest to their gain: Thus they carried away his Goods and Merchandise,
exposing 'em to sale, and out of the Money, reserved more than the double of
the fine to themselves. At another time Green, going to Preach in his own
house, was suddenly set upon, and so despoiled, by the Invaders, of the goods
of his shop, (for he was a threadseller) that nothing was left but one Clue,
which not willingly, but accidentally dropped from 'em. At another time also,
while Green Preached in his House, some Informers came upon 'em, Armed as for a
fight, and after silence, they demand the Preacher; The others denied to
produce him; they laid hands on many of the hearers, and presenting them with
Swords, and Pistols, they threaten to kill them, if they would not presently
give up the Preacher, but their threats were fruitless: But at last, coming to
Green, who appeared by some signs to be the Preacher, he was also dumb to their
Questions, and deaf to their Threats; giving no Answer to the former, and being
unmoved by the latter, they having greatest suspicion of him, did not kill him,
but carried him to the Magistrate; to whom Green when asked if he was the
Preacher, answered he was: He asked him further, why he told not that before to
those that brought him; He answered, he would not to any such Men, who had no
Authority to propound the Question, tho he now did it willingly before the
Magistrate, who might not only Justly and Lawfully ask, but also Command. The
following example seems to be Memorable, for the various Circumstances of
persons and place: There met not a few Quakers in a house at London, about
Noon, the Room being scarce able to hold 'em, which being told the Magistrate,
Soldiers were sent to scatter the Meeting and Thrust 'em out of the house. But
they in like manner thronged together in the next street, Notwithstanding the
noise and hissings of passers by; There were there W. Penn, a Noble and Noted
Man, whom I Have before described W. Mead, Son in Law to Fell, and Margaret, who
was first Married to Fell, and then to Fox, a Man not much then notic'd, tho a
Considerable Merchant: Those the Soldiers singl'd out of the Company, seized,
and shut up, that they might want their houses and liberty, on pretense, they
had both Preached to the Congregation in the street. They Are brought to
Examination, and the crime is charged on 'em in these words, viz. That they
being Quakers, had in contempt of the King, assembled themselves together with
force and arms, illegally, and seditiously, to the troubling of the peace; The
Judges, as it is certainly, according to the Laws of their Court, were desirous
they should make their appearance uncovered, that they might give a greater
proof of their Submission and Humility; when one of their officers had pulled
of these Men's hats, the Judge Commanded them again to be put on, that they
might with their own hands take 'em of; They refused, since the Judge had
ordered them to be covered, when as they came in before, them uncovered. This
the Judges resenting ill, fining each of 'em, for Contempt of the King and his
Court, in 40 Marks Eng. Penn, and Mead, did long dispute the matter, till
Witnesses were brought in, who being questioned, affirmed nothing else, than
that they had heard them speak certain words in public to the Congregation,
but what the words were, they said, they could not hear, which evidence both
Penn, and Mead, with a ready wit, and and quick Expression, as far as was
needful, did sharply, and fluently confute. After the Judge, and Council, had
charged 'em I omit their Names for no Disadvantage to them) with having
transgressed the Common Laws, Penn so defended himself, and his party, that the
Judge thinking, by the accuracy of his words, their Authority and Dignity would
be too much shaken, and Impair^ed, that the Judges might be taxed with Malice,
and Ignorance, orders him to be removed out of the Court: Mead was also thus
treated, for vindicating his Action with too great a semblance of boldness, and
obstinacy; after many debates, the Jury comes in, who being sworn, did narrowly
expend, and enquire into, all they could find objected against 'em; they bring
in this verdict, that Penn had spoken to the Congregation in public, that Mead
was not guilty, without adding a word further. This Verdict highly offended the
Judge, and Council, who were firmly of opinion, that they were guilty, of what
they were charged with, and therefore they raged and invey'd against the Jury,
and especially, Edward Bushel, whose sole efficiency they Judged pernicious, in
seducing his Colleagues, threatening him with what envy and certain prejudice so
rash a Verdict might draw upon himself; they remained steadfast in their first
opinion, that Penn had done nothing against Law, and Mead was not at all
guilty; And this said they is neither so dark, nor obscure, but any may easily
perceive it that is desirous; as for themselves, since they had done nothing for
hatred, or fear, nor any thing contrary to their Duty, or Judgment, as they
were Conscious of no fault, so they feared no threatenings; after the Jury had
finished their discourse, Penn added some words with more Sharpness, and
Freedom, Implying that the Judges reguarded not Law, but Judged of the matter
according to their partial pleasure; for which words, the Judges, that were
there, were so offended, that they presently gave strict charge to the
Jayl-keeper to take him in Custody, and keep him in Irons: The Court proving
thus confused, and Litigious, It was at length thought fit to adjourn the Trial
for that day, and consequently, to enlarge the defendents till the following;
The Jury being then again Interrogated, if these Men were guilty of what they
stood Indicted for, still persisted in their former reply, viz. That they were
not; after many words, more hot than fruitful, the Judge commanded that Penn
and Mead should be detained in Custody, till they paid that sum that was laid
on each of them, for their Irreverent Carriage, at the beginning of the Trial.
Making this the due desert of their fault; both of 'em having reproached, and
disrespected the Court: Here Penn could not so Command himself, as to hold his
peace, at so unjust a procedure. When neither would pay the Money that was
required, they were both ordered to be thrown into Goal, but the cause was
removed from the Bench to the Bar, where each of 'em in person, before a
Multitude of Citizens, and these of the best quality, and sort, who were led
thither by the curiosity of seeing the trial, defended, and pleaded his cause
for himself: The Harangue of Penn is not unworthy to be observed, which was
now, and then, in repeating Interrupted, and Intermitted; But in a due
progress, constant, and undivided: It was to this purpose. The nature of Man is
so ordered, that as there is no Mortals almost to be found, who think not the
injuries they receive to be great; so, every one, for the most part, is ready
and desirous to defend his cause, and avoid the danger that threatens him;
whether this be our case before you at present, or whether our Complaints be
short of our sufferings, dangers that hang over us, and Crimes that we are
charged with, you your selves may maturely consider, providing you will disarm
your selves of passion, and partiality, and grant us the justice of a patient
Attention: This is the burden of our accusation, and on this score is our guilt
founded; we omitted some Ceremonies before the Court, and did not presently
consent to that, which we knew, they designed to build our guilt upon; we spoke
too boldly and freely for our selves, as if we had accused our Accusers and
Judges; we must therefore, before this great, and gown'd Society, dwell upon
mere punctilio's, and triffles; and yet, whilst our words and behavior are
snarl'd at, we are not guilty of the things for which we stand Indicted; Is
there any Law which commads the defendent, not only to be discovered, but to
discover himself; and when our hats are put on, neither by us, nor at our
pleasure, but your own Command, how unjust and ridiculous is it, that a fine
should be laid on us, and not rather on your selves? But we answered not fully
to all their questions, a crime exceeding all possible excuse, that can be
brought to palliate our viloated duty; being asked many things, we answered
some, tho not all, sometimes restraining our selves not contrary to Law; you
know what each of these amounts to: Certainly he that speaks nothing does not
affirm, neither indeed does he therefore deny, It Is then expedient for the
defendent to speak, when his own silence would wrong his cause, but he that
defends himself, when not so much as asked, gives occasion of suspicion,
reproach, and calumny: Truly no Man is obliged to accuse himself; If any rash,
or precipitant word dropped out, this is nothing but a humane weakness that few
are strangers to; it being hard, in this, as in other matters to keep a
measure; when the mind is moved with extraordinary anguish; But I suppose we
are known to be none of those, who are offensive to others, by the Intemperance
of our Tongues; neither are we as yet conscious of our pretended guilt. that we
have hitherto defended our selves with any Impertinency; but this, this, is our
crime to day, why both here and every where, we are dragged into Judgment
because we seldom deprecate our charge, or Court favor, by throwing our selves
at your feet, or using gilded expressions, to ensnare your Ears, if not our
own minds also; which would if not at present, yet certainly hereafter prove
detrimental to us, and our common cause: If it be an accusing and reproving of
others, to reject the falsehood of their unjust Accusation, and Modestly, and
Ingenuously show what they do amiss, let us bear that Name, which only the
sense and glory of well doing gives us tittle to: But this is, or at least
should be, the sole and proper question, what is this crime which we have done,
that you esteem so heinous: Since no Law forbids it, no Man can doubt the
Lawfulness of our doing it, and injustice of your reprehending it; For where
there is no Law, there is no Transgression. As to the council's Allegation of a
Common, and general Law, as the Foundation and strength of the whole
Accusation; when a general saying is generally to be understood, things common
cannot oblige without a special statute; so long as he applies not his rule to
the matter in hand, whereupon the subject of our discourse is hinged, truly his
citation is to little purpose, and his talk is fruitless; for the wise and
ancient Kings that made those Laws, and the skillful and ingenious Lawyers of
our Country who interpreted them, did ever take 'em in no other meaning than
applicable to certain persons, things, times, and Circumstances; wherefore thus
to wrest Controversy to Law, is to disjoyn it from it self. Moreover, no Law
can be just which forbids what the divine Law Commands, and reason Dictates; or
Commands what God and nature forbids and denies, even where the reverence and
worship of God is concerned. Is this their Justice, and Equity, with whom we
have to do; to bid shut our mouths, or carry us to punishment, when we speak
against injustice in our own defense? Since by the common Law its provided,
that he that may do that which is more, should not be denied liberty to do that
which is less; what hinders us, when Religion the greatest good is at the
stake, to which other things tho never so valuable have no proportion, to be
allowed the common privilege of gainsaying? Then we must be robbed of our whole
liberty, our Wives and Children dragged into slavery, our Families scattered,
our Estates seized, and carried away into triumph for our own Conscience sake,
by the accusation of every beggar, and Malicious informer craftily waiting for
our Ruin and Destruction; Let the Lord of Sea and Land Judge betwixt us in
this matter. The Judgment of twelve Men was always much regarded, by the
Patricij of old, the Nobles, and Optimates, who being sworn Assessors, after
hearing the cause, and evidence, brought in their sentence according to the
equity of the matter: That book has also hitherto been highly honored, which
contain the Rights of King, Parliament, and People, which is called Magna
Charta: What reverence Judges pay unto these, who Arrogate the entire power,
and sole decision of the Trial to themselves, and that with so much passion,
and prejudice, as they are so unhappy, neither to be able to govern, or conceal
it; let the Judges themselves declare Impartially. It appears plainly, the
Magna Charta is become a nose of wax, since it is so often hammered out into
every form. If things run in this Channel, the times will come soon when we may
bid farewell to Religion, to all Society, yea right and property too; if all
Trials and Judges be like this, in whose mind so much of the Popish inquisition
is ingrain'd. As for us, since we were not accused, we could not be condemned,
yea, since we are absolved by the Jury, we desire our liberty. As for you the
most just and great God will Judge the Justice of all your proceedings. When
Penn and Mead persisted in their purpose not to pay that Money which they were
amers'd in, being thrown into Jail, Penn's father paid it for them both, and
delivered 'em from their Imprisonment; a severe and warlick exploit followed
done upon the Quakers, in the County of Surrey: In certain places, Captains
with their Soldiers, only by their own Power and Authority broke in upon
Quakers houses without any occasion, Coloring the Injustice of their Action,
with a pretense that they searched for hidden, and concealed Arms, and other
Instruments of Sedition and Rebellion; thus they perceived what they had in
their houses, and afterward came upon them at their pleasure and spoiled them.
This use and custom did so overflow and prevail, that Military Men of that
sort, and size, both foot, and horse without any Command, assaulted those
people, while at their Religious exercises, and Proclaimed and made War without
any Enemy, with so much vehemence, fierceness, Clamor and Execution, as if
they would fright heaven it self with the thundering of their words; and
thrusting 'em out of the houses where they were met, if they stood nigh by, or
spoke but a word, (which you may suppose they often, if not always did) they
dragged some of 'em immediately into fetters, and smote others most cruelly
with their Military Weapons, this was a common custom in Harsly-down. The house
being full of Quakers at their worship many Soldiers, and Horsemen with
Swords, Pikes, and Firearms fly's thither; the Footmen goes in, and presently
running upon them, thrusts them all out of doors; being put out into the
street, the Horsemen rides them down; seeing their only hope of safety to be
placed in the swiftness of their feet, by flight they betook themselves to that
remedy, and endeavored to escape whither soever they could: But then the
Horsemen spurred after them with their Horses, and running upon the Men and
Women as they were scattered, and also upon those that abode in their place,
insulting over the young and feeble, they struck them upon their bodies and
faces, with their Pistols, as furiously as they could: The footmen pouring
themselves out of the house upon the people thus ensnared and invergl'd,
followed after, and beat them with their Muskets and Pikes so violently, that
some of them flew in pieces out of their hands: Neither did they forbear,
retreat or withdraw, till more than twenty of the poor Quakers were wounded,
Eight days after the Quakers again met, and must likewise by a new force of
Horse and Foot be assaulted, ejected, and put to flight, surrounded, and
oppressed, and the ground fructify'd by the effusion of their blood; here there
were twice as many wounded as before: That day seven-night the Quakers not
leaving of their assembling, a party of foot and horse came up to the house:
One of them going in with a pale full of dirt and Excrements, maliciously
emptied it upon the Innocent Multitude, not content with this, putting them
from their House and Meeting, they followed and loaded them with so many
wounds, that they were within a little of having robbed 'em of their life. Some
of the Country people, being moved with Compassion at the sad Countenance,
Lamentation, and tears of Men, they had always found both harmless, and
blameless, did succor and shelter them, with the sanctuary of their houses.
But those Malignant rakes, finding the way even thither, broke in, and pulled
'em out, and threatening some, holding their Weapons over their heads, and
cutting the women's Clothes, handled them with a detestable Impudence, and
obscenity. There was one woman with Child taken as she fled, whom a Soldier
rudely smote twice on the belly and once on the breast with his Musket, and
another threw dirt in her mouth, whereby she was so frighted, that afterward
she miscary'd. But the Zeal of the Quakers in Meeting or Soldiers in
persecuting, was not as yet chilled. For they no sooner returned to their usual
Meeting than the Soldiers followed them as they had done formerly, afflicting
them with their wonted Rudeness; so that the very Earth was re-sprinkled with
their Blood, and Twenty, or more of them, were inhumanely wounded; which a
certain Country Officer seeing, and being troubled at (a Man very discreet for
his office) or at least not always so rough and rigid, advised the Soldiers
not to persist in such wild rigor, and unreasonable rudeness, hoping he might
easily obtain what he desired. The Soldiers were so far from regarding his
request, they fell upon him so forcibly that they almost broke his pate. There
were more examples of cruelty done at this time, in several places elsewhere;
yet the Quakers never assembled at night, nor in a Solitary place, lest they
should seem to attempt any thing unworthy of Light, and whereof they should be
afraid; yet they met sometimes more cautiously, and timerously, and with as
little stir as they possibly could, not because they were disrespected,
Vilified, and Calamitously treated, but sometimes by reason of the greatness of
the danger, they forbore the times and places of their Assembling. Sometimes
they were denied the use of their own houses, where they used to conveen
frequently and numerously, the Magistrate commanding the Doors and Entrances to
be closed up with brick, and mortar to prevent their admission: But they
thinking themselves Masters of their own houses, opened 'em without Command or
Counsel of any other, and went into their Meetings, as they formerly had done.

The Qnakers observed this Year, that there was above Eight Thousand of their
Sect made Prisoners, since the King's Return, whereof Six Hundred were as yet
detained.

Things being in this condition, about the Year Seventy Two a Remarkable War
happened betwixt the Confederate Kings of Britain and France, and the States
of the United Provinces: in which War the Dutch had the better (as 'twas
thought) both by Sea, and Land; not only by withstanding so great Armies of two
such potent Kings, and two Bishops (more intent on the destruction than
preservation of Men) but also snatched a considerable victory from 'em both.
King Charles fearing lest the War abroad might create some matter of sedition
at home, that he might preserve ease and concord amongst his subjects, granted
not only protection to Men of all Religions, and consequently to the Quakers
(Papists being only excepted) but also the free exercise of their several
persuasions, whereby the Quakers from a tempestuous storm, were brought into a
safe Haven: The Remembrance of the past, pleasure of the present, and hope of
the future time induced them to compose, restore, and accomplish the common
concern of their neglected affairs: But this rest and tranquillity was of no
greater Continuance, than till matters were adjusted twixt the Dutch and
English, for, in two year's space the war being ended, the Jars twixt ancient
friends and brethren, easily kindled and quickly quenched, did not only serve
to wash away the strife but renew and confirm their former love. So the Quakers
were tossed with new dangers again, as when another storm suddenly falls upon
those, that anchored in the safety of an happy Haven and drives 'em from the
hopes, of the expected shore into the great and dangerous roarings of the deep.
Having hitherto related concerning these Men, almost all things I thought
worthy to be read or repeated, since nothing follows much differing from what
we have heard, I shall run through what remains, as orderly as briefly. Geo. Fox
having now traversed England more than one; and thinking he had spent study and
Labor enough in endeavoring to declare and advance his Religion, not
contenting himself to work only at home, began to think upon going further
abroad, there to commence and carry on the same design: In the year 71 passing
over the wide Sea, he went to New England in America, to visit friends of the
same Doctrine and Discipline; encouraging and confirming 'em to retain and
preserve the faith they had received piously and inviosably; Then he went in to
the Barmuda's Islands, from thence to Jamaica, Merry-Land, Virginia,
Nova-Cesarea, Insula-Longa, and to the ou^most Rhodes, from which last Island
in the year 72, 4th month, and 19th day, he wrote a journal in form of an
Epistle, and sent it here to his friends in England, whereof I have a Copy: But
I and nothing else written there but the Climates, Seasons, Tracts, Borders,
and Regions upon which they went out, where they found, or form^d Societies of
their persuasion, whom they met every where, especially in Virginia and Rhodes,
how cheerfully and kindly they discoursed and entertained him. In Virginia he
speaks of one or two of the Rulers of that Wild and Barbarous people, who came
to a certain assembly of the Quakers, and tho much unacquainted with the
English Language, behaved themselves to the Quakers with respect and civility;
whilst Fox with his friends went further into the Country, and there had the
fortune to light upon others of 'em, they entertained him and his friends
Discreetly and Courteously. This Journey of two years space being ended, a few
months after, Fox in Vigornia by Judge Parker's command, for their frequent
Meetings was put in Custody in the Country-Jail: There he continued for a year
and more, being sometimes brought to a judicial appearance: When nothing could
be made out, he was remanded into Jayl, or so delayed to a certain season upon
his promise of another appearance, wherein Fox did always satisfy the Judges
observing his promise with a Religious tenderness: The strife and Controversy
was levelled at this, to make Fox take the Oath of fidelity to the Government,
Fox denied to make Corporal Oath or swear in express words, not that he refused
to undertake or affirm the thing; for he was ready to give a written bill to
the Judges, tying himself to the performance of all that was required; thinking
they could expect or demand no more from him, he defended his cause at all
occasions with many sounding and sententious Arguments, and such as are thought
to be derived from the sacred fountain of the word of God; but to no purpose
for the Judges regarded all the Allegations brought by that sort of Men, as
nothing but base and contemptible pretenses. How Fox spent his time whilst kept
here in prison, the many books written by him do declare; especially that
containing the Confession of the faith of Jesus Christ, enriched and Interwoven
with Scriptural places, culled out of the New Testament by a singular order; he
had also Diverse Conferences with Learned Men, while he enjoyed the leisure the
prison afforded him; in which he often showed the disparity of the encounter
betwixt the Learned in the Dialectick Art; and those that are wholly Rude and
Artless, whereof I have this Example. He had a Disputation with Dr. Crowder,
prebendary of Worcester concerning an Oath, as it was lawful or forbidden under
Gospel or Law; In which debate when Crowder concluded, that as an Oath was of
old Lawful under the Law, so now it was not unlawful under the Gospel; In like
manner as Adultery and other vices forbidden by the Law, are also prohibited
under the Gospel. Fox being offended by so Ignorant a Consequence, began to be
in a passion, but before he had liberty to reply to what was said, all that
were present contested and exclaimed and raised this groundless report aginst
him, that he affirmed and taught as Orthodox, that Swearing, Adultery,
Drunkenness, and other vices of that nature were Lawful, notwithstanding the
fruitless resistance of Crowder; and that he had broke out in obscene cursing
and lying, who only defended a Nod might be a certain pledge of fidelity, and
one word fill the place of an Oath, another Clergyman disputing with Fox
concerning the perfection of Saints in this Life, forming an induction from the
word of God, wherein he thought great force of Argument to be couched, came to
Fox and asked him what he thought of himself, pressing him more than ordinarily
to answer ingenuously. Fox scarce knowng what such a question was designed for,
at length made no other return than this, By the grace of God I am what I am.
Thereby neither expressly affirming nor denying, and yet obscurely hinting what
he thought; at length Fox, after many disappointments, by the coming of the
Governor, Alesius was dismissed; after so long absence, returning to his House
and Wife, he lived there with her for some time so quietly, that there was not
a Syllable spoken of Fox; in the mean time he wrote and sent many Letters,
Suasory, Hortatory, and of other sorts, concerning such things as he thought
his labor and pains might not be lost on, but be useful and advantageous. He
wrote also to the Jews at Amsterdam, and to the Papists, yea, and to the Pope
himself; as also to the rulers of the lesser Africa, and even to the Emperor
of the Turks, accosting him with this very Inscription and Title of the great
Turk, a name horrid and unsavory enough, especially, in that Nation and
Language. Fox wrote, and caused all those Letters to be Printed in his
Mother Tongue (the English Language), but they were not Translated, and sent as
they were Inscribed; So that they rather proved tokens of a laborious,
Confident and Arrogant mind, than in any measure profitable and advantageous.
At London in the year 74 on the 9th and 16th days of October, there was a
Conference held in a Meeting house of the Baptists, 'twixt the Quakers and
them, concerning the person of Christ; the speakers on the Quakers side, were
G. Withad, and S. Crisp, G. Keith, and W. Penn; for the Baptists, T. Hicky,
Jer. Joes, W. Kiffin, T. Planty, all preachers in their own persuasion, the
cause of the debate was a book published by Hicky, in which he branded the
Quakers with the reproach of being disintituled to the Character of Christians;
teaching Christ to be no person without us, but that the Internal light of
every Man's mind is Christ: The Quakers desired them to prove their challenge,
by showing which of them had ever taught such Doctrine, or else, that the
reproacher might be punished by his fellowship according to the due desert of
his delinquency. The first day they handled the Quakers opinion, the Baptists
alleging such words to have been written by the Quakers in a certain book,
that Christ was never seen with bodily eyes by any Man: By which words the
Baptists did not yet make out the weight of their charge against the Quakers,
(for they explained the words thus, that tho it be certain as Christ was Man,
he was Externally seen by Men, but as he is God, that he is Invisible does
sufficiently comport with the Analogy of Scripture: That when we speak of
Christ's being known, loved, or worshipped, it is evident we mean not of
Corporeal vision, but mental Intuition:) At the next Meeting the Baptists took
another Argument to prove the Quakers to be no Christians, because they taught
Divine Revelation to be the Immediate Rule of Faith and Life, which Argument
when the Quakers had shown to be weak and childish, the Baptists having few
more Topics to lean upon, turned aside to what concerned not the Controversy:
But being unable by Windings and Circumlocutions to defend themselves, and
taking it ill to be worsted and confuted began to place their victory in
Reproach and Loquacity, filling all with Tumult and Noise. The Quakers who all
this time sat still with an equality of fixedness, sedateness, and constancy,
received their assaults as the swelling floods are broken and beat of by the
Rocks. Thus they parted, so far from adjusting the matter, that they were more
exasperated by the Conference they had enjoyed. The next year Rob. Barclay
wrote his Theological Theses, and sent them to the Doctors, Professors, and
Students of Theology, Popish and Protestant, in every Country of Europe,
desiring 'em to examine, and return them an Answer: The next year he wrote and
published his Apology, a work greater, and better known than that I need give
account of it: He sent two Copies of this book to every Princes Ambassador at
Ni^iguen, that met to treat of the Common peace, that they might weigh, and
send it to their Prince for their Cognizance, and Inquiry into the matter: To
each he added a double Letter of advice, that as the burden of the Christian
world was laid upon them, so they might with all care and diligence endeavor,
according to their Incumbent duty, to procure the rest and safety of
Christians. Nic. Arnold, professor of the Theology in the College of Frizeland,
opposed a Theological Exercitation to these Theses, wherein he bassles
Barclay's opinion: To this treatise Barclay answered by another piece, showing,
that Arnold did only repeat what has been often said, by a changed expression.
A little after Tho. Brown a Scot Barclay's Countryman, one of the Preachers of
the word of God, who to the Number of 2000 were deprived of their Benefices,
for not submitting to the Regency of the Prelates, wrote a thick and large
Volume in English, against the great treatise of Barclay, in which Barclay
taking him to mistake their meaning, and therefore too much to expatiate and
wander from the purpose, answers him in the same Language, putting neither more
nor less in his book than what he thought necessary. Afterward, Joh. G.
Bajerus, Doctor and Professor of Theology at Jena, (a Lutheran) published the
Doctrine concerning the beginning of the true and saving knowledge of God,
against Barclay's dissertation in his Theses and Apology, who carping at some
Expressions of Barclay, as not proper, but absurd and obscure, from which no
body could gather what Barclay did mean, was answered by G. Keith, (Barclay
being then taken up with other affairs) a Man most skillful in Philosophy, and
Argument, who against Bajer did plainly unfold the sense and meaning of his
friend's words, and in this reply so handled the whole Argument, that afterward
Bajer made never any return. Lastly, Joh. Chr. Holthusius, a pastor addicted to
the Ausburg Confession, wrote a large treatise in the German Tongue, worthy to
be styled the Antibarclaian German, since the Quakers has not hitherto answered
it. In this year 75, at Rome, Mich. Molin, a Spaniard, a Priest, and Doctor of
Theology, published his book in the Italian Tongue, to which he gave the Title
of the Spiritual Captain: In which book he revived the Mystic, Theology, as
they call it, which for many years had lain Dormant in the Papacy, who was
Tutor and Pedagogue to a Number of Men, for advancing that Doctrine of study
and life: The Sect was called Quietism, and the followers, Quietists; from
their singular Discipline, which prescribes the laying aside External helps of
coming to God, meditation and reasoning by things outwardly Considered and
Compared; (which are the first Elements that belong to these who begin to enter
into Eternal Life) and making only use of Divine Contemplation, and the
simplicity of faith: Those who have made or desire to make great progress in
the Celestial way, must employ themselves intently with a ready will, and
ardent Love, to receive and perceive God in themselves, and suffer him to work
in them by his Spirit, while they wait for him with a quiet silence. I shall
add no more of this Man's Doctrine or its success, as being known to the
Learned Historians of our Age: As ever since the Quakers name had its rise,
nothing, among Christians, in Religion, Behavior, and Conversation, scem'd to
be hatched or invented with greater care, or more resin'd, and removed from the
custom of the Vulgar, but what was presently fathered on the Quakers Authority,
fellowship, and patronage: Thus in Italy and elsewhere, many made the Quakers
in England, with their Creatures, and Confederates, the Sole cause and Original
of this Sect, and all the opinions thereupon following: In like manner in
England, the Quakers were Reckoned among the Religious crew which they call
Mysticks, and Branches of the Quietists, drawing their common nature and temper
from the same Root with one another. This rumor and suspicion was the more
increased, that the Quakers especially Barclay, in his Apology extraordinarily
commended these ancient Mystic^s, and not long after, that Keith in his book,
called the way to the City of God, which he published in English, did so teach,
confirm, and advance that Theology, that he seemed to join with and strengthen
the hands of the Quietists. Because this opinion before was, and as yet is so
infix'd in the minds of many, that the Quakers are of the flock of the
Mysticks, or that the Quietists and they don't much differ, I shall pick out
especially from Keith's book a short Summary of that Doctrine, adding as little
of my own as I can; except where I Am forced to put my own words for his,
without Impairing his meaning at all. We ought (says he) to withdraw our selves
from every vain thought, earthly, purely intellectual, yea even Divine, which
are subjected to such words and propositions, as fall under the force of
Argumenting and Reasoning; which draw their being from another original. When
God manifests himself in Man, in the Seed of God which is in Man, and hereby
conveys himself into the mind of Man, Man must betake and apply himself to God,
in the Seed of God 'twixt the influence and operation of God in him, and only
to give himself the leisure to wait for these feelings of the mind that proceed
from God, viz. The seeing, hearing, smelling, touching tasting of the Spirit,
of the power, the light, and Life of God in Christ in that Seed. And so it is
agreeable to Man, when he has thus converted himself unto God, to persist and
continue in that State with much patience, tranquillity and silence, before he
fall to the use and exercise, or daily business of his Lawful vocation. When
this happens, In a little time the mind in some measure approaches to an holy
and Divine life, the beginnings of Spiritual Death, Regeneration and Active
operation. It Is not then sit to do any thing, without the certain Conscience
and clear knowledge of faith, but what the internal Guide, and Spiritual
Counselor and Instructor teaches, without that apparent assurance that the
Spirit is arisen or raises himself in us, and makes us inwardly to feel leave
and liberty to do, what the Spirit commands or suffers to be done. And so it is
convenient at, first, to Act faith only by receiving and then exercising it; as
the Cion when first graffed into the stock first receives juice, then grows and
fructifies. In these things that the rest of the Quakers both did and do agree,
its scarce to be doubted. Tho it sufficiently appears from what has been said,
that these Mysticks, Molinists and Quakers, do not so far differ in this
Doctrine and Study, as that one of 'em does either fear or despise, to follow
and imitate the others Example; yet betwixt 'em both there is a very great
difference and jarr as the Molinists adhere to the Rectors of Conscience,
sacred orders, and very many rites, and the Quakers reject all these Rules and
Principles; which being neither abstruse, nor hard to be known, I shall not now
enlarge on with any further addition. England being now at leisure from War and
Peace with the Dutch again established, the long-gather'd grudge against the
Quakers, and the anger, that sometime was restrained and forborne, began to be
now revived and strengthened in order to renew the War against 'em. Fox as yet
thinking himself most concerned, yea to have the oversight of the Quakers
affairs, went on preaching with such boldness, confidence, and care of their
business, that he run himself into many dangers. So also did Keith and Penn.
Whether with a design to avoid the danger, or because they supposed that they
could and ought to deserve well by their Counsel, and Authority, at the hands
of their friends that were living elsewhere, it is not known; In the year 77
they went together into Holland, and part of Germany, to visit some few friends
they had in those Countries; In which Voyage what was done by them I shall
endeavor to show in the following book: In the mean time the daily increase of
evil started reproach and oppression against many. There was afterward a great
persecution begun in the County of Nottingham, which being also diffused into
other Provinces, and at length, in the year 80 through the whole Land, run
through the people with an exceeding violence. This affair, that year, Penn and
Mead did accurately describe, and many others whose fellowship with those that
suffered Calamities was such, that what they endured they thought done to
themselves; and therefore they sent their desires to King and Parliament, to
inform them of the Injuries done to their friends, and entreat at length a
remedy and help, against those evils of so long Continuance. Tho I could insert
Innumerable examples of their troubles, that I may not excur without the bounds
of my intended brevity, I shall content my self to repeat two of 'em, mentioned
by those whom I have already named, so far I suppose from being unknown, that
tho they have been kept silent, their truth may be attested by the memory of
many as yet, for I write nothing but what I am assured of. W. Godrig of Banwal,
in Somersetshire, being desired to give light to somewhat by his Oath, knowing
certainly that he would religiously refuse it, upon his refusal, was dragged
into Jayl, and despoiled of all his goods and movables to the value of 244 lib.
ster. and also Immovables, whose yearly value was supposed to amount to 60 lib.
or thereabout, at last, after thirteen years Imprisonment, all his Estate was
publicly Confiscated. Mich. Renald, a wealthy and monyed Man in the County of
Bark-shire, owed the Tithes of his Land for one year, to about the sum of 10
lib. which he, refusing to pay, was summoned by the Creditor, being also so
unwilling to follow such a suit, that he rather would have sustained any
greater detriment; the cause was so ordered in Judgment, and the trial given in
the plaintiff's favor, that the Collectors for a fine, out of his Cattle or
stuff, should instead of ten, take 60 lib. wherewith these fellows, being
cunning, severe, and hot for their gain, were scarce contented; they took away
to the value of 97 lib. besides, being their own Officers, they take as their
wages, out of the shaves of Corn about the worth of 12 lib. more. About this
time the Quakers counted 243 that were dead, by wounds and strokes received at
their Meetings. While these things were done in England, in Scotland, also
especially the Northern part, much trouble was raised against the Quakers, and
that by reason of their public Preachings; some were greatly sined, others
refusing to pay them, had their goods taken from them, and that to the double
of what was laid on: Some were miserably kept in Custody, amongst whom was
Barclay's father mentioned in the former book, and Alexander Skein, once famous
amongst the Magistrates of Aberdeen; yet amongst all the Calamities and Sorrows
they suffered, they had no greater grief, torment, nor sorrow, than to see and
understand their Religion, Behavior, and Actions, to be so execrably, and
maliciously defam'd'd, and reviled: For so they were every where in Libels and
Verses, Base, and Reproachful pictures described, and designed, and that often
by the vilest sort of Men. So in familiar Conference, eatings, and drinkings,
there was scarce a talkative, prattling, or babbling fellow, that loved to talk
or act Comically, but he must reduce his discourse and gesture, to traduce the
sincerity and simplicity of the Quakers. There were no ^ordid Vagrants, Quacks,
Juglers, or Gamesters, that had a mind to please the people, or make themselves
be laughed at; but must bring in the Quakers, in their Gesticulation, and
Buffoonry. Yea, the Theaters, and shows in Plays and Comedys, which are wholly
exploded, when void of wantonness, and not Armed with the follies, and Madness
of such words, and Actions. These must assign the Quakers their Acts, Speeches
and Motions, and so, lay open to the view of the world they professed
themselves Masters to know and display the Lives, and Actions of all sorts of
Men. Yea, in the Courts of Kings and Princes, their Fools, and Pleasants, which
they kept to relax them from grief and pensiveness, could not show themselves
more dexterously ridiculous, than by representing the Quakers, or aping the
motions of their mouth, voice, gesture, and countenance: I heard a pleasant
story from them: Helen which the English for shortness calls Nell at London, a
most noted Dancer at the Playhouse, (afterward a miss of King Cha. II.) tho she
could imitate all the Actors by any gesture of her body, yet she could not by
her out-most effort and endeavor, even before the King and Courtiers (whom she
often pleased with such ludicrous Actions) Act the Quaker so to the life as to
draw out, compress, and remit the Spirit, and so to ape their praying and
holding forth, without betraying force and affectation, and how unhappy she was
in Imitating those Actions, which she could never have knowledge of by any
Conjecture. I was told the like of one of the Kings fools, by those that were
Eyewitnesses of the matter. The Quakers were also greatly afflicted in
Leicester, and Somersetshire, in the year 81 and 82. There is a Village in
Leicester, not far distant from the chief City of the whole province, thither
many of the Quakers are conveen'd and assembled, which was not pleasing to some
Inhabitants, and especially Ministers of Churches that lived in those places.
Some young Men and Boys watched to disturb their Meeting, and at other times
Men with silence and constancy; when they met, they Immediately assault them
unawares, take 'em, pull the Men's hats and women's upper coats from 'em, push
'em out of the house, throws mud upon 'em and chases 'em abroad: At a certain
time the laborers joined with the Company of Boys, and falling on the Quakers,
crowded together, beating them with many blows, and dragging 'em out by the
necks, rolled 'em in the Clay, and then thrust 'em into Prison: At another
time, some young Men and Boys, (who tho little chitts yet flew on them with
Manly boldness) filled one of the women's mouths so with water and clay, that by
their Villainy they almost bereaved her of her life. This these youths said they
began to do at the command of a certain Parish Minister; this last was done in
presence of one of the Ministers, that looked on, and yet did not dissuade them
from their Rudeness. These indeed were done by the Rabble, which we must always
distinguish from the Counsels, and Statutes, which the Magistrates Lawfully
justify, and approve of. There was another and greater persecution at Bristoll,
which, for the greatness of the matter, I must digress from my purposed brevity
to give some account of. This City in the War betwixt King Cha. I. And the
Parliament amongst the first stood firm to the Parliament's party, so it also
principally withstood the King and his Brother the Duke of York's endeavors
and designs, adhering fast to those Members of Parliament, who urged with great
Eagerness and Zeal, the destruction of Popery, and Exclusion of York, as one
that was twisted with, and wedded to Popery; and because the Presbyterians and
Independents were of that Number, they incurred the great envy and hatred of
the Royal Family, and of those Peers who thought it their duty and interest to
adhere to the King in all his designs. In this City it self there were not
wanting of those, who having the power in their hand, used it at their
pleasure, to gratify the Court, and regard their own and others profit, and be
revenged on others whom they knew to be their Enemies. It was hard to gain any
thing upon the Presbyterians, they therefore turned to the Independents,
disturbing their Meetings every where: In short, the infesting assemblies,
afflicting, vexing, and pillaging their frequenters, broke out upon the
Quakers, and they were made the Theater, and Subject of the Calamity: The
pretense was ancient, but now more stretched that the Quakers fomented the
Civil War, and assembled with Arms, being dragged daily from their Meetings,
and brought before the Magistrate, refusing to take the Oath of fidelity (it
being contrary to their Conscience to swear to any Oath) they were immediately
thrown into Prisons and Gaols, which proving in vain, they resolved to treat
them with greater force and rigor: A band of Men being thus appointed, and
furnished, whose Captain was always a praetor of the City, (whom they call
Sheriff, not he that is Mayor) and also some pettifogging Lawyer, that as often
as the Quakers assembled together, upon the least Cobweb pretense of
Information, they run all to the house, break the door, beat out the Men,
Women, and Children, without respect to Sex, or Age, drawing, driving, and
dragging them into Jayl: The first onset was in the Parish of St. Jam. in the
middle of December. because the Master of the house had not paid his fine, for his
Man's absence, when the Train-bands was viewed, because his fine had not been
exacted, they seized what was in his house for the Kings use: Thus taking, and
snatching away what they pleased, they destroyed burnt and scattered the rest;
again they return after six days, and the little that was brought in, in that
time. In the like manner they expose to be trampled and trodden on: In this
expedition a certain City-Captain was their leader. The Quakers return seven
days after to the same empty house, where there was not so much as a seat,
which the Sheriff understanding, with a Tribe of young Men and Boys following
him, comes to the Qnakers with rage, and fury, and falling upon them not daring
to resist, they scattered, and defeated them without much business; and rushing
in upon a widdow's retirement, they snatched away, broke and threw out Chests,
Coffers, Boxes, Dales, Planks, and Casements: The Quakers returning three days
after, were treated, and chased in the like manner by the Ruffians, who then
threw out the little Remnants, and pulling down the house, they equaled it
with the ground. The Quakers having taken another house in the Village, about
the 1st of Jan. (the beginning of the new year, as we divide, and describe it)
thither they go, the Sheriff being told, he with his Clients, and followers,
enticed with the new prospect of prey, marched with a quick pace, and the sign
being given, every one for himself without any order, flies on the Men, and
their goods; here also being none that either could, or would resist them; they
satisfied their desires as they formerly had done. The Quakers once more three
days after made choice of another house elsewhere, thither also these Men and
Boys do rush for further reward, and again assault, and lay hands upon them,
but this house was Confiscated to the King. After five days Interval, the
Quakers returning to their old house in that Village, were set upon by the
Sheriff and his Crew, being seized, they were dragged before the Magistrate,
nothing remaining in the half fallen and whole spoiled house that they could
take away, who, when the Oath of fidelity was tendered refusing to swear at all,
were thrown presently into the common Goal, but it being full, the rest of them
were thrust into Bridewell, and other places, In the mean time it cannot easily
be told what great sums of Money they laid on and took from 'em, and that for
nothing, but because they had found 'em at Meetings, tho sometimes they were
altogether silent; and for those that could not pay by reason of their poverty
they forced the richer sort to make satisfaction, which was often laid at the
Merchants Doors: What violence and baseness was here to be seen will easily
appear by one Example. There was one Rich. Marsh, a noted Merchant, a certain
Informer comes to his house, to demand a fine of a few Merks, having broke up
his Warehouse, they searched it for Money, but not finding it, they seized on
his books, and bills of debtor and Creditor, and several bundles of Papers and
Letters, and many other Writings, pretending to tatch them, and keep 'em to
themselves, besides, ravaging the rest of the house, whatever wares or utensils
they found, they make bold to meddle with it on the like pretense, destroying
and pulling down what stuff was in the house, and at last having feasted and
glutted themselves with Wine, they went off with all the booty they had met
with: It was then the Subject of all Tongues and Discourses, that those Men
that were employed in hatrassing the Quakers, and dividing their goods and
money amongst themselves, must needs be enriched with such an accession of
wealth and money they so often lighted on: It happened that Tho. Earl the then
Sheriff, a very considerable and honest Man, mindful of his Dignity and Office,
called one that was suspected to give an account concerning the disposal of
that money and goods: When he could not deny what was really true, yet would
not confess, he first endeavored to turn the stream of the discourse, but the
other continuing to urge his query, in stead of extricating, he inveigl'd
himself more, and then, his anger beginning to boil out, he threatened to bring
the matter before the Parliament, who, he supposed would make the Sheriffs
Enquiry fruitless.

The Qua^ers were daily impar'd and punished, and that both in their Lives and
Estates, so that none of their Persons or Possessions were safe; Yet they
forbore not their Ancient Meetings and Assemblies: Neither did their Enemies
leave off to grieve and afflict them, till they had showed their Insolence and
Baseness as far as they could. The Officers, Sergeants and Flocks of Boys, not
only when the Quakers assembled in public, but also every where, whomsoever
they met they seized; some of 'em throwing 'em so violently on their Faces,
that they could not rise again without great pain, beating and bruising others
with Canes; and while they bemoaned themselves under the smart of their Wounds,
the others insulted with a barbarous cruelty: Yea, One of the Informers being
mad with Fury, sometimes took a Boy; lifting him up by the Hair, and at other
times, as he had understood the Intrigue of Dressing his Discourse in a more
enticing Dialect, accosting a Girl with pleasing expressions, whom, because she
refused his Kisses and Amorous Embraces, he held by the Arm with such Force and
Violence, that he easily distorted the Tender Joints. Neither did he only kick
Old Men to the Ground with his Feet, but also Women, Young, Big-bellied, or
Old. If one had offered to intercede for another, though it had been an Husband
for a Tender Wife, the Blows were presently exchanged upon himself. 'Twas
little to hear 'em daily belch out such Names as these, Viz. Whores, Bitches
and Bawds, words not to be used by one Cstristian to another. A certain Boy,
scarce out of his Hanging-Sleeves, wantoning and playing with a young Girl,
with that impudent Levity, that he began to handle the Girl obscenely, she for
the Roguish endeavor of his Immodest Contaction, and also, to preserve her
Honor and Chastity, gave him a small chop upon the Cheek; the Informer knowing
it would have her put in Jayl, because she had aimed with her hand to defend
her Chastity from the daunings of the young Rogues lust, objecting that without
the least necessity, she had beat the boy out of a Turbulent Spirit: The 16th
of April in the year following, the Sheriff and Informer rushed in
precipitantly upon ten women assembled together. These they ordered to be
dragged to Bridwel, one of them being with child was very tender, whom the
Sheriff dragged along with his own hand (for he was one that needed not a
Sergeants assistance) neither could Prayers or Complaints induce the cruel
Monster to desist. The house being emptied, the Sheriff brought, or let in
Laborers, Porters, Carriers, and such like equally famous for Rudeness and
Insolence, and so fitted for a work of this Nature, who took their pleasure in
Eating and Drinking of the spoils and booty of that day, while the others were
enduring such Cruelty and Misery. After they had Eaten and Drunken what they
could, providing themselves in Banner and Drum, they past the rest of the time
in Playing, Dancing and Singing, which the Sheriff took pleasure to feed his
Eyes with the sight of: The Quaker woman seeing this, asked the Sheriff if he
thought it Convenient, that a house devoted to the worship of God, should be
made a Theater of their Lustful shows; the Sheriff, whose mind was always so
forstall'd with hatred against the Quakers, that he could digest nothing that
proceeded from them, was so highly offended that he Commanded her presently to
be thrown into Bridewel amongst her Companions: In prison no less affliction
followed after 'em by the harshness of the Keeper, and Cruelty of his Servants.
There was a Vault wherein Prisoners that were no Malefactors, were suffered to
Converse, work and discourse together, but this small liberty, he would not
permit the Quakers to enjoy. When they endeavored any thing at set times, when
they had opportunity to sit or talk together, he disturbed, divided 'em, and
shut 'em assunder, beating 'em upon finding what they had said or done, he
threw them amongst Theives and Rogues, where they could not see and meet one
another, but must strive and struggle with so odious a Company: When the
Sheriff or informer came into Prison, they treated them no, less harshly and
furiously: At last, the Number of the Prisoners was so great, that there was no
Room to lie in all Night, nor scarce to breath freely by day, so that they
almost all fell into various Diseases, and danger of being soon overtaken by
Death, a piece of Comfort, since it would have allayed the miseries of life,
yet here they are discharged to deplore their Condition: The Prisoners, and four
Physicians of the City whom the matter was known to, wrote a Letter to the
Mayor, and the rest of the Magistrates, that they might be acquainted with
their Calamity, the Keepers Cruelty, and the whole affair, endeavoring to
lighten their Miseries and Torments, and might assist 'em against the Cruelty
of their Persecuters. But the Mayor, in whom the greatest power is lodged, and
the rest of the Magistracy having read their Letters, and being moved with
Compassion, resolved to succor these distressed People, knowing that no
Relaxation would be obtained by those fellows of an Inferior Rank, especially
the Sheriff, whom I have mentioned, who fortified himself so much at London by
others Authority, that if they would do any thing, it must be done amongst
themselves, and that those that were dispossessed of their houses and ground,
might have Liberty to complain of the Injury they had sustained. In Apr. there
was a Court at Bristoll for the Quaker Prisoners, where all things being duly
heard and considered, the Quakers upon payment of a cer^^ fine, and taking the
Oath of fidelity that was tendered to them, were offeted to be freed from their
Goal and Misery; but they choose Continuance in Goal, rather than the fine and
Oath: There was one Erasm. Dole, who suffered himself to be brought in to use
the ^erm of declaring instead of that of Swearing: A certain Sergeant plucked
out a Bible unawares, and laying his hand upon it put the book to his mouth
according to the usual manner of giving an Oath: Whereupon not a few did vainly
boast that there were amongst the Quakers who refused not an Oath; and that now
the l^e being broken, we would bring 'em to the rest which they seemed to
decline with an equal Aversion. But that this might not take Impre^ion in the
minds of Men, Dole in a book gives a faithful account how the whole matter was
managed: Thus the Quakers were remitted to Goal, and more Barbarously treated
by the Keepers them formerly, there being no Room left for Prayer or price to
obtain the least bodily Convenience. The Quakers not being fully content to
have these affairs known only to those of their own City, did in many writings
publish, and divulge 'em to the Perusal and Remembrance of the rest of the
Nation: About this time many Quakers at London, for not forbearing their
public Meetings, and refusing to pay the sines they owed on that score, were
thrown into Prison, and forced there to remain; In the mean time, the sharping
crew of Informers took away their goods wheresoever they could light on 'em,
not according to the sum was laid on, but as they pleased to value them, which
was at little enough. Among the Prisoners there were two Quaker Preachers, W.
Bringly, and Fr. Stamper, from the latter was taken 49 lib. ster. and more. At
Wortham in Suffolk, Jo. Bishop a Countreyman, owed the Parish Minister 8 lib.
for two years Tithes, which when he did not pay, the Minister got out a
Judgment, for 76 lib. to be Levied out of his Horses, Sheep, Cows, and Oxen.
While the Kingdom was in this State, tossed with the storms of Persecution and
trouble, King Cha. II. dyed and Ja. the D. of York succeeded in his stead: The
7th of that Name: In the year 1685, being installed into the Throne, the first
thing he Levelled the force of his desires at, was the Introducing, and
advancing the Popish Religion: that he might open the way for, and abate the
envy of others against it, he granted a Common Privilege to all, to exercise
their Religion according to their pleasures, all being tickled with the
specious Allurement, that were formerly hated because of their persuasion, ran
as it were upon the first Allarum to Congratulate by their special and
particular Addresses the tenderness of his Majesty's grace and favor, and
throw themselves into his Protection and Patronage: The Quakers also all, tho
less Courtly, and more rustic in a certain writing, very Civil and
Complaisant, emitted by the order of a General Meeting, gave him thanks, and
gratefully laid hold of his Benevolence. About that time were detained in the
Prisons of England 1460 Quakers, these all by the coming out of the Kings
Edict, had Liberty to go out, and live as they pleased; and afterward when 200
and more were thrown into Prison; In the year following, they had the same
impunity and liberty: Moreover, that the King might avoid all suspicion of
severity, and attain the Popular praise of Benignity, he gave in charge to his
Courtiers and Servants, that none of 'em should dare to trouble a Quaker, tho
he stood or passed by the King without being discovered. Nay, more, he used
sometimes to come to them, when he knew they desired to see and speak with him,
finding them ashamed or afraid to approach; he prevented and Anticipated the
subject of their desire: A thing seldom to be met with in the Court. It was
pleasant and facetious when a certain Quaker drew nigh to the King, who, tho
the Quaker was covered, yet discovered himself, he desired the King not to do
it, but was answered, wherever there is the person of a King, there must of
nece^^ty always one be discovered: Thus the King was ingraciated into the
Quakers favors; having extraordinarily kindled their Love and Affection. Yet
some thought their reason was therefore bestowed that they might be so wise as
to look further then they could see with their Eyes, did not prize the Kings
bounty and facility so highly, putting a great difference betwixt the effect of
a free and unbiased Inclination, and Product of a self-seeking Contrivance and
Design, and knowing the measure of the Kings endeavor took all his indulgence
as an ill Omen, and sign of a storm to follow a Clam. W. Penn was greatly in
favor with the K. the Quakers sole Pa^ron at Court, on whom the hateful Eyes
of his Enemies were intent: the K. loved him as a singular and entire Friend,
and imparted to him many of his Secrets and Counsels. The K. often honored him
with his audience in private, discoursing with him of various affairs and that
not for one, but many hours together; delaying to hear the best of his peers,
who at the same time were attending in the presence Chamber, or some other nigh
by, to meet with the King. One of 'em being envious, and impatient of delay,
taking it as an affront to see Penn more regarded then he, adventured to take
the freedom to tell the K. that when he met with Penn he regarded not his
Nobility. The K. made no other Answer then that Penn talked Ingeniously, and he
heard him willingly, Penn being so highly favored by the K. acquired thereby a
Number of Friends; These also that formerly were e're acquainted with him, when
they had any thing to be done or desired of the K. came to, Courted and
Entreated Penn to promote their business by his favor with the K. He was
especially thus importuned by the Quakers. Penn refused none of his friends any
Office he could do for any of 'em, with the K. but was principally ready to
serve the Quakers, especially wherever their Religion was concerned. It Is
usually thought when you do me one favor readily, you thereby encourage me to
expect a second. Thus they run to Penn without Intermission as their alone
Pillar and Support, who always caressed and received 'em cheerfully, and
effected their business by his Interest and Eloquence. Hence his house and
Gates were daily thronged by a Numerous train of Clients and Suppliants,
desiring him to present their addresses to his Majesty. There were sometimes
there 200 and more. When the carrying on these affairs required expenses at
Court for Writings, and drawing out of things into Acts, Coppyings, Fees, and
other Moneys which are due or at least are usually paid, Penn so discreetly
managed matters, that out of his own, which he had in abundance, he liberally
discharged all emergent expenses. Tho he did thus, yet could he not decline the
virulent Lashes of Malicious Tongnes, and these of the lower as well as the
higher sort (which came to his Ears, but did not much affect him) that he was
not so Active in his friends concerns, so much from the freedom of a willing
Inclination, as the Mercenary expectation of profit and advantage; that all
that confluence of People that Courted him, and Industrious Administration of
their affairs was not for nothing if it were put to the Test, but rewarded with
more then what was expended: This reproach Penn only repulsed with some by
silence, the best avenger of Calumny: But with the King, who was desirous to
know what truth was in it, he so cleared and acquitted himself, that he judged
him not only Blameless, but them also tardy, who had the vanity to think, or
folly to assert Penn to be guilty of such Malicious aspersions: Penn being
drowned with such Cares and Businesses, esteeming it his duty to look to his
own affairs, lest by the Continuance of such liberality, he should dry up the
Fountains of his paternal Inheritance, he did not wholly abandon his
Be^evolence and Diligence, but did so by degrees Moderate, and rule 'em, that
he gave ^o occasion of an invi^ious Complaint: Penn having laid down this
certain Conclusion, that there must needs be one Society of Christians, the
common safety and advantage Requiring, that every one worship God freely
without any Impediment and Hinderance, providing only he lived peaceably, and
submissively to the power and honor of the Magistrate; and since this Kingdom
was denied that Privilege, having the way to that liberty obstructed by an
Oath, which every one by Law was required to take, and by other penalties laid
upon Dissenters, Penn treated with the King of these two, who was also desirous
to have 'em removed, and therefore received the address more willingly; Penn so
defended and confirmed the Kings Edict, which was now emitted to this purpose
in a certain Book he published for that end, that ^e incurred the hatred,
bitterness, and anger of the Protestant party Universally and Implacably; some
of the Quakers also were ^o displeased that they did not love him and extol him
as before, others wholly avoided and abandoned him: The Protestants exclaimed
that Penn as well as the King aimed at Popery with his outmost endeavor,
calling him not only a Papist, but also a Jesuit, an order that is equally
crafty, and hated. The Quakers thought it not at all amiss to have the penal
Laws wholly Abiegated, which the Quaker subjects most of all were exposed to,
but liked not to have the Law concerning the Oath repea^'d, lest the Papists
thereby being let into the Government might quickly renew these sanguinary
Laws, and by means thereof take, weary, drive out and kill the Protestants, and
especially the Quakers according to the custom of their Tenets and Religion, as
if they had only been absolved from former Constitutions, to be condemned more
cruelly to severer punishment: Thus they feared the snare chiefly to be laid
for themselves. While many were thus hurried in their minds, Penn so proved
himself in another book not to be addicted to, but an hater of Popery, by the
Testimony of his word, his Conscience, which is a thousand Witnesses, and of
God than whom none can be greater, that if the words of Man may ever be
believed, every one may credit Penn not to speak false, blazing it with any
Color of subtility, but that he wrote truth with Candor and Sincerity. Tho
Penn could not, by that book change the opinion that many had received of him,
yet he so fully convinced the Quakers that from them he retrieved his ancient
praise, for some time intermitted, so that they owned him for one constant to
their Religion, and yet left him to the singularity of his own opinion: So the
Quakers under this King lived quietly and easily, except a few, that were
somewhat troubled, by the ensnaring Tricks of some deceitful men: but the Time
of New Trouble, and Change of all was at hand: For now the King, weary of
waiting, thinking his Designs not capable of being defeated by any, introduced
Popery not hiddenly, but openly: Not to mention others, these of the Highest
Dignity, even Bishops and Archbishops, that withstood his Intentions, were,
some of 'em, brought over to his Cause, by Bribes, and others put into the
Tower of London. These being Resolute and Courageous in their honorable cause
found by experience how far it was necessary and yet how hard to suffer for the
liberty of their Conscience. And since my discourse has led me hither, I cannot
but add what was said by the Quakers themselves. When the Bishops of England
were now thus Stated, some of the Quakers took the Freedom to tell 'em that
same mischief, returned now on themselves, that formerly came out from them
upon the Quakers: When it came to their Ears, they resented it ill, that such
words should be spoken and scattered of them by the Quakers: Robert Barclay
understanding this went presently to the Tower, and told 'em all modestly that
was done against the Quakers, both by the command and permission of the
Bishops, to which narrative they could make no other reply but that of silence.
But after 3 years K. James's Reign expired and was succeeded by K. William the
Third, of Nassaw, hereditary State-holder of Holland, Son in Law, and Nephew to
James by his Sister, who in all the series and course of his Life showed
himself the best of Princes and Generals, equally adorned with Civil and
Warlick virtue and withal Armed with Christian Piety, a like useful to Church
and State, both by his Inclination and Education in his own Country, which tho
it has no Kings, yet produces, and fits 'em for other Nations: Upon his first
taking up the Reins of Government, he beliav'd himself to all with that
Moderation, that it was manifest, he desired rather to be loved then feared,
and to bereave none of Liberty of Conscience in Religion; so that all justly
esteemed him a most prudent and moderate Prince, equal to the best King that
e're preceeded him. He granted Freedom and Indulgence to all but only the
Papists, whose infidelity he suspected those he treated with a mixture of Grace
and Severity, making always the former the greatest Ingredient. The Quakers
also could not but love him, and embrace him as their most effectual defender,
being suffered to perform their Religious exercises, without the hinderance of
fear and molestation. This Royal benevolence was enhanced by the Parliament,
which the King called after his Inanguration, according to the ancient Custom
of Kings, who used to have a Parliament in the beginning of their Reign, that
if any former Law were to be changed or Abolished, it might be legally done
with consent of the house. This Parliament ratified a Liberty in Religion,
giving immunity to all, from the force and severity that formerly resulted from
any penal Act, excepting yet the Papists, who were reckoned such Enemies that
no peace could be established with them, and granting liberty to them would be
taking it from our selves, and so to raise war against our own safety:
Excepting also Socinians, and those of the like stamp who either openly or by
Clandestine practices, Aimed at subverting the Foundations of the Christian
faith. Thus the Quakers had liberty; but since it is a matter of some moment to
know the Rights and Privileges given 'em by King and Parliament, and inserted
in Acts of Liberty in Religion, it will not be fruitless to handle it more
largely, if it were but for that French Authors sake whom I mentioned before,
not to his praise, a base unconstant and Roguish fellow, who, after many
turnings, and windings in Religion, as both strangers and they that know him
assure me by Letters, plays now strenuously the Papist at Paris: However it is
certain he treats of this theme, as if he had aimed at no other design then to
bring in some and play upon others, with a few frothy flowrishes of words: This
is the matter of fact. The Parliament made it their purpose and endeavor, to
give Liberty of Conscience to such as I have Named. A Committee of a select
number of the house was ordered to treat of this affair. They when doubting of
the Quakers Doctrine, and says concerning the sacred Scripture and mystery of
the holy Trinity, because they use not to call the Scripture the word of God,
(thinking that name to be proper only to Christ, or to the internal word of
God, under which sense external Letters can never fall) nor to term the Father,
Son and Spirit three persons (that being a word not used in Scripture, ordered
their Articles and opinion to be presently inquired into. Two famous Quakers at
that time, Geo. Withad and John Virughton treated of these matters with Sir
Tho. Clargy* a member of the house. He advised (...) with Kindness and Candor,
to publish their mind fully and fairly concerning these two Articles that were
doubted of. They without delay write and subscribe their Thoughts, and
willingly presented 'em to that honorable Man, from whom, as they had received
a wholesome Advice, they now also expect a seasonable assistance. The form of
each of 'em for himself was to this purpose. I believe with my heart, and
confess with my mouth the sacred Scriptures to be Divine, left us by Men
Inspired of God, as an exact rule of our faith and behavior; and I profess to
believe in one only God, who is the father, and in Jesus Christ his Eternal
Son, very God, and very Man, and in the Holy Spirit one, and the same God with
the Father and Son blessed for evermore. This confession having pleased Clargy
was given to be read to the rest of the Members, who thought fit to call in
some nine or ten Quakers, that were ready at hand for such a design, to
question 'em if that were their faith and persuasion: Upon their owning it the
day following the matter was presented by the Committee to the whole house; and
thus it was agreed that the Quakers should have liberty, and ordered it should
be recorded and drawn out into an Act. While public affairs were thus changed,
W. Penn was not so regarded and respected by King and Court, as he was formerly
by King James; partly because of his intimacy with King James, and partly for
adhering to his old opinion, concerning the Oath of fidelity which was now
mitigated but not abrogated. Besides, this it was suspected that Penn
Corresponded with the late King, now Lurking in France, under the umbrage and
protection of the French King, an enemy justly and equally odious to the
British King and united Provinces, 'twixt whom there was now an inveterate
War. This suspicion was followed and also increased by a Letter intercepted
from King James to Penn, desiring Penn to come to his assistance in the present
State and Condition he was in, and express the Resentments of his favor and
benevolence. Upon this Penn being cited to appear was asked, why King James
wrote unto him, he answered he could not hinder such a thing, being further
questioned what Resentments these were, which the late King seemed to desire of
him, he answered he knew not, but said he supposed King James would have him to
endeavor his Restitution, and that tho he could not decline the suspicion, yet
he could avoid the guilt, and since he had loved King James in his prosperity,
he should not hate him in his adversity, yea, he loved him as yet for many
favors he had conferred on him, tho he would not join with him in what
concerned the State of the Kingdom. He owned he had been much obliged to King
James, and that he would reward his kindness by any private office as far as he
could, observing inviolably and entirely that duty to the public, and
Government which was equally Incumbent upon all Subjects, and therefore that he
had never the vanity to think of endeavoring to restore him that Crown which
was fallen from his head, so that nothing in that Letter could at all seem to
fix guilt upon him. From that time Penn withdrew himself more and more from
business, and at length, at London, in his own house, confined himself as it
were to a voluntary exile, from the converse, fellowship, and conference of
others, employing himself only in his Domestic affairs, that he might be
devoted more to Meditation and Spiritual exercises: In the year Ninety three,
two books of his came out in English, the one of a Solitary life, the other a
Key to understand the Articles of the Quakers faith. This year Penn went out of
his voluntary Prison, compensing the leisure of his lonely life by the comfort
of Marriage, which he now entered into, and the greater toil he took on himself
in managing all his business and affairs. Geo. Fox also after many changes and
vici^^itudes, having seen various chances and dangers, after he had often been
Anxious concerning the progress and continuance of his life, now not doubting
to Consummate and end his Labors, in the beginning of Ninety one resigned up
his Life. After his Death his Widow Margaret, an old woman of about 76 years,
who had shared with him in the office of preaching, wrote thus to a General
Meeting of women held at London that same year.

Most Dear Friends, and Sisters in the Lord,
I Did not scruple to write unto you, from the Sense of that which was from the
beginning, which now is, and for ever shall be, and that for your great Love
and care of me, and the half of my self, my Husband, as long as he labored
among you for the Lord. Since he is now entered into Rest and heavenly Glory, if
we'll regard what he said while he was alive, let us fix our constant Dependence
upon God: Neither doubt I, if we walk with that Spirit of Life and Strength he
had, but we shall be preserved even unto the end; In the mean time growing up
and bearing fruit unto the Lord, we shall become Trees Justice to the praise
and Glory of God. Wherefore I do earnestly warn and exhort you to abide
constantly in the service of God; for ye shall certainly reap the reward of
much Consolation in this World, and of an eternal Recompense in that which is
to come. Farewell, and join with me in praising of God.


Fox not long before he died by the Interposal of certain Friends and
Amanuenses's wrote a large book in English, only with reference to what
concerned himself, during the time he labored among his friends in the
Ministry; and provided by his latter will it should be carefully Printed, and a
Copy of it sent to all the yearly and Quarterly Meetings of his Friends,
wherever gathered together throughout the whole World, in Remembrance of him,
and for their particular Advantage. The book was published being strengthened
with the Authority of a General assembly, of that persuasion about the end of
the year ensuing. I long sought it with great Industry, and after much pains it
came at length to my hand, but not till the whole work was almost finished and
a part of it already received from the Printer. I perceive by that book some
things we have related concerning Fox to be there omitted; but what we have said in
ours of Fox does for the main agree with what there is recorded. I made some
Remarks from thence of Fox, which tho I knew not before, I adventured to make
use of relying on his own Credit and Testimony. I may take the liberty to say
further of that great book of Fox, that it contains but few Historical
Narratives, consisting chiefly (...) Enumerating places he Traveled to all the
days of his Life, and the disputes he there maintained with several sorts of
Men, and the almost innumerable Orations and Epistles he wrote. Fox was a Man
alike famous for the temper and disposition of his body and mind, of a very
solid and succulent body, and a mind fitly attemper'd thereto, of a great
Memory, and tho not at all dull, yet not Extraordinarily quick and acute;
Always more ready to think than to talk, and yet more forward to speak than to
write: Unacquainted with no Doctrine, or Art tho never so Vulgar, not Curious,
yet sometimes taking pleasure to divert himself, by playing with the cheats of
the Learned. Laborious and diligent tho 'twere of little or nothing, in all the
minutes of his Common leisure Indefatigable, even when struggling with the
greatest of troubles. Much given to watching, making the measure shorter than
that of the Night. So given to frugality both for Health and Religion, that he
once fasted ten days as he testifies of himself, being equally temperate in all
the parts of his Life: Bold, and always of a constant patience, doing all
things so openly as not fearing to make 'em known, so enduring all things as if
the sole suffering, and not the Cause, or Action, were glorious; so ambitioning
the Title of a Martyr, as if he had thought the Name alone to be sufficient.

He was moreover courageous, tenacious of his Opinion, and morose, so much
considing in his Person, Pains and Advice, that he thought nothing could be
done rightly, or perfected without him, being de^irous every where to be
present, and preside; and what happened to be done well, he laid claim to the
glory of it, pretending Title to the Reward of the Praise of it from all; and
yet all this under color of Simplicity and Humility. Pleasant and Bountiful to
those that loved him, but bitter against others that were not of his Society,
not only hurting 'em verbally, but really as fer as he could, and that
sometimes not only imprudently, but even immodestly and impudently too. One of
his ancient friends and acquaintances writes, in a certain Letter of Fox, that
he was, according to the measure of his Capacity devoted greatly to the worship
of God, and promoting of Piety among Men, meek in Conversation, yet tainted
with this, which almost all teachers labor under, in a new Sect or Discipline,
that he was too harsh amongst the Quakers themselves, especially those that
would not receive such forms as he had conceived or constituted. He left many
books, which some of his followers do but faintly praise, yet others extol 'em
to the Skies; few touch 'em that are not of their persuasion, and no body reads
'em that loathes repetition of the same thing, in various dress of words and
expressions, or dislikes treating a theme with that Prolixity, as not to regard
what is sufficient, but how much can be said.

While Fox was alive, the Quakers lived with a Brotherly Concord, though there
always were some that differed in some Article, beside others that fell off
from their Fellowship; but Fox, as their supreme Master, being removed, whose
sayings and doings they regarded as a Law, the Bond of Union being now broken,
though hitherto they seemed to be led and governed only by his Mind and Desire,
a great Discord arose in England, especially among those, who, tho they were
not much wiser than the Vulgar, arrogated more Wit and Accuracy to themselves.
The Subject of this Controversy was the Humanity of Christ, first kindled some
Years ago in Pensylvania, and now tossed 'twixt Keith and his Friends, and
others, with their Followers, puffed up with some Knowledge. I shall treat of
this Controversy in the following book: They Have Disputed in England concerning
that Article, almost to the losing of all Society. He that pursues the Life of
an Enemy, neglects the use of no sort of Weapon; but he that studies to rob him
of his Fame, forbears to revile him with no sort of Reproach. That Controversy
was so invidious, divisive and troublesome, and persu'd with so much eagerness
of mind, that men being flushed with the Desire of Overcoming, were not content
to contend with words, nor only to load one another with many Suspicions, but
also to spread an ill Report of their Antagonists, to hunt after, and wound one
another with Calumnies, openly denouncing Enmity, Division and Schism.

Upon this, it is almost a wonder to think what Ignominy the Quakers did every
where incur* what Reports were in all places dispersed of 'em, for their so
great desire of strife and contention, that their whole Church seemed infected
with that Itch and Contagion: And since the division of their parties was such,
there was little Conjunction Peace and Brotherly affection to be expected, nay,
rather the time seemed to draw nigh when the Sect and its Name must dwindle
into nothing, and that by the force of its own endeavor. There were some
concerned in this Controversy who, tho they managed it not by force and
violence, but hidden Engines, not by open blows, but private Lashes yet
certainly contributed to their downfall and destruction: There were General
Councils of 'em held yearly at London, from ninety two to the year ninety four.

In this year Keith came from Pensilvania to London, and was called by the
Council of that year, as the principal head, and adviser of the whole affair.
After he came and was long heard, even that Council could not compose these
strifes, nor so much as a little decide the difference: So that the mischief as
yet remains with Reproach and Disgrace. Such is the stiffness and vehemence of
these Men, while now Iull'd with the soft Gale of Prosperity and Ease, that
there was never the least shadow of the like before, while they wrestled with
the rough wind of Adversity.

But of this I Will speak more fully in the following Book, lest this be swelled
beyond its bounds, and there the matter comes in, in its more proper place.

And now this and many other signs, give some no small occasion to affirm that
liberty, case, and External Tranquillity do Minister to discord, slothfulness,
wantonness, and Intemperance, which are all dangerous to Life; neither do they
always avail to the happiness of living, for not a few among these Men may be
found, that have too great a propension to vices of that nature.

The Masters and Observers of behavior omitted not to reprove such faults very
smartly, and some of them who had also committed 'em forbore not to invey
sharply against themselves. Examples hereof I Will designedly pass by, tho some
without Calumny and Reproach I could insert, lest they that are concerned may
be somewhat displeased at the ripping of that which may rub upon themselves:
Yet one I shall mention which London resounded with, lest fame report it
otherwise than perhaps it was done.

There was a very sincere Quaker, free from all suspicion of this kind, who
being scorched with the flames of Love, that the Charms of his Mistress's face
had kindled, conversed with her with too much weakness and frequency: but upon
Remorse and Knowledge of his Guilt, being pierced with Shame and Sorrow for his
sin, he makes a public Confession of his fault to the Church, submitting
himself to the Censure and Correction of his friends; yea further, for
deviating from Honesty and Modesty so far, that he might not fall into that
snare again, or for the future repeat the like wickedness, with his own hand he
Chastises himself by a present cutting off the delinquent Member.

Tho all this time they enjoyed so much liberty, yet they neither were nor are
wholly free from all sort of Commotion and Disturbance: Neither when the Oath
of fidelity, (that great invitation to oppression) was taken away, were other
pretenses of Oaths wanting, that might prove Incitements to bring on
Persecution. For from that day to this, many instances may be seen of these
Men, whose inheritance for refusing an Oath has been forfeited; some having
their goods wholly taken from 'em, others beside the loss of their goods being
cast into Prison. And since, as yet as well as before, the wilfulness of the
one party in exacting, and of the other in refusing the payment of Tithes, is
not at all impaired or abated, a time could very seldom be pitched on, wherein
there was none of 'em to be found in Custody. That the grudge of ancient, and
levity of new Enemies are the efficients of this, and not the supreme Power and
Authority, every one will easily own who considers, that Kings have many Eyes,
Ears and Hands, but yet must be always long-suffering and patient, but not able
at all times to effect what they would, nor always willing to do what they can
and should.

The End of the Second Book.
THE General History OF THE QUAKERS.
BOOK III.
The Contents.
The Quakers going to New England, in America. The coming of Quaker-Women to
New England. How they were received. The Laws of the Cities against Quakers.
The various Persecution of 'em: some were whipped; some had their Ears cut off,
others were hanged. A writing of the Magistracy of Boston, concerning those
that were hanged. Edict of King Charles to his Governors in those Countries,
to forbear Persecution. What happened in New Holland, Virginia, Barmuda's, and
other places. Pensylvania a Country for Quakers. In it was given liberty to
men of all Religions. The various and mixed multitude of men in that Country.
From hence flows a confused and various Doctrine and Conversation among the
Quakers themselves. Hence came that sharp Debate of Keith and his Adherents
against their Adversaries, chiefly concerning Christ internally and externally,
and a great confusion and disturbance of affairs thereupon. This Disputation
awakened such Dissension, Commotion and Distraction of minds, not unlike to a
mutiney and Civil War, that it was scattered from Pensylvania into England,
especially London, whereas yet it remains to this very day. Some of the Quakers
took Voyage for the East Indies. Others went into Africa. The Quakers
traveling into Neighbo^ring and Foreign Countries. What was done by them in
Holland and Friezeland. A short History of the Labadists The Departure and
Death of Anna Maria, Schurman. The Endeavors of some Quakers among men of that
Sect. What the Quakers did at Emdin, a Town in East Friezeland. There at length
liberty was offered 'em by the chief of the City. The Endeavors of Ames and
Penn in the Palatinate on the Rhine. Fox's Letter to Elizabeth, Prineess
Palatine, and the Princes 's Answer to him. Penn's Sermon before that Princess.
The Quakers Affairs in Alsace and at Gedan. Fox's wonderful Letter to the King
of Poland* The History of the Petists, as they call them in Germany. The great
wanderings of some of them. The Excursion of others into Pensylvania, the
Country so fertile of Quakers. What Quakers went into France, and with what
success. Who of 'em went iuto Italy. What happened to Love and Perrot at Rome.
George Robinson's wonderful Fortune at Jerusalem. The Suffering of Two
Quaker-women in the Island Melita, by reason of the Inquisition. The Rarity of
Mary Fishers Journey to, and Return from the Emperor of the Turks.

I Have already shown in the former Books the State of the Quakers, from their
beginning to this preseut time, in Britain, their Mother-Countrey and Nurse. I
shall now give as short a Narrative as I can of their Affairs also in other
Regions.

In treating hereof; some Places in America, subjected to the Sway of the
English Government, especially New England in the North, toward the Sea, seem
first to present themselves to our View: Hither many from Old England, flying
from the Imperious and Cruel Regency of Licentious Kings and Proud Bishops,
retired (and fixed their Residence here; Purchasing for themselves a peculiar
Inheritance, which the Quakers, among the first, ^ent to, hoping therefore
among their Friends, whom not only one Neighborhood, but also cause of
abandoning their Country, did now conjoyn and unite in one Society, they might
promote and advance their present Interest and Peace with more liberty and
safety than they had in Old England. The first that went with that Design to
these new, uncultivated and Desert Places, leaving the Pleasant and Fortunate
Island of Britain, being destin^d and sent there to bud forth the blooming
blossoms of a Religious Spring, were John Burniat, a man more Famous than
Learned, called out to the Ministry in the Year Fifty Three, Robert Hosben,
Joseph Nicholson, and several others of the Masculine Order; Ann Austin, a
Woman stricken in Years, Mother of some Children, Mary Fisher, a Maid, whose
Intellectual Faculties was greatly adorned by the Gravi^y of her Deportment,
afterward married to William Baily, a Famous Preacher, and others also of the
Female Rank. This fell out in the Year Fifty Five. Of those Burniat survives in
our present Memory, as yet I suppose a Preacher in Ireland. Many of those made
their way for Virginia, Maryland, the Caribes, Barmuda's, Barbados, and other
adjacent Islands. Of these having found little worth our Observation, I shall
discourse in the last place, if Occasion offers.

But the Women, Ann Austin and Mary Fisher, traveled into New England, and
were shortly followed by others of both Sexes. Neither were the Actions of
these very memorable, their Power being abridged by the Sufferings they were
forced to endure; which indeed may be reckoned so great and so many, that they
are not unworthy to be noticed and observed.

Of all the Tract of the New England Commonwealth, Boston is the Metropolis,
and Judiciary Seat. At that time John Endicot was Rector, or Governor of the
whole Province, one that from a very low condition was gradually mounted to
this Honor and Dignity: Of whose Temper, Behavior and Government, which was
then variously thought and talked of, and whereof there were afterward, on
both sides Witnesses, I shall content my self wholly to be silent. Next to him
was Richard Bellingham, whose manner of Life and Nature I also pass by.

At this time there was no where any thing like a Law enacted against the
Quakers. A Ship then arrived at Boston, and was no sooner Anchored than a rumor
was spread, that 2 Quaker women were come in the Ship. The Governor being
absent, he that was depute immediately sent order for seizing these women,
sealing up and keeping their Hampers, Boxes, and Chests, and bringing the Books
of their Sect, whereof they had great store, into the City, where they were
publicly burnt by the hand of the Hangman. Then the women themselves were
brought into Town, and soon after before the Judges, who presently as soon as
they sat down on the Bench pronounced the women to be certainly Quakers, for
giving the singular title of thou to the Judge, and not the more Courteous
compellation of you contrary to the custom of almost all the English. The
Judges thinking this to be a sure enough sign, and the matter to be clear and
evident of it self, their office rendering 'em best Advocates for themselves,
ordered the women to be taken and thrown into Goal, and have nothing of the
goods they had left in the Ship, not so much as their Tools and Instruments of
Writing, lest they should write of the Condition to which they were reduced, or
something of their New Religion and Doctrine.

The Jailer to complete what the Judges had begun, had the manners
Irreligiously to rob 'em of their Bibles. 'Twas also decreed that none should
go, speak or carry any meat to them: Being kept in so strait and narrow a
place, having scarce any thing to eat, sleep, or lie upon, till after some days
something of their own was suffered to be brought 'em from the Ship, which
Nichol. Vpshal a Citizen of Boston, and Member of the Church there, privately
agreed for a sum with the Goal-Keeper to let in, and also to give 'em what
sustenance was sufficient. They complained further of their treatment, as being
reproached and reviled as Whores, who scruple not to expose and defile
themselves, and upon pretense of searching the truth of the matter, of their
being most basely and rudely stripped naked, and not only viewed contrary to
Chastity and Shame, Fac'dness, but even handled with wicked and immodest hands,
without regarding those secrets of nature which modest Men would shun the
seeing or touching of: These things being so Villainous to Act, and scarce
modest to name, the women were rather forced to sit with and endure, than
betray their own shame without any Redress, or expose their Disgrace without
Sympathy or Compassion. The women abode for five weeks shut up in this lonely
and poor habitation: Then the Captain of the Ship with whom they came, before
he set Sail had leave from the Judges, at his own proper provision and charges
to carry them back, from whence he had brought 'em. They being driven back, in
a little time after, Sara Gibbens, Mary Wartherhad, Mary Prince, Dorothy
Wangre, also Christopher Holder, Thomas Thunton, William Brent and John
Copelan, coming there met with such Treatment as the women had done before.
Upon this occasion there was a Law established that no Ship-Master should
presume to bring a Quaker there, and if any Quaker should Adventure to come
upon their Territories, he was presently to be rewarded with the Confinement of
a Prison. Nichol. Vpshal whose civility to the Imprisoned women I spoke of,
inquiring more narrowly into the Quakers Religion, began to withdraw from his
own Church, and betake himself to the Quakers fellowship, and oppose and
exclaim against the Legislators Constitutions, for establishing a humane
sanction or Law contrary to the Rule of Divine precepts, warning and advising
'em all to take care lest by a willful fighting against God, they pull down his
wrath and Judgment on themselves. The Judges minds were hereby so Exasperated,
that resolving to make so new a danger Exemplary, they first fined him in a
hundred Crowns, sentenced him to Goal, and last of all to Banishment. There was
in the Western part of the province in sight of the Country an Island called
Rhodes. Here some Quakers did live, hither went Vpshal to join with his cause.
Whither when he came, 'twas commonly reported, that the Barbarous Indian
Governor finding him, gave him an Invitation to reside in his Country and
Precincts, promising him a seat in his indigency and exile, and also to
Accommodate him with a suitable habitation, adding those words. What sort of
God have the English, who deal so with others that worship their own. After the
others were put to the flight, Ann Burden, a widow of London in Old England,
having some years ago lived with her Husband at Boston, came there now for some
Money that was due to her, with Mary Dyer, wife to William Dyer, being both
ignorant of what was established by Law, and what mischief here did threaten
the Quakers. These women were presently seized and kept in Prison, until the
husband did succor the one, and good and Compassionate people the other. Ann
Burden was so acquitted that she was particularly prohibited, to import these
Wars others had brought in her name and account for sums and Moneys due by
some debtors, tho they could have been sold dearer there than in old England,
she was forced again to Transport 'em over the Sea, not without being clipped by
the Customers, and Officers, who were Artists sufficient in meddling with her
goods, and dividing a considerable part among themselves. In 75 the year
following; and matters were stretched to such a pitch, that all advice and
assistance to that sort of Men seemed so fruitless, that they afforded but
matter of Accusation and Calumny. Since they could not by Sea they did
therefore by Land, travel through strange and desolate places, even such Woods,
Forests, and Solitudes, as none before 'em ever passed over, not knowing, or
having wherewith to sustain themselves, except what they carried along in a
bag; but when that failed, being in utter want, they sometimes met with help
and supply from the Indians, tho otherwise the most Barbarous of all Mortals,
who not only shew^d 'em the way but things needful for life and use, yea such
as these Countries take for Rarities and Delicacies; so that the Quakers had
reason to esteem their own Englishmen Enemies, and take those wild Men for
Benefactors and Friends. Among these strangers, Mary Clarke was the first that
adventured to entreat the Judges at Boston, not to persist to vex and afflict
the innocent, but rather wholly to forbear to grieve and persecute 'em; tho she
did not insist or reflect on the Judges, yet they gave themselves so over to
rage, that they commanded her to be whipped and cast into Prison: So scandalous a
reproach that matter was reputed. Their whip is made of a small rope or cord,
with three grains and several knots upon each of 'em fastesn'd to a staff of
such a length, that when the Executioner would inflict the lashes, he must
often employ both his hands to perform it, the sufferer being often left worse
than half dead. Cristoph. Holder and John Copelan being once expelled, the City
was afterward treated, as the woman had been before. At a little Sea Town not
far from Boston, having both entered into the public Church, after Service and
Sermon was ended, Holder began to discourse to the people. They presently
dragged him and Copelan out by the hair, dashing their very faces on the
ground, stopping one of their mouths with a sleeve and hankerchief, pulling 'em
out of the Church, they carry them to Boston, where they were both lashed with
such cruel stripes that some of the Spectators swoon'd away at the sight of it:
After that they were thrown into Prison, and there compelled to lie, without
either meat or drink three days and three nights, and nine weeks in the middle
of Winter were forced to remain in so cold an habitation: Holder the year
following, returning to Boston to seek a Ship to carry him back to Old England,
was again Imprisoned without any reason. Whereunto this piece of severity was
Annexed. There lived at Salem a little from Boston Lawrence and Cassandra
Southikes, dear and loving Yoke-fellows, accounted most faithful and honest
Church Members. These two I have spoken of, when they came into Salem, they
received willingly and entertained kindly; their Hostess taking the freedom to
tell 'em, that the books they had with 'em were not unpleasing to her, was
presented with some of s'em, as a Resentment of her favor. For this fault the
two, the Man and his Wife were carried to Boston and there Imprisoned, and she
fined in an hundred florens and more. Moreover, some, that were true enough
Children of the Church, being averse to such severity not only to the Quakers,
but even such who from tenderness showed 'em any kindness, did therefore
withdraw themselves from the Church's Communion, and accordingly were sure to
be fined and Imprisoned. The Southikes with their Son Josia were the first of
this kind, and for being the first were brought back unto Boston, and condemned
to be fined, Imprisoned and whipped, tho the parents were old weakly and infirm,
in a very cold and Winterly season, they were all shut up and detained in Goal.
These parents had also two Children more, a Son Daniel and a Daughter Prardeda,
who were so far from being terrified with what their parents had suffered, that
they were incited, by their example, to relinguish and abandon the fellowship
of the Church, and adjoyn themselve to the Quakers Society: They were thereupon
sentenced to the same punishment with their parents, a pecuniary Mulct being
laid upon both, which if they did not pay, 'twas ordered they should Compense
it by their Work and Labor among the Chained and Slaves. Being insolvent, and
yet as unwilling, as unable to endure that hard and most cruel toil, it was
ordered by an Act of the Senate at Salem, and afterward ratified by the
Parliament at Boston, that the boys should go to the English that were trading
in Virginia and Barmuda's, and the charge hereof was given to Edward Rutter,
one of the then Officers of the Treasury. It had been effected had it not been
for the Seamen, who approved the cruelty of that butcherly hangman, that took
pleasure in the yelling and howling of the Boys, and extenuated the Barbarity
or these bitter Men, even while they Remembered the youthful innocence of the
others; A cruelty so unheard of that it was unlawful in Israel of old, unless
they had been guilty of theft, or out of the Number of the Israelites: These
divine Laws of the Religious Zealots, in Correcting faults, and inflicting
punishments, I would not give my self the trouble to Repeat, had they not been
so plainly and manifestly known, that they became the Subject talk of almost
every Tongue. One Sam. Sattor, who had gone to the Quakers Meeting at Salem, at
that Crowd in the public Church, when the handkerchief was thrust into
Christoph. Holder's mouth to stop his throat and prevent his speaking, for
pulling it out for fear it should choke him, was presently cast into Prison at
Boston. Another William Sattor, for declining to go to Church was admonished of
his crime by a certain number of Lashes, and after Correction put in the same
Goal. The Law that was formerly made against Quakers, was now in this manner
enlarged and amplify'd (...) that if any inhabitant did happen to understand
(...) Quaker to be any where within these Territories, he should presently
acquaint the Governor of the Sea ports, who were ordered, if the Quaker did
not immediately go thence, to cause him be whipped, and driven out of that
Country. If by means of any person a Quaker were brought there, he was to
forfeit 100 l. sterling. to the Exchequer, and be kept in Custody till the sum
should be paid. If any received a Quaker into his house and did not at the
same instant go out of it himself, for the first fault he was to pay 25 l. and
for every hour he retained him longer, he was fined in forty shillings; but if
otherwise, he was detained till he paid the 100 l. If any Quaker should come
there from far, or any of that place should embrace Quakerism; at first if they
were Males their Ear was to be cut off, and then the other if they promised not
to renounce it; both times they were closely to be shut up in Goal, till they
went into Banishment at their own proper Charges: If Females they were twice
severely to be whipped, and then to undergo the same sentence with the Men: If
either Male or Female offended the third time, their Tongue was bored with a
Red hot Iron, and they shut up in Goal in like manner as before. This Law being
made Richard Donden from Old England had the ill fortune to come here
Ignorantly; who, since he knew not the Law, was only punished by Whipping and
Banishment, having a threatening annexed that if e're he returned, the loss of
his Ears should complete his suffering. But the women Sara Gibbens, and Dorohty
Wangie, were treated with greater Cruelty and Rigor, who, for three days after
Imprisonment were denied all Victuals, and in this famishing and fainting
Condition, were whipped and beaten with a mercyless fury, and after their stripes
kept other three days starved as before without any food. Dorothy Gardenet when
lashed inhumanely, kneeling, begged of God to forgive her Tormenters; It would
be long to mention many, and impossible to repeat all examples of this kind. I
shall therefore name only one or two, passing by others, to pursue my intended
brevity. There came to Salem, and from thence to Newbury, William Brand, and
William Leader, who being desired by the people there, to enter into Conference
with their Parish Minister, having got liberty from him that commanded the
place, who also promised to Patronize and protect 'em, being led by their own
Inclination and the peoples desire, readily listened to the proffered proposal:
But when they departed the cunning Commander, a Man equally Malicious and
Treacherous, thinking, his simplicity and integrity sufficiently justified
since they were not troubled all the time of the Conference, and that he now
kept his promise, and answered their Expectation sent to seize, bind, and carry
them to Boston. Being cast into Goal after two days fasting their naked backs
were exposed to the lash, loading 'em with threats, they thrust 'em into
Bridewell, giving charge to the Keeper to task 'em severely: Which when they
declined, as imposed undeservedly, the Nominal Master, but real Servant of his
lust and wickedness, knowing these labors to be most commonly his own proper
profit and advantage, to make a penny by their toil and slavery, exacted from
'em violently what he charged 'em to perform: These poor Men had not yet tasted
any thing. Brand exceeded the other not only in years, but also in patience,
courage, and constancy: Him the Villain, pretending the public, tho only
executing his private Gall and envy, dragging along, shekel'd his neck and
heels together, and left him in this misery locked in Chains 16 hours without
any sense of Compassion or Humanity.

Then unlocking the Chains he bids him fall to his work if he did not design to
despair of his back. He replied he would not, nor could tho he were willing.
The Butcherly fellow seeing him unmoved by either hopes or fear of punishment,
with a Sea-Rope or Cord twisted of hemp did lash the Man with such rage and
violence, that the Rope it self was broken into pieces; but seeing the first
did not prevail, seeking another to accomplish his end, with renewed force he
gave him almost an hundred lashes, insomuch that his whole body was as it were
swelled into one lump, and the greatest part of his flesh as it had been baked
in an Oven, by reason of an universal tumor and blackness. When the fourth day
was now come, he had not yet tasted any bodily nourishment. Afterward this
brutish and hard hearted Man shut Brand (thus miserably torn with the lashes)
up in a strait and Solitary place, without bed, straw, or any thing to lie on,
to refresh his torn and half lifeless body; which things, when they came to the
Ears of the people, that are prone to Compassion, and as ready to mischief,
yea, sometimes use to demand, that these whom they hold guilty, may be
presently punished, at other times perhaps they relent, and are grieved if they
think the punishment to severely inflicted, began now to rage, rise up and run
in Crowds, that the Magistrates to prevent their sedition, first sent a Surgeon
to give him what help he could and on his report that it was mortal and
incurable, (tho afterward the Man recovered of his wounds) ordered it to be
signified, by affixing bills through the City, that they disapproved of such
cruel usage, and would therefore consider of what the Keeper had done. But a
certain one of the Town Ministers, a Man of Knowledge, Authority and
Reputation, whom I shall not now Name, restrained the people with words to this
purpose: That Brand had endeavored so to smite the Laws of the Gospel, that
they might retain the marks of the blows, that it was therefore just that his
Limbs should smart under the same punishment; if he that punished him were
taxed with a Crime, that he would Transfer the guilt of it on himself.
Therefore an Act for the future was established, that if any Quaker refused to
perform his task, the Goal Keeper might not beat him above twice a week, the
first time giving ten stripes, the next fifteen, and so increasing five every
diet. The next year Cristop. Holder, and John Copelan above mentioned, and John
Rousie, whose father was (I think) Deputy Governor of Barmuda's, having been
here before, and driven into Exile, returned once more, they to Dedham and he
to Boston. These three in the latter Autumn not openly and in presence of the
people, had their right Ear cut off by the public Hangman, but only before the
Judge that ordered it. The mild Men, by the loss of their ears being rather
further softened than embittered, contained themselves with so much patience,
that they only broke out in words to this purpose. We beg from our heart that
God may forgive 'em, who have unwarily or imprudently caused this to be done;
but whoever has maliciously contributed thereto, let our blood rest upon their
heads: And let them find in that day, when they must give an account of all
they have done, that it lies heavily on their head like the weight of a
Millstone. After these Men as well as others had been thus inhumanely
dismembered and deformed, they were also detained and continued in Custody for
refusing that slavery they were enjoined to perform, and remaining unwilling to
undergo that punishment, which was only proper for Thiefes and Malefactors; one
trouble so arose upon another, that they were forced to bear repeated
sufferings, and stripes. There was a certain Man whose Name I know not,
(silence or oblivion has buried it in darkness, or at least it seems hindered
it to be disclosed) who for being a Quaker was branded in the hand with the
Letter H. to design him an Heretie. There are very many instances of Bitterness
and Cruelty, that were Barbarously inflicted and patiently endured, might be
easily added were it fruitful to Name 'em. The Quakers complained of their
Enemies fury for raging against 'em for no other cause, but coming there
without the Magistrates Command, and giving their books to those that would
read 'em, or talking with others concerning their Religion, instructing their
own Congregations and Flocks, and sometimes for going to the Church it self,
and there speaking, when service was ended, or for any thing else of the like
nature: Since they had never raised a mutiny, nor practiced any violence or
force, but were always simple and quiet Men, more ready to suffer whatever was
inflicted, than to Act any thing turbulently or seditiously. That yet Men of
all Orders and Degrees, Politic, Ecclesiastic, City, and Crowd, should concur
and assemble with an Unanimous consent, to destroy and drive out so innocent a
crew, as the Plague and Contagion of all the Country, could not but seem
strange to all unprejudiced.

'Twas then said of them, as it is now of the Brow^ists, that they conspired all
with one mouth and mind, by a mutual Consent, Counsel, Aid, and Endeavor, to
ingross their Region and Religion to themselves. The Magistrates often advised
with the Ministers, and the Ministers in their Meetings consulted with the
Magistrates, so that for the most part there was but one assembly of 'em both.
Hence, what pleased the Magistrates the Clergy approved of, and what the
Ministers took upon 'em to determine, the Magistrates by their Authority did
confirm: And what proceeded from both the two never missed of a grateful
welcome from the people. But yet all the Magistrates and Rulers in chief of
the Cities, and Preachers of the word, did not so willingly and equally consent
to infest, afflict and persecute the Quakers* Nay, some of 'em were not only
against it in their Judgment, but opposed it by their words as far as they
could. Among the Rulers against persecuting the Quakers, they place and praise
John Winthoepius a very great and excellent Man, and also those Men whose names
are subjoined; among the better sort of Citizens was William Coddington, at
that time a Merchant in Boston very considerable for his wealth and prudence;
who, the Quakers testify, did so behave themselves, both at home and wherever
they went, as those that must shortly give an account of all their Actions done
in the Body: Among the Preachers John Cotton Minister at Boston famous for
knowledge, Administering his Office, and Piety in behaving himself toward God
and Men: They own he was always uncorrupted and untainted, and averse to this
sort of Rigor and Cruelty. The people of New England as yet wanted one piece
of severity to suppress the Quakers, viz. To take 'em out of the way by Death,
whom they thought they could not otherwise restrain. This Law obtained in New
as well as Old England, that no Criminal should be sentenced to Death, till the
matter be duly known and considered by twelve extraordinary Inquirers whom
they call Jury Men, because they are sworn to determine nothing till they have
diligently searched, and narrowly weighed the affair, as has been elsewhere
shown on another occasion. Since this Law withstood and obstructed the
inflicting the punishment of Death upon Quakers, they began to consult and
greedily endeavor to Abrogate this Law by an Act of the Senate. Whereupon 12
voted that it should be retained, and 13 that it should be rescinded; and thus
the odd vote carried it. The matter being known, one of the Senators, Wozely,
esteemed a quiet, just and equitable Man, was then unhappily forced to be
absent, being hindered and detained by a bodily indisposition, taking it ill
that such an Act had passed so, knowing that if he had been there the design
had been frustrated, he was reported to have said, that had he but known that
they were consulting and deliberating of that, notwithstanding the bodily
sickness he labored under, he would have crept there on his hands and his
feet, to oppose the Injustice of so unreasonable an Act.

By this Council, the matter is brought into the sole power and hand of the
ordinary Judges, or the supreme Court of the province. There was now therefore
so much Zeal and Eagerness, in most of the Rulers of Cities and Provinces, in
afflicting and puisuing the Quakers to the utmost, that if any did not revile
and reproach 'em, or stopped and retarded the violence of others against 'em,
especially if any defended and excused 'em, he was esteemed a Quaker himself,
and at least deprived of his place and office, if he had not great interest at
hand. There Is a Letter of one of 'em ( James Cudworth) yet extant, who was then
one of the Magistrates of Boston, but for this cause divested of that honor,
written at that time and sent from Boston to a certain friend of his in Old
England, which Letter since written in English, I shall not here trouble the
Reader with, but content my self to resume some words of it, which were
expressed to this effect. The State of Affairs are here sad. The Antichristian
SpiSpirit is wedded to persecution. Who declines to persecute and afflict these
Men that differ from us in matter of Religion, is withdrawn from his place, and
not permitted to execute any Office in the Government. Thus Hatherly and I have
been treated. Thus they used me for no other reason, than taking in certain
Quakers to my house, which I did, that I might inquire of 'em more narrowly
concerning the foundations of their persuasion; this I took always to be more
reasonable, than to condemn those with the blind World, whose Doctrine and
Principles we are utterly ignorant of, And tho I declared before that I herded
not with Quakers, and that I was as far from agreeing with 'em in many things,
as I was from persecuting 'em, yet these two years they have so estranged
themselves from me, that at length they have unchair'd me from my office in the
Magistracy; what future event the Teeming womb of such furious Actions will
produce, time will declare when the birth is disclosed, farewell. This kind of
Judging being pushed out of Doors, a Law was made that if any Quakers, did
irreclaimably and obstinately persist, and could not be otherwise repressed or
restrained, they should suffer the desert of their Contumacy, and end their
obstinate life with a halter. Soon after Samuel Gorton was tried for his life,
but in Judgment 'twas carried, he should be cleared, and that only by one Vote:
Which decision one of the Ministers (whose name I again designedly conceal) a
Man of a Copious torrent of Knowledge, Subtilty, and Eloquence, digested so
heinously, that publicly in the Pulpit he broke out in those words; by whom,
to whom, and on what occasion they were uttered, is I suppose not unknown to
the Learned: Because thou has let go the accursed Man, thy life shall therefore
answer for his. After this, two Quakers were Arraigned before the same Judges,
William Robbinson a Merchant in London, and Marmadue Stevenson a Countreyman of
Yorkshire in Old England: Of their Imprisonment, Trial, and Punishment, the
Quakers give a large and true account, as matters so clear and known in that
Country, that the noise of their fame is not yet quite extinguished. They came
both here knowingly and designedly, for no other end than to preach the Gospel,
to which they had applied themselves in their own Country before. After
Robbinson for some time had continued at Rhodes, and Stevenson at Barmuda's, in
the year fifty nine they came to Boston in New England. Here they were no
sooner arrived, than, without either Informer or Witness, upon their own
betraying of themselves, they are thrown into the Solitary Darkness of a Prison;
there they find Mary Dyer who was Banished from Boston, as has already been
said, and yet returned thither again, as is sometimes their way, and Nicholas
David. These all being brought before the Judges, and accordingly charged with
Sedition and Rebellion, Robbinson purges himself and his Companions in Misery
from the least shadow of that suspicion. But they presently disregarding such
defense stopped his mouth by thrusting an Handkerchief in his throat, and seeing
he yet endeavored to speak, they that were present raging with fury, and the
officer likewise more hasty than prudent, made ready his lash, knowing well how
to use it, and chastis'd his back for his Tongues excuse and defense. The cause
being considered, they were all ordered to depart thence to a present exile. By
a customary patience, and suffering of evils, they were now so inured and
hardened to troubles, that they resolved rather than forsake their faith to
make a Noble retreat into their Grave. Mary Dyer and Nicho. David, thought it
then their duty to leave that Country, but in a very short Interval of time,
Mary being recalled by a new impulse, had the Courage yet to return unto
Boston, and came to Prison to talk with her Brethren and Sisters, and at the
same time was seized and shut up, so that now she had power and liberty enough
to surfeit herself with their Company and Conference, for in all things,
constant and daily plenty nauseats the fancy and cloys the Appetite. On the
other hand Robbinson and Stevenson thought it necessary to forsake Boston, but
not the whole Country, and therefore within a very few days they go to some
places about Salem, and there takes occasion to declare their Doctrine. But
they were no better dealt with than others. When they, for some time, had been
thus enclosed within the verge of those little Walls, the Judges began to
consult among themselves what they must needs do with 'em at length. And seeing
'em so obdur'd in their obstinacy, that they despaired of reducing 'em to dread
of fear, and that they did not regard what way they took, if they could but
render themselves Masters of their desires, they resolved to put an end to
their life and proceedings. Yet this was not so obscurely contrived, but
Robbinson and Stevenson easily forseeing what the Judges had designed to do,
the day before they had fixed this purpose, each of 'em wrote a Letter to the
Senate of Boston, whose Theme and Scope was almost the same, containing the
motives that induced 'em both, to come and visit these Corners of the Earth;
Robbinson wrote that he did not come there to gratify at all his own Curiosity,
but only by the Judgment and Pleasure of God, while he abode at Rhodes, and
about noon tide, when he was resolving to go elsewhere, an heavenly Command
reversed his Resolution, injoyning him to take Journey for Boston, and there to
finish his Course and lay down his life, and have no worse reward for his
service, than what God had there appointed for him: That his Soul at last,
after many wanderings through the vain Theater of this wearisom world, might be
received to a fixed possession, and there rest in an Eternal Mansion. Stevenson
also wrote, that while he was in his Country in England, in his own Farm
Plowing a field, upon a certain day he felt his Breast kindled with the flame
of Divine Love, and the word of the Lord came unto him thus; I Have appointed
thee tho thou be a Plowman to become a Preacher and Teacher of Nations: At the
same moment being moved Extraordinarily, that tho he was married, and Father of
some Children, to leave his dear wife, his Mate and Companion of Life and
Affairs, and as it were his other self, and this sweet and tender offspring,
these entire Bonds of Love, and Ties of Friendship, being untouched with the
sense of so many Domestic concerns, to take Journey presently for the Island
of Barmuda's not doubting to leave all to the Providential care and Disposal of
God: And that accordingly he went to that Island and from thence to Rhodes, and
at length came to Boston; and that now for his Religion, and Testimony for God,
he was ready to take farewell of this troublesome Life. The day of Arraignment
was the 20th of October. Being all three brought into Prison, attainted and
convicted of a Capital crime, without any previous Trial or defense, they were
found guilty of Death, and Sentenced to be hanged. Robbinson moved the Judge of
the Court that, that Letter might be read I spoke of before, asserting it to
all be matter of Fact, without inquiring into the occasion thereof; this he
desired e're sentence should pass, but the Judge thought the letter unworthy to
be perused. Whereupon Stevenson, putting up his Epistle, after the sentence was
actually pronounced, answered with the same courage of mind and expression. In
the day when you that would be reckoned Judges, shall kill the true Servants of
God, know ye, you shall answer to him who is the only true Judge, and the day
of your visitation shall come upon you, and Eternal destuction shall fall on
your heads. Upon the 27th in the Afternoon, the day appointed for their
Execution, two Companies of Soldiers were ordered to be there. The condemned
persons were placed in the front, and all the Drummers were set round about
'em, who beat incessantly to drown the sound of their words, that what they
said might not be heard by the people. The fellow sufferers marched all in a
rank, Mary in the middle having each other by the hand, all of a cheerful
Countenance and ready Tongue, tho the beating of the Drums rendered their
discourse useless to others. Their friends followed with a sad silence. When
they came to the Gibbet, having so long kissed and embraced each other, with
such affection that they could scarce be pulled asunder, they wished all
happiness to one another; at last, when the unavoidable necessity of departure
obliged 'em to put an end to their caresses, letting one another unwillingly
go, they took all their Eternal and Mutual farewell, Robbinson first got up,
beginning and ending with words to this purpose.

We are not here, Citizens, to suffer as wicked or evil doers, whose
Consciences before did vex and torment 'em, but as those, who, being stirred up
by God, ^ear witness to the truth. But perhaps this may seem little at present,
as what concerns you not much to hear. That we may not therefore contend what
we have acted, to have been Lawful, our duty, and necessary to be done; we
would have you to know that this is your day, wherein God has visited you,
leaving you yet occasion and opportunity to shun and escape the destruction of
your Souls; but if you go on to hedge up and obstruct that way to turn Gods
wrath, and procure your own salvation, if your Rebellion and Arrogance be
increased and hardened, this is the day, wherein God is arisen to take
vengeance of all his Enemies with an Omnipotent Arm, and you shall groan with
one voice under the weight of his wrath. You Have at this time made it very
apparent and manifest what you are, by your hatred against us; wherefore while
the light of Christ does shine, we as yet continue to admonish and warn you, to
take heed to that light while you may. For my part I have lived unto Christ,
and do die for Christ, taking him now for my Life and My all.

Then Stevenson followed speaking such like words; Be it known unto you, we
suffer not now for any Evil by us Committed, but only for doing of these good
de^ds which our Conscience always taught us to be our Duty: And as your
Consciences in the day that is to came, shall toss and terrify you with
perpetual Anguish, so we being this day released from all care, shall rest free
from Anxiety and trouble, and instead of that frail and fading Life, shall have
unceasing and perfect happiness with God. With these words he ended. These two
Men being dead, their naked bodies were thrown into a Ditch, and covered up by
the way side, where they ended their Life.

And now Mary goes up the Ladder with her hands bound, her Coats tied down, and
face covered, in present readiness, to welcome her end, being already
forestalled with apprehensions of Death. But the Judges, among themselves, had
granted Mary a pardon, being humbly petitioned by a Son of hers. This was only
designed to terrify and affright her, but being taken down, and greatly in
suspense, looking up to understand what the matter did mean, at last, before
she went down from the Ladder, with a deep sigh she broke out in these words,
that there was no delay in her to go with her Brethren, and receive that
certain fruit of her Labors, and reward of all her Dangers and Evils, as the
glorious Trophies of her Courage and Constancy, that she might also imbalm her
Religion with her blood, if the Rulers would not annull that wicked Law. When
taken away from the Ladder, she was first shut up in the place whence she came,
and two days after carried out of the Town. When this was done it cannot easily
be told, how the Quakers minds, and mouths were Irritated, both here and in
other places: So that every where their doleful Mournings and Exclamations were
heard; that now these Men's thoughts and Designs did show themselves, leaving no
further room for doubt, who were these pure and upright in Life, who at all
times did so cry out, that there was no living without Religion, and no
Religion without Godliness, and neither could be without Liberty of Conscience;
who therefore in their own Country, in England, did so decry that violent
Tyranny, and because of the injury done to them there, fled from it as a thing
not sufferable, and leaving their own native Soul, came into this utmost Region
of the Earth, surrounded on all hands with Barbarous Nations. That this was so
plain, that they must be inconsiderate who doubt of it, since they behaved
themselves so to their own Countrymen, and those who, when under affliction
and trouble, had fled unto them for refuge and comfort, but met with nothing
among them but the utmost cruelty: That it further appeared, from the Savage
fierceness they used toward Men, that were altogether innocent, bereaving 'em
not only of their Goods and Estates, but even of their Reputation, Blood,
Bones, and Life it self. There were not a few Complaints of others also, who
were not at all of the family of the Quakers, who spoke their Abhorrence
against that new sort of Judgment, that was hitherto among Protestants unheard
of, thinking it unreasonable thus to rage against those whom they reckoned
just, honest and blameless, or at least to be guilty of inconsiderable faults,
or had they deserved some notable punishment, yet they thought it Disgraceful
for themselves to be the Authors of inflicting it. These and the like were some
matter of trouble to the Magistracy of Boston, who could as little deny the
cause as what they had acted; that they might, against all Complaints and
Calumnies, shield the fame of their Name and Religion, and if any thing of the
like nature should happen for the future, more excusably repeat what they had
already done, and seize them that said any thing to the contrary, they caused
this Apologetical Pamphlet to be emitted in English, by their own Clerk Edward
Rawson.

Tho the equity of our proceedings with William Robbinson, Marmaduc Stevenson,
and Mary Dyer, being fortified by the Authority of our Court, and according to
the Laws both of Cod and our Country, does induce us rather reasonably to
expect Commendation and Praise from all good and wise Men, than dispose us to
think it at all necessary, to make any Defense and Apology for our selves;
Notwithstanding, because some of a shallow Capacity, from perhaps a Principle
of Pity and Compassion (which as it is indeed a Christian virtue, so it is
justly intitl'd to deserved praise, except where it too easily turns it self,
putting on false and pernicious dresses, for want of a Judgment better
informed) are desirous of some satisfaction in the matter, and because those
Men that are of ill principles and practices may unjustly accuse us, and take
us for Men of very Bloody and cruel Inclinations; we therefore thought fit, to
satisfy the one, and stop the Mouths and Clamours of the others, to order the
publishing of this Declaration. It Is almost three years since some Men, who
professed themselves openly Quakers after we understood, being informed by
Letters, sent us from the English by the way of Berbado's, how pernicious their
opinions and endeavors had been, took the boldness also to come unto Boston.
We only then committed them to Prison, till we could find occasion to send 'em
from among us, without using any further severity against 'em.

And tho their discipline and turbulent behavior, troublesome to the people
and reproachful to the Magistrate, called loudly for a greater punishment,
without the least shadow of Injustice, yet the Court was rather willing to show
their prudence, in preserving and defend-ing our own peace, and the Government
that was established among us, against the Quakers utmost efforts, who aimed at
the subversion of our Laws and Statutes, and final overthrow of our Religion
also: This we are too well acquainted with to be ignorant of, both by what our
experience taught us of them, and what Specimens their Ancestors the Papists
have left us. We therefore made and promulg'd a Law, that no Master of a Ship
whatsoever should bring a Quaker into our Precincts and Territories, if they
did otherwise, they were to be Imprisoned until they could be banished and
removed from among us. But since yet, these Men did constantly return through
many secret ways and wanderings, neither could any punishment or threatening be
invented to stop their impudent and rash coming back, tho we endeavored to
prevent it by increasing the punishment to the cutting off the returner's ear^^
yet that it self did not avail to withstand their mad and unwearied fury; we
were therefore forced to take another course to maintain the public Peace and
Tranquillity. Upon this all things being duly considered, finding their obsticy
could not otherwise be restrained, we made a Law according to the Model of that
which was settled in England against the Jesuits, that such sort of Men should
be put to Death.

The making this Law did not hinder their return and disdainful continuance
within our Territories, even after the time for their departure was expired;
They were therefore justly thrown into Goal, and confessing themselves to be
those we had driven from among us before by the Court's order, according to the
sentence of that Law, they forfeited their Life: except Mary Dyer, to whom, at
her Sons humble intercession, We, with an equality of Mercy and Clemency,
granted the Liberty to be gone from among us within two days, which she
promised to observe. The Contemplation of that gradual progress we made, in the
whole series of that affair, will confute all Clamours and Accusations of our
cruelty; since our own just and necessary defense did not only invite but also
enjoin us, to show the edge of so sharp a Law to Men of such stiffness and
obstinacy, which as these Men opposed with Contumacious violence, they freely
and willingly murdered themselves. It was always our wish that they had not
done it, and that the supreme Law, the peoples safety, might be kept entire
from all danger and detriment. Our Antodating their danger that was to ensue,
and granting of pardon to Mary Dyer are evident Demonstrations, that we were
more desirous to preserve their lives than take 'em away.

Moreover tho so great punishment was provided against Quakers by Law,
especially those, who, being ejected, did return, yet there were not a few so
rash as to come, not only those who had not been here before, but also who had
been expelled and ban^sh'd, ready to suffer any torment that could happen, yea,
to welcome death it self tho never so cruel. A chief instance of boldness and
obstinacy, was very Conspicuous in the same Mary Dyer, who, as it was known,
tho she was on the Ladder, and her neck in the Rope, upon the very Borders of
her last breath: Yet, after she had been once expelled she returned, and yet
was dismissed on this Condition, that she would no more repeat the same crime;
Notwithstanding all this she returned once more, persisting in the same purpose
and mind, that she must either have liberty for her self and Companions (that
Law of ejecting and murdering Quakers being Abrogated) to rest in ease safely
and quietly, or if she could not obtain it, she would seal with her Death her
constant confidence in her Religion, and thereby accuse the wickedness and
insatiable cruelty of these Judges, and convince them, in the presence of all
Men, to be guilty of doing the highest of Injuries. She came therefore
undaunted from Rhodes to Boston, in the year following which was the 60th the
31 day of the month of May. She was seized, and immediately the next day
brought before the Judge, the Court being throng; who, having told what charge
had been formerly given her, as the same time gave sentence of Death, that to
morrow she should be hanged by the neck till she died, that they might make
sure to prevent her return for the future, and give her no more occasion to be
guilty of the like. The next day, accordingly she is taken out of the Town,
guarded with Soldiers before and behind, with their Drums beating round about
her; she came to the Gibbet with Courage in her Breast, and very great
Cheerfulness in her face, from whence she knew she should not return any more;
having there spoken a great many words, that showed both the greatness of her
mind and certain hope she had placed in Heaven, she gave up her Spirit and so
fell asleep. The Quakers, that either knew this Woman, or had it from others
Testimony of her, say in her praise, that she was a person of no mean Extract
and Parentage, of an Estate pretty plentiful, of a comely Stature and
Countenance, of a piercing knowledge in many things, of a wonderful sweet and
pleasant Discourse, so sit for great affairs that she wanted nothing that was
Manly, except only the Name and the Sex. William Leadre was another instance of
such constancy. He being also upon pain of Death ejected, and forbidden to see
Boston again, as I showed before, notwithstanding, the year following, viz.
sixty two, returned thither prepared to expect and endure the same that these
who had gone before had already suffered, to offer his Blood for his Religion
to those, who, he knew, were thirsty enough to drink it. When the report of his
arrival was spread abroad, and had also reached the Ears of the Judges, they
ordered the Man, that thus contemned all threats of judicial punishment, to be
seized and hurried headlong to Goal, and all the cold season of the Winter to
be kept, in great hunger and want, fastened to a thick and heavy log, so that
he scarce could move himself out of his place, being only as a dead trunk of a
Man. Having at length considered what to do with him, they accused him
heinously for daring to return; he answered as the cause of expelling him was
injust, he thought he had just occasion to return: They set the danger of his
life before him, because neither threatenings nor fear could restrain him. He
answered, that were he so easily to be frighted, he would never have had the
boldness again to return. Being asked at another time if he would go into
England, he answered he had no business there, afterward, they endeavored
earnestly to persuade him to renounce his Errors and Conform to the Church of
England; He replied then with greater vehemence, that if he owned his own
confession to be false he must deny and reject God himself, If he should herd
with those of the Church of Englands Communion, he must join with Notorious
Murderers and Cutthroats. They again threatened him with an Infamous. Death; to
which he answered, he would Everlastingly rejoice to suffer any thing for his
Faith and Religion, and that he was not at all afraid of Death, so much as of
the just Judgment of God, yea, that he would not decline any sort of Death,
since the just cause why he suffered it was absent; and that that punishment
they blazoned with the threatening Colors of Death, seemed to him the way of
Life and Eternal felicity, so this discourse was not long continued: But while
they th^s lingered, doubting what to do, and could not come to a certain
Conclusion, other Quakers, to the Number of five, who had all been banished,
and prohibited to return, upon the same penalty of losing their Life, did yet
without prudence or fear return. Whereof one Wenlock Christyson, understanding
what they designed to determine of Leader went straight way to the Court, and
told 'em that it was his sole errand to come to warn 'em, to shed no more
Innocent blood: But his admonition was no worse rewarded than with a Goal. Most
of 'em at this time was so forcibly incensed, that they could be broken by no
Violence or Reproaches, thinking then themselves to be truly happy, when they
were counted worthy to suffer Affliction for their Religion, yea, Death tho
never so Ignominious and Cruel, hence it comes that each Sect has its Martyrs.
This they also ambition'd as a holy sight, running to embrace Death as the
Crown of their Religion, sign of faith, Mark of Society, witness of Communion,
Monument of their Name, matter of perpetual fame, and not only end of this
Temporary life, but also beginning of that which is Eternal. Thus the Senate of
Boston, after many debates, being unwilling to conclude of Leaders affair,
regarding the Actions, not the words, of the Criminal, at length ordered him to
be Indicted of Treason, and pronounced him a Man whom they Judged and Declared
to deserve to be severed, from among the Number of the Living, which sentence
was accordingly executed upon the 14th day of March, Then his head was lifted
up on high on an unhappy Gibbet, and he ended his life without any fear, having
spoken these words before some friends, my God to thee I commend my just Soul.
After him the Court's first enquiry was on Wenlock, who seemed to them to have
drawn all severity on himself. When no body doubted but Wenlock would fall a
victim to appease the Judges fury, when he came to be tried he disputed long,
and the Judges differed in their Thoughts and Intentions, whereupon Wenlock did
so much urge the Equity and Justice of discussing the affair, according to the
Rules of the English Laws, arguing that those Laws were only made against
Jesuits and not Quakers, who might very justly expect Impunity although they erred
in the sight of Men: The Judges were at length so Inveigl'd and Entangled, that
they returned to the old form of proceeding, and committed the whole weight of
the cause to the Judgment of twelve Sworn Jurymen: But they also, having long
delayed Wenlock, at length brought him in guilty of Death: This was done on the
13th day of the 1st month of the Summer Season; but the Execution of the
sentence was some days delayed. John Currier an inhabitant of Boston, having
been whipped through three Towns before, returned by the same places, to Boston,
to his Wife and Children, whom he had left there; being again whipped about the
same round, he was detained in Prison at Boston, where he had resid'd; In the
opinion of himself and other Men, he was to be branded with a burning Iron in
the shoulder, and there marked with the Letter R. to design him, according to
the English and Roman Laws, that which we call a Rogue.

There were 28 more Prisoners there, One of 'em condemned for all his life to
remain in the Prison where he then was; the rest were uncertain what should
become of 'em, seeing themselves daily detained and delayed. As many things
unexpected and unlooked for, in the life of Man falls oftener out than when we
have hopes and expectations of the matter, so while the Judges were so often
remiss, and the Quakers punishment so frequently delayed, and yet nothing was
seen, to retard it, suddenly and beyond all Expectation, it was appointed by
the Magistrates Command, that a new Law should immediately take place, to
release Wenlock and the rest of the Prisoners from any punishment they were
liable to, by the old; so that they might when they pleased be freed from the
Prison, and for that purpose the doors were set open. The signal being given,
they went out without Loitering. Only Peter Pearson and Judith Brown, were
contrary to their hopes detained and whipped at a Cart. The cause of so
unexpected a change was supposed to be the fear of the Magistrates, foreseeing
that the King and Nobles in Old England, would not well resent such Rigor and
Cruelty, and would therefore take care to prevent it for the future. Not long
after King Charles being informed, how the Quakers were treated in New England,
by Rumors, Messengers, and their own complaints given in by Petition to the
King and Parliament, and that not only once but often, sent immediately to the
Governor of Boston, and the rest of the fellow rulers of these Countries and
Colonies, a Letter concerning the Imprisoned Quakers, giving it to be carried
by Sam. Sattoc, a Quaker who had been an Inhabitant there, but was thence
banished as I mentioned already, and now returned there in a Ship commanded by
one of his own persuasion. The Letter was as follows. C. R. to his dear and
faithful Subjects, since we have Learned that many of our Subjects, among you
called Quakers to have been some Imprisoned, others killed, the rest, as we are
told remaining fall in danger; we thought good to signify our will and pleasure
to you concerning that affair for the future. Our will is therefore, that if
there be any Quakers among you, whose Death Corporal punishment, or
Imprisonment, you have ordered, or may for the future have occasion to
determine, that you proceed no further in that affair, but forthwith send 'em
whether they be Condemned, or bound, into our Kingdom of England, with an
account of their particular Trials and Faults, that they may here be dealt
withal according to our Laws and their Merits. Herein this letter shall be your
warrant. Given from our Court at White Hall, the 10th of Sept. 1661, the 13th
year of our Reign. By the Kings command, William Morris. This Epistle of the
King so stayed their Persecution, that it was no Crime to be reckoned a Quaker.
The Magistracy of Boston fearing the Kings displeasure for what they had done,
sent three into Old England, Temple an Officer, a Magistrate, and Norton a
Minister, to acquaint the King with what they had done. But Jurisdiction, and
Judgment was not therefore wholly stopped or taken away. But being forbidden to
inflict a final severity and punishment, they compens'd it by the heavier
Temporary torment, making some, by their Chastisement, rather wish to die than
endure so great and many Evils so often. Tho I could instance many examples of
this, I Will only relate one or two, partly to avoid Prolixity, and partly
because by one we may guess of the rest. That year Ann Cotton, a woman of
sixty, came with a design to live at Boston; but was so far from being admitted
that she was thrown into Goal: Being at length wearied of her, they took her to
a Wood, and after many wanderings she found occasion to go for England. There
she obtained a pattent from the K. allowing her to reside at Boston. She
renewed her Journey, and came boldly back to Boston. But neither was she then
admitted: She went therefore to Cambridge, where she was thrown into a dark
Deu, thrice lashed, then carried to a Remote and Desolate place, where, from
wild Beasts, she might be in daily danger of her life. But returning by the
same ways she went out she was also whipped, as she had been before. The
following year being scarce expired, Ann Coleman, Mary Tomkins, and Alide
Ambrose, women of greater Age than Extract, came into D^ver: These were dragged
hence through Eleven other places, in the middle of a Cold and Snowy Winter,
receiving at each of 'em ten lashes on their naked body, and were so cut with
the stripes that scarce a Breast was left 'em. Yet they remained so constant
and resolute, that they went back to the same Town to a Meeting with their
friends. Upon this 2 Brethren called Ruperts, Sons of a Quaker dragged the
women out of the Meeting through the Snow and Clay, turning their very faces to
the Earth, and the day following brought 'em thus daubed along to the shore,
remaining unmoved at all their entreaties, drew them headlong through the
waters into a little Cannoe, committing them and it to the Sea. But a vehement
storm suddenly rising the poor women were taken out of the Boat, by some that
had more tenderness than they that put them in. Tho they now were stiff, their
Clothes being frozen and almost dead with intolerable cold, they bring 'em far
from the Sea to the house whence they came, and after a little refreshment
drive them away from thence. Yet the women were so hardy and inured to
Afflictions, that they often returned even where they suffered such things. The
Quakers complain that many of 'em were branded, as if they had been the Dreggs,
and Off-scourings of Men, whom all good Men must needs be Enemies to, and on
that score were robbed of all Liberty and Privilege, as Ignominious persons
who are allowed no Action or Complaint: Yet, they say, there were some for many
years, who had their habitation and residence there. In process of time the
Kings Authority, who knew not their trouble, more and more prevailed, and their
Number, Resolution, and Constancy, in overcoming by suffering, all punishments
the Law could inflict; the Judgments against 'em began to cease, and their
Impunity and Liberty to increase. In the mean time the Quakers, that could not
stay here, withdrew themselves to the Island of Rhodes, which is so opposite
to, and separated from the Continent that it became a refuge and sanctuary for
them. And the more suited to this purpose because the Governor thereof was a
Quaker, William Coddington, whom I mentioned before: He was one of the chief
Planters, that came hither to traffic. He had a house so large and fine at
Boston, before it had received that Name, that afterward it proved an Ornament
to the City. He also shared in the Magistracy some time. But when the
persecution of Quakers arose, he disapproved of the Magistrates proceedings so
much, that he exhorted 'em all to refrain from their Cruelty against the
Quakers; they therefore treated him as they would have done them: He departed
thence into this Island, where he* had not only liberty to act and say what he
pleased, but was also made Governor of the whole Island. But before I
altogether leave New England, I must touch at New-Holland bordering upon it,
lest a longer narrative prove troublesome to the Reader. Dutchman for the most
part were Inhabitants there. In trafficking, the Dutch having commerce with the
English, they came and stayed mutually with each other, thus some of the
Quakers found the way also hither* more with a design to Propagate their
Religion, than a desire either of buying or selling. It Is a custom among the
States, not to be Solicitous of these whom they give command of other places
to, concerning Men's following believing, or asserting in their Religion
whatever their Conscience prompts 'em unto, providing they don't oppose the
supreme Authority, or act contrary to the public Tranquillity. At this rate
the Rulers of that Country behaved themselves, maintaining their Dignity
amongst Quakers and others, and preserving the public peace committed to their
Charge. Of this moderation these are 2 instances. The chief City in New-Holland
is called New-Amsterdam, from the Metropolis of Holland of the same Name: Two
Mile from hence is a Village called Hemsteed. This Village was a territory of
our Colony, but for the most part peopled with English Inhabitants; of those a
few, that formerly were Brownists (or puritans) fell off from their own party
to the Quakers, having their Meetings and Religious exercises together. And
these things so long as Cantiously and Privately done, our Magistrates did not
so much take notice of or punish, as they did, when they did not use so much
Moderation and Caution; and we find too much liberty would tend to the
seduction of others. An instance of this for a Tenor to others, was shown in
one Rob. Hodson, who was arrived at such a pitch of boldness, as he induced
several of his own Sect to meet together, for solemn prayers, not secretly, but
abroad in an open Garden: The news therefore of this so famous an assembly
being brought to those, who, had it not been for this rash and provoking
proceeding of theirs, would easily have let them alone; they all ran in upon
them, and taking Hodson upon whom besides a Bible in his hand, they found a
Dagger in his Bosom, and since that seemed to be a Weapon more sit for Offense
than Defense, they tied his hands and carried him to New-Amsterdam to the
Governor Stuyvesand. He, taking the Man for a Contemner of the Laws and
Disturber of the public Peace, caused him to be cast into a dark place full of
Filth and Dirt; and soon after Arraigns him for sedition, and, by the suffrages
of all the Magistrates, pronounces sentence upon him in Dutch; (which because
he did not understand, one Translated it to him into English) that either he
should pay a fine of 600 Florens, or be clothed in Sackcloth and Chained, and
tied with a Barbarous slave should work for two years upon the Reparations of
the City Walls. Which work when he was brought to, and refused to do, a lusty
crabbed Negro slave laid on him 50 lashes with a Cat with nine Tails; and when
for all that he would not set himself to work, he redoubled his blows, and that
to such a Degree as he was not able to stand on his Legs. And because all this
while he would not do as he was Commanded, at last the Governor ordered him
this punishment: They stripped him naked to the waste, and then hanged him up by
the hands and tied a great Logg of Wood to his feet, and beat him severely with
whips, and so carried him from the Court to the Prison from whence he came. The
same they served him 2 years after. With these stripes the poor Man was so
disabled, that he lay along while without sense, and almost without life, so
that there had been small hopes of his ever recovering; if an English woman
moved with a pious grief and pity had not Administered proper Medicines to him,
and binding up his Wounds, restored him to life again. At last the Governors
Sister so pleaded his cause with her Brother, as procured his Enlargement from
his dismal Solitude. This was about the time, that the Persecution against
these people began to rage in New England. Another Town in the like Condition,
belonging indeed to the English, but under the Jurisdiction of the Hollandew,
was Gravesend. And there a Noble Lady the. Countess of Mordee; who was a
Puritan was turned Quaker, and resided chiefly at this place, gave the
remaining people of this Society the liberty of Meeting in her house; but
managed it with that prudence and observance of time and place, as gave no
offense to any stranger or person of another Religion than her own, and so she
and her people remained free from all Molestation and Disturbance. And because
we have made mention of this Lady and her Company in this place; I Will relate a
memorable story. There was the Son of certain English Clergyman, arrived at
years of Discretion, and of very honest Conversation: Who being often in the
house of this Lady, and Entertaining her many times with discourses upon
Religious Subjects, she invites him to come to their Meeting and hear their
Preaching, at least for once. He answered her again and again (for she was very
earnest with him) that he should be always very ready to obey her Ladyship in
any other thing, but in this humbly begged her Ladyships excuse. This young
Gentlewoman continuing obstinate, and the Lady by how much more she persisted
in the thing, by so much the greater was the grief of her Disappointment, at
last he did that of his own accord, which he neither would or could upon her
Prayers and Entreaties. He fancied to himself one night in his sleep, that he
heard and saw many things of the Quakers, and when he was awaked and thought
nothing had put a deceit upon his senses, he heard as it were a voice, and went
and came to a Company of those sort of people, of whom he had formed in his
mind so many representations when he was asleep. He, approving of his Oraculous
Dream, the day following goes to a Meeting of the Quakers, where he was so
taken with their Discourses, that he was Transported beyond himself. And his
mind was continually running on going thither again. But before he did, he
Communicates his Intention to several of his Friends, who mightily dehorted him
therefrom. Considering therefore their reasons on the one hand, and on the
other the Continual Idea of his Night Vision never going out of his mind; and
that not devised, or fancied, but real discourse of theirs, was always
turmoi^ing him, so that with the horrible Agonies of his mind, not knowing
which way to turn, or what to do, he fell into a grievous and dangerous fit of
Sickness. From which being recovered, he not only Estranged himself wholly
from that sort of People, but also imputed what had happened to him among that
people, to the Effects of Incantation, and said, the Devil wrought amongst
them. Of the truth of this I have a very worthy Gentleman a witness, who is now
a faithful Minister of the Word of God in our Country; to whom the young Man
has often related this story. Sometimes there has been of these sort of People,
who before a Magistrate have said, they could not say or do any thing with
them, without their hats on. These there was no better way to deal with than by
severely reprimanding them, and sending them away unheard, and soundly rated
at. There were some women which in the high ways, others, tho but few, who in
the middle of the Sermon or Prayers of our people, would break out either into
an Extempore or Praemiditated Noise or Singing. These Women were Commanded or
Compelled to go away, or carried away and taken into Custody till they were
discharged. And so, if their crime was no greater, they were no further
punished. Now to speak a little of the other Plantations of the English,
Virginia, Bermudas, etc. I have said already in the beginning who they were
that first Voyaged hither; but who they were that (first) went to those places
I cannot so certainly tell. It seems George Wilson came to Virginia in the year
56, and there died in B^^^s. Henry Fell went to Barmudas the same year, and not
long after returned again. In those parts also the Religion of the Quakers
began to appear abroad sensibly, and show its face. As for these Men till the
year 60, I don't find any punishment inflicted on them, only some Fines were
laid upon them, because they used to entertain one another in their houses, or
refused to take an Oath, or be uncovered before a Magistrate, or to undertake
any Military Services: Although these fines were often so great, that even for one
default only, the third part or more of their goods were taken away, they not
having much Money, as the generality of them were of the meaner sort of people.
This I find, that in Mariland, a province joining to Virginia, this year,
Thomas Thurston was cast into Prison, and the Officer desiring one John Holland
to assist him in this business, who refusing (and saying it was unreasonable
Thurston should be used so, and that he could not assist him in the taking of a
Man Prisoner, who was his Friend and old Acquaintance) to be any ways assistant
to the said Office (which the Laws of England will no ways excuse not even
among those, that are of the first Degree and Quality) he himself was put in
Prison too, and afterward severely whipped. Then in the year 60 and that
following, as the Spirit and Courage of these people began to increase with
their Numbers, and these Friends to set up their Meetings, and at last they
went on Cheerfully in their ways, then, both for the reasons aforesaid. And
especially, on the account of these Meetings, they were prosecuted with
Imprisonments, Whippings, Banishments, Transportations, into wild Woods and
Desolate places; till at length this excessive severity began to abate; and
this Sect of People to rest and be confirmed; and that especially by reason of
the Kings Interposition, and an order sent like that I spoke of before to the
Governor of New England. Those who are acquainted with that part of America,
which is under the English Jurisdiction, know Pensilvania, the Propriety and
Government of which (vacant by the Death of William Pen) from whom the said
Country takes its Denomination, descended to his Son William Penn, that famous
Patron and Head of the Quakers. And he being heir to this Country, it became
as it were the Inheritance and Portion of the Quakers, especially since the
year 82, at which time Penn going to his Government ordered all things to his
own mind, and appointed all his Officers and Agents their proper places.
Omitting therefore to speak of the political Order and Government of this
Country, and its legal Establishment, and of the Benefits and Advantages these
Quaker-people enjoy, both throughout the whole Province and especially in the
Town, which, from their mutual Love to one another, they have called
Philadelphia; these people at that time were induced with such a Courage and
Fortitude of mind, and opinion of their own Constitutions, Government,
Unanimity, and good Agreement, that they ventured to invite all the Barbarous
Americans, and indeed all Men, in whom there was the least spark of Religion,
Moral Honesty, or Quietness of Temper, to come and live among them, promising
them upon their good behavior the like Advantages themselves enjoyed, and the
free exercise of their own Religion. Which the better to understand, it will be
worth while to set down their Decree. Which runs thus. We give a General
general liberty of Conscience to all, who acknowledge one God omnipotent, the
Creator, Preserver, and Governor of the World, and hold themselves obliged in
Conscience to live quietly and justly under Government, To that degree that
none shall have any thing to do, as to Religious matters and opinions, at any
time to compel or force another to any sort of Religious Worship to which he
is averse, or to Contribute any thing toward the Maintenance of Preachers, or
to places set apart for Religious. Worship. And that every one shall have the
full use of his Christian liberty, without sustaining any detriment for the
same. And if any one abuse another, or mock him for being of a different
persuasion from him in religious matters, he shall be accounted a Disturber of
the public peace and punished accordingly. Now tho I have hitherto only
recited this Writing, and all those things I have yet treated on, without
pretending to interpret or give the mind or sense of these people ( in them)
yet here I cannot forbear taking notice that they call this liberty Christian,
when as they extend it to all Men, who only acknowledge one God. Now if these
Men will agree with themselves, they must necessarily take all those for
Christians in whom there appears, any Principle or Religion or Piety, as being
what they say, is from Christ, yea is Christ. But as the Inhabitants of this
Country were for the most part Quakers, so because of the Convenience of the
Country and this liberty of Religion, confirmed by the Edict aforesaid. More
Quakers at several times came thither, from Diverse other parts of America. And
not only those of this persuasion, but also others of other Principles and
Opinions in Religion, and several of none or slender fortunes came and fixed
themselves in those remote parts of the World, hoping for a blessing from
Heaven, and a bettering of their Condition. For seldom those that have any
Estate or hopes of one in their own Country, travel into strange and unknown
Countries, leaving all their Friends and Acquaintance behind them. Moreover, W.
Penn the Lord and Governor of the Country, a little before the breaking out
of the Mortal War which still rages between the French of the one side, and the
English and their Confederates of the higher and lower Germany on the other,
incited thither several people, both English and our Country folks, and some
of the Palatinate of the Rhene, who having nothing of their own to loose at
home, and hearing of the plenty of all things in America, were got into several
parts thereabouts, and having entertained a good opinion of him, many of them
were drawn thither in hopes of getting a good livelihood by their handy works.
And so all these people addicted themselves to Agriculture, and preparing and
enlarging that part of the Country which was before uninhabited and
uncultivated, and withal of their own proper concerns. And all things succeeded
well and happily to them, they being indefatigably Diligent and Industrious. So
the whole Country became well manured, and Laws were made for the better
distribution of the Lands, Alloting to every one their particular part. And
these strangers had an equal privilege of exercising what Religion they would,
and living according to their own fashion with those of their own Company. And
moreover, they were made capable of all honors and be^^ing any office or
dignity in the Magistracy, either in City or Country. Although this was the
Prerogative of the Quakers, not that they had Arrogated it to themselves by any
Law, but by reason of the Multitude of them and their all agreeing together,
and being Ambitious to possess the first and best places in the Government.
Whence it came to pass that there were some of whom there is no great question
to be made, but that only for profit and advantage sake, dissembling their own
opinions they went out to the Quakers, and tacked about as the wind turned. Now
as we see that for the most part fortune follows the diligent, the Ingenious,
and Industrious; So the greatest part (almost) of these people, being religious
Men and Men of Integrity, but unexpert and not well verst in the Affairs of the
World; the rest not only ignorant and unexperienced in affairs, but also wild
and licentious in Discourse and Conversation. And amongst the rest of them were
some of the Quakers. In process of time these grave and serious Men, hanging of
a knot together, diligently aiming at what they had always seemed to despise,
and affected to get into all the Courts and Offices of Judicature, and mightily
to busy themselves about those Employs. And when they were chosen Magistrates
and Judges, they behaved them-excellently in the said Offices, and oftentimes
carried themselves roughly and proudly to their Clients and Suitours, and in
their sentences, and decisions of suits and punishing of Malefactors, they
fitted themselves with such a kind of Juridical Actions as always bred disgust;
and when the Case required that any thing was to be Solemnly affirmed or
denied, they caused the Witnesses to swear, or at least use such a kind of
assertion as little differs from an Oath, as: I speak and promise it in the
presence of God; or as true as God's in Heaven, or which at least was no less
than an Oath amongst God's ancient people the Jews, As the Lord lives.
Moreover, they also who aimed at the Ministerial offices in the Church, and
Arrived at such like Degrees of Honor, were chosen and appointed by them, or
delayed by them who had most influence upon the Senate; whose minds they filled
with a belief, that they took a great deal of care of the weal-publick and the
Laws, and would be very mindful of them in their places of Authority, and
Accommodate themselves in the Offices of Justice, according to former customs
and presidents. But besides these there were agreat many of the Quakers both
Men and Women, who took upon them the liberty to Preach and Exercised the same,
without any (or any just at least) warrant for so doing; after that manner
intruding themselves, without producing any just Testimony, either of their
Ability or good Conversation. And there are some of the Quakers themselves who
assert, that among these there were some, who for their profound ignorance of
the very first Principles of Religion, were so far unfit to bear the Office of
Teachers or Ministers in the Church, that they did not deserve so much as to be
taken in as members of it; Which being a thing of no small moment, and laying a
firm foundation for hatred and envy, disagreement and Contention among these
People, even to this very day, it is much to be feared, that unless they agree
better among themselves, it may come to pass one day, that their domestic
Quarrels invite their Barbarous Neighbors, or other foreign foes to set upon
them in an hostile manner and put a speedy period to their Government, and
longer continuance there. And we may know also that whereas the War between the
French and English, is carried into these parts of the World also; and although
these people can tell how to fight well enough with words, yet they will have
nothing to do with War or Armies either for offense or defense, and
consequently lie an easy Conquest for an Enemy, who very quietly, and without
any danger at all to themselves, might soon overcome them: King William of
England has sent 'em over a Governor, one of the Church of England, with
Orders, That if occasion be, he should take care to defend them against any
Armed Enemy, better than otherwise they would themselves.

Now since we are at present upon this Country of the Quakers, and have but now
made mention of the great dissentions and distractions amongst them; it would
not be suitable to this Relation, and the design of this Work, if I should omit
that great and very memorable Case, that within these few years has happened
among them in those Parts, which because known to few, I will relate and
deduce down to this very time, when as yet none knows what the end of it will
be. I have shown, in the former Book concerning George Keith, that famous
Teacher amongst the Quakers, how the Quakers, his Friends and Acquaintaince in
England, ascribed to him certain Errors or Forms of speaking, which they did
not approve of; but which of their good will toward him, they attributed to
his singular Learning. This man came over into these parts, and residing a
while in some Islands near Pensylvania, in the year 89, removed thence to
Philadelphia, being invited by some who not only desired him for their
Preacher, but also to be Tutor to their Children. When he came thither, he
undertook both Offices, and to show his Modesty, takes the place of an Usher to
teach Boys, and discharges it very commendably. And at the same time exercising
his Preaching Faculty among an unlearned and Ignorant company of People, as for
the most part their Preachers were, he excelled 'em all, appearing as a bright
Luminary, and outshining all the rest of that Order among them. And by his
opportune diligence, and industry in all the parts of his Ministerial Office he
rendered himself beloved of 'em all, especially the more inferior sort of
People. And it had been well indeed if so it had continued. But a short time
produced a great alteration in the state of Affairs. For soon after there arose
some, that opposed Keith, him and charged him with many, not only, Errors in
Doctrine, but also high and unpardonable Crimes. For Keith did not forbear over
and over again, to inculcate and instruct all his Auditors in the Doctrines of
the twofold Nature of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the Divine and Human;
and of the Human, the one part Heavenly, Spiritual and Eternal, the other
Earthly and Corporeal, conceived in time of his Mother Mary. Then his second
Tenent was this, which he often repeated to them all; That Christ, as Born of
Mary, was uninted with the Divine Nature, and so was present with his Light and
Life in all the Children of God It was difficult for him to keep the Conception
of his mind to himself, without divulging them, especially because, when a man
rightly comprehends a thing himself it is nothing, unless another be made
acquainted with it too. Wherefore Keith, although he a good while smothered in
silence, the Opinions which he had long entertained, Of the Transmigration of
Souls after Death; Of the last Judgment, and State of the Deceased, and end of
the World, as being unsafe, and less acceptable to be disclosed; yet he could
not so contain himself, but that now and then he gave an inckling in his
Discourses, of what his inward conceptions of these things were; and sometimes
he was not able to forbear betraying in his words, what his true sense of those
things was, and what he principally aimed at in them; whence it came to pass,
that those that loved Keith, and favored his Doctrine, greedily entertained
these Principles. And yet for the most part, those that were the greatest
followers of his Doctrins and Admirers of his Skill and Parts (whom Keith
indeed, for his own Credit's sake, either found or made thorough paced in his
Principles) embraced these Notions so heartily, that they relied more upon his
Authority and Precepts, than their own Judgment, and thought it enough to say,
that he knew and said so, and so, and that, with them, was Demonstration. And
so his Exact and Nice and Subtle Judgment, in these matters, was a subterfuge
to cover their Ignorance. Against these Tenants of Keith, and those of his
Party, there were others that set themselves, and especially against that
Article of the Divine and Human Nature of Christ. which Article Keith openly
acknowledged he held, and professed; and that it was no new thing, by him
devised, but anciently, and always taught by the whole Society. Against which
Article they objected, that of one he made two Christ's. Of these Adversaries
the Head and chief was an Elderly Minister, one W. Stockade by Name, a man
indeed not unlearned, but in the Opinion of himself, and many more unlearned
and ignorant People, a man of vast Parts, and Learning, and the Champion and
Defender of the Ancient and Pure Religion of these People. Keith stretched his
Opinion and Belief of this Article so far, and made it so necessary to be known
and believed, as that thereupon Christianity it self depended, and that the
denial of that Article, was the same as to deny the Passion and Death of
Christ, yea, Christ himself. Moreover, that they who persisted in the denying
of this Article, the sin of such denial was so great, that it gave just cause
to those that held it, to fly to Extremity, and separate themselves from those
who obstinately deny it. At last when this question had been Controverted a
long while, and no end like to be put to it; Keith, and those of his Party,
grew to that height, and were so peremptory in this Controversy, that they
said, God had called 'em to separate themselves from those sort of Infidels. In
the mean while, as this good Company were so disgusted at the Opinions of the
other acuter Men, they entertained and published such kind of Notions about the
same Articles; as Keith and his followers no less delested and were averse
from; then they cried out, the Denial of their Opinions was no less than a
renouncing of the Faith, and utterly overturning the Foundations of it. Although
these same men differed in their Opinions mightily amongst themselves; and some
as much from others, as all of them differed from Keith's sentimeuts. So as to
that Article of the Human Nature of Christ, some affirmed, that Christ never
arose, and ascended into Heaven; as he was born of Mary, and suffered on the
Cross. Others, That Christ took that Body indeed out of the Sepulcher, but in
his Assention into Heaven, laid it aside. Others doubted of the whole business,
and could not tell what to pitch upon. Some thought that all Controversy about
such a thing as was not only controvertible, or not worth the while, and by
reason of the slightness of the concern, made nothing to the purpose of Faith,
however 'twas decided. These thought it the best way to lay down the
Controversy, and keep Peace. As to the state of Souls after Death, there was
so^^ that held, That all Faithful and Religious Persons, immediately entered
into the Compleatness of Joy and happiness, but that the unbelievers and wicked
instantly upon their Death, underwent all that punishment that attends them,
and that herein consisted all the Resurrection. Which was as much as to say,
That properly there will be no further Resurrection of the Body, and that the
Body after it is resolved into Dust, shall be no where, or nothing at all, nor
any future Day of Reckoning, or of the last and general Judgment. Others there
were that said, that the Resurrection and all the glorious Condition spoken of
should at last be consummated and perfect in this Life, for this Reason,
because Christ Arose, and lived such a happy and blessed Life; which in other
words, is all one as to say that there is no Heaven or Hell, but what is within
Men. These Opinions Keith took notice of, and reprehended in these men's
Discourses and Sermons, as being contrary to the Articles of the Catholic
Faith, especially as they are propounded and declared to us in the Scriptures
of the Old and New Testament; and told those of his Party, That these men
taught and dellvered such Doctrines, as when they came thoroughly to understand,
they ought not to give any the least Entertainment to 'em.

At last in the year 91, there was an Experiment made, to put an End to these
Controversies in a Meeting of the Friends and Brethren. Time and place was
appointed by Common consent. The two principal Adversaries, Keith and Stocker
dispute together with great heat and vehemence, but such was the end of it,
that the difference instead of being composed was but so much the more
increased. Whereupon the cause was deferred to the General yearly assembly,
which that year was held at Philadelphia in September In which assembly the
Doctrine of Keith was brought on the Stage: For whereas Keith did not so much
define as suppose or leave to be examined as truth, what was attributed to him
of the Transmigration of Souls, and their state after their departure out of
the Body; therefore that was not called into question, but this; Whether to
Preach faith in Christ within a Man, and Christ without a Man is not to Preach
two Christ's. There were six Sessions or Acts held about this, in which
notwithstanding there were so many Teachers endued with and taught and led by,
the Holy Spirit it self, immediately, as they call it, and being of the highest
form of Christianity, yet they could not come to a Conclusion, or Definitive
sentence about this Controversy. For the Disputants on both sides even in this
Supreme and Sacred Council, did so scold and rail one at another. Keith's
adversaries using all the Reproachful and Opprobrious Terms they could think of
against his Doctrine, inveighed bitterly against the Man himself; and not only
so, but also in a Contentious chiding way used a great many Scurrilous bitter
words, and that they might not seem to talk more than do, they handled him very
coursely and dragged and thrust him about very unhandsomly, not that they were
so furious by nature as Egged on by the cause they had in hand. And on the
other hand, Keith and they that were of his side, tho otherwise a Man of wit
and sense enough yet at this time and on this occasion likewise, not naturally
or of his own accord, but as he was forced to it, and not able longer to
contain his just resentments of their Injurious dealings with him, at last
broke out into invective Speeches against his Adversaries, as being the Effects
of his just Indignation against them, not railing, but giving them answers
worthy of their heat and malice. At last one urged another with the Terms of
Dolts, Fools, Heretics, Infidels, Heathens, Profane, wicked Wretches. So they,
how far now these people, in this case have forgot themselves both in Doctrine
and Discipline, and how far off they have been from that perfect Agreement and
Absolute Modesty they pretend to, as the more cautious, and clear sighted, have
long and often suspected, so now all, both wise and unwise, may easily see.
These wrangling Disputants being never a-weary; those of the Brethren which
were the presidents and moderators in this famous cause, considering, that by
these endless Jarrs and Disputes of the contending partys, the Fame and Glory
of the Quakers Name, was like to suffer; made an end of this affair thus at
last. Reprehending both partys, (as indeed both were to blame) they acquitted
Keith, and acknowledged his Doctrine concerning Jesus Christ, to be true and
right; and order Stockade, to confess himself to have dealt unfairly with
Keith; and give him satisfaction for the damage he has done him. So for a while
these Contentions ceased and all was quiet. Now in this time of Peace and
Quietness Tho. Fitzwater a Quaker Minister, being puffed up with the conceit,
some people had entertained of his Wit and Learning, in a certain Monthly
Meeting accuses Keith of Hercsy, for denying the light of Chirst to be
sufficient for Men. Here again both sides were mightily heated, and said many
things of the sudden, which was the more easily Excusable from the Trouble and
Commotion of mind they were in. Nor here could the whole Senate reconcile these
two people, or bring them to any Terms of Agreement. Then the Case was reserved
to another assembly, to which were invited Tho. Lloyd the Governor, and others
of the Magiracy of the whole province, that by their prudence and suffrages the
matter might be brought to a Conclusion. There Keith brought a great accusation
against Stockade that, he had not as yet given him satisfaction according to
the decree of the former Council. And here many quarrels (...) out of one. The
Governor and Magistrates lay many things to Keith's charge. At last the
greatest part of Ministers and Elders incline on (...). Whereupon the
Governors fall to him too; And make an order of Council, that Stockade himself
shall Condemn himself of Ignorance and Infidelity. Stockade denies to do any
such thing, and stands upon his defense insisting, that what he had said of
Keith, he had said with very good reason. The difference too between Keith and
Fitzwater was brought on the Stage, which had been handled in the former
Monthly Meeting. And they all agree and pass this Peremptory sentence, that
Stockade by a public Writing should take the blame upon himself of his offense
against Keith, and that Fitzwater should do the same for himself, for as much
as relates to Keith and over and above should give an account of his faith in
Writing before this Council, and therein satisfy them as to what he held of the
Resurrection of Christ, and the present State of his humane nature in Heaven;
and that in the mean while both of them should desist from Praying and
Preaching in their Meetings till they had done what was ordered them. The
determinations of this assembly, tho Stockade and Fitzwater at first either
expressly or silently submitted to, yet now at last sentence being past upon
them, they flew off, and refused to obey it, alleging: That whereas this was a
business Ecclesiastical, and was a Controversy wholly amongst the Ministers of
the Church, and that a very hard and difficult one too, which they themselves
could scarce comprehend, therefore it was only proper for the Cognizance and
Decision of the Ministers of the Church: Now that part of those that had
undertakon to Judge and Determine these affairs and they a Considerable part
too, were of those whose office these things don't belong to, and whose aptness
to enlarge their own Power and Authority was sufficiently well known;
Wherefore, neither was their sentence or determination Valid, nor would they
obey such an Interdict. Therefore Stockade and Fitzwater notwithstanding all
this went on in their Ministerial functions, and withdrew and separated
themselves from those that were the followers of Keiths Yet Keith and those of
his party did not presently take notice and allow of this separation, nor
likewise disjoyn themselves utterly from their Society; but waited in hopes to
see them repent of what they had done, and give satisfaction for their
Injurious dealings, or at least in words to own their faults, and so in good
time to return into Friendship with them again, and wholly unite together in
stricter Bonds of Friendship than ever. The most part both of City and Country
held on Keith's side, and from thence were called Keithians. As things stood
thus this Governor and rest of the Magistrates, fearing lest the difference
should spead further, and be the forerunner of greater disturbances, came to a
Conclusion that it would be best to put a stop to this Inconvenience as soon
and as well as they could. Wherefore they considered that it would be best not
to rescind the former Judgment; but yet to recall those things which were done
before under a new Cognizance. At their Command therefore there met together at
Philadelphia in the year 92, the 20th day of the 4th Month eight and twenty
Men, of which the greater part were Ministers or Preachers, among whom were
some, who exercised the offices both of Ministers in the Church and Magistrates
in the Commonwealth; of which one was Sam. Jennings a great Enemy of Keiths
and another Arthur Cook, no great friend to him. To these Men was Committed the
care and Administration of this affair, to advise as Friends and Arbitrators on
both sides, and to put a final end to the Difference and Contention that was
between Keith and his Adversaries. But these Men meeting together, not so much
to decide these Differences which were now become General, as to Condemn Keith
and those of his party, and absolve those of the other side, in their first
Session pass this short sentence upon him without hearing him, or any thing on
his behalf, and Seal it in Writing. That Keith is a Man that has not the fear
of God before his Eyes. Than which sentence Keith could not have had a severer
passed upon him by open Enemies, than was done by these his Judges. And now,
according to his Adversaries principal wish, the Magistracy forbid keith,
without any further delay, all exercise of his Ministerial function in the
Church; and if notwithstanding he should continue so to do, he should be
prosecuted as an adjudged Enemy. And now the Enemies of Keith applaud themselves
that they have compassed their Ends, and obtained their revenge on him.
Wherefore Keith and one Tho. Bud, publish a book in English, Entitled, The
Vindication of an Innocent cause against a false Judgment passed upon it.
Wherein they relate the form, Continuance, and order of the Judgment passed
against the Keithians, and also the depraved Morals of some of the Judges, that
had combined together in this Cause, and specially of the Ministers of the
word. Not to cast any Reflection upon the Magistracy, nor Sully the Honors of
the Ministers of their Church, or discover the failings of any order of Men;
but to show, what it was they ought to beware of, least the evil should be
dispersed from the head through all the Members; and so the Enemies might take
occasion to reflect disgrace upon this Church, and Arrogate Glory to
themselves. Upon a time Keith entered into Discourse with the Governor, and
makes a long and heavy complaint to him, of the Judgment that was past upon him
in his absence, without being duly cited or the cause heard; that of the
Judges Diverse were prejudiced against him, and he had thereupon suffered Diverse
Injuries, unusual and unheard of amongst just and upright Judges. After which
the Governor as it were directing his discourse to Keith's Complaints said,
that if he had sustained any Injury in the aforesaid Meeting he should complain
of it, and seek redress, in the general and yearly Council which was shortly to
be held at Philadelphia. Keith being oppressed, with so many adversities and
troubles; yet not overcome, considered that it was best for him to do so; and
so being egged on with a resentment of the Injuries he had received. He writes
a sharp appeal to the Council, and lays down twelve Articles, containing an
Exposition of his and his Friends's Doctrine and Belief: And that the whole
state of the Case, after so great and long a Controversy, which in a short
space of time could not so easily be comprehended in all its parts, might the
better be apprehended and more commodiously decided by the Synod; and they in
their great Wisdom and Vigilance might briefly adjudg for the one, and against
the others, as might be convenient; and prescribe to each their Duties. And
because it seemed dangerous to write out so many Books in Manuscript, Keith
causes both Books to be Printed, to the intent, in time, to send a Copy to them
all, that they might from this time weigh and consider the Case, and then,
being prepared, be ready to give it a quick dispatch. The Title of the Book
was, An Appeal from twenty eight men, to the Spirit of Truth. Printed by
William Bradford. Two Copies of it were distributed by John Comb; which so soon
as it was known, the Magistrates pronounces them all guilty, as breakers of the
Peace, and disturbers of the Government; and sends the Mayor, With, who seizes
the Printer and Publisher, and carries them from their Houses, into Prison; and
withal, as if he had been in his own Possession or Estate, takes out of their
Workhouses what Tools or Utensils he pleases, and carries them away. The next
day the Magistrate orders the Mayor to lay his Action against Keith and his
Companions, and partners in his Crime, joining for help, two of the College of
the Magistrates, who were not Quakers, namely, Lucius Coke, a Lutheran, and
John Holmes, a Baptist, who, as being of a different Persuasion, and partial to
neither side, might pass for upright Judges. But these Gentlemen declined the
Office for this reason, because the thing which these Men were accused of,
arose from Religion and Tending thereunto, had nothing of concern with the
civil Government, and therefore was more proper to be decided by those Men from
whom it came, and who were concerned in it. To which they added, that since
neither Humane nor Divine Laws allowed, that any one should be Condemned
without being first heard, it was just and right that Keith, before any
Judgment passed upon him, should be heard. This was an answer that did not
please those, whose designs seemed not to aim at the quieting of the present
Disorders, but rather to the increase of them, and raising of new. And so they
go on with their Intention, and without hearing of Keith proceed to sentence.
They give Judgment for Keith's Condemnation, in a long Writing, of which these
were the heads. That the Governors have declared Keith to be a wicked Man, an
ill Citizen, a Teacher ill Principled, and Disaffected to the Government, King
and Queen. And this they order the Crier to publish in the Court, before a
great Concourse of People. In the Ecclesiastical Convention, where the debate
between Keith and his Adversaries was handled, the Governor and other of the
Magistracy being present, there happened a dispute between Keith and the
Governor himself; about a place which the Governor had quoted out of a book
formerly written by Keith. Which place when Keith had said it made nothing to
the purpose, nor was it rightly cited by the Governor, he went on and added
that the Governor was also one of those, who had not cited him to the hearing
of the cause, but had Condemned him unheard. This slipped from Keith in his heat
and sudden transport of mind, and by a slip of the Tongue, which often happens
in hot disputes, that the Governor was an Impu^ent Man and his Name would rot.
Which words, tho the Governor had more than once said that he would not take
notice of as spoken upon such a time and occasion, yet now he lays to Keiths
charge as an Egregious reproach to Magistracy, not to be passed by without
punishment: It was added; that Keith at the same time Reproached the Governor
as a person not capable for the due discharge of his Office. But as to that
Keith says, that he neither said nor thought so. In the said sentence of
Condemnation also it is contained; that Keith should call another of the
Magistrates by a Name which in English Signifies one or all of these, viz.
Scolder, Quareller, wrody deceiver, Sordid fellow, Seoundel, Knave. Which
accusation Keith thus wiped off, Not denying the fact, he said he called that
Man by that Name; as being one who indeed was not of the Magistracy, and yet
notwithstanding sat in that assembly that Condemned Keith, and as such
concurred with them in the same sentence, and subscribed his Condemnation.
Amongst these Disputes and Wranglings there was a New Court of Judicature held
at Philadelphia; for the passing an Impartial Sentence upon these three Men,
who had lain under so much prejudice. Jenings was President, and Cook one of
the Judges, who, I have both said before, were Quaker Ministers. Now hither
were cited to plead their own Cause, Keith, Bradford, Comb, Bud, Buss, and
others of the Keithians, who all came; all and every of them were Indicted of
this Crime, of Writing, Uttering and Devising a Book, entitled an Appeal,
being a very Seditious, Scandalous Book, and full of a great many Lies, in
which particularly Jennings, the President of this Assembly, was Charged as a
proud, imperious Man, and insolent in his Discourse and Demeanor, and the said
book did Print, concealing the Printers Name, Buss, whose Christian Name was
Peter, was charged over and above the rest, to have said many other things of
Jennings, more than was contained in the book. Wonderful this. The case with
Jennings the president and the whole Senate, was whether they that were brought
before them as Criminals, or Jennings himself were guilty; he an untainted and
unblamable person, or they foul Detractors, worthy the highest punishment; The
Court was full of Scolding and Quarrelling. Whatsoever (they alleged) had been
said or written against Jennings was not against him, as a Magistrate but an
Ecclesiastical person, a Preacher, and if he pleased his Colleague, not with an
intent to reproach or accuse him; but for his Correction, and to try all
things; as brethren used, or ought, to do. And these Criminals proved by good
Witnesses and Evidences; that they, who complained so much of the Calumnies
laid to their Charge, were worse than the Objections against them insinuated;
Namely that they were not only Proud and Imperious persons, but so far from
having the Command of themselves, that they could scarce contain themselves
within any bounds of their Lusts and Pleasures. In this troublesome assembly,
Keith made many grave Speeches; whereof this was the sense and sum. Will there
never an end be put to these sort of Controversies and Quarrels, or will these
Latentions be always continued which (whether we be Victors or Vanquished) are
so Shameful and Commentable to us, and wished for and laughed at by those who
once seeming desirous of our Friendship and Amity, now are turned our Haters
and Enemies and curse us. And as if in this Case we had lost all our wisdom,
and there was no further place left for a remedy to this mischief, which if it
remains, and spreads farther, will not only reflect an Eternal Disgrace upon
our Truth, but also, will so afflict and spoil it, especially in these parts,
amongst these Barbarians, as will at last bring on it all manner of Ruin and
Destruction to its utter Subversion. The State of the Case lies here. While
those whose province it is to take care of the safety of this Country and
Religion, find it a difficult task, to please all parties; but much more so to
set themselves openly against all; hence comes there to be called so many
Concur^ions, and so many various and different events, till its come to that
pass, by the setting up a few bold Men against all Laws; that some narrow
Soul'd people, terrified in Conscience, and fearful of appearing Criminal; not
only now don't stand as Criminals, but themselves sit and act, as Judges in
their own Cause, and as such pass Sentances, as their own private Animosities,
and prejudice and desire of revenge which they have been now along while
Hatching and Consulting amongst themselves, promp't them to. And what such
great Crime is there Committed, that should occasion so great disputes and
strife. Isaias, that great and excellent Prophet cries out, that there are
those who make a Man guilty for a word, and lay a stumbling block for him that
is ready to fall in the gate. And lately, into what Snares, what Streights have
I been brought; and all for a word, which besides that it was spoken hastily
and not stood in, if it were examined to the bottom, and might receive a true
proper and fair Interpretation, or if taken in the best sense, which always
ought to be followed, would not only have been pardoned, but brought me
Commendation too, now for the like cause of Truth and Virtue, are I and my
Companians arraigned as Criminals. For here we are charged with Sedition,
Dishonouring the Magistrates, Treason. Yea, as if we were almost all guilty of
every of these Crimes, who are so far from them, as we study nothing more than
obedience to lawful Power and Authority. But what Conviction is there of this?
What the least proof of it? Or what that bears the least Resemblance of it? For
if to accuse alone be enough, neither any of you, or any Man living will be
innocent, and there will be no need to fear those punishments that these Men
deserve. But here lies the Conviction and proof of the Crime, because we have
spoken somewhat tartly against some of your order and have used sharp Language.
We hear it. After a hostile manner? No, this your modesty will not give you
leave to say, tho all the rest you affirm with a geeat deal of Confidence. But
we have written and spoken a great many Scandalous things against them. Whom?
Those who were and as yet are of our order. Who tho they are, Ecclesiastics,
Doctors, Ministers, now at this time lay aside those Characters, and take upon
them to be Magistrates and Judges. But what are these Scandalous things? Are
they such, as both they and we do mutually exhort one another to, and if that
be not enough, such as our places and duties oblige us publicly to admonish
those that are Committed to our charge? Is there any thing more than this? That
the Printers Name is not prefixed to the Book. But what harm is there in that?
What necessity, or Law, Custom, or Example is there for that? I appeal to you O
my Companions, who have published so many famous books in England, and the most
Illustrious Penn, the Lord and chief Governor of this Country, of whom there
are so many Monuments extant, not bearing thy Name, or the Names of those that
Printed them: Which since it is so, let all Honest and Impartial people see and
Judge, who in this place principally are to be esteemed innocent, and who
guilty; whereof the one do not in any wise refuse to stand before their Judges,
and to have their whole cause plainly determined; The others fly from Justice
and mock their Judges. Now see and consider ye, what ye have to determine, that
it may be that against Truth and Probability, falsity and fraud, which Tempests
and Impure breaths are against the Sun; and that it may come to pass, if not at
present, yet that at last, oppressed truth may have a Glorious resurrection and
light up her head, and slighted and injured virtue shine forth spendidly, as
the Suns rays break out so much the more Illustrious after the Gloomy Clouds
are dispelled; and at last that happy time may come, in which the allwise,
incorrupt, and Almighty Judge shall lay open and make manifest those things
that are at present obscured in an abyss of Darkness, and shall reveal the
thoughts and counsels of the Heart, and every one shall receive their reward
from God. After a long, Quarrelsome, and Confused disputing of the Case pro and
con, in which some of 'em so thought their Tongues to be their own, as they
said what they pleased, the Judges having concluded, and all people a-gape to
hear the sentences: They laid upon Keith and Bud the penalty of five pounds
each. Bradford's Trial was put off till the next Sessions. That which with
these Men seems unjust, they call the Judiciary Court of the whole province.
What these Judges seem to think of themselves, as if from them there could be
no appeal, they don't allow of King Charles had reserved to himself (in the
assignment he had made of the Country to W. Penn, in the Grand Charter, or
Grant he gave him,) the final Decision of such Cases, wherein the Inhabitants
of the Country themselves injured in the highest Tribunal of that Country,
and no other redress was to be had. Therefore these Men appeal, to the
Cognizance of the King and Queen in England, and to stand by their Decision.
And this was denied them, by a bold and strong power than which nothing is more
formidable or pernicious. Wherefore these Men yiedling to their pleasure, and
the present time reserved their own right to themselves till another time.
There came in this time of great streights and trouble of mind and dejection
these Men lay under, two of these kind of people from England, who advised
Keith, out of the ancient Friendship nearness and dearness, which he had
entered into with them and the whole Society, that as much as in him lay and as
Much as he could, and should forego his own private Inconvenience for the sake
of the public, and follow peace, and avoid the scandal of such a Discension,
and so great a Distraction. And that thereunto they would lend him their
advice. Which advice of thens Keith liked and approved of very well; and although
he knew how uncertain a thing it was and full of Danger, and that it was no
part of a wise Man to follow that that he could not overtake, yet that a
dubious probability of good, was better than an uncertain Evil. And so weighing
all things well first, he proposes to his Adversaries several Terms of
Accommodation by Letters sent to them. But they, things succeeding now
according to their wishes, and their hearts being hardened with inveterate
hatred, Interpreted this Change of his for an inconstancy unbecoming wise Men,
and were angry at him for requesting this at their hands. Wherefore the
Keithians seeing that neither so could this business be brought about, and
considering that it would be labor in vain, and to no purpose, but rather
hurtful, to make any further overtures of peace, or if they should obtain any
thing, that it would not be peace but a Slavish kind of Agreement, therefore
they kept themselves to themselves, and within the bounds of their own
Confession, which Keith and some others in his own Name, and of those of his
party signed. And so much for the passages in Philadelphia till toward the end
of the year 93. But when the News of all these things was sent into England,
and to London, it is hard to say, what a great Grief and Trouble these things
were, to these Friendly People, and gave Occasion to their Enemies to inveigh
against, and insuit over the whole Sect; hitting them in the Teeth, that now
they plainly saw what they had long suspected, of their distinction and
difference of Religion; and now they both heard and saw what they professed
themselves, and what they practiced.

This was no ways pleasing to the Quakers in these parts; nay, it was very
grievous and intolerable for them to hear of. And they labored might and main
to wipe off all Suspicion from themselves; and showed, That if any where, or at
any time, there should be such an unwary disagreement in Doctrine and Manners
amongst those of their Sect; That these Objections therefore did not lie
against them all, and that they in England and these parts, did agree very well
together, and were consonant in Faith and Prayer, and kept up the ancient Glory
of their People. But they were so far from beating any body off of this Opinion
by their Speeches and protestations, that they increased it the more; For in a
short time there arose amongst the Quakers themselves, some that so engaged
themselves in this Difference, every one taking his side; and so prosecuted one
another with Hatred, Ignominy and Reproaches, that at last they began to talk
of dissenting and departing from one another, and making Schisms; So that there
was no body, of any Parts or Sense, who did not see that that Excuse was not
only very useless, but also extremely vain and ridiculous.

Things going thus, there were nevertheless some of these People, of the
greatest Name and Place amongst them, toward the ending, as I said of this
Year, who gave in charge to some of the Leading Men of the Church at London,
and those of the most ancient Professors. Whitehead, Park, Marshal, and Eight
more; that in the Name of the Society, they should write, subscribe, and
publish a Confession of the Faith of them all in their own English Tongue, as
an Answer to their Adversaries Objections, Which work they perform, entituling
their book, The Christian Doctrine and Society of the People called Quakers,
Vindicated from the Reproach of the late Division of some, in some parts of
America, as being unjustly charged upon the body of the said People, either
here or elsewhere. And when they come to declare and profess their mind and
belief of the several Articles of their Faith, in that Article that treats of
Christ, they deny that to preach Christ within, and Christ without, is to
preach Two Christ's. But when they treat of Christ's Resurrection and Ascension,
and of Heaven and Hell, they oppose themselves to the others New Doctrines. At
last, in the end of the Work, they reject the Notion of the Transmigration of
Souls, after the Death of their Bodies, into New Bodies, and declare they know
none who say, that God has revealed any such thing to them. In these things
they make mention of no Men's Names, and before they conclude the Work, they
take occasion to exhort all to sound Faith, Peace and Charity.

In the mean while, diverse Complaints, both of the Keithians and their
Adversaries, were at several times sent over to London, to the General Yearly
Meeting: This Meeting, which was thereupon first held, considering, what a
disgrace and prejudice this Dissension would be to their People, not only in
these Parts, but also all the World over; and that if they should delay the
time, and go slowly to work, to remedy this Inconvenience, it would be in vain
to bring help afterward; if they would; they leave no stone unturned to avert
this Mischief and Danger. Yet this Meeting lost all their labor. And that was
not all neither: For now at London and elsewhere, and all England over, there
were some of the Quakers that interessed themselves in this Dispute; and
growing sharp upon it, while some of them could not, or would not, without
Passion, refute the others, they stood stiffly to their own Opinions, and would
not be refuted. Hence Hatred, and at last, Faction arising, they were
distracted among themselves, and some strive to dissolve the Society
altogether. These indeed at first were not many, but as sometimes a little
Cloud raises a great Tempest, so this insolence and Vehemence of a few, stirred
up greater Concussions and Motion, amongst many: Wherefore the next Year's
General Meeting, who easily might see, that such Dissentions and Strifes, could
have no other end than their mutual destruction, being very desirous of Peace
and Amity, were so much the more intent upon this, to bring things to that
pass, That all, laying aside their Controversies, and Enmities, and Quarrels,
the Event of which was so dubious, and no advantage, or next to none could
redound to the Victors, but the detriment would be mortal and perpetual, should
study to preserve Peace, and without any fraud, desist from such Wars; and sice
what they had hitherto done, in accusing one another, and quarrelling together,
could not be helped, that they should not go on so to do, and blot out the
memory of all things said and done, that were past, by a perpetual Oblivion of
'em, and thereupon shake hands together, in Token of Faith and Amity. But
neither could this Meeting, although they employed all the Vigor both of their
Minds and Discourse to this purpose, decide the Controversy, or put an end to
this business, and bring the Contending Parties to an Agreement. But they were
so far from leaving off the thing they had attempted, that though they heard
these Parties as Brethren and Judges, yet the strife did but increase, and the
longer it continued, the sharper it was. The time of the last Meeting, or of
the last Year 94. came on. And now Keith was come back from Pensilvania into
England, to London, he on whose account all this Difference had risen.
Therefore it second good to the Meeting held that Year, that in so great and
long continued motions of their distracted People, the Heads and Chieftains of
the contending Parties, and likewise Keith should be present, and plead their
own Causes before this whole Assembly. So in the first place there were read
several Letters, writ and sent from Pensilvania to this Assembly upon this
Occasion. Then the Parties were heard, and every one had the liberty of
Defending and Proving. But here the Dissension and Vehemence of some of them
was so greet, and they were so provoking and contentious in their Language,
that the more the matter was debated, the farther off still they were.

This Meeting lasted for Twelve Days; whereas never any before had been above
Four Days. So after a long while, since the aforementioned Order for Oblivion,
signified nothing, and there was no End made of contending, no Cessation of the
Assembly's Trouble, and and at last there seemed to be more need for doing
something than further consulting, the major part of the Meeting, and those of
the greatest Anthority, concluded upon, and determined this Sentence; And
having considered the Case, since there was no hopes now of a Reconciliation;
That Keith should acknowledge himself to have very much burdened the Church,
and take upon himself the Occasion of this so great Disturbance, and beg pardon
for this miscarriage; and moreover, leave off the maintaining and dispersing
of, and forsake his Opinions, Novelties and Sophisms, whereby he has so much
either adulrerated the Church, or despoiled her of her former splendour, and
enfeebled her; and that he should follow after this, to consult the Honor and
Interest of the whole Society, and defend and promote that.

Which Sentence struck this man with such a sudden and vehement Impulse, as
made him break out into a Speech, in these Terms: That nothing could be better
entertained by him, than this Endeavor of the Meeting, as it relates to the
Establishing a mutual Peace and Concord, and that there was nothing that he
would more willingly perform than Obedience to this Assembly, and to have the
happiness to be serviceable to them and all theirs. And therefore that he did
in no respect decline the Authority and Decision of this so great assembly, but
so. While these things consist with Equity and Reason, and he may without
prejudice to himself and them? But now since he is free from Error, and no
fault or Crime is found in him, he has nothing to excuse himself for, or ask
pardon of, and that it was not he that is liable to blame, or had involved
himself in guilt, but they which do not Comprehend what he had taught, and
presently and rashly believe and spread about reports of things, that they do
not rightly understand. And so, that they deserve most to be blamed, that they
may not go on so to insult over the name and fame of other^, and those their
Brethren, and to set the whole Church in an uproar, that every one of them may
receive such a sentence as they have deserved. Lastly, since that it had
happened so, that his Adversaries would not forsake their private Animosities
and Singular Opinions, as for their own, so for the peace and profit of the
public; but lay the faults which belong to themselves, at his door, that he
relying upon the justice and innocence of his Cause, and resting satisfied with
the Testimony of the Spirit and Witness of his Conscience, whatsoever should
happen, so long as he was not Culpable, he would moderately bear, and in the
mean while he would unburthen himself and do what became a good Christian, to
defend his reputation and good Name, least seeming regardless of that, he
should seem, not to value, and betray his Religion and Honesty. So since there
was no hopes of a peace, the Meeting being ended, after it had held so long;
Keith appears abroad again, and defends his Speech, and excuses himself in the
best terms he could; both by speaking, in his Sermons; and publishing Books in
Print; and although he confesses that through mistake, not wilful culpability, he
had formerly written some things, which now adays were not approved of, yet
that as for his Doctrine of the humanity of Christ, being what he had the
greatest reason himself to approve of, and being indeed most justly approvable
and a principal Article, and foundation of the Doctrine and Faith of Christians
he would to his utmost power Preach it abroad. On the other hand his
Adversaries also with equal Zeal go on to observe Keith in the Meetings, to
refute his opinions, and inveigh against him with hard Speeches. Amongst which
the chief were Dan. Whirley and W. Penn, which Penn, as Keith was in the middle
of his Discourse, before the whole Meeting, could not forbear more than once to
call him Apostate, and an open Enemy to the truth and the whole Society.
Others, as Tho. Ellwood and John Pennington, not only by their books impugned
the Tenants of this Man, and refelled his Arguments; but also traduced his
person, rendered him infamous. So at last some began to find fault with others,
and use a greater liberty in accusing them, and to hate them, and provoke them
to anger, and fury as it were, and every one strove to bring others to his own
party, and inspire them with Enmity against the others. These things lasted
till the late General Meeting held at Lon^. this year 95. Which as soon as it
began to be held. Keith came hither with an Intention to lay all things clearly
open, in hopes to find more Equitable Treatment from his Judges. But when he
came to the door, which he did the first day, he was stopped by the Door-Keepers
(who knew aforehand what his mind and Intentions were) but the day after, tho
'twere late, first getting admittance, he came before his Adversaries (who he
knew were within, and whose Intentions against him he was sensible of
beforehand) and not Viva vo^^, which would have had more of a forcible Energy
in it, but in Writing, the more carefully and moderately to Express himself, he
delivered a Speech to this purpose. That he was never convinced either by any
assembly, or by that which was held in that place the year before, of any
Error of his either in Doctrine or Life, tho he don't pretend to exempt
himself from Error, being a frailty incident to all Men, and not foreign to
himself; but he Confessed himself to have said and written several things
heretofore, in which at this time he acknowledges his frailty. And because no
assembly of those people who are commonly called Quakers, lawfully and rightly
conveen'd, has condemned him of them, as by the silence of them all on that
account appears, he therefore looks upon himself as free from all Error. That
he well knows the Council the last Meeting gave him; but since that was only
Counsel, which obliges no Man, and infers no necessity, equal to a Command,
that he was at his own liberty, either to follow it or let it alone. But that
he had omitted it, because, he thought, he had done all that was his duty to do
in this business, and that there was none of the Brethren of the Society, who,
if they would but consider the deeds both of him and his Adversaries, without
prejudice, or being biased by others opinions, or making a rash Determination
of things; and weigh them in the Balance of the sacred Scriptures and right
reason, but what would approve of his doings and condemn theirs. This (...) was
searce read, but it raised a mighty commotion in the minds of them all. But the
principal adversaries of Keith and speakers in this Contention were W. Penn, W.
Bingley. G. Withale, J. Vaughton, J. Field, and J. Waldenfield. And Penn and
Withade had so little Command of their minds and tongues, as Keith also was so
unable to contain himself (by which you may see the Prudence and Moderation
both of him and them) that they urged one another with this Crime; that each of
them spread abroad detestable and cursed Doctrines, and ensnared Men in them to
the hazard or loss of their salvation. And Keith told, that Bingly, Vaughton,
and others, when any of them seemed to speak to another, either not in good
time, or not readily or plainly enough (because they first staid to meditate,
or wait the motion of the Spirit, before they spoke) were used to nod one at
another, point, or make signs to them to speak, and if that would not do, to
pluck them by the sleeves, and so to put them upon speaking. Which certainly
was not that that they had in their minds, or what the Spirit moved them, to
speak, which was contrary to the Doctrine and Fundamental Principles of these
Men. But as there was neither Measure nor end of these disputes; nor was there
any respite of this Contention and Scold, tho they were now grown hoarse again;
and it was not time as yet for them to break up; Bingly and Waldenfield
persuade the rest not to treat with Keith any further, and so presently
dissolving the assembly they go away, and withal cause all the rest to do so to
and disperse. After they had left of dealing with Keith, they consulted, what
was best to be done about him. In which Consultation some of them complained
with Relation to Keith, that they had not the privilege given them of speaking
their minds, and that there were some, that by their talkativeness, and proud
way of speaking, and with their looks and aspect took the words out of their
Mouths, or made them hold their Tongues, or altogether silenced them; there
were others who were so frighted and overaw'd, that they could not bring out
what they differed and were of a contrary mind from others, in: And there were
some also, that dissemblingly and against their wills had spoken, and who were
sorry for what they had done, and retracted from the sentence that was given.
At the last with the suffrages of the greatest part of them, this decree was
made and agreed to: That Keith was of a Spirit no ways Christian, and was the
cause of these differences and divisions, and openly Injurious to the Brethren:
And therefore that he had withdrawn and separated himself from the Holy
Communion of the Church of Christ, and was gone off from the power of Preaching
and Praying in the Meetings of Friends: Wherefore he was not to be accounted or
received as one of them, unless he first publicly confessed his Crime, and
gave some tokens of amendment. And moreover, by the Acts of the Meeting, this
sentence was sent in Writing to all the Meetings of the Quakers all the World
over: That this Meeting in London was no ways concerned in the late differences
in some parts of America, tho now there was hopes things would succeed there
better than formerly. But that the Christian Advice and Council that had been
given to Keith and others in the yearly Meeting before, Keith had openly in his
Printed books, set himself against and opposed, and so betrayed himself to have
turned aside from the peaceable Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to
persevere in the Spirit of Discord and Contradiction, and by so doing has given
great trouble and grief to the Church of Christ, and especially, to the last,
and likewise to this Meeting too. And so, that now they had born Witness
against him, until he had truly repented and reconciled himself to the
faithful friends and Brethren. So then, in this Meeting now so lately held,
when all hopes of reconciliation was taken away, and no other end of any other
advice likely to be; and a Man Excommunicated and cast out, whom the Generality
of People looked upon as one of the most Ingenious and best defenders of the
Quakers and their Religion; this seemed to be a Schism amongst Men so joined
and united together amongst themselves as they were. And now redounded to their
great disgrace, through the accusations and sharp Speeches of those that withdrew
from amongst them. Wherefore these now are their Adversaries, and now and then
have a fling at them after this manner, that now they may see themselves, what
a sort of Men they are, and how much worse than those they would Condemn; and
this was laid to their Charge, that having been free from Domestic jars
within, and fears from without, of a long while, that now with such intestine
and deadly hatred, strife, and sedition, they should fall together by the Ears
amongst themselves, instead of that Spiritual and Heavenly Wisdom and Prudence
they always bragged of; and that incredible Amity and Concord, that by a nod or
sign only they could have had any thing one of another; that it seemed they
would show, that those that formerly were so unconquerable without were now so
very weak within, and in a short time would fall by their own Weapons; and that
now the times were changed they would bring upon themselves the total loss of
that liberty, in hopes of which they promised themselves Perpetuity. And thus
much of the beginning, progress and increase of these People, and of their
Actions and Sufferings in their own Country and those depending upon it, to
this very time, in which, that odious to be named and terrible persecution, is
quelled and taken off, and not only these Men, but all those differing from
the public Churches, are protected in their Civil Liberties in all those
Countries, and peace and liberty of Conscience is established, and that
Confirmed by the Laws. Only excepting Papists and Socinians, and the like
Propagators of the old Arian Heresy, the causes and reasons of which I have
treated on elsewhere. Which Favor and Indulgence, how it was granted to these
people both by the equal bountys of that King, than whom a better cannot be
wished for, and to whom therefore all good Men wish a long and happy Reign;
especially being now always in Arms and Venturing his life for the Common
good, and of his Queen who is lately deceased, but her Soul being rendered to
God, the Memory of her lives and always will do so to the latest surviving
Posterity, for those many and illustrious Virtues that concentred in her Royal
Person; and also by the joint Consent of the Lords and Commons in both Houses
of Parliament, assembled readily Complying with the Royal pleasure herein, I
have likewise before set forth. This I must note before I go any farther, that
this prudence and clemency, of the King and Queen, and of those great Men, was
so much glorious to themselves, and worthy to be acknowledged by these Men,
because in all the times aforepast there were not only, so many and great
Vexations, Prosecutions, Afflictions, unsufferable Slaughters, every where laid
upon all sorts of People, which, either indeed, were Acted by Erroneous
Principles, or the Pride and Envy of some Men, had a mind to load with false
Accusations; as if they were very great Heretics, when as they only differed
from them in Church Government, and some Eternal Rites and Modes, and otherwise
held the same true and Catholic Faith and Doctrine with these Men, but also
because all those penal Laws, which were made and ordained, before the time of
the Reformation, against Heretics, as they called them, stood still in force
and none of them was repealed not so much as that De Comburendo Haeretico, or
for burning the Heretic; so that if at any time, any one of Eminent power had
a mind he might by Virtue of that Law Arraign any one and bring him to that
dismal and horrid punishment, and have it Executed upon him. Which appears by
the Examples of two Men under the Reign of K. James the 1st, in the 11th year
of this Century. Which because it has not of a long while been taken notice of
by most Writers, and yet it is not amiss to be known, especially at this time,
I shall briefly relate. One of these Men was Bartholmew Legate, of the County
of Essex, a Man of an unblamable Life, ready wit, and well read in the H.
Scriptures, but disliking the Nicene Creed, and denying the plurality of
persons in the Godhead, and the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ; after he
had been for some time kept in Prison at London, and being enlarged again, more
boldly defended his impious Errors, and could not be brought to desist from it,
even by these reasons the King himself brought, at last in an Assembly of
Bishops, was Condemned of Contumacious and Irreclaimable Heresy, and delivered
over to the secular Judges, and by the Kings command according to the Act de
haeretico comburendo, the 18. day of March, about Noon, was publicly burned
and Consumed to Ashes. The other was one R. Wightman of the Town of Burton near
the River Trent, who was Condemned by the Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield of
several Heresies, the first was that he was an Ebionite, the last an
Anabaptist, and burned at Litchfield the 11th day of Ap. It Is true indeed, that
this Law for burning the Heretic, as also for putting him to Death in any
wise, was repealed in the Reign of Charles the Second; but this is true also,
that that repeal was not made without a great deal of Difficulty and Repugnance
of some Men, and it was so done too, that tho the Clergy had this power of Life
and Death taken away from them; and yet still out of this power they had so
much Authority left them, as to Excommunicate, as they call it, those that they
should account Heretics; and thereupon to deprive them of their Liberty, and
take away their goods, and the Consequences which follow thereupon. Which thing
I have thought fit to take notice as being not well known, and yet worth the
while to know. This repeal was made in the 29th year of his Reign, and 77th of
the Century, in that memorable Parliament Which was continued from the year 61
by several Propagations down to that time: There was a certain Man of the
Country of Middlesex, whose Name was Tailor, who had defiled himself with so
many and great Crimes and Vices, that he had no fear, notice, or Apprehension
of God, wherefore he was sent to London, and brought before the Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Court. In which Court, as they were deliberating what to
Determine about a Man so very impious, or rather an impure beast, one of the
younger Bishops, being more vehement and hot in his Censures than the rest,
gave his Judgment that this Man should be Exterminated from humane Society by
burning, and alleges that Law for the Burning of Heretics with fire. Which
seeming somewhat harsh to others of the Bishops, and some giving their opinion
one way, others another; The Earl of Hall, the next day, in Parliament in the
House of Lords proposes and persuades, that that Law for the Burning of
Heretics might be Abolished, for as long as that Law was not yet taken away
and repealed, it might come to pass that what Religion or Sect soever came
uppermost, the professors of that, by Virtue of this Law, might put to Death by
burning all those that they should count Heretics. The Bishops opposed and
cried out against this Petition. But when it came to the Vote the present Earl
of Hallefax, and likewise the Duke of Buckingham; and Earl of Shaftsbury and
other great Men, Considering that at that time things looked with a fearful
aspect, and that it was often seen in the Course of Nature, that many times
things which had been hindered and delayed might break out again (as in that
cursed Popish Plot, and the preparations of the Papists for the Destruction of
the reformed Religion, at that time was easily to be seen) and that that Law
particularly might one day be signally Injurious and Destructive they so
persuade the rest, and make it out so plain by force of Argument that, the
repeal of that Law is concluded upon and decreed, contrary to the mind and will
of the Bishops, which Bill being carried down to the House of Commons, some
Excellent Men (among which the principal was W. Russell, a great Lover of his
Country and Religion (and a Man worthy of immortal honor) presently Vote for
it, and procured the Bill to pass. And so by Authority of the King and both
Houses of Parliament, this ancient Law was Abrogated and Repealed by this Act:
That from henceforth, by Authority of the King and Parliament, the writ de
heretico comburendo, (or, for burning Heretics) and all Capital punishments,
following upon any Ecclesiastical Censures, should be taken off: Not taking
away nevertheless or diminishing, the Jurisdiction of the Protestant
Archbishops or Bishops, or any other Ecclesiastical Court to punish Atheism,
Blasphemy, Heresy, or Schism, or any other Damnable Doctrines or Opinions; So
that Nevertheless, it shall and may be lawful to them to punish such Men
according to the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws, by Excommunication, Deprivation,
Deposition, and other Censures, not Extending to Death. What, but also, how
fraudulent a Liberty to all Religions was granted by K. James the 2d, and what
care the Bishops, most of them, but not all, took to oppose it, is not
necessary now to be insisted on, But to return from whence I have digressed;
Now because these Quakers had made no inconsiderable progress in their Affairs
in America, that new, and to the Ancients unknown part of the World; there were
some of them, who thought it might be a work worth the while to attempt the
like all over this part of the World, which we inhabit, and of which for the
most part we have a more ancient knowledge of; and that not only in the
European Countries, where we have great dealings, but also in Asia it self and
Africa among the remotest Nations, Destitute of the right knowledge of God, and
brought up in the profoundest Ignorance of the truth and true Religion, with a
design to enlighten them, and by their Arguments and Solicitations to bring
them over into their Society and the same belief with themselves. And so John
Stubs and Henry Fell took up a resolution, and prepared themselves for a Voyage
into China, that farthermost bound of Asia, and most Easterly Region of the
Earth. But when they understood how difficult, or indeed almost impossible, it
was to gain access into those parts, especially for such sort of Men as they,
who, wherever they went, were the laughing stock and hatred of all people, and
found matter of discourse and ridicule for all that saw them; and Considering
that the safest way for them to go would be if first they could get into the
East Indies, and there travel about the places that were possessed by the
English and Dutch, and under their Jurisdiction and Government, they applied
themselves to the Governor and Committee of the East India Company in England,
for leave to make a Voyage thither in their Ships. But they slighted these
peoples requests. So they entreat the same favor of the Governors of the
Dutch East India Company. But they neither did not grant them their desire.
Wherefore both of them, seeing all hopes and opportunity of this Voyage lost,
laid aside their intended design. A like memorable instance there is of one
Alexander Parker, who not only proposed, but made a Voyage into Africa, to
endeavor if there were any opportunity to bring those poor people to the
knowledge of the Truth and Godliness. But he came back again after he had been
gone a year, but gave no account (as these people are used always to know more
than they say) what he had done in those parts, and why he had made so quick a
return. So these Men made a great bustle and stir to no purpose at all. And
when thereupon they became very Despicable and Ridiculous in the Eyes of their
Adversaries; who had not failed to pry into, and to take exact notice of all
that they did, and thence raise objections against them, they made use of this
excuse to defend themselves with, when they had not accomplished what they
aimed at, that it appeared plainly that they were not frighted, or deterred by
any dangers or difficulties from Prosecuting what they desired and intended,
but only were compelled by necessity to leave it off; and that as the Deeds of
all Men, so theirs too, ought not to be measured and approved of by the Event,
but from the goodness of intention and well meaning the design was begun with.
Now leaving these remote quarters of the world, I will return again into
Europe, and first into our own Country. For so it was that whilst these Men, as
we have seen, traversed the remotest Regions of the Earth; others of them came
over into our provinces, and from hence went to other places, to propagate and
spread abroad their Doctrines; these being of the most skillful and fit amongst
them for these purposes, and especially being indefatigably industrious in
labors, and patient under Adversities. But nevertheless, as none of these Men,
except one or two, was so furnished by the Holy Spirit, as to be able to speak
the Language of the Nation they came to wherever it was, without the help of an
Interpreter, who himself seldom knew how to translate their sayings into the
same sense and words, as they spoke them, and besides might either, through
mistake or on set purpose render them amiss. So all of them with great
vehemence, Zeal and Industry, set about this work, but for all their care and
pains could not do much good at it. Besides, that they also, which followed
those that had gone before them, although they understood the Languages of the
Countries they went into well enough, yet made but small progresses. Wherefore
in all those parts where these Preachers had traveled, at this day you shall
find very few or no Quakers. Now these Emissaries came over I believe into our
provinces first, I believe because of the nearness of the Country and Liberty
and toleration of Religion, and the Multitude of Diverse people following their
own particular Sects of Religion, wherefore there were several of them that did
not much differ in Principles of Religion, and very little in their way of
living from the Quakers. The first of these Emissaries and Missionaries, that
came over hither, were William Ames, John Stubs, and William Caton. This was in
the year 55. Not long after these, followed John Higgins, Steven Crisp, William
Baily, Josias Cole, and others. When Ames, Stubbs and Caton were come over to
Holland, they moved some of their own Countrymen with their new Doctrines, to
such a Degree, that they raised some little Disturbance in the Reformed English
Church, and brought a few of our Country Mennonites, or Anabaptists, over to
their side And these made the Name of Quakers to be first known in these
Provinces. After these things Ames travels to other places, but Stubs and Caton
betake themselves to Rotterdam, where at that time, as well as now, a great
many English Merchants resided. And here Caton held forth, in an English
Merchant's House, to a great Number of English and Dutch there assembled, in
his own mother Tongue, English; but his words were rendered in Dutch by another
Man, for the sake of those Hollanders that did not understand English: But this
was labor in vain, for which they gave this reason; that their Interpreter had
not rightly given the Auditors the true sense and meaning of what Caton had
said, and the due Emphasis of his words: So Caton, leaving Stubs at Rotterdam,
goes back again to Amsterdam, in which City there was now a little small Church
gathered, and that principally of Dutch Anabaptists. Where coming into the
Assembly of these people, and there making a long Discourse by an Interpreter,
for here also they did not understand English, he met with the same success as
before at Rotterdam: For before the coming of these Men to Rotterdam, there
were certain Citizens of that City, for their singular way of living and
manners, however suspected and hated by the others, that met together in a
certain house. There was a rumor spread abroad that within that house, there
was a parcel of foolish, triffling, juggling fellows met together. So there
runs a great Concourse of People thither, ready to set upon them in great fury.
But the Burgomaster of the City, comes thither with the officers that usually
attend him. They knocked at the door, and because no body opened it, they break
it open, and there find out this unusual Meeting, and see one Isaac Ferner a
Preaching to them, not out of a Pulpit, but standing upon the stairs. Him the
Burgomaster commands to be apprehended and 3 of his hearers, for the rest of
them were fled away in a great fright. These 4 Men were presently carried away
to a Bethlem-house, or place where Madmen and those that were distracted used
to be kept, as if they were such a kind of people. There was one of these, to
whose feet they tied a Wooden Clog so that he might walk indeed, but could not
go far. He takes his Clog, and as if he had got a battering Ram, falls a
beating the Wall with it, to such a degree, that at last he broke it through,
and made a whole big enough to Creep through, and so away he runs with his Clog
on, and gets home to his own house. The rest of them, follow his Example, and
get away too, all but one softly fellow, who thought, that if he should go away
without the Magistrates leave, it would be a betraying of his cause, a
Condemning of himself, and Confession of his Guilt, and therefore he thought it
was better to stand to it stoutly, than to run away shamefully. But when the
Burgo-master had more exactly considered these people's Case, and reflected
that their Crime was not of so high a nature as to deserve a very severe
punishment he recalled his own order, and caused him that staid behind to be
set at liberty, and made no search after those that were gone away. But these
Men were no ways belonging to the Society and Communion of Quakers, as was then
generally believed and as our little News-Mongers writ in their Letters,
following the Common Vogue, Whereof this is an Argument that happened a little
after, for Caton and others of his Society, coming hither, and hearing of what
these people had done blamed their doings as being a foolish and mad action,
and utterly refused to join Communion with them. As those people themselves
afterward did not join with the Quakers, but also mightily opposed them and
set themselves as great Adversaries against their Discipline ways and manners.
And although, Ferner, he who had been their Preacher, afterward joined himself
with the Quakers, yet at last he fell off from them again, and casting of all
manner, of goodness, probity, and religion, he turned Physician, but he took
more care of and looked after his own body, and indulged himself in Riot and
Luxury, than regard to the health of his patients, and after he had riotously
consumed his Estate, he betook himself to little triffling Vanities and joined
in Communion, Friendship, and faith with the Papists, in which State not long
after he died, and like a good Catholic, stepped aside into some of the better
sort of the internal Mansions And so I have said enough of this Meeting, and
the more because I was willing to Vindicare those that truly are Quakers from
this Crime, of which they are innocent; and to undeceive others that may lie
under a mistake about it, by relating the whole story as I have been certified
it was transacted. To return therefore to the main stream of our discourse,
when neither Ames, or his Companions could do any thing, or very little to the
purpose, Caton and Stubs truly they lay still for one while, Considering what
to do. But Ames left Holland and went into Germany, to the Palatinate of the
Rhine, but notwithstanding, a while after returns into Holland again, and goes
to Amsterdam. But it being known* that he came for, and what he would be at,
the Burgomaster sends for him by a Sergeant, and one one of the Citizens of the
City with him; and when they were come with undaunted Courages; he commands
them within 24 hours to depart the City. Which they delaying to do the next day
the Burgomaster gives them the same charge again. Which new order, besides that
they refused to obey, they spoke against, and said that they neither deserved
to be used so, nor could they bring themselves to Comply with it, so the
Burgomaster, finding them so twice disobedient, and giving ill Examples to the
City, commands them to be apprehended and publicly kept in Custody for six
days, and then in the Evening to be obscurely, and secretly carried without the
Gates of the City, and there left with a charge never to return again. But this
command also they took no notice of, so that notwithstanding, they returned
back again the next day, and Ames, in the middle of the day, in the sight of
all the people, walked in the Market and went up to the very Court it self:
Which one of the Burgomasters seeing through the Lattices, is said to have
expressed himself to his Colleagues thus, Denoting not his own desire, but the
merit of the Man, Lo, yonder is that Quaker that we might make a Martyr of now
if we would. Yet these great Men, who would have punished such a deed severly,
if it had been in another case, thought fit to wink at this, Concluding amongst
themselves, that as long as it was doubtful and uncertain, what the designs or
doings of these people were, that mercy was to be preferred before the
strictness of justice; and that whatsoever the Enterprises or Intentions of
them were, yet that a Command of Prohibition was always less available, than
one that prescribed any thing to be done; and that many Men, if they are not
restrained from any thing of their own accord, are but so much the more eager
after, and desirous of it if they are forbidden: Moreover, that in a great
Multitude sometimes it is a point of principal prudence to take no notice of
some things which we know, and that in great Governments oftentimes, the
Authority is better preserved, by dissembling, than punishing, small faults.
And indeed it was not long, before Ames seeing that he could do no good by his
presence, boldne^s, or confidence, went away of his own accord out of the City.
From thence he goes to Scheidam, and Rotterdam, and Goud, and staid in these
places for sometime, and oftentimes went and returned the same way, and trys
the same thing over and over, and sounds the minds of the people; when at the
same time, he could do, almost nothing by all his great labor and pains and
travel, but only set the minds of some people against him, and brought upon
himself and his followers the hatred of the Clergy. For as some of those, who
were Ames his most Zealous Auditors and followers, which for the most part were
Mennonites a bold sort of people, very talkative and Litigions, began more
freely and petulantly to give out their Speeches, and hold their Conventicles;
so also those, who looked upon it to be their duty and place, to suffer no
Diminution of the esteem and dignity of their Church, began to hate those Men,
and look upon them not only as Fools, but as Madmen, Men of a Malignant
seditious temper, whose assemblies were nothing else, but Seminaries of discord
and wickedness. Wherefore these Men gave warning to their Auditors both
privately and publicly, that they should have nothing to do with them in any
wise: And those that were most zealous and intent upon this Argument insinuated
them to be a sort of Heretics, and that they ought to be punished and their
Meetings restramed: And at last advised Classes and Synods to be held for
asserting the rights, and warding off Injuries from the Church, and that
nothing should be wanting thereunto, and to make satisfaction for any Damages
sustained. This was done first in the Synod of Rotterdam, An. 57. It happened
at Goud that one William Tick, a Man much addicted to the Quaker's opinions and
ways, called a Council or Assembly, of some of his own Gang; which the
Magistrate looking upon as a Company of Infidels, and sending for Tick, he
would neither declare what his intention was, or in the least uncover his head,
so he was sent into an House of Correction. There was a Town not far from Goud
in the way to Rotterdam; In which Ames had drawn a certain Cooper, one Martin's
Son into his Society, and here this Man also one time inviting Ames to his
house, gets together there some of his Neighbors to discourse of the Things of
Faith, and the good ordering of their Lives. News of this being brought to the
Minister of the Place, and known to others, they ran from every side to this
house, crying out, That there was a Conventicle of seditious wicked men
assembled there. Which Tumult roused up Ames, so that he walks out in a Calm
Mood, and very leisurely paces it along, but all of a sudden they fall a
reproaching him with a thousand opprobrious terms; and handle him so at last,
that if he had not betook himself to his heels, he had run in danger of his
Life. But a little while after, these same Men, nothing fearing the violence of
the Mob, reassembling in the same place again, some run away and told the
Burgomaster, what they were a doing. And when they had told him what these Men
had done heretofore, and so being induced to believe, that these Meetings were
Conspiracies against the Common Weal and the peace and security of the State;
he sent Sergeants and Officers, to take Ames and his Landlord, and carry them
to Rotterdam; and there put them in the Bethlem-house I made mention of not
long ago. Which coming to be known in the City, some of the Ministers, both of
the reformed Church, and the Remonstrants too, go to Ames, to see him and talk
with him. And they discourse much with him of many points, both of his Doctrine
and Religion, and that several times; but he handling things so obscurely and
perplexedly to any Man's apprehension; that other people could scarcely tell
what he would have; and they on all occasions starting such objections; as he,
either could not tell how or declined to give a plain answer to, this Discourse
was to no purpose at all Ames published a little book not long after, in which
he proposes to the Ministers of our reformed Churches, 83 questions of several
Articles of Faith, for them to solve. To these Answers James Coleman, then a
youth, and then also of a happy wit, and Eloquent Tongue, as also one of known
piety and probity, integrity, and uprightness, both in life and manners (for
all those that were any ways considerable for Age or Learning, despised and
passed by in silence, as things not worth the minding, those little triffling
questions of this Quaker, proposed only for ostentation and show) and that
lest these people should boast themselves, as if we were silent and refused to
answer them, in despair of the Victory. And he answered them not with a
youthful heat, but with moderation and wisdom. And this young Man in like
manner proposed 60 questions to Ames, and the rest of his Brethren the Quakers
that they might have whereon to exercise themselves, and show their wit and
parts. Now whilst Ames was consined to this solitary place he spent his time
principally in Writing. And so besides several Letters to his friends, he makes
and publishes a reply to Coleman's Answers, not foreign indeed from the
purpose, but bitter and not to be suffered in those that so much reprehend the
same fault in others. But as to the Questions that Coleman proposed to the
Quakers, those, not Ames, but Higgins Answers, but so as not only, partly
declining that wherein the State of the Case lay partly improperly and
absurdly, partly obscurely and in dark terms, but also roughtly and with ill
Language he mannages, and if it were but by this alone, betrays his cause. Ames
at last being set at liberty from this place comes to Leyden, and there also
going on with the same work as before, he was cast into such another like
place, full of Spiders and Cobwebs, and there he was kept, till the
Burgomaster, weary of his Idleness, or Misery and Sickness, sent him away from
thence. Then away he travels into other provinces of Holland. It Is a wonder, he
being a Man, than whom there was scarce any of those people more forward, and
traveling, over so many Towns and Places, understanding both Languages very
well, both English and Dutch and bestowing so much labor and pains amongst all
sorts of People, that there were no more that joined themselves with him and
the Quakers, not even in the most populous Cities where there were so many
Inhabitants English, and all sorts and kinds of Men, and some very near the
Quakers in a great many things. But as the coming and motion of these Men had
raised these little Disturbances here and there, and greater troubles and
confusions were feared in other places, these things principally stirred up the
Carefulness and Diligence of the Clergy, every where, as there was occasion to
be on the watch, and look out, least they should cause any inconvenience or do
any damage to their flock. And so this gave occasion to the Synod of Goud An.
59. To make this decree, that all Pastors should take a diligent observation of
these Quaker's Meetings, and the books they should disperse, and apply
themselves to the Magistrates by their Authority to suppress these things, and
that, if these Men should any where give any Trouble to our People, the
Ministers of the word should well confirm the minds of their Auditors in their
Sermons, Catechisings and Visitations. After this there was little heard of the
Quakers. For it was a long while before the people knew what the Quakers were.
Whence at first they were looked upon as a poor sort of people without a Name,
or place of habitation, as a kind of Fools, and Madmen. Then as an unquiet and
troublesome sort of people; For which reasons they were cast into Bonds and
Prisons. And at last they were accounted for bringers up of some new Sects of
Religion, which wanted a new place of residence. And therefore now as defiled
persons they seemed fit to be removed a far off. Some therefore in their
progress sat down amongst the Anabaptists or Mennonites, an unquiet sort of
people, always hunting after Novelties. Others are believed to have gone over
to the Socinians, a pestilent deceitful sort of Heretics; from whom
nevertheless they are so far off, that except the Papists there is none they are
more averse from. It happened that in the year 64, the Socinians, of which
there was a great Number in those Countries, every day grew more and more, and
made some Commotions again and again, and also here and there began to raise
Disturbances. Nor must I pass over in silence, that among the principal
Asserters and Defenders of the Socinian cause, there was one especially; who,
as a Cock can Crow best upon his own Dunghill, who, not only upon all occasions
railed furiously against the Quakers, and not only thwarted their Councils and
Designs in some parts of these provinces, but also could not restrain the force
of his anger, before he had done Considerable damages to some of them. Now
this I find by the Acts of the Synod of Woerd, held the year aforementioned,
that our people then also were afraid of the Quakers, and took care lest by any
means, any damage should accrue to their Churches by them. And moreover the
Quakers to be Enumerated with the Socinians.

Hence a Decree was made in that Synod, That care should be taken, that the
Interdict of the States should be put in Execution; by which they had
cautiously provided a few years before, That none should bring the Socinian
Errors, or Books into these Countries, or keep any such sort of Meetings, or
Conventicles, under the Penalty, That if any one should do any such thing, for
the first time as a Blasphemer against the Divine Name, and Disturber of the
Peace, he should be banished out of the Province; and for the second Offense
should be punished for so great a Crime, at the Will and Pleasure of his
Judges. Then Two years afterward the Legates of the Synod of Dort presented a
supplicatory Treatise to the States, in which they pray the order I before
mentioned may be put in Execution. The States refer that treatise to the
Session of their senate. The senate, by reason of other grave and difficult
businesses of the common Weal which they had in hand, protract and delay the
Cognizance of this affair. Afterward the Treatise was not to be found. The
Legates write it over again and tender it De novo. And yet for all that could
get no Answer. So now three whole years were run on. Wherefore in the year 69.
In the Synod of Goud and that other of Schonhove since the Legates had been for
so long time employed in this affair to no purpose at all, and every one easily
saw, what it was that caused this delay, the further Prosecution of this affair
was quite left off. But Ames and his first Companions departing out of these
Countries, the Quaker's affairs in Holland were principally promoted by the
Council and Assistance of one Benjamin Furley, an English Merchant, first at
Amsterdam, then at Rotterdam, who, together with his Merchandise, had addicted
himself to the study of Learning, and in the favor of these Men, wrote several
little Tracts in Diverse Languages. But yet refrained himself from exercising
the office of a Teacher or Minister amongst them, alleging this reason for it,
that he could safely enough be taught at all times, but could scarce be a
Teacher himself without danger. Although, as time and age teach Men many things,
this same Man afterward found fault with and went off from many things in the
Doctrine and Manners of the Quakers. From hence it appears what the Number of
the Quakers might be in Holland, and after what manner at this Day it is
included in a few familys, there are not so many as that the Number of familyes
can equallize that of the Citys throughout the whole Province. And so long as
they used all manner of moderation in their way of Living, and only took care
about their own Religion, without concerning themselves with that of others,
they enjoyed as much Liberty as themselves could wish for,

While these things were doing in Holland; in Zealand, in the City of
Middleburgh, Christopher Bertrad, an English Seaman (the same Man who caused
such a Disturbance in the Church at Bristol in England, and carried himself so
insolenty before the Magistrate as we took notice of in the First Book) in an
Assembly of the Church of England, in Prayer-time, he made such a noise with
his Discourse and Clamours, and angered them to such a degree, that they thrust
him out of the Church; Whither he presently running in again, they sent for
Officers who conducted him to Prison. Where, when he had remained for a year
and a half, there came to him, moved at his long Confinement, and affected with
a like Sense of his Griefs, Caton, who, as soon as 'twas known who he was, was
put into the same place. Then both of them, at the request of the States
Ambassador to the Commonwealth of England, at Newport, were sent and put into
a Man of War, and carried over into England, being jeered, reproached and vexed
all the way by the Seamen and Soldiers. Now Ames, who was always the chief man
in action, as long as he remained in these Parts; Considering, that things did
not go to his mind in Holland, and that Caton had reaped such fruits of his
Labor in Zealand; he undertakes a journey into Gelderland, and from thence to
Overyssell, and goe's through almost all the Meetings of the Mennonites in both
those Provinces, trying if he could bring over any of these people, who seemed
better affected to his party, and indeed were pretty near the Quakers, if not
in all, yet at least in many Opinions and Customs. But here neither Ames could
make any advantage or do any thing worth the speaking of.

After this he and Caton, who was now come back out of England, took a journey
into Friesland, to try the Mennonites there, who, in that Province, more than
in any other part of these Countries, not only in their Institutions, but also
in their Country Customs, and the Nature of the people, were harmless,
temperate, precise, and came nearer the Discipline of the ancient Anabaptists,
not that which of late days has prevailed amongst that sort of People. But
here, these men only show themselves, and go away again as wise as they went
without any good or hurt done. But after these men were gone, there were not a
few, that embraced the very same Doctrine, that these men came to declare, and
joined themselves to them with the same ninds and desires. These Mennonites,
and a pareel of Socinians, that shrouded themselves under their Meetings; and
that sort of Men, [the Family of Love] who are full of Love and Humanity, cross
to none, open and free to all, who hold this Notion of God, (and herein their
Worship of God lies) That God is not Evil; and that they themselves are not so
nither, nor would do any ill to any body. Which sort of men increasing every
day more and more, and now coming abroad and meeting together both publicly
and privately, and holding their general Assemblys for publck Worship, and
constantly observing their meetings, and by this means making way for the
commission of many other penicious and ill things; the Mennonites being a more
Religious and strict sort of People, began to look upon them with evil Eyes,
and be displeased with them, and lay many things to their charge, and fill
their Sermons with them. And the Ministers and Overseers of our Church
complained much of this new sort of People, and painted them in all their
Colors, and accused them of being the worst of Heretics, guilty of all manner
of Vices, and admonished their Auditors in long and Earnest Discourses, that
they should by all means have a care of them. Moreover there were Councils and
Synods held to Consider of the best ways and means to Suppress and Extinguish
in the bud this growing mischief, and it was Ordained; that they should be
debarred both from their private Consultations, and also, their public
meetings; Whereupon the Delegates of the Synod present a Writing to the
Counselors or Delegates of the States, (we call both the one and the other
Deputies) in which they grievously complain, That there were to be found in
these Provinces, both elsewhere and in Friesland several of the impious sect of
the Quakers, and they desire of them, that the States would maturely advise
about it and take care to put a stop to the farther Spreading of those
diabolical Errors: Whereupon the States of Fri^sland make this Law, That no
Socinians, Quakers, or Dippers (for what other Name to give them I cannot tell)
should come within those Territories; or if they did should be shut up in a
Bride-well, and there kept Constantly to hard Labor, with a reward moreover of
25 Gelders of Friesland for any Person that should discover any of these
People. This fell out in the Year 62. After this Order Friesland enjoyed peace
and quiet from these People, either they keept themselves close within their
own houses, or the Government was not very inqusitive after them, and thought
they had a sufficient awe upon them. And now also, in the rest of the
Provinces, after this time there was no great account made of these People,
both by reason of the small numbers there was of them, and that they themselves
grew more moderate. Wherefore tho at the first they were had in Contempt of all
People every where, and in their Meetings, and goings in and out, and at their
funeral Solemnities and Burials, the Boys and Mob, often used to abuse them to
a high degree; yet afterward they growing more cautious and circumspect in
their Actions, in some things, and omitting others, even this insolence of the
People against them was left of by degrees. Nor must we pass over, how that for
a long time, a great many Pamphlets, written not so much for the instruction of
others, as the Ostentation of their own Sect; and besides, a great many of
those bolted-out-Extempore, ill-composed, rash, tumultuous, weak, triffling,
unfit not only to be Read again, but also to be looked upon, came out of these
men's Shops, and little Libels of Questions were put out, in favor or for the
defense of that Sect; or for the exalting that, and depression of other
Religions, (although some of these Libels and Pamphlets were made and writ by
ill Men, and with a base design fathered upon the Quakers.) Afterward this
kind of Writing, and that plenty of Writers, was displeasing to the wiser men
among the Quakers, and they concluded that these foolish Triffles, and the
multitudes of them, had done more hurt than good to their Doctrine and People,
and procured them more disgrace than Credit. Then by degrees there arose
others, who treated of their Affairs with a finer Wit, and more polite
Judgment, using more cogent Arguments, and a more exact style of Discourse,
with easy and fluent Language, not like the former Scriblers; And these took
of the ill will and aversion which some had entertained against them, and
reconciled them to a better Opinion of their Religion, making it appear more
Weighty and Momentous. There came over in the year 1670. into Holland, one
James Park, and from thence he went on into Friesland to Harling: And in that
City observing many things that he disliked, both amongst the Reformed and
amongst the Mennonites: Of which two sort of People, almost all the whole City
confisted: He returned back again into Holland, and coming to Amsterdam, writes
a Letter to the People of both those Churches: 'Twas a tart Letter, and full of
contumelious Accusations and Reproofs, as if the Religion of them both were
only a barren Profession, and their Lives the height of all manner of
Hypocrisy and Impiety, and a Denial of God, concluding with a denunciation of
Threats and Execrations against them, as if it were in the Name, and by the
Command of the Divine Being himself. This Letter was sent to Harling, by
Cornelius Rudolph, and James and Isaac Buylard, the Father and Son, all of them
Citizens of Amsterdam, and formerly Mennonites, but now turned Quakers. So to
Harling they all go. They purposed first to Read the Letter in one of the
Mennonite's Meetings, and then send it to the Ministers of the Reformed
Churches in Friesland, for them to Read. Moreover, they concluded to send and
disperse several Pamphlets treating of their Opinions, up and down the Country;
and to possess People's Minds as much as they could, and try all ways and means
that they could possibly think of to promote the interest of their Society
throughout Friseland: For which thing, the Buylards seemed the most proper
Instruments, both by reason of their long Dealing and Commerce, and
Acquaintance and Familiarity with many in those parts.

With these designs therefore and hopes they all three together go directly to
Harling, the entrance and gate of that Province. Cornelius Rudolph (it being an
Holiday) goes presently into one of the Mennonite's Meetings; (the Buylards
staying in the mean while in their Inn to rest themselves) and after all the
Exercises were over, draws the Letter out of his Bosom; and the Chief of them
not seeming averse to it, though many of the People were against it, yet at least
he reads it over to them all, that they might all know what they were to be
accounted of, who they were that corrected, and took such care of them. This
almost all of them resent as a very heinous thing; and set upon him with great
clamor and violence. Not to make more Words of it, they fetch the Beadle of
the City, and he carries Rudolph away into a secret place. Then the Buylards
are fetch out of their Inn and carried thither too. And thence, two days after,
to render their Undertaking the more contemptible to some, and inspire others
with the greater Aversion against them, they are tied together by night; and
because they would not go of themselves, are carried to Leeweward, the Capital
City of the Province, and put into the Bridewell there. Where at their first
coming they were kindly received and civilly entertained by the Governors of
the place, who did for them what they would, that they might go into the
Conclave which they would have them: Afterward, when they were grieved to
accept the offered civility, they thrust them into such a kind of a Cellar, as
they, not being used to such a horrid and dark Habitation, and accustomed at
home at their own Houses to live plentifully, through want and grief within a
short space of time fell very Sick together. Several sorts of men come to visit
them, and they Discourse with them all of Religion, and bestow their Pamphlets
upon several of them. They write also to the Magistrates, complaining that
they, being innocent People, should be so used as if they were the greatest
Criminals in the World. After this they are taken out of this place, and
carried into the City Prison, which they call the Fort, and were brought to
their Trial, which was held before three of the chief Council of the Court;
They deny nothing that was alleged against them, but only plead that they did
not know, that what they had done was contrary to Law; for they had heard, and
were of that Opinion, that the Decree that the Law had made against the
Quakers, was some time since repealed. And indeed, since there was no reason to
suppose that these Men should tell a Lie in this case; and since for a good
while there had no force or effect of this Law appeared; and, as it is a Maxim
in Law, that a Law ceases for want of being put in Execution, it might be
likely enough that these People might not know it. And they gave great
Commendations of the Moderation and Temper of the Senator Vierssen in this
Cause. But whereas these Men also did not, nor indeed could deny the Fact
charged upon them; That they had done such a thing amongst the Mennonites; and
that that was the design they went upon, with an intention also by the same
Letter to defame and disturb our Churches: And moreover all of them refusing,
during their Trial, to be uncovered, and to Sit in the seats where the
Prisoners, or Criminals as they call them used to Sit; the Judges reputing
their intended Crime as if it had been a thing accomplished, commanded them to
be carried back and put in the same Prison from whence they came. Now Isaac
grew very ill; therefore he had a Bed sent him for him to lie upon; but his
Father, and Companion Rndolph, being soon taken away from him, were thrust into
the company of diverse Erroneous and wicked Men, which afflicted them with a
double grief, both because they were dragged away from their dear Friend, and
he too drawing near, as it should seem, to Death, and so he should be taken
from their Embraces who was a Person so desirable to them; and they penned up
amongst a parcel of wicked Varlets, and as they aggravated it, wild Beasts
disguising their Cruelty under the appearance of an human shape. And now these
Captives, being shut up in a Prison together among these cursed Villains, were
plagued and tormented night and day continually, not only with the beastly
Discourses, but also the filthy and villainous Actions of those wretched Rogues;
at last they grew very weak; James moreover being an old man of 70 years old;
Rudolph indeed began to grow much worse; but James to such a degree, that he
fell into a deadly Disease. So this old Man had the favor of a more open and
commodious place granted him; but then it was too late: for now his Breast
being stuff^ (...) with a Cold and the smoaky Air, after three days time he
died of a Ptysick. After these things were over, in 7 months time, his Son is
let out of Prison, but so as he is banished that whole Province for the space
of ten years. Rudolph is not only kept in Prison, but is also ordered not to
stir out thence till after 5 years were over.

The Quakers make a great complaint, and also publish it in Writing, What great
injury and violence is offered to their Friends in Friesland by the Mennonites,
and Reformed, and the Governors there, they as the Beginners, these as the
Promoters, and those as the Executioners in their Persecution. And when it was
objected to them, What they had done in a Congregation of the Mennonites, and
intended to do in our Churches, they replied; That they had done nothing else,
but only publicly reproved those that had cast Aspersions and Reproaches upon
them and their Doctrine; and so that it was not they that were the Revilers,
but they had only given an answer to the Calumnies of those that had set upon
them first. And that the Mennonites had little reason to complain or find fault
with such a thing in other People, whereas 'twas common with them to do the
same thing among themselves every day, and that they often fell from their Duty
in this case; so that there was scarce any City, but in which they gave a great
deal of trouble to the Magistrates by their Quarrelli (...). But to return from
whence I have digressed; Cornelius remains in Prison for 3 years; till that
first, most pernicious, and to our Provinces almost fatal War with the French,
at what time the Bishop of Munster drew his Troops toward this Province of
Friesland. At what time they dismissed this Man out of Custody, and commanded
him to depart out of their Territories. And from that time the Quakers began to
show themselves more in Friesland, and to increase more and more, and more
freely to act; they now becoming better acquainted, and reconciling themselves
to the Opinions and Discourses of the People, and being less uncouth to their
sight and hearing.

At several times there went through these Countries to visit their Friends,
Fox, Barclay; Penn, Keith, and others. But there was nothing worth remembering
done by these Men; save that Barclay at such time, as the Ambassadors of
several Kings and Princes were met together at Nimeguen to Treat about a
general Peace; he also interceeds to procure a Peace for all their Churches,
and delivers a Letter thereupon to each of these Gentlemen, and withal certain
Theological Theses, containing the Heads of their Doctrines, and afterward
affixes them to the Doors of a certain University, and submits them to the
Examination of all Men: And also, That William Penn and Galen Abraham, a
Physician, and also a Preacher amongst those Mennonites, which we account all,
or for the most part of them at least, to be Socinians: At the same time almost
at Amsterdam disputed in a private House, of the signs of the New Church, and
extraordinary Call of Ministers; and that after such a manner, as Penn, who,
after the manner of his Nation, spoke nothing but in a premeditated and set
form of Speech; showed upon this occasion that when he had a mind to it, he was
not wanting in the faculty of answering Extempore, to the sudden and large
Discourses of others; but the other so abounded in multitudes of words, as he
never came at the stress of the matter where the cause lay; And where he could
not tell how to bring close Arguments to the purpose, he either very
ingeniously put of giving an answer at all, or turned it into Joke and Banter,
and so it ended after the same rate as Disputations most commonly do. The
Quakers are wont when they talk of the Things that happened to them in these
Countries, to say, That they never suffered so much, but that the benefits they
now enjoy do more than countervail it; and that whatsoever they have suffered,
that they have suffered nothing for any ill Deed or Crime, which even those
that are most enraged against them, never pretended to object against any one
of them; and that indeed they have not suffered for their Doctrine and
Religion, since that at the time they suffered, those who were their
Persecutors did not so much as know what their Doctrine and Religion was; and
such their Religion was looked upon as Error through mistake had apprehended
it; and when afterward, what their Doctrine and Religion was, began to be more
exactly known and conceived by Men, and that not upon suspicion and by
conjecture only, but certain notices and due apprehensions thereof, that
thenceforward no Injury or Violence was offered to them by any Persons
whatsoever, upon the account of their Doctrine and Religion. Moreover, thus
they will go on to argue with you, and say, That although they cannot
absolutely forget, nor totally blot out of their mind the remembrance of what
had befallen them in these Countries, yet that this they can do nevertheless,
to take no notice of, but bury them in perpetual silence, and to rejoice in
their present enjoyment.

Now there springs up a new race of Men, a new Sect, Discipline, and new way of
living, in these Provinces. These were comprehended in that Communion and
Society, which they called Labadistic, from the Author and Gatherer of it, one
John Labadee, a French Walloon, formerly a Papist and Jesuit; afterward coming
over to our side, a Minister of the Gospel in several of the French Churches;
last of all, at Middleburgh in Zealand, but he was put out of his place for
refusing to submit to the Judgment and Decree of the Walloon Synod, (for so
here they call the French Churches) of some Fact he had done; A very
ripe-witted and subtle Man he was indeed, moderately Learned, but above measure
Eloquent and Rhetorical, and beyond expression, prompt and ready to speak
Extempore upon any subject: Of this Man various were the Opinions and Senses of
the People. For thus they that were Adversaries to him described him, as a Man
of a sickle temper, and always changing, disdainful, yielding to none that were
his Superiors, to his Equals arrogant and proud, and to his Inferiors
altogether intolerable; neither in Mind nor Manners the same sort of a Man
that in Countenance and Habit he seemed to be, making show of a great deal of
Modesty and Humility, but full of Craft in Counterfeiting and Dissimulation;
though better at playing the Counterfeit of what he was not, than Dissembling
what he was; so that there was no Man living more fit or better qualified,
under a specious pretense of Goodness, and show of Religion, to tickle the
Minds of unwary People, and circumvent them as he pleased. There were others
that loved the Man well, and were his Followers, and familiar Friends, and most
intimate Acquaintance, as could scarce ever endure to be out of his Sight; and
these celebrated his Praises, as one that far exceeded all the Doctors of the
Churches, and a Man sent on a Divine Embassy from Heaven to Mankind, who
thought and did all things Divinely, and with a Mind perpetually conversant in
Heaven, and from thence derived, instituted, and was to perfect the Work of
Reformation, to others either altogether unknown, or an ungrateful task they
would not care to undertake, or that it would seem an insupportable burden, or
of such a kind as no body would be able to go through with. Others there were
that had entertained a middling sort of an Opinion of him, between both these
Extremes, and they looked upon him as a very excellent Man, and a very useful
and necessary instrument for the Reformation of Life and Manners, and likely to
become their undoubted Restorer, but that he was a little too hasty and severe,
and almost passionately intent in the weighing and correcting of Men; and so by
over-doing, did undo and spoil what his Intentions aimed at.

Of thi^ Society there was as it were another Parent, one Anna Maria a
Schurman, a noble Maid, and very Rich; and more than that, which is seldom
heard of or found, I had almost said known, (...) Person endued with most
singular Piety and Integrity, abounding in a universal Learning and Knowledge,
skilled in various Arts and Sciences, and the Knowledge of very many Languages,
not only of the European, but also of the Oriental Tongues, and that not only
of those that were more anciently in use, but of the modern times; so that in
this Sex there has either never, or at least very seldom been seen, a more
illustrious or eminent Example; so that hereby she was become the love and
delight, and as it were, the Lady Patroness of the Learned of her time; which
she her self afterward took notice of, and deplored, in a Book which she Writ,
and Entitled it, (...). Of this Society there were Members, many of the
Nobility and People, but they were such as were of the best Esteem, and Monied
Men in whom there was either an inclination or intention of Piety, and a
forsaking of evil Company, and a Contempt and avoidance of the frail and
fleeting things of this World. A fit Society this, for those that were thus
disposed; for those I say, who in this light, transient, and soon perishing
state of the Affairs of the whole Universe, and in so great an abundance of the
wickedness of Mankind, and those great numbers of Christians as they pretend
themselves, who only are so in name, and not reality, were nauseated and tired
with what they heard and saw, and to whom Christ alone and their Salvation of
their Souls by him, was their only desire and care. The first House this
Society had was at Amsterdam. Then at Altona upon the Elbe, where Labadee
deceased, being a Man mightily beloved by all those of his Party. Last of all
at Wiewerd, a Town in Friesland, not far distant from Leeweward, where they had
a very ample House, formerly the Mansion House of the Waltars, and then
afterward Hereditary to the Family of the Sommeldices. In which place not long
after this Society was dissolved and dispersed about, rfter the manner of the
Primitive and most blessed State of the Church, which a great many People
presaged and foretold from the very first, and so all this expectation was
lost, and all those Treasures which several of the Society had contributed
toward it* were turned into Ashes. Now before this came to pass, this noble
Maid, being now stricken in years, and almost decripit, arrived at the end of
her Race, and Dying, was Clothed with Immortality: Happy she, had she not in
the very midst of her Glory turned aside to this By-Way, and having run through
part of her life, in that very House, on which she, had, with those prodigious
Endowments of Mind, bestowed so much Cost, she was forsaken of all those that
gaped after her Estate, and all her Family, and left all alone; but only not
forsaken of God, or abandoned to Desperation, and so in her mournful Seat she
breathed out her Soul, when she had first recommended it to God in Christ. Of
this excellent Maid, (to add this by the by) What was mortal and perishing was
reposed not in the Sepulchral Monument or Tomb belonging to the Family of the
Waltars, erected in the Church, as it might have been; but without in the
Churchyard, or Ground lying about it, in the common Earth, amongst the rest of
her Brothers and Sisters, according to her own desire, leaving that Monument
out of Modesty, that Familiarizer and Governess of all other Virtues, of which
this Lady in her lifetime was always the perfect Pattern. But since, what the
Doctrine of these People was, what their Religion, and how their way of Living,
what their Intention, and what their aims and enterprises about the Church and
other Men were, may be fully known by their Writings, which several Men among
them, yea, and some Women too, have published concerning themselves, and many
of our Learned Men, of them; I shall not now stay to Recapitulate. But because
all this Relation tends to this end, to show what Agreement there was between
the Quakers, of whom alone in this Work we treat, and these Labadists (I call
them so because I know no better name to call them by) in Doctrine, and what
Institution to one and the same purpose; and lastly, what intentions they had
to join in Friendships, and contract Acquaintances, I will shortly and in few
words relate it. As to their Doctrine, although these Men at first introduced
little or nothing which was different from our Faith, yet in process of time
they brought in diverse Innovations about the use of the Holy Scriptures, and
the guidance and operations of the Holy Spirit, and Prayers, and the remaining
parts of Worship, and the Sacraments and Discipline of the Church, so that they
came nearer to the Opinions of the Quakers in these things, than to our
Doctrine. Now it appears that these Men, no less than the Quakers, reprehended
and found fault with many things in our Churches, and those of all Protestants,
that they were all so corrupt and depraved, that no effect, no fruit of the
Spirit of God appeared amongst them, nor no Worship of God, but only a carnal
and external One; no mutual attention, no conjunction of Minds, no love, no
will, no endeavors for the good, one of another, or the common good, that was
to be seen. Lastly, That no one's Life and Manners answered what they all
professed, or the Example and Precepts of Christ. And as this was the complaint
and quarrel of the Quakers, so in like manner was it of these People too, that
with these vices above others were infected those that were the Prelates and
Preachers of the Word, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Lastly, these
People thought thus, that they were the Men from whom the beginning and first
Examples of the Restitution of the Church was to be expected, who also were
wholly intent upon the famous work of this Reformation; Just as the Quakers
thought, that this was chiefly reserved for them, and that they were in a
special manner obliged to go on with this Work of Reformation. So great was the
Fame of this Society, that there was scarce any place in these Countries where
there was not a great talk talk about these Teachers and Workers, so that in
Foreign Countries there was scarce any where, unless it were among such People,
who have no regard to what is done abroad, who had not heard something of them.
Therefore when these Reports were gone over into England and Scotland; at first
indeed there were some of these Men who, being averse from the State of the
Church as under the Bishops, contained themselves within their own Churches
which were more remote from, external rites and splendour, and a worldly and
delicate polite, as they call it, and elegant Life and Conversation, who also
undertook the Ministerial Function. At last, also the Quakers, who as soon as
ever they heard of this sort of Men, and their plain Religion, and way of Life
that they followed, they began to think in good earnest of this Society of
People, and to be better acquainted with them, and to consider ways and means
amongst themselves how they should come to enter into Consultation with them. I
know that there was one of those Ministers of the Gospel, so averse from the
Episcopal way, and addicted to Presbyterial Churches, who not only himself
writes to this Society, but also communicates his thoughts upon this subject to
an eminent Quaker, which Man when after that time he foresaw many things from
the face of the Kingdom, which tho not altogether true indeed, yet seeming very
probable and likely to come to pass, at that time he was not such a fearer of
Episcopacy, but that one might read in his Countenance, and since he was a Man,
that one time or another it would come to pass, as afterward it happened, that
he was made a Bishop. The first of the Quakers that came from Scotland to the
Labadists to Amsterdam, was George Keith, a Man both very skillful in, and much
used to Controversy and Disputes. After him, comes out of England, R. Barclay,
a Man likewise of great Experience, and well seen in the Defense of his
Religion. These Men, one after another, treat about this matter with Labadee,
and the rest of them, on whom the Government of the Society lay. But when the
Quakers opened their Mind briefly, and in a common Style, but they on the other
hand used such deep and far fetched Speeches, and those so round about the
bush, and turning and winding, and so much Eloquence, or endless Talkativeness,
that the Quakers knew not what these Men would say, or how to know or find out
and discern their Opinions, Institutions, and Intentions, or where to have
them, (which also had often happened to our People enquiring of these Men about
these things) and now began to suspect, that they were not such a pure sort of
People, and were either bordering upon some Errors, or privately entertained
and bred some monstrous Opinion. And when the Quakers tried again at another
time, to see further if by any means they could bring things to a Consent and
Agreement, and a conjunction together that they might act in common Concert,
the Labadists not only drew back, but also resented it ill, and were so angry,
that they thought it would be to no purpose to try any farther Conclusions with
them. And either upon the occasion of these Meetings together, or from the
designs of some of their Adversaries to reproach them, it came to pass, that
from that time the Labadists came to be called Quakers, which name followed
them from Amsterdam to Hereford, and there accompanied them, so that Men all
abroad not only called them by the Name of Quakers, which to them appeared as a
horrible Title, but also oftentimes used to throw Stones at them. To avoid
which reproach, and withal to show, how much they hated both Name and Thing,
they, out of their Printing-Office which they carried about with 'em, published
a Writing by the Title, showing what the Argument of the Book was; An
Examination and Confutation of the Quakers. Nevertheless after this, there went
to these Labadists in Friesland, William Penn, that most famous Man amongst the
Quakers; A Man of such Spirit and Wit, as was both willing and able to
encounter with all their Adversaries. But the end of all was the same.

To which I will add this Relation, That William Penn at this time being so
near the -- Wood, the Summer Residence of that Illustrious Lady, the Princess
of -- of whom, as indeed she was, and is a Princess who has a peculiar Talent
of Wisdom, and Piety, and Greatness of Soul, in asserting and promoting the
Interest of Religion, he had heard much talk, and this Princess being now there
present, it comes in his mind, and he entreats it as an extraordinary Favor,
that he may have the Liberty of Access to wait upon her Highness. And she her
self too having heard much of Penn, admits him; but so, as what she had heard
many say, runs in her highness's mind, that Penn was not the Man that he
desired to be taken for, but was either a Jesuit, or else an Emissary of his
King's sent to sound the minds of the People and Grandees of this Country, and
therefore she fore-armes her self against him. But when this Princess had
admitted Penn to her Speech; and he composes his Speech not with those
Artificial Elegancies and Courtly Niceties, which his former Inclination,
Education, and Customs had enabled him to; but with the highest gravity, and as
far as Religion would permit, in the most exquisite terms he could devise; and
thinking this discourse might not be displeasing to the Princess, at the end of
it, he begs leave to make a Sermon before her Highness. To which the Princess,
to make short with him, Answers, that she had very good Preachers of her own,
whom he might hear; and she had not far off David Fluda Giffen, a Preacher
worthy of such a Princess; as who besides his natural parts, Learning, and
sweetness of Conversation, (...) with Probity of Life, and endued with a
singular gift in Preaching, was now the worthy pastor of the Church at Dort, a
Man to us well known and our very great friend. Which Answer Penn taking in the
stead of a civil Refusal, with a cheerful Countenance and in kind terms asks
her Highness, if in any other respect he might be serviceable to her; and so
takes his leave of her Highness. Now from Friesland a province of our Belgium,
which is simply called Friesland, I go on to that they call East-Friesland. In
that Country, in the chief City called Embden, in the 74th year of this
Century, there were a few Quakers that appeared there, of whom the Principal or
chief Men were John William Haasbaard, a Doctor of Physic; John Borsome and
Cornelius Andrews. These Men began first to hold their Meetings privately,
afterward more openly, then to publish books of their Tenets; to allure and
invite the more to their Communion. Which being known, and growing public, to
the Magistrates, convened most of the Quakers before them into their Courts.
They appear there. By the Magistrates order there came thither two of their
Ministers, one the Presidents of the Meeting of East-Friesland, and another
next to him, Frederic Vlderic, and John Alardin. The Senate has under
Deliberation, that whereas, as yet, they did not rightly understand, other than
by Relations from other hands, what the sentiments of these Men was, what they
did, or what they aimed at and pretended to, that therefore it would be their
best way, to hear and understand these things from themselves, least they
should seem to pass a sentence upon people before they had heard, or known what
their Cause was; and on the other hand, if they were indeed found to be such as
fame reported them, that they might, in due time, obviate and prevent their
attempts, and mix them as it were in the bud before they grew to greater
strength. But when these Quakers appeared before the Magistrates, they stood
with their hats on, and would not pull them off although they were ordered so to
do; not out of Pride or from Innation or Contempt of them, but because it was
the Custom and Fashion of those of their opinion, and they thought that such
sort of honors were not due to Men. A great deal of Dispute there was about
this business between the Quakers and those Ecclesiastical persons. Which
Discourse, being drawn out to a great length, and nothing brought to the
purpose that was intended, the Magistrate Haasbaard, as being the principal and
most skillful mannager of this affair that 2 days afterward he should appear
before a Convention of the Pastors, and Synod of the Church, and there, before
them, state the Case of his Religion, under the penalty of 10 Imperials
Haasbaard refused this Meeting, and appears not at the Stated day* But the
Quakers however go on, and in the mean while; and afterward meet in
Haasbaard's house. Wherefore the Magistrate lays a fine upon them of 100
Imperials a time, as often as they met together after that manner. They take no
notice of that, neither. So the Magistrate taking this as an affront to his
Authority and Dispising of his gentle Government and Clemency, concluded to
take another course with this People. Which yet before he would do, he thought
fit once again to try if he could pick out of (...) Men, what their Intentions,
desires and aims were, therefore the next day he causes them to be called into
Court before him, and together with them the two Ministers before mentioned
were ordered to be present, that they might Examine them about these things,
and maturely deliberate upon them. For they thus thought that it was absolutely
belonging to the Duty and Business of the Political and Ecclesiastical Order,
to look after and enquire, what was done in the City, and in the Church, and
with all Care and Diligence, to provide and take Order that no Disturbance,
Faction, Tumult, or any pernicious Error, Deceit, or Seduction should arise,
and spread about among the People; and that the Quakers themselves, in this
case, ought not only to pay their Obedience to the Magistrates, but also
themselves, of their own accord, and free will, by the impulse of their
Religion, and monitions of our Lord Christ, and the Motions of the Holy Spirit,
not to decline the Exposition of what it was they insisted on, and the
Principles they so much Gloried in, but with all imaginable Readiness to comply
with the Magistrates desire herein, and to render an Account of their Faith and
Actions before these men.

The Quakers made their appearance, and stood with their Hats on to plead their
own Cause, and First the Magistrates began to reprove them, not only for
refusing to obey their Order, but also, that they had so far cast of all manner
of Obedience to them, to whom, by the Laws of the City, they were subject; and
the Confession of their Life and Faith they left to them to declare to those,
who with so much mildness attended their Answer as to these things; Then both
those Ministers began, with a great deal of Modesty and Simplicity, to ask them
their Opinion of the several chief Heads of Divinity, and the Christian
Religion, and where they Esteemed them to lie under any Error to instruct them.
To whom the Quakers opposing their Answers, both Parties entered into a Dispute
amongst themselves; and in the Disputation the Quakers at last grew so far out
of patience, that they inveighed against the Preachers and Ministers of the
Word, and termed their Examination a Spanish-Inquisition, and them Hireling
Ministers; and thereupon cried out, That they would have nothing to do with
them; with which immoderation the Magistrate being moved, against forbid them
to Meet under the same Penalty: And tells them withal, that if yet they would
so do, that he would take Order that they should depart the City, and his
Jurisdiction. This was done in full Senate; But yet this Threatening was so far
from deterring them, that presently after, in the very same place, they held
their Meetings again. The number of the Quakers was found to be about 10, or at
the most, not above 12 Families. Therefore the Magistrate supposing that so far
he might possibly give License to their obstinacy; but their Confidence
increasing, that it would be a troublesome thing always to Contest with People
of this sort of Temper, and that therefore it would not be Proper to defer the
Punishing of them any longer, but to Inflict it as far as his Power, and the
Condition of the City required it; so he calls the Quakers before him again, and
they continuing still to be in their former tune and Refractory as before; by
his Edict and Command he orders them within 3 days to depart the City, and his
whole Jurisdiction; and if they would not Obey, they were to expect a severe
Sentence to be passed upon them, and this interdict they despise, and again
reiterate their Facts, and meet together nevertheless. This was told again to
the Magistrate, and the Penalty they had incurred was found and read; So they
together, being ten in number, both Men and Women, as being Disobedient to the
Laws of the City, were sent aboard a Ship, and carried out of the jurisdiction
of the City, with Charge that they should never, in their whole lifetime,
return into the Province again. So the Magistrate unwillingly, and contrary to
his Nature and Custom, dealt the more sharply with these Men, only to set an
example before other stubborn Persons, and those that might be ready to do ill
Deeds; as not, unless compelled, we cut of a Limb of the Body, least it should
infect the rest, and bring the whole to Destruction. But they being sent away,
scarce tarried one day before they came back again. Then they were all
committed to Prison, which was a Cellar under the Burgo-master's House, and had
nothing else allowed them for Food, but only Bread and Water, and were denied
the privilege of having their Friends come to see them, or bringing any better
Provision for their Accommodation. But if any of them was not well, he had the
liberty granted him of going home to his House, and there remaining till he was
recovered. A little while after they were again sent out of the Country, all
but Haasbaard: And though they had undergone so many Hardships, yet resolved to
lose their very lives rather than give over their Enterprises, they return back
again. Being provoked, now after the usual manner, and as it were, made a joke
and ^aughing-stock, they were clapped into the same Prison again, and afterward
transported in a Ship out of the City and all the Province; except Haasbaard
again, upon whom, as the Ringleader of the rest, the Indignation and Anger of
the Magistrates principally fell. And the Quakers complained and wrote, that
some of the Magistrates, especially the Consuls (they give you both the Deeds
and Names of them, I only, which is enough for my purpose, shall take notice of
the thing it self) at this time were very vehement against their Friends, and
especially very high in their Words. They added also, that the Ministers of the
Word were also more hard and rigid against them, except one of whom they said
and wrote, that in a public Sermon he had declaimed against the Persecution of
the Quakers. They pass over his Name. I shall speak both of the Name and
Passage, what was told me by Reverend Men, who both at this day are Pastors and
Elders of the Church of Embden, and chief Men in the Ecclesiastical Assembly of
that Tract; to wit, That there was none of the Ministers and Pastors of the
Church who, besides Refuting the Opinions of the Quakers in Words, did any
thing more; And amongst those Ministers there was then one Herman Holthuse, now
of Pious Memory, of whom I remember that he was a Man both of great strictness
as to other things, and also as to his Life and Conversation; joined with the
highest lenity and goodness toward all other Men; who deeply Commiserating the
Case and Afflictions of the Quakers, thought and said, that they were too too
severely prosecuted, but this in his private Discourses, never abroad and in
the Pulpit. Now an ill Omen followed; there was an Order issued out to the
Chamberlain to confiscate the Goods of the Captives and Exiles. When neither
Haasbaard nor his Mother, being called upon, would lay down the Fine, his Goods
were all Sealed up in the House, and he again driven into Exile; from whence
nevertheless he quickly returns, with the fresher and more eager heat, because
of his loss by Death of the dearer part of himself, his Wife, and his little
Children left behind; the Mother now, out of her Goods fallen to her, paying
the Chamberlain the Sum of 200 Imperials. The Goods of another, a banished
Maid, were sold by public Outcry. Moreover, about the end of the year there
was an Order set out, That no body should let his House to a Quaker, or take
any of them for Lodgers. Now return back as I said before all the expelled
Quakers. But all of them are again thrust into the same place, and also a Woman
with Child, but not so near her time as the Quakers thought. As also, that was
too great a glory of Martyrdom, which the Quakers told of a certain Quakers
Child of 3 years old, or scarce so much, which upon a disturbance made in the
House, fell into such a Fit of Trembling, with Convulsions of the whole Body,
that that day proved to it the last of its Life. But not to repeat the same
thing so often over and over again, and to reduce our discourse to a narrower
compass, this sending out and coming back, expulsion again and return was made
about 20 times in this and the ensuing year. For it seemed hard to the
Magistrate to enact any thing so grievous against his own Citizens, against
whom there could no other Charge be laid than Constancy in their Religion; and
to the Quakers so to forsake their Native Country and Houses, and whatsoever
else that was dear to them; and not endeavor to regain their old Seats, and
way of Life and Religion, and the exercise hereof, and without which it cannot
consist. The Quakers writ boldly and amply of this to the Magistracy of Embden,
as well the Dutch as English, in the Sentences and grave Language of Fox,
Green, Crocius, and Penn. The subject and scope of them all was he same. What
fury possessed their Spirits, or what weakness their Minds, that had enraged
them to such a Degree against those People, that had never done any thing that
could merit their Just Displeasure, or in the least diminish their Rights. For
that they loved their Houses, and were ready on all occasions to return to the
City, and to their Families, and to their Native Soil; and preferred this
before the Will of the Magistrates, the Magistrates might easily know the Cause
of that, unless that being impatient of the Truth, by prejudice against these
men's Discourse, they hindered their Defense, and themselves a right Judgment.
For that was not their Principle to think themselves exempt from all Laws,
subject to no Government, or touched with no fears, or any Expectation of Evil.
That they were not so lame or faultring in their Duties, nor had so put off the
Sense of all common Humanity. But they were of another Opinion, That it was
God, and the guidance of the Spirit, and their Conscience, which carried them
on; and that there was a Religion which they had from God, in which the first
principle head, Strength and Defense, was Liberty, and that not only private,
but open, public and common; That we should not abstain from the Presence or
Companies of Men, or sight and speech of friends and acquaintance, or be
behindhand in the daily performance of Good Offices and Turns one for another;
which things they that deny or take away, totally subvert not only, Liberty,
but also all Religion. Wherefore also this thing ought not to be esteemed as a
Disgrace to these Men, or a Crime, but rather in their praise, as a good Action
that they might estimate them by themselves, if they re-call'd to mind, that if
any humane Affection, or any desire of a glorious show, had put them upon these
Thoughts, that they might, if they traveled elsewhere, live a quiet and honest
Life, remote from these Storms of Contentions and Ignominy; whereas they chose
rather to undergo so many Miseries and Calamities. And that that they could
affirm, which they said without Arrogance or Pride, That if the Magistrates
were resolved to go on as they had begun, that their Friends also were
determined, rather than forsake their Places, or forego their Religion, they
would suffer the last Extremities, and not only endure and undergo the most
continual Torments, but even the cruellest Deaths that could be inflicted.

Also Haasbaard sent a Leter to the Senate, out of Prison, whose last words, at
the End of it, are memorable: That he longed for the time wherein God would
open the Eyes of Men, that they might see how that himself and the Quakers were
injuriously and falsely accused, and to that Judge they committed their
integrity. In the time following, the Edict against the Reception of the
Quakers, was put in Execution upon those who were thereof convicted, as the
Mother of Haasbaard, for receiving her said Son in her house, was fined 50
Imperials; and a certain woman, a member of the Reformed Church, because she
did not deny her Husband, who was a Quaker, to lodge, bed and board with her,
was mulcted 50 Golden Florens. In the mean time, Haasbard, besides his Exile,
being oppressed with so many Cares and Griefs, which lead to Distempers and
Death, was over-taken by his last Day, and dies. Who being dead when the
persecution seemed to die too, it revived again a little after in his 3
Sisters, whereof two were unmarried, and one Married, but who at this time did
not Co-habit with her husband. For when these women and likewise 6 Men of their
Acquaintance met together to see one another and for mutual Exhortation's sake,
by and by the Sergeants and Soldiers come in unto them, and run upon them, and
carry them away to Prison, and take away out of the Women's pockets Money and
Silver Cases, and a watch of great Value, which they wear not out of Pride, or
for Ornament or Ostentations sake, but for use, and while these Varlets spend
one part of their prey and suppress another part, the rest they carry to the
Burgomaster. Yet these people some days after were dismissed, instead of a
fine which they would not pay, the things that they had taken from the Women
being detained. The last assault was in the year 79, Then the hatred began by
degrees to grow less and less, and to wax old, when it was better seen and
known, That the Quakers were not such a sort of people as the Magistrates and
Citizens had taken them for. A Wonder this, but yet neither new nor unknown.
Charles King of England dying, and James succeeding him, some rich Quakers
flying out of England came hither to Embden. These the Senate were so far from
repelling that they received them very kindly, and not only granted them
houses, but also the Exercise of their Religion, and access to it, and leave to
build a public Meeting place and proffered them ground to build it upon,
hoping that that would now tend to the Increase and Riches and Splendour of
their City, and Nevertheless without any Detriment, or Disgrace to their
Religion. Moreover, the year following, after that, a Quaker-woman, a Citizen
of Embden, a woman of eminent Condition, and some other Rich and Honest
Citizens, who had been against the Persecution, had well prepared the Matter;
the Senate, that had been so severe against the banished Citizens, do now no
less Hospitably invite them home, than formerly they had in hostile manner
expelled them, and permit them the free Exercise of their Religion, and promise
and engage themselves to Protect and Defend them therein, and Confirm the same
by a Decree, of which I have had the liberty of Perusal. Although this Liberality
and Beneficence of theirs was now in vain, and too late, for these English
afterward having heard that William Prince of Orange was made King, whose
alone Name allured the minds of these Men to return home to their former Seats,
and these Exiles of Emden, now residing in other places, without fear or care
Transacted in their affairs with good success, and therefore returned their
very hearty thanks to the Magistrate, and professed themselves to have
forgotten all former Injuries, and that they should ever retain a grateful
sense of the present favor, Nevertheless that they should more willingly
choose to remain in the present repose and haven, wherein they were now settled
than to return back from whence they came.

There are no Quakers at this day in East Friesland, save four or five Families
at Embden; Ames, one of those Quakers who came first into our Provinces,
thought fit to go from thence to Germany, and pass through the Palatinate of
the Rhine; as being one who was not only sufficiently versed in his own
Country Language, and ours, but also in the German Tongue; And here he first
makes his Application to his Electoral Highness, who having had some Account of
these sort of men, and being very desirous both to see and discourse with some
of them, as it is the Genius of those Great Men often to hear, learn and attain
to the Knowledge of many Things, he sends for Ames to come to him, and after he
had seriously discoursed with him, dismissed him kindly. When Ames had left the
Court and City, he wanders over the Country, and there makes several Essays to
promote his Design, but it came to nothing; and therefore he returns to
Holland. But having afterward taken Two of his Companions along with him, to
wit, Bat and Higginson, he goes again for the Palatinate, and addressed himself
to the Prince, offering, both to him and to his Courtiers, the books of his
Sect, designing thereby to engage the Favor and Good Will of the Prince
toward himself and his Laborers. But the Prince was not so readily taken
therewith; and besides that, the Princes Eyes and Ears were intent upon those
Affairs that concern Religion; The Ecclesiastical Orders were also in the way,
who informed the Prince of the Nature of these Men's Institutions and ways, and
advised him, that he should rather silence them as Men bent to raise Storms and
Tempests in his Country, and keep them off and send them away parting before
they did any mischief: So they went their ways elsewhere but yet kept in this
part of the Country, and followed their design, and after many windings and
turnings, found some Countrymen at Kircheim, near Worms, whom, after they had
for some time heard them, they brought over to their way, and this was all they
could, after all their indefatigable Labor and Toil, effect and bring about.

In pursuance to these men's Practices, William Penn, Barclay and Keith, at that
time they came with Fox into Holland, steered their Course for these Parts, but
being ignorant in the German Tongue, they took some of the Natives of the
Country along with them to be their Interpreters; but there was nothing done by
them that is worthy of mentioning. But those few Quakers, who I have said,
lived in these places, did afterward increase to Seven or Eight Families; who
after they had by little and little united Men, and Associated together, they
declined to go to the public Churches, and refused to pay for the subsistence
of the Clergy, and therefore as well the Rectors and Pastors of the Churches
thereabouts, as also the Priests of the Territories of Worms looked with an
evil Eye upon them, and so going on from one thing to another began to accuse
and sue them, and when they could not be satisfied in their demands, which the
others would not comply with, alleging the unlawfulness of paying such Tithes
and Products from their Lands they did, instead of the Money due upon the
account, take what they pleased from among their Sheep, Swine, and other
Cattle, whereas those Men did in the mean time by their diligence, as it were,
singular Providence bear up still against their losses and poverty, so as that
they had yearly wherewithal both to subsist upon, and for fear of trouble, or
greater constraint and violence to satisfy their Adversaries; but after they
had for some years lived in this manner, they did that very year that preceded
the German War, wherein all that Fruitful and Delicious Country was wasted
with Fire and Sword, by those Men who showed themselves so much more skillful
and ready to Destroy then to Conqer especially these late years, of their own
accord and in a considerate manner, so as if they had foreseen so great a War
and been afraid of such an impending Calamity, forsake their Native Country
those Villages and Cottages, which they could scarce bear up with props and
stakes, and entered into a voluntary and perpetual Banishment, so passed over
into Pensilvania, being that part of English America that I have before
described in which part of the world, each of them having Land Distributed and
Assigned unto them by the Proprietor of that part, William Penn, they live now
in the greatest Freedom and plentifully enough: I have a little before spoken
of Penn, and some other of his Companions Traveling from Holland into Germany,
to those People that were of their Sect at the same time; Isabel Fell, Fox's
Daughter in Law and Wife to Keith, together with a certain Dutch Woman, went
from Amsterdam to Herword in Westphalia, there to speak with the Princess
Elizabeth, eldest Daughter to Frederick once King of Bohemia, and Elector
Palatine, a Lady truly renowned and famous for her wit, Learning and Piety, and
if so be the endowments of the mind are to be looked upon and esteemed of
themselves without the goods of Fortune, a Princess the most happy and famous
of any of her Age, with a design by their Conversation and Pamphlets, to work
somewhat upon her, that might tend to the use and benefit of their Religion and
Society. Fox, who thought that the Fame of his Name was no less known to this
Princess, than it was in England, his Native Country, delivers these Women a
Letter for them to carry in his Name to the Princess, that they might, by that
means, have easier access unto her, and their Discourses be of more weight with
her; in which Epistle Fox addressed himself unto her in a little more neat and
civil manner, than he was wont to do, laying aside that fusty harshness and
Rusticity he was accustomed to, whereby he made no distinction between Persons
of high Birth and Quality, and the meanest Gar-men and Porters, but now he
carresses and saluteth the Princess in the most engaging manner, and highly
extolls her Piety and Modesty, as being Virtues worthy of a Princess, and sets
forth how much all mankind at this time receed from these offices and duties
incumbent upon them, and as the State of the Church stood at this present time,
there was more need then ever to keep fast to them, and at last exhorts the
Princes that, as she had been engaged in the work, she should go on more and
more. When these women came to the Princess's Court, and desired liberty to
speak with her, she who was full of humanity and gentleness, and never
disdained any tho never so mean and unequal to her Condition, that desired to
apply themselves unto her, admits and hears them with cheerful and favorable
Countenance, being especially pleased with. Isabells Discourse, who indeed had
a curious voice and a freer way of delivering her self, and having heard what
they had to say, dismissed them with a short and pithy answer, and having
afterward opened and read Fox's Epistle; She takes care to deliver unto them
her own Letter, writ in the Language he had done, to wit, English, that they
might give it to Fox, which Letter was to this effect.

Dear Friend,
I cannot choose but tenderly Love all those that Love the Lord Jesus Christ;
and who not only believe in him, but also suffer for his Sake; wherefore I was
mightily pleased with the Letter which you sent me, and your Friends that
visited me. I shall pursue the Advice, both of the one and of the other, as far
as God shall grant me his ^ight and Motion; and in the mean time remain,

Your Loving Friend, Elizabeth.


And about this time, William Penn being on his German Expedition, together
with his other Friends, directs his Course to this Princess; and, that I may
not multiply many words, Preached twice in the Princesses Inner-Chamber, there
being some few of the Townsmen present, concerning the Vanity and Rejection of
Earthly Things, and the Elevation of the Mind to higher Speculations; and did
so far prevail by his polite Eloquence, and Approbation of the Auditors, that
the Princess declared that she had been always intent upon the Duty Penn spoke
off, and did not yet cease to go on the same Work and Duty; with which answer
those Men departed: And because that the attempt of these Quakers in their
Opinions, had hitherto met with no bad success in this part of Germany, the
same Men egged on with the same hope, go into Holsatia, and the parts adjacent.

There were yet in these parts amongst the Mennonites or Anabaptists, who were
few, a small number still remaining and lurking here of those Sectaries
wherewith Germany in the preceding Age had been plagued, being those who
sprung up from the School, or rather Stall and Hog-sty of David George, not
from the Family of Love, as they called it, and such scum and off-scourings as
these, and who still retained their foolish and vain Imaginations, and,
according to their vain and vile Inventions and Examples, united together and
entered into a Fraternity more feignedly then truly and really. Now these
itinerant Quakers found some of these Men at Hamburg, which is the most famous
City of Holsatia, as also at Fredricburg, (a place upon the Eyder, and
frequented and partly inhabited by the Arminians and Remonstrants of our
Country) who looking upon these Men to come up very near to their Opinions,
Tenets, and Ways, and so begin of their own accord prepared and fitted
thereunto, they did easily fall in with them; though there were also some that
were not of this Sect, but intensly addicted to the Mennonites, who now
associated together, and applied themselves with all their might and main to
maintain the Assertors of the Quaker's Doctrines; All these that lurked among
the Anabaptist, and even others also, though they were like unto them, and
followed their ways still in many things, were always suffered upon the account
of their Ignorance, and supposed Innocence, to live quietly; until that about
two years before, the Mayor of the City of Fredricburg, then newly created, and
that he himself, might do somewhat new, and make himself to be taken notice of,
began to disturb the Peace of these Quakers that had hitherto been left alone,
and to create them some Molestation and Trouble; Which when the Remonstrants of
Amsterdam came to understand, and particularly, Ph. Limburg, their Pastor and
worthy Professor; and being careful of the Safety of those Men, and concerned
to maintain the esteem of their own Religion, urge, least that now all Men,
both good and bad, should say they were become other sort of Persons and cruel,
whom most Men looked upon always remote from all manner of Persecution, that
they should Revoke their Proceedings against those Men, and intercede for the
continuation of their Liberty, that had been hitherto unviolable, and entirely
respite them and cease their Persecution. Fox Travels from Holland, through the
Countries of Friesland and Aldenburg, to go to these Men, taking more
Consolation with his Friends than doing any good to others. Those fame
Itinerants and Emissaries of whom I have made mention before, went forwards,
and came to Regal Prussia, as far as the Baltic Sea; where at Dantzick a very
few also of the remainder of those old Fanatics and of the Mennonites (Men who
could discern little what belonged to Religion, or was to be pursued therein,
and poor, who could scarce by their daily and hard labor get daily sustenance)
applied themselves to them, and fell in with their Doctrine and Counsels. These
Men from this time forwards have been continually harrassed by the Lutherans,
in whose Hands the Supreme Power and Magistracy is, and heavily Fined and
Imprisoned. Wherefore G. Fox did upon their behalf, as being his Friends,
Brethren and Equals, in the year 1677, send a Letter to John III. King of
Poland, and intercedes with him thereby for a Tolleration for them; concerning
which Epistle, which Fox took care should be published in his long Diary after
his Death, this is worthy to be noted, That at first it was written in England
in the English Tongue, then sent into Holland and there Translated into the
German Language; and lastly, sent from thence and delivered to the King. The
substance whereof was this: That it was a most equitable and righteous thing,
that all Kings, Princes, and Magistrates should grant Liberty of Conscience to
all their Subjects; and by no means disturb nor obstruct their Assemblies and
Divine Exercises: He set forth, that this was the judgment of the Fathers, and
ancient Doctors of the Church, as also the modern ones, and even the Learned
Men of the present time we live in; And that many Kings and Princes had
Indulged this Grace and Favor to their People, and for that reason were highly
worthy of Praise, and were really extolled by worthy honest and wise Men: He
also collected and picked out several Sayings and Sentences turned out of
Greek, Latin, French, and other Languages; as also Examples and Precepts found
in Histories, to press this matter more upon him. But this Epistle was so
written, that it looked and represented not the Work and Sentiment only of one
single Person, but of many, and seemed to take in the Complicated Sense and
Advice of the whole Society of the Quakers: Yet this Letter had the name of
George Fox only subscribed to it, and that without any other Mark and
Designation of Persons or Authority; so that Fox, though a most-illiterate and
unlearned Man, and who, besides the common English Books; had never looked into
any other, nor could he Read them, would by no means have it thought or
doubted, that this weighty Epistle, ^o full of Learning, and composed and
written in so Elaborate a manner, and with so much Pains and Study, was not
Written by him, and his own Production, and that he was not the Man who had
daily perused all those Books, and made them his own; or that it was thus
Written by a Multitude or whole Society of Men; yet so as that they should
leave it to the Judgment of one Fox an ignorant Fellow, and upon his
Approbation look upon it to be firm and good; and he to approve of the same, by
the greatness and Authority of his Name affixed to it. And hence it is apparent,
that there is no mind so Humble, but is apt to be carried away with the Air of
Glory; yea, many times Glory and Applause is mostly coveted by those who most
contemn it, and endeavor to introduce a Contempt thereof, glorying and taking
Pride herein, in that they despised all manner of Glory so much. But however it
were; the Letter pleased the King, and the Matter of it was very grateful to
him; insomuch, that the King, either by his own Authority, or other
Engagements, brought it so about, that they ceased to persecute them; But the
same Persecution was in a short time after revived and introduced upon them:
When Fox writes a new Epistle to the King; and deprecates the Injuries and
Dangers brought upon those People his Friends, interceding with the King
thereby on their behalf; discovering now, in this his Letter, himself entirely
as he was, and not as before, hand over head, without all manner of shame and
blushing, Arrogating to himself the Work of other Men, and a false praise: But
this Letter did not please the King so well, so as either to purge them from
what was laid to their Charge, or to free them from their Sufferings. These
Quakers are even to the present time a prey and a laughing stock to almost all
the Inhabitants; and they had long since been utterly ruined and destroyed, all
of them, had it not been for a few among them that had some small Substance,
who out of their own Necessities have sustained them under their oppressive
Poverty; And had it not been also for those Quakers in Holland, who are
superior to these in Fortunes and Estates. And now, that I may pass over
nothing that may appertain to the State and Concerns of the Quakers, before I
depart from these Men in Germany. It will not be impertinent to insert the
short History of those Men, lately sprung up in Germany, and who still coverse
and are scattered up and down in diverse parts of the same Country, which are
called by the name of Pretists, and whom many look upon as the Brood and
Offspring of the Quakers, or Enthusiasts, sprung up again in these times, and
being as it were lopped off, grow again, and bud out from the old Stock;
concerning which Men, there are many who have taken upon them to write, who
have discovered themselves to have heard and imagined more things concerning
them than they really know; but I shall not take in all herein, but will leave
out the larger passages, and only take notice of the Principal Heads. For
seeing that in so great a multitude of Christians, as well else where as in
Germany, who declare themselves to be the Disciples of blessed Luther, and to
follow his Doctrine, and way of Living, most of them all were indeed affected
with a great desire of, and love to their Religion, but yet retained, through
great Ignorance and intolerable superstition, the observance of some Rites and
Ceremonies, and which in very deed had little or nothing in common, with some
Religion, Piety and Holiness, and this was not so abstruse, but that it was
apparent to all, so as that they might behold it with their Eyes, and handle it
with their Hands; yea, and the same was now consined, and, as it were, ^ealed
by examples and manners, some Godly Men, zealous toward God, and for the good
of Men, and such as were also* both Learned and Experienced, bethought
themselves, that it was every ones duty, with the utmost care and Diligence, to
heal, or cut off this Malady, or Pestilence in the Church, which crept daily
more and more into Men's Lives and Conversations.

Among these, in the Year sixty one, one Theophilus Brosgeband, a Deacon of the
Lutheran Church, in the City of Rostock, in the Duchy of M^chelenburg, sets up
in Opposition to these Practices, and, so in a book written by him in the
German Tongue, sets forth, and notes the various Errors that the Lutherans were
conscious of; and at the same time speaks moderately and gently concerning the
Controversies that were between the Lutherans and other Reformed, concerning
the Lord's Supper, and sets down his own Opinion in the matter, with his
Reasons for the same. He was indeed a man that studied, and was a lover of
Concord and Peace between Friends, who held the same Faith, which is very good,
and the very name delectable: but he got little Praise and Thanks for his
Pains; nay, this his labor and endeavor went scarce unpunished; for there
were many Persons that forthwith fell at variance with him hereupon, reviled
him, were very bitter against, and troublesome to him, which he by his
long-suffering and patience, wore out, and diverted. After this Henry Muller
became one of this number, who in the same City was Teacher and Professor of
Divinity in the Church and University, and a Person of exquisite Learning and
Piety, and who about five or six years after Brosgeband did in like manner
reprove those of his own Religion, concerning their Errors, and Lives and
Conversations, that were unsuitable to Religion, and especially in a book
written also in the German Tongue (that it might come into the hands of all
those to whom it did more peculiarly belong) handling that Passage of the
Apostle Paul, which is in his First Epistle to the Corinthians, 12. c. 2. v.
(in which place the Holy Apostle, that he might make way for to show to those
Men, how much they were now Honored and Enriched by the Spirit of God, puts
them in mind, how in times past they were carried away to dumb Idols, led and
driven thereunto by unclean Spirits) he wrote that Christians now adays, had
not left their dumb Idols, whereunto they cleaved, to whom they attributed all
things (neglecting true Religion, and setting true Godliness at naught) to wit,
The Pulpit, from whence they Preach to the People, The Baptismal Font, The
Confessor's Tribunal, and the Altar. By which words many that were of the same
Function with him, took themselves to be much Inspired, and so looked upon him
to be their Enemy, and did not only content themselves with injuring of him in
his fame, and the esteem had of him; and seeing that the Name of the Quakers
was at this time very rife every where in Germany, and that the same,
especially with the rude multitude, and men of the most abject Condition; who
catch hold of all things without any distinction of Truth or Falsehood, was much
envied and hated, and not free from danger. There was a certain Person of some
note at Hamburg (for the thing may be said without nameing his Name) though of
no great fame as to his Learning, and of an immoderate and proud Disposition,
and full of words, who was so transported with Rage against Muller, that he
accused him, and laid to his charge, That he was not only guilty of other
Errors, but more especially of Quakerism, and thus by stirring up the People,
did, as it were, enforce the Laws with Menaces, that he should desist and
proceed no further, which matters* Muller, though he was willing, but not able
to bring about to his designed purpose; yet he was desirous to be freed from
the scandal cast upon him, and to remove the ignominy, ^^rging, That he
introduced no perverse or strange Doctrine, and was not the man his Enemy
represented him to be, which he brought so about, that having got the clear
Testimonies of several Professors in the Universities of his Orthodoxy, and of
Doctors in Churches; he Published the same in his Apology, and set them in
opposition to the Reflections and Scandals cast upon him by his Enemies: Now
Philip James Spener, Minister at Francford upon the Mease, of a Church
Constituted according to the same Augustine Confession, did within a few years
prosecute the Footsteps of these Men; as also John Heari^k Harby, Minister of
a Church of the same Confession at Trarback on the Mosel; both of them men of
that Industry and Conversation, as to be able easily to keep up the Fame of
their great Learning and Probity, and not be thought to seek after the Favor
and Glory of Men herein; these Men did, in their Public Sermons, Discourses,
and Private Exercises, bend all their Endeavors this way, that they might
extirpate and root up these Evil Weeds and Thistles from Men's minds. Spener
began his Work with those things, which did more immediately incu^ into the
Senses of Men, and which seemed to imitate, and have relation to Popery, that
was so hateful to the Lutherans; by reason of the dull, foolish and profane
Rites and Ceremonies that are therein, and such as are not barely estranged
from true Worship and Sanctity; to wit, in their Churches and Public
Assemblies, and particularly in their Pompous Tables, Organs, Altars, Priestly
Garments, etc. And from hence he proceeds to other things, which men do measure
by use alone, and mere handling, so as that a pretty number of People, in a
short space of time, did, by his means, not only Loath all that Pompousness in
their Churches, but also laying aside many other external Rites, applied
themselves to Exercise the true Faith and Life of Christians: But this was not
all, but they did often times meet together in their Houses, and so did
instruct and exhort one another; every one, as well as they were enabled out of
the Holy Scripture to follow the same Sincere Life and Faith, and to do all the
Duties incumbent upon them toward Men: Hereby also in the same manner, by his
Instructions, did so stir up and affect the Minds and Consciences of his
Hearers, that very many of them, in those places, and adjacent to the Rhine,
did often times meet together in one place; and this they did assume as a
common Rule and constant Practice among them, that laying aside those
Discourses which concerned Questions and Disputes, or idle and unnecessary
Enquiries, which were more fit for the Schools than for the Formation of
Manners, they only employed themselves herein, that having come to know and
discern Christian Truths, without which, Faith and a Christian Life cannot be;
they insisted upon the ways and means how to attain to this Life and Faith, and
Instructed and Exhorted one another, in showing and exercising of the Same.
Spener is called from Francford to Drosden, into the Elector's Court, there to
exercise the Office of Chief Preacher; and seeing there were many things to be
Corrected and Amended in the Court, and that this could not be done by
gentleness and pleasant Artifice, but by a Tragic Gravity and severity, and
that there was not, besides this, such a number and choice of then for the
purpose, which withal, required one endued with much Religion and Goodness; in
the mean time, there were some Students in the University of Lipsick, designed
and appointed for the Ministerial Office (they were only two at first) that
began to stir in this matter, and this they made the chief exercise of their
capacities, this was the bent of their studies, that being themselves stored
with this knowledge, and exercised in this sort of Life, they might afterward
teach their Auditors committed to their care, the like documents and stir them
up to the same; and therefore they daily instructed their people and held their
Assemblies, and did not only urge their Discourses from the
Scripture-Authority, but did draw out from the proper and Genuine Fountain of
Divine writ, (...) excellent order, the meaning of one or more places, and the
mind of the Holy Spirit, and the Energy of Faith and true Piety, and adopted
them to the certain uses and cases of Men, every one according to the
Conscience and Experience he had in such a thing, and setting this for a rule,
in these words to be observed by all, That the sacred Books of the Old and New
Testament, are to be read* expounded and converted to various uses, to the
glory of the sacred Trinity, to the increase of the New Man, of holy
Instruction, and exegetical Divinity, as also to an example of an holy
Couversation. They were termed the Philobiblick Colleges. These Students
Endeavors and Studies were some time after imitated by others, and even by
such as were of greater years, and Masters themselves; so that some of them
handled the same with the Professors Consent, in the Public Auditories, in
their Academical Lectures; the Chief whereof were Augustus H. Francus, the
Disciple and Companion for a long time of Spener, and John L' Schadeus,
Francus's Chamberber-Fellow both of them Masters of Art, and Learned and
Eloquent. There was moreover a new Accession of Citizens, and of women too to
these Collegiates, who also encouraged their Pastors and Guides in Divine
Things, to the same work; but as for the most part it happens in such
Assemblies, there was in process of time so great a desire in some to frequent
these Colleges* that some Students declined to go to the Public and Private
Schools; some of the People would not go to the Churches, some despised them,
others went thither to partake only of the Lord's Supper sparingly, and some
disregarded all other ordinances and institutions in comparison of these
Congregations and Meetings. But these Students were for the most part persons
of a mean condition and of no fortune, and but of very indifferent Parts and
Learning, or only of such a plebean stamp, or late initiation into the
republic of literature, and that their ^^udition, as a natural Consequence and
Principal vice attending of it, was tumultuary, but Masters over Boys, and for
that reason seeming themselves to be capable to do any thing, yea, as, the
saying is, to hit the Crow in the Eye, whereof there is good store in that City
and Country; and the people, especially the women, were very rude and mean, who
every where followed the Crows through dirt and mire, and lived from hand to
mouth, and were in the mean time puffed up with the ostentation of being
honored and esteemed, and with some ensigns of a triffling glory. And tho some
of those Masters and Rulers, of whom I have just spoken, would not seem to be
of the like Sentiments and Act in the same manner as these Men, yet they did
not gainsay, when it was not expedient they should be silent; wherefore that
silence of theirs did at length bring them under no small suspicion, and they
were adjudged to be not much remote and distant from those extremes. Whence
they became at first envied and hated by the other Students, Citizens,
Teachers, Professors and Pastors, then they put an ill Construction upon all
their doings and spoke evilly concerning them, and last of all, became to be
interdicted and prohibited: But those Counsels were found to be of no effect;
for the more the one was enraged and bent to suppress, and utterly to
extinguish the Sect the more did the other hold to it stiffly and obstinately.
But least too great a disturbance might be wrought and troubles ensue thereon,
for the further avoiding of danger, some of the Colleges were dissolved or
diminished: While these things were in Agitation H. Francus, and some other
Students came according to the Citation of the Senate, and order of the
Professors of Lipsick into that City; where each of them were by some delegated
for that purpose Interrogated and wearied with innumerable captious and
fallacious questions in reference to their sentiments concerning every Article
of their Religion, and what it was they did reject, who having therein
abundantly satisfied their inquisitors, they were dismissed, upon condition that
they carried themselves so as to have a regard both to their Dignity and
Advantage, and neither publicly nor privately to teach the people any
otherwise. Next year, there were Letters sent from the great Consistory or
Ecclesiastical Senate from Dresden, of which Consistory the Elector is
Principal, to the Academical Senate of Lipsick, wherein they were Commanded to
Abolish all such Colleges, and that he should commit all that made resistance
to Prison, as a just punishment of their Contumacy and for a check upon their
further opposition; which thing struck such a fear into some of them, that they
lost all their courage and withdrew from the whole assembly and their former
purposes. But others on the other hand with great constancy and contumacy,
proceeding from the greatness and hardiness of their minds, persisted and went
on in their design and purpose. And others of these thought it their duty to
proceed unweariedly in the reformation and to apply themselves to that work
with all their might, but to Act with Moderation not by Popular Tumults, but
that so necessary a thing was not to be omitted* for all the many enviers,
adversaries and enemies they had and what injuries, Inconveniences and Dangers
soever befell them. Others moreover would have it be looked upon as a firm and
stable way and method to meet together, and instruct privately among any sorts
of men, whether Citizens, Men or Women; neither did they think they ought to
depart thence, tho they were never so much hated, and suffered never so many
afflictions; so those who stood in opposition to them, thought fit, before that
they had gathered greater strength, to deal with them another way: I shall, in
the first place, speak of the more maddest sort of them; for thus it was, That
those who were more moderate of them (and they were all of them followers of
Sener, or most part of them) did prove their design and enterprise, and
refelled the wrath and persecution of their Adversaries against 'em, and
together with the calumnies and furious outrages of some toward 'em, by saying
and writing, That they fully Embraced the Doctrine and Confession of Luther, (as
he was always in the mouths of the Adversaries, and the only heavenly and
Divine Man in his Doctrine), and of the Lutherans; and that their Desire was
only this, That in reference to the Modes and Propositions, some Chapters might
be more clearly and explicitly taught: such as these are, The Knowledge of God
and ones self in his own mind, the Knowledge of Justification and
Sanctification, and the Connection and Cohseren^y of both, as also of
Regeneration. Then Self-Denial, the Life of Faith, the Power of Christ in such
as are his, Christian Prayers, Christian Perfection, the Union of the Soul with
Christ, and the Operation of Christ in it. And this was their Censure
concerning the Life and Conversation of Men, That Men are ^^^^^rably slothful,
languid and cold in all Christian (...); and if they do any thing, they are
wonderfully taken up and pleased with their own enter^^^^ Works, and trust in
their own performances, and (...) those things that are of a solid Faith and
tr^e Piety; and bewailed, besides, the intermission and neglect of
Ecclesiastical Discipline.

Lastly, They added, That the Ministers and Pastors of Churches, did not, as
they ought to have done, discharge their Functions in instructing and stirring
up their Hearers to these more necessary Duties, neither in their Sermons, nor
Catechisings; and that the Professors and Doctors in the Schools, did not
instruct, encourage, form and prepare their Students for these things; and the
Students did not take care to apply their Minds thereunto, yea, that they
rather thought the same to be almost a Disgrace unto them, and so contenting
themselves in this manner with the instruction they receive, and sticking fast
to their former youthful Ways and Practices, the same evil Disposition being
still ripe in them, and the remembrance of their preceding Life not
obliterated, and only filled with a vain noise of Philosophy, but void of the
Spirit and any inward Experience, they apply themselves to the Ministry; And
when by these Arts, they come as it were to their own Possessions, then they
deliver from the Pulpit what they have learnt of Men, and strenuously apply
themselves to be skillful at Words only, to handle the Tongue, etc. and if they
attain to the knack of it, they discourse copiously of some Word or Sentence,
but with no Argument, no subject Matter, that tends to Ingenerate Piety, as
Declaimers do in the Schools, or Petty-Foggers in Courts of Judicature, and
Places all their Duty herein, and so finish it; but otherwise take little care
of their Auditors, but of themselves are very tender and nice, and their
Families live deliciously, and they esteem nothing more honorable and
desirable than this. On the other hand, their Enemies lay a long Catalogue of
foul Errors to their Charge, and send them up and down every where, and so
recount them all, and confute them in the Chairs and Auditories of the
Universities, and Churche^, before the Students and People, who at least are of
themselves inclined; and when there is so great a stress laid upon it, to run
altogether headlong thereunto, so as to take all things in a perverted Sense,
and to entertain a most ill Opinion of those Men. And that the Sect might be
the better known, and a summary given of their Errors, and the greatness and
horridness of their Faults, they gave those Men the Name of Pietists, and the
Sect it self they dignified with the Appellation of Pietism, which name those
Men in the mean time looked upon to be their Honor and Glory, these their
Enemies put upon them as a mark of their Crime, and a term of Ignominy and
Reproach, as if they thought all Vices were to be couched under this one alone;
And the Envy and Rage of some proceeded so far, that if any one explained who
those Pietests were, and how this name might rightly and properly be taken,
they inveighed also against this, as a most horrid Wickedness, and a capital
Crime. An Example, where you have in these four Verses, written in the German
Tongue, but turned for your better Information into Latin, and are as
follows: Quum nomen Pictesta omnem sic personat orbe^^,
Quis Pictista? Studens noscere verba Dei;
Et Juxta hanc normam vi am emendare laborans
Illius, at quantum hoc, Christianumque decus.


But that these Men might be distinguished by their proper Forms and
Characters, they called them also by the Names of the Illuminate, Cathari,
Puritans, etc. as being those who were full of their own most proud but vain
Conceit, or boasted themselves to be the only Persons that had the Light, when
in the mean time they had not a spark of Knowledge and Truth, and in their
whole life seemed to be so pure and perfect, when as in truth there was an
Ulcer within them, which in time would break out, that in public, continually
carried a counterfeit face of Goodness, but did in the mean time defile
themselves secretly, and in their Recesses, with the most notorious Vices: This
was the common Opinion, Byword, and Laughing Stock of all, that these Men were
Imitators of the old Enthusiasts, and the Inventors of new; That they were like
the Quakers, and that they followed their Doctrine and Discipline throughout;
when, at the same time, all, or the most part of them, scarce knew what the
Opinions, Constitutions, and Heresies of the Quakers were; which thing is
evident from Spener's Book in the German Tongue, wherein that Person defending
his own Cause, and as to Quakerism, going about to remove that suspicion Men
had of him upon that account, while he quotes the Opinions of the Quakers, he
alleged them in such a manner, that he, to whom the Opinion of the Quakers was
known, understood at the first Reading of them, (saving the Man's Honor) that
he had not known what the Quakers meant: And so grievously were these Men dealt
with, after they had thus loaded them with these obnoxious Names, that those
Students who would not leave these ways, and who from their Dependencies were
called the Elector's Scholars, were deprived of their Stipends, others of all
hopes of Preferment by Men of their own Functions, who most of them betook
themselves to the Territories of the Elector of Brandenburg, who granted these
Distressed Men not only a place of Refuge, but also whatever they had occasion
for; and did moreover assign to their principal Doctors a place in the
University of Halen, that every one might instruct his Pupils as he pleased.

Now Horbius, upon the French War, if that may be called a War, wherein there
has been such unheard of Devastations made, and Barbarities committed, went
from Trarback to Wishenheim upon the Neckar, and from thence to Hamburg, and
there was made Minister of St. Nicholas's Church; where, according to his
wonted manner, he applied himself to instruct his hearers in true Piety, and
particularly in his Catechisings, to instill his Principles into the Youth, and
even young Children* but soon after, the Fame and Dignity of Horbius stirred
his two Colleagues, whose Eyes and Ears he had offended above the rest of the
People, to Envy and Cavil at him; as if Horbius brought hither also these
odious Precepts and Opinions of Enthusiasts and Quakers; which accusation, it is
strange too believe, how it increased, after that Horbius had distributed a
little Book among those that were Catechized by him, not written by himself,
but by another, concerning the Rudiments of Christian Education; for when the
elder of the two Colleagues aforesaid, who became Horbius's Adversaries, (there
is no occasion to name his Name, seeing its common in the Mouths of all Men)
had concluded with himself that the Book was Writ by a Pietist, he immediately
proscribes it as an Heretical Book, and sets Horbius forth to his Auditors; and
by his Rhetorical Flourishes, as if he were an Heretical Doctor, a Quaker, and
such an one as ought to be expelled out of the City. And as there is nothing so
easily given out, and harder stopped, nothing nearer received and further
spread, then Lies, and Men's Evil Reports, concerning their Guides and Rulers;
so the same report in the twinkling (as it were) of an Eye, without any more
ado, did so dilate it self not only through the whole City, but all the Country
over, so as that Horbius was known by no other Name than the Quaker-Doctor.
Moreover, the rude multitude, and the most abject sort of Men, some of them
through a stupid Ignorance, as being not able to distinguish the first
Principles of the Christian Doctrine; others, partly through Ignorance, and
partly through an uncertain Authority and blind Guidance of other Men, as if
they were Slaves or Brute-Beasts; Some seeing themselves unable to try the
thing it self, and being very much afraid of the Evil, least that also should
fall upon them, so referring the first beginning thereof to one which they much
suspected; And lastly, others through a blinded prejudice, and accustomed to
raillery, and to do ill turns, received Horbius every where with Hissing and
Reproaches, railed at him, and did really persecute the Man; so as that unless
his Life had been preserved, through the faithfulness of honest Men, and they
his Friends too, he had through the fury and violence of those his Enemies been
certainly deprived of it. Wherefore, when Horbius saw, that his hopes was
overborn by the Malice and Envy of so many Men, and that there was nothing now
left for him but Dangers, he chose rather to forsake his Ministry and the City,
and by giving way rather than by resisting, to break those impetuous Spirits:
For seeing that all the rest, except those two Colleagues aforesaid, stuck to
Horbius's side, there was at that time very great Dissension and Strife between
those Pastors who stood in opposition to Horbius and those that were on his
part; and that by Sermons, Pamphlets, and Letters, every one according to his
Faculty in Speaking, or Writing, putting forth his utmost in defense of his
side, and in opposition to his Enemies, and placing the victory in the last
action, until at length, the matter was brought to that pass by the
Interposition and Authority of the Senate, Magistrates, and Supreme Power of
the City, (a special and principal Remedy for such sort of divided Men and
Assemblies) that all the quarrel and difference in Words and Writings was taken
off by an Amnesty, as they call it, or General Act of Indemnity; and each of
them were to forgive what was past, as much as all good Men hoped it would be
so. It Is sad to consider what a vast number of things have been written all
this time, through all Germany that is of the Lutheran Religion, not in the
Latin Tongue, save a very few, but in the German Language, that so now the
whole Dispute which so many Learned Men could not find an end to, should be
equally committed to the Judgment of the Learned and Unlearned, and especially
be the entertainment of the vulgar and abject sort of Mankind, whose Judgment,
they who thus contended, are so far from expecting, that they even Despise, and
desire not to have them named with them. In the mean time we must pretermit,
that the Quakers abiding elsewhere, and very well knowing and retaining an
account, and the particulars of all their own Conveniences, neglected nothing
wherein they thought there was any thing to their Advantage, that might be done
in this Commotion and Division of these Men. They had certainly in those
places, at this time, a certain Hope wrought in them, and their Spirits were
raised with some joy, that it might come thereby to pass, that there should be
such Persons that would Judge more favorably of the Doctrine of the Quakers,
and that perhaps they would apply their Minds to them, the Words of their
Epistle in an Anniversary Meeting at London the preceding year, writ to all
the Churches of the Quakers, bear witness hereunto, which were to this purpose;
That they had Thoughts, and some Hopes, that the falling out of the Lutherans
in those places amongst themselves, might tend to a farther Discovery and
Promotion of the Truth in those Parts.

Moreover, there was in Germany, as it were, three sorts of Pietists (pardon
the expression.) One, which I have described, consists of those who sought, and
pressed nothing else, but sincere Religion and true Piety; and the greatest
part of those are among the Learned and better sort of men, through Saxony and
all Germany.

Another sort of them was that cried, That the Church was much Corrupted, and
loved Piety; but such, who themselves on the other hand, stagger not a little
in the Faith and True Religion, and these same are commonly less moderate and
more violent in Celebrating their Assemblies together. These came near the
Weiglian Sect, and such sort of Fanatical People that sprung up about an
hundred year ago, and not dead in all that intermediate time in Misnia and
other Countries about, who imagined, as if it had been an Opinion not yet
received in the Church, and yet necessarily to be delivered, That there is one
certain Divine Seed in all Men, and that God and Christ do so infuse themselves
into Men, that they are one. Moreover, That man becomes God and Christ, and
that so he ought to Worship God and Christ in himself, and a great deal more of
such stuff: Which Tenants, seeing they were of themselves very obscure and
incomprehensible, or only an empty sound without any Sense, they by their
winding cants did yet further involve and make more intricate; and these men
dreamt of I know not what Millenary Kingdom and Golden Age, and continued
watching among all who should be no longer Mortal, in which Kingdom all things
should be restored to their former state and condition, and the Blessed abound
with all Spiritual and Corporal Pleasures and Delights, and should be satisfied
at a Thought in what they desired or Wished, from the Divine and Celestial
Affluence of the Holy Spirit; wherefore seeing, that they now thought the same
time was at hand. They so settled their Rules, that laying aside all
Controversies among Christians, they now with one mind, by mutual instructions
and exhortations, looked to that Kingdom, prepared themselves for it, and
invited other men unto it, and made it their business so to do.

The Third sort of them was that which may be called Behmists or Teutonists;
these called back, as it were, Jacob Behman, the Shoemaker of Garlingen in
Silesia, from the Dead, who was called Tutonick, and did both Broach those
Opinions, which had been really delivered by him, as also those Errors that had
been falsely laid upon him, and ascribed to him, yea, and horrid and hellish
Blasphemy, and cried them up as worthy of all Esteem and Glory. But before I
give the particulars hereof, I do not think it absurd to say somewhat
concerning the Doctrine and Writings of this Behman, and the rather, because of
the great variety of Opinions, and Observations of Learned and famous Men
concerning them. He had wrote and published in the German Tongue, some Books,
or rather Pamphlets, wherein (as he would persuade himself) he discovered many
things necessary to be known, or the Foundations of true Religion, and Piety,
in dark words, disjoined from the usual and known names, and such as he that
would, could not perceive and apprehend; producing some of his own, and adding,
as his own invention, some other things which he had heard or road else where:
But when it came to pass, as it often happens, that those Germans, especially
the Lutherans, who Assumed to themselves the Appellation of Learned Men, and
who were eager in a search after Knowledge, Science and Truth, and durst attempt
any thing; and were already puffed up with their own and other men's Opinions
concerning the Excellency of their Learning, alight upon these Notions; these,
as coming nigh unto Behman's Principles, but looking upon them, yet to be
ruder, and as it were, but rough drawn, as being what he had only begun, they
go on to complete them; and from the Storehouse of their own Wisdom, build up,
and heap together many Opinions, but such as were Monstrous and Horrid, and
digest them into books and Publish them, and render the Behman Name well known
in Germany, Holland and England, by their writing in those several Languages:
Some things also they Published in Latin; and they prove and extol the whole
with a wondrous Character, as if they were Golden Books, and to be got all by
Heart, by those who followed the Christian Religion, and loved their own
Everlasting Salvation. In the mean, as every Man has his Freedom to Judge, there
were various Judgments made concerning the Writings of Jacob Behman himself;
some thinking moderately concerning them; and tho there were some Light things
and mistakes in them yet they adjudged there was no Heresy contained in them,
but others again determined otherwise, that they were very Heretical Writings;
to which some added also, that they had been all written by a Man, who if he
was not stark Mad, was yet highly disturbed in his Mind and Understanding, and
that he himself had afterward confessed the same thing, when he came to his
right Mind, and so at length by confessing and bewailing his own Temerity and
unconsiderateness, as indeed it was highly to be Rejected, as being foolish,
and unfruitful as to any good; yet his Offense pardoned by his Countrymen the
Silesians, wherein, because the Fame of the Man has certainly been injured, I
do not think it impertinent to declare in a few words, what his case was, and
how terminated, as to the Event thereof; therefore seeing there were such
various Opinions concerning this Man made by the World; the Elector of Saxeny
caused him to come to Dr^s^^^^, and there to present himself, and be Examined,
and stand to the Judgment of certain Divines, who after they had seriously and
attentively Examined him, and tried his Sentiments also as to every Article of
faith, and what he meant in his Books which he had Published; they not only
Absolved him of Heresy, but did moreover acknowledge he had in him some singular
gift from God, and dismissed him in Peace; which Examination and Matter of Fact
when Anthony Wock, who kept the Princess Archicus about 15* years ago, took
^otice of in his History of Dresden; and that he transmitted the same Work to
Noremburg, to be printed and Published there; the Censors of Books, who were
better pleased that this passage concerning Behman should not be known, and
that the Work of Dishonor, already put upon him, might remain, quite struck
out this Part of the History, that related to Behman's Examination, and the
event thereof.

But (...) that in the great Dissension and Contention between the Ministers of
Hamburg, those Men would not also leave Behman alone but condemned him as an
Heretic, Ph. J. Spener, who judged more favorably concerning him, consulting
the Man's Credit, and fearing least an Error once seizing upon the Minds of
Men, should by continuance attain to a suspicion of Truth, and utterly take
away the Man's good Name, which was hitherto in suspense, did in a certain
Writing of his, in opposition to the Hamburgers, show the whole matter as it
was transacted at Dresden, according to what W^ck had wrote, and affirm the
same, as having seen and read the Original Writing himself, taken out of the
Elector's Archives; and who indeed is a Person worthy of Commendation and
Credit. But Behman returning into his own Native City, when after an hard
Sickness, he drew near unto his last end, he had the Lord's Supper Administered
to him by the Minister of the place, according to the manner of the Lutheran
Church; and when he had there paid his last Debt to Nature, he was by the
Magistrates command honorably Buried, and a Funeral Sermon Preached for him.
And now to return to the matter I was upon, the Results of these men's
Inventions and Toil, some of them, interpreting Behman's Writings one way, some
another way; and while in the mean time they endeavored to increase, and also
to amend them, basely depraving of them, was this (as to the Substance thereof;
for there is no need to relate the singular Distinctions therein, as there is
no occasion to se^ down this stuff it self, but for these men's sakes who cease
not to blab it out, and to breath it into, and infect the unwary with their
stinking breath, and for them who are not aware of it, but when once they
discern it, will hate and shun the same for ever, that God is one Essence, but
a Threefold Principle in a Successive Order: That he is the Spring of, and does
influence all things; to wit, a fire, wherein there is the Light, Understanding
and Wisdom of God, which is the Son of God; and Oil, wherein that Light of God
burns, which is the holy Spirit. And that in this manner all and singular
things are for God, of his own proper Nature, and that of Three Principles,
which Three Principles are in Nature called by the Name of Sulphur, Salt and
Water. Moreover, That God created all Things in Number, Weight and Measure,
which so again consist in various Divine Delicacies, especially in the Rational
Creatures, as being those in whom God has, as it were, created himself, so as
to divide a Particle of his own certain Quality into New Creatures.

Lastly, That Man restored, shall enjoy the Element of Gracious Light, which
Element is Christ himself, and that the holy Spirit shall rest upon him for his
further Vivification. It Is needless to add the rest.

These same Sentiments of these Men, which I believe they acquired by revealing
upon, but not understanding the Platonic Writings, by polishing and mixing of
them, they heaped up together into a Book. And this, which is not Christian
Theology, but is uttered by men that think themselves in their Right Wits,
rather a War of the Giants against Heaven; and in reference to the matter
thereof, not only unconceivable and horrible* but so as to the words also, was
esteemed by these men (among whom, tho there were some, who tho their Noddles
were not souud altogether, yet there were certainly others of sound
Understanding, and in their right Wits; yea, active, learned and industrious,
laying aside these Sentiments and Speeches) as some very sub^il and sublime
Contemplation and Knowledge of God, if any such could be in the World. This
they called Mystical Theology: they made so much account thereof, that unless
any one had attained to it, held it and professed it, he knew nothing of Divine
Matters. If any denied it, they adjudged him by no means capable of Salvation.
On the other hand, their Adversaries looked upon this their Theology to be so
ghastly, and even terrible to be uttered; and upon all the Writings which these
Teutonicks put forth, with so hard (...) Censure, as if written not with Ink,
but with a Pe^ dipped in the bitterest Gall, and guided by the Devil, and so as
if they contained nothing else but a Collection of the most vile, foolish and
base things, with idle words and dotages, and they adjudged him that agreed
thereunto, and approved of them, worthy to be expelled, and far enough removed
from all Christian Community, seeing they forbad their people to read, or as
much as to look upon those Writings; and so there was not so much as place
allowed these men in these provinces: The Principal Leaders, and Ensign-bearers
of these new Pietists, were certain Doctors of Wirtemburg, whose Doctrine was
scattered not only among their Scholars, who constantly heard them, and
followed them, and therefore easily stuck to their Precepts, and became
themselves like unto them, but also among many others, who yet while they were
carried with a desire alone to attain to Godliness, were called by the only
Name of Pietists, and ingenuously took upon them to follow the Party of Horbius
and Spener; insomuch that now upon the Rhine and where the river Lip
discharges her self into the same at Wesel, and the places adjacent toward
Cleve, many even of our Churches did also so embrace this mystical Theology,
some according to the Weigelian, some the Tentonick mode, and did so vigorously
promote it, cherish such as received it with so much Ardency, that they began
to unite and gather together, so as that our Divines had no small task upon
them for to instruct and teach them better, that they might not withdraw from
our Churches. And there is no occasion here to relate how much vexation and
trouble their Ministers, and other good Men had in Holland, both from the old
Weigelian family, and from this new brood of Teutonicks; seeing this is so well
known there and in every bodies mouth; but this is not to be past over so far
as it has relation to the affairs of the Quakers; among these new mystical Men
there was one John Jacob Zimmerman Pastor of the Lutheran Church in the Dutehy
of Wirtemburg, a Man skilled in Mathematics and, saving what he had Contracted
of these erroneous opinions, had all other excellent endowments of mind, to
which may be added the temperance of his Life, wherein he was inferior to none,
and who was of considerable fame in the world; Who when he saw there was
nothing but great danger like to hang over himself and his Friends; he invites
and stirs up through his own hope about sixteen or seaventeen Families of these
sort of Men, to prefer also an hope of better things tho it were dubious before
the present danger, and forsaking their Country which they through the most
precipitous and utmost danger, tho they suffered Death for the same, could not
help and relieve as they supposed, and leaving their Inheritance, which they
could not carry along with them, to depart and betake themselves into other
parts of the world, even to Pensilvania, the Quakers Country and there divide
all the good and the evil that befall them between themselves, and learn the
Languages of that People, and Endeavor to inspire Faith and Piety into the
same Inhabitants by their words and examples which they could not do to these
Christians here. These agree to it, at least so far as to try and sound the
way, and if things did not go ill, to fortify and fit themselves for the same.
Zimmerman, having yet N. Koster for his Colleague, who was also a famous Man,
and of such severe manners that few could equal him, writes to a certain Quaker
in Holland who was a Man of no mean Learning, and very wealthy, very bountiful
and liberal toward all the poor, pious and good. That as he and his followers
and friends designed, (They are the very words of the Letter which is now in my
Custody). To depart from these Babilonish Coasts, to those American
Plantations, being led thereunto by the guidance of the Divine Spirit, and that
seeing that all of them wanted wordly substance, that they would not le^ them
want Friends, but assist them herein, that they might have a good Ship well
provided for them to carry them into those places, wherein they might mind this
one thing, to wit to show with unanimous consent, their Faith and Love in the
Spirit in converting of People, but at the same time to sustain their bodies by
their daily Labor. So great was the desire, inclination and affection of this
Man toward them, that he forthwith promised them all manner of assistance, and
performed it and fitted them with a Ship for their purpose, and did out of that
large Portion of Land he had in Pensilvania, assign unto them a matter of two
thousand and four hundred Acres, for ever of such Land as it was, but such as
might be manured, imposing yearly to be paid a very small matter of rent upon
every Acre, and gave freely of his own and what he got from his friends, as
much as paid their Charge and Passage, amounting to an hundred and thirty
pounds sterling; a very great gift, and so much the more strange, that that
same Quaker should be so liberal, and yet would not have his name mentioned, or
known in the matter. But when these Men came into Holland they Sailed from
thence directly for Pensilvania; Zimmerman seasonably dies, but surely it was
unseasonable for them, but yet not so, but that they all did cheerfully pursue
their Voyage, and while I am writing hereof, I receive an account, that they
arrived at the place they aimed at, and that they all lived in the same house,
and had a public Meeting three times every week, and that they took much
pains, to teach the blind people to become like unto themselves, and to conform
to their examples: This Commotion and Disturbance made among the Lutherans, has
been not only noted here for a Commemoration of the present time, but for a
perpetual memorial of that people and I shall return to the Quakers, and
briefly say something of their passing into other Countries and the most remote
parts of Europe, and so shall conclude this book and the whole work therewith,
and this we must not and ought the lest to pass over; because they also
wonderfully extol, but in words and Writing, the doing of these Travelers and
Itinerants, almost beyond belief, not indeed untruly, but yet with so
flattering an Estimation of these men's Labors and Troubles, which they
suffered for their Religion, and had returned unto them for those Benefits and
Rewards, to wit, for the Propagating of their Religion, and the increase of it
in those Countries; and unless I mistake (I confess I may mistake) I see that
in process of time, as these men are very fond of their own Glory, of whom,
some, notwithstanding their external Plainness and Modesty, swell with the
leaven of Spiritual Pride, that they will esteem all the sayings of their
Predecessors as Oracles, and their Actions, Miracles, and so Enhance and
Magnify them as such, and Boast and Glory that the same have done very great
things every where, and memorable to all Posterity. A little before those first
Emisaries went into Holland, and the Adjacent Countries, Edward Buroughs and
Sam. Fisher went to Dunkirk, a Seaport Town in French Flanders, to show there
to the People the Ignorance and Superstition of the Papacy.

But when they found none upon whom they thought they might work any thing,
they shortly, without any delay, return for England again, flying from the
Storm, which they saw hanging over their Heads, and seeing that they could do
no good for the promotion of their Religion, they were a^raid to do the same an
injury in other things, by their own misfortunes, sufferings and perhaps
destruction

The same year did William Cotton go to Calai^, a City on the Seacoast of
France, six miles distant from Dunkirk, with the same design as the other two,
had, beforementioned, but not so skilful in the Language of the Country, where
entering into the great Church, and viewing all things frowningly, but holding
his Peace, he said at last that he was a sort of a new Guest, and when after
some time, he was known to be an Englishman, he was led to the House of a
certain Noble Scotch-man, and being asked what he was, he did not deny, but
that he was so and so. There when the foresaid Scotch-man made himself to be
his Interpreter to the People, Cotton speaks a few words concerning the
Idolatry and Corrupt Manners of the People; which when he had done, and that
they contrived to do him an Injury; he no sooner came to hear of it, but
bethinking himself, he ought to take heed, and to reserve his life for another
necessity of dying, as his Friends before had done, he suddenly, and without
any manner of delay, that he might disappoint the Consultations and
Contrivances of his Enemies, flies, and makes the best of his way back again
into England* George Ball was the only person that penetrared into France, and
so that he never returned thence again, and so it is uncertain and unknown what
he did, or what became of him; The Quakers think he perished, somewhere in
Prison: None other after thesemen, went on this design into France. St. Crisp
tried this Experiment in that horrid and more than barbarous Persecution of the
whole Reformed Churches in that Kingdom, and in the dispersion of so many
Thousands of men through other Reformed Countries, of which we have not yet
seen an end, that he wrote a book, and took care to send and deliver it to
those men, to try whether he could a^^ect some of them, so as to entertain a
good Opinion of the Quakers Religion, and join themselves to their Sect. It Is
not to be doubted but that Book had its first beginning from Crisp; but because
it was written in French, as it was to the French; and that Crisp was ignorant
of that Language, or not well skilled therein; it^s certain it was Translated,
and believed to have been much increased, and published b^ another hand. And
it is no crime to think, seeing the Style is so like unto that way of w^i^ing
used by Pe^n, who is still the choicest Writer amongst the Quakers, that he was
that same Artificer.

It contains in it nothing concerning Religion; It only puts those French in
mind to consider with themselves, wherefore God suffered such Calamities to
befall them; whether they were not the Consequent of their Soft and Depraved
Education, and Love to Earthly things, and blind Obedience toward those, to
whose care they committed the Direction of their Consciences; then that they
should weigh what Good, what Progress in Sanctity of Life those Calamities
wrought in them, which they endured with so much Lamentation. Lastly, That not
contenting themselves with that Reformation which hitherto was instituted
amongst them, they should go on, and do their endeavor to Finish and
Consummate this begun Work. But the Book was writ both in Respect to the
Sentences, Phrases, and words very different from the English Mode, and not
only from that of the Quakers, and to Conform to the Method and way of Writing
in the French Tongue at this day, when that Language is Arrived to its highest
Maturity, that there could be nothing in my Judgment, writ more neatly, and
more congruous to the Genius and Temper of those People: This Book the Quakers
distributed gratis every where through the Countries, where those French
Refugees had Fled, and in some places as the People were coming out of their
Churches. But there was not one found that we have heard of, or came to
understand that was induced by this Book to fall in with the Quakers.

Hester Bidley relates this Passage to have happened to her self a little
before this time, which every one is at liberty to believe as he pleases: She
went to the late Q. of England, of happy memory, and complains to her, That it
was very great grief of Heart to her, as she was a Woman, and a Christian, that
so great and tedious a War was waged between Christians, and such great
Calamities and Slaughters of Men, which happened every day, pierced her Heart;
and therefore she Exhorted the Queen to endeavor, at least, to bend her study
this way, for to end this War, that Peace may be made, and so gain great
respect and affection from all. The Queen, who was of a most free and good
Temper, having given her her Answer, she further desires, That the Queen would
grant her leave to go over into France, saying she would advise and speak to
the French King about the same affair, and would have a Letter from the Queen
to the same effect. This the Queen refused, and diswades her from the said
enterprise, urging that such a Journey and Business would be very difficult and
dangerous: yet for all this the woman through her importunity and earnest
solicitation, got a pass from the said Queen's Secretary; and seeing that a
short space of time is tedious to a longing person, she forthwith sets out, and
after various traverses comes into France and goes to Versailles, and there
coming to know that the late King of England was there, she at first applies
her self unto him, as to one to whom he had been some years before known, upon
the like occasion, and delivers unto him the Letter written by her to the
French King; the substance whereof was this; That she being stirred by God, the
Supreme King of all, that Illuminates this World, prayed the King to make his
Peace with God, and with the Nations he was at War with, and put a stop to such
an overflowing and Rivulet of Blood that was shed. King James having seen the
Epistle, sends the Woman to the Duke of Orleance, to whom when she had come,
she delivered the Letter, and said withal, that she must speak with the King;
the Duke agrees to deliver the Letter, but said she must not speak with the
King; whereupon, the Woman full of Grief and Lamentation, and with shedding
many Tears, did at last break forth into these words, Am I permitted to speak
with the King of Kings an^ may not I speak with Man? Should I tell this to our
People in England, they would believe what they are all of them already
persuaded of, that the King of France is so high and proud that none can speak
with him. Which passage, when the King came to understand, he, in about three
days after, grants her liberty to come to his Presence; the Room was full of
Princes and Princesses, Prelates and great Men, the King Enters the same, and
having seen the Woman, speaks to her, with his Hat under his Arm; whereupon she
asked whether he was the King, the King answers, yes. Then said she, What is
the meaning that the King is bare, it is not the fashion of the Kings of
England. Upon this the King puts on his Hat, so the Woman run over briefly what
she had before written in the Letter, in the King's Presence, to whom the King,
with a Kingly Gravity and Brevity, replied: But Woman, I desire Peace, and seek
Peace, and would have Peace, and tell the Prince of Orange so, So in envy and
spite do they in France call William King of great Britain to this very time,
wherein now for fear they begin to acknowledge and own his Regal Majesty in
their pompous words and names; this K. I say, a K. so constituted according to
all Divine and Human Laws, that if any one would decipher a Lawful and Just K.
he can do it no better than by defining of it under the name of this; when as
at the same time that name of Prince of Orange, has been throughout this Age,
and before throughout the World, as Glorions and Venerable, as that of King,
and as much feared by Enemies. At these words the K. went his ways, and so did
the Woman likewise, and having got Passes from the King, goes to Holland, and
from thence returns for England, having, with all her endeavors, effected
nothing; and so far is the Woman's Account of her self, whom the Quakers think,
ought not to be mistrusted herein, because related by her self, of whose
Sinceriry and Honesty they make no manner of of doubt; but others think it a
thing more to be heeded, because the Woman did show the Letters delivered to
her, before the one signed by the Queen's Secretary, and the other by the
King's Command, and with his own Hand: Strange are the things which these Men
relate; and some Write concerning the Travels of Samuel Fisher, John Stubbs,
John Perrot, and John Love, Ministers of their Church, into Italy, and from
thence to Ionia, the Lesser Asia, and Smyrna, as also of others, and of some
Women's Journeys into those remote parts, as I know not through what difficult
places, and what great pains they took for the propagation of their Religion,
and how many Expeditions they went upon, as if they would view and enlighten
thoroughly all those Countries and Nations.

I shall only pursue these Men's Relations, as they refer to that same
expedition of mine formerly from Italy into Ionia, and what is worth
Remembrance shall be taken notice of briefly, and so calling to remembrance my
former Journey, and that same City, I mean Smyrna, I lived for some time in my
younger days, and was Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ our Lord; for so
pleasant and delightful are our past Labors, and the most pleasant thing most
unpleasant, if we may not some times speak of it, or at least remember it.
Those four Men which we have already named, arrived in Italy by Sea, and came
ashore at the Port of Leghorne, as it is now called, but formerly Portus
Herculeus, etc. There they delivered some of their Pamphlets to the Governor,
who delivered the same to the Inquisitors and Censors of Matters that appertain
to Religion, who, when they found nothing in them that belonged to the Popish
Religion, and that they had done nothing, for which by right they ought to be
dissatisfied with them, they dismiss them. They go forwards, and get to Venice,
and there offer their Pamphlets to the Doge, who holds the Chief Dignity in the
Republic, and from thence without stop go to Rome, the compendium of the whole
Papacy, and there see slightly and hastily the vast heap, and mass, of so many
things that are to be seen in that place, and having viewed them, leave them as
an evil Omen, and return without any delay to Venice from whence they came.
Then Perrote and Love take Shipping at this place, and go for Smirna, touching
all the way no Land, no Port, nor so much as any Shore; where, when they were
arrived, because they had an intention to go for Constantinople, when the
English Consul came to hear of it, and had wisely considered the Life, and
rough Demeanours of those Men, who knew not how to forbear, and to serve the
times, and so fearing least they should act somewhat rashly toward the
Emperor, that might tend not only to their own Inconveniency, but to the
Disadvantage of the English Nation, he sends them against their Wills back
again into Italy; And so when they arrived there they returned to Rome; while
they were at Rome, Love and Perrote being Men not able to hide their
Disposition, and moderate the same for some time, and in the place they were,
and to the Men they came amongst, and not willing to dissemble and form Lies;
when by this their Carriage they came to be known, what they were, and what
their Design was, they are by the Inquisitors thrown into Prison. Love died
under his Confinement, as some Monks declared, by Starving himself to Death;
but as afterward some of the Nuns reported, (so hard a thing it is to keep a
secret, most difficult when once blabbed out to suppress, for the more it is
concealed the more it is discovered) he was Murdered in the night; Perrote
continued some time in Prison, and was afterward set at liberty; About the
occasion of which Enlargement there was at first various Opinions, but
afterward there was no vain Suspicion, that, he being shut up in this place,
chose rather to go backward than forward in his Work, seeing that after his
return into England, he forsook the Quakers, and set himself directly against
them, drawing others also off along with him, and engaging of them to embrace
his new Opinions and Precepts: The other two being struck with fear, fled away.
And here I shall subjoin the Example of a London Youth, one George Robinson by
name: He when he had sailed from England, in a Merchant Ship to the end of the
Mediterranean, and arrived at Scanderoon; and from thence, as it is the way of
many that Travel those parts, as being a shorter and easier way, continued his
Journey toward the place which they call Jerusalem, with a design to see if he
could behold or effect any thing there that might be advantageous to his
Religion; Here he many ways discovered himself to be a Quaker; the which when
it came to the Monks and Popish Priests Ears they in their Monastery, which is
as it were the Storehouse and Treasury of all manner of Villainy, take Counsel
together, whereby to bring him to such a danger, from which there should be no
escape, and so put this villainous trick upon him. There was such a Law among
the Turks formerly, though not many years past, made, That, if any Christian
enter into any of their Churches, he is put to Death unless he redeem his Life
with the change of his Religion; which Law was made not by the invention of the
Turks themselves, but by the instinct of Ambassadors, and European Consuls on
those Coasts, who thought it to be their Prudence to provide in that manner,
least their Mariners, who are so serviceable to their Countries, but a ruffling
sort of Men, and prone to all impetuous and saucy Actions, should offer any
violence to the Churches and Porches of the Turks, and demean themselves
insolently upon that account, and that so from that foreign Evil, another worse
Evil arise, and befall the whole Nation; therefore that they might bring this
young Man into the utmost peril of his Life; they by their cunning
Machinations, order the matter so, as that he entered into one of their Mosques
or Churches: There the Turks seize him, and having got an Interpreter, which
sort of Men, who are of the Greek Nation, is never wanting, they threaten him,
that unless he would change his Religion, and forsake his Christianity, and
embrace the Mohammedan Way, they would burn him alive upon Camels Dung. He
chooses to Die; they prepare for it; but a Turkish Officer comes up to them
with great speed, who had found out by what Methods, Cunning, and Craft, they
had trappan'd the young Man, and cries to them, that they should be quiet, stop,
and see what they did; he shows them the whole matter, and so frees the young
Man, who was ready to Die, and almost Breathless, from the very Jaws of Death;
and after that, brought him to his own House, cherished and succored him, and
does as it were hug and adore for some time, as it is the manner of the Turks to
love, venerate, and esteem such worthy of eternal Monuments, for undergoing
such a Death, as to be Martyrs for their Religion; and at last commanded those
Papists and bald Monks, who had not an Hair of Humanity to conduct this young
Man, but one who was endued with a manly Nature and Fortitude into a place of
Safety, unless they were minded to incur the like danger, or some other
vindictive displeasure for the same. These manly Examples were imitated by some
of the Female Sex, both Wives and Virgins, not out of a Womanly precipitancy
and boldness, but upon a determinate Advice, taking good resolution of Mind,
and raising up the Fortitude of their Bodies, contemning the danger of their
lives, changing as it were their Sex, or being transmuted from Women to Men,
which says Pliny's credit, in reference to a Transmutation of this Kind, of
which sort L. Mutianu's showed a Boy at Smyrna, which he had seen. For so did
they steer their Course toward those same Places, and studied to obtain the
same Glory and Praise for the Preaching and Propagating of their Religion. Of
these Women, the first two were Catherine Evans and Sarah Chevench, who in the
year 61, went by Sea from London to Italy, to the intent they might get a Ship
to go from thence to Scanderoo^, and so on to Judeae; which Women, while that
the Ship as they sailed touched upon Malta, went out of the Ship and drew near
the Island: There they forthwith deliver their Pamphlets to such as they met
with, and in the mean time beholding and abhorring so many Signs of an
Idolatrous People, seeing they could not by their Tongue and Language express
the Sense they had of it to these men, (for they use partly the Italian, partly
the Turkish, and partly a mixed and medley Speech, as having been Conquered, and
the place inhabited by both People several times) they did it to them by Signs
and Nods, and other Gestures; being afterward brought to the Inquisitors, and
having an Interpreter assigned them, they refuse to do what the Papists would
have them; Dispute against them; and at last, reject and so despise their their
Worship, Adoration, and Religion, that the Malteses seized upon these
chattering Women, and threw them into Prison, and there kept them about two
years; and then at last thrust them out of their Island; There were two other
Maidens who were also English Women, one of which was afterward Married to a
Citizen, and eminent Merchant of Amsterdam, (for there is no need of naming her
or her Companion) that even as these Women had done, did with the same design
go by Sea as far as Scanderoon; but being there not permitted to go any further
by the English Consul, they did at length, with much Grief and Sorrow, return
to their own Country. I shall add another Example of the strange and ardent
Resolution of Women, which is almost too great, and therefore the less
Credible; and therefore every one may make Judgment thereof as he pleases; but
it is such as that the Quakers who have received it, and delivered the same unto
me, do so attest; that for all they have no other Testimony of the Truth of the
thing, no manner of witness, none conscious or judge of the same besides the
Woman her self, they say they doubt so little thereof as if the thing had been
done in their Sight: She was an English Maiden, her name Mary Fisher, who would
not be at rest before she went in Person to the great Emperor of the Turks, and
informed him concerning the Errors of his Religion, and the Truth of hers. It
was the same Emperor, who in my time, and long after, governed that Empire,
called by the name of Mahomet Han the 4th of the Name, a Monster of a Man, a
Deformed sight both in Body and Mind, as if one strove with the other how to
offend, of a black Complexion, with a flat broad Nose and Mouth, stupid,
logger-headed, cruel, fierce, as to his Aspect, and besides other marks upon
his Body, had a Scar beneath his Eyelid on the upper part of his Cheek, which
came from a wound and cruel Cut given him by his Brother's Guards and
Followers, a Testimony of his Boisterous and Cruel Disposition, because that
upon his Brother's Accession to that Throne, he attempted to take him off, and
cut off his Head with his own hands. Tho others have given a diffent Relation
of this matter, to wit, that this Mahomet's Father, because he had understood
by signs and Prophesies, that the Son should expel the Father from the Throne,
had endeavored to cut off this his Son, and that in the mean time, while the
Son was kept from falling into the hands of his Father, in this manner, he gave
him this mark of the mischief he designed for him. This passage has been
interlac'd here, not that there is any great connection between the matter in
hand and it, but for curiosity's sake, upon the account of them who are
desirous of Novelties; and that this Maiden might come to the sight of this
Man, speak with him, and put him in mind of the Justice of her cause, she goes
on board an English Ship, and Sails for Smyrna; but when the English Consul at
Smyrna came to know her design, he advises the young Woman, by all means to
forbear, but she persists in her Resolution, so the Consul not enduring that
she should expose her self to so many, and such great hazards and rash
undertakings, and being not able to divert her any other way from her purpose,
he puts her on board a Ship, and go her Conveyed to Venice: She having lost the
opportunity, but not the will she had to accomplish her design; after that she
had sailed up as high as Peloponesus, or the Morea, she made them put her a
shore on the next Land: There having got this freedom, and regarding neither
the circumstances of Nature, nor the weakness of her Sex, being all alone, and
ignorant of the Way and the Language, that she might avoid the danger of
falling into the hands of Thieves, she Travails on Foot all along the Shore and
Seacoast of the Morea, Greece, and Macedon; and from thence over the Mountains
and craggy places of Romania, or Thrace, as far as the River Mariza came to
Adrianople, where the Emperor did then continually reside, because he was very
much hated by those of Constantinople, and so he, in like manner, shunned the
presence and sight of them. There was a vast Retinue and Concourse of People
attending the Emperor, besides his Army, which lay there, so as that there was
scarce room enough to contain^ such a multitude. The Woman was lucky, though she
did not know it, to alight upon such Men, who though they are called by the name
of Turks, came not short, in their Kindnesses to Strangers, of any other
Nation, especially the nobler and better sort of them, (which I my self have
not so much understood as experienced) yea, do so respect and esteem
Women-kind, that if any injure them in Words or Actions, he runs in danger of
his Life. It was a very difficult thing to come to and speak with the Emperor;
but as there is nothing pleasant to a Lover but what is sought after and hard
to be obtained, she trys every way, looks about her narrowly, follows closely
her Business, and after many Solicitations and Traverses backwards and
forwards, through many places, at last she found one who spoke for her to the
Grand Vizier, who is the chief Man in Authority next the Emperor, and acquaints
him, that there was an English Woman, who had some good Counsel to give the
Emperor in the Name of the Great God* This Vizier was Achmet Bassa, very
Renowned among the Turks, because he succeeded his Father in that great Office,
which Honor none ever before him attained to in that kind; The Vizier speaks
to the Emperor on the Woman's behalf, the Emperor grants her Liberty to come to
him: She came accompanied with the Dragmans or Emperors Interpreters; but I
could never learn what it was the Woman said to him; The Emperor after he had
given her Audience, commands her to withdraw, and ordered her to be conveyed to
Constantinople, that she might from thence return to her own Country; This is
that which the Woman after her return was wont to relate to the Quakers, and
none able to confirm or confute it; and this is that same person who together
with Anne Austin, was the first of all the Women that went to Preach their
Religion in New England, and who for her great Endowments, not only of mind and
wit, but also for her great dexterity and experience, was by William Ball, a
Preacher of no small fame among the Quakers, thought worthy to make him a
Wife, as I have said in the beginning of this Book, that so that which was the
beginning of this Book is also the end of the same, and of the whole work.

AN APPENDIX: CONTAINING The True Copy of a Latin Letter Writ by George ^eith,
and sent by him to Gerard Croes, Translated out of his Latin Manuscript into
English.
Some Annotations upon diverse things related in the Latin Book, called, The
Quakerian History of Gerard Croes, concerning me G. K. and some Opinions (or
Sentiments) not well by him alleged to be mine, with an Emendation and
Correction of those things which the Author (through Mistake) has unduely
fixed on me: As also concerning some other things respecting some Sentiments of
many called Quakers; and our late Controversies in matters of Faith and
Religion.

IN the Epist. Dedicat. -- Who hate every humane Name in the Church.

The Annotation. It is well said. I wish the Reformed (so called) did endeavor
so to do. As to my part, it is very odious to me, that such among the People,
called Quakers, professing the same Christian Faith with me, should be called
Keithians. For if the Name of Calvinist be odious to him; Why should not the
Name of Keithian be equally odious to me, and to my Brethren professing the
same Faith of Christ with me, the which Name this Author uses in diverse places
of his History.

In the Epist, Dedic. There is not any thing of any moment, in the whole work,
that was not done in public view.

The Annot. The Author does relate most things in a good degree, heartily and
moderately; but in some things that are no less matters of Fact, than Articles
of Doctrine, which he imputes to me; he has missed the Mark, but, as I
believe, unwillingly, he not being, in all things, well informed, that did
concern my Affairs in Religious Controversies.

Page 192. of the History. Being a Chaplain in a certain Noble Family, was
adapted a Minister of the Divine Word.

The Annot. I acknowledge I did live for some time in a certain rich Family,
giving Education to some Children belonging to that Family, using frequent
Prayer, and other Exercises of Religion in the same; but before I had the
Profession of a Quaker, I was never adapted a Minister of the Divine Word.

Page 194. Thus the Doctrine and Religion of the Quakers owes its birth and
growth to England, its Accomplishment and Perfection to Scotland.

The Annot. Here he seems too much to favor Robert Barclay and Me, being
both Scotch-men, for certain Writings and Labors of ours, in Explaining the
People called Quakers their Principles, and so they seemed unto us. But that I
may confess the thing as it it. By too great experience, for some years past I
have learned, having more inward Conversation with some Ministers of the first
rank among them, than formerly I had, and more intently Reading some of their
Books, which before I did little Read; and such of them as I had Read, I had
not so carefully and accurately considered, what I did Read in them) that many
of the Principles and Dogma's delivered and explained by me, in the Name of the
Quakers, were not so, according to the sense of most of the Ministry among that
People, as according to my sense, given to me by the Grace of God; and I do
ingeniously confess, that therein I was greatly mistaken.

P. 178. And concerning Christ dwelling in every M^^^.

The Annot. Here he does not relate aright the distinction (at least wise) as
by me explained, betwixt the Existence (or in-being) of Christ in Man, and his
In-dwelling. Christ indeed is in every Man, as he is the Word, that has
proceeded, or emanated from God; but he dwells only in the Saints. The
Inhabitation of God and Christ in Men, denotes their Union with those Men in
whom they dwell; but there is no Union nor Communion of God and Christ with
evil men and unbelievers.

P. 279. So Christ, so God by Christ, is in all Men, and dwells in all Men,
yea in all Creatures.

The Annot. See the Correction above given.

P. The same. Chrisst and God set, or go down Latineword (occidit) in Men, but
not every way.

The Annot. If by the Latin word ( occidit) he understands it in that sense,
as the Sun is said to set, or go down in the West; or to arise, or come up in
the East, it is in some manner tolerable. But if by that Latin word ( occidit)
he understands as if God did dye in any Men, I do not acknowledge that ever I
said, or Writ, nay, nor either thought any such thing. But on the contrary,
when Thomas Fitzwater said in his Prayer at the yearly Meeting in Philadelphia,
these words, O God, who dyed in us, and have risen in us. I did publicly in
the Meeting reprehend him, as speaking Blasphemously: So far was it from me,
that I never thought any such thing, for God is every way Immortal. Indeed the
Man Christ (who is God) was Born and Dyed, but not as God, but as Man. But if
at any time I have said, that Christ is Crucified in any one, I did no wise
understand it, so as that he suffered in the least as God) but as that Seed of
God siffereth in Men by their sins, which Seed of God belongs to Christ, as a
certain member of Christ (mystically speaking;) for if the Saints and Believers
are called the Members of Christ in Scripture, Why may not this Seed of God
much more be called so? Because by that Seed the Faithful become the Members of
Christ, and are united with him mystically and spiritually.

Page The same. And that seed is a substance, a particle of the Invisible and
spiritual substance, of the Son of God, and the Divine Man.

The Annot. That the Seed of God in the Faithful is a substance, I own that I
have affirmed, and I do still affirm it: But I said not, as I do not now say,
that it is a Particle of God, nor does the Author fix this upon me. But that I
said, that Seed of God, was a Particle of Christ the Divine Man. I would not be
so understood, as if it were a Particle that could be divided, or separated
from Christ, in that manner, as a Corporeal Particle can be divided or
separated from the Body whose part it is, for it is undividable from Christ its
Fountain [as the Beams from the Sun.]

P. The same. So the Saints from all Ages have eat the Flesh, and drank the
Blood of Christ.

The Annot. That the Life of Christ in the Saints and Faithful is called the
Flesh and Blood of Christ, according to Joh. 6. 54. 63. is not otherwise so
said than Allegorically, and by a Metaphor, as when it is called Milk, Wine,
Oil, Fatness, Bread. I grant also, that the Saints in all Ages have eat the
Flesh, and drunk the Blood of Christ, in the common sense of Protestant
Writers, understanding by the Flesh of Christ, his outward Flesh, and by his
Blood, his outward Blood; but so, that they did not eat his Flesh, and drink
his Blood by the mouth of the body, but by Faith, according to these excellent
words of Augustine; Why (said he) preparest thou the Teeth and the Belly to eat
Christ's Flesh? Believe, and thou have eat it. And I do not think that ever I
said, that the inward Blood of Christ was that Blood which [by way of
Atonement] does reconcile us to God. But I always believed, and still I so
believe, that the Blood of Christ, which reconcileth us to God [by way of
Atonement] is that most holy Blood of his most holy Body outwardly shed; which
Blood was a necessary part of the Sacrifice of Christ which he offered for our
sins, joined with his most holy Obedience, and his most great Dolors and
Sufferings, both of his (most holy) Soul and Body.

P. 280. And often by the Infamy and Tearing asunder of his Body he is so
afflicted with grief, and suppressed, as if he were nailed to the Cross.

The Annot. I do not remember that ever I said or Writ such words, or so much
as thought them: I own that I have Writ, that Christ, or the Life of Christ in
some manner (or respect) is Crucified in men when they commit heinous Sins, who
have formerly experienced Christ, after a sort, to live in them; but all this
is to be taken with a grain of allowance, and in a sober sense. Nor did I ever
think that Christ suffers such griefs in men, as he suffered when he was
nailed to the Cross, when he did bear on him the weight of the Sins of the
whole World: but this I did mean, that the life of Christ (as it were) does so
suffer in some men, committing heinous sins, as the life of man suffers, when a
Finger or a Toe of his Body is wounded with a mortal wound; but that suffering
is neither such, nor so great, as when the Head or Heart is mortally wounded.
Again, it is one thing for a manss Finger to be killed, and far another for his
Head and Heart to be killed. And whatsoever is the Suffering of Christ in some
men, I do neither think nor remember, that either by Word or Writing, I
affirmed, that Christ's Sufferings in any men were, or are, in any part or
degree Propitiatory, or by way of a Propitiatory Sacrifice; I know some have so
Writ ( viz. that Christ, in men, offers up himself a Sacrifice to pacify the
Wrath of God) but I have publicly showed my Offense, and witnessed against it:
But still I acknowledge, and perhaps somewhere I have so Writ, that the Life of
Christ in the Faithful, is (not a Propitiatory Sacrifice, but) as an Heavenly
and Divine Incense, most sweetly smelling before God.

P. the same. Thus Christ, as he is that Divine Man, is to be worshipped and
adored by all, but not as outward, born of Mary.

The Annot. In this also he does not rightly ascribe such Doctrine to me, as if
I denied that Divine Worship were due to the Man Christ outwardly Born of Mary;
for I have plainly Taught the contrary; particularly in my Book called, The Way
cast up: which Book, I suppose, this Author has both seen and read; therefore I
the rather think strange, that he should attribute such Doctrine to me; for, in
that Book, I set down some words of Prayer to the Man Christ, who suffered
without us, calling him Son of David: and, in this point, I did dissent from
many called Quakers, and I still dissent. But this I also affirm, that the
Divine Worship which we give to Christ, is so to be directed to Christ our
alone Mediator, that by the Man Christ it may be directed to God, and does
ultimately terminate in God. Also, he does not aright ascribe to me, that
Doctrine of the rending asunder, or laceration of Christ's Body in Men, for
laceration implies division, or separation of the parts asunder, which cannot
happen to the life of Christ in men. Nor did, or do I understand Christ to have
Flesh, or a Body in the Saints, but only in an Allegorical and Figurative
sense; as when that of Christ, which the Faithful perceive in them, which they
taste, and which is to their Souls Meat and Drink, whereby they are Spiritually
refreshed and nourished, is called in Scripture, Milk, Honey, Bread, Wine, Oil,
Fatness, and the like, all which are Names of a Bodily substance, and therefore
cannot be applied to this Mystery, but by way of Allegory, and that for the
defect of proper words.

P. The same. Such a Dogma, as this of Keith, was entertained by Heretics, and
published by Gul. Postellus a Frenchman, of which Keith was not ignorant.

The Annot. Although in some words and phrases, I may seem to agree to these, in
this Author's esteem, or others, yet I no-wise agree in sense with them, nor
have I followed their words, but the words and phrases of Scripture, which the
Heretics used, but wrested to a foreign and contrary sense to the Truth* as
if by the presence and inhabitation of God and Christ in Men, these Men were
deifyed, and made God and Christ, and the same honor were due to them as to
God and Christ, which never came into my mind, yea, I always abhorred such sort
of Doctrine, as not only Heretical, but Mad, and only proper to Men demented.
And as concerning Gulielmus Postellus, I saw but little of his Writings at any
time, and what I saw I did not well understand, for the obscurity of his style,
and diverse things in him did not please me. But what I have Writ concerning
the Birth, or Begetting, and Formation of Christ in the Faithful, I would not
be understood to mean it in the sense of Heretics, but in the sense of
Scripture, Gal. 4. 19. which speaks after this manner. And in the sense of
Augustine, and Erasmus, who both have Writ, If Mary had not conceived Christ in
her heart (or Soul) although she did bear him according to the Flesh, she could
not have been Saved by him. Nor did I ever dream there was such an Union,
betwixt Christ, and the Faithful, as to make up one Person, as the Soul and
Body of Man, make up one Man. But such an Union I did, and do understand
betwixt Christ and the Faithful, and betwixt God and the Faithful, by Christ,
as is by the sincere Faith and Love of the Faithful, begot and wrought in them
by the Spirit of God. Moreover, that I have Writ some things of the Incarnate
Word in the Faithful (in my Book called, The Way Cast Up.) I meant it no
otherwise than Allegorically; for I never thought that our corruptible flesh,
which we carry about, is the Flesh of the Word; but in an Allegorical sense I
understand it as Orig^n, and other Ancient Writers, by the Flesh of the Word of
God, Mystically speaking, they understood the inward Life and Virtue of Christ,
which feeds the Souls of the Faithful, as the flesh of a Lamb or Calf feeds
the Bodies; and by the like Allegory the same Life of Christ in the Faithful is
called Bread, [but there is a shortness and disparity, and that great, in all
these Similitudes] which Life of Christ in the Saints, is a certain influence,
or efflux from the Man Christ, or from that fullness of life and Grace in him,
as he is without the Saints, Glorified with the Father in Heaven. But this
efflux, or influence, flowing from the Person of Christ, without the Saints,
into the hearts of the Saints, too few Christian Teachers do acknowledge. They
confess indeed, that Grace is given us of God, for Christ's Merits, and so they
affirm, that the Man Christ is the Moral Cause of the Grace which we have of
God, [which is true.] But that the Man Christ sends down from Heaven the
Influences of Grace, the Divine Rain, and Dew of Grace, out of his fullness, to
few acknowledge, for they understand the Grace of Christ to be nothing else,
than a certain quality, (after the manner of an accident) inherent in the Soul.
And because it is the very being of an accident to be inherent in its subject,
therefore they will not own that it comes down from Christ out of Heaven: In
which I acknowledge I much differ from them in my Persuasion.

P. 280. Toward the end -- And these Books he took care to get Printed, not in
England, but in Holland; not consulting the Society of his Prof^ssion, nor
letting them know it, that they might not refuse their Consent.

The Annot. In this also he does not well relate the matter of Fact. I procured
indeed two Books of mine to be Printed in Holland, the one called, The Way Cast
up; the other called, The Way to the City of God: not consulting the English
Quakers [I not being an Englishman, nor living then in England] nor the 2d.
days Weekly Meeting at London; but I consulted the Scots Friends where I lived.
And notwithstanding that some London-Quakers, of the Ministry, accused both
these Books to contain False Doctrine in some Articles, yet George Whitehead
recommended the first in Print; and both George Whitehead and William Pen, at a
Solemn Meeting of the Ministry, held at London about the year 1678. defended it
against the gainsaying of Three Ministers of Note [among the Quakers] diverse,
beside the Ministry and my self, being present; tho, of late the same two men
have risen up against me, after a most offensive manner, for my standing up to
defend the same Heads of Christian Religion, contained in these Books, and
generally confessed by all True Christians, against these most ignorant men,
who opposed them in Pensilvania: The which does plainly demonstrate the great
Hypocrise of these two men. The Heads of Doctrine were chiefly Three, on which
these three Ministers abovementioned, accused my Book, and me, being the
Author of it. The first was, that in my Book I had affirmed, That the same Body
of Christ, which was Nailed to the Cross, and was Crucified and Buried, Rose
again, and afterward was taken up into Heaven. The Second was, That it is the
Duty of all Christians, to Pray to the same Jesus Christ, who was then
Crucified, and to Worship and Adore him; and, by him, our alone Mediator, to
Worship, Adore, and Pray unto God the Father. The Third was, That the most Holy
Men, in their highest Seize of Holiness, are to approach unto God, with
Prayer and Thanksgiving, by the Mediation of the Man Christ Jesus. But these
three men abovementioned, who had diverse others [even of the Ministry] who
favored their Errors, did openly and boldly, in that Solemn Meeting, deny
these Three Heads of Doctrine above specified; and my other Book called, The
Way to the City of God, cited by the Author in this History; some of the People
called Quakers, when I was absent in America, procured it to be Reprinted at
London, changing nothing at all in it. I know that both these Books have much
displeased many called Quakers, and have pleased many others, and does still
please them. So that to many, that of Virgil may be applied, Scinditur incertum
studia in contraria vulgas.S In English thus; The wavering People divided are
From one another, asunder far,
Which their pretended Unity does mar.


P. 450. But when Keith did not so much positively determine, as by Hypothesis
suppose, that which some did attribute to him, concerning the Transmigration,
(or Revolution) of Souls, and their State after Death; or did subject it as fit
to be examined, whether it was true or not, that was not made the Question
betwixt his Adversaries in Pensilvania and him.

The Annot. Let the Reader compare what the Author brings in this place,
concerning the Opinion of the Transmigration, etc. untruly fixed upon me by
some, with what he has said. p. 284. in these words. To me (says he) it is
certain, as I think, that Keith does earnestly embrace, if not all, yet the
chiefest of these Propositions [as mentioned by him in the forecited place,
concerning the Transmigration, and collected, as I suppose, out of the Book
called, The Two Hundred Queries.] Surely this Author does not appear so well to
agree with himself, in this Affair; for in the one place, soberly enough, and
civilly, he Writes concerning me, not fixing that Opinion on me; but in the
other, he says it is certain, that I earnestly embrace, if not all, yet the
chiefest of these Propositions. But I am most certain, that he cannot produce
any one Witness, that did, or could certainly inform him, that I did any ways
embrace all, or any of these propositions, either as any Article of Faith, or
as any positive Dogma, or Principle in Philosophy. And I know not any one that
does positively embrace them all. But as concerning the Dogma it self, of the
revolution of some (not all) Souls, setting aside many Circumstances, and
casual Propositions, not touching the chief Question, proposed only by some
Christian Writers, by way of Hypothesis, and not as a positive Conclusion;
however I might seem to some to favor it, as an Hypothesis, because,
sometimes, modestly discoursing of it, with some very few of my familiar
Acquaintance, I did bring some Reasons both for and against (as in other
doubtful matters, ingenuous and free-spirited men use to Discourse pro and
contra [in order to find out the Truth] as concerning the Motion of the Earth,
and the like,) yet I openly declare, that I never embraced it, either as an
Article of Faith, or as any positive Dogma in Philosophy, as I do not at
present: Nor am I ashamed to say, as I am not sufficiently able, and furnished,
in all respects, to refute it, by evident Reasons, so nor am I to defend it.
And I often call to mind that saying of Plato, It is not the part of a wise man
to determine of obscure matters: and much more that of David, I exercise not my
self in things too high for me. But because I could by no means approve that
method of Arguing, which some used against that opinion; nor the false zeal
kindled in some against it, that did rise in them, from their prejudice against
the necessity of Faith in Christ Crucified [in any degree, either expressly or
implicitely] in order to eternal Salvation. Therefore some leavened with this
evil prejudice, did make it their business to load me with Reproaches, and to
spread false Rumors concerning me, as holding many absurd things concerning the
Transmigration and Revolution of Souls. For whereas many did use to bring this
Argument against the necessity of Faith in the Crucified Jesus, in order to
Eternal Salvation.

If such a necessity of Faith in the Crucified Man, Jesus Christ, for Eternal
Salvation, be allowed or granted, the Revolution of many Souls must be granted;
but the last is absurd, and therefore is the first absurd also. And I, in my
Answering to this Argument, have sometimes said, on the Hypothesis, that if
such a sequel of the Major, or first Proposition, were admitted, it were better
to admit, or allow that Hypothesis concerning the Revolution of the Souls of
some Gentiles dying in pure Gentilisme [or Deisme] who have, in any manner,
lived Piously toward God, and Soberly and Honestly toward Men; suppose it be
not true, then to assert that such Dying in a pure Gentilisme, are [wholly and
finally] deprived of Eternal Life: On the other hand, to affirm, that
immediately after Death, such (dying without the least grain of the Knowledge
and Faith of Christ Crucified, either express, or implicit) do enter into
Eternal Life. Let now any Impartial Man Judge in this Case, yea, let the Author
of this History himself Judge, whether for my Christian Zeal, in standing up
for the necessity of the Christian Faith, against these Deists lately risen up
in these parts, and elsewhere, and against the Pelagians, either rediviving, or
at leastwise calling back again to life, the most filthy Errors of the Old
Pelagians, who were extremely bitter Enemies to the necessity of Faith in
Christ Crucified my Adversaries have justly accused me of a Crime in this
matter? Nor do I think that this Author (whom I judge to be a sober Man) when
he has well weighed the case, will join himself, a Neighbor, or Consociate
himself to these my Pelagian and Theist-Adversaries, (Confessing to Christ with
the Mouth and Words, but really, and in the true Sense of Scripture, denying
him,) to Accuse me, as they do, as guilty of a Crime in this thing.

P. 384. The Cause, was the Controversy, that arose some few years ago in
Pensilvania, and agitated betwixt Keith, and his Neighbors, concerning the
Twofold Humanity of Christ.

Annot. I marvel with what reason this Author could affirm, that the
Controversy about the Twofold Humanity of Christ, was the cause of the Strife
betwixt my Adversaries and me in Pensilvania [or here in England.] For I do not
remember that I had the least Controversy with my Adversaries, either there or
here, concerning the Twofold Humanity of Christ but concerning Christ within,
and Christ without. For because I frequently Preached in the Quakers Meetings,
Faith in Christ; being Man without us, as well as in Christ, the Life, the
Light, the Word in us, and that this Faith, that respected him both ways, was
necessary to our Eternal Salvation; therefore, first, William Stockdale accused
me, of being guilty in Preaching Two Christ's; and after him Thomas Fitswater,
publicly, in a Monthly Meeting accused me, for denying, That the Light within
us was sufficient to Salvation, without something else. Now my Adversaries in
Pensilvania, by Christ within us, understood no other thing than the Godhead;
and they had this sense, or meaning of Christ within, that this only should be
called, and esteemed Christ, which they did feel in their hearts to reprove
sin, and to refresh them with a certain Joy, if at any time they did well. Bnt
that in some of my Writings I had said somewhat of the Existence of Christ the
Heavenly Man, before he assumed Flesh in the Womb of the Virgin: I see not by
what just manner he would fix it on me, that I held a Twofold Humanity of
Christ, as if there were Two Men Christ's, the one Heavenly, the other Earthly,
and Corporeal; unless by such a method of Arguing, he would infer from the
Scripture it self, that every Man is Two Men, as consisting of a twofold
Humanity. Because Paul, after a Mystical-way familiar to the Jews, Writes of
an inward and outward Man. And perhaps by such manner of Arguing, one given to
quibbles of arguing, might study to prove out of Scripture, that many men have
four Humanities; for, beside that, the Scripture speaks of our inward and
outward Man, which are Soul and Body; it speaks also of the Old Man, which we
are bid put off, and the New Man, which we are to put on. But, if this Author,
or any other, charge me with an Error in this point, that I hold, that the
Mediatory Soul, or Spirit of Christ did exist, before he assumed Flesh: it is
not enough, with bare words, to blame me for Error, without solid Argument; but
let them produce solid Arguments, if they have any, to convince me, and solidly
answer my Arguments I have brought from Scripture, by which I judge I have
proved my Assertion. Nor am I singular in that case, that I believe, that
Christ the Mediator, did exist before he took flesh, although not in whole, yet
in some part and respect, even from the Beginning of the World, to wit, in
respect of his Mediatory, Celestial Soul and Spirit; for diverse Pious men,
even among Protestants, have affirmed the same, no less than some Jewish
Doctors, and also some Gentile Philosophers had the same persuasion; for
because they did observe, that the highest and lowest beings in the Universal
Creation, were joined by certain middle Beings; hence they concluded, very
agreeably to Reason, that there was some mediatory Being ( i. e. a Mediator,
betwixt God, that infinite and infinitely high Being, and Mortal Men; who,
being compared with God, are justly to be esteemed but as dust and ashes before
him; as indeed the Saints did express the same, and especially that excellent
and most humble Man Abrham, called in Scripture the Friend of God, the Father
of the Faithful, and Heir of the World, did so humble himself before God, that
he called himself dust and Ashes.

P. 446. Then according to that Dogma, to inculcate this unto all, that Christ,
as he was Born of Mary, is united with the Divine Nature, and so is present
with his Light, and with his Life in all the Children of God.

The Annot. And here also he does not rightly declare my Faith; for by the
Presence of Christ in all the Children of God, I do not understand that the
External Person of Christ, or the Body which was Born of Mary is in them, nor
yet the Soul of Christ, in respect of its center, or of the fullness of virtue,
which only, and alone, dwells in the External Person and Body of Christ, that
was Born of the Virgin. But this I say, as the like I have said many years ago,
and have Writ in diverse of my Books published in Print, that a certain ray, or
substantial influence is derived from out of the Man Christ in Heaven, and
flows into the hearts of the Faithful, after such manner, as the Beams of the
Sun, that are truly substantial, come out form the Center of the Sun, and pass
into the Earth, and the Fruits of the Earth, to make them grow, and come to
maturity: the which similitude, and diverse others, the Scripture frequently
uses; as that of the Vine, and Branches, the Head and Members of Man's Body.

P. 455. They publish a Book, which they call, The Plea of the Innocent,
against the false Judgment of a Guilty Man.

The Annot. For a guilty Man, read guilty Men* for the word guilty is as well
Plural as singular: and, in the Title of our Book, we understand the word
guilty in the Plural; for, there were Twenty eight Men guilty in giving forth
that false Judgment.

P. 459. That Keith called another Man of the Magistracy by such a Name, that
Englishmen doubt of its signification.

The Annot. Every Englishman almost knows what is intended by that Name, or
Word, answering to the Latin word Nebulo, or Nequam; which word Nebulo is
derived from the Hebrew word Ne^al, as those who are skillful in the Hebrew and
Latin affirm, which is of the same signification, and is given in Scripture to
False Teachers, and to other bad Men. And let the Impartial Judge, whether that
Person was not worthy of such an Appellation, who (though professing himself a
Christian) did affirm boldly to me, before diverse Witnesses, that he did not
expect to be saved by that which died at Jerusalem, to wit, the Man Christ,
that was Crucified at Jerusalem. Surely, if a Jew had said this, it had been
more tolerable; but, that one called a Christian, and reckoned of the First
Rank among Christians, should spue out his Filth so Blasphemously against the
Savior of the World; and so wickedly, might have moved any Christian, having
the least grain of true Faith, not only to call him so, but somewhat more hard.
And the same Person did vehemently urge me [at that same very time I so Named
him] that I would submit my Self, and my Faith, to that Meeting, wherein I so
called him, in that Question, Whether God was present in all his Creatures:
Some in that Meeting, and these even Ministers, openly denying it: for so he
spoke to me, because I refused to submit my Faith, and Conscience in that
Question, to the Determination of that Meeting, Will thou not submit to the
Church? Does not the Spirit of God speak in the Church? Does the Spirit speak
in Trees? because I had affirmed that the Spirit was in Trees. What more, I
pray, does the Church of Rome presume? yea, I know not: If she does presume so
much, that if she determines, that there is no God: (or which is the
equivalent, that God is not every where present,) her Members must stand to her
Determination. And because I refused to submit my Faith to the Determination of
that Meeting, in that Question, Whether God be present in all his Creatures?
that Meeting would not give any Judgment in the case. And, as I heard
afterward, that man was of the Magistracy, but obscurely put in, and known to
few, and not at all to me as such; nor was he any Magistrate in that place when
I spoke that Word. And I observe that this very Author in this History, P. 376.
has called a certain Frenchman a Papist, (who had sometime ago writ some false
things against the People called Quakers) by the like name, to wit, Nequam and
impurum hominem, A Knave and filthy Man: And I doubt not but he does remember
how frequently his [much esteemed] John Calvin in his Writings, has called the
Papists filthy Dogs, and yet many of them were in an eminent degree of the
Magistracy. But I speak not this to justify my self or any other, when by
human Infirmity we may be carried with too great heat of Mind in reproving the
Errors and Faults of others. But it was most loathsome Hypocrisy in my
Adversaries, to blame my heat with so great a noise, and to make nothing of
their own Iniquity and Impiety, yea Blasphemy, against both God and Christ; and
who in the heat of Mind, and in hard Words, did far exceed me.

P. 440. So that to them, [to wit, the People called Quakers] all are
Christians [to wit, Jews, Mahometans, Painims] in whom any good Seed of
Religion appears, and which they say is from Christ, yea is Christ himself.

The Annot. He may well indeed affirm this of many of them, and especially of
George Whitehead, who earnestly contendeth in that late Book, called The
Christian Doctrine, etc. cited by the Author Page: 467. that these Heathens or
Gentiles (who are obedient to the Light within, who are without all Knowledge
and Faith of Christ without) are Christians, wherein I have much differed from
them, and do at present differ. For although I contend with all good
Christians, That Christ as he is that essential Word, is in all Men; yet it
does not suffice to our Eternal Salvation, to know only, and believe that
Christ is the Word, but that we both know him, and believe in him, as he took
Flesh, Died for our Sins, and Rose again, etc. and how in that respect, he is
our Savior, as he is the entire Christ, God-Man.

P. 452. Neither could this whole Deified Senate reconcile these two men.

The Annot. Whither the Author calls that Senate Deified, by way of scorn or
otherwise, I do not determine. But if by the word Entheatus, he means,
Deified or Godded, as to say, made God, or equal to God, certainly some of the
Quakers have so affirmed, that who have the Spirit of God are equal to God; but
I never had any such madness, nor have.

P. 474. Pen and Whitehead could so little rule their Minds and Tongues, and
Keith also could so little contain himself, etc.

The Annot. I was indeed pressed with such grief of Soul, and warmed with such
heat of Mind against their Injustice and Hypocrisy, that I confess I could not
contain, but sharply reprove their Faults; and however I might have exceeded
with respect to the inward frame of my mind, yet I said nothing that was false,
when on the other side they did cast out many false and unjust things against
me; And William Penn, in that very Meeting, did justify his false Accusation
against me, when in the public Meeting at Ratcliff, he called me Apostate,
saying, He did it not in any Passion, but he was so transported out of himself
by the glorious Power of God, that he did not at all know, whether he was
Standing, Sitting, or Kneeling; which many who heard him so falsely accuse me,
knew well enough, was a most shameful Falsehood.

Page 113. For neither is the Scripture to them, ( viz. the Quakers) as we
understand that word, the perpetual and absolutely necessary Mean, and the only
and entire Form and Rule of Faith and Manners.

The Annot. I deny not but that it is true what this Author says of the most,
and especially of many Ministers and Preachers among them. But as to me, when I
was enough in favor with that People, (and to use their Phrase) when I was in
Unity with the Body of Friends, I did affirm, both by Word and Writ, that the
Holy Scripture, to wit, not the bare Letter, but the Doctrine of the Scripture,
whether delivered by Voice or VVriting, [in God's ordinary way] was the
perpetual and necessary Mean, and continues so to be, of our obtaining the
Faith [of Christ Crucified] the Holy Spirit working together with the Doctrine
in Men's Hearts; which does plainly appear out of my Answer to W. Bayer,
Professor of Theology at Jeninge in Germany, [first published in Latin and sent
to him, and then in English] for Robert Barclay; which Answer I suppose this
Author has read, for he makes mention of it in this his History, and does
relate the general Contents of it fairly enough: And let the Author read again,
if he pleases, that Answer, or let any other read it, and they will find,
(especially if they read the Chap. 5th and 3d) if they well weigh what I there
delivered in that matter, that either the difference is none, or but small,
betwixt my Faith and the Faith of the more sound Protestants any where, in that
particular.

P. 114. Hence that God has given to all men, a new Birth, etc.

The Annot. The Author (I judge) does not well ascribe this to the People
called Quakers, viz. That God has given to all Men a new Birth: But this they
say, That God has given to every Man an inward Light, or a certain Seed of the
New Birth, which yet in many Men comes not to a New Birth: And although in
this I aggree with them, That God has given to every Man an inward Light, as a
certain Seed, yet in this I greatly differ from many of them, that many yea the
most, or rather indeed almost all the Ministers among them (very few excepted)
do affirm, that this inward Light is sufficient to bring forth the New Birth,
and to give Eternal Salvation, without any thing, without us, that is, without
the Man-Christ, that was outwardly Born, and Crucified and Rose again, whom
some of their Ministers in my hearing, have called an outside thing, a shell, a
husk, that does little or nothing profit us, and the Faith of which does
nothing profit us. And William Penn in that Meeting at Ratcliff, where he
falsely called me an Apostate, did publicly proclaim after this manner:
Friends, (said he) see no great need of Preaching the Faith of Christ's Death
and Suffenings, for all England and all Christendom have that Faith, and it
does not profit them. But the Faith which profitteth Men is the Faith of Christ
within, and this Friends Preach. Let now the Author judge, or any other
intelligent Person [professing Christianity,] whither William Penn has not
sufficiently by these words proved himself an Apostate from the Christian
Faith? And mark the necessary consequence of these words. All England and all
Christendom have the Faith of Christ's Death and Suffering, and it does not
profit them, therefore there is no necessity of Preaching it; but it were best
that that Faith were wholly forgot and buried in Oblivion! Is not this manner
of Preaching enough not only to prove him that so Preaches, an Apostate, but
that it is the way with open face to bring in Anti-Christianism into the
World! But although it must be granted, that too many [in Christendom] have no
other but a dead and hypocritical Faith, concerning Christ, and his Death and
Sufferings, for which dead and hypocritical Faith, I never did contend with
any, nor do I at present: Yet this does not hinder, but that many both in
England, and throughout Christendom, consisting of diverse Professions, under
the common name of Christians, have a sincere and living Faith of Christ's Death
and Sufferings, etc. which does greatly profit them [to Eternal Salvation.]

P. 115. Which when it is brought to pass, [viz. the New Birth] Christ, who is
altogether Holy and Righteous, does exist, live and work in that Man; and by
that the same Man becomes just, by the righteousness of Christ existing in
that Man.

The Annot. He does truly enough here relate what is the judgment of many, yea,
the greatest part of the Ministers of that People, who do not distinguish
betwixt the Righteousness of Justification, whereof a great part is Forgiveness
of Sins, (by and for Christ's Sake, and for his Merits Sake) apprehended by a
sincere and effectual Faith, and the Righteousness of Sanctification, whereby
the Faithful are made inwardly Holy and Righteous, by the inward Virtue and
Life of Christ, and of the Holy Spirit inwardly working in the Hearts of the
Saints, which sanctifying Virtue and Power, only true Believers in Christ
Crucified do feel and experience; and in this I differ from them, and in many
other things, as I have heretofore done.

P. 116. And so indeed they did admit and receive a Ministry of the Gospel, but
such as every Christian ought to undergo, although in a distinct degree, by the
alone impulse of the Holy Spirit, without the Call of Men.

The Annot. Yea, not only without the Call of Men, but without all Examination
or Trial, whether they who profess they are moved by the impulse of the Holy
Spirit to the Ministry, are able and qualified to undergo that Office, being
instructed and endued with Spiritual Gifts of Knowledge and Doctrine: Whereby
it comes to pass, that very many, both Males and Females among that People, are
suffered to exercise the Office of Preaching [in their public Meetings,] who
are very sottish and miserably ignorant in the first Elements and Rudiments of
the Christian Doctrine. And this most vile Error and Practice has brought in
so great Ignorance and Blindness among them, which men but meanly instructed in
the matters of Christian Doctrine and Faith can scarce enough admire. George
Keith.

Some other short Annotations, correcting some mistakes in the Author of this
History, with respect to some other particulars, and one or two Observations.

Page 273. That the Quaker that foretold the burning of the City of London
lived at Hereford.

The Annot. This I think is a mistake, he belonged (I suppose) to
Huntingtonshire.

P. 321. Afterward Solomon Eccles went into New England, where in a certain
Speech with a vehement contention of Wrath, he pronounced a certain judgment to
come upon a particular Person, as if he had been commanded of God to do it,
which Oracle when it failed, etc.

The Annot. This is a great mistake as to the place, which was not New England,
for he was then in old England, somewhere in the West toward Bristol, the
sentence or false Prophecy being by him pronounced against John Story, an
ancient Preacher among that People, who never was in New England: The great and
only offense that Solomon Eccles and his Party had against him, being, that he
did not agree in all Points to some Orders and Methods of Church Discipline
given out by G. Fox, especially about Women's Government in the Church, which
John Story and many others did think, the other party did extend too far, and
did too severely and rigidly impose upon their Brethren: But after the time of
this false Prophecy was expired, John Story lived some years, against whom
nothing was ever justly objected, either as to his Doctrine or manner of
Conversation. And though what the Author writes in true, that Solomon Eccles,
afterward when he had the experience that his Prophecy was vain and false, did
by a public Writing confess his Error, yet too many of his party greatly
sought to extenuate his Crime, by alleging that it was true as to substance,
though it failed as to the circumstance of time; and I did not hear that for
any time Solomon Eccles was put to Silence, and a stop put to his Ministry for
that trespass, though it was very great; for if Men but flatter their Ministry,
great Trespasses will be connived at; but if any deal plainly and roundly with
them, and tell them their Faults, it shall be esteemed next degree to
impardonable Sin.

P. 438. The Propriety and Government of Pensilvania being void by the Death of
William Penn [the Elder,] from whom also the possessive name of that Country,
together with the Propriety and Government of it passed to his Son William Penn.

The Annot. This is also a mistake, for though William Penn had a considerable
Estate that came to him by his Father, yet his Father was never in the
possession of either the Propriety or Government of Pensilvania, but it came to
him wholly after his Fathers Death, as is known to many; and the name of
Pensilvania took its Rise from the Son, and not from the Father, which name (as
was commonly reported) was given to the Country by King Charles II. who gave
him the Country and its Government.

P. 570. That Esther Biddel said, She was by the Instigation of God moved to
pray the French King, that he would make Peace with God, and with the Nations,
etc.

The Annot. How is it probable that God would send a Message to the French King
by such an ignorant Person, and so great an Unbeliever in Christ Crucified,
(unless we could suppose that such a Miracle was wrought as when God opened the
Mouth of the Ass to reprove the madness of Balaam) the said Esther Biddel being
heard by many in a public Meeting of the Quakers, on a first day at the Savoy,
a little before her pretended Message to the French King, so to Preach:
Friends, Keep in your minds to Christ the Light in you, and let not your minds
go forth to a Christ without you, for in the beginning, Friends did not direct
us to Christ without us, but to the glorious Light of Christ within us; in
which Antichristian Doctrine, another in that same Meeting did oppose her.

Note, Some very small Additions are put in by the Author of the Letter,
betwixt [ ] by way of Explanation, to make some things in the Letter more plain.

Something Added in Behalf of the People called Quakers, both with respect to
the Historian, and also G. Keith.
ANd therefore after the perusal of this History, and George Keith's Letter
added, it is desired this may seriously be considered; it being mostly taken out
of a Book of George Keith's, printed by him, Anno 1692, Entitled, A Serious
Appeal. Wherein he takes notice of Directions for weak and dis^empered
Christians: and says* may be of some service to that Injured People, called in
Scorn Quakers, p. 1. From my own observation, which with a grieved Soul* I have
made in this Generation, I hereby give warning to this and all succeeding Ages,
that if they have any regard to Truth, or Charity, they take heed how* they
believe any Factious partial Historian or Divine, in any evil that he says of
the Party that he is against; for though there be good and eredible Persons of
most Parties, you shall find that Passion and Partiality prevails against
Conscience, Truth and Charity in most that are sick of this Disease, and that
ehe Envious Zeal which is described, James, cap. 3. does make them think they
do God service, first, in believing false Reports, and then in venting them
against those, that their Zeal or Faction does call the Enemies of Truth, which
Directions G. K. quotes out of Richard Baxter.

And G. K. says, p. 1, 2. of the Serious Appeal; And it is a thing generally
acknowledged by all Protestants, that where any Man, or Society of Men, err not
in a Fundamental Article of the Christian Faith, we ought to have Charity
toward them, as our Christian Brethren, if in some other things they are under
some Mistakes, and that their Conversation and Practice be free of Scandal.

And that we do not err in any Fundamental Article of Christian Faith; hear G.
K. further in our behalf.

Serious Appeal, p. 6. And notwithstanding of Cotton Matther's strong
Asseverations against us, as if We denied almost all, or most of the
Fundamental Articles of the Christian and Protestant Faith, yet he shall never
be able to prove it. That we are guilty of this his so extremely rash and
uncharitable charge, either as in respect of the Body of that People, called in
scorn Quakers, or in respect of any particular Writers, or Publishers of our
Doctrines and Principles, and Preachers among us, generally owned and approved
by Us, as Men of a sound judgment and understanding. And as for his Citations
out of Quakers printed Books and ^reatises, I would have you to consider, that
most of them all are borrowed and taken not from our own Books, but from our
professed Adversaries, men known well enough to be possessed with Prejudice
against us, such as Tho. Hicks, and John Faldo, and others, whom our Friends in
Old England, and particularly Geo. Whitehead, and William Pen, have largely
answered; yea, I do here solemnly charge C. M. to give us but one single
Instance of any one Fundamental Article of Chaistian Faith denied by us as a
People, or by any one of our Writers or Preachers, generally owned and approved
by Us.

Serious Appeal, p. 7. G. K. says; Farther, it suffices to me, and I hope
does to many others, that according to the best knowledge I have of the People
called Quakers, and those most generally owned by them, as Preachers and
Publishers of their Faith of unquestioned esteem among them, and worthy of
double honor, as many such there are. I know none that are guilty of any one
of such Heresies and Blasphemies: And G. K. further says in the same Page,
They -- who best know them (the Quakers) ought to be allowed to give their
sense of them, as I have done (says he) in the sincerity of my heart,
according to my best understanding and knowledge of them, and I think I should
know, and do know these called Quakers, and their Principles -- Note, He had
then been among us about 28 years, and a Preacher the greatest part thereof,
and may well therefore be suposed to know onr Doctrines: and the Defection he
would now Insinuate, must needs be very sudden, were we so degenerated in
Fundamentals since 1692. when his Book here cited was published: as his
Prejudice or Enmity does now represent.

But if the Reader inspect the State of the Case as Explained by Sam. Jennings.
Truth Defended, etc. by Tho. Ellwood. A Modest Account from Pensilvania, by
Caleb Pusey. And The Apostate Exposed by John Pennington, it will evidently
appear, the Defection is in himself.

Serious Appeal, p. 10. G. K. Vindicates William Penn, arguing about the
Trinity, or Three Persons, saying, ^e, i. e. William Penn, only Argues against
the invented Names [Persons] as Calvin does acknowledge them, which, in all
proper Languages does signify Substances, and not (...) Properties, or
relative Attributes, which W. P. will not deny to be in God.

In the Book above, p. 11. In the Name of the People called Quakers, says G.
K. We Zealously believe, that the Man Christ is in Heaven without us, in his
Glorified Body of Man, the same for being he had on Earth, but wonderfully
changed in manner and condition. But yet we cannot approve of the Two Carnal
Conceptions of many Carnal and Ignorant Professors.

Book forecited, p. 61. G. K. says, The least Babes in the Truth are not
without frequent Prayer, both in their Houses, and at their Tables, although
not so very frequent vocally; yet sometimes vocally, as God is pleased to give
an utterance, and at other times, only with our hearts, which God accepts; for
vocal and external words of Prayer, are not so essential to Prayer; but that
true Prayer may be, and is, most frequently without it.

Thus has G. K. justified these, and many other of our Doctrines and
Practices, after 28 years conversation among us as aforesaid: though now, in
his late Books, since he is gone out from us, he joins with this Historian
against us; and it may be of both said, in G. K's own Quotation, p. 1. of the
Book above cited, that Passion and Partiality prevails against Conscience,
Truth and Charity; and that the Envious Zeal, described, James, c. 3. does make
them think, they do God service, the one in venting, and both in falsely
reporting against those that their Zeal or Faction, does call the Enemies of
Truth. But let the Reader seriously peruse the following Testimony of our
Friends in Pensilvania, and its hoped it wi^^ manifest, that we are sound in
those Christian Doctrines briefly therein asserted.

And as to our particular Remarks, we shall refer the Reader to what may in
some short time be Published, part thereof being Writ in Latin, and is already
public in Holland, and may be Translated into English, with farther Remarks on
diverse things and passages in the foregoing History and Appendix, and which
when made public, will more fully and particularly detect the Historian and
George Keith: And whereas the Historian has wrongly stated the Difference
between the yearly Meeting and G. K. as also given a wrong Relation of Passages
and things therein, the Impartial Reader at present is referred to A true
account of the Proceedings, Sense, and Advice of the People called Quakers, at
the Yearly Meeting of Faithful Friends and Brethren began in London 1694.
Published by Robert Hannoy in a Pamphlet so entitled as above.

OUR Ancient Testimony RENEWED. Concerning our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
THE HOLY SCRIPTURES, AND THE Resurrection. Occasioned at this time by several
Unjust Charges published against us, and our Truly Christian Profession, by G.
Keith, who has Unfairly and Untruly Misrepresented us. Given forth by a
Meeting of Public Friends, and Others, at Philadelphia in Pensylvania.

Psalm. 41. 2. Yea, mine own Familiar Friend in whom I trusted, and has eaten
of my Bread, has lifted up his Heel against me.

Obad. Ver. 10. Because of thy Violence against thy Brother Jacob, shame shall
cover thy Face, etc.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street.
1695.

To the READER.
THAT we faithfully and sincerely own and confess Christ Jesus our Lord and
Savior, according to the Divine Testimones of the Holy Writ, and according to
his Spiritual Manifestations upon our Souls; and it is for our Christian
Vindication herein, and not for Controversy; (for a Contest with Contentious
Persons is endless) this following Confession is writ and submitted to thy
perusal. Farewell.

Our Scripture Confession Concerning our Lord Jesus Christ.
I. Concerning his Divinity, and his Being from the Beginning.
WE believe, That in the Beginning was the Word, Jo. 1. 1, 2, 3.
and that the Word was with God, and the Word was God, the same was in the
beginning with God; all things were made by him, and without him was not any
thing made that was made: Mic. 5. 2.
Whose Goings forth have been from of old, Ephesians. 3. 9.
from Everlasting: For God Created all things by Jesus Christ, who is the Image
of the Invisible God; Col. 1. 15.
the Firstborn of every Creature, the Brightness of the Father's Glory, and
the express Image of his Substance. Heb. 1. 3.


II. Concerning his Appearance in the Flesh.
WE believe, Joh. 2. 14.
That the Word was made Flesh, for he took not on him the Nature of Angels, but
took on him the Seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16, 17.
being in all things made like unto his Brethren; Touched with a feeling of our
Infirimities, Heb. 4. 15.
and in all things tempted as we are, yet without Sin: He died for our Sins,
according to the Scriptures, and he was buried, 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4.
and he rose again the Third day, according to the Scripture.

III. Concerning the End and Use of that Appearance.
WE believe, Jo. 8. 3.
That God sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin
condemned Sin in the Flesh. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, 1
Jo. 3, 8.
that he might destroy the Works of the Devil. Being manifested to take away
our Sins, Ephesians. 5. 2.
for he gave himself for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet
smelling savor; Heb. 9. 12.
having obtained Eternal Redemption for us: And through the Eternal Spirit
offered up himself without spot to God, Heb. 9. 14.
to purge our Consciences from dead Works to serve the Living God -- He was the
Lamb that was slain from the Foundation of the World; Rev. 13. 8.
of whom the Fathers did all drink; for they drank of that Spiritual Rock that
followed them, 1 Cor. 10. 4.
and that Rock was Christ, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever: Who
suffered for us, Heb. 13. 8.
leaving us an Example, that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21.
that the Life also of Jesus may be made manifest in our mortal Flesh! 2 Cor.
4. 11.
that we may know him, and the power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of
his Resurrection, Phil. 3. 10.
and the Fellowship of his Sufferings, being made Comformable to his Death.

IV. Concerning the Inward Manifestation of Christ.
WE believe, Isa. 57. 17.
That God dwells with the Contrite and Humble in Spirit; for he said, 2 Cor.
6. 16.
he will dwell in them, and walk in them; and that Christ stands at the Door
and knocks, Rev. 3. 20.
if any Man hear his Voice, and open the Door, he will come into him, and sup
with him. 2 Cor. 13. 5.
And therefore ought we to examine our selves, and prove our own selves,
knowing how that Christ is in us, unless we be Reprobates; for this is the
Riches of the Glory of the Mystery which God would make known among (or rather
in) the Gentiles, Col. 1. 27.
Christ within the hope of Glory.

V. Concerning his being our Mediator and Advocate.
WE believe, There is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, even the
Man Christ Jesus, i Tim. 2. 5, 6.
who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time -- My little
Children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not; and if any Man sin,
we have an Advocate with the Father, Christ Jesus the Righteous -- And he is
the Propitiation for our Sins, 1 Jo. 2. 1, 2.
and not for ours only, but for the Sins of the whole World. He sits on the
Right Hand of God the Father, Heb. 7. 25.
and ever lives to make Intercession for us.

VI. Concerning his Unity with the Saints.
WE believe, That he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, Heb. 2. 11.
are all of one; for by the exceeding great and precious Promises that are
given them, they are made pertakers of the Divine Nature; 2 Pet. 1. 4.
because for this end prayed Christ, saying, That they all may be one, as thou
Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us; and the Glory
which thou gave me I have given them, the they may be one, even as we are, I
in them, and thou in me, Jo. 17. 21, 22, 23.
that they may be made perfect in one.

VII. Concerning his Coming to Judgment.
WE believe, That we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, 2 Cor.
5 10, 11.
that every one may receive the things done in his Body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad -- Knowing therefore the Terror of the
Lord, we persuade Men.

VIII. Concerning the Resurrection.
WE Believe, There shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just and
Unjust; they that have done good to the Resurrection of Life, and they that
have done evil to the Resurrection of Damnation; 1 Cor. 15. 37, 38, 44. 50.
Flesh and Blood cannot Inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does Corruption
Inherit Incorruption. Nor is that Body sown that shall be, but God gives it a
Body as it has pleased him, and to every Seed his own Body: It is sown in
Dishonor, it is raised in Glory; it is sown in Corruption, it is raised in
Incorruption; it is sown in Weakness, it is raised in Power; it is sown a
Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body.

IX. Concerning the Scriptures.
WE Believe, Romans 15. 4.
That whatsoever things were written for our Learning; that we through Patience
and Comfort of the Scriptures might have hope -- Which are able to make wise
unto Salvation through Faith, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17:
which is in Christ Jesus: All Scripture given forth by Inspiration of God, (as
we believe the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are) is profitable
for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness,
that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works: --
And knowing also, 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21.
that no Prophecy of the Scriptures is of any private Interpretation; for
Prophecy came not in old time by the Will of Man, but Holy Men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

Our Solemn Confession, in the Holy Fear of God, concerning our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, according to the several Testimonies given forth by our
Faithful Brethren.
WE sincerely believe, own and confess no other Lord and Savior than our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God, to whom the Prophets and Apostles give
witness, and who in the fullness of Time took Flesh of the Seed of Abraham, and
of the Stock of David: We confess to his Miraculous Conception by the Power of
the Holy Spirit overshadowing of the Virgin Mary; and to his being Born of her
(according to the Flesh) and that he took upon him a Real Body, and that he was
a Real Man; and that in the Days of his Flesh he Preached Righteousness,
wrought Miracles, was Crucified, being put to Death by Wicked Hands; and that
he was Buried, and Rose again the Third Day according to the Scriptures; and
after he Rose he really appeared to many Brethren, and afterward he ascended
into Glory according to the Wisdom and Power of the Heavenly Father, and is
Glorified with the same Glory which he had with the Father, before the World
began, being ascended far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things,
whose Glory is Incomprehensible. And we also believe, That he is that one
Mediator between God and Man, viz. that Entire, Perfect, Heavenly, and most
Glorious Man, Christ Jesus, who ever lives, and endures in his Soul (or Spirit)
and Glorious Body. We further believe, That according to his Promise to his
Disciples before he left them, ( viz.) That he would come unto them again, and
that he that was with them should be in them, and they in Christ, and Christ in
them, John 14. 20. and that accordingly he came; and that he who appeared in
that Body which was prepared for him, was full of Grace and Truth, and received
the Spirit not by measure, appeared by a measure of his Grace and Spirit in his
Apostles and Disciples, and does since in all his Faithful Followers; And that
he is their King, Prophet, and High Priest, and Interceeds and Mediates in
their behalf, bringing in Everlasting Righteousness, Peace and Assurance for
ever into their Hearts and Consciences, to whom be everlasting Honor and
Dominion, Amen.

Concerning the Soul's Immortality, and the Resurrection.
WE believe our Souls are Immortal, and shall be preserved in their distinct
and proper Beings, and shall have Spiritual, Glorious Bodies, such as shall be
proper for them, as it shall please God to give them in the Resurrection, that
we may be capable of our particular Rewards, and different Degrees of Glory
after this Life in the World to come.

Griffith Owen, John Wilsford, George Maris, John Adams, Nicholas Walln,
William Biles, Robert Owen, John Lynam, John Humphreys, Caleb Pusey, Alex.
Beardsley, Samuel Richardson, Ralph Jackson, Richard Gove, Richard Ormo,
William ^outhby, David Lloyd, Samuel Jennings, Thomas Duckett, Thomas Janney,
Arthur Cook, John Symcock, Robert Ewer, Samuel Carpenter, Phin. Pemberton,
John Bevan, Cadder Morgan, Richard Walter, Lewis David, Edward Jones, Reece
John William, Griffith ^ohn, John Roberts, Robert Jones, Robert David, William
Edward, Edward Rees, Thomas Jones, James Fox.


FINIS.

