THE Naked Truth. OR, THE TRUE STATE OF THE Primitive Church.

BY AN Humble Moderator.

Zach. 8. 19. Love the Truth and Peace.

Gal. 4. 16. Am I therefore become your Enemy, because I tell you the truth?

Printed in the Year, 1675.

An Humble Petition to the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament.
MY Lords and noble Gentlemen, You have fully expressed your Zeal to God and
his Church in making Laws for Unity in Faith, and Uniformity in Discipline:
for, as our Savior said, A Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand; so
the same may certainly be said of a Church, the reason being the same for both:
And I call the Searcher of all hearts, the God of life and death, to witness,
that I would most readily, yea most joyfully sacrifice all I have in this
world, my life and all, that all Non-Conformists were reduced to our Church.
But it falls out most sadly that your Laws have not the desired effect, our
Church is more and more divided; such is the perverse nature of man, Niti in
Vetitum, obstinately to oppose Authority, especially when they can pretend the
color of Religion and Conscience; this carries so great an applause among the
Vulgar (still envious at Superiors) that it is, as it were, Nuts to an Ape,
sweeter to them than any other thing this world affords: for the enjoyment of
this they will endure any thing, imprisonment, loss of goods, yea sometime of
life also. And this is it which mainly nourishes our Divisions, gives great
advantage to the growth of Popery, and threatens the total ruin of our Church.
Many who were formerly very zealous for our Church, seeing these our sad
divisions, and not seeing those of the Roman-Church, nor their gross
Superstitions (which their Priests conceal till they have got men fast) are
easily seduced by their pretended Unity, and daily fall from us. This makes my
heart to bleed, and my soul with anguish ready to expire, rather than live to
see that dismal day of relapse into their manifold Idolatries. Wherefore I
humbled my Soul before God in fasting and prayer, begging daily the assistance
of his holy Spirit, to direct me to some healing Salve for these our bleeding
Wounds: and therefore I have some reason to believe, that what is contained in
these following Papers, comes from the great goodness of God, who never fails
those who seek him in humility and sincerity both, which I am confident I have
done; and this I am sure of, that no Worldly designs have moved me to this, but
have often tempted me to give it over; I am also sure, that there is nothing
contained therein, which is contrary to the known Laws of the Land: in this
only I confess I have transgressed; in putting it forth without license, and
for this I beg of God and you, as Naaman did of Elisha, In this thing the Lord
and you pardon your Servant; and I hope you will say unto me as Elisha did unto
Naaman, Go in peace; and I farther hope this shall not cast such a prejudice
upon it, as to make you cast it by, or read it with disgust. I do not expect
you should approve any thing upon the account of my seeking God in this, but
upon my Reasons alleged; nor do I expect that upon my Reasons you should
approve all: yet I beseech you seriously consider all, and God of his infinite
goodness direct you to that which may make for the Unity of our Church, by
yielding to weak ones (if not wilful Ones also) as far as your Reason and
Conscience will permit: sure you cannot so loath all condescension, as not to
loath more, and detest Papal confusion, which certainly comes on apace by our
division; and of two evils, both Reason and Religion require us to choose the
less; now doubtless you cannot think condescension (if evil at all, sure not)
so evil as Papal Idolatry, and that Papistry is Idolatry, is so clearly proved
by our Learned Dr. Stilling fleet, as it were lost labor to say more of it.
Condescension may seem in some respects imprudent, but whether in this
conjuncture of affairs imprudent, I beseech you again consider well. The Wisest
men have changed their Counsels and Resolves upon second thoughts, much more
upon experience, and approaching evils not at first discovered. It is a common
thing with Princes when they find their main enemies power increase much, to
make peace with lesser enemies, on conditions never before to be endured;
Self-preservation being the prime principle in all Creatures rational and
irrational, springing from Nature it self, it should in nature and reason
overbalance any other consideration; and whatever is done to this end, if not
sinfully done, must needs be wisely done. I most humbly beseech the All-wise
God, and sole giver of wisdom, to pour down his Holy and Wise Spirit upon you.

Amen.
To the READER.
CHristian Reader, so I term you, hoping you have in some measure the Spirit of
Christ, and desire it more, the spirit of meekness, humility, charity, not to
censure my errors, and enveigh against them, but to pity and endeavor to
rectify them, if you find any; and I assure you in the word of a Christian, I
shall be far more ready to recant, than to vent an error: If you be not thus
Christianly disposed, I earnestly beseech you read no furtner, for I am sure
you will be displeased with it: and can you think it wisdom to run your self
into displeasure? enjoy your present quiet, and let me rest. But if you be so
Christianly disposed as I mentioned, then I as earnestly heg of you to proceed,
to discover my errors and amend them. But perchance you will ask who I am, why
did I not tell you, by putting my name to this Pamphlet? I will ingenuously
confess the cause. I am a weak man, of great Passions, not able to bear
Commendations or Reproach; my small ability puts me out of danger of the first,
but in great fear of the later. Why then was I so forward to publish my
weakness? to have it cured; yet truly I have not been very forward, for it is
now above two years since I had these thoughts, in which time I have read and
conferred all I could to discover if I were in an error, but for all I yet
could meet with, do not find it so, but hope all I say is truth, and that it
may he useful to the Public, in this present conjuncture of affairs.
Therefore I proceed, and in the next place most humbly beseech all that read
this, to lay aside all bias of interest or education, both are very great, I am
sure I found it so very long before I could master them, and that of education
most difficult; were it not so, there could not be that difference of opinion
in Christian Religion, all allowing the Bible for the Rule of Faith, the
Papists themselves do not reject it, but add to it the authority of the Church.
I verily believe there are thousands of Papists, Lutherans Calvinists, both
Learned and Religious, who would lay down their lives for the truth they
profess, and yet are divided in opinion merely by education, having in their
youth so imprinted their own opinions in their mind, as you may sooner separate
their body than their opinion from their Soul. Nay, I have heard that among the
Turks there are many wise and moderate persons that are as zealous to maintain
their ridiculous. Alcaron as we our Bible; which cannot proceed from any thing
but the strong bias of education, which so wheels about and intoxicates their
brain. And to say somewhat more particular of our own Nation here, Those that
have been educated in that way as to sit at the Communion, and baptize their
Children without the Cross, had rather omit these Sacraments than use kneeling
or the Cross; and those that have been educated in kneeling and crossing,
though they acknowledge they are mere Ceremonies indifferent, yet had rather
omit the Sacraments, than omit the Ceremonies just as if a man had rather
starve than eat bread baked in a Pan, because he has used bread baked in an
Oven. So that Religion in many is really hut their humor, fancy passes for
reason, and custom is more prevalent than any argument. This is the thing
which makes me fear I shall meet with very few that will calmly and
indifferently consider what I write, but will presently startle at it as new
and cross to their Genius; or to their interest or their reputation, which they
value above all, I mean the esteem and kindness of their best friends and
acquaintance, whose taunts and reproach they cannot bear; but I humbly beseech
them to pause a while, and lay it by till the passion be over, 'till they have
mastered all these difficulties. I beseech them to set before their eyes the
beauty, the honor, the stedfastness of Truth; the comfort, the delight, the
everlasting felicity of a clear and rectified Conscience; then resume it and
consider again. But they cry Pish, it is not worth it, it is a ridiculous toy,
and savours something of the Sectarian: I grant there are some things among the
Sectarians I approve of, I will not reject and condemn any truth uttered, or
any good action performed though said and done by the Devil. I consider the
things, and if good, embrace them, whoever utters them, though I detest his
errors in other things; You will say the same? then I heseech you do the same;
consider what I say simply in it self, whether the Papists or Anabaptists say
the same, it matters not; I hope you will not reject Christ because they both
profefs him. But if after all your serious patient, unbiast consideration you
find it an erroneous contemptible Pamphlet, yet contemn not the person that
wrote it in the sincerity of his heart, lest you receive the same measure again
from Christ, who has assured us, that shall be his rule, to meet unto us the
like. Christ died for the salvation of my poor soul as well as yours, contemn
it not therefore, but endeavor to rectify it; if God has given you more
knowledge and wisdom than me, be not high-minded but fear, and let him that
stands take heed lest he fall. Thus I pray for you, do you the like for me, and
however we differ in Opinion, let us accord in Charity, and in Christ Jesus the
Redeemer of us all.

Amen.
Concerning Articles of Faith.
THat which we commonly call the Apostles Creed, if it were not Composed by
them, yet certainly by Primitive and Apostolic Men, and proposed as the Sum
of Christian Faith, the Sum total necessary to Salvation; It cannot be
supposed they lest out any thing which they thought necessary to Salvation,
they might as well have omitted half or all: as one Commandment broken is the
same in effect with all, so one necessary Principle of Faith denied, Cancels
all, and shuts outfrom Heaven. When I speak of believing the Apostles Creed, I
do not mean, that we believe all there contained with a Divine Faith because it
is there contained, for we have no assurance that the Apostles Composed that
Creed; but we are sure all that is in that Creed is evident in Scripture to any
common understanding; therefore we believe all with a Divine Faith. But I
mention this Creed only, to show that the Primitive Church received this as
the sum total of Faith necessary to Salvation; why not now? Is the state of
Salvation altered? If it be complete, what needs any other Article? You would
have men improve in Faith, so would I, but rather intensive than extensive, to
confirm it rather than enlarge it: One sound grain of Mustard Seed is better
than a bushel of unsound chaffie stuff. It Is good to know all Gospel Truths,
and to believe them, no doubt of that; but the Question is not what is good,
but what is necessary. I pray remember the Treasurer to Candace, Queen of
Ethiopia, whom Philip Instructed in the Faith; his time of Catechizing was very
short, and soon proceeded to Baptism. But Philip first required a Confession of
his Faith, and the Eunuch made it, and I beseech you Observe it; I believe that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God: and straitway he was Baptized. How? no more
than this? No more; this little grain of Faith being sound, believed with all
his heart, purchased the Kingdom of Heaven: Had he believed the whole Gospel
with half his heart, it had been of less value in the sight of God; it is not
the Quantity, but the Quality of our Faith God requires. But sure the Eunuch
was more fully Instructed; it may be you are sure of it, but I could never yet
meet with any assurance of it, nor any great probability of it; I am sure he
saw Philip no more, and I am sure Philip required no more, but baptized him on
this, and had the Eunuch departed this Life in the same instant that Philip
parted from him, I believe I have better assurance that this faith would have
saved the Eunuch, than any Man has that he ever was taught more: See 1 John 4.
2. Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is of
God: but the more the better still I grant, though no more necessary. Have thou
more Faith, have it to thy self before God, happy is he who condemns not
himself in the thing which he allows; happy is he who is thankful to God for
having received much, and despises not him that has received little: God
dispenses his gifts and graces according to his free Will and Pleasure, nor
does he require more of any Man than according to the proportion he has given,
no more should we.

Nothing has caused more mischief in the Church than the establishing new and
many Articles of Faith, and requiring all to assent unto them. I am willing to
believe that zealous men endeavored this with pious intentions to promote that
which they conceived Truth; but by imposing it on the diffenters, caused
furious Wars, and lamentable Bloodshed among Christians, Brother Fighting
against Brother, and Murdering each other. Can there be any thing more
irrational than to endeavor to promote the truth of the Gospel contrary to the
Laws of the Gospel? to break an evident Commandment to establish a doubtful
Truth? I say, doubtful to him on whom it is imposed, though seeming clear to
him that imposes it. If it were fully expressed in Scripture-words, there would
need no new Expression, no new Article; if it be not fully expressed in
Scripture, but deduced from Scripture-Expressions, then what one Man thinks
clearly deduced, another may think not so; I mean, not another ignorant and
weak, but as learned, and as able. What more common than in Divinity and
Philosophy Schools? One cries, this is a clear Demonstration; another cries, no
such matter, but flatly denies it. Men's understandings are as various as their
Speech or their Countenance, otherwise it were impossible there should be so
many understanding and moderate, yea, and conscientious Men also, Papists,
Lutherans, Calvinists, all in such Opposition one against another, all
believing Scripture, yet so differing in the deductions from Scripture. Truly I
think him very defective in Charity, however he abound in Faith, who thinks all
Papists or Lutherans, or Calvinists maliciously or wilfully blind.

As for my part, I think nothing can be more clearly deduced from Scripture,
nothing more fully expressed in Scripture, nothing more suitable to Natural
Reason, than that no Man should be forced to believe, for no Man can be forced
to believe; you may force a Man to say this or that, but not to believe it.
First, as to Reason. If you bring a Man an evident Demonstration, and he has a
Brain to understand your Demonstration, he cannot but assent to it. If you hold
a clear Printed Book with a clear Candle to a Man of clear Eyes and able to
read, he will certainly read; but if the Print be not clear, or the Candle or
his Sight not clear, or he not Learned to read, can your force make him read?
And just so it is with our understanding, which is the eye of our Soul, and a
demonstration being as a candle to give light; if then your demonstration or
deduction, or his understanding be not clear, or he not learned, you may with a
club dash out his brains, but never clear them. He then that believes the
Scripture, cannot but believe what you clearly demonstrate from Scripture, if he
has clear brains; if he has not, your force may puzle and pudle his brains
more by the passion of anger and hatred, make him abhor you and your arguments,
but never lovingly embrace you or them: and thus you may hazard his Soul by
hatred, and your own Soul also by provoking him to it, but never save his Soul
by a true belief. But perchance you will conclude, he does not believe the
Scripture, because he does not believe your arguments from Scripture; (a
strange conclusion) but what then? would you, can you force him to believe the
Scripture? can you drive says like a nail into his head or heart with a
hammer? nay, it is not in a man's own power to make himself believe any thing
farther then his reason shows him, much less divine things; this is the
peculiar work of Grace, and if Faith be the gift of God, your Argument cannot
give it, nor your Hammer force it; Arguments may be good Inducements, and if
right, will prevail with those to believe whom God has ordained to Eternal
Life, but no other; Preaching the Word is the means God himself has appointed,
but as for force, I cannot find in the Gospel either commandment or countenance
given for it. If the Scripture command to speak the truth in love, to instruct
our Brother in the spirit of meekness, if we are to pray and beseech him to
receive the grace of God, can any thing be more contrary to Scripture Rule,
then force and violence? to what purpose then is force, since it cannot make
him believe the Gospel; and if he does believe the Gospel, he will, I am sure,
he cannot choose but believe what you clearly show him is contained there
(supposing his brain to be clear); and I am also sure, if he believe what is
clearly contained, he need not believe any thing else. The Scripture is our
Rule of Faith complete and full, the Scripture it self tells us so, John 20.
31. These things are written that you might believe, and believing ye might
have life; and our Savior tells us, That in them we have Eternal Life, John 5.
39. and the 2d. Tim. 3. 15. St. Paul tells us, The Scriptures are able to make
us wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus; all Scripture is
given by inspiration of God and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. And I beseech all men further
to consider what is said Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Thou shall not add thereto nor diminish
from it; and likewise how they will avoid the Curse in the last of the
Revelation, if they add to the words there written; and surely it is the same
Crime to add to any other Book of Scripture. If it be answered, They do not
require us to believe it to be Scripture. I reply, They require men to believe
it as Scripture, with Divine Faith, which is as bad, they make their own words
equal with Gods word; or if they say, they require not Divine Faith, then I am
sure it is no matter of Salvation whether I believe it or no, humane Faith
cannot save. Thus you see how impertinent, how irrational, how impious it is,
to require a man to believe any thing more than is clearly contained in
Scripture; and if it be clearly contained there, he that believes Scripture and
sees it clearly contained there, cannot but believe it; if he do not see it
clearly contained there, you cannot force either his sight or his Faith. Your
force may make him blinder, but never see cleerer; may make him an Hypocrite,
no true Convert.

Again, I desire all men soberly to consider. Are not the prime and most
necessary Principles of Faith, the Trinity, three Persons and one God, the
Incarnation of Jesus Christ, the same person to be God and Man, the
Resurrection of the Dead, that we shall rise with the same Body, when one body
may be eaten and converted into several bodies, and such like: Are they not
things far above the highest reason and sharpest understanding that ever had
Man; yet we believe them, because God (who cannot lie) has declared them: is
it not then a strange thing for any man to take upon him to declare one tittle
more of them then God has declared, seeing we understand not what is declared;
I mean we have no comprehensive knowledge of the matter declared, but only a
believing knowledge, our Faith not our Reason reaches it: the Apostles by the
Scriptures teach us this, not the Schools by Syllogismes. If then our Reason
understands not what is declared, How can we by Reason make any deduction by
way of Argument from that which we understand not? As for Example. Some hold,
That the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son; some, that he
proceeds from the Father by the Son. I pray, Does any man understand how the
Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, from the Son, or by the Son? no certainly,
how then can he affirm or believe a tittle more of the Holy Ghost than the Holy
Ghost has declared? Seeing, as I said, He understands not at all what is
declared. Discourse must be of things intelligible, though Faith believes
things not intelligible. Can any man prove, that rotation and circulation are
all one, who understands not what rotation or circulation is? the like may be
said of procession or mission of the Holy Ghost, The Scripture plainly tells,
That the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, and that he is sent by the
Father, that he is sent also by the Son, but whether he proceeds from the Son
or by the Son, the Scripture is silent, and I am therefore ignorant, having no
knowledge at all of any Divine Mysteries but from the Scriptures. I grant, That
by rational deductions and humane way of argumenting, it is probable, that the
Holy Ghost proceeds from the Son as from the Father; but if in divine matters
we once give way to humane deductions, a cunning Sophister may soon lead a weak
Disputant into many Errors. By humane deduction you may infer, that the Son is
inferior to the Father as begotten by him, the Holy Ghost inferior to both,
being sent by both; with us the less is sent by the greater; by humane
deduction from three distinct persons you may prove three distinct substances;
I hope you will make no such inferences in the Divine Persons. Again, What a
business have the Schoolmen made about these words of our Savior; This is my
Body: with their praedicatum, and subjectum, and copula, and individuum vagum,
in the pronoun This. Innumerable are their intricate Impertinencies in this
matter, and in their conclusions, The Papists hold Christ to be present in the
Sacrament Transubstantialiter; the Lutherans, Consubstantialiter; the
Calvinists, Sacramentaliter; and yet all confess they understand none of these
ways; as St. Paul says, Desiring to be Teachers they understand not what they
say, neither whereof they affirm, 1 Timothy 1. 7. Had the Scripture affirmed any
of these ways, we ought to have submitted our Reason in things above Reason
though we understand them not, and it is reasonable so to do; but to go about to
prove by reason what is above reason, is wonderful; and to discourse of what we
understand not, is doubtless a spice of madness, and the conclusions we draw
from such discourses, must needs be very dangerous, we following the ignem
fatuum, the uncertain light of humane reason in Divine matters so totally
beyond our reach: Wherefore we have no other safe way to speak of Divine
matters but in Scripture Language, ipsissimis verbis, with the very same words,
according to that, 2 Timothy 1. 13. Hold fast the form of sound words which thou
have heard of me in Faith: Mark, Hold fast not only the matter of Faith, but
the form of sound words, these are safe; humane words in Divine and high
Mysteries are dangerous; Man can no more set them forth in humane words, than
express the Divine substance by humane painting, it is the sole work of the Holy
Ghost, who is also Divine.

There has not been a greater plague to Christian Religion than
School Divinity, where men take upon them the liberty to propose new Questions,
make nice distinctions and rash conclusions of Divine matters, tossing them up
and down with their Tongues like Tennis Balls; and from hence proceed all the
dangerous Heresies, and cruel Bickerings about them, falling from words to
blows. The first Divinity School we read of, was set up at Alexandria by
Pantaenus, and from thence soon after sprang forth that damnable Haeresie of
the Arrians, which over ran all Christendom, and was the cause of destruction
to many Millions of Christians both Body and Soul. The Haeresies before this
were so gross and sensual, that none took them up but dissolute or frantic
people, and soon vanished; but after this School subtle way of arguing was
brought into Christianity, Haeresie grew more refined, and so subtle, that the
plain and Pious Fathers of the Church knew not how to lay hold of it and
repress it, the School distinctions and evasions quite baffled them: and these
Sophisters, proud of their conquest, triumphed and carried away a specious
appearance of Truth as well as Learning, (or rather cunning) insomuch that many
godly persons were also deluded and fell in unto them, and many of their
Haeresies continue unto this day. This great bane of the Church took it is rise
from hence; Many of the Primitive Doctors and Fathers being converted from
Heathenisme, and having by long and great Industry acquired much knowledge in
natural Philosophy, Antiquity, History, and subtle Logic or Sophistry, were
very unwilling to abandon quite these their long studied and dearly beloved
Sciences, (falsely so called) and therefore translated them into Christianity,
applying their School terms, distinctions, Syllogismes, etc. to Divine matters;
intending perchance, through indiscreet zeal, to illustrate and imbellish
Christian knowledge with such artificial forms and figures, but rather defaced
and spoiled it; which the wisdom of St. Paul well foresaw, and therefore
forewarned us of it, Col. 2. 8. Beware lest any man spoil you through
Philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the Rudiments of
the World, and not after Christ. I humbly conceive it and been far better for
them, and all Christendom, had they determined with St. Paul, To know nothing
but Christ and him Crucified; and not to intermingle man's Wisdom and
excellency of speech with Divine Knowledge and Scripture Doctrine, which is to
be taught by the demonstration of the Spirit and of power, as is set forth 1
Cor. 2. not with Logical Syllogisms and Sophistical Enthymems; for as the
wisdom of God was foolishness to the Greeks and Gentiles, so the wisdom of
the Greeks and Gentiles was foolishness to God, and destruction to his Church;
who by the foolishness of preaching had overcome all their wisdom, and
captivated their understandings in obedience to the Faith. But when the
Christian Doctors left this plain and simple way of preaching, and sell to
cunning disputing, introducing new forms of speech and nice expressions of
their own coining, some approving, some opposing them, great Discords, Wars
and Confusions soon followed. Had that most Prudent and most Pious Constantine
the first and best of Christian Emperors, had he pursued his own intentions to
suppress all disputes and all new questions of God the Son, both Homoousian and
Homoiousion, and commanded all to acquiesce in the very Scripture expressions
without any addition, I am confident the Arrian Heresy had soon expired; but
by continual disputation the heat of Passion was raised, and the matter pursued
with far more violence, which at length grew into rancour and malice
irreconcilable: For some Godly Bishops (I humbly conceive more zealous than
discreet) would not rest satisfied unless the Arrians were forced either to
subscribe to the new word Homoousian, or to quit their Livings; and this caused
that great Persecution against the Orthodox, where the Arrians prevailed;
whereas by silence imposed on all parties, the malice, rancour, persecution,
war, all had been prevented, and the Truth spoken in love would at length most
probably have prevailed: For, was not the Gospel at first planted this way?
preaching and praying men to receive it, by this way of weakness it pre^vailed;
for the weak things of God are stronger then men. But when men will be wiser
then God, and in their foolish wisdom think it fit to add their strength to
Gods weakness, as a speedier and surer way to establish the Truth, God to
convince them of their folly, suffers that strong man the Enemy of the Gospel
(whom none but his Almighty Arm can bind and master) to come and sow his tares
of division which soon over-runs the good seed of the Church, and brings all to
confusion.

But what then? would I have all heretical Opinions broached and spread abroad
without any control? Are not Princes and Magistrates to be Nursing Fathers
unto the Church? must they not add the Power of the Sword to that of the Word?
Not hold the Sword in vain, but for the punishment of evil Doers, etc? All this
I grant, and desire as much as any man, that both Prince and Pastor would hold
fast the Faith once delivered to the Saints, fully declared and contained in
Scripture; let them suffer no new Doctrine to be set on foot, certainly
superfluous (the Scripture being allsufficient) and probably dangerous, as
being of Man, and not of God, who having given us a complete Rule of Faith and
Life by his Prophets, Apostles, and his only Son, we have no reason to believe
any New Doctrine proceeds from him; therefore St. Paul is very bold, and cries
out, If an Angel from Heaven Preach unto you any other Gospel than is already
preached, let him be accursed. The Magistrate then is to countenance and
protect the Pastor preaching the Gospel of Christ, to silence, oppose, punish
all that Preach any thing contrary, or not clearly contained in the Gospel.
Heresies never at first appear in their own natural shape, but disguised with
specious pretenses drawn from some obscure places of Scripture, capable of
various Interpretations, and thus having gotten footing, by degrees they lay
aside their Disguises, and march on barefaced. Therefore both Pastor and
Magistrate ought to be very watchful, and oppose all beginnings ever so
specious, as dangerous, or at least superfluous, as I said. Let the Pastors at
first endeavor by plain and sound Doctrine to stop the mouths of Gainsayers;
but if these turbulent spirits will not be stopped, neither by Admonitions nor
Entreaties, then let the Pastors proceed to the Power of the Keys; which, were
it used with that Gravity and Severity as it was in the Primitive times, would
have great effect; that is, were it used in a solemn Assembly, by the Reverend
Bishop and his Clergy, (not by Lay-Chancellours and their Surrogates) and the
person excommunicated and shut out of the Church, were likewise excluded from
all Conversation and Commerce, every one shunning his company as a person
infected with the Plague (so it was of old, and so it ought to be now, and so
it would be now, if men made any Conscience of their ways) this I am confident
would reduce many a one: But if after this any persevere in their perverseness,
then the Magistrate may doubtless by his Power, used with Christian moderation,
endeavor to stop the spread^^g of the Contagion, and do what in wisdom he
thinks meet to preserve the purity and peace of Church and State, urging
against them that Scripture, Have thou Faith, have it to thy self before God,
Romans 14. 22. Or that, Give none offense neither to the Jew nor to the Gentile,
nor to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10. 32. Or that, Gal. 5. 12. I would they were
even cut off that trouble you. St. Paul was not here in jest but in great
earnest, as appears by his continued fervency all along this Epistle; and
doubtless he means not here a cutting off from the Church by way of
Excommunication, for that was in his power to do; why then should he wish it?
nay, they had cut themselves off from the Church before; certainly then he
means a cutting off by the Civil Power, which then was Heathen, and therefore
St. Paul would not have it made use of by Christians; for he would not allow
them to appeal to unbelieving Magistrates, no not in Civil things, 1 Cor. 6.
much less in Spiritual things. Wherefore when St. Paul wishes they were cut
off, he wishes there were a fitting Power, that is, a Christian Magistrate to
punish or banish those that trouble the Church of Christ with Doctrines
apparently contrary to the clear Text, and such as are destructive to
Christianity; I dare go no farther. But as for those who keep their erroneous
Opinions to themselves, who neither publish nor practice any thing to the
disturbance of the Church or State, but only refuse to conform to the Churches
established Doctrine or Discipline, pardon me if I say, that really I cannot
find any warrant, or so much as any hint from the Gospel, to use any Force to
compel them; and from Reason sure there is no Motive to use Force; because, as
I showed before, Force cannot make a man believe your Doctrine, but only as an
Hypocrite, Profess what he believes not.

I know full well there is a common Objection against this, taken from St.
Austin, who was long of my Opinion, but seems to be altered on this occasion.
Some Heretics Donatists, came to him in his latter days, and gave thanks,
that the Civil Power was made use of to restrain them; confessing, that was the
Means which brought them to consider more calmly their own former extravagant
Opinions, and so brought them home to the true Church. This Objection is easily
answered. First, the Donatists are well known to have been a Sect, not only
erroneous in Judgment, but very turbulent in Behavior, always in seditious
practices; and in that case I showed before how the Civil Magistrate may
proceed to Punishment; but our case is not in repressing seditious practices,
but enforceing a. Confession of Faith, quite of another nature. Then secondly,
to answer more particularly this story, I suppose there is no man such a
stranger to the world, as to be ignorant that there are Hypocrites in it; and
such (for ought we know) these seeming converted Donatists might be, who for
love of this World more than for love of the Truth, forsook their heretical
Profession, though not their Opinion; who, conscious to themselves of their own
dissimulation, and desirous to get favor with St. Austin, a Person of great
Veneration and Authority with all, related unto him this specious Story, which
St. Austin's great Charity was apt to believe, as St. Paul says, believes all
things; and from hence concludes, that it might be lawful to use the Power of
the Civil Sword to reduce Heretics to the Church. But unless it can be
evidenced that these Donatists Hearts were changed as well as their Profession,
(a thing impossible to prove) all this proves nothing. Thirdly, Put the Case
their Hearts were really changed as to matter of Belief, it is evident their
Hearts were very worldly still, grovelling on the Earth, not one step nearer
Heaven; our Savior says, An evil Tree cannot bring forth good Fruit, and sure
their Heart was evil, which was far more moved for the quiet enjoyment of this
Worlds good, than for the blessed enjoyment of Christ. Fourthly, Though we
farther grant, that the pruning of the Magistrates Sword did really correct the
vitiousness of the Tree, and made it bring forth some good Fruit, yet shall we
do evil, that good may come of it? God forbid, says St. Paul. Put the case
Malchus had been converted by St. Peter's cutting off his Ear, this would not
have excused St. Peter's act, which our Savior so sharply reproved and
threatened with perishing by the Sword, and gave him the reason why he ought not
to use the Sword in his cause; Think thou that I cannot pray unto my Father,
and he will presently give me more than twelve legions of Angels? Can thou do
any thing more prejudicial to the honor of my Godhead, than to think I want
the help of Man to defend me? And according to this may our Savior say;
Think thou that I cannot pray unto my Father, and he shall give me more than
twelve millions of Souls to worship my Name? or can thou do any thing to
eclipse more the power and glory of the Gospel, which I have ordained to be set
up by weakness and foolishness of Preaching, and thereby to subdue both the
wisdom of the Greeks, and the power of the Gentiles: As I my self have
conquered all Enemies by preaching and suffering, so must my Disciples tread in
my steps. And just so we find that the Gospel was most miraculously advanced
over all the World by preaching and suffering for it; not by compelling others
to it. It Is evident that upon preaching of the Gospel, as many as were ordained
by God to Eternal Life, believed: and surely those who are not ordained by God
to Eternal Life, can never be brought thither by the ordinance or power of Man:
Wherefore when the Ministers have preached and prayed, they have performed all
they can do, the rest must be left to the Justice or Mercy of God, who has
mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens; so, that the
sharpest Sword in this world shall enter their hard heart no more than an
Adamant.

All this I say in reference to compelling Men to believe or conform, still
reserving to the Magistrate power, according to Scripture, To punish evil
doers (not evil believers, not who think, but) do publish or do practice
something to subvert the Fundamentals of Religion, or disturb the Peace of the
State, or injure their Neighbor. God, the only searcher of hearts, reserves
unto himself the punishment of evil thoughts, of evil belief, which Man can
never have a right cognizance of, for the greatest Professor may be the
greatest Atheist, But the Magistrate shall conceive he has sufficient warrant
to punish also evil believers, and shall proceed to execution, or on that
pretense shall punish true believers; the Scripture is most clear, that the
Subject is bound to submit and bear it with all Christian patience, to the loss
of Goods, Liberty, or Life, not only patiently to bear it, but to rejoice in
it; and I am sure if he has any true Religion, any right understanding in him,
he will rejoice on his own behalf, because his reward is exceeding great:
Therefore whoever under pretense of Religion raises any Tumult, or takes up
Arms against the Magistrate to preserve himself from persecution, absolutely
declares himself, either a stark Fool, or a stark Atheist; either he believes
there is no such reward, or is mad to reject the opportunity of gaining it; and
so at the best is fit for Bedlam, at the worst for the Gallows; now let him
choose.

An Appendix to the former Subject.
BEfore I leave this matter of imposing new Articles of Faith, I desire to
speak a word or two concerning the authority of Councels and Fathers in
relation to it.

When the Superstitions and the Abuses of the Popish Church, especially in the
matter of Indulgences grew so very gross, as not longer to be endured, Luther,
Melancthon, Oecolompadius, Bucer, and diverse others opposed them; and coming to
dispute with their Adversaries about these things, the Popish Doctors having no
Scripture for their Errors, quoted several Fathers and Councils, to give
countenance unto them. The Evangelical Doctors (so called, because they chiefly
urged Evangelium the Gospel for the defense of their Doctrine) were most of
them bred up from their Infancy in the Popish Church, and therein taught even
to adore all Councils and Fathers, and (education being of great force to
command and awe both the Wil's and Judgments of Men) made them very shie and
timorous to reject that authority, which they had long reverenced; in modesty
therefore some of the Evangelical Doctors were content to admit the authority
of Fathers and Councils for three or four of the first Centuries, some admitted
five or six, whereby they were reduced some times to great streights in their
Disputations: for though neither all nor half the Popish Errors can be found in
the Councils and Fathers of these Centuries, yet some of them were crept very
early into the Church. This Superstition of the Cross and Chrysme were in use
in the second Century: The Milenary Error got footing about that time; the
necessity of Infants receiving the Blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper came
in soon after: About the fourth Century there was some touches in Oratory
Sermons by way of Rhetorical Ejaculations like praying to Saints, but long
after came to be formally used as now in Churches; and so Superstitions came in
some at one time, and some at another. The Papists themselves do not receive
all these Errors, but reject some, as that of the Millenaries, and the
necessity of Infants receiving the Lords Supper. Now I ask first the Papists by
what rule they retain some of these things; and reject others? Secondly, I ask
the Evangelical, by what rule they submit to the authority of some Centuries,
and refuse others? Both will answer me, Because they believe some to be
erroneus some to be Orthodox. Whereby it is evident that neither submit to the
Fathers authority, as comanding their Judgments, but receive their Opinions as
agreeing with their Judgments, this is evidently true and clearly rational, and
fully agrees with the Rules given by some of the Fathers, as St. Cyprian and
St. Austin, two as generally and as deservedly reverenced as any in the
Christian Church. St. Cyprian tells us, that the very Praepositus (which we
call Bishop) is to be guided by his own reason and conscience, and is
responsible only to God for his Doctrine. St. Austin tells us, that he submits
to no Doctor of the Church ever so learned, ever so holy, any further than he
proves his doctrine by Scripture or reason, and desires none should do
otherwise by him; this is plain and rational dealing, had the Evangelical
Doctors taken this course in the beginning, they had saved themselves from many
intricate troubles which their inbred over-revence to antiquity entangled them
in: But sure they needed not have been so scrupulous in this matter, seeing
there is scarce any one Father whose authority the Papists themselves do not in
some particular or other reject, though other whiles when he speaks for them,
they try it up to that height, as if it were even a matter of damnation not to
submit unto it. I say not this as if I would have antiquity wholly rejected by
no means, but, to consult the Fathers with great regard as Expositors of
Scriptures, and attentively observe what they show us from thence. I am not of
those who admire the great knowledge in divine matters revealed in this later
Age of the world, I do not think there are any now so likely to discover the
truth of Gospel mysteries as those of ancient days. As for that saying, A
Pigme set on a Giants shoulder, may see more than the Giant; pardon me if I
call it a shallow and silly fancy, nothing to our purpose; for our question is
not of seeing more, but of the clear discerning and judging those things we all
see, but are in doubt what they mean: if a Pigme and a Giant see a Beast at a
miles distance, and are in dispute whether it be a Horse or an Ox, the Pigme
set on the Giant shoulder, is never the nearer discerning what it is, which
depends on the sharpness of sight, not the height of his shoulders: Now that
the ancient and holy Fathers of the Church were more spiritual, and
consequently sharper sighted in spiritual things than we carnal creatures of
this later age, is evident by their Spiritual holy Lives: The natural Man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them because
they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. And how natural, how carnal, how
purblind we are, is too too visible. Besides, a purblind man near the object,
will discern it better than a much sharper sight at greater distance as we are:
For if you ask those lofty conceited Pigmes, why they give more credit to the
Fathers of the second and third Century, than to those of the sixth or seventh;
they answer, Because those that lived nearer the days of Christ and his
Apostles, are like liar to know their minds better than those of remoter and
corrupted Ages; the reason is good, but mightily confounds those who live at
the very foot of the Hill in the valley of darkness and all Iniquity, and
therefore not so likely to discern the truth of the doctrine of Christ,
preached on the top of Mount Sion, as those who lived in higher ascents.
Wherefore I shall always hearken with due reverence unto what those Primitive
Holy Fathers deliver, and the more holy and more ancient, doubtless more to be
regarded. And yet seeing that Irenaeus, and before him Papi^^, held to be a
Disciple of St. John the Apostle, taught the error of the Millenaries, rejected
now by all the Church, why might not others do so as well as they? and
therefore there can be no certainty of their Doctrine farther than they show us
clearly from Scripture, which ought to be our only Rule of Faith, as I showed
before. But in any point of Religion; either of Faith or Discipline, if after
diligent and humble search of Scripture, the matter be doubtful, then certainly
I would so much reverence antiquity as to embrace what I found approved of by
the greater number of ancient Fathers; and what I found generally approved by
them, though my own judgment did much incline to the contrary, yet I would
receive it, unless it appeared to me flatly opposite to Scripture, which we
believe to be the Word of God; then it were damnation in me to forsake that,
and hearken to the words of Fathers on earth, or Angels coming from Heaven,
till they could make me understand their word agreed with Gods Word. I must be
saved by Faith in God and Christ, and not by faith in Men or Angels. And now I
shall be bold to make this assertion; That the Man who reads Scripture humbly
and attentively, fasts and prays to God earnestly, consults his Pastors and
Teachers carefully and modestly, and yet after all continues in some error by
blind ignorance and mistake of Scripture (if such a thing was, or ever will be
suffered by the infinite goodness of God) that Man shall sooner be saved, than
he who receives a true opinion from the authority of Men, which he soberly
conceives to be contrary to Scripture; for it is all one to him, as if it were
really so; all things are unclean to him that believes them unclean, so all
things are damnable to him that believes them damnable, as he must do who
believes them flatly contrary to Scripture. Let no Man count me a libertine in
faith, because I would neither compel, nor be compelled to submit to the
Doctrines of Men. I trust in God, no Man shall out-go me in zealous contending
for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, once for all, never to receive any
new Doctrine, any other Gospel than that preached by Christ and his Apostles,
herein I am no Libertine; by God's gracious assistance, neither Men nor Angels
shall make me recede from one tittle of this, nor to embrace with divine faith
one tittle more than this, for doubtless it is far greater Idolatry to believe
in Man, than to sacrifice to Man, more to give him my heart, than my hand. And
yet notwithstanding all this, no Man is forwarder than my self to receive from
others humane doctrine as humane; that is, I believe it is not only possible
but probable also, that another may have more natural understanding, more
acquired learning than my self, and so may find out that in Scripture, or from
Scripture; or by reason, which I cannot do my self; but yet I can have no
possible assurance that the Doctrine he delivers to me is absolutely true;
because I have assurance that it is possible for him to err, and then I can
have no assurance but that he may err in that very Doctrine he now delivers
me. There is no Man I ever yet heard or read of, to whom I could more readily
submit than to St. Austin, a Person of wonderful sharpness in understanding,
and yet of great modesty; no way affecting to take new Opinions, much less to
impose them no others. Now I pray consider, How can we have assurance of any
Doctrine he delivers more than another, I mean assurance from his own authority
or reason (what he delivers from Scripture authority is another matter;) we
believe St. Austin erred in some things whereof he was most confident; he
believed it absolutely necessary for Children to receive the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, as I said; he believed it a direct heresy to hold there were
any Antipodes: Lactantius another great Wit and great Scholar, believed the
like, with diverse others. Who then can doubt but that they might be mistaken in
other things also. Wherefore let God be true, and all Men liars, in this sense,
to deliver lies materially; that is, falsities for truths.

What I have said of Fathers, must certainly hold good of Councels also though
ever so general, ever so Primitive; for this and that Father may, and have
erred; surely then that and that may also err: I can have no assurance in Men,
nor can I be saved by faith in Men. The general Objection made against this,
is, The promise which Christ made unto his Church, That the gates of Hell
should not prevail against it, and that he would be with the Apostles unto the
Worlds end. As for that other saying of our Savior, He that will not hear the
Church, let him be to thee as an Heathen and a Publican, I cannot but wonder
that Men of any brains or modesty should so grossly abuse this saying, spoken of
several differences between Man and Man, to be referred to the termination of
the Church; that is, the Congregation of the Faithful, which they usually and
by order should assemble in; and refer this to the Church in general in matters
of Faith, not in the least pointed at there. Wherefore I pass this over as very
impertinent, and proceed to answer the former Objection of more weight, yet no
way concluding as they would have it; No Man in the Christian World can more
firmly believe than I do, That the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it,
and that Christ will be with his Church unto the end of the World; but I do not
believe, nor am I bound by Scripture to believe such Expositions as the Popish
Church makes of this place. By what authority does the Romish Church challenge
to themselves to be Expositors of Scriptures more than other Churches? I find
nothing for it in Scripture, which is my Rule of Faith. I proceed then to the
business of general Councels. Whether they may err in some points of Faith;
and why not? All the Evangelical Doctors grant the later general Councels have
erred; if so, why not the former? what promise had the former from Christ more
than the later? what period is there set in Scripture for their not erring, or
what promise is there at all for any not to err? The gates of Hell shall not
prevail against the Church, I grant, what is this to a General Council? not the
thousand part of the Clergy, not the thousand thousand part of the Church,
which is Scripture is always put for the whole Body of the Faithful, though of
late it be translated into quite another notion, and taken for the Clergy only.
But you will say a General Council is the representative of the whole Church:
what then? what promise is made in Scripture that the representative shall not
err? You further urge, If the representative err, it is probable the whole
Church will receive their error. I answer, We are now treating of matter of
Faith, which must not depend on humane probabilities, but Divine certainties;
besides, it is not so probable the Church will receive the error of the
representative. We know the whole Church has not received a Truth determined
by them, much loss an error. And I pray, have not Councels been against
Councels? Put then the case, a General Council should err in some matters, you
cannot therefore say the whole Church has erred, the gates of Hell have
prevailed against the Church. I pray consider, can you truly say, the Great
Turk has prevailed against the Christian Army, because he has killed the
thousand part of it? and yet the greatest General Council holds a less
proportion to the whole Church. But I will grant yet more: Put the case the
whole Church should deviate into some erroneous Superstitions, had the Devil
therefore prevailed against it? Can I say I have prevailed against another Man
because I gave him some slight hurt in his Leg or Thigh? as long as his Head,
his Heart, his Arm are whole, he still is able to fight and wound me as bad or
worse; till the Devil can so wound the whole body of the Church as to destroy
the Vitals, the Fundamentals, and make it no Church, the gates of Hell cannot be
said* to have prevailed against it. Now God be blessed there have continued all
along several Churches as great or greater than the Roman Church, which have
still maintained in defiance of Satan, One God the Father of whom are all
things, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and several other
sound Doctrines of Christianity; how then has Satan prevailed, when so many
millions have waged war against him, and upheld the Kingdom of God and his
Christ? The Scripture plainly tells us, that in the days of Anti-Christ's
great power, the Church shall be driven into the wilderness, scarce visible in
the world; neither Pope, nor Devil has yet so prevailed, but as then Christ
shall have, so Christ has still had a Church warring against Satan. Sure no
learned Papist will deny, but that about the second Century, the Millenaries
were far the greater part of the Church, scarce any writing Doctor in those
days but had this error. Did Satan then prevail? And in St. Austin's days the
necessity of Infants receiving the Lords Supper was so general, and held so
necessary a Principle, that it was made use of to prove the necessity of Infant
Baptism, this Sacrament being to precede the other: in those days a Lanthorn
would have been necessary to find out a Church without this error. Did Satan
then prevail? But say you, No General Council determined those errors; why?
because none was called about them; had any been called, who can doubt but that
they would have avowed that in the Council, which they all taught in their
Churches: No, the Spirit of God would have preserved them from it: Show me that
promise in Scripture; if Gods Spirit did not preserve them from teaching the
whole Church so, I fear the Spirit would not have preserved them more in
Council than in Congregation, where all sucking in this error from their
Infancy, would hardly have quitted it by a determination in Council. I humbly
crave pardon for this bold presumption, being lead into it by the bold
assertion of the Papists, telling us without warrant how God will preserve
their Councils from error, as if they had been of his Privy Council. We are not
to search into Gods secret Counsels for what he will permit, or why he permits
this or that. I search only into his declared Promises, and with all the search
I can possiby make, I cannot find any such promise to General Councils as not to
err; no, only that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against his Church to
destroy it, which he has hitherto made good, and I am sure will to the end of
the World; but beyond his promise I am not sure of any thing, though it seems
ever so rational. God will not endure to be fettered with Sophistical Sophisms,
and humane consequences; and therefore I am afraid to wander from his wise and
holy Word, and trust to the Doctrine of Men seeming ever so wise, ever so holy;
I reverence their Persons, but cannot believe in their Doctrine. I am taught to
believe only in God, not in the Church, much less in any member or Congregation
or Council; but to believe the Holy Catholic Church, that is, that God has
had, now has, and will have to the Worlds end, a select company of Faithful
ones, confessing and serving him; To whom be honor and glory for ever.

Amen.
Concerning Ceremonies and Church Service.
FIrst as to Ceremonies. I wonder Men of any tolerable discretion should be so
eager either for or against them, our salvation no way depending on them, but
much hazarded by our contention about them, breaking Peace, the principal thing
recommended to us by the Gospel of Peace; sure both are very sinful. For my
part, I think all Subjects are bound in conscience to conform to the
established Ceremonies of that Church, whereof they are Members, unless there
be any thing flatly against the Word of God: for to disobey our Superiors is
directly against the Word of God: 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake. And therefore he that does not submit, had
need have as clear an evidence out of Scripture, that the thing he rejects is
directly contrary to the Word of God, otherwise he breaks an evident
Commandment to satisfy himself in a doubtful thing, which without doubt is
damnable. St. Paul requires one Brother to yield unto another in things
indifferent; much more Children to Parents, Subjects to Governors. But no Man
that knows this World can expect all Children, all Subjects, will be dutiful
and obedient; and therefore as Children are to obey their Parents, so Parents
ought not to provoke their Children to disobedience, by imposing unnecessary
things and very offensive: Yet if they do impose such things, the Children are
bound to obey, unless the things imposed be offensive to God also, then they
are acquitted, not otherwise. But still Parents must remember they are to give
account to God of their commands, as Children are for their obedience: And
setting this aside, Nature alone should prompt Parents to seek the love of
their Children, especially spiritual Parents, styled the Ministers of God, who
is love: Should not they desire rather to lead the People into the House of God
by love, than whip them in by fear; to have their Churches full, rather than
empty; to put on such a habit as would invite them in, and not such as will
fright them out. What wise and loving Father would put on a winding sheet on
his head, to fright his weak and simple Child: I say this to the chief Rulers
of the Church, not to inferior Ministers, who must observe the Constitutions of
the Chief, and the Chief ought to consider the disposition of inferiors, what
will be most edifying for them. As the Apostles in the beginning of
Christianity continued to observe the not eating of blood, and things
strangled, to comply with the Jews: so the Surplice with other things was
wisely and piously retained by the Reformers from Popery, when probably many
long nourished up in those Ceremonies, would not have come in to the Church,
had all those been cast out; but now to be zealous, for them when the People
are so passionate against them, savours more of passion likewise in Governors
than Religion; as if they had rather show their Authority than their Charity.
If they answer, That many of their Flock are as zealous for these things, as
others against them, and they had rather gratify the Obedient Conformers, than
the Disobedient Gainsayers: I reply; First, This is no Obedience to conform to
such Ordinances of their Superiors as they have a passion fox; the Superiors in
this conform rath^r to them, than they to their Superiors: Try their Obedience
if they will submit to the taking of these things away, and then you may have
more reason to gratify them; yet you know you are rather to bear with the
infirmities of the weak, than please the strong. Love your Friends most, value
the Obedient most; but love your Enemies also, endeavor to gain the
disobedient also: The first are your dutiful Sons, abide always with you, all
that you have is theirs; but yet when the Prodigal the stray returns, rejoice
and kill the fatted Calf; yea, if he will not return, leave the ninety and
nine, and go seek that one that is lost. But you have no hopes of gaining him,
you believe it is not Conscience but Faction, and wilful perverseness keeps him
off; Oh do not despair, believe better of him; Charity hops all things,
believes all things. But you know it is so with him; then pity him the more
going headlong into Hell, yield the more to save his Soul from Hell, overcome
evil with good, fetter him, bind him fast with chains of love, what is stronger
then love? it will overcome Schism, Faction, Sedition, any thing; it will
overcome God himself, and even force God to withhold him by his merciful and
powerful hand; and thus converting this perverse sinner from the error of his
way, you will save his Soul alive and cover the multitude of your sins: a
blessed and joyful work whereat the Angels of Heaven will rejoice and sing
Alleluja, Amen. Oh my Fathers! my Fathers! that should Preach and Practice the
Gospel of Peace and Love to your Children, vouchsafe at my humble request to
read Romans 14. See what great liberty that great Grandfather of the Church
allows his Children, and observe in the general how he became all things to all
men to gain some; and will not you in some things comply to gain all? will you
restrain the liberty of the Gospel to the rigidity of your Discipline to lose
some, to lose many, and perchance in the end to loose all, your selves and all.
Be pious, be charitable, be prudent, build your Church on a Rock that will
endure storms, and not on the sand of Ceremonies that will both raise storms
and probably overturn your Church e're long. But you will say, If you yield to
some dissenters in this, you must as well yield to others in that, and so by
degrees abolish all your Ceremonies: I beseech you, Is not the body more then
raiment, substance more then Ceremony, will not you quit the later to preserve
the former? but you will preserve both, God graut you lose not both. But you
will say, This is the way to lose both; first take away Ceremonies, thereby you
displease and loose your Friends, and then lie exposed to your Enemies to spoil
your Goods. If your Goods be the substance of your Religion, and you preserve
your Ceremonies to preserve these, then really my fear of your loosing all is
increased; this is a very sandy and dirty foundation, cannot hold out against
storms; but if Faith, Hope and Charity be the substance of your Religion, (as
I hope it is) these stood firm and increased in the primitive times, in the
greatest storms, when the whole world of Jews and Gentiles were enemies to the
Church, and not one of your Ceremonies in the Church to preserve it: the simple
naked Truth without any Surplice to cover it, without any Ecclesiastical Policy
to maintain it, overcome all, and so would do now, did we trust to that and the
Defender of it. Perchance I appear a great Enemy to the Surplice so often
naming that, I confess I am, would you know why? not that I dislike, but in my
own Judgment much approve a pure white Robe on the Ministers shoulders, to put
him in mind what purity becomes a Minister of the Gospel. But such dirty nasty
Surplices as most of them wear, and especially the singers in Cathedrals (where
they should be most decent) is rather an intimation of their durty lives, and
have given my Stomach such a surfeit of them, as I have almost an aversness to
all: and I am confident had not this decent habit been so undecently abused, it
had never been so generally loathed.

I will name another Ceremony which gives great offense, with greater reason,
The bowing toward the Altar, which in my own judgment I allow and pract^ce in
some measure, when I come into such congregations as generally use it, avoiding
still to give offense to any as far as I may with a safe conscience. I affirm
it is a very fitting thing to show reverence in the House of God, and to show,
it by bowing as well as any other means, and to bow that way as well as any
other way, and in bowing, if the congregation did it to the South or West, I
should as readily conform to that. But you will say the primitive Christians,
as we read, did generally bow toward the East (the primitive Christians did so
I grant, but not the prime Primitive) what then? is this any obligation on us
now? the Primitive did also use Chrysme or consecrated Oil, yet we retain it
not; it grew into an abuse, therefore left off, so has this bowing toward the
Altar by the Papists, supposing Christ corporally present there: and truly many
of our Church men, give great suspicion to the people that they also believe
some such thing, otherwise pray answer me; when a Minister at his entering into
the Church has bowed to show his reverence in the House of God and when he
ascends up to the Altar bows again, to show some particular reverence in that
place where that blessed Sacrament is consecrated (let this pass for good also,
Though something may be said against it) yet I pray tell me, why the Reader
passing from one side of the Church to the other, and the Minister passing from
one end of the Altar to the other bows again? Surely in reverence to the King
of Kings he supposes there sitting, who can imagine any other cause of his
homage? and yet I verily believe this is not the cause, but merely a causeless
custom taken up one from another (the common beginning of all superstitions)
having no reason for it, but much against it, giving thereby great scandal to
weak ones, and ground of Slander to malicious ones, who lay hold on any
occasions to accuse them of Papistry; for certainly it is done with little or no
reason, or with a great deal of Superstition.

Now as to that grand debated Ceremony of kneeling at the Lords Supper I think
there is no reason to condemn those that use it, nor much reason to press it on
those that disuse it. Why? Are we not to perform this great act of devotion
with all possible reverence? I grant it, but is this to be expressed altogether
in the outward posture of the body? if so, then your opposers thus retort it
upon you: If outward humility be the thing you contend for, you ought to show
it to your God in the humblest way, and that is by prostrating rather then
kneelng; but if inward Humility, sure that consists chiefly in obedience to
what Christ commanded, and to do it as he practiced it, who can doubt but this
is the most perfect obedience? and you know when our Savior instituted this
blessed Sacrament, he gave this command in the close, Do this in remembrance of
me; and sure he remembers our Savior best who does every thing as he did, both
in Substance and Ceremony, and so we find the primitive Christians did,
observing also to receive it at Supper, as our Savior did; but when this grew
into a sinful abuse, the ceremony was altered, to preserve the substance in
more purity: so was kneeling abused by the Papists and turned into great
Superstition, why not therefore changed in like manner. But you kneel without
any superstition, you do not adore the Elements on the Table, as the Papists
do, but Christ in Heaven. And so this man receives sitting and at supper
without any irreverence, he does it so merely in obedience to Christ's command,
both in ceremony and substance, Do this in remembrance of me. But you do not
conceive Christ's command extended to the Ceremonies, but only to the
substance, and the Church has expressly commanded kneeling as the more
reverend Posture, therefore you ought to obey; I think so too: but this man
conceives Christ command's both substance and ceremonies to be observed, and
consequently conceives the Churches command contrary to Christ's, therefore he
ought not to obey till you can rectify his judgment; if you can, then he ought
to obey also; if you cannot, have patience with your weak Brother, require no
more of him in this matter then Christ required of his disciples; sure Christ
would not have allowed any unfitting posture; be not over-wise, nor over holy,
condemn not that which Christ allowed. God is so infinitely gracious as to
accept our poor devotions in any form, if but sincere in substance, nay though
weak and frail in the substantial part, he will not break the bruised reed, nor
quench the smoking flax, his tender Fatherly bowels yern upon his dear
Children coming to him afar off. Oh then let us learn to be like minded, tender
and compassionate to our weak brethren, admit them into Cods worship in any
posture, if they come in sincerity of heart, reject not those whom God accepts.

I might go on thus to handle other Ceremonies, as, the Cross in Baptism, the
Ring in Marriage, etc. But I conceive it needless, the same reasons being
applicable to all, and he that is once brought to be indifferent and
unconcerned in one, will soon be so disposed to all. Wherefore I conclude this
point of Ceremonies with St. Paul, He that regards a day, regards it unto
the Lord, and he that regards not the day, to the Lord he does not regard it;
he that eats, eats to the Lord for he gives God thanks, and he that eats
not, to the Lord he eats not, and gives god thanks: so he that kneeleth,
kneeleth to the Lord, and he that kneeleth not to the Lord, he kneeleth not.
And I desire you farther to observe this circumstance in St. Paul's words, how
he calls the zealous observer of Ceremonial matters, the weak Brother, and
commands the strong not to despise him, it being really a despicable weakness
and a childish or effeminate kind of Devotion to be zealous in any ceremonial
observance, which masculine spirits are apt to despise, but in Christian
charity ought rather to pity and bear the infirmities of others. Wherefore let
us be men of understanding, men in devotion, be zealous, and hold fast the
substantial parts of Religion, Piety, Justice, Temperance, Chastity, Truth,
Sincerity, stand fast for these, not recede one hairs breadth from these, keep
but our ground and fight it out like men to death against all Powers and
Principalities on earth, or under the earth, and let us leave it to women and
Children to contend about Ceremonies, let it be indifferent to us whether this,
or that, or no Ceremony, whether kneel, or not kneel, bow or not bow, Surplice,
or not Surplice, Cross or no Cross, Ring or not Ring, let us give glory to God
in all, and no offense to our Brethren in any thing.

Now if any man would be so curious as to ask why St. Paul did not determine
this point, whether they should eat herbs only; or other meats also, whether
regard a day or not, and so establish Uniformity among them; I cannot imagine
any other reason, but merely to teach us this charitable compliance with one
another, as necessary a practice as any other. Man is a very ticklish Animal to
Govern, he will not always be guided by reason and authority, man has a will
as well as reason, and will have his own will in many things, even the godly:
very few are found so entirely pious as wholly to deny themselves, it is so high
and sharp a point of Religion, as you may break the heart strings of many in
winding them up so high, and thus crack all their Religion; perchance you would
find it so your selves, had the Nonconformists the screwing you up, as you
them. Wherefore consider your selves, least ye also be tempted, be charitable
to the weak, proceed not so severely against them in your Courts of Judicature;
but remember what St. Paul says, Colos. 2. Let no manjudge you in meat, or in
drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath
days, which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ; will
you then in respect of an Holy Day, Cross in Baptism, standing at the Creed,
kneeling at the Sacrament, and the like, will you in respect of such shadows,
judge, excommunicate, sentence to everlasting flames, a Soul that holds of the
body of Christ, believes all his holy Ghospel, accords with you in one Faith,
one Baptism, who acknowledges the only true God Creator of Heaven and Earth,
and Jesus Christ whom he has sent to be the Redeemer of Mankind, which our
Savior affirms, To be Eternal Life; will you condemn such an one to Eternal
Death? God forbid. My Reverend Fathers and Judges of the Church, I with St.
Paul, Col. 3. beseech you, Put on fatherly bowels of mercies, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering toward your poor weak Children,
and so long as they hold fast the body Christ, be not so rigorous with them for
shadows; if they submit to you in substance, have patience, though they do not
submit in Ceremonies, and give me leave to tell you my poor Opinion* This
violent pressing of Ceremonies has, (I humbly conceive) been a great hindrance
from embracing them, men fearing your intentions therein to be far worse then
really they are, and therefore abhor them. Have you never observed a flock of
Sheep forcibly driven over a narrow Bridge, the poor Sheep fearing they are
going into some Pen for Slaughter, choose rather to leap into the River then go
forwards, but drive them on gently and patiently, they will of themselves take
the way you desire. Uniformity in Ceremony is a good and desirable thing,
therefore endeavor it; but unity in Faith and Charity is better, and therefore
if you cannot obtain that, be sure to preserve this; this is the one thing
necessary, choose this better part if you cannot have both; for this fierce
urging Uniformity in worship has caused great division in Faith as well as
Charity; for had you by abolishing some Ceremonies taken the weak brethren into
your Church, they had not wandered about after seducing Teachers, nor fallen
into so many gross Opinions of their own, but being daily catechized and
instructed by your Orthodox and sound Preaching, they would have followed you
like good Sheep; whereas now they wander about into a hundred by paths of
error, many whereof lead beadlong to Hell. Now I beseech you in the fear of God
set before your eyes the dreadful day of Judgment, when Christ on his Tribunal
of Justice shall require an account of every word and deed, and shall thus
question you; Here are several Souls who taking offense at your Ceremonies have
forsaken my Church, have forsaken the Faith, have run into Hell, the Souls for
which I shed my precious Blood; Why have you suffered this? nay, why have you
occasioned this? will you answer, it was to preserve your Ceremonies? will not
Christ return unto you, Are your Ceremonies more dear unto you then the Souls
for which I dyed? who has required these things at your hands? will you for
Ceremonies, which you your selves confess to be indifferent, no way necessary
unto Salvation, suffer your weak Brethren to perish, for whom I dyed? Have not
I showed you how David and his Soldiers were guiltless in eating the
Shewbread, which was not lawful but only for the Priests to eat? If David
dispensed with a Ceremony commanded by God to satisfy the hunger of his
People, will not you dispense with your own Ceremonies to satisfy the Souls of
my people, who are called by my Name, and profess my Name, though in weakness?
Or will you tell Christ, they ought to suffer for their own wilfulness and
perverseness, who will not submit to the Laws of the Church as they ought; will
not Christ return? Shall they perish for transgressing your humane Laws, which
they ignorantly conclude erroneous, and shall not you perish for transgressing
my Divine Laws, which you know to be good and holy? had I mercy on you, and
should not you have had mercy on your fellow servants? with the same measure
you meeted it shall be measured to you again: I tremble to go farther, but most
humlby beseech you for Christ's sake, endeavor to regain these stray sheep, for
whom he shed his precious blood, and think it as great an advantage, as great
an honor to you, as it was to St. Paul, to become all things to all men, that
you may gain some, as doubtless you will many, though not all; and the few
standers off will become the more convinced, and at long running wearied out
and gained also. Thus having reduced all into one fold in true faith and
Christian charity, the present generation will much forget, the succeeding
generation will be wholly ignorant of these erroneous fancies, and all
animosities being quite exinguished, wholesome edifying Ceremonies may be easily
introduc't again with comfort to all, which are now irksome and grievous to
many. And so I pass on to the second matter; The Church Service contained in
the Book of Common Prayer, whereof briefly, because what I said before may be
applied to this also.

Concerning Church Service.
I will not here enter into the dispute, whether it be lawful for a Church to
have a set form of Prayer, supposing that there are none but either highly
fanatic. or higly factious, that affirm it unlawful; and with such I have no
reason to expect, that reasonable Arguments should prevail; for enough has
beeen already printed to this purpose. I may also suppose, that there is
nothing contained in our Book of Common Prayer, that is directly contrary to
the Word of God; for had there been any such thing, we should have heard of it
long since, which I never yet did from any sober man. And truly I might in the
third place suppose that (a Book of Common Prayer being no way contrary to the
Word of God) the use of it is far more conducing to Piety, then to suffer
extemporary prayer to be used generally in Churches; experience has fully
declared it in our late confused times, when a man should have heard in many
Churches such extravagant, such wild, such rash, such blasphemous expressions,
as would drive any sober conscientious person out of their Churches. Can you
with reason expect it otherwise? when half the Churches in this Nation have not
a tolerable maintenance to support men of parts and discretion fit to perform
so solemn and holy an Office. Had we the holiness, the zeal the charity, the
humility of the Primitive times, when men forsook all the World and daily
sacrificed their lives for the Service of God, we might hope that God would
graciously pour down upon us, as he did on them, the special gifts of praying
and prophesying, but now when most serve God for gain, and would neither open
nor shut the Church doors for naught, as Malachi says, we must not expect
those gifts and graces. And therefore I conceive it absolutely necessary to
have some form prescribed to be used by all; for were there liberty left to the
more able and discreet, most would suppose themselves to be such (few
discovering their own weakness;) and were it left to the Bishop to license as
he saw fit, it would prove a very great cause of our heart-burning among his
Clergy, and hatred toward himself, yea and rebellion against him and the
laws. But now in Christ I humbly beseech the Governors of the Church calmly to
consider, Were it not better to have such a form of Service as would satisfy
most. The Fathers of our Church (as I said before) when they reformed this
Nation from Popery, were desirous to fetch off as many as they could, retaining
for this cause all the Ceremonies and Forms of prayer they could with a good
rectisied conscience, and therefore they prescribed that form of second service
to be said at the Altar, as carrying some resemblance to the Mass, then the
peoples delight, which being now become the peoples hate, should for the same
resemblance, according to the same rule of reason, be now taken away. We
commend our Forefathers for doing piously and wisely, and yet we will not
imitate them; they endeavored to please and gain the people, we will needs
displease and lose them: Certainly we cannot do our Forefathers a greater
honor then to observe their rule of reason, to confirm to the Times; and
therefore they are grossly mistaken who think it a dishonor to them (...) us
to take away what they have established; when we keep close to the reason
wherefore they did establish it: Wise Physicians by the same rule of reason
prescribe things clean contrary according to the temper of their Patients, hot
or cold, Some other things I could mention in the Book of Common Prayer (though
no way ill in themselves) yet fit to be altered, and would obviously appear so
to every wise man once resolved to compose such a form as would take in most of
this Nation, which I humbly conceive Governors should in conscience endeavor
becoming all things to all men to gain some, though not all; yet happily gain
all in process of time, for the reason before specified.

But though I desire such a form of Service, such Ceremonies also to be
established, as may give most general satisfaction, yet I desire what is
established may be generally observed, and not a liberty left (as some do
propose) to add or detract Ceremonies or Prayers according to the various
opinions and humors of men: for certainly this would cause great faction and
division; those that are for Ceremonies would run from their own Church to
others where they were used; others to some fine fancied Prayers of such as
they approve of; and thus some Churches would be thronged, others deserted, and
no account could be taken by the Pastor of this Congregation: Atheists also and
Papists under pretense of frequenting other Churches would abandon all. This
course (say you) would bring but few into the Church, and perchance drive some
out, who having been long bred up to such and such Ceremonies, would have small
devotion to frequent the Church, if all or many were abolished. To this I
answer, That certainly his Religion is vain; that would abandon the Substance
for want of the Ceremonies, which he acknowledges to be no way necessary, but
only more satisfaction to his mind: Surely a very ignorant mind, who has not
learnt, That obedience is better then sacrifice and whole burnt offerings: And
surely a very uncharitable mind, who would not leave ninety and nine
unnecessary Ceremonies, to bring one sinful strayed Sheep into the
Congregation, and convert him from the error of his nonconforming way. I
profess I am amazed to see how many men of a very good sense in most things, so
zealously erroneous in this business of Religion, seeing the scripture so
plainly declares, that nothing so covers the multitude of our sins as an act of
charity; nothing so acceptable unto God, so joyful to his holy Angels, as
conversion of a sinner. Yet these men will most passionately (and pardon me if
I say most uncharitably and irreligiously) cry, A way with these Idiot
Sectaries and mad Phanaticks, let them wander and perish in their own wild
imaginations, we will not leave one Ceremony, nor any one line of our Common
Prayer Book to gain thousands of them. No, if you alter that, we will rather
leave the Church and go to the Papists Mass. If these be not as simple
Sectaries and mad Phanaticks as any whatsoever, let God and his holy Angels
judge. But as for you my Reverend Fathers of the Church, I hope you will
consult with Scripture in this weighty Affair, and model all according to the
rules of meekness, charity, and compassionate tenderness to weak ones, there
set down: and endeavor with prudent admonitions to rectify the errors of
these too zealous Ceremonists, and with fatherly bowels of condescension to win
the hearts of blind and wilful Separatists. Certainly the more understanding
and powerful Leaders of them will not, cannot have the face to stand off after
your charitable condescension, their populous pretenses will be so confuted,
their mouths so stopped, their faces so confounded, as for mere shame, if not
for reason and religion, they must come into our Church: and their Pastors
coming in, the Sheep will follow, though some stand a while and gaze: but at
length having no men of ability to lead them on in their perverse ways, the
Shop-prating Weavers and Cobblers will soon be deserted, and made heartless,
seeing their own naked folly. And then shall we all join and joyfully sing Te
Deum in our Churches, and the holy Angels in the Heavens. And then I shall most
gladly sing with good old Simeon, Lord now let thy servant depart in peace, for
mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

Concerning Preaching.
IT remains that I now handle this great business of Preaching, wherein I fear
I shall displease many, there being but few who use it according to the
original Institution; and yet I had rather they should Preach as they do, then
quite omit it; for certainly it is a necessary work for a Minister of the Gospel
to Preach the Gospel. St. Paul tells us, That some Preach the Gospel out of
envy; yet he was pleased that Christ should be so preached rather then not
preached; and so I say of Preaching Christ out of vanity; as it is evident many
do, preaching themselves and their own abilities, at least as they think
ablilities, though often great weaknesses and conceited impertinences. I
beseech you tell me, did not Christ and the Apostles Preach the best way? and
are not we to follow their example? Who dare say otherwise? yet many do
otherwise; they take ere or there a sentence of Scripture, the shorter and more
abstruse the better, to show their skill and invention, this they divided and
subdivided into generals and particulars, the quid, the quale, the quantum, and
such like quack salving forms; then they study how to hook in this or that
quaint sentence of Philosopher or Father, this or that nice speculation,
endeavoring to couch all this in most elegant language; in short, their main
end is to show their Wit, their Reading, and whatever they think is excellent
in them: No doubt rarely agreeing with that of St. Paul, I determined not to
know any thing among you save Jesus Christ and him crucified; And my speech and
my preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration
of the Spirit and of Power: 1 Cor. 2. And I verily believe this is the reason
why Preaching has so little effect in these days, because they labor to speak
the wisdom of this world, which is foolishness with God, nor do they Preach in
demonstration of the Spirit, but in demonstration of their Learning. I know
full well this unapostolick way of Preaching was used by some of the Ancient
Fathers, especially the Greeks, always fond of nicities and curiosities, and
being now become Christians (as I said before) transplanted their beloved
Rhetorical flowers of humane learning into Christian Gardens, which proved
rather Weeds to overrun the seed of sound and plain Apostolic Doctrine,
humane nature being a soil apter to give nourishment and vigor to humane
principles then divine. But when did ever any Learned, Witty Rhetorical harang,
or cunning Syllogistical discourse convert the tithe of St. Peter's or St.
Paul*s foolish Preaching, as he terms it, but the wisdom of God to those that
are perfect and sound in the faith. Who is ignorant of that famous passage at
the Council of Nice? whither resorted with diverse others, one Eminent Heathen
Philosopher, offering himself (as the manner of those vainglorious Sophisters
was) to dispute with the Christian Doctors; some Bishops of greater Repute for
Learning undertook him, and as they thought, clearly Confuted; but no way
Converted him; at last rises up a grave ancient Bishop of small Learning, but
of great Faith and Piety, and (with great dissatisfaction of his Brethren
fearing some gross baffle should befall this good man) comes up to the
Philosopher, and with great Magisterial Authority recites unto him the
Apostolic Creed, I believe in God the Father Almighty -- and in the close
calls to him, O Philosopher believe thou all this? The Philosopher answered,
I believe; not being able to resist the demonstration of spirit and power
wherewith he uttered those Divine Mysteries, as he confess't before them all.
You will say this was a Miracle of great rarity; I grant it, but many such
Miracles should we see, had we the Faith and powerful Spirit of this Holy
Bishop, and would endeavor to imitate Apostoli^al Preaching, not Philosophical
Arguing, nor Rhetorical declaiming.

We see plainly the Apostolical Preaching was either Catechistical
Instructions, or Pious Admonitions; not tying themselves to any form, but past
from one matter to another as the Auditors condition required, not as the
Preachers fancy and reading prompt; just as the Roman Emperor Caligula, who
when Delinquents came before him to be judged, condemned or acquitted them as
agreed best with the current of his Oration: So these men shape their discourse
more to the applause then edification of the hearers. And so much time is spent
in composing these Oratory Sermons, as the Minister has not leisure to perform
a quarter of his Parochial Duty, of visiting the Sick, of admonishing the
scandalous, of reconciling the janglers, of private examining and instructing
the poor ignorant souls, thousands in every Country as ignorant as Heathens,
who understand no more of most Sermons then if in Greek; so that the Sermon is
rather a Banquet for the Wantons that are full, then instruction to those who
are even starved for want of spiritual food, the plain and saving Word of
Christ, not the nice conceited word of Man, which may nourish Camelions, never
make solid sound Christians. There are others of a different strain, who
wanting both Wit and Learning also, think to supply all by strength of Lungs,
by loud and long babbling, riding hackney from one good Town to another, and
with fervency of spirit like a boiling pot running over where ever they come.
Were it a laughing matter, who could contain to hear some seeming Zealot
Pastors talk so much of their obligation to Preach the Gospel, and must
(forsoo^h) do it in the Pulpit twice a Sunday, counting those almost accursed
that do not so, and yet have many poor Sheep in their flock as ignorant as any
Sheep, whom they never regard, never instruct in the first Principles of the
Gospel; as if Preaching were tied to the Pulpit and the Sabbath day. Pardon me
if I tell you a Story which now comes in my head. I chanced to be in a Lords
House on a Saturday, when a zealous Minister came in; after some complements
and ceremonious discourse he told the Lord, That where ever he was he never
failed to Preach the Gospel on the Lords day as his duty, and therefore
entreated that the Pastor of the Parish might be desired to give place to him
next morning. I suspecting both his zeal and design (which afterward appeared)
asked him if he had received any particular command from Christ to Preach at
this place and that hour? The Minister, starding at my Question, answered, No.
I replied, Sure then other Ministers had the same obligation to Preach the
Gospel as he had, and moreover it was the Pastors particular duty to Preach to
his own Congregation on the Lord's day, how then could he in conscience desire
the Pastor to omit his duty, and give place to a stranger who had there no duty
incumbent upon him? But the Lord pulled me by the elbow and took me off from
farther pressing him, and told him, he would send to the Pastor to give him
place. But to return to our business. Very few are to be found, here and there
one of Piety and Discretion, that demeans himself prudently in his Office; and
the reason is this. It is grown up into a general opinion, That none are fit to
be admitted into Holy Orders but such as have studied in the University; and if
he has learnt a little to chop Logic, he is presently deemed fit to divide
the Word of Truth, and is easily instituted into a Living, and if he can bring
some nice Metaphysical speculations from Aristotle; or some Theological
distinctions from Aquinas, then he is worthy of two or three Livings or
Prebends: and thus University Youths, and even Boys of no experience or
discretion, are made Spiritual Pastors, the gravest and most weighty Office in
the World. I beseech you, what have these Sciences (falsely so called) to do
with the Gospel, where we find not one tittle of them; but rather decryed as
enemies to the Gospel, as tending to vain jangling, strife and contention,
nothing of Edification. We had lately a brave story of the Jesuits in China,
who finding the King and his Courtiers much delighted with the Mathematics,
but not very knowing in them, wrote to the General of their Order at Rome to
send them some Priests, very skilful in that Science, to Preach the Gospel
there. Why did they not send for some also well skilled in Puppit Plays?
ridiculous crea ures shall I say, or rather impious, who think to support the
dignity, the majesty, the divinity of the Gospel with such humane toys? Just
as if a King, having some potent Enemy invading his Country, should instead of
leading on a stout and gallant Army against him, lead on a Morice-dance
capering and frisking most featly, thinking thereby to appease and gain the
heart of his Adversary. Yea fools and blind; we wrestle not against flesh and
blood, but against Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the
darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places, Ephesians. 6.
12. And therefore the weapons of our warfare must not be carnal but mighty
through God to the pulling down of strong holds, 2. Cor. 10. 4. We must then
take the whole armor of God, the helmet of Salvation, the breast plate of
Righteousness, the shield of faith, the sword of the Spirit. Read also St. Paul
to Timothy and Titus, setting down the required qualifications of Bishops and
Deacons, see if you can find any such Mathematick, Logic, Physic? no, but
Gravity, Sobriety, Meekness, Diligence, and the like. Were such men taken into
holy Orders and constituted Pastors, the Church of Christ had been far better
edified, and the Pastors far more reverenced then now they are: though Plato,
Arisstotle, Euclid, Scotus, Aquinas, were never known to them, so much as by
name, yet they would want no pastoral knowledge which is completely contained
in Scripture; as St. Paul told Timothy, That is was sufficient to make him wise
unto Salvation, profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for
Instruction that the man of God might be thoroughly furnished; mark, thoroughly
furnished without Logic, Physic, Mathematick, Metaphysick, or School
Di^inity. Scripture Divinity thoroughly furnishes the man of God for ^ll. I
speak not this in disparagement of University Learning, which I highly value,
if rightly made use of, it is as useful as honorable to a Nation, but much of
University Learning as useless to a Spiritual Pastor, as the Art of Navigation
to a Physician; the Pastors only requisite and completely qualifying Science;
being according to St. Paul to know nothing but Christ and him crucified, and
to Preach Christ, not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration
of the Spirit and of power; to Preach Christ as well out of Pulpit as in the
Pulpit; in season and out of season to the poor and to the rich; to the simple
and ignorant far rather than to the knowing; to Rebuke, to Correct, to edify
both by word and deed.

Wherefore I most humbly beseech the Church Governors to remember the Original
Institution of the Ministry, what kind of men the Apostles chose into it, grave
Elderly men, therefore styled Elders, and known as well by that name as
Bishops, who having by long conversation gotten experience and knowledge to
govern themselves, were made governors of others. I grant we have Timothy for
an example of younger years, that is, young by way of comparison to the other
Seniors; as a man of forty may be called young, compared to those of sixty; yet
no youth simply, nor simple youth: and it is plain he was a person no way short
of the Elders in gravity, though somewhat in years: St. Paul's general Rule
was, not to admit of Novices; but all general Rules have some exceptions.
Timothy was one and a rare one, we find not another. Next I pray consider what
kind of Preaching they used, you may easily guess at their Sermons by their
Epistles, full of short Catechistical Instructions, grave Exhortations, sober
Reproofs, discreet Corrections, and then tell me whether a raw Novice from the
University with all his Sciences and Languages be fit for this, or rather a
grave sober person of age and experience, having a a good natural capacity,
illuminated by Scripture Instruction and Prayer, using also the help of grave
and sound Interpreters. Really it is most evident that the Church is run into
great contempt by the slightness and giddiness of many Ministers, who intend
nothing but to make a handsome School-Boyes Exercises in the Pulpit on Sunday,
but never attend the other Parochial duties, no nor their own advance in
Spiritual knowledge, but give themselves wholly either to idle Studies, or
idler Recreations, and are very children in Divine knowledge and behavior. I do
affirm this in the presence of God as a truth, and I have known some pass for
very good Preachers, that could not give a good account of the Athanasian
Creed, nor scarce of the Childrens Catechism; Masters of Art, but Schoolboys
in true Divinity, and so their Parishoners continue very Babes all their life
long.

It would make any true Christian's heart bleed to think, how many thousand
poor souls there are in this Land, that have no more knowledge of God then
Heathens; thousands of the mendicant condition never come to Church, and are
never looked after by any; likewise thousands of mean husbandry Men that do come
to Church, understand no more of the Sermon then Bruites: perchance in their
infancy some of them learnt a little of their Catechism, that is; they could,
like Parrots, say some broken pieces, but never understand the meaning of one
line (this is the common way of Chatechising) but afterward as they grow up to
be Men, grow more babes in Religion, so ignorant as searce to know their
Heavenly Father, and are admitted to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper before
they are able to give account of the Sacrament of Baptism. This it is
generally in the Country, and in the City as bad, partly for the reason before
specified, and partly by reason the number in many Parishes is far greater then
any one Pastor can have a due care of; he cannot know half the Names or Faces
of them, much less their Faith and Behavior, which is requisite that he may
both instruct and reprove where there is need. Wherefore I humbly conceive it is
necessary to divide these numerous Parishes into several parts; but wi^hal to
provide means out of them for several Ministers, for there is no hope to gain
it from their Charity or Piety, which is plain Hypocrisy, seeming so zealous to
hear the Word, but to contribute nothing toward it; the Minister may Preach
his heart out, and yet not get out of their purses any tolerable Maintenance; a
poor Husbandman in the Country of twenty pound a year, that gets his bread by
the swear of his brows, pays more to his Minister than a Citizen that gets
hundreds a year, sitting at great ease in his Shop, and spends more in
Ribbonds, Laces and Perriwigs in one year, then he pays to his Minister in ten
or twenty: I beseech them to consider what account they will give to their Lord
and Master at that day.

But I return to the requisite qualities of a Minister, who according to St.
Paul is to be a Governor as well as a Preacher; to admonish and rebuke as well
as instruct, and therefore of two evils choose the lesser, rather Men defective
in parts to preach, which may be supplied by Homilies, then defective in Wisdom
and Discretion to govern, which cannot be supplied by other means. But would Men
be content with the true Gospel and Apostolic preaching, doubtless there might
persons be found out fit for both, to Govern and to Preach; to preach one God
the Creator of all, one Christ the Redeemer of all, one Holy Ghost the
Sanctifier of all, to preach the Baptism of Repentance, and the Sa^rament of
the Lord's Supper, to preach Godliness, Justice, Mercy, Charity, Sobriety,
Chastity etc. All which will be far better performed by a grave and godly
conscientious Man, well Catechized, though he never saw University, though he
knew no other Language but his Mother Tongue, then by any Aristotelist,
Scotist, Aquinatist, with all their knacks of quiddities and qualities,
Syllogismes and Enthymems, distinctions and subsumptions etc. Not one Greek, or
Italian, or French of a thousand knew any Language but his Mother Tongue when
the Gospel first flourished there; not one Indian of hundred thousand, where
St. Thomas planted the Gospel, ever heard of Plato or Aristotle; and so I may
say of many other Nations where the Gospel was planted and Priests ordained.
When God instituted Aaron and that Priesthood, when Christ instituted the
Apostles and this Priesthood, not a title mentioned of School Sciences or
Foreign Languages. It Is true, the Apostles by the Holy Ghost received the gift
of Tongues, because they were to preach to all Nations; but we find not any
infusion of School learning by the Holy Ghost, nor any more gift of Tongues
after the Gospel once spread over the world; God thought it then needless, I
pray let us be no wiser then God and his Christ, who converted the world by the
foolishness of Preaching, but I never yet heard of any one Nation converted by
the wisdom of Philosophical Rhetorical Preaching. Mistake me not, I say that
Sciences and Languages are no way necessary for common Parochical Preachers,
yet I grant that Sciences, especially Historical, and Languages especially the
Oriental, are very useful to the perfect understanding of Scripture, and very
fit for some Ministers to study, to whom God has given parts and means to
acquire them, who may be helpful to others; and the Universities are very good
places to train up youths to this purpose; but still these faculties are no way
necessary to a parochial Cure, a small proportion of Learning with a great deal
of Piety and Discretion is much better. Besides there is another thing much to
be considered. Were there such grave conscientious persons admitted into the
Ministry as the Apostles ordained, such Preaching set up as they practiced, and
all other decryed, such double honor paid unto the Ministry as St. Paul
commanded and primitively was rendered (such grave persons would scarce ever
fail of it) then we might find thousands in the Nation that having means of
their own, would preach the Gospel to the poor for conscience sake. The
maintenance for Ministers in most parts is so wretchedly small (and so like to
be, the Tithes being in the hands of Laymen without hopes of recovery) that
there is no convenient support for men of Worth and Gravity, and therefore
Youths and striplings as wretched are put into them of mere necessity, that
they lie not wholly void; whereas if men that had some Estate to help to
maintain themselves, being persons of conscience and convenient Knowledge, were
put into the Ministry, and such preaching the Gospel accepted of, as the
Apostles and Primitive Disciples used, the Cures would be served with far more
edification of the people, and honor to the Church, then now they are.

I most humbly beseech all in the spirit of meekness and humility to consider
these things, laying aside the veil of pomp and vanity, which blinds their
eyes, and hinders them from discovering the naked truth and simplicity of the
Gospel. I call the Searcher of all hearts to witness, I wish unto all
Clergymen both double honor and double maintenance also, I cannot think any
thing too much for those who conscienciously labor in the Ministry. But seeing
(as I said) there is no hopes of regaining the Church maintenance, we in
prudence should seek out such helps as may be had. And truly I have great
reason to hope, that were this rule observed of putting only grave discreet and
conscientious persons into the Ministry (whether University men or not, it
matters not, so as fully instructed in the Doctrine of the Gospel by sound
Commentators) many persons of good rank and Estate would think it no dishonor
but rather a high honor to enter into it, as they did in the Primitive time;
Julian nearly related to the Roman Emperor, and afterward Emperor himself,
thought it an honor to be admitted a Reader, one of the lowest Offices in the
Church. And for the better advancing this business, and fitting all sorts of
men with convenient Knowledge for the Ministry, I humbly conceive it very fit
there should be one good and brief English Comment of Scripture selected and
compiled out of those many voluminous Authors, laying asid all impertinent
criticismes, abstruse questions, nice speculations, and the like, setting down
only the plain and most obvious sense in matters of Faith and good life,
necessary to salvation; such a book to be set forth by Authority, with a
command that no man in Sermons, Exhortations or Catechisings teach any thing
contrary to it, and what ever Learning beyond that is brought into the Pulpit,
let it rather be exploded then applauded; for if any countenance be given to
excursions, there will be no end, the itch men have to show their Learning will
soon bring us again into the vain unedifying practice we now are in. I humbly
conceive it fit also that the book of Homilies be reviewed, not to correct any
thing in them, for they are most excellent sound Exhortations, containing the
true Primitive Spirit; but to add to them what ever is wanting to the necessary
Doctrine of Faith and good manners, to teach every person how to behave himself
in his several vocation, and these commanded to be read once over every year;
for I have observed several, even good and conscientious Preachers to take
quite another method, and preach on this or that Chapter, and so in the whole
year, yea perchance in two or three years, never preach on the duty between Man
and Wife, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, Magistrates and Subjects;
or omit to treat of Pride, or Malice, or Cheating, or the like, by reason of
which omissions, several in the Congregation are ignorant in necessary duties,
though rightly instructed in many things unnecessary.

I expect that many will cry out of this as a means to introduce laziness into
the Ministry, and a hindrance from exercising those Talents God has endowed
them with. To this I answer, First, That I had rather the Ministers should be
lazy, then the People ignorant in their duty. But secondly I answer, That
besides Pulpit Preaching, the Minister may find enough to do to keep him from
laziness, and exercise the best, that is, the most useful Talents of a
Minister, to visit and comfort the Sick and Afflicted, to compose Differences
and reconcile Janglers, to examine and instruct the meaner and duller part of
his Flock, who are not capable of Pulpit preaching, to whom they must inculcate
both Doctrines and Admonitions ten times over, and scarcely so, make them
apprehend any Spiritual matters. Experience only can raise a belief how
extremely dull the common people are in the mysteries of Faith, and but little
quicker in the principles of a good life: Christ dyed to save these poor vulgar
Souls as well as those of the Gentry and more learned, yet the labor of most
Ministers is to entertain those that know enough, and are very lazy in
Catechizing those poor souls that know nothing; let these be fully instructed,
and then for me, let them show their Talents by preaching as often as they
please to others: All that I labor for, is, that those may have it who most
want it, either by injoyning such Homilies as I mentioned to be yearly read, or
such Sermons to be yearly preached: I am no enemy to true Apostolical
preaching, God forbid I should; but to vain Scholastical useless preaching, to
have the Pastor, who should daily watch over his Flock, sit in his Study all
the Week long, picking from that or this Quaint Author a few beautiful Flowers,
and then come on Sunday with his Nosegay in his hand to enter^ain Ladies and
Courtiers; for my part I count this far more sinful laziness, then to read a
Pious Homily on Sunday, and all the Week after, go up and down from house to
house taking pains to instruct and exhort such as I mentioned: But these shall
be called dumb Dogs, yet surely by none but barking Curs, who are wholly
ignorant in true Apostolic Preaching; Pardon me if I return them their due,
who speak evil of that they understand not.

They will Object, The Apostles and Primitive Disciples did not read Homilies,
but Preached themselves; Neither do I desire that any one Homily should ever be
read, so as we had the true Apostolic preaching both o^ Sundays in public,
and Weekdays also in private, where there is need: But I am sure such pious
Homilies as I mentioned are no ways contrary to the Apostolical and primitive
practice, and are far more useful then such preaching as we have now adays. And
I am also sure, that in the purest and most primitive time, Homilies under
another name were read in the Churches, that is, the Epistles of Apostolic
godly Bishops written to other Churches, were read in the Congregation with
great Veneration; Shall the name of Epistle make the one applauded, the name of
Homily make the other reproached, the contents and the intent being the same,
to stir up the people to godliness? If this will satisfy, let the Homilies be
styled Epistles to such or such a Church, and then I hope they will pass for
current. But you will say, The Compilers of our Homilies are not of equal
authority to those primitive Epistlers; Let that pass, but I am sure they are
of far more authority, then most of our Preachers. I pray consider, how many
giddy Youths are of our Ministry, how many of greater age but of as little
gravity or discretion; how many that vainly preach themselves and their own
abilities, not Christ and his Gospel; how many that preach piously and yet not
usefully, but, as I said before, many things unnecessary, omitting many
necessary: Sum up all these particulars, and you will find a small remainder
that preach piously and edifying also, very few to equal the Compilers of our
Homilies; and then calmly consider the great use, yea the great necessity of
such Homilies. But if you can furnish all our Churches with pious discreet
edifying preaching Pastors, I am abundantly satisfied, and do you seal up the
Book of Homilies till a new dearth of spiritual food, which God in his great
mercy prevent.

Amen.
Concerning Bishops and Priests.
WHoever unbiased reads the Scripture, thence proceeds to the first Christian
Writers, and so goes on from Age to Age, cannot doubt but that the Church was
always governed by Bishops, that is, by one Elder, or Presbyter, or President,
or what else you please to call him, set over the rest of the Clergy with
authority to Ordain, to Exhort, to Rebuke, to Judge and Censure as he found
cause: no other form of Government is mentioned by any Authority for Fifteen
hundred years from the Apostles downwards. Now who can in reason and modesty
suspect those Primitive Bishops who lived in the days of the Apostles, chosen
by them into the Church, succeeded them in Church Government, yea and in
Martyrdom also for the Faith, as Clemens, Ignatius, Polycarpus and others, who,
I say, can suspect them to be prevaricators in Church Discipline, and take upon
them another form of Episcopal Government contrary to Apostolican Institution.
These great Masters of Self-denial who gave their Lives for the Truth, would
they transmit unto Posterity a Church Government contrary to the Truth; let who
will believe it, I can neither believe it, nor suspect it: And there is yet
another thing very observable, that all the Orthodox Church dispersed all the
world over, some parts having no correspondence at all with the other by reason
of distance, some by Wars divided and made cruel Enemies, yet all agreed in
this form of Government; and not only the Orthodox, but also the Schismatics
and Heretics, who separated from, hated and persecuted the Orthodox Church,
they likewise retained still this form of Government, as if all were of
necessity compelled to acknowledge this, having never known, heard nor dreamed
of other. And therefore nothing but necessity, if that, can excuse those who
first set up another form of Government to their own Masters, let them stand or
fall, I will not presume to censure them: I will only say, That from the
beginning it was not so, and I thank God it is not so with us, but as it was in
the beginning, so it is now with us, and ever shall be I trust in God. Amen.

But notwithstanding all this, yet it is very much to be doubted whether they
were of any distinct superior order from and above the Presbyters, or one of
the same order set over the rest with power to ordain Elders, to exhort,
rebuke, chastise, as Timothy and Titus were constituted by St. Paul. For though
they were of the same order with the other Elders and Pastors, yet there was
great reason for some to be placed with greater Authority to rule over the
rest. The Scripture tells us, That even in the days of the Apostles there were
several seducing teachers, leading the people into errors and heresies, and
more were to follow after the Apostles times, grievous wolves in sheeps
clothing; and therefore it was very necessary to pick out some of eminent
soundness in faith and godliness of life, and set them up on high with great
Authority, as fixed Stars in the Heavens (so styled Revel. 1.) to whom all
might have regard in dangerous times, as Mariners observe in their Seafaring
journies. But the Scripture no where expresses any distinction of order among
the Elders, we find there but two orders mentioned, Bishops and Deacons. Of
Deacons we shall treat afterward. Let us now proceed to the Order of Bishops
and Priests, which the Scripture distinguishes not, for there we find but one
kind of Ordination, then certainly but one Order, for two distinct Orders cannot
be conferred in the same instant, by the same words, by the same actions. They
who think Deaconship and Priesthood distinct, the one subservient to the other,
though they intend in the same hour to consecrate the same Man Deacon and
Priest, do they not first complete him Deacon, then Priest? I pray let any Man
show me from Scripture (as I said) Timothy or Titus or any one ordained twice,
made first Priest then Bishop, which is absolutely necessary if they be
distinct characters, and it is generally affirmed, though I humbly conceive they
scarce understand what they affirm, I mean they understand not what these
characters are, whether Greek, Hebrew, or Arabic, or what else. But let that
pass, I desire them only to show me how a Man can make two characters with one
stroke or motion, A. and B. at the same instant. If then neither Timothy nor
Titus, nor any other were but once ordained, whence can we gather these two
distinct characters, these two distinct Orders? We find the Apostles themselves
but once ordained, those by the Apostles but once ordained, and so on. When St.
Paul left Titus in Creete to ordain, he mentions only one ordination, that of
Presbyters, (so the word in Greek) no other; there is no commission given him to
ordain Bishops and Presbyters. Who then was to ordain Bishops there? not Titus,
he had no such command, we do not find that St. Paul himself did; And sure you
will not grant that the Presbyters which Titus ordained, that they could ordain
Bishops there, for you will not allow them to ordain so much as Presbyters? Yet
Bishops you will needs have in every City, and in Creete were very many, who
ordained Bishops for them all? Truly I cannot find, nor you neither I believe.
But you will say, The superior order contains in it virtually the inferior
order, (let this pass at present) does Presbyter then virtually cantain Bishop?
If so; then all Presbyters are Bishops. No say you, Bishop is the superior
order, and that contains in it Presbyter. You say so, but by your leave you are
to prove so, or give me leave to say otherwise, especially seeing I have
Scripture for my saying, and you have none for yours. But should I grant Bishop
the superior, what then? we find Titus ordained not any but Presbyters, as he
was commanded by St. Paul; so we are still at a loss for our Bishops, we find
not their Ordination. Or did St. Paul mistake in his expression, and meaning
Bishops in every City, said Presbyters in every City, let this pass also, and I
pray let us see what you mean by this, The superior order virtually contains
the inferior. Do not you say they are two distinct Orders, two real distinct
indelible characters imprinted in the Soul, as the Schoolmen affirm (give me
leave to talk their Language though I understand it not) If I take a fair paper
and make an A. upon it for the character of Presbyter, and then make a B. upon
it for the Character of a Bishop, the same paper contains both Characters, but
sure one Character does not contain the other, A. does not contain B. nor does
B. contain A. So the same Soul may receive two Characters, two Orders, but if
the two Orders be distinct, how can they contain each other, I understand no
more then I do these Holy Characters. If they can paint them out unto me in
their proper figures, perchance I may understand them better, but as yet I
ingeniously confess my ignorance. I grant in a Metaphysical way of Abstraction,
the superior species contains the inferior genus. A Man, a rational creature,
contains the animality of a Horse, the inferior creature, but does not contain
a real Horse in his belly, nor can a man beget Horses or men when he pleases.
Nor can you truly say a man is a Horse; I believe my Schoolmen would take it in
snuff should I affirm any of them to be Horses, etc. But they affirm that a
Bishop does not only virtually contain the Priesthood, but is really a Priest,
and can make Priests or Bishops as he please, Whereby you may see this answer,
That the Superior Order virtually contains the inferior; is a mere evasion;
it sounds as if it were something, but really is nothing to our purpose at all;
for we are not now upon Metaphysical abstractions, but real individual
subsistencies, two actual distinct Orders, as they would have it, two distinct
indelible characters imprinted on men's souls by Ordination, as A. and B. which
can never be truly affirmed one of the other. A. is not B. and B. is not A. a
man is not a horse, and a Horse is not a man; so a Bishop ordained only Bishop,
is not a Priest, nor a Priest a Bishop, if they be distinct. Wherefore I must
believe them one and the same Order, especially seeing the Scripture applies
the same name promiscuously to both, which is the second argument of their
identity, to be one and the same.

Acts. 20. St. Paul sends to Ephesus to call the Presbyters of that Ghurch
unhim at Miletum, and speaking to them he calls them all Bishops (in our
Translation it is Overseers) Verse 28. So in his Epistle to the Phillippians, he
directs to all the Saints with the Bishops and Deacons, both in the plural
number so that by the word Bishops, we must needs understand Presbyters; for
Bishops as we now take the word, were never many in one City. I pray observe
also St. Paul Epis. to Titus 1. 5. For this cause left I thee in Crete -- that
thou should ordain Elders in every City -- if any be blameless -- for a
Bishop must be blameless, Is it not here evident, that an Elder and a Bishop in
St. Paul's Language is one and the same; otherwise there were no coherency at
all in St. Paul's speech. If this be not convincing, beyond all possible
evasion, I understand nothing of discourse. Other such places are obvious in
Scripture to every one, I need mention no more; only I desire to inform the
Reader of a passage to this purpose, in an Epistle of Clemens to the
Corinthians, This Clemens is mentioned in Scripture, and is he whom St. Peter
appointed his successor at Rome, and who was of so great Authority, that as St.
Hierome tells us, this his Epistle was read in Churches: Now in this Epistle
Clemens particularly sets forth the constitution of the Church by the Apostles,
and what Ministers they ordained in the Church; to wit, Bishops and Deacons, he
names no other, which seems to me as full an evidence as can be, that there
were no other Orders in the Church in those days but those two; And yet we are
sure there was then Presbiters in the Church; for Peter and John call
themselves Presbyters, and St. Peter calls them Presbiters to whom he wrote his
Epistle; so that if there were but two Orders, to wit, Bishops and Deacons,
Presbyters must be one and the same with Bishops or with Deacons; not with
Deacons therefore one and the same with Bishops; One Order called by two names
promiscuously in Scripture, as has been showed before: And I desire you to
observe that of those two names Presbyter and Bishop, if therebe any dignity
and eminency expressed in one more then the other, sure it is in the name of
Presbiter, not Bishop, because the Apostles themselves, and the chief of the
Apostles (as some would have it who stand highest on their Pan^ables) are in
Scripture styled Presbyters or Elders, as the word in our English Translation,
but never Bishops, as I remember. And therefore I cannot but wonder why that
haughty head of the Papists should not assume to himself the title of his
pretended predecessor St. Peter, Presbyter rather then Bishop, unless it be by
God's providential disposure to show his blindness in this as well as in other
things, and make him confute himself by this name of Bishop, which was never
given to St. Peter, no more then St. Peter gave unto him the Headship of the
Church. As to the interpretations and answers given to these and such like
Scripture expressions, sure I need not take any pains to confute them; for they
are so weak as that Petavius, a late Writer, and great stickler for the
superiority of Episcopacy, durst not trust to them, nor would venture his
credit to make use of them, but sound out a new and rare conceit, as he
conceives, That these Presters mentioned in Scripture and called by both names,
were all really Bishops, and that the Apostles Ordained them so; as most
convenient for that time; for the Congregations of the Faithful being small,
there needed no Priests under the Bishops to officiate, and yet there was need
of a Bishop in those small Congregations, because there were several things to
be done, which were not within the power and capacity of Presbiters to act, (as
he supposes) viz. the laying on of hands, and confirming the Faithful after
Baptism, the veiling of devoted Women, the reconciling of penitents, the
ordaining Deacons where there was need; and adds moreover several
impertinences, as the making of Chrisme, consecrating Church-Vessels, etc. And
Petavius mightily applauds himself in this conceit, as the only means to clear
all difficulties: Our Doctor Hammond also finding the usual interpretations of
those places of Scripture above mentioned too weak to sustain the arguments
builded on them for the Unity of Order, goes along after Petavius a great way
in the fore cited discourse (though not in the later impertinances), and
affirms that the Presbyters then were all Bishops; And so far I go with them,
that all were Presbyters, all Bishops, because all was one, and one was all,
several names not several Orders, as they would have it, and this I humbly
conceive firmly proved by my former Argument of one Ordination, wherein two
distinct Orders could not be conferred, so that still I require them to show me
from Scripture where these Presbyter-Bishops were twice Ordained, else it
cannot be truly affirmed they were really and actually Priests and Bishops. As
for that answer, That though but one Order was conferred, viz. Episcopal, yet
that being superior to the Priesthood contains this virtually in it; first you
are to prove Bishop to be superior to Presbiter, which I deny, the Apostles
being peculiarly called Presbyters. Secondly, that one contains the other, I
suppose is already confuted, and fully declared that it cannot be; And as I
mentioned before, you do in effect confess it your selves by your practice; for
if the Superior Order so contains the inferior as to enable a Man thereby to
act all things belonging to the inferior, it is a very impertinent thing to
ordain a Man, as you do, first a Deacon, then a Priest, then a Bishop, when you
design to confer all upon him in the same day and hour.

And now I pray give me leave to examine a little Petavius his rare conceits,
which he conceives will satisfy all former objections, and will meet with no
news ones. He confesses the Presbyters of the Apostles times were all of one
Order, viz. Bishops, because the Pastors of each congregations might perform
those several acts he mentions, which a bare Presbyter is not capable of. And
why not capable of them, how does he prove this? he brings not one tittle of
proof for this cut of Scripture, where there are good proofs to the contrary.
St. Peter and St. John, Presbyters, could do all these and more; Ergo,
Presbyters are capable of all. But says he, The Apostles were Bishops also;
also is impertinent, as signifying somewhat else; whereas I say and prove it is
one and the same Order, only another name, it lies upon him to prove this
difference of Orders; and how does he prove it, because Presbyters cannot do the
acts of a Bishop; why, this is the thing in question; and thus he runs round to
prove this by that, and that by this, and not one tittle out of Scripture for
either. I know full well by several Canons of Councils made some at one time,
some at another, the Bishops reserved many things to themselves, whereof most
of them had been practiced formerly by Presbyters, and the Canons were made to
prevent the like for the future; for had there not been such a pactice, there
had been no need of such Canons, whereby they reserved these things unto
themselves, and for their own greatness would needs persuade the World, that
Presbyters were not capable of them. I grant, that for decency and order in
that sense, some things may be reserved to some, other things to other to
perform, but that the Order of Priesthood was not capable, is even ridiculous
that the Priesthood being capable to do the greatest things, should not be
capable to do the least; he can consecrate the Souls of Men by Baptism and the
Lords Supper, yet (for sooth) cannot consecrate their Oil, and their Cups, and
their Candlestiks, which we never heard the Apostles did or dreamed of, but are
the fond dreams of doting Men, just like the Pharisees washing cups and
platters after the doctrines of Men. Really there needs no better confutation
of their distinction and superiority of Episcopal Order, then the mean
ridiculous things which they ascribe unto their Bishops, and debar Presbyters
of, which my thinks a Presbyter should contemn were they offered him; and
therefore such Arguments as these are not worth the small pains I have taken
about them.

I proceed to somewhat that seems a little better; Petavius tells us, That the
number of Christians increasing, and factions arising in the Church, the
Apostles at length toward the end of their times, chose out of these
Presbyter-Bishops, some chief Men and placed them as Governors over the rest,
and reserved unto these principal Men the power of ordaining; thus far I freely
consent, the Scripture declares it, and it seems most Rational. And I humbly
conceive these Governors, and Ordainers were Men of great prudence and
moderation, and probably had also that gift of the Holy Ghost, The discerning
of spirits, and judging of Men (a gift mentioned in Scripture among others)
that none might be admitted into the Priesthood but Men of meek and peaceable
spirits. But now I would ask Petavius when these Governing Ordaining Bishops
were set over the rest of the Presbyter-Bishops, when Titus was first settled
with this Authority in Creete, and when Timothy was thus placed at Ephesus,
where we find before were several Presbyter-Bishops, what became of them? were
they un-Bishop'd and made simple Presbyters? they must no more ordain nor
govern, but be subject to Timothy and Titus. I am sure it was thought no small
punishment in future Ages, when Bishops were thus by decrees of Council abased
and cast down unto the Presbyter form, and it was for some notorious crimes. I
pray what crime were all these Presbyter-Bishops guilty of, to be thus handled,
and tumbled down into a lower form? Truly Petavius deals hardly with them,
unless he can show us their crime. Or will he instead of accusing them excuse
himself, and say they were not un-Bishopt nor abased, but only restrained from
exercising that power their order was capable of, had they been commissioned
thereto. Truly I must commend Petavius if he will thus ingeniously confess the
truth, for I shall by and by fully declare that it is the diversity of
Commission; and not of Order, that enables Men to act diversely, and that a
Bishop without commission can do no more than a Presbyter without commission;
and therefore I far^her beg of Petavius, that, till he can prove the contrary,
he would confess them also to be all of one single Order, called only by diverse
names, Priest, or Bishop, and one chosen out of the number, not the rest
abased, but he exalted with authority to Govern. This is the rational and
common practice of all Societies, Corporations, Colleges, Monasteries,
Conclave of Cardinals, what not; There is no new Order supposed in any of
these, but only a new Election, and a new Authority given, according to the
fundamental constitution of each Society. The Pope himself with his triple
crown and triple dominion over all Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, pretends
to have no new order of Popeship, but only the new Authority conferred by his
Election: why then may not Presbyters chosen to preside over the rest without
any new Order, do the like. And for this very reason I conceive Justin Martyr
uses the name of President always for Bishop; and St. Cyprian also, a Bishop
himself, and most glorious Martyr, he calls himself and other Bishops generally
by the name of Praepositus, as if this were the main distinction betwixt
himself and his Presbyters, that he was Praepositus only, one of them placed
with authority over them: no more: Nor does the name of Bishop in the original
Greek signify any more then an Overseer of the rest. And as for the avoiding of
Heresies and Factions, they thought it meet to settle some Bishop, of great
soundness in faith, and godliness of life, with authority to restrain and
chastise disorderly Pastors. Just so, when whole Nations were converted, and
not only the Pastors but the Bishops also (who had oversight of the Pastors)
increased in number, then for the same reason it was thought fit there should
be an Overseer of the Bishops, and be called an Archbishop; when the Arch
Bishops were multiplied, then another set over them, and he called a Patriark;
and at last one over the Patriarks, and he called Papa a Pope Catexochen,
though Papa before was a name attrributed to other Bishops. Now as Pope
Patriarck, Archbishop, Bishop, are all one and the same Order (Papists
themselves grant this) so Bishop, Elder, Presbyter, Priest, all one and the
same, only one of these set over the rest, and he now particularly called
Episcopus, that is, Bishop Catexochen, because he oversees the Overseers: but
this last constitution only is Apostolical, the other of Archbishop, Patriark,
Pope, are mere humane, not at all mentioned in Scripture.

But now another Objection arises. Petavius grants that all the Elders which
the Apostles Ordained were Bishops, and toward the end of the Apostles days
they set some eminent amongst them over the rest to govern and ordain Elders in
every City, as Timothy and Titus, and these Elders in every City were Bishops,
and thus the Apostles left the Church with Bishops only and Deacons. And this
is evident by what I brought before out of Clemens, who lived after the
Apostles days, and mentions only Bishops and Deacons left by the Apostles. This
being so, I desire to know who after the Apostles days began this new kind of
Ordination of Presbyters or Elders not Bishops, the Apostles Ordained none
such; who then? and by what authority was this new Order set up? the Scripture
mentions it not; when and by whom came it in? A very bold undertaking without
Scripture or Apostolical practice.

I will not boast my conceit as Petavius does his; only I wish the Reader to
consider which is most practical, most rational, or rather most scriptural,
thereon I frame this wole Fabric as the Rock and only sure Foundation; humane
Brain is too weak to erect and to support the Fabric of the Church of God,
which the Romanists have made a very Babel with their humane inventions and
multiplied Characters and Orders; some of them would have nine several holy
Orders in God's Church militant here on Earth, because there are nine several
Orders of Celestial Spirits in the Church Triumphant in Heaven. This is a
castle of their own building in the Air, a rare foundation for God's Church.
Others will have seven several Orders and Characters as seven Gifts of the Holy
Ghost. Has the Holy Ghost then but seven several Gifts to confer on Men? St.
Paul. 1 Cor. 12. counts unto us nine; not as if these were all, but only for
example sake, to show us that many and diverse Gifts are conferred on us by one
and the same Spirit; and in the conclusion of the same Chapter he mentions
eight. These things were uttered accidentally according to the occasion, not as
limiting the Gifts of the Holy Ghost to any set number. But if you will further
look into their application of these Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and see to what
kind of several Orders they appropriate them, it would make a Man amazed to see
sober Learned Men, even that great. Wit and Scholar Aquinas, discourse in such
wild manner; as did you but stand behind a Curtain to hear and not see them,
you doubtless would conclude you heard some old Woman in the Nursery telling
her Dreams to Children, rather than Divine Doctors in School. I Will name but one
or two of their Orders. The Porter of the Church Door is one, and he (forsooth)
has a Sacred Character imprinted on his Soul, and his Gift is the discerning
of Spirits, that he may judge who are fit to enter into God's Church, who to be
shut out. Another of their Orders is that of Acolouthi, who are now (anciently
they were quite another thing) certain Boys carrying Torches, and attending on
the Bishop saying Mass; these have their Character also, and their Gift of the
Holy Ghost, is the interpretation of Tongues, signified (no doubt on it) by the
Light in their Hands, but understand no more of Tongues than the Stick of their
Torch. I will not weary you with more of their Absurdities.

Our Episcopal Divines rejecting these chymerical fancies of Orders and
Characters, suppose it to be a certain Faculty and Power conferred by the
laying on of hands for the exercise of Ministerial Duties; and according to
this purpose the Superior Order contains the Inferior, as the greater Power
contains in it the less: Thus Episcopacy being the superior Order, contains in
it Priesthood and Deaconship, these three are their supposed distinct Orders.
They may suppose this if they please, and. I may suppose the contrary: But I
would gladly know on what Scripture they ground this discourse, that is the
thing I still require, and there we find no larger Faculty or Power given to
Bishops, but rather to Presbyters, as I have showed, the Apostles who had the
greatest power being styled Presbyters, not Bishops. And when our Bishops do
Ordain Presbyters, do not they use the very same form of words which our
Savior used when he Ordained the Apostles? Receive ye the Holy Ghost: whose
sins ye forgive, they are forgiven, etc. Do they not then by the same words
conser the same power? (for I hope they use no Equivocation, nor mental
Reservation) if the Power be the same, the Order is the same by their own Rule.
Again, let us examine their own Practice; Do they not require a Man should be
ordained first Deacon, before he be ordained Priest, and Priest before Bishop;
what needs this, if the superior contains the inferior. But in Scripture we
find it otherwise, Timothy who long officiated under St. Paul as a Presbyter,
when he was left at Ephesus, and so when Titus was left at Creet, both to be
Bishops, we find no new ordination; were this requisite, sure the Scripture
would have given us at least some hint of it, but not one tittle there. But if
the Scripture be defective in expressions, you will supply it by the
expressions and practice of the Church in first succeeding Ages.

Before you go on and take much pains to show me this, give me leave to tell
you, that I shall not easily recede from Scripture in fundamentals, either of
Faith or Church Discipline, in things indifferent of themselves, or in more
weighty matters very doubtfully expressed in Scripture, I shall always most
readily submit to the interpretation of the Primitive and Universal Church, I
require both Primitive and Universal; for I showed before, that in matters of
Faith there were some errors very Primitive, yet not continued by the Universal
Church, but rejected in succeeding Ages. And at the time of the Evangelical
Reformation by Luther, Melancton, Calvin, etc. I can show some errors generally
received in most, if not in all the Churches of Christendom, but neither
approved nor known by the Primitive Church; wherefore I require what you
produce, should be both Primitive and Universal, and this to interpret some
place of Scripture doubtful in it self, not plain: Now as to the business in
hand, I cannot yield that the Scripture is very doubtful in it, or scarce
doubtful at all; for though in Scripture it is not in terminis* said Presbytery
and Episcopacy are both one and the same Order, yet the circumstantial
expressions are (as I have showed) so strong and many, that they are equivalent
to a clear expression in terminis. Secondly, this is not a matter of any
indifferency, but of vast and dangerous consequence, if mistaken, That a Church
without such Bishops as you require cannot be truly called a Church, and so we
shall exclude many Godly Reformed Churches: For if Bishops be of such a
superior and distinct order as you pretend, if the power of Ordination be
inherent in them only, Then where no Bishop, no true Priests ordained, where no
Priests no Sacraments, where no Sacraments no Church. Wherefore I humbly
beseech you be not too positive in this point, lest thereby you do not only
condemn all the Reformed Churches, but the Scripture and St. Paul also, who
tells us, That the Scripture is sufficient to make us wise unto Salvation, both
in matters of faith and works also, to instruct and thoroughly furnish us to
every good work: and will any deny this of Ordination to be both a good and
necessary work, seeing that the powerful preaching the Word and administration
of the Sacraments depend upon it. Wherefore I dare not by any means suspect the
Scripture defective in this weighty affair. Yet to show you our willingness to
hear all things, let us hear what you can tell us from Antiquity.

The first you bring is Epiphanius, three hundred years after the Apostles,
from whom the main Objection is drawn against the Indentity of Order, and shot
as a Cannon Bell against us beyond all possible resistance, but you will find
it to be a meet Tennis Ball. Epiphanius making a Catalogue of Heretics, puts
in Aertius for one, who was an Arian, and moreover held that Bishops and
Priests were all of one Order, and of equal Dignity and Authority, and that a
Presbyter had power to Ordain, Confirm, and in short, to act any thing equal
with a Bishop. That he was an Heretic is apparent, being an Arrian; nay I
shall not scruple to yield unto you that he was an Heretic in this his
assertion concerning Episcopacy and Presbytery, (as we now understand them); I
say, the Assertion contains Heresy in one part but not in every part, viz.
That the Bishop and other Presbyters are of equal authority and power to act,
this may, in some sense, be called Heresy, for it is against Apostolical
Constitution declared in Scripture, therefore an Heresy; and if you can show
me from Scripture as much against Identity of Order, I shall brand him for an
Heretic in that also; but being sure there is no such thing in Scripture,
there can be no Heresy in affirming the Identity. I fully agree with
Tertullian, we can make no judgment, de rebus fidei, nisi ex literis fidei, of
matters of Faith but from the writings of Faith, that is, the Scripture, and
therefore I shall never be pulled from this Pillar of Truth. The Scripture is
our complete Rule of Faith, no Opinion is heretical and damnable which is not
against that. Now, Good Reader, I pray take notice that Epiphanius was a very
godly Bishop in the main, but yet a very choleric Man, as appears in that his
fierce contest with John Bishop of Constantinople, and his bitter expressions
therein, which I do not mention in disparagement of this holy Man, but only to
give the Reader a caution to remember, that passionate Men do sometimes censure
more severely than there is cause: Epiphanius being a Bishop, and finding the
authority and dignity of Episcopacy much disparaged by Aerius being an Arrian
Heretic, falls upon him sharply for this his Opinion also, wherein he was in
part much to be condemned, as I freely confessed before, but not in the very
Point now in question; nor does Epiphanius himself condemn him in this
particular as an Heretic, but only in the gross, to which I freely give my
vote. But you will tell me, that a Man of a far milder temper, St. Austin, does
also enrol Aerius among Heretics. I know it well, but I desire you to know
that St. Austin does not lay this to his charge as an Heresy, for he says
only thus: Aereus also was an Heretic, for he fell into Arrian Heresy, and he
added some Opinions of his own; then St. Austin recounts several of his
Opinions, whereof this was one, That he affirmed there was no difference
between a Bishop and a Presbyter; where I pray you observe, St. Austin gives us
the reason why he ranks him with Heretics, (viz.) because he fell into the
Arrian Heresy; then follows, And he added some Opinions of his own: St. Austin
calls these Opinions not Heresies, for he does not say he added more Heresies
of his own. Secondly, I pray you observe St. Austin makes no mention of his
affirming the Identity of Order, but only this, That there was no difference at
all between Bishop and Presbyter, wherein I will condemn Aerius as well as you.
But as for the Identity of Order, it is well known that St. Austin is noted by
Medina, a Papist Writer and others, to incline to this Opinion; but for my part
I think the words quoted from St. Austin do not express any Opinion one way or
other to this purpose, but are only a Complement to St. Hierom, who was but a
Prespyter; yet in humility St. Austin being a Bishop, acknowledges him to be
his superior in many things. But I desire you to take notice of another very
remarkable and most worthy passage of St. Austin, who tells us plainly that we
are not to read him, or any other Author, ever so holy or ever so learned, with
any obligation to submit to his or their Opinions, unless they prove their
Opinions by Scripture or convincing Reasons. So then, had Aerius been declared
both by Epiphanius and St. Austin also to have been an Heretic in this very
particular of Identity of Order, yet they bringing neither Scripture nor any
reason at all, but merely a bare narrative of Aerius and his Opinions, not so
much as calling his Opinion in this particular Heresy, much less offering
proofs for it; by St. Austin's rule we may, with great civility to them and
great confidence in the truth, still affirm the Identity of Order.

But how will I answer that Objection taken out of St. Hierom, who, say you,
was as great a leveller of Bishops with Priests as any (and therefore whatever
comes from him, you may be sure is extracted from him by the powerfulness of
undeniable truth) yet he confesses that Bishops have the authority of
Ordination more than Presbyters. A Man may smile to see this used as an
Argument for the preheminency of Bishops, which is directly against it: for St.
Hierom having discourst of the equality and Identity of Presbyters and Bishops,
and having brought many Arguments from Scripture to prove that Bishop and
Presbyter was only two names for one and the same Office; for a further
confirmation hereof asks this question, I pray what does a Bishop do more than
a Presbyter except Ordination? plainly intimating thereby, that this could make
no such distinction of eminency in them above Presbyters: I beseech you
consider, Do not Presbyters perform Offices of a higher nature than Ordination.
Presbyters are ordained Ambassadors for Christ to preach his Holy Gospel for
the Salvation of Souls; they are under Christ, Mediators between God and the
People to make intercession for them, they administer the Sacrament of Baptism,
wherein the Children of Warth are regenerated and made the Children of God, and
Heirs of eternal Life; yea, they administer the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
also, the most transcendent act of Religion and Christian Dignity, whereby we
are made partakers of the Body and Blood of Christ: And what does a Bishop more
than these except Ordination, which being no Sacrament, sure is inferior in
dignity to the other mentioned Acts, and therefore cannot elevate them to a
higher degree. Judge now, I beseech you, whether this question makes pro or
con; Are not such questions always tending to disparagement? When any Man is
boasting his Power and Authority, should I come and ask, What can you do more
than others, unless it be in this or that poor business not worth speaking of;
would he not take this as an affront? Wherefore it cannot enter into my head
that St. Hierom intended by this Question to express any superior Order above
the Priesthood, but plainly the contrary, v z. That Bishops having no other
power distinct from Priests but Ordination, this could be no Argument for a
distinct and superior Order. And now I desire my Reader, if he understand
Latin, to view the Epistle of St. Hierom to Evagrius, and doubtless he will
wonder to see Men have the confidence to quote any thing out of it for the
distinction between Episcopacy and Presbytery, for the whole Epistle is to show
the Identity of them. Before I chanced to read this Epistle, I was of the
crroneous Opinion, that Bishops were a distinct Order, but so convinced by this
Epistle, as I was forced to submit to a change: And I farther desire my Reader
to observe the various fate of St. Hierom and Aerius: Aerius is reviled as an
Heretic for affirming this Identity of Order; Hierom passes for a Saint, and a
great Doctor of the Church, though he affirms the very same as fully as Aerius,
or any Man can do; and therefore it may be my fate to be reviled as Aerius was;
but our Savior bids us rejoice and be exceeding glad when we are reviled for
his Names sake, (or for his Words sake, sure all is one) for great is our
Reward; and so I proceed.

But there lies yet a great Objection made by our good Bishop Hall; he tells us
how that Collutbus a Presbyter of Alexandria, took upon him to ordain others;
and that afterward, in a Council of a hundred Bishops in Egypt, their
Ordination was declared null, because ordained by a Presbyter: From this and
some other such Instances the Bishop would prove that the Order of Presbyters
is not capable to ordain, therefore Bishops are a distinct Order. I am sorry so
good a Man had no better a proof for his intended purpose. It seems he quite
forgot how that the famous Council of Nice, consisting of above three hundred,
made a Canon, wherein they declare, That if any Bishop should ordain any of the
Clergy belonging to another Bishop's Diocese, without consent and leave had of
that Bishop to whose Diocese they did belong, their Ordination should be null.
You see then the irregular Ordination of a Bishop is as null as the irregular
Ordination of a Presbyter; therefore the irregular Bishop, and the irregular
Presbyter are of the same Order, of the same Authority, neither able to Ordain.
Is it not most evident by this, that it is not their Order but Commission that
makes them capable to Ordain; sure an irregular Bishop is of the same Order
with the regular: Is the Line of his Diocese like a Conjurers Circle, within it
he is a Bishop, without it he is none. No, but within it he has Commission
given him to Ordain, without it no Commission, no nor to act in his own Diocese
beyond his Commission, which is to ordain only the Clergy of his own Diocese,
and within his own Diocese. Can any thing be plainer? Cellutbus then being but
a Presbyter, and under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Alexandria; his taking
upon him to ordain Presbyters, was highly irregular and insolent, and therefore
most justly declared null. I desire the Papistical School-Divines, with their
manifold indelible Characters to observe here, how easily the Councils dashed
out the indelible Character of Presbyter imprinted on the Souls of these Men
irregularly ordained, they made a clear rasure, not one tittle of it left. And
could they so easily cancel the Gift of the Holy Ghost? I leave my Schoolmen to
find out how this rare feat was done. And I proceed to add a Canon taken from a
Council at Antioch concerning Chorepiscopi, much to our purpose.

When the Apostles had settled Bishops in every City, with authority of
ordaining and governing the several Churches or Congregations within the
Circuits of those Cities; some were very large, and therefore in process of
time, when more were converted to the Faith, and the Congregations increased
more in number, and at greater distance than the Bishop himself could well have
the overfight of; the Bishop chose some principal Men for his assistance, and
dividing his great Circuit into several lesser Circuits, placed these Men as
Overseers under him; and these were called Chorepiscopi, that is, Country
Bishops, and were much after the manner of our Rural Deans. Those Chorepiscopi,
Country Bishops, being thus settled in authority to govern the Pastoral Priests
in their Circuits, took upon them to ordain more Priests when occasion
required, which the chief Bishops took very ill at their hands, as a great
lessening to their Supreme Authority. And to prevent it for the future, a Canon
was made in the Council of Antioch, about the year 340. to forbid these Country
Bishops to ordain any Priests. Now I pray you observe, These Chorepiscopi were
either really ordained in the Order of the Chief Bishop, or not; if they were
as full Bishops as he, (as really they were) why might they not ordain Priests
as well as he? The Chief Bishop answers, Because he gave them no Commission.
Whereby you see that the power of ordaining Priests was annexed no more to
Bishops than to Priests, unless the Bishops received a new Commission to
ordain; as well as a new Ordination. If it be answered, That these Chorepiscopi
were mere Priests sent forth to have inspection only over other Priests; Then I
pray observe, that these Chorepiscopi being mere Priests, took upon them to
ordain other Priests; which certainly had been madness for them to do, had they
then such a Belief of Bishops as is now required. They might as well have
undertaken to create Stars in the Heavens: For if Bishops only have received a
Divine power from Christ and his Apostles to ordain Priests, he that has not
this divine power of Ordination, can no more ordain a Priest, than a Man
without the divine power of Creation can create a Star, both are impossible in
nature: from whence it must follow, that these Country Bishops were directly
mad in undertaking to ordain Priests, having received no such divine power from
Christ, his Apostles, or their Successors: But if we take these Country Bishops
for sober Godly Persons in their right wits (as doubtless they were, being
selected for that Office) they must needs believe that being Priests alone,
they had power to ordain other Priests; and also believed, that the Bishops
having made them Overseers and Governors in their little Circuits, they had
also received thereby Commission to ordain as well as to govern, and were as
little Bishops under an Archbishop, for such really they were; so that I cannot
in charity censure them so much as of contumacy in taking upon them more then
(they thought at least) they had Commission to act; I doubt not but the chief
Bishop would be wary enough not to employ any contumacious persons. I conclude
then, first, That it was only a mere mistake, an easy and pardonable mistake
of their Commission. Secondly, That in those Times it was not thought an
impossible thing for bare Priests, no Bishops, to ordain other Priests, for
then certainly they would never have undertaken it. And I confess my self, of
their opinion; and cannot but so continue till I see more reason to the contrary.

And I hope my Reader will see what weak proofs are brought for this
distinction and superiority of Order, no Scripture, no Primitive General
Council, no general consent of Primitive Doctors and Fathers, no not one
Primitive Father of Note speaking particularly and home to our purpose. Only a
touch of Epiphanius and St. Austin upon Aerius the Arrian Heretic, but not
declared, no not by them, an Heretic in this particular of Episcopacy; so that
I my self declare more particularly against him then these Fathers do, accusing
him of Heresy in part of his affirmation concerning Bishops, though not in
every part.

I shall conclude this business by giving my poor Judgment drawn from the
preceding Arguments. I find in Scripture that the Priesthood is a holy Order,
into which no man is to thrust himself unless he be called; I do not find that
Deaconship has an inferior part in it, or Episcopacy above it, but that it is
complete and entire in it self, and that it may involve many administrrtions in
one and the same Order, and sometimes many in one and the same person. St. John
was an Apostle, an Evangelist, a Prophet, a Pastor, a Teacher, an Ordainer
(which we call Bishop) all these Gifts he had by one and the same Spirit, and
in one and the same Priesthood. Christ himself was of this Order, a Priest for
ever after the Order of Melcbisedek, that is, both King and Priest, these were
his Offices; he is called also the Bishop of our Souls: Was this in Christ a
distinct and superior Office or Order to his Priesthood, who will presume to
affirm this? And Christ told his Apostles, As my Father sent me, so send I you;
Christ therefore made them also Kings and Priests, as St. John tells us, Rev.
1. Our Savior's Kingdom was not of this World, no more was that of the
Apostles, Our Savior's Office of Priest and Bishop was one and the same, so
was that of the Apostles; and they Ordained and sent others, as Christ.
Ordained, and sent them; there was no distinction or diversity of Order in
Christ and his Apostles, no more was there in those who were Ordained and sent
by the Apostles, though there might be diversity of Gifts or Administrations;
all were not Evangelists nor Prophets; some had the gift of Tongues, some of
Prophecy, some of Miracles, some of discerning Spirits; and some such Gift I
conceive they might have whom the Apostles constituted superintendent
Overseers, Bishops over the rest, endued especially with the Gift of Discerning
and Judging of Men, and therefore fit to be entrusted with the Ordaining of
others, for which there needed no new Order, but the enlargement only of their
Commission to Ordain, to oversee and govern those that were Ordained. And
these, as I said before, being settled in this eminent manner over the rest,
were called by that name in Greek which signifies as much, and which we in
English call Bishop; and by degrees this name was wholly appropriate to them.
In this order the Apostles left the Church at their death, and in this order
their Successors continued it (as in duty sure they ought) from time to time
near one thousand five hundred years, without any interruption. Wherefore for
any to alter this way of Government, or to take upon them to Ordain, not being
chosen this way to it, they would be guilty of great rashness and high
presumption; and I thank God, I am as zealous for the preserving this Primitive
way, as any Man; Yet I cannot by any means consent to them, who would have
Episcopacy to be a distinct Order, for the Reasons before given; nor can I
think the Ordination of a Priest made by Priests invalid, for though it ought
not be done, (but only of necessity) yet being done it is valid, and certainly
may without any crime be done by any Priest, by shipwrak or any such chance
cast into a Country where there were none Commissionated to Ordain; in such a
case he might and ought to Ordain other fit Persons for the Service of God, and
Preaching of the Gospel. For who can doubt but that the Substance is to be
preferred before Ceremony? And as St. Paul approved of the Preaching of Christ,
out of envy rather than no Preaching; so doubtless to Ordain out of order is
better than no Ordination, and the Church of Christ be deprived of Preaching,
Praying, and Administering the Sacraments, and all other Pastoral Duties; so
great necessity may well excuse any irregularity: Yet where Order can possibly
be observed, it ought to be, for God is the God of Order: Wherefore he that
wilfully transgresses against Order, transgresses against God, and shall
receive to himself damnation: for if to resist the Ordinance of Man only in
humane and temporal things be damnation, much more is it, to resist an
Apostolic Ordinance in things Spiritual and Divine.

Concerning Deacons.
HAving thus stated and united the two pretended distinct Orders of Episcopacy
and Presbytery, I now proceed to the third pretended Spitual Order, that of
Deaconship. Whether this of Deaconship be properly to be called an Order or an
Office, I will not dispute; but certainly no Spiriritual Order, for their
Office was to serve Tables, as the Scripture phrases it, which in plain English
is nothing else but Overseers of the Poor, to distribute justly and discreetly
the Alms of the Faithful, which the Apostles would not trouble themselves
withal, least it should hinder them in the Ministration of the Word and Prayer.
But as most matters of this World in process of time deflect much from the
original constitution, so it fell out in this business; for the Bishops, who
pretend to be successors to the Apostles, by little and little took to
themselves the Dispensation of Alms, first by way of Inspection over the
Deacons, but at length the total Management, and the Deacons, who were mere
Lay-Officers, by degrees crept into the Church-Ministration, and became a
reputed Spiritual Order, and a necessary degree and step to the Priesthood, of
which I can find nothing in Scripture and the Original Institution, not a word
relating to any thing but the ordering of Alms for the Poor. And the first I
find of their officiating in Spiritual matters, is in Justin Martyr, who lived
in the second Century, he relates, that when the Bishop had consecrated the
Bread and Wine for the Lords Supper, the Deacons took it from him, and
delivered it to the Lay-Communicants there present, and carried it also to the
Faithful that were absent, hindered, I guess, from coming by sickness, or some
other good excusing cause. In the beginning when the Congregations of the
Faithful were small, the Bishop himself delivered the Communion to them, but at
length increasing to great numbers, it would have taken too much of their time
for the Bishop to have delivered it to the whole Congregation; so the Deacons
were made use of as fit Persons for this matter; for in those days there was
always a Communion in the Assemblies on the Lord's Day, and the Laity that Day
brought their Alms and Presents with them, which were delivered unto the
Deacons to dispose of to the Poor by the Bishops direction, and therefore the
Deacons receiving from their hands their charitable Benevolence, were thought
the fittest to return again to their hands the consecrated Mysteries being part
of their Offerings. But it is evident this was not yet come to be the general
practice of all Churches, but only in Greece, where Justin Martyr lived; for
Tertullian who lived in Africa some years after Justin, declares that the
custom there was, to receive the Blessed Sacrament from the hands of the Bishop
only, whom he calls the President, that is, whosoever was chief in the
Assembly, whether Bishop or Presbyter: But yet I confess that this custom of
the Deacons delivering the Blessed Sacrament, or at least one part of it, viz.
the Chalice, by degrees became the custom in most Churches in after Ages; and
so passing from one thing to another, in time they came to administer the
Sacrament of Baptism, and at last to the Ministration of the Word, the business
which the Apostles peculiarly reserved to themselves, and which the Bishops
also for a long time reserved so entirely to themselves, as it was thought a
great insolency for any, even for the Presbyters, to take upon them to preach
in presence of the Bishop. Valerius Bishop of Hippo (as Possidius relates) was
sharply rebuked by his fellow Bishops for suffering St. Austin, then but a
Presbyter, to preach before him. I know sometimes it was suffered also in other
Churches, but very rarely, where the Bishop himself was of weak abilities for
the Work, and had some Presbyters under him very eminent. And so it was with
Bishop Valerius and St. Austin, a Person of great note in those days. And thus
you see, in process of time, how strangely things alter from their original
Institution, the Bishops omit preaching, and become servants of Tables, and the
Deacons for serving of Tables, step up into the Pulpit and became Preachers.
But Petavius takes upon him to prove Deaconship a Spiritual Order, and brings
us a more early Author for it than Justin, that noble Martyr mentioned before,
Ignatius, who in his Epistle ad Tralli, calls Deacons (as Petavius conceives)
Ministers of the Mysteries of Christ. Here I find that, which I often lament,
Learned Men to go on in a track one after another, and some through
inadvertency, some through partiality take many Passages of ancient Authors
quite different from their meaning, as here, all following the first erroneous
Interpreter of Ignatius. Whoever first translated this Epistle of Ignatius,
sure this fancy of Deacons ran much in his head, otherwise he could never have
found them here, for it is evident the word Diaconus in this place relates to
the Presbytery newly before mentioned, telling the People they ought to be
obedient to the Presbyters as to the Apostles of Christ; (then follows) You
must therefore please them in all things, being Ministers of the Mysteries of
Christ. Mark, I beseech you, You must therefore; Is not Therefore a Particle
relating to what went before viz. to the Presbyters, otherwise the Speech is
very absurd. Should I say, Presbyters are as the Apostles of Christ, therefore
you must in all things please the Deacons, were it sense? no, but just, Deus in
Coele, ergo, baculus in Angulo; but to say the Presbyters are as the Apostles,
therefore you must please them in all things, being the Ministers of the
Mysteries of Christ, as the Apostles were; this is very good coherent sense;
and so run the words of Ignatius; but the weak Interpreter mistaking the word
Diacanus, ran into this error, and many learned Men without any consideration
have run after him. I grant the word Diaconos is often set for Deacons,
specifically distinguished from Presbyters; but it is very often set for all
Ministers in general, Apostles, Bishops, Presbyters, as you find frequently in
Scripture. St. Paul in one Epistle, viz. the 2d. Cor. twice styles himself and
other Apostles Diaconous. And I do the more wonder at the Interpreters mistake
in this place, because by the following words, Ignatius here excludes the
specifical Deacons, saying, Not the Ministers of meats and drinks. Now we know
the specifical Deacons were Ministers of meats and drinks to the Poor, it was
their proper work, for this very end they were chosen, and for no other, as
appears evidently in the Acts; and therefore Ignatius saying, Not the Ministers
of meats and drinks, directly excludes such Deacons, and the word Diaconous
must necessarily be taken in the larger sense, and relate to the Presbyters
before mentioned, therefore please them in all things being the Ministers of
the Mysteries of Christ, not of meats and drinks for the Poor. Whoever
understands the Greek and will see, must needs see the truth of what I affirm.
But Petavius intoxicated with this spiritual Order of Deaconship, turns all
this round quite another way, according to the working of his fancy. And so he
does some places of Scripture as little to his purpose as this. He tells us out
of the Acts, that Philip and Stephen, both Deacons, were Preachers of the Word,
that is a Spiritual work, therefore belongs to a Spiritual Order. I would
gladly know who informed Petavius, that Philip who Preached to the Eunuch, and
afterward went about Preaching to others, was Philip the Deacon and not rather
Philip the Apostle, as seems to me far more probable; for Philip the Deacon was
by his Office to reside at Jerusalem and take care of the Poor, thither the
Alms of the Faithful were sent, to relieve the Saints at Jerusalem. But you
farther urge, Surely Stephen was a Deacon; and let Philip also if you please,
it signifies little to the purpose. Sure I can show out of Scripture, Preachers
that were in no Spiritual Order, neither Presbyters, nor Deacons neither, as
Aquilla and Priscilla his Wife too, and Apollo likewise, to whom they both
Preached and instructed him more fully: sure they did not ordain Apollo a
Deacon, nor can I believe any of the Apostles ordained him Deacon, and sent him
forth to Preach before he was well catechized in the Word, he was not so much
as Baptized in Christ, but knew only the Baptism of John; if not Baptized,
surely not ordained Deacon, yet he prevailed and mightily convinced the Jews.
It is in reason strange, though in practice common, to see how Men wedded to an
Opinion, think whatever they read speaks to that, so Fathers, Doctors, all
clink as they think. In the Primitive time all, both Men and Women, did Preach
the Gospel, taken in a large sense, as St. Peter calls Noah, a Preacher of
Righteousness, that is, they endeavored to instruct all they conversed with,
in the Faith of Christ and Godliness, for which many both Men and Women
suffered Martyrdom. Wherefore though Philip the Deacon and Stephen Preach the
Gospel, it signifies nothing to the Spirituality of the Deaconship, seeing that
thousands of Laymen and Women also did the like. And so the Apostles laying
their hands on those chosen to be Deacons, signifies as little to this purpose.
Do not we find that Paul laid his hands on the converted Disciples at Ephesus,
and they received the Holy Ghost, and Prophesied, yet none of them ordained
either Presbyter or Deacon. And sometimes the Apostles laid their hands on
those that were already ordained, both Presbyters and Apostles also, as on
Barnabas and Paul, when they were sent forth to Preach. This laying of hands
was a Ceremony used on several occasions, I need not mention more, they are
obvious to any that read the Scripture. It Is evident then from Scripture, that
the first institution of Deacons was a mere Lay-Office, I will not say a
profane Office (as some too grossly and irreverently have termed it) but a
pious and honorable Office in the Church of God, to serve Tables, to take care
of God's Poor; but (as I have showed) in process of time it became quite
another thing, and so different from the Original Institution, as it made
Chrysostom, and diverse other great and good Men, doubt whether the Apostles
did not constitute two sorts of Deacons, some for this Lay-Office, some for
Spiritual-Offices: Had Chrysostom consulted only Scripture, he would never
have doubted, nor dreamed of two sorts of Deacons, there being no mention at
all but of one; but he seeing the practice of the Church (which he was
unwilling to condemn) so different from that one Apostolical Institution of
Deacons; this so confounded the good Man that he knew not well what to make of
it, and willing to piece Scripture and the present practice together, to put a
new patch upon an old Garment, made the rent the wider, rending the Deaconship
in two pieces, which of old was but one, only to serve Tables; which Office he
that used well, purchased to himself a good degree, a good esteem, and so it
might be a recommendation to the degree of Priesthood, though no necessary step
to it. And so we find that holy Deacon and most renowned Martyr St. Lawrence,
was made a Priest, but continued afterward in that same Office of Deacon unto
Death, which he suffered in a most cruel manner, laid on a Gridiron over Coals,
rather than he would give up the Treasury of the Church and Alms of the Poor,
to the covetous cruel Tyrant. This holy Deacon Petavius brings to prove, that
Deacons by virtue of that Order only, did minister in holy things, telling us,
that St. Ambrose mentions how he did distribute in the Lords Supper, the Blood
of Christ to the Communicants under Bishop Xistus. Whereas St. Ambrose tells us
how he Consecrated the Blood of Christ, which plainly shows how untruly
Petavius deals with us, and that St. Laurence was a Priest, not a bare Deacon,
for neither Petavius, nor ever any allowed Deacons the Consecration of these
sacred Mysteries. Wherefore seeing the Scripture allows Deacons, as Deacons, no
more then serving of Tables for the Poor, whatever else Ministration is allowed
them is by humane Authority, not Divine, and their Office or Order, which you
please to call it, being about Temporal things must be Temporal, not Spiritual.
And so I leave them to their proper Office of serving Tables, not finding in
Scripture any thing more belonging to them.

Concerning Confirmation.
Confirmation or some such thing is so necessary, that for want of due
execution thereof, Persons extremely unfit are admitted to the holy Table of
the Lords Supper. I fear a quarter of the Communicants of this Nation do not
sufficiently understand the true meaning of these holy Mysteries, the due
preparation for them, the benefits, the damages, in worthily or unworthily
receiving them: This I affirm upon experience, having, by way of discourse,
questioned many both of low and high degree, where one would little expect such
Ignorance. And by reason of this gross Ignorance in due preparing, and
conscientious receiving this blessed Cordial and Medicine of the Soul (of power
in it self to cure all our diseases if rightly applied) is turned into our
destruction, and damnation of the Soul. For this holy Sacrament rightly
apprehended, would strike a terror into the Soul and a dread of Sin, but Men
receiving it without any regard into their sinful souls, the beams of Grace
which this Sun of Righteousness brings with it, harden their dirty hearts, and
make them afterward unsensible of any horrid abomination whatsoever. And all
this is occasioned by the want of some fit Person of authority, to examine
youth of all degrees, ever so high or ever so low, before they are admitted to
the Lords Table. For there being many poor ignorant Curates, many
unconscientious careless Ministers, many overawed by the superior quality of
their Parishioners, some cannot, some will not, some dare not search into the
requisite abilities of persons to be admitted. All which was prevented in the
Primitive times of Christianity, when able and holy Bishops were elected, and
therefore reverenced and obeyed in all Spiritual matters by the greatest as
well as by the least. These diligently and publicly before the Congregation at
set-times in the year, chiefly at Easter, examined all those who had been
converted to the faith from infidelity that year, and all those, who baptized
in the faith, desired admittance to the Lords Table; and upon approbation and
confirmation of the Bishop, fit persons only were publicly Baptized by him,
and at the Church door, as soon as Churches were built, where the Baptistery was
placed, and then brought into the Church and admitted to the Lords Table: And
no inferior Minister did either baptize, or administer the holy Communion,
unless it were by the Bishops order on urgent occasions. These things are very
well known to the Learned, who are conversant in Ignatius his Epistles, Just in
Martyr, Tertullian, Cyprian, and other succeeding Writers. And in short,
nothing was door of any moment, as is plain in Ignatius, but by the Bishops
directions. But at length the number of Christians growing great, and
multitudes of Children daily Born, and an Opinion growing up also, that it was
absolutely necessary for the salvation of Children not only to be baptized, but
also to receive the Holy Communion before death, it was impossible for the
Bishop to be at hand to perform all, or to give particular order for all:
Necessity forced every Priest in his Cure to perform these Offices. Yet in
process of time the opinion of the necessity for Children to receive the Holy
Communion before death, declining, and few or none admitted till the age of
discretion, and the necessity of Baptism for Children still continuing, the
Bishops suffered still all Ministers to Baptize, but resumed to themselves
again the power of Confirming and Licensing youth to the Holy Communion. And
Bishops only for a long time executing this Office, it grew by degrees into an
Opinion, that Bishops only were capable to do it, and that Confirmation was a
Sacrament, and such a Sacrament as inferior Priests, supposed then also to be
of an inferior Order, were not to meddle with. What errors will Men, yea
learned Men, carried along with a crowd, slide into, not willing to stand in
opposition with a multitude, especially when countenanced by the Bishop their
Superior. And then succeeding learned Men having in their Infancy sucked in
the error, continue it in their riper learned years, and endeavor to desend it
as a certain truth; and at last it passes for an Article of Faith, necessary
to be believed. Thus have I laid out before you the true State and Progress of
this business of Confirmation.

Now I pray consider first; Suppose Confirmation to be a Sacrament, and to be
administered by the Bishop only, and none to be admitted to the Lords Table till
Confirmed: How is it possible for a Bishop of so large a Diocese, as some of
ours are (some extended three or fourscore miles, many forty or fifty)
personally to Confirm half the Youth in a Diocese, if he duly examine each one,
as is most fit and necessary. We see how this is performed in their Triennial
Visitations; not a quarter of those, who are admitted, ever come to the Bishop,
and yet the crowd is great: What is then done to those that come? They are
asked by the Bishop, whether they believe and will perform those things their
Godfathers and Godmothers affirmed and promised for them at their Baptism?
they answer, Yes, and so are confirmed: But what those things are, whether they
understand and can give a good account of those things, not a word of this. Oh
but the Curate who presents those Children to the Bishop, assures him that they
are fully instructed for it; this is the thing we complain of, and desire to be
redressed; that it may not be left to the discretion and care of every Curate,
seeing what pitiful Creatures are by them admitted. And do we not see
sometimes (the Curate desiring to please the fond Mother) Children confirmed so
young, as cannot without a Miracle be of a capacity to understand those divine
Mysteries. Besides, it may often happen that a pious Child well fitted for the
Holy Sacrament, and perchance being weak, earnestly desires it before his
death, yet must stay some years 'till next Visitation, or take a long Journey
to the Bishop, for which he may want strength or means to support him. But in
the Primitive Times the Bishops confirmed every year; their Diocese also was
very narrow, so that access to him was quick and easy; and the work was as
easy to the Bishop, yea and easy also to the inferior Curate to instruct and
prepare them; for Parents and Masters did then according to their bounden duty
(the great neglect whereof in these days will find some punishment at the last
day) made it their chief care to instruct their Servants and Children from
their infancy in the Principles of Religion.

You see how impossible it is for a Bishop in a large Diocese and Triennial
visitation, to perform this necessary work as it ought; and therefore in the
second place consider, how necessary it is for the Bishop to appoint some
discreet conscientious Ministers, (as our Dean Rurals should be) in several
Circuits to examine and license to the Lord's Table: For I pass it as granted
that Confirmation is no Sacrament; and if it were, why may not Priests, not
Bishops perform it? Certainly there is not one word in Scripture forbidding it,
or any colorable pretense against it, nor can I discover the least ground of
reason to forbid it; inferior Ministers performing other Offices superior to
it, and certainly equal to it, though it were a Sacrament, which our Church
denies. There is nothing in the World can be pretended, but that in the
beginning Bishops did only perform it. To this I answer, That from the very
beginning there were no other Priests but Bishops, as I have showed you, and
then Bishops did all other Ministerial Duties, Preach, Pray, Baptize,
Catechize; and in succeeding Ages, when there were several inferior Priests,
not Bishops, all but Confirming was ever transmitted to them; and to Deacons
also, Preaching, Praying, and Baptizing, nay Baptizing tolerated in necessity
to Midwives, (I would gladly see any such thing in Antiquity) and shall
Confirming, the meanest of all these, be denied Priests? You will tell me there
have been Decrees in some Councils to forbid it: And will you be bound up to
all the Decrees of Councils, without Scripture, or any reason for them? If once
we leave Scripture, and hearken to the Doctrines of Men, ever so holy, ever so
learned, ever so Primitive, we shall soon be wheedled into the Papists
Religion, and many other Errors, which the Papists themselves now reject, as I
have declared at large before, and therefore I forbear, saying more now to this
purpose; but proceed to a third Consideration, What will be the best means to
prepare Youth for the receiving the holy Communion in every Cure, and then
present them to such as are appointed to License them.

In the first place, I humbly conceive it will be necessary to add unto the
Catechism, a short and plain Paraphrase upon every sentence in the Creed, the
Lords Prayer, and Ten Commandments, and particularly to explain every unusual
hard word therein. For those general Questions at the end of them do not so
sufficiently open the understandings of the weaker or duller Youth, as that
they know how to apply those generals to each particular sentence; but many
Youths who can most readily say the Catechism to a little, yet understand many
words no more than if they were Greek, and scarce are able to give you the
meaning of any Sentence in their own words: And although they have all
perfectly by heart, as we say, yet have very little in their heads and
understandings; and so a Parrot may be well nigh as capable of the Lords
Supper, as some of those.

In the next place I must tell you, That I fear as much Ministers of the best
parts as those of the meanest for this necessary work of Catechizing, lest both
have the same effect, though they act extremely different, the one talking
nonsense, the other above common sense, both of them confounding the brains of
the poor Youths, who understand neither of them. I have heard some Learned
Ministers call the Youth together, ask a few Catechism-questions, which the
Boys answering readily are commended and dismissed: And then begins this
learned Man a profound Lecture, shaped according to his own large dimensions,
at which both Boys and Men also for the most part gaze, as at a prodigious
Monster of Learning; and perchance some of them say to themselves the same,
that Festus said to St. Paul, The Man is besides himself, much Learning has
made him mad. Sure he does not know where he is, not in an University-School of
Divinity; but in an Assembly of weak and silly Youth (who must be fed with
milk, and are not capable of strong meat) where it were better for him with St.
Paut, to speak five words with his understanding, that by his voice he may
teach others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue, or in such
English as they understand no more than an unknown tongue. I humbly beseech
these Men to attend to the Form and Phrase of the Gospel, and mark what kind of
matter and language the Divine Oracle used in Preaching it, even to the learned
Scribes and Pharisees, and to learn of him who was lowly in heart, and came not
to seek his own glory, but the glory of Him that sent him. I desire them also
to read the latter end of the first Chapter of 1 Cor. and the beginning of the
second, and learn from thence to speak the Wisdom of God in the weak and
foolish way of Preaching, to instruct and gain the weak and foolish, yet wise
unto God. Really no Man that has not made some experience can believe, how
strangely weak and dull thousands both of boys and men also, are in
apprehending spiritual matters: so that a man had need to study much, how to
fit their weak heads with a suitable discourse, and has as much need of great
patience also to repeat every thing again and again, and even beat it into
their heads. I have observed that Plato's manner of many short and plain
questions and answers to effect much; and likewise familiar similitudes from
things within their own occupation and knowledge. And now to encourage them to
this toilsome work, I beseech them to consider, that the Souls of these weak
simple ones, cost our Savior as dear, as those of the Philosophers, and
therefore are as dear to him, yea it seems dearer, seeing St. Paul tells us in
the place before cited, that he calls more of them to Salvation; and therefore
they ought to be as dear to our Saviors Ministers, and to be chiefly called
and sought by them; and then they shall be sure to have their reward from this
our lowly Savior.

In the last place, I conceive it necessary to consider, what course may be
taken to bring all to Catechizing: for I have heard some Pious Ministers much
complain, that they have used their utmost endeavors, yet cannot effect it:
and it can never be expected, that many of the Youth will come, unless
compelled by Parents and Masters; of whom many are so careless, many so
covetous, as they think every hour lost, which is not spent on their worldly
affairs: so that the Parents and Masters need compulsion as well as their
Children and Servants. And considering how this necessary work of Catechizing
has been neglected for many years past, it is much to be feared that the aged
need it as much as the youth. But would Parents and Masters well consider the
great advantages that would accrue to them, even in their worldly concerns,
they would be very zealous to come themselves, and both see and hear their
youth Catechized, and bred up in Piety and Godliness: the want whereof has
bred that great undutifulness in children, that sloth and falseness of
servants, which we sadly behold in this degenerated age, And let me mention
once again the strict account Parents and Masters must give to God for so great
neglect to those committed to their charge, Wherefore unless some fitter
expedient can be found, I humbly conceive it would have some effect, if such
careless Parents and Masters were not admitted themselves to the Holy
Communion, who were faulty in this kind: for though many of them are not very
zealous of the Holy Communion, and could easily pass it by, yet for reputation
sake they would not easily incur the being rejected; and doubtless many of them
would be moved thereby, and the example of some would be followed by others,
and so by degrees the number would increase: and when Catechizing by this means
begins to grow in fashion, it would quickly be taken up by all. God be merciful
to us, that Religion in many is chiefly for fashion sake! yet I hope by Gods
assisting grace, Religion beginning, though but in fashion, would end at last in
true Devotion, at least in many, if not in all. However it is good that God
should publicly be glorified, the public would sdeed the better for it,
though the private hypocrites suffer punishment in the end. God in his mercy
turn their hearts that they may escape.

Of Church Government.
MY last particular which remains yet to be handled, is that of the Authority
of Bishops to govern as well as to ordain. And in the first place, who can but
wonder to see men so zealous in assuming to themselves the sole power of
Ordination, so much neglect, and even wholly abandon the power of the Keys,
that of Excommunication, so high and so dreadful; which, though by great abuse
in latter times is made very contemptible, yet in the original institution and
Primitive practice was very terrible: A power to deliver men over unto Satan,
that Prince of darkness, to take full possession of their Souls, and sometimes
of their Bodies also, both being sentenced thereby to the everlasting flames of
Hell; and likewise a power to release penitent souls from the chains of
darkness, and slavery of the Devil, and restore them to the glorious liberty of
the Sons of God; whereby they are made Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven. If there
be any thing under Heaven fit to stir up the Ambition of mortal men, yea an
ambition in Angels themselves, sure this is it. Who can forgive sins but God
alone? said the Jews to our Savior Christ swelling with indignation against
him for this, though they had seen many divine Miracles wrought by him, yet
this is so peculiar, so transcendent a divine act, as not to be offered at by
any but the great God Jehovah himself. But blessed for ever be this great and
gracious God, who by his eternal Son Christ Jesus has given this power unto
men. As his heavenly Father sent him with this power, so sent he his Apostles
with this power, saying unto them, Whosesoever sins ye remit they are remitted
unto them, and whosesoever sins ye retain they are retained: Wherefore if there
be any thing in the Office of a Bishop to be stood upon and challenged peculiar
to themselves, certainly it should be this; yet this is in a manner quite
relinquished unto their Chancellors, Laymen, who have no more capacity to
sentence or absolve a sinner, then to dissolve the heavens and earth, and make
a new heaven and a new earth, and this pretended power of Chancellors is
sometimes purchased with a sum of Money, their Money perish with them. Good
God! what a horrid abuse is this of the Divine Authority. But this notorious
transgression is excused, as they think, by this, that a Minister called the
Bishops surrogat; but is indeed the Chancellors servant, chosen, called, and
placed there by him; to be his Crier in the Court, no better, that when he has
examined, heard and sentenced the Cause, then the Minister (forsooth)
pronounces the sentence Just as a Rector of a Parish Church should exclude any
of his Congregation and lock him out of the Church, then comes the Clerk shows
and gingles the Keys, that all may take notice that he is excluded. And by this
his authority the Chancellor takes upon him to sentence not only Laymen, but
Clergy men also brought into his Court for any delinquency, and in the Court of
the Arches there they sentence even Bishops themselves. This is a common
practice in later ages, but in St. Ambrose his time so great a wonder, as with
amazement cries out against the Emperor Valentinian, when he took upon him to
judge in such cases, saying, When was it ever heard of since the beginning of
the World, that Laymen should judge of spirituals, (he means in spiritual
things, not in temporal things, which by the laws of God and man belongs to the
Lay-Magistrate) This was that Ambrose of whom the other great Emperor, as Good
as Great Theodosius; Father to this Valeninian affirmed, Ambrose only knew how
to act the Bishop, and with all Christian humility this great Emperor
submitted to the sentence of this godly Bishop denying him entrance into the
Church for the cruelty acted by his Soldiers at Thessilonica by his command;
and upon his great repentance and penance performed six months together, and
after public confession in the Church, was again absolved and joyfully
received into the Church. Oh my Great and Reverend Fathers of the Church the
Bishops, whom Christ has cleaved to his high dignity, whom he has made Kings
and Princes, whom he has called to sit with him on his Throne, there to give
sentence of eternal life or eternal death, can you so tamely part with this
prime flower of your Crown, yea the very Apex of it, and suffer the Lay-members
of the Church to usurp this divine authority? Or how can you answer it to the
chief Bishop of our Souls, if any one Soul by the ill management of the
Chancellors should certainly perish? shall not his blood be required at your
hands? But perchance some of you will answer, It Is no fault of yours, but of
your predecessors, who gave such Patents unto them, as by virtue thereof they
exercise this power, will ye nill ye. It Is too true, and I remember when the
Bishop of Wells, hearing of a cause corruptly managed, and coming into the
Court to rectify it, the Chancellor Dr. Duke fair and mannerly bad him be gone,
for he had no power there to act any thing, and there with all pulls out his
Patent sealed by the Bishops Predecessor, which like Perseus shield with the
Gorgons head frighted the poor Bishop out of the Court. Where are you
Parliament men you great Sons of the Church so zealous for Episcopal
Government, yet suffer this principal part of it to be thus alienated and
usurped by Laymen? If an unordained person take upon him to pray or preach,
with what outeries and severe Laws, and with great reason also, you fall upon
him; but if an unordained person take upon him to judge, sentence, and
excommunicate Bishops themselves, you calmly pass it over, take no notice of
it. You will answer me, The Bishops themselves pass it over, yea and pass it
away from themselves and their successors for to gratify their kinsmen, or
their friends; or perchance for worse, why then should you stir in it. Truly in
this you have reason, and the balm most wholly light on them, who do not use
all possible endeavor and implore your assistance also to rectify this great
abuse, which subverts the main Pillar of the Church Government, this is no
Ceremonial matter, but the very substance of it, they strain at Gnats and
swallow Camels. For Chancellors to intermeddle in Probats of Wills, payment of
Tithes, or any other temporal matters, there is no scripture nor reason to
condemn, but rather to condemn, Bishops, should they interpose in such matters
for which they have no commission from Scripture, but rather a prohibition from
that saying of our Svaiovr, Man who made me a judge or a divider over you? but
then it will be necessary that Chancellors have also power of Temporal
punishments, and not profane that high and holy power in sordid earthly
things; certainly a greater profanation than to convert a Church into a
Chandlers Shop; the Church is a bulk of earthly materials and holy only by
dedication; the power of its Keys is in its own nature and original
constitution spiritual and divine: If Uzza being no Levite suffered death for
laying hold on the Sacred Ark of God to support and hold it up, what shall he
suffer who being no consecrated person lays hold on the sacred authority of
Gnd to pull it down from heaven to earth? Let them consider.

But let not the Civilians for this account me an Enemy to their Profession,
which no man honors more, and I heartily wish much more of our Civil matters
were committed to their management and judicature. The Civil Law is that whereby
most of the civilized World is governed, and if we will have commerce with
them, it is fit we should have able Civilians to deal with them, which will
never be unelss they have profitable and honourabl places to encourage them for
it; all that I beg of them is, that they would contain themselves within their
own Sphere of activity, and not intrude into spiritual and sacred matters
committed by Christ and his Apostles to the Priesthood. And so I beg of
Priests, that they would not intermeddle in Lay and Temporol officer. In the
time of Popery when Spiritual and Temporal affairs were all intermingled and
horribly confounded, as the Pope took upon him Secular and Imperial authority,
directly contrary to the Word and Constitutions of Christ, so the Bishops and
Priests under him intermeddled in all Secular Affairs and offices, and in this
Nation Bishops were frequently Lord Keepers, Treasurers, Chief Justices,
Vice-Royes, what not? which is strangely un-Apostolical and unlawful, their
vocation being wholly Spiritual, as Men chosen out of the World, should have no
more to do with it, than of mere necessity for food and raiment. Wherefore to
take upon them any Lay-Office, which must needs take them off much from the
Ministry of the Word and Prayer, is doubtless very sinful: For Acts 6. we find
the Apostles gave themselves continually to these, and would not endure to have
these interrupted by that charitable Office of taking care for the Poor;
certainly then they would have much less endured; yea, abominated to be taken
off by temporal and worldly Offices. And on this occasion, let me speak a word
to those of the inferior Clergy, who take upon them to study and practice
Physic for hire, this must needs be likewise sinful, as taking them off from
their spiritual employment; had they studied Physic before they entered Holy
Orders, and would after make use of their skill among their poor Neighbors out
of charity; this were commendable, but being entered on a spiritual and
pastoral Charge, which requires the whole man, and more to spend their time in
this, or any other study not spiritual, is contrary to their vocation, and
consequently sinful; and to do it for gain is sordid, and unworthy their high
and holy Calling. But Necessitas cogit ad turpia, the maintenance of many
Ministers is so small, as it forces them even for food and raiment to seek it
by other Employment, which may in some measure excuse them, but mightily
condemn those who should provide better for them: Whether this belongs not to
King and Parliament, I must humbly beseech them in Christ's name seriously to
consider: I crave pardon for this (I hope useful) Digression, and return to the
Business of Excommunication.

This Sacred Authority of Excommunication being committed by Christ to the
Apostles by them to their Successors, was used in weighty and very scandalous
matters, very few examples of it in Scripture: The incestuous Corinthian
Hymenus and Alexander, scarce another clearly expressed. The Apostles being fully
guided by the Holy Ghost in all things, did exercise this power singly
themselves; but the succeeding Bishops, having not the Spirit of that full
measure, used the assistance of the principal Clergy in their Diocese, that the
act might be more solemn and authentic; the person excommunicated, if he
conceived the act injurious, appealed to one or more neighboring Bishops, who
assembled together, and discussing the matter, either confirmed or reversed the
Act, as they found cause: And sometimes the matter proceeded so far as to cause
an Assembly of the whole Province. But each Bishop, or Praepositus (as St.
Cyprian calls him, and declares, that he) was absolute in his own Diocese to
exercise his power, and none condemned for using it, but only for abusing it
contrary to reason and conscience; there were the only rules they proceeded by
at first. Afterward when Bishops on this or other occasions met in Assemblies
Provincial or General, they made it diverse Canons, which passed for Rules and
Laws to govern the Church by, which doubtless are very good helps to bridle the
extravagant passions of particular Men, very apt in this corrupt age to
prevaricate; yet I cannot conceive them so far oblidging but new emergent
circumstances may justly cause new and different Decrees; yet so, as every
particular Bishop is oblidged for peace sake to submit to, or at least to
acquiesce in the General Decree of that Nation where he lives, I said, They are
not bound entirely to submit to the Decrees of former Councils, either
Provincial or General; because, as I have showed before, all their Decrees are
humane, not Divine; and all humane Ecclesiastical Laws are alterable, according
to the time and occasions by other General Councils.

As to the bounds of each Bishops Diocese, they were occasioned several ways:
The Apostles for the better spreading of the Gospel, Preached it first in the
principal Cities, which generally had great influence upon the adjacent parts,
by reason that the occasions of most call them thither, and in these Cities
they settled the chief Pastors of the Church, with power to ordain Presbyters
and Pastors in other lesser Cities and Towns round about, as the Congregations
of the Faithful increased; and all those Churches that were erected, and
Pastors established in them by these Apostolic Men in the chief Cities (I
humbly conceive in reverence of their worth and Apostolic authority) were
freely observant and subject to them, which afterward out of custom, grew into
a kind of right challenged by their successors. Sometimes the authority of the
Pastor or Bishop of a City was enlarged according to the temporal authority of
the same, it being the Metropolitan of this or that Country; for so we find in
the Council of Nice, and other Councils, the chiefest and largest authority
given to the Bishop of old Rome, because it was the first Imperial City, to
Constantinople as the second Imperial City, to Alexandria as the chief City of
that part of Africa, to Antioch, Jerusalem, Ephesus, Corinth, Phillipi, etc.
where you see that though Jerusalem were the first City from whence the Gospel
issued forth, Antioch the second City where the Gospel was planted, and where
the Faithful were first called Christians; yet Rome, Constantinople and
Alexandria were preferred before them, and had far larger Jurisdiction; so that
it is a mere humane temporal matter, and Men have no farther obligation to it
in conscience, than for Peace sake and Order, which in like manner obliges
every Man to be subject to all Magistrates within their respective
Jurisdictions.

There are yet two things more to be considered in this business. First, Where
the Apostles first planted the Gospel in Cities with authority over the
adjacent part, it was in rich populous Countries, where Cities were much nearer
together than in these Northen parts, and the circuit of each City was much
less in compass, so that the Bishop might well have the inspection into all,
and understand the behavior of each Pastor under him, to admonish and chastise
when there was cause. Whereas with us partly by great distance of Cities,
partly by the favor of former Princes, several Towns being cast into one
Diocese, they became so large, as it is impossible any one Bishop should have a
sufficient inspection into them. As I said before of great Parishes so here of
Diocesses, the Bishop knows not the names nor faces of half, or a quarter of
them, much less their behavior, he may have as well a part of France in his
Diocese to govern. And as for their Triennial and Circuity Visitations, they
signify just nothing as to this, it is a mere money business to pay
procurations to the Bishop, fees to Chancellors, Registers, etc. the Bishop
indeed usually makes a Speech unto them, and a Sermon is preached by some one
of them, wherein perchance good Admonitions are given; but what knowledge can
the Bishop by this have of their lives, or doctrine, or diligence? If he
continue long there he may learn a few more names or faces, scarce any thing
more. I humbly conceive this ought to be redressed, and the Diocese bronght
into that compass, that each Bishop may be a Bishop in Government, as well as
in Title and Authority over them But if the Diocesses be divided less, and
Bishops more increased, where shall we have maintenance for so many Bishops,
some having too little already? When ever I shall see the Clergy of this Nation
Congregated by his Majesty's Authority, resolved in good earnest to reform and
establish all according to the holy Constitutions of the Primitive Times, and
come to this last mentioned, contracting the bonds, and in number increasing
the Diocesses, and Bishops for them, I Will undertake to propose ways both
rational and conscientious of providing convenient maintenanee for all; but I
desire to be excused at present, least greedy Harpies make ill use of my
zealous intentions.

And so I proceed to consider a second abuse in Church Government, which is,
Exempt Jurisdictions, a thing altogether unknown to Antiquity and brought in by
Papal Tyranny. The Popes at the height of their usurped dominion, taking upon
themselves to be head of the Christian Churches, to be the Universal Bishop
thereof, and all other to be but their Curates, took then upon them also, among
other matters, to exempt from the power of ^^y their under Bishops whomsover
they Pleased. And out of policy to have the more Creatures and Vassals
immediately depending on them in every Kingdom and Nation, to stickle for them
with Kings and Princes on all occasions, did for the most part exempt all
Monasteries (who with their near Relations and Tenants made a great part of the
Kingdom) from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop; they exempted also several Deans
and Chapterss, several peculiar Chapels, several Arch-Deaconries, and other,
and some of these were endowed with Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction in their
Precincts, wherein they acted whatever they pleased, without control of any
but their Popeships: All which would have appeared a confused madness in
Primitive times, when for any person to have been out of the Jurisdiction of
all Bishops, was to have been quite out of the Church, and would have been
looked upon as a Heathen and Infidel, according to the Primitive practice in all
Ages, till Papal usurpation. And therefore all these Exempt Jurisdictions are
mere Papal, and if duly examined, will be found opposite to the established
Laws of this Kingdom since the reformation from Popery, as they are directly
opposite to the Primitive Canons of the Church before Popery was known or heard
of. And by reason of these Exempt Jurisdictions great disputes and great frauds
arise between the Bishop and them, and the poor Clergy are so pild and pold by
them both, that they are forced to go in threadbare Coats, whilst the several
Officers of both grow fat and fair by fees extracted from them. Wherefore I
humbly conceive the Bishops, with the rest of the Clergy are bound in
conscience to implore the Assistance of both Houses of Parliament to Petition
His Majesty for the redress of these abuses by Pious Laws, Settling the Church
Government in the Primitive purity and authority, which most evidently was very
great, and as greatly reverenced, Bishops being the persons to whom Christ and
his Apostles committed the Souls of Men, bought with the precious blood of
Christ, to whom be glory, and to his holy Spouse the Church, be all Sacred
Authority for ever.

Amen.
A Charitable Admonition to all Non-Conformists.
MY beloved in Christ, you see how earnestly I have pleaded for you to the
Fathers and Governors of our Church, that they would graciously condescend to
abolish some Ceremonies in the Church, that they may receive you into it; but
yet I have no great hopes that they will hearken to me, you your selves for
whom I plead, destroy my hope; for they presently dash me in the teeth saying,
go rather and persuade the Sons in duty to submit to their Fathers, then
Fathers to yield to Sons; and can you deny but of the two you are rather to
submit? You think to excuse this by saying, Were it not against your Conscience
you would submit, but you dare not for fear of displeasing God, his holy Word
forbids you; I beseech you show me in his holy Word any one clear sentence,
against any one Ceremony commanded in our Church; you see plainly I am not
biast to any one Ceremony, and I am sure I have read the Scripture all over
several times, and I humbly conceive it is no pride of heart, if I think I
understand Scripture as well as you; and for my part I cannot find any one
condemning Sentence in Scripture. But you have the Spirit of God enlightening
you, which I want; by this rule you may affirm any thing out of Scripture, and
I should be as mad in disputing against you, as you in affirming it; it is
madness for a blind man (as you conceive me to be) to dispute of colors;
therefore if you are so void of all reason, as to expect your bare affirmation,
that you have light, ought to convince all gainsayers, I shall not trouble my
self or you, to gainsay you farther, but address my self to others, who soberly
undertake to show me such Texts, as an unbiast Christian willing and desirous
to submit to all Scripture Truths (as I am sure I am) may discover the truth of
them; and I desire those sober undertakers to show me, any one such clear Text
to excuse their nonconforming, as I show them for their conforming: Submit
your selves to every ordinance of man etc. 1 Pet. 2. 13. and, Obey them that
have the rule over you, and submit, Heb. 13. 17. These are as clear as the Sun,
that you ought to obey: Now if the Text you bring be not so clear but doubtful,
I beseech you is your conscience so bold against a clear Text, and so timorous
at a doubtful Text, is this religion or reason? is it not apparently wilfulness
and faction? I beseech you my Brethren, take heed of thus dissembling with God
and the world, or take heed of giving your selves up to these delusions of a
mistaken spirit. Humility and Obedience are evident marks of the Spirit; Learn
of me, says Christ, Math. 11. 29. for I am meek and lowly in Heart: God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. Wherefore I I beseech you,
first, put on the Lord Jesus with all humility, that he may give you the grace
of his holy Spirit, to discern clear Truths, from conceited fanciful errors.
Secondly, I beseech you consider, whether of the two it be not safer to err in
the way of Humility, then to err in the way of Pride, which makes it doubly
damnable, void of all excuse (I say this because you think or pretend to think
our way erroneous, not that I have any such thought or doubt) whereas the
Humble Soul has great excuse to plead; and if Charity cover a multitude of
Sins, sure Humility will cover some; a Soul clothed with Humility cannot easily
be displeasing to our humble Savior; but clothed with pride, can scarce be
acceptable, but rather hateful, like the proud Pharisee, with all his
enumerated Virtues; and my Brethren, it is most evident your spirit savours
somewhat of the Pharisee, magnifying your own holiness, and despising all
others as Publicans and Sinners, and refusing all communion with them; whereas
the Holy of Holies, our Lord Jesus, chose chiefly to converse with such; really
I cannot but think your case very dangerous on this account only, were there no
more to accuse you of. Thirdly, I beseech you to consider the great mischief
you bring upon this Church and Nation by your separation from the Church; You
pretend to be the great Zelots against Popery, and yet give me leave to say,
Your indiscreet disobedient Zeal mainly brings it in; your separation, and many
following divisions, have caused many to abhor our Church, and turn to Popery,
and doubtless you are to give an account to God for the ruin of those Souls;
for I can never yield that you have any reasonable and true conscientious cause
of separation, but merely mistaken-reason and conscience, which I much pity,
but no way approve; and therefore I must lay the advance of Popery to your
charge, to your separation, for I am sure it is the main snare wherewith they
catch unstable Souls, persuading them our Church is not guided by the Spirit of
Truth, seeing it is confounded by the spirit of division, it cannot be of God
who is both Verity and Unity. Now though it be well known to the Learned, that
their Church has neither Verity nor Unity, yet this is not discernable to weak
Souls, especially here in this Country, where their Church is under a cloud,
and therefore their foul spots nothing so visible as abroad, where it walks
barefaced, but are here by their Priests either with great confidence denied,
or with great cunning disguised. Wherefore again I most earnestly and most
humbly beseech you for Jesus sake, put on our Lord Jesus in all humility and
obedience, submitting your selves to the Ordinances of those Superiors and
Powers which God has set over you; and if out of mere humility and obedience
you conform, though you were guilty of some error therein (I am confident there
is none, yet were it so) my Soul for yours. that guilt shall never be laid to
your charge by our most Gracious Savior. and most mereiful Judge Christ Jesus
our Lord: to whom be all honor and glory for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

