A SHORT DISCOURSE Concerning the READING His Majesty's Late DECLARATION IN THE
CHURCHES.

Set forth by the Right Reverend Father in GOD HERBERT Lord Bishop of HEREFORD.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed for Charles Harper, and are to be sold by Randal Tailor near
Stationers' Hall. 1688.

A SHORT ACCOUNT Concerning the READING His Majesty's Declaration IN THE
CHURCHES.
WHen the Command for Reading the Kings Declaration came down first,
accompanied with the Petition of my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and several
other Bishops, humbly praying to be excused from the Publishing those
Declarations, I disputed with my self so long, that I grew into a perfect Agony
at last, and could take no Rest all that Night. For two great Evils appeared
before me, both contrary one to the other, and yet an absolute necessity of my
falling into one of them, either Disobedience to the Kings Commands, or a
Separation and Schism from my Metropolitan and other worthy Bishops, whose
Judgments I truly reverenced in most things, and whose Integrity in all things.
This made that Night very dismal to me, till at length, the day coming on, I
got up and began to consider things with less troubled Thoughts, and more
calmly and seriously to weigh the whole Matter. And the first thing that
represented it self unto me, as an Anchor to fix and hold fast my Soul, and
compose my Conscience, was that saying, Submit your selves to every ordinance
of man for the Lords sake. 1 Pet. ii. 13. and again verse. 17. Fear God, honor
the King. This was said by St. Peter, who, we believe, was guided by the Holy
Ghost, and therefore we take it as the express Command of God, and ought to
observe it in every thing that is not flatly contrary to the Word of God, or,
at least, most evidently deduced from the Word of God, so that every common
understanding must needs see it. Now the King expressly commanding his
Declaration to be Read in all Churches, without requiring him that Reads it to
declare either his Consent, Assent, Allowing or Liking of it, I would gladly
know how any man can show me that to do this is contrary to Gods Holy Word. If
you say, that this Declaration contains a Dispensing Power contrary to the Laws
of the Land, as is declared in the Parliament 1662. and 1672. Let it be so. Is
it therefore contrary to the Word of God? Show it me. If the King would
vouchsafe to ask my Judgment, I would humbly and earnestly beseech him not to
use his Dispensing Power in that high manner. And I farther call God to Witness
that I would readily and cheerfully lay down my life to Compose the miserable
Breaches that are in these Nations on this account. But if after all, the King
tells me, he has this Dispensing Power inherent in his Majesty by Right, and
will use it whether I will or nill; What can I poor wretch do? Or what can all
my Brethren, the Bishops, lawfully do, but submit unto his Majesty's Will and
have patience? But, as a Paper lately come forth says, In Reading this His
Majesty's Declaration in the House of God, I do thereby declare my Consent unto
it: for I ought to Read nothing there but what I do approve of. Where does he
find this so expressed in the Word of God? Or from what Text does it necessarily
and evidently follow? Can this be as clearly deduced from thence, or is it as
plainly expressed as that on the contrary side, that I am to submit to every
Ordinance of man: This is the saying I stick close to, and require him to show
me out of the Word of God, that to read any thing in the House of God, is
declaring my Consent unto it: and therefore his affirmation without some such
proof from Scripture signifies nothing. Nay, to set Scripture aside, and to
discourse of matters by common understanding: If I should read unto the people
in the Church a Paper declaring that the King of France does Persecute several
Protestants, and deprive them of their Estates, does my Reading this Paper any
way declare my Consent to his Persecution? So, should I read a Paper in the
Church declaring the Kings Toleration of Sectaries, does it any way declare my
Consent unto it? No certainly. This Argument is very frivolous and vain. But
you ask me, why do I Read this in the Church? and I answer, because the King
Commands it, and I know nothing in Scripture that forbids it, and therefore I
am bound to obey it. But that Paper farther asks, if the King command a Popish
Homily for Transubstantiation to be Read in the Church, would I read it? No
certainly, unless I read it so as to confute it, and show the absurdity of it.
The Case is very different: this is a Doctrine I am necessarily to instruct the
people in, and to show them either the Truth or Falsity of it. And the Case is
the same in all Doctrines taught in the House of God. But in Reading the Kings
Declaration, there is no Doctrine Taught, only matter of Fact declared. But you
will say, that was known before, and sure there must be some other intention in
requiring me to Read it. It Is true, perchance it is to try my Obedience. And
our Enemies having some guess by our late not giving thanks for that part of
His Majesty's Declaration, which was to maintain the Church of England, because
Liberty for Dissenters was then also granted, that we will likewise refuse the
Reading of the Declaration for the same Reason, and thereby displease the King,
they therefore persuade His Majesty to require it of us. But for my own part I
was then as urgent for our giving of Thanks, as a necessary and grateful Duty;
which, had we then performed, it would probably have prevented this Command of
Reading it: which is likely to have a very sad Consequence, and I heartily
lament it, but know not how to remedy it. Yet on this occasion I beg leave of
my Brethren to tell them my whole Sense of this Matter. When the Kings Majesty
first of all declared his Resolution to maintain the Church of England in the
clear Profession of its Doctrine, with its Rights and Discipline, this was such
unexpected and surprising News, that I stood long amazed at it: and when at
length I had Composed my Mind and settled my self in full belief of it, I did
then also in all humble gratitude resolve to comply and serve His Majesty in
every thing that I could with a safe Conscience perform, and thereby preserve
His Majesty's most favorable intention and kindness toward us. And for so
good an end as the free enjoyment of our Religion, and the True Worship of God
to be publicly continued and defended, I was ready both then to give Thanks,
and now to Read (in both which I see no apparent evil) and to perform such
other things as shall be proposed, which shall appear unto me as harmless as I
take them to be. Yea I confess I should yet go farther, and in doubtful Cases
beg leave of God (as Naaman the Syrian did of Elisha, that when he bowed down
in the House of Rimmon, with the King leaning on his Hand, the Lord would
pardon his servant in this thing: so) that he would graciously pardon me in
complying with His Majesty in some things, wherein there might be some shadow,
though no real substance of Offense: and I should never doubt of Gods merciful
Pardon in it, seeing I did it out of pure Obedience to my King, upon Gods
Command, and to so good an end, as the preserving of Truth and Peace among us.
Which if we lose on this occasion, they will have much to answer for, who are
the Authors of it. Yet I verily believe, and durst lay down my life for the
Truth of it, that my Brethren who refuse the dispersing of these Declarations,
are very far from having any evil intention in it; but will as readily Obey the
King as my self, in what is as agreeable to their Consciences, as these things
are to mine. And had I had the good fortune to have been amongst them at their
Consultation, I should not have doubted of good success in persuading them to
this business: which, although it comes now too late for this; yet by the Grace
of God it may prevent some future evil accidents. However I resolved to publish
it, to give as much satisfaction to the World as I can upon what reason I
dissent from my Brethren, who, I am confident, aim at the same thing, though we
go clean contrary ways unto it. And I most humbly implore His Gracious Majesty
to believe so of them, and not to give way to Passion, or to hearken unto those
who would exasperate him against them: for it is impossible a True Son of the
Church of England should have any Disloyal thoughts in his Heart, his
Principles commanding him unto entire Obedience, either Active or Passive,
without any Equivocation, or Mental Reservation in any Case whatsoever. And
therefore a true generous Heart cannot but be kind and merciful to such
submissive Subjects, according to that, Parcere subjectis and debellare
superbos.

FINIS.

