THE SECOND PART OF Babel's-Builders Vnmask't, In an ANSWER to a False Charge
against W. R. and T. C. in a Book Entitled, John Penington's Complaint, etc.
IN the said Complaint against W. R. put out in the name of J. Penington, I
find the Scripture fulfilled in the Approvers thereof as well as in J. P. That
the time would come, they will not endure Sound Doctrine. For although that
Testimony cited from Js. P's (was Sound Truth) who was one of the most
experienced among them; yet because it thwarts their present Designs and
Interest, therefore they revile the Publishers and the Owners thereof, as
appears by the black Names and Characters to W. R. and T. C. Notoriously guilty
of premeditated Falsehood, impious Prevaricators, Betrayers of Truth, and the
sincere Professors thereof unto the wicked; unworthy, and untrue to his word, a
Shame to Moral Heathens, hardened Heart, prostrate Soul, in stiffness against
the Lord; departed from the just Principle in themselves, and daily doing
despite to the Spirit of Grace, loose libertine, etc. after all their other
kindnesses in the lower end of the 9th. page by craft (which they be well
skilled in) term W. Rogers Forger, whereby their Book seems more like a Popish
Bull than a Complaint.

And the great and black Crimes pretended against T. C. is because, He
published some Testimonies of Isaac Peningtons, and saw not his Book, but
published them on the sole Authority of W. R. whom you term a Prosessed
Adversary, page 8. but yet (although the young Man has too much Confidence) he
dares not say, It was not his Fathers: but I do now (as before) affirm it was
every word (that I published as Isaac Peningtons) really his, without any
additions or alteration of the sense of the words, only abridged, and advice
thereof given in the Preface, and also in page 11. and recommended to the Book.
But whereas J. P. says, that I published it solely on the credit of W. R. That
is false, and he, and his Approvers Slanderers and False-Accusers; for I had
other satisfaction from them whose Honesty, Ability and Credit exceeds J. P's
although I did transcribe it from W. Rs. being then from London, where I had
not the opportunity of Isaac Peningtons Book, and being not willing to exceed
two Sheets, therefore did abridge some Sentences, but not to the alteration
thereof. But if I had only taken W. R's Authority therein; it is well known,
that he is a Man whose Credit will pass for a greater Concernment with many
honest Friends, notwithstanding your Abuses and Slanders of him, because he
has detected your Apostasy. And seeing ye have not, nor cannot prove W. R's
Citation, nor mine false; but W. R. has in the Sixth Part of the
Christian-Quaker manifested that he took all his ( viz. 10 pages) all together,
and not left out, altered, or added any words: therefore it is the same as if I
had transeribed them from Isaac Penningtons, as I have done the Second Edition
before Publication: and yet you are as much offended with that, (and indeed
have as much cause) for the words be the same, and will stand a Witness against
Your Idol, G. F 's Laws, although he have many such as Solomon Eccles and C.
Tailor to adore them as from the Oracles of Divine Breath etc.

John Pennington at the lower end of his first page, cites W. R's words or
preamble (that he mentions just before the Testimony) and in second page, says,
Who would desire fairer dealing: and notwithstanding all your black and bitter
revilings of W. R. before mentioned, have not proved that W. R. has not
performed what he there said: and if W. R. had cited but as many lines as he
has done pages of Isaac Penningtons, and taken entire Sentences that depend
not on others, he had not wronged him, nor abused the Reader. For W. R. never
said it was the beginning, or end of Isaac Penningtons, nor the whole, but on
the contrary, said it was a Part; therefore W. R. not base nor untrue to his
word, but you false Accusers. For in page 78. of Examination, Is. P. says
(speaking of Christ) He waited until that was opened in his Disciples which was
able to receive his Testimony, and he made use of his Power of Life, etc. -- To
enable him -- to serve and wait in patience for the fulfilling the Will of the
Father. These Lines need not the whole to explain them, and do prove what W. R.
affirms, and against what he opposes, and he is not such a crafty Mangler as
you term him, (nor has he acted as you have in your Hypocrisy, etc. published
in the name of T. L. also the Accuser, etc.) For there be many more Sentences
in that Part which he omitted, that be against your Impositions, etc.

And for that you charge W. R. for mangling, and T. C. for curtaling, yet
observe but your own Doings; you eite a few words of the Epistle to Corinth:
The Spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets. Now you would think it
harsh Judgment to be treated with such Language (as you do W. R.) because you
have not quoted the whole Chapter, or at least, the words next adjoining: and
by your own Measures, you may justly be termed Manglers and Curtalers of
Scripture, and deserve those Names given W. R. and T. C. too many, and too foul
to repeat. And that which aggravates your Confidence and Unrighteousness in so
reviling W. R. for not citing all, or more of Isaac Penningtons Testimony, is
in your 6th.p. say that he has cited words to the same effect, as those he
left out: whereby it appears it would but have been needless Repitition of him
to have cited the same again. And those by him cited, are such plain Truths,
and according to Scripture, that they need not others to explain them. Page 5.
you say, W. R. would make appear that Isaac Pennington was against any Outward
Form of Government, Order, and Discipline; but W. R. does not say so, nor any
ill, or disrespective word of Isaac Penington in all his Book, therefore in
that also you be false Accusers. And for that Sentence which J. P. says in his
4th. page W. R. left out, because it pinched him, (it was not in so far as he
cited) the words be these. And the Unity being thus kept, all will come into
one outwardly, also at length, as the Light grows in every one, -- but this
must be patiently waited for from the Hand of God, who has the right way of
effecting it, -- and not harshly -- attempted by the rough hand of Man. These
J.P. truly cites, but when he comes to infer from them, then he is guilty of
what he falsely charges W. R. with: For he is so much in have for Outward
Oneness with G. F' s Laws, that he takes no notice of the explaining words, but
leaps over them; he forgets to stay for Outward Oneness until the Lord Effect
it, as his Father said; to plead but to stay until the Grace of God convince
the Conscience, is now termed, a loose Plea, and the Root of Ranterism with
some of G. F's chief Men of War: for they must Establish the Church in the Holy
Order of the Gospel (as they call it) And this their hasty imposing G. F's
Laws, is the great cause of difference. For W. R. etc. do not oppose any
Outward Oneness that Friends are by the Lords Hand brought into, but incourages
it. And Is. P's words allowed their plain and true meaning, are not pinshing to
W. R. for Is. P. says, And the Unity being thus kept, etc. which relates to
something before mentioned: where he says, He that has a Taste of the one
Heart, and one Way, knows that no variety of Practices, which is of God, can
make a Breach in the true Unity, etc. -- And every one keeping here, there is
one Heart kept in the midst of all variety and diversity of Practices. Whereby
it is clear, that the Unity he believed, admitted of diversity of Practices.
Which is the same with W. R. etc. and is that J. P. and his Adherents are so
against, viz. Bearing with, and not judging one another, as Isaac Pennington
says (truly) is likelier means to bring into One Outwardly, than compelling.
And J. P. does falsely and perversely say (in his 5th.page.) W.R. durst not trust
his Reader with those words; For if it be so, that all arc to be of one Mind or
Practice Outwardly, yet that does not prove that all must come to Conformity to
G. F.' s Laws. But it may as well be inferred from those words, that G. F. etc.
will come into one with J. P's Father, according to his many Testimonies, viz.
Not to strive to force into one Mind, but walk sweetly together in Love,
although in diversity of Practices; which is also according to Scripture, and
the ancient Testimony, and Christ's Rule; Do as you would be done by; therefore
more properly to be expected and pleaded for from this very pinching Sentence,
as J. P. calls it, than to plead for Impositions.

And for that J. P. would reflect on W. R. in page 7.8. for using the words We,
and Our, only as a flourish: it is well known, that abler and honester than J.
P. have, and will own themselves concerned. However W. R. needs no help against
such as J. P. but his own work of Falsehood is sufficient correction to himself;
who notwithstanding he has not proved any wrong done by W. R. but that he has
performed what he said, and that J. P. says, is fair Dealing; yet after all his
other foul Language, does in the 9th. page no less than term W. R, a Forger:
but it appears, that the cause of all their rage against him, is, because he
has endeavored to prove G. F. but a fallable man, unto whom Christopher
Tailor and Solomon Eccles etc. have given unsitting Titles and Names.

And forasmuch as J. P. has not made good his charge of wrong done by W. R. to
his Father in his Citations, nor disproved any words that W. R. or T. C. cited
as his Fathers, but that they are really so, nor any thing omitted by W. R.
that was in the Part he cited. Therefore it can be no Injury to Isaac
Penington, or the Reader, that T. C. transcribed that Part of Isaac Peningtons
Testimony from W. R's Book, which was occasioned as before.

And for that J. P. in page 8. reflects on T. C. that he did not Berean-like
search his Fathers Writings. Those Testimonies by T. C. are so agreeable to the
Truth and Scriptures, that if J. P. and a hundred more of G. F's Men of War do
deny, or oppose them, yet T. C. would not be ashamed to own them. And they were
not published as a Charge or Defamation to Is. P. but will stand on Record to
his Praise. And if any Injury be to Is. P. it is by him, and his Adherents that
would insinuate that his Father intended any other way than his words are, and
would make him contradict himself and Truth also. And for that J. P. says, T.
C. added wide Inferences of his own, as of a Liberty in paying Tithes, as a
civil Right: Indeed he says true in that he says, wide Inferences, for that
Passage he is so offended at, is about seven pages wide from his Fathers, and
two other Friends Testimonies between: but if J. P. think that I should ask
him, etc. license to mention his Fathers Name, or Writings, he is mistaken.

Also J. P. says, far from his Fathers Sense and Practice, I did not say it
was his Fathers Sense or Practice, but his Father does say, page, 64. Christ is
sole Lord and Judge of the Conscience, Romans 14.4. and not either Minister or
Church, -- that is many times required to be left upon a further degree of
Knowledge given, which was not required to be left before, etc. This proves
what T. C. affirms, That we ought not to judge one another about Matters that
relate to Conscience.

As for that cited as E. B's Vision, It has been so received and delivered
from, and to many Eminent Friends. T.C. does not pretend that he saw him write
it, but if any mistake were in the assigned Author, the truth is no less truth.

And whereas J. P. faith, T. C's Title is fallacious: had any thing been set in
the Title which was not in the Book, then he might have so said, nor do I
understand it is deceit, not to express all on the Title, that is in the Book.
But to me there appears greater deceit in the Conclusion of his, where he
faith, Let this be dispersed only where W. R's abusive Book has gone, (which
Caution pretends privacy) Yet this Book was sold to Strangers, that had no
appearance like Quakers, and lay public on the Booksellers Boards to the view
of any, and sold to them that never saw W. R's Book.

And for that' J. P. in page 8. about Tithes, says, It is a denying Christ
come in the Flesh; it needs his further Explanation, especially since we find
that many of the Believing Jews were found in the Practice of Circumcision
(equally abrogated with Tithes) and not Judged for such their Practice, whilst
through Faith they were not led from under it. T. C. does not plead for Tithes,
but believes them to be an oppression, But that every one that pays them,
denies Christ being come in the Flesh, I think, is too rash; when the payment
thereof is grounded on a Submission to the Established Laws, and not on a
Religious Score, in pursuance of the Law under the First Covenant abrogated by
Christ. For the Tribute demanded of Christ, was contrary to their Law, yet he
paid it. Also to be smitten, or compelled to go a Mile, But yet Christ
commanded to bear it, and do them; and for all J. P. etc. are so angry, I will
adventure to add without their license, that I believe they that pay them only
out of Christian Submission to the Magistrate, do better than those that deny
them, only because G. F. etc. do so order, or will Judge them therefore.

And for the using of plain Language, or any Practice Friends use, or refuse,
as in Conscience to God, T. C. condemns not, only Imitation. And for that J. P.
says is a Lie, if he mean saying you to a single Person, this I think is too
uncharitable and a rude word in it self, and so accounted by J.P. as in his
14th. p. 1. 10. he says W. R. foul-mouthedly gives G. F. the Lie (but that was
to G. F.) I cannot understand, that saying You to a single Person, is a Lie,
unless it be spoke to deceive: for I take a Lie to be a wilful Untruth, for
every Untruth is not a Lie, because one may speak untrue, and yet not know but
believes it is true; also Speech is only to signify the Intents, and if the
Party spoken to, plainly know the meaning of the Speaker, the end is answered,
and that distinction rather proper for Schools than Christians: And this
confident black-mouthed young man has by those few words marked as Liars (and
so for the Lake) hundreds of better Christians than himself. But I know that
with the Lord is more Mercy, also with the Christian-Quaker more Charity. And I
am satisfied J. P. is not the Young Man Ezekiel saw, That was to mark those
that mourn for all the Abominations that be done in Jerusalem: For I believe
that among those he has marked as Liars, there be many such. I am sorry his
anger against T.C. should so transport him to fall foul of so many Generations
past, as also many now no ways concerned, nor privy to T.C's Provocation of
him, that he is so offended at. For T. C. condemns none that are Conscientious
to God, although in different Practice, neither does he question but they were,
and are acceptable: But G.F. etc. making Laws and Orders how People should
speak and act, and yet pretend to Believe and Preach the Sufficiency of the
New Covenant, and dare not trust them therewith, this I take to be a more
denial of Christ being come in the Flesh, than a peaceable Submission to the
Law, when nothing from God in the Heart is otherwise required. And I do believe
that G. F. is not as Moses, to receive Orders from; but HIM to whom all
Judgment is committed. And who ever fixes Christ his Offices or Titles on G. F.
etc. such are Denyers of Christ being come in the Flesh. And I am not against
Gospel Order, but for it, as W. R. in the Third Part, and several other places
in the Christian-Quaker has asserted.

And for that J. P. is offended with T. C. in page 9. because he said, That may
be required of one, which may not be required of another. T. C. did not say, It
is so, but, may be, and if that be possible, as I am sure it is, then what I
affirmed, is truth, and I think the Parable of the Talents, etc. makes that
good, and as Is. Pennington says, Though the Doings or Thoughts, or Words be
Diverse, yet if they proceed from the same Principle and Nature, there is a true
Unity felt therein, where the Life alone is Judge. A small grain of Charity,
(much less than he has of Enmity) would have showed him how to reconcile such
Assertions to Truth: but to satisfy the honest hearted (and not to gratify
the Chief Priests and Pharisees) T.C. does say, That he believes many
Christians do out of Conscience scruple Paying of Tithes, as believing it
sinful; and that it is required of such, that they be faithful thereto; but he
also believes that some honest People have not the same scruple or doubt,
therefore it is not so required of them: and in this case it may properly be
said, That is required of one, which may not be of another. For that J. P.
queries of W. R. whether he will stand by T.C. thereby taking on him to enquire
for help for T. C. he need not, for T. C. never complained to him for, neither
would he have any of his help, for he likes not his Practice so well: and T. C.
fears not but he shall have sufficient assistance as he is on Truths part, and
otherways he does not desire any: but hopes never shall shelter under J. P's
Refuge, for I am sure that must be swept away. And if not to pay Tithes be a
fundamental or substantial Doctrine of Christian Religion, (which is the
highest it can be) hear what Isaac Pennington in page 11. of Examination,
speaking of the Kingdom of God, faith, Another may want diverse Doctrines
concerning it, perhaps some of those which men call FUNDAMENTAL, and yet be a
Citizen of it, and in the Power, etc. Also, see Edward Burrough's Testimony,
page 20. Notwithstanding Difference in Judgment, in Cases Substantial, yet they
were to be in Love and Unity. Whereby it appears from both their Writings, that
they allowed difference in Practice and Judgment; in things esteemed
SUBSTANTIALS (and G. F's Laws cannot be more.) And this was the Unity Isaac
Pennington says, page 88. Being thus kept, all will come into One Outwardly. I
hope this rash Young Man will not term his Father, and E. B. as he has T. C.
One that shuns the Cross, and seeks Ease in the Flesh, and say, They oppose
Truth to Truth, and makes the Spirit inconsistent with it self.

And seeing Is. P's words are such undeniable Truths as cited by T. C which J.
P. cannot deny, only says, it is but in part his Fathers Sense; T. C. never
said it was all, but in Preface referred to his Book. I hope J.P. will not make
one Part contradict the other, for that would render himself guilty of what he
falsely charges on W. R. and T. C. that they have abused and perverted his
Fathers Writings, and thereby all those black Characters that J. P. has
bestowed on W. R. and T. C. justly belong to himself. And for that he has been
so extravagant (beyond his pretended Principle) to bestow such a Livery on T.C.
and so abundantly belace it: I believe he never knew T. C. before the occasion
of these Testimonies; therefore seeing his knowledge was so little, neither
has he proved any great Crimes against him: I appeal to any Christian Quaker,
whether it be not a very unchristian and bold adventure of this black monthed
Young Man to say, T.C. daily does despite to the Spirit of Grace, and that he
opens a Gap to Libertinism. I deny all fleshly Liberty and Ease, but the high
Hedge, or Wall, viz. G. F's Orders, etc. must be destroyed, and that City laid
wast. (And every one know his dependence upon the Foundation Christ Jesus, the
Light) And what you have hewed and hammered, and made such a noise with your
Tools, they are not therefore the fitter for the Lords House; for His Day is
come, and coming on all your Fenced Cities and High Towers, and those who like
the poor Rekabites, cannot dwell in your Fenced Cities, nor drink of your Wine;
these in all other Tribes as well as Yours, is the Lord gathering into the one
Habitation, the Light, although not into one Outward Form, yet of one Mind, and
Heart, to do the Will of God, and serve each other; and here will be their
Greatness, not in striving to rule and command each other, and Preaching up
Submission to Elders, and those to have Rule and Care of the Church, because
their Party have gotten the Dominion; but on the contrary, strives who shall be
Lowest, most Meek, and Patient, and bear others Burdens, every one prefering
his Brother before himself, and so Honor and Submission is freely rendered, but
not required: And as Peter said, Every one subject one to another, and all may
Prophesy one by one, and the rest Judge, and not one, or a few that will
Prophesy and Judge to. And whereas the Apostle does in some cases allude to the
Members of the Body to show that several Offices or Gifts, differing, are
useful, and that one should not think much of another, because not the same
Member or Office. And although in a natural Body, every Member has its fixed
Office, it is not so in the Spiritual Body, but Place or Office may change;
none, Eye or Hand for the whole Body constantly fixed, but Eye, or Hand to day,
may be Foot to morrow, and who seems contemptible to day, may to morrow be
Honored. And Christ's Ministers they have his Image of Meekness and
Self-denial, and what they deliver as from God, is commended to his Word of
Grace in the Heart; for those that Christ exalts will not exalt thcmselves, but
as Christ did when they would have made him King, then he hid himself, but when
they came to take him to crucify him; then he said, Whom seek ye? I am he.

And notwithstanded T.C. is by this J.P. etc. rendered a Ranter, and Loose
Libertine, etc. yet I will now give a brief Relation of the occasion of T. C.
his being concerned, also some hints of the Difference.

Having heard in public Meeting, also by Print and Writing, that I. S. and
I.W. were Men of evil Practices and Principles, as by a Judgment given against
them (by above 60 Persons) wherein I.S. and I.W. were rendered Obstinate,
Despisers of Heavenly Dignities, promoting false pernicious Jealousies, setting
up a kind of a Standard of Separation from the Blessed Fellowship of the
Churches of Christ, bring Confusion to the Churches. These with more black
Names and Terms, they say are in the Name, and by the Authority of Christ; also
they refer to a Paper subscribed by about 80 Friends in WestmorLand, wherein
they say will be found the true Nature of Imposition. Which is because some
Persons that belonged not to their Meetings, frequented them, and occasioned
Differences about G.F. his Laws; wherefore the Persons concerned, desired that
they would not concern themselves, unless they had any Business or Message from
the Lord: wherein they made no absolute exclusion of any: yet this is termed by
G. F. Imposition, worse than any Court, Assize, or Sessions, and yet these
Meetings were for Business, viz, taking care of the Poor, etc. as they were a
Body, or People gathered together: And for Peace sake, some absented, and met
apart, but proposed that if they might enjoy their Freedom in Peace, and to act
as in Conscience persuaded, they would be content to meet with their other
Brethren as formerly; yet this is one chief Crime charged against them in your
Judgment; and one of G. F's Party said, They resolve to give Battle to this
Spirit in the Name of the Lord, wherever they meet it: by which it appears
they have proclaimed War, and therefore are termed G. F's Men of War; and so
far as I can find, the chief Cause is, that they ( I. S. and I.W. etc.) prefer
the Law of God and the Scriptures before G.F's Laws: for all your Charges and
Accusations against them, you charge them not with Breach of the Law of God, or
the Nation, or Personal Wrongs, as Men, but Dissatisfactions about your Forms,
etc.

And the Consideration of the Innocence of I.S. and I.W. and the Severe and
Unjust Sentence against them, and other public defaming them, occasioned some
to appear in their Vindication, and indeed it concerns them, and all Friends as
Men, as well as Christians: for if G. F. or any one Man, or Company, terming
themselves the Body, or Church (and usurping Authority) have Power to impose
Laws on others, and contrary to their Consciences, they must thereto conform,
or are Apostates and Insidels: this makes void the New-Covenent, or Law in the
Heart, and is so unlike, nay, contraay to True Christianity, that I am
astonished thereat; Christ said, What ever you would others should do unto you,
that do unto them, etc. And I am well satisfied these Persons themselves would
not he so imposed on. And because I.W. said, That they ought to use no Force
but the Word of Life to stir up People, and that they would not have People
over driven. And I.S. said, He believed one was an honest Friend, and yet had
not a Testimony against Tithes. These and such like Christian Expressions are
accounted such black Sins, that they be made Heads of Articles against them:
And if such Proceedings be not like Popery and Imposition, I know not What is.
I mean not, that they would introduce the Pope of Rome to have Power here in
England, but themselves, G. F. etc. would have Power, and do assume and
maintain, That they have Power and Wisdom from God to determine the Affairs of
the Church; and do excommunicate, and come little short of Rome, according to
their Power; but many do bless God, that some of them have no Power to mulct,
or corporeally punish, but they say they have Power in Heaven, a great deal,
and do not only lay a small Fine for not Conforming, but seize the whole
Estate, and banish thence effectually to their utmost: and for Matters of less
coucernment than eating Flesh or Herbs, or observing a Day, or not; for the
Outward Life may in great measure depend on some of these sometimes. But G.F.
his Laws about Women's Meetings, and Form of Marriages be termed from the
Oracles of Divine; Breath, Heavenly Dignities, Christ's Government, and the
conforming to them, Prosperity of Sion, Peace of Jerusalem, and almost all high
Titles in Scripture, and they stamp the Inventions of G. F. and his Party with
the Authority of the Spirit of God, if but about Time or Place of Meeting;
which if scrupled for some reasons of Inconveniences of Time or Place, or out
of Conscience to avoid Superstition in Forms; for such small Matters have some
been rendered, Disturbers of the Churches Peace: as if all Good and Hope of
Salvation stood only in them: nay, in their Bull of 66. against I.S. and I.W.
after all the black Characters given them, they do say, By the Power and Spirit
of God -- they warn all to beware of them, etc. and to warn them to go home,
and be reconciled to their Brethren, etc. ( i.e.) Submit to G.F. and say,
therein will ye acquit your selves in Gods Sight. Whereby it appears what Value
and Force they esteem their Orders, that the bare observing them can absolve: a
cheap way to Heaven, if you can believe all these Men say, and that they be the
only Dispensers of the Gospel: but as conscientious and careful as these new
Spiritual Lords would make the honest hearted believe they are, for the Glory
of God and Prosperity of Truth; it appears by their severe Judgment, and
heathenising. I.S. and I. W. etc. and their condemning I. A. because out of
Conscience they cannot conform to G. F's Laws, and their excusing S. E. who
speak Lies in the Name of the Lord; also the high Praises given the Barbados
Church, notwithstanding their so erroneous Judgment in pursuance of G. F's
Laws, as in Babel-Builders, it more fully appears, that their Care is for G.
F's Laws, more than the Laws of God.

And the consideration of the Inconsistency of the Principles of Truth, with
their Church Government, is cause of astonishment to many; remembering that
under pretenses of every one walking as they were by the Light in their
Consciences persuaded, they gathered many honest People out of all Societies;
and now term Outward Orders (about needless Ceremonies) ordered by G. F. etc.
Christ's Government, and no being Members of Christ's Church, without so owning
them, and yet their own Liberty, but at pleasure of others: considering all
Circumstances, I think scarce any Imposers now extant, if they be not: and the
consideration of what ill Consequence it may prove to the After-Ages, if G.F.
and his Party but gain that Point of Power, viz. To give Laws to others, and
that it is their Duty to be conformable thereto, although contrary to their
Consciences; Or that any one of G. F's. Party pretending them seyes Public
Laborers or Ministers, must not be denied Inspection into others Affairs, for
fear of being accounted Imposers, worse than any Court, Assize, or Sessions, as
G. F. did the Westmorland Friends: I say, the Apprehension of the ill Effects
of these Principles and Practices: If some others should but have the
Confidence to give such Names, and Dignities (as G. F. etc. have done) to their
Laws and Ceremonies now in use, and some of them in themselves as inoffensive
as G. F's, only too much stress laid on them. I dread to think the ill
Consequences thereof: it was truly said, That Popery, least suspected, will do
us most harm. For when Constantinople pretended to the Universal Bishopric,
Rome then seemed as much against what the now is, as some now do, for all they
may, now say, Am I a Dog (as one once did) and yet did that he then seemed so
to abhor: and of all People in England, miserable Slaves be we poor Quakers,
better and safer to submit to a Church that have their Atticles fixed, or the
Scripture for their Rule, for thereby we may know what may be required, their
Power being limited; but G. F's etc. not. For they have a High Tower, where
they think themselves so safe, that none can reach them, and that is their
pretense to their Church Power, which others pretend to as well as they;
therefore it was truly said in Adr. to Prot. Eithor convince my Understanding,
or show me a Miracle; but that failed; for that Deceiver S.E. would have forged
one on I.S. (when in likelihood not to live long) belying the Lord, and saying,
That year he should dye; but has since confessed it was false. A cheap way of
buying Pardons, and great Encouragement for other his Fellow Servants to G. F.
to do the same; who make such a noise of Vnsubjected Spirits to the Yoke of
Christ, as if there were no Yoke of Christ, but G. F.'s Orders. Is not Pure
Religion, now the same as ever? Is the Lord changed, or the Force of Faith
abated? for by that the Elders obtained a good Report; and that Sure Word that
Peter directed to, was more sure than the Voice that was heard in the Mount;
and is now as Sure and Powerful as ever; and if surer to that Church when Peter
wrote to them, then that formerly spoke to Christ in the Mount, although Peter
himself a Witness of it: then more sure and safe than G. F's, etc. For as his
great Champion and Servant S.E. was mistaken, so may he, and better to undergo
their False Judgment, than that of God in the Conscience, although they may
say, You despise Dignities, and disturb the Churches, and be Apostates, etc.
Remember it was Pharaoh of old that said to the Children of Israel, Ye are
idle; and the Enemies to Jerusalem in Nehemiahs time said, when they went to
repair the Breaches, They would Rebel, and damage the Kings Tribute, and the
Jews cried out of the Apostles, That if they were let alone, the Romans would
come and take Place and Nation, as G. F. etc. faith, Make us a Derision to the
Heathen, and lay wast Gods Heritage. It is the Old Lording Spirit that has
followed, and entered all Forms that has entered G. F. etc. who would ( Pharaoh
like) keep in Bondage, therefore say, Ye are Idle, and weary of the Cross, and
would go back into Egypt: but I know not what looks more like, Egypt, than
being tasked by G. F. etc. and be in Bondage to them who must give, or rather
command what, and how much we must do, to have our Work and Task set by them,
that is Egypt, and contrary to the Apostle, who when desired to concern
himself, by complaint about the neglect of some Widows, he said, Choose ye out
faithful Men, shall we leave the Work of the Lord to serve Tables? But G.F's
Party contrary to this Example, they will call it Imposition and( Independency)
worse than Court, Assize, or Sessions, if you will not let them meddle with
your Business, when unconcerned, although they have liberty to deliver any thing
they have from God. Oh poor slaves, the under Members of your Body. For I would
know the Security that any thing one has, is their own; if but G.E. or S. E.
pretend something on their Spirits, which C.T. may term From the Oracle of
Divine Breath: you must be at Unity (that is, give up) or else erred from your
Measures. The Dangerousness of these Doctrines, and their such early
Proceedings thereon, causes some to think no pains ill spent to Detect and Lay
Naked such Men and Principles, that it may be known that G. F. etc. are not the
best among the Quakers, nor the best of Gods Servants, as C. T. etc. have
falsely affirmed; For there be thousands among them abhor such things, (although
the ruling Party term them Apostates, etc.) who desire no more Liberty than
they are willing to allow to others differing from them, and desire, as Christ
said, To do as they would be done by. But these Ruling Foxonians do exceed the
Church of Laodicea, who were said To have a Name to live, but these few have
taken to themselves almost all the Living Names and High Titles that can be
found in Scripture, but the Life would do them more goodl; more Life, and fewer
Titles; read what was said to Laodicea, Thou say thou art Rich, and
increased with Goods, but knew not that thou were Blind and Naked. Names of
Living, and saying they be rich, are not such good Signs, proud boasting
swelling words bespeak not so much Christ's Life, as Is. P. says to New England;
They have long had a Form, and it may be, have eaten up the Power, and they may
not be so Savoury now in their Ease, and Authority, as under their Trouble and
Persecutions, and God may in kindness to them send among them a Foolish People
to stir them up -- now their coming is not to scatter corrupt Opinions, but by
the Power of Truth to scatter that which scatters from the Lord; nor is it to
draw to their way, but to the Lord, and the Living Way which they are exhorted
to try before they receive. So that all who Endeavor to promote Forms more
than Peace and Charity, which are the very Life of Christianity, gives just
Cause to suspect the Lord does not send them: and this as certainly belongs to
G.F: his Party (who assume to themselves the Rule and Government) as it did to
New England, for you are doing the same Work as they did; (I do not mean
hanging, etc.) but cry out as they did, Disturb the Church, preach Heretical
Opinions, deny Christ's Gospel and Ministers, and Christ's Ordinances: and what
for? but not Preaching up, or not conforming to some New Laws of these New
Spiritual Lords, viz. G. F. etc.

Also in a Postscript to S. C's Babylonish Opposer, etc. J. P. says, that T.C.
has curtailed a Testimony of his Dear Fathers: but if any deserve to be termed
Curtailers, or Perverters, then it belongs to the Writer and Approvers of the
Accuser, etc. who cite Part of the Title to the Third Part of the Christian
Quaker, but they leave out in the middle of the Sentence some of the Principle
words, viz. Who alone is Lord of the Conscience; and some Other, and W. R's
next words be, For the better illustration of our Meaning, an Answer to a Part
of a Book of R. B. is cited. By which words it is apparent, that in Justice no
Conclusion ought to be made from that Title, without consulting that Answer
referred to: but yet they do in the Accuser, also, a Sheet put out in the Name
of T. L. Also J. P's Complaint, page 5. say of W.R's. The whole Drift of that
Part is to tie up all to an Inward Government of Christ, exclusive of any
Outward Government, etc. Whereby it is evident they would persuade Friends that
W. R. etc. is against Order, etc. and yet they do cite in the Accuser, by way
of Contradiction to W.R. from that Answer in 23d.page of the Third Part, that
W. R. says, Not that I would be understood that it is not necessary to be in
the Exercise of Outward Order, with respect of Gospel, Discipline, and from
page 83. of the Third Part, My Soul should rejoice to see that Day, wherein we
might all be so led by the Appearance of Christ's Spirit in us, that Oneness
might thereby be witnessed among all the Families of Gods People. Also 38. and
43. pages of the First Part, and 47. of the Second, and 33.64. and 65. of the
Third. All these be by themselves cited out of C. Q. which do plainly manifest
W. R. is not against Order, and Oneness, nor Discipline, as they falsely charge
him, but they False Accusers (so proved by their own Citations) and Curtailers,
as in the 5th. page of the Accuser, etc. They cite a Place from page 21. of the
First Part of the C. Q. W. R. says This Sensence, THese Words in different
Letters, were left out in their Citation.
as Heirs of the Gospel of Life and Salvation take your Possessons has been of
late Years frequently expressed by G. F. when speaking to Friends, by way of
Encouragement to continue Men and Women's Meetings distinct from the Public
Meeting for Worship, by which it is much doubted that some Ignorant People
have concluded that the frequenting such Meetings, is an Evidence that they are
Heirs of Life and Salvation. Where they leave out G.F. his Name, and other
material words, etc. and say W. R. reflects on he knows not who, when he names
G. F. and as they quote his words, they seem a general Reflection on Meetings
for Worship, when W. R. says distinct from them, and they have left out and
added words in many Places to the manifest Perversion of the Sense, and
according to their own Measures, are Curtailers and Perverters, and have so far
excelled T. Hicks and I. Ives, that if any People (pretending to Christ's
Church, etc.) may be said to have attained to the perfection of that they
themselves call Forgery, Perverting, and Curtailing: they, viz. G.F's Chief Men
of War, have, as appears in their Accuser, also their Hypocrisy Detected, put
out in the Name of that poor Aged Man T. L. of 81 Years, and touse their own
Expressions, who would have thought they should have the Face to accuse others
for that they are so grossly guilty of, and have the confidence to say that T.
C. has the face to bring up the Names of Is. P. and E. B. again with the same
tendency, to render their Sense different from their Brethrens present
Practice, is no less than a manifest Perversion. I my self know that my Father
has delivered to the contrary, and never saw, nor heard any thing
contradictory thereto come from him. Wherefore I shall mention some more of
their present Sense or Judgment, also Is. P. Testimonys, and leave their
Inconsistency to the Judgment of the Reader.

These under, are their Present Judgment These following are Is. P's and E.B's
Judgment formerly. Is. P. EXAM. 10. Page 2. Epistle Brief Examination. Speaking
of the Church, say, Her Members are of one Mind in Church Matters. And P. 4. no
fear of want of Unity, where all are left with the One Spirit of Truth, they
must be of one Mind, they cannot be otherwise. The true Trial of Spirits is not
by an Assent to Doctrines, which a Hypocrite may assent to. 11. A man may want
some of those Doctrines Men call FUNDAMENTALS, and yet be a Citizen of it ( i.
e. Heaven.) E. B. notwithstanding difference in Judgment in Cases Substantial
yet they were to walk together in Love and Unity.

And I desire Friends to consider these Sayings of Is. P. and E. B. now Cited,
and many more, and compare with what is also Cited against them, and their
Severe Persecution of I.S. I.W. I.A. and others, for not Conforming to G. F's
Laws, but for showing Charity to some honest Men that differed from them in
some things. And I. S. and I. W. said, They would not have People over driven.
And this Christian Charity which Is. P's and E. B's ancient Testimonies accord
with, (and so ought all in Truth) G. F's Party are so Apostatised from,
(rendering them such Evil Facts) that they make them Heads of Articles; nay, for
differing about Manner or Form of Marriages, shall condemn out of Unity, which
is out of the Church of Christ, with them, as by their Principle before Cited,
must be all of one Mind, cannot be otherwise: but the Testimonies cited of I.
P's and E. B.'s say contrary.

And therefore, who cannot adore G. F. and his Laws, as C. T. etc. have done,
From the Oracle of Divine Breath, and S. E. The great and good Ordinancer of
Jesus Christ: and if not of one Mind with them, and will not give up to his
Women's Meetings, etc. Then Rebels against the Lord, and Cursed from God from
all Eternity to all Eternity, as some of G. F's Men of War have said, because
some will not bow to G. F's Will: And he himself has said, those that be of I.
S's Party, be of the Devils Party, then out of the Truth, and not safe to be
left to their Freedom, or as G.F. says, to the Barbados Church, Those that
have not Unity with Men's and Women's Meetings, are erred from their Measures,
but the Universal Spirit has Unity with the least Measure. So that they that
are not of one Mind with them, have not the least Measure, for if they had,
they should have Unity with them. Which Doctrine is also confirmed, in their
Brief Examination, page 2. and 3. If thou are such an one that can do nothing
against the Truth, but for the Truth, then may thou safely be left to thy
Freedom in the things of God: which words do imply, that it is not for others
to expect it, or have right to it, as confirmed a littel farther, where having
spoke of some good things, then say, That if thou plead thy Freedom against
such things, etc. thy Freedom is naught, and out of Truth. Now with those, and
many more such good Names, and Rich Attire, do they dress G. F's Laws with: and
who cannot, as C. T. and S. E. adore him, and them, as they have, then Your
Freedom's naught, and out of Truth, and by the Consequence of the above cited
Doctrine, It is not fit for you to be left to your Freedom in the things of
God, unless you be arrived to that height of Hypocritical and Pharisaical
Righteousness as C.T. etc. (who in his Epistle of Caution is of the same mind
with Exam.) He would have it Believed they cannot appoint any thing against,
but for the Truth, whereby it is manifest that their Charity for Freedom in the
Things of God, (i. e. Liberty of Conscience) extends to such as can own G. F.
for the best of Gods Servants, and his Laws from the Oracle of Divine Breath;
but those who cannot so believe, their Freedom is naught, and they out of
Truth, although never so Conscientious to God otherwise. But Ad^. to Pr^t. p.
104, says. Faith in that day was an entire Resignation and Dependence on God,
and not a Subscription to Verbal Propositions and Articles, although never so
true. P. 105 Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and thy
Neighbor as thy self; is the perfection Christian Religion, -- and certain
Token of a Disciple. These Qualifications may be, and yet not of one Mind in
some Forms; neither are all the Members of Christ's Church arrived to that State
(or not to that height of Presumption) as G. T. etc. but on the contrary; may
through unwatchfulness and weakness do some things displeasing to God:
therefore not for, but against the Truth, yet ought to be left to their Freedom
in the Things of God. And that Position, That them which be left with the one
Spirit of Truth, must be of one Mind, cannot be otherwise; I take to be false,
For Peter and Paul differed, and were not of one Mind in some things, yet I
hope you will not deny them to be Members of Christ's Church, and to be left to
their Freedom, etc. seeing you have so much Christian Charity for Moral Men to
admit they may be Christians. It is said, p. 7. of Brief Exam. The difference
between Peter and Paul testifies the weakness of Peter, and -- Justifies Paul's
Reproof of his too great Compliance with the Jews. -- Which makes against
Liberty of various Practices in the 'Church. But I take him to mistake, for
Peter not only complied to the Jews himself, but he Would constrain the Gentiles
to do like the Jews. Gal 2. v. 14. Therefore Paul withstood him, and it was not
the believing, or practicing one or'tother, for he said Circumcision or
Uncircumcision avail not; also he caused Timothy to be Circumcised, but it was
the Preaching of Forms or Ceremonies of necessity to Salvation, that he terms
Compelling, Act. 15. Certain Men taught the Gentiles, that except they were
Circumcised, and kept the Law of Moses, they could not be Saved. This Paul
withstood. Also it is said, Br. Exam. page 7. That Passage about Eating has
nothing in it for which it is alleged, for it related not to Church Order or
Communion: But I think it did, for in the Qu. before, it is said, The Persons
differing, were Peter and Paul, and Peter eat with the Gentiles, as Gal. 2.12.
also 1. Cor. 8.10. If any see thee which have Knowledge, sit at Table in the
Idols Temple, shall not the Conscience of him that is weak be imboldned to eat
those things sacrificed to Idols. Also Romans 14. The Apostle speaks of observing
Days to the Lord, as well as eating, and about offending one another, which
could not so properly be in what any eats in private, as his Nourishment, but
related to some Differences about Meats, which some would have obliged the
Believing Gentiles to observe the Jews Ceremonies therein, on account of
Salvation, as in Act. 15. which Paul was against, and they had Disputes about.
Romans 14. Him that is weak receive not to doubtful Disputations: and in the next
words the Apostle says, One believes he may eat all things, another that is
weakeateth Herbs: and in Verse. 5. Let Every Man be fully persuaded in his own
Mind, and Verse. 12. Every one shall give account of himself to God; let us not
therefore judge one another. These Scriptures and Citations clearly manifest
that Christians ought to be left to their Freedom, (i. e. Liberty of
Conscience) although not so strong, or at least, not so confident as C. T. etc.
But if it be, as said in page 7. Br. Exam. It related only to what they would
Eat, as private Persons in respect to Appetite: although they had therein
Power, yet the Apostle advises to the consideration of others: as Romans 14.14. I
know and am persuaded that there is nothing unclean of it self. Yet in 1 Cor.
10.13. If Meat offend my Brother, I will eat no Flesh while the World stands.
Now if Paul would thus deny himself in condescension to a weak Brother, surely
he was far from compelling him to be of his Mind, or saying, They cannot be
otherwise. Therefore if that Instance about Meats related only to private
Freedoms, that makes much more against a necessity of all being of one Mind,
but rather according to Is. Ps etc. Testimonies for leaving them to their
Freedom, walking in Love and Unity in Diversity of Practices. Wherefore that
astonishing Affirmation of I. P. That he never saw nor heard any thing
contradictory to the present Sense and Practice of Friends (i. e. G. F. and his
Party) from his Father; seemed to me so remote from Truth, that I wonder (to
use their own words) they have the Face to assert it. I recommend you all to
the word of Gods Grace nigh in your Hearts, which is able to give you an
Inheritance among the Sanctified Ones, which neither G. F. etc. nor conforming
to his Orders can do.

Tho. Crisp.


