A SECOND CALL TO A farther Humiliation, BEING A SERMON PREACHED The 24th. of
November. last past.

BY The Right Reverend Father in God, HERBERT, Lord Bishop of Hereford, in his
Cathedral Church of Hereford.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Harper, at the Flower-de-luce, over against St.
Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet, 1678.

TO THE READER.
Good Reader,
IT may be you do not take your self to be one of those who need this Second
Call to Humiliation; you not being of the number of those exorbitant Sinners,
whose notorious Vices cry aloud for Judgment. First then, humble your self in
thankfulness to God for his preventing Grace, that you are not; for assuredly
by Nature you are the same. Secondly, Consider that though the main bulk of sin
belong to others, yet when the Vessel is near full, a small addition will fill
up the measure, yea, and may make it run over; and on that account your guilt
may be great, and your Humiliation necessary. Thirdly, Though you contribute
nothing to the measure (a rare Blessing) yet as a member of the body, you are
bound by Nature and Religion both to do your utmost endeavor to keep off the
evil from the whole; this likewise requires your Humiliation as necessary. Yet,
say you, none of all that makes this my Sermon necessary, there being other
abler Sermons already abroad to this effect: Pardon me, this may be
notwithstanding a necessary help. When four strong men are laboring to raise a
heavy Log, and are near effecting it, the addition of a fifth, though weaker,
may be necessary to complete the work, at least may make it easier and surer.
And I shall count it no small happiness to have contributed something toward
the true humiliation and reformation of this sinful Land. God of his infinite
mercy by his powerful Grace assist all our endeavors.

Amen.
I Pet. v. v. 6. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty Hand of God --
WE lately kept a day of Humiliation to prevent, by Gods mercy, the fearful
Judgment which seemed to hang over our heads by a bloody Plot, contrived by
Popish Priests for the destruction both of King and Kingdom, Church and State,
all at a blow; and let me tell you, still hangs over us. You hear what
desperate bloody things have been spoken and acted in London, in the face of
King and Parliament since the discovery, which plainly declare these Men have
still confidence to effect their design, otherwise they could not be so mad as
to give such evidence against themselves of their bloody intention, and give
also such provocation to the Supreme Legislative power for their more severe
chastisement, unless they had hopes they should yet be able to give the Law to,
and chastise this Supreme power; which makes me fear we and other people of the
Land are not yet humbled as we ought. Some perchance thought the business of
Humiliation was to end with the day, and that they had fully performed their
task in Fasting that day, and coming to Church, and then expected God must
presently withdraw his chastising hand: But have they withdrawn their sinning
hand? I desire them to examine that a little better. Others it may be went
farther, and resolved, yea, and entered on the way of Reformation, but are since
fallen from their first love, and that days fervor, and are grown lukewarm:
How far each one is failing, I leave every man to look well into their own
heart; but there is great cause of fear we have not done our part; for we have
a most gracious God, who never fails those that seek him in true Humiliation
and hearty Repentance. It is the same God that spared wicked Niniveh upon
Repentance, and doubtless would do the same to us did we repent as Niniveh did:
but pardon me if I tell you I doubt it much; whereof I shall say more in the
close. Certainly then we have no reason to hope God should do to us as to
Niniveh, if we do nothing like what Niniveh did. Wherefore I thought it
necessary to give you a Second Call to a further Humiliation, and in Christ's
stead beseech you, Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God.

But some perchance conceive this to be no proper day for a Humiliation Sermon;
and I beseech you why? Is not this the Lords day, and ought to be kept a Feast
unto the Lord? And with what? Will you offer unto him a Sacrifice of an hundred
Bulls, and five hundred Rams? But the Lord delights not in such Sacrifices.
The Sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O
God, shall thou not despise. Certainly then we cannot better celebrate a Feast
unto the Lord, then by offering up our broken hearts and contrite spirits: Or
will you keep this a Feast unto the holy Angels in Heaven? You know who tells
us that they 'rejoyce more over one Sinner that repents, than over ninety and
nine just persons which need no Repentance. What a mighty Feast then shall we
make unto the holy Angels in Heaven, by all our Humiliation and Repentance. And
do you desire after you have Feasted God and his holy Angels, to feast your
selves also this blessed day? Why then you know a good Conscience is a
continual feast, and this you cannot have but by Humiliation and Repentance:
for I doubt not but you will approve of that Scripture which tells us, If we
say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. But
if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. You see then there is no other way to have
a good Conscience clean from sins, but by humbly confessing them. Humble then
your selves under the mighty hand of God, and you shall keep this day a most
acceptable Feast unto the Lord, a most joyful feast to all his holy Angels, a
most delightful and happy feast unto your selves this day, and all the days of
your life.

Which that we may effect, I shall first show you that a discourse of
Humiliation is useful and necessary for all persons: Secondly, seasonable at
all times, in Prosperity or Adversity: Thirdly, I shall show you the method of
Humiliation out of Holy Writ: Fourthly, come to Application.

First, A discourse of Humiliation is useful and necessary for all persons of
either Sex, of any Age; for Pride, the opposite Vice is a disease all Mankind
is infected with, and shows it self even in our Childhood before any other, and
continues till our very death. As for other Vices, some we are not obnoxious
to, till we are grown up into the world, and some are out-grown by long
decaying Age; but Pride comes with us into the world, and never leaves us till
we go out, but rather increases along with our Age. And as the continuance of
it is total during our whole life, so the mischief of it is total, and brings
an universal ruin to the soul, as Hugo de anima well observes. Caetera vitia
illas solas virtutes impetunt, quibus ipsa destruuntur; superbia vero contra
omnes animi virtutes se erigit. Other Vices assault and destroy only their
opposite Virtues, as Covetousness destroys Liberality; Anger, Patience;
Drunkenness, Sobriety; Lasciviousness, Chastity, etc. but Pride is the total
ruin of all Virtues; it makes our Chastity, our Sobriety, our Alms; yea, our
very devotions by Pride are made displeasing and hateful to God; it gives an
ugly black tincture to all the good we can possibly perform. Had Pride entered
the heart of the Blessed Virgin her self, she would have been the Accursed of
God, whereas Humility made her the Blessed of God, the Mother of God, for which
all Generations shall and do call her Blessed. Yea, Mary Magdalen the Sinner,
by her Humiliation at Christ's Feet, is made his Favorite. And the lowly
Publican not daring to lift up his eyes toward Heaven, is by Humiliation
justified and made an Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven; but by Pride, the most
Beautiful, the most Holy, the most Glorious Angels of Heaven were converted
into most deformed, most wicked, most horrid Devils. From hence you may easily
conceive what a mischievous ruining Vice Pride is, which effected a change so
incredible, as it needed the Word of God to attest the truth of it. And as this
Vice is above all other mischievous to the soul, so is it above all hateful to
God, as you see by the eternal punishment inflicted on the Angels without any
redemption; and the reason of it is, because this is crimen laesae majestatis;
it directly opposes the Majesty of God, and aims at being Rival with him in his
Monarchical power. So the Prince of Pride, Lucifer, expressed his design, Ero
similis altissimo, I will be like the most High: It is said therefore, Jam. 4.
6. God resists the Proud, (...), an expression of great weight, as if God set
himself in Battlearray, with all his Power to oppose this Crime and avenge it
to the uttermost. God is displeased at all Sin, yet pardons all upon
Repentance; but when he meets with this Luciferian Sin, he looks upon it as a
declared Rebel, to be proceeded against with rigor and terror, a Rebel not to
be reclaimed; for Pride and Humiliation are directly opposite, no hope of
submission there. Certainly then all persons are deeply concerned to employ
their utmost endeavor to suppress this Vice. And though it be so deeply rooted
in our Nature, as'tis impossible wholly to extirpate it, yet we should daily
pray for Gods gracious assistance, and use all imaginable industry to abate it
by frequent Humiliation; for which I shall propose some rational motives.

First then, I would gladly know what it is the proud mind of Man designs and
aims at; is it not to be esteemed and reverenced by all? This is then the thing
that I propose, to take that course which will make all men reverence him; and
certainly this can never be effected by Pride, but by Humility; for in the
first place, all Proud men hate one auother: So Cassander observes, Omnis fere
vitiosus diligit sibi similem, solus superbus odit elatum. All other Vicious
men love one another: Drunkards love Drunkards, Thieves love Thieves, lewd love
lewd ones, etc. Proud men only hate one another; and why? Because they directly
cross each others design, and challenge that Reverence to themselves, which
others likewise require to themselves. So then by Pride he has lost in the
first place all proud men, they are become his enemies. Secondly, Humbleminded
men must needs prefer humility before pride; and consequently they will be sure
to pay the humble man all respect, the proud none. And thus it is evident, that
by pride, men gain the hate of proud men, the undervalue of humble men, and so
lose the love and esteem of all. But perchance all proud men are of the Tyrants
mind, who said Oderint dum timeant; Let them fear me, and worship me, though
they hate me; that is, I had rather have Jades and Asses fear me, than Men to
love and reverence me; so irrational and absurd a speech, as Balaam's Ass would
never have uttered it, and therefore I shall not think fit to answer it.

Let the second consideration be this, What rational motive can any man have to
exalt himself above another? Let him answer me St. Paul's Question, 1 Cor. iv.
7. Who makes thee to differ from another? what have thou, that thou have not
received? If excellency of Grace, sure the gift of God: for by Nature thou art
of the same corrupt mass of earth that Judas was, and it is by God's special
grace that thou art not as very a villain as he. If excellency of Nature, Wit,
Beauty, Strength, sure the gift of God: it was not in thy father's power to
beget a wise man or a fool; a beautiful Alcibiades, or a deformed Aesop. And
for thy self, thou can not add one cubit to thy stature, one little Finger to
thy maimed Hand; nay, thou can not make one hair white or black. Have thou
the riches and glory of the World, sure the gift of God; for thou broughtest
nothing into the World with thee, and it is certain thou can carry nothing
out. Have thou command over thousands, sure the gift of God; for why does a
single King command, and thousands of Subjects obey, seeing men by nature hate
subjection? therefore it must necessarily be from some power overruling their
own wills; which is of God, disposing men's hearts to obey that power which he
has set over them: and so all power is of God. Let God withdraw his inward
motion of obedience and reverence to Majesty, a single base Ravillac spurred on
by the Devil shall cut off a gallant King environed with all the power of
France. Or do thou, Philosopher-like, glory in the riches of thy Soul, thy
great wisdom and knowledge in all things, which none can take from thee? Omnia
tua tecum portas. Silly man! a small distemper growing into an high Fever,
shall confound and convert all thy wisdom into madness, and make thee the
laughing stock of the World. Is it not then most irrational to boast thy self
for what is not thine own? and most irreligious to rob God of what is his own?
ascribing to thy self the honor due unto him; yea and to rob so gracious a
God, who for all the noble gifts he has so freely conferred on us, expects
only the calves of our lips for tribute.

Let the third consideration be this, The proud man robs not only God, but
himself of all the gifts and graces conferred upon him: you may easily turn all
these to his ruin and make him his own enemy to destroy himself, and yet hug
you as his dearest friend. For by seeming kindness and flattery, you may
undermine and blow him up into the air immediately: do but admire his
abilities, magnify his greatness, and extol him to the skies as a demi God,
presently he is puffed up, swells with excessive pride, and expects an universal
homage to be paid by every one to his transcendent worth: and then you may be
sure that in this world of pride, he meets with some other haughty person to
confront and affront him; which like Wormwood mingled with his Wine, imbitters
all those things which otherwise might afford him great content. And the
greater his ability and excellency is, the greater is his indignation and
torment to have it slighted: and thus his felicity becomes his misery. Haman
that great and proud favorite of King Ahasuerus, who lorded it over the whole
Kingdom, having all at his command; how did one affronting neglect of resolute
Mordecay, like the Mowers Sith, cut him down as a flower of the Field in the
height of all his glory, and cast him on the bed of sorrow as the most
unfortunate wretch of the whole Land? And mighty conquering Caesar, when he had
brought great Pompey level with the earth, who could never endure parem in
republica; and when he had made Rome, the commanding Empress of the World, his
Vassal, entering now triumphantly her streets most gloriously adorned for his
reception, and filled with loud applauding Spectators; one silent stiff-neck'd
Pontius Aquila with a sullen look so pierced his swelling heart as to leave him
little sense of that great felicity. O unfortunate Pride, which can never be
happy in any condition high or low; but is sure to meet with many a bitter Pill
in both: whereas the lowly-minded man is happy in all conditions, he envies not
the great ones exalted above him: for he acknowledges God the supreme Lord and
free disposer of all, lawful for him to do what he will with his own, as our
Savior expresses, He despises not those that are under him, but, according to
St. Paul, 1 Cor. xii. looks on all as his fellow members, neither the Head nor
the Hand does say unto the Foot, I have no need of thee: and therefore though
he be adorned with any special gift of Nature, or exalted to any degree of
splendour, wealth, or authority, he does not thereby challenge any homage to
himself from his fellow members; he knows he can as little subsist without
them, as they without him, but ought mutually to serve one another, and all
join to give glory to God the Creator and giver of all, from whom the
lowly-minded man receives every grace and gift as an undeserved and unexpected
favor, which gives a high and pleasing relish to it. And when he meets with
the cup of assliction, the bitterness is very much abated by the sweet
composure of his mind, arising from his own demerits, which in his humble
ballancing thoughts still seem to outweigh the calamity, and so retains a
joyful and thankful remembrance of God's goodness, who lays so light a burden
on his shoulders for such heavy sins. Humble then your selves under the mighty
hand of God.

Secondly, As thoughts of Humiliation are useful for all persons, so are they
seasonable at all times, in prosperity or in adversity. In prosperity men are
apt to be puffed up and insolent, even so far as to forget God that gives it. A
strange corruption in our nature! that favors and blessings, which should make
us remember and love God the more, are apt to make us love him the less and
forget him. As wholesome meat, that increases the strength of a healthy person,
received into a foul stomach oppresses and decays the spirits of the sick: the
same effect have the good things of this World in a foul sinful Soul. This our
provident God foreseeing in the Israelites when they drew near to the land of
promise, as a careful father gives them timely warning of, Dent. vi. 10, 11,
12. And it shall be, when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the
land which be swear unto thy fathers; to Abrabam, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to
give thee great and goodly Cities which thou buildedst not, and houses full of
all good things, which thou filledst not, and wells dug which thou diggedst
not, vineyards and olive trees which thou plamedst not; when thou shall have
eaten and be full, then beware lest thou forget the Lord which brought thee
forth out of the land of Egypt, from the bouse of bondage. By this, beloved,
you see how necessary it is in prosperity to busy our thoughts in humbling our
selves under God's gracious Hand, and to consider our own unworthiness, and
Gods infinite goodness in conferring daily favors on us, who justly deserve
punishment for our daily sins, and thereupon implore his Divine grace to
rectify and purify our carnal hearts, and dispose them to employ his
blessings to his glory, and not to the increasing of our own Lusts, which
provoke us to sin more against his Divine goodness. St. Austin on the 7th.
Psalm, lays before us another very pious consideration, telling us, that such
worldly things as we commonly esteem and call Blessings, may proceed from God's
Anger, and not from his Favor. Irritavit Dominum peccator, ut ista patiatur,
id est, ut correctionis flagella non patiatur. It may be that God provoked by
our sins, instead of a careful Fatherly correction, gives us those things, as
an Enemy, to our hurt; just as a cunning Neighbor who intends to supplant some
Prodigal person, and work him out of his Estate, in great appearing kindness
supplies him plentifully with money day by day, which helps forward the
spending of his Estate, and hastens his ruin. Wherefore all Godly persons upon
any great access of prosperity, with much cautionary fear examine themselves,
whether any sin lies concealed in some corner of their heart; and if so, they
then conclude this Prosperity cannot be a favor from God, for God cannot have
a love and favor for Sinners; and therefore they fear this may be a giving
them up to greater opportunities of sinning, leaving them to their own Lusts,
and so to fill up the measure of their Iniquities according to that, Rev. xxii.
11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he which is filthy, let him
be filthy still. Whereby you see, thoughts of Humiliation are very necessary in
times of Prosperity, lest we be exalted too much by it, or cousened with a
belief of Gods favor in it; for which, diligent search ought to be made.

Secondly, In time of Adversity no man can doubt but that Humiliation is very
requisite; Nature it self teaches this, to lament and bewail our miseries; we
commonly over-act that part. And yet there is a perverse Generation amongst us,
so irreligious and so headstrong, as that nothing can take them off their
mad-brain'd mirth, but when God by his chastising Hand calls to weeping and
mourning, to baldness and girding with Sackcloath, as it is Isa. xxii. 12, 13.
They as it were in defiance of his Almighty Hand, call to joy and gladness,
slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep, eating Flesh, and drinking Wine; let us eat
and drink, for to morrow we shall die. Desperate wretches run on dancing and
capring till they leap into Hell. Others there are, who clean contrary, are so
dejected with any Affliction, as if they expected their Heaven in this life,
and constant felicity in this mutable world, where nothing continues in the
same condition: not only every year we see so great a change, as from beautiful
and delightful Summer to dirty, cold, and pinching Winter, but every month a
various face of the Earth, every day an ebbing and flowing of the Sea; and in
the Heaven a change from glorious Sunshine to dismal darkness. How then can
any one be so sottish as to expect that Fortune must give him quite contrary to
the whole course of Nature, a continued day without night, a constant Summer
without Winter? Nay, he would not have one storm surprise him, nor a cold blast
touch his tender flesh. Others there are, who instead of mourning and
lamenting, are murmuring and repining, vexing and fuming, As cold water cast on
hot iron in the Forge, makes it bounce and sparkle about, so Assliction falling
on these hot impatient persons, they clamor and fly about at all that come
near them; they increase much the evil by their Passion, afflicting themselves
and all they have to do with. As for this impatient sort of Men, if they be
neither Atheists nor Quakers, sure they will acknowledge themselves guilty of
sin, and that the wages of sin is death, eternal death; and are they not
willing to exchange and suffer a momentary evil instead of an eternal evil? Had
they not rather have a hand scorched or cut off, than have the whole body cast
into Hell flames? Let them consider with what fury they fall on those who
offend them in matter of Estate or Reputation, and then reflect with what mercy
God deals with them for their sinning against his divine Majesty. Will not one
Worm endure a trivial injury from another, and must the infinite Majesty of God
endure injury upon injury from dirty Worms without any Correction? Were they
not mad with passion, sure they would rather give humble and hearty thanks for
his mercy, than brutishly murmur at his justice, which really is mercy and not
justice, to inflict Flea-bites for Scorpions. I wish these grumblers would rake
and shovel together the trash and dirt of their foul Conscience on a heap, see
what a vast bulk that will make; then let them borrow from Isa. xl. 12. the
Scales wherein God weighs the Hills and Mountains, put this mountain of dirt
in one scale, the dram of Gods merciful Correction in the other, they will find
their punishment to be so exceeding light, and so unproportionable to their
excessive sins, as that in justice they have reason to expect far greater
torments yet to come; and then doubtless, instead of murmuring at the present
affliction, they will so dread those torments to come, as most fervently to
pray unto God with St. Austin, Hic ure, hic seca, ut in aeternum parcas. A man
that has a grievous sore in his leg, and very much fears a gangrene, sends
himself for the Surgeon, and willingly stretches forth his leg to be lanc'd
and seared, yea, and to be cut off, to save his life: So St. Austine knowing
the dangerous corruption of his heart, and fearing eternal death, prays
earnestly to God to lance, cut, sear, do any thing to his body here, to save
his soul from everlasting flames hereafter. There is no man in the world so
impatient, but had he a right apprehension of the eternal torment his sins
justly deserve, he would both patiently and cheerfully suffer any affliction in
this world, to avoid that eternal evil to come. And in like manner the weeping
Lamenter at his sad affliction, would he but fathom the Ocean of his iniquity,
and by that measure his deserved punishment, not one more salt tear would drop
from his mournful eye, but his heart would be filled with gladness, and his
mouth with thanksgiving, that he is not swallowed up in an Ocean of Torment.
Lastly, as for those mad-headed persons, who fear neither God nor men, who put
far from them the evil day; who chaunt to the Viol, and drink Wine in bowls,
who hearken not to the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely; it were
but lost labor to talk to them; there is nothing else to be done, but to pity
their madness, and pray for their soberness, and so commit them to the infinite
mercy of God.

But I trust in God there are none here but such as fear God and tremble at his
judgments. Wherefore leaving these desperate ones, I shall now proceed to the
third thing proposed, the method of Humiliation taken from holy Writ; where we
are told, That the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. And there is
no product in the World more natural than fear springing from guilt, and
humiliation from fear. The guilty conscience still fears the severe Brow of an
incensed Judge and a fearful heart will soon teach the trembling knees to bend
and supplicate for pardon. Wherefore there cannot be a better and speedier
means of Humiliation than to look into the sacred Records of God, and there see
what fearful judgments by the Divine Decree have been executed on rebellious
Sinners; which are there written for our example: As that upon Korah, Dathan,
and Abiram; they with their whole Families, Wives, Children, Servants and
Kindred, all in an instant swallowed up quick by the gaping and devouring jaws
of the earth. Or look on those horrible showers of fire and brimstone poured
forth upon Sodom and Gomorrah consuming every creature, both man and beast,
houses and goods, reducing all to Ashes. Consider, I beseech you, what hideous
howlings, what confused roarings the numberless multitude sent forth in the
midst of those raging flames, renting the Heavens with their piercing cries. Or
look on that universal Deluge upon all mankind, Noah and his Family only
excepted, when the windows of Heaven were opened, pouring forth not showers,
but whole catarracts of Water to overwhelm them in the midst of their festival
jollities: and whilst they run from the Valleys to the Hills for rescue, the
speedier floods get to the Mountain tops, hurrying them along faster than they
intended, and hoising them up from earth even unto the clouds, from whence
those waters fell. And then think what sad farewels the fondling Parents and
tender Children, the new married Spouse and enamoured Bride gave each other,
floting on those dismal waters, and by the boistrous billows often dashed
together to receive a bitter parting kiss. And with what vexation of spirit did
they behold Noah and his Family securely sailing in the Ark of Salvation, which
in their desperate folly they had contemned with scoffing derision. So sottish
and faithless is sinful man, never to believe and fear the approaching misery
till swallowed up by it. And as these are dreadful patterns of God's fury
against impenitent sinners in former Ages: so we read in the Revelation of
great calamities foregoing the terrible day of the Lord, when men's hearts shall
fail and melt away for very anguish, and Death it self, the terror of men in
prosperity, shall be wished for in that excessive misery, as a comfortable
deliverance from the horrible Plagues then poured forth. And yet all this put
together is as nothing, compared to those everlasting flames, wherein both
Bodies and Souls shall be tormented for ever and ever. Reason and Experience
both teach us, that the anguish of the Soul must needs exceed the sufferings of
the body by many degrees: for you know it is the Soul that gives sense unto the
body; the body without the Soul feels neither lancing nor burning. If then the
Soul be the fountain of sense, and isso powerful as to infuse into a stupid
dead lump of earth such smart and nimble feeling, you cannot but conclude, that
the original sense of the Soul is capable of feeling far greater torment than
the body. We see daily Men in Duels tormented with anger and revenge in their
Soul, throw their bodies upon the point of their hated Enemies sword, and
receive deadly wounds one after another without any smaying, as if they felt
them not, the greater torment of the mind making that of the body not sensible,
nor Death considerable, but continue their fury to the last gasp. All which
plainly shows the anguish of the Soul far exceeds any pain of the body.
Beloved, no man can express, no nor fully conceive that horror and raging
madness of a Soul in Hell, considering how that instead of that excessive and
everlasting pain, she might have enjoyed the everlasting glory of Heaven, and
the incomprehensible felicity the Saints possess in contemplation of God's
infinite goodness and love to Man: and then to remember how this endless
felicity was cast away, and endless torment incurred for the enjoyment of most
silly momentary joys, and base bestial delights. This is that torment of
torments, that never dying Worm of Conscience, which eternally gnaws and feeds
upon the soul. What man with sensible ears, eyes, and heart, hearing, or
reading, and considering these things, with a lively apprehension of that
Supreme Judge of quick and dead coming in the Clouds with all the Host of
Heaven, and carrying in one hand that glittering two-edged Sword which wounds
to eternal death; and in the other that just poising Balance, wherein shall be
exactly weighed not only the grievous sins of Murder, Adultery, Perjury, etc.
but every idle word, and every idle thought, which alone will make up a
Mountain of Sands to weigh us down to the pit of darkness, besides a vast
number of foul and heavy Crimes to precipitate our guilty souls below the very
center of Hell, into some unknown gulf, as bottomless as our sins are
numberless: What man, I say, not wholly petrified and become a very Statue, but
having a sensible heart in some measure to comprehend the terror of this
severe Judgment-day, but will humble himself in Sackcloath and Ashes? Yea,
Beloved, had we but a lively full apprehension of it, our very heart would be
shivered into dust and ashes.

But yet our Humiliation must not end here in this servile slavish fear, we
must proceed on farther. For though the fear of the Lord be the beginning of
Wisdom, yet love is the consummation of wisdom. The Devils believe and tremble,
but Christians must believe and love. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, with all thy soul. Love is the fulfilling of the Law. And certainly
there cannot be any man so extreme Ill-natured, but if he firmly believe what
Christ has done for him, must needs love him; it is impossible it should be
otherwise. What man guilty of Treason, Condemned to be hanged, drawn, and
quartered, and going to Execution, should see the Kings only Son run after him
with a Pardon from his Father, the Son having undertaken to suffer that cruel
death for the condemned person, that so satisfaction might be made to Justice
for the Treason committed: Is it possible this condemned person should not love
this wonderful loving Prince? No, it is not possible; yea, so love him as to
refuse the Pardon, and rather choose to die himself, than suffer so noble, so
innocent, and so loving a hearted Prince to die for his Crime. And yet,
beloved, this is much short of our case, for this is but one man's dying for
another, both by nature of equal condition. But we have the Allglorious Son of
the Almighty God dying for us sinful Worms of the Earth; yea, and he knew full
well when he suffered that shameful cruel Death for us, how shamefully and
cruelly we would requite this his infinite Love, by doing many sinful things as
hateful to him as death, and so, as much as in us lies, Crucify the Lord of
glory afresh, and put him to an open shame. And do we now believe all this to
be a real truth, and yet go on day by day to do these sinful deeds, so hateful
to him that has showed such infinite love to us? Beloved, let us not delude
our selves; it is impossible any man should be so barbarously ungrateful as to
believe this, and do thus: Wherefore, most assuredly we do not believe it: And
why do we not believe it? Was there ever any truth so miraculously attested; so
convincingly proved by thousands of Witnesses, both Christians and Jews?
Christians with love, dying for the truth of it; and Jews with hatred, to this
very day relating the fact. Why then do we not believe it? No other imaginable
reason can be given, but that the infinite greatness of such love, as God to
dye for sinful worms, exceeds our belief; had God done less for us, we should
have believed him sooner, and served him better. O the baseness of our corrupt
hard-hearted Nature, the more God does for us, the less we do for him! who can
sufficiently bewail this our miserable condition? Such we are all by nature,
though, blessed be God, many by his grace are corrected and converted into a
better state; their hearts being purified by Faith, and sanctified by Love,
humble themselves at our blessed Saviors Feet, and there bitterly bewail their
manifold transgressions, and with all fervency of spirit, praise and glorify
his infinite love and mercy. This is true Christian Humiliation and Repentance,
when out of a due sense of Christ's infinite love to us, we heartily lament our
sinful ingratitude toward such a gracious Savior, who laid down his life a
Ransom for us. The fear of Gods Judgments is good at first to strike us down to
the Earth, and make us enter into a serious consideration of our sinful ways,
and what we have justly deserved, the everlasting flames of Hell: But then to
consider, notwithstanding all our undutiful behavior, the infinite love and
mercy of God, to lay on his beloved Son the Iniquities of us all, that by his
sufferings, he might spare us, and by his death restore us to everlasting life:
What heart can then choose but melt into loving penitential tears! Humble thus
your selves under the mighty hand of God, and he will be sure to exalt you in
due time.

All of you, as I suppose, have learnt from Scripture, that when Man was
Created in the state of Innocence, God placed him in a Paradise of delight,
void of misery or trouble: Man never felt nor knew what misery was till he had
sinned. By Sin came death and all evil into the world: But though all evil in
general came by sin, yet it does not therefore follow, that every particular
evil happens unto men for some particular sin of theirs. The Gospel tells us,
Joh. ix. 2. of a man born blind, yet not by reason of any sin of his or his
Fathers, but that the works of God might be made manifest, as our Savior there
declares: And many sore calamities fell on righteous Job for his trial. And so
the holy Apostles, with diverse other Saints and Martyrs, suffered great
afflictions, not for their sins, but for Gods glory and the promotion of the
Gospel. But I never yet could learn from any History, sacred or human, that any
general Calamity ever fell on any Nation without National sins. If you ask me
why particular men suffer affliction without notorious sins, more than whole
Nations: great reason may be given for it. There is no Nation under Heaven so
generally virtuous and endued with Grace as to make advantage by afflictions,
that is, by patient suffering to acquire an ample reward: but some for want of
Christian courage will be cast down; others by impatiency much exasperated;
others for want of Faith grow doubtful of God's providence, and say, They have
cleansed their heart in vain, and washed their hands in innocence. But those
particular favorites, whom God has fitted with special graces for the day of
trial, Calamities are as burnishers to such, they fetch off all their rust and
make their virtues shine more glorious in this world, and will be more amply
rewarded in the next.

This being so, let us now consider the state of this Nation. We have seen many
great calamities befall us within fifteen years last past. The first was a
Plague so great as never was known in this land before. The next a greater Fire
than this Nation, or, I believe, any Nation in the world ever saw: and besides
that dreadful Fire of London, many other lamentable Fires since in several
parts. Not long after this a bloody War with the Dutch; in in which this Nation
received a more shameful dishonor than ever. A few Dutch Ships, with a handful
of men in them, to sail up the Royal Channel of Thames, and so near to the
Imperial Court and Metropolitan City burn or carry away many of our principal
Ships. And truly I conceive the honor of a Nation should be more considered
than the Wealth of it. Men of honor had rather lose both estate and life than
their reputation. And therefore I think that shameful affront ought to be
numbered amongst our great calamities.

Now, Beloved, as our calamities have been more and greater than ever in so
short a time, so doubtless our sins are more and greater than ever, according
to what I said before, That National calamities never come but for National
sins. And it is too apparently true in this our sinful Land, where Pride and
Luxury with all the consequent vices are grown to a vast height of excess. And
which is worst of all, we are come to that desperate condition which the
Israelites were at just before the total devastation of their Country, when
Jerusalem was taken by Nebuchadnezzar; the Jewish King Zedechiah having his
eyes put out, he and all his Nobles, Priests and People were bound in fetters
and carried away captives into Babylon, and all the land laid wast. And what
was it that brought this universal desolation on the Israelites? Jeremiah the
Prophet tells us, Chap. vi. 15. and again repeats it, Chap. vii. 12. as a grief
that lay very heavy on his heart. Were they, says he, ashamed when they
committed abominations? Nay, they were not ashamed, neither could they blush.
This is the most desperate condition of a sinful people, when their heart and
forehead both are hardened as brass, not at all to blush and be ashamed, when
you tell them of their abominations: nay, they will tell you themselves, as it
is Isa. iii. 9. They declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. And this is
our deplorable condition: Men are not at all ashamed to profess their Atheism,
to declare their Fornication and Adultery, and own their Queans as much as
their Wives, as it were in defiance of God's holy Commandment. And shall I not
visit for these things, says the Lord? Jer. v. v. 9. A most dreadful threat
coming from the mouth of Almighty God, whose breath is a consuming fire. But
perchance some will ask, why should we expect God's anger should break forth
against us more than other Nations? Are not their sins as great as ours? I
answer this with another Question; Do not all Fathers, all Masters resent more
the offenses of such a Son, such a Servant, to whom they have showed far more
kindness than to others? No doubt of it. I pray you then tell me what favor,
what blessing is it from Heaven or Earth which this Nation does not by God's
mercy enjoy? As for Spirituals, God's holy Word is daily read and preached unto
us; His service of Prayers several times a day celebrated; his holy Sacraments
duly and frequently administered; his Ministers as often instructing and
exhorting us. And then for Temporals, what fruitful seasons have we for many
years enjoyed, so that abundance is a burden to many; want not known to any
that will use moderate labor to acquire necessaries. Nor are we less abounding
with foreign than domestic Commodities: and all this plenty has been enjoyed
with peace, whilst all our Neighbors have many years been embroiled and
confounded with bloody Wars. Again, I pray you tell me, what Vice abounds in
any Nation, that this Nation is not as desperately infected with. Nay, I can
truly affirm, that no Nation where the Gospel is publicly read and taught in
sincerity, does so abound and declare their abominations as England does. I
grant, in Italy and France they do (yet not among the Protestants there) but in
no other Nation in the World, whether Protestant or Papist. Lastly, Then tell
me, Why should not we expect the same bloody Rod should be laid on our loins
which other Nations have already felt? How visibly and near did God in his
infinite mercy, by way of warning, hold it forth to us in his late discovering
that hellish Plot of our bloud-thirsting Enemies, the Popish Priests, who had
contrived to murder not only our Bodies, but our Souls also, by taking from us
the light of the Gospel, which is the life of our Souls, and to cast us into
the Dungeon of Popish darkness? But that Plot (say you) being now discovered,
the King and Parliament will take such a course with them, as they shall never
be able more to hurt us. Is there any man so simple as to think this? Has God
no other avenging Arrows in his Quiver than this which now seems to be broken?
Or, has he no other Workmen to make him Arrows and Darts than Papists? When
ever God pleases to wound a Nation, he never wants instruments, the world is
too full of such evil workers. But truly there needs no more than the Popish
Priests, whom though you Banish the whole Land, you may be sure they will not
sit idle abroad, but night and day labor to make assisting Parties in Italy,
Spain, and France: We find they all have contributed Money to carry on that
devilish work; and doubtless they will go on to contribute both Money and Men
also, as occasion shall serve; they will not easily sit down and suffer
themselves to be baffled in this design they thought themselves so sure off.
The Pope and his Emissaries will never rest, but strive with all imaginable
endeavor to regain England, once the prime flower of his triple Crown. But put
the case we were encompassed with walls of brass as high as Heaven, and secured
from all the Papists in the world, what then? Have we not divisions and
factions, too many amongst our selves, to execute Gods a venging wrath one on
another? God setting Egyptian against Egyptian, Brother against Brother,
Father against Son, Son against Father, till we are utterly consumed. And were
there but one man left in the world, God can cause Worms and Lice to come out
of his own Bowels to devour him. Humble then your selves under the mighty hand
of God: It Is his hand only that can deliver us. Except the Lord keep the City,
the Watchman waketh but in vain; and therefore cursed be the man that makes
flesh his arm. If this present discovery work so happily upon us, as to move us
out of love and gratitude to God, to humble our hearts in sincere repentance
and amendment of life, it will be a wonderful Blessing indeed. But if as little
amendment follow this very great Blessing as the several past judgments, I fear
this may prove, as in dying persons, a seeming recovery of Gods favor before
our final destruction by his fury. Really, Beloved, I look on this seeming
great blessing with a very doubtful heart, divided betwixt hope and fear. The
great sins of this Land make me fear we are no way fit for blessings, but
according to St. Austins rule mentioned before, rather fit for scourges, as
this may prove, and increase the Judgment, if no amendment follow. Wherefore
again and again I beseech you in Christ's stead, Humble your selves under the
mighty hand of God, as Nineveh did. We cannot have a better pattern for our
Humiliation, seeing they sped so happily by it. See Jonah iii. 6. etc. You see
Beloved, here was entire Humiliation, both outward and inward? Outward, they
laid aside their Robes of state and splendour; they fasted, and mourned, and
cried mightily to God. And so it ought to be when God visits a Nation, as I
showed you out of Isa. xxii. 12. When God calls to fasting and mourning,
Sackcloath and Ashes; then mirth and jollity, feasting and sporting, rich and
gay clothing, which at other times were tolerable, are then very sinful, a sin
never to be forgiven, says Isay there. Beloved, I pray you mark it well; it is
no such slight matter as many make of it, for mirth at such a time is to make a
mock at Gods call to Mourning, and as it were to outface him, a sin not to be
forgiven. And now I pray you tell me, have we imitated Nineveh in such outward
Humiliation, or have we done any thing like it? Who have laid aside their
splendid Garments and gay Clothing? Nay, have they not bought new ones? new
Laces? new Ribbands? which might very well have been spared in times of mirth,
and now much fitter employed in buying something to cloth the Naked. Whose
body is macerated and abated one hairs breadth? Nay, who has spared one joint
of meat from his Table and sent it to feed the Hungry? Whose Countenance is
dejected? Whose Mirth abated? Whose Laughter stopped? What one outward sign of
Humiliation does appear? I grant in our own particular Humiliations, We are not
to put on a sad Countenance as the Hypocrites do, but not to do it on public
Humiliations, when God calls to Sackcloath and Mourning, is as the dissolute
Mad-brain'd do, who fear not God, nor regard Man. Were your Father and Mother
very sick, and in great danger, would you flant it and frolic it about, sing
and dance? And when the Father of our Country, the Kings sacred Majesty, the
holy Church our Mother, our Laws and Liberty are all in apparent danger; will
you then do such wild foolish sinful things? Consider better what God by his
Holy word requires at this time, and be not stiff-necked, but humble your
selves under Gods mighty hand. Who doubts but the inward humiliation of the
heart, repentance of sin, and amendment of life is the principal part, and that
which I chiefly aim at; for without this all the rest is mere Hypocrifie. But,
as our Savior says, This ought you to have done, and not to leave the other
undone. For those outward parts of Humiliation are very much conducing to
Repentance, as it is, Eccles. vii. 3. By the sadness of the Countenance the
heart is made better. Contrariwise, A merry heart makes a cheerful
Countenance, Prove. xv. 13. The great sympathy between our Soul and Body, makes
the one part still partake with the other. I pray you observe how the Ninevites
humbled their very Cattle by fasting, as well as themselves: and why? St.
Gregory answers, That the bleatings of the sheep and lowings of the Cattle,
with such other doleful notes, might move the hearts of Men to sadness, which
is a great preparative to Repentance: for then it is but converting that Passion
to the right Object and the work is done. Wherefore I earnestly recommend unto
you the use of all outward Motives; and all little enough to bring us to that
true compunction of Heart which our sins deserve. And it is a great evidence our
hearts are not truly sorrowful, that we are so averse to this outward
Humiliation: for that Man or Woman that is deeply affected with grief for the
loss of their Beloved, cannot easily be brought to cloth, or eat necessaries;
and Mirth and Laughter are madness to such. Were then our hearts truly
sorrowful both for our own sins, and the sins of the Land, our countenance
would not be so jolly, nor our clothing so gay, nor our diet so luxurious. We
are all to blame, God forgive us. Let us then every one humbly and fervently
undertake this blessed Work of Reformation: the best of us all need it.

But perchance there may be many well disposed to Reformation, yet much
discouraged by those more exorbitant Sinners, of whom there is little or no
hope; and you fear lest their crying sins may outcry your penitent tears, and
bring down some heavy judgment on the Land; wherein you shall be sharers
however you demean your selves. I desire these despairing Creatures, first, to
remember God's most merciful condescension to Abraham supplicating for wicked
Sodom, who moved the infinite clemency of God to promise to spare that sinful
City, if he found but ten Righteous persons in it: Let your Repentance add ten
more and make them twenty, and then you will have a better foundation of hope.
Secondly, There is hope that your Repentance may draw on theirs. As evil
communication corrupt good manners: so good will correct evil manners. Your
Virtue will set off their iniquity so foul as will make the less brazen faced
ashamed of their ways and turn to the Lord. Besides, Your humble fervent
Prayers may move the mercy of God to give some of those greater Sinners
Repentance, who pray not for themselves. And thus the number of wicked ones
daily decreasing, may come to be so small, as God may be moved to root out
those few wicked, and spare the Land. The Husbandman finding but a few Thistles
and Briars in his Meadow, stocks them up; but if they much overspread the
ground, he plows it up all. Thirdly, Put the case the worst that may be, That
God has decreed the destruction of this Land, yet by your humiliation you may
escape the Calamity, as in Ezekiel. ix. 4, 5, 6. And the Lord said unto him, Go
through the midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark
upon the foreheads of the men that sigh, and that cry for all the abominations
that be done in the midst thereof. And to the other he said in mine hearing; Go
ye after him through the City, and smite: let not your eye spare, neither have
ye pity. Slay utterly old and young, both Maids and little Children, and Women,
but come not near any man upon whom is the mark, What Heavenly comfort is here
for all you that now humble your selves, and cry both for your own sins, and
all the abominations that are done in the Land; the Angel of God shall set a
mark on your foreheads to preserve you from the evil. O beloved, we have a most
gracious God who never fails to reward those that seek him diligently, as I
formerly showed you: your tears shall be put into his sacred bottle; not one
shall fall in vain to the ground, but shall be converted into Pearls to be set
in a Crown of immortal Glory, which our blessed Savior Christ has purchased
for us by his precious blood; To whom with the Father, etc.

FINIS.

