A LETTER From the Right Honorable, The Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, TO The
Honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the Parliament of England, Concerning
The Taking in and Surrendering OF Enistery. Carrick Town and Castle.
Passage-Fort. Bandon-Bridge. Kingsale, and the Fort there.


Die Mercurii, 12 Decembr. 1649.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith printed and
published, and Read in all Churches and Chapels in and about the City of
London, late Lines of Communication, and Bills of Mortality.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.



London, Printed by John Field for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of
England. 1649.

Die Mercurii, 12 December. 1649.
A Letter from the Lord Lieutenant from Ireland, was this day read.
ORdered by the Parliament, That the said Letter be forthwith printed and
published, and that the same be sent to the Lord Mayor of London, and that the
Lord Mayor do take care, that the said Letters be sent and dispersed to the
several Ministers of the several Parishes in and about the City of London, late
lines of Communication and Bills of Mortality.

Ordered, That public Thanks be given to Almighty God on the next Lords Day,
in all the several Churches in and about the City of London, and within the
late lines of Communication, and Bills of Mortality, for his great Mercies, in
giving as these seasonable and great Victories in Ireland; And that this Letter
of the Lord Lieutenant General be then publicly read in all the said several
Churches in and about the said City, and within the lines of Communication and
Bills of Mortality.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

For the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Parliament of England.
Mr. Speaker,
THe Enemy being quartered between the two Rivers of Noer and the Barrow, and
Masters of all the Passages thereupon, and giving out their Resolution to fight
us thereby, as we conceived laboring to get reputation in the Countries, and
accession of more strength; It was thought fit our Army should march toward
them, which accordingly upon Tuesday the fifteenth instant was done. The Major
General and Lieutenant General (leaving me very sick at Ross behind them) with
two Battering Guns, advanced toward Enistery, a little walled Town about five
miles from Ross, upon the Noer, on the South Side thereof, which was possessed
by the Enemy; but a party of our men, under the command of Colonel Abbot, the
night before approaching the Gates, and attempting to fire the same, the Enemy
ran away through the River, leaving good store of Provisions behind them: Our
Commanders hoped by gaining of this Town, to have gained a Pass, but indeed
there fell so much sudden wet, as made the River unpassable, by that time the
Army was come up: Whereupon, hearing the Enemy lay about two miles off upon
near Thomas Town, a pretty large walled Town upon the Noer, on the North side
thereof having a Bridge over the River; our Army marched thither, but the Enemy
had broke the Bridge, and Garisoned the Town, and in the view of our Army
marched away to Kilkenny, seeming to decline an Engagement, although I believe
they were double our numbers, which they had power to have necessitated us
unto, but was no ways in our power (if they would stand upon the advantage of
the Passage) to engage them unto, nor indeed to continue out two days longer,
having almost spent all the bread they carried with them: Whereupon (seeking
God) for direction, they resolved to send a good party of Horse and Dragoons
under Colonel Reynolds to Carrick, and to march the residue of their Army back
toward Ross, to gain more bread for the prosecution of that design, if by the
blessing of God it should take. Colonel Reynolds marching with twelve Troops of
Horse, and three Troops of Dragoons, came betimes in the morning to Carrick,
where dividing himself into two parties, whilst they were amused with the one,
he entered one of the Gates with the other; which the Soldiers perceiving,
diverse of them and their Officers escaped over the River in Boats; about a
hundred Officers and Soldiers taken Prisoners, without the loss of one man of
our part: In this place is a very good Castle, and one of the ancientst Seats
belonging to the Lord of Ormond in Ireland; the same was rendered without any
loss also; where was good store of Provisions for the refreshing of our men.
The Colonel giving a speedy intelligence of Gods mercy in this, We agreed to
march with all convenient speed, the residue of the Army up thither, which
accordingly was done upon Wednesday and Thursday, the 21 and 22 of this
instant; and through Gods mercy I was enabled to bear them company. Being come
thither, we did look at it as an especial good hand of Providence to give us
this place, inasmuch as it gives us a passage over the River Sewer, to the City
of Waterford, and indeed into Munster, to our Shipping and Provisions, which
before were beaten from us out of our Waterford Bay, by the Enemies Guns. It
has given us also opportunity, to besiege or block up Waterford: And we hope
our Gracious God will therein direct us also. It has given us also the
opportunity of our Guns, Ammunition, and Victuals; and indeed Quarter for our
Horse, which could not have subsisted much longer; so sweet a mercy was the
giving of this little place unto us, having rested there a night, and by noon
the next day gotten our Army over the River, leaving Col: Reynolds with about
One hundred and fifty Foot, his own six Troops of Horse, and one Troop of
Dragoons, with a very little Ammunition, according to the smalness of our
marching store: We marched away toward Waterford upon Friday 23, and on
Saturday about noon came before the City; the Enemy not being a little troubled
at this unsuspected business (which indeed was the mere guidance of God)
marches down with great fury toward Carrick, with their whole Army, resolving
to swallow it up; And upon Saturday the Four and twentieth, assaults the place
round, thinking to take it by storm; but God had otherwise determined, for the
Troopers and the rest of the Soldiers with stones, did so pelt them, they
continuing very near four hours under the walls, having burnt the Gates, which
our men Barocado'd up with stones; and likewise dug under the walls, and
sprung a small Mine, which flew in their own faces; but they lost above forty
or fifty men dead under the walls, and have drawn off, as some say, near Four
hundred more, which they buried up and down the Fields, besides what are
wounded, and as Inchiquin himself confessed, in the hearing of some of their
Soldiers lately come to us, has lost him above One thousand men: The Enemy was
drawing off his dead a good part of the night; they were in such haste upon the
assault, that they killed their own Trumpet, as he was returning with an Answer
to a Summons sent by them; both in the taking and defending of this place, Col:
Reynolds his carriage was such, as deserves much honor. Upon our coming before
Waterford, I sent the Lieutenant General with a Regiment of Horse, and three
Troops of Dragoons, to endeavor the reducing of Passage-Fort, a very large
Fort, with a Castle in the midst of it, having five Guns planted in it, and
commanding the River better then Duncannon, it not being much above Musket
shot over where this Fort stands, and we can bring up hither Ships of Three
hundred Tuns, without any danger from Duncannon; upon the attempt, though our
materials were not very apt for the business, yet the Enemy called for Quarter,
and had it, and we the place: We also possessed the Guns, which the Enemy had
planted to beat our Ships out of the Bay, two miles below. By the taking of
this Fort, we shall much streighten Duncannon from provisions by water, as we
hope they are not in a condition to get much by Land; besides the advantage it
is of to us, to have provisions to come up the River. It has pleased the Lord
whilst these things has been thus transacting here, to add to your interest
in Munster, Bandon-Bridge, the Town as we hear upon the matter, thrusting out
young Jepson, who was their Governor, or else he deserting it upon that
jealousy; As also Kingsale, and the Fort there, out of which Fort Four hundred
men marched upon Articles when it was surrendered, so that now by the good hand
of the Lord, your interest in Munster is near as good already, as ever it was
since this War begun. I sent a party about two days ago to my Lord of Broughil,
from whom I expect to have an Account of all. Sir, what can be said to these
things? is it an Arm of Flesh that does these things? is it the Wisdom and
Council, or Strength of men? it is the Lord only; God will curse that man and
his house, that dares to think otherwise. Sir, you see the Work is done by
divine leading; God gets into the hearts of men, and persuades them to come
under you. I tell you, a considerable party of your Army, is fitter for an
Hospital then the Field: If the Enemy did not know it, I should have held it
impolitique to have writ it: They know it, yet they know not what to do. I
humbly beg leave to offer a word or two; I beg of those that are faithful, that
they give glory to God; I wish it may have influence upon the Hearts and
Spirits of all those that are now in place of Government, in the greatest
Trust, that they may all in Heart draw near unto God, giving him glory by
holiness of life and conversation, That these unspeakable Mercies, may teach
dissenting Brethren on all sides to agree, at least in praising God. And if the
Father of the Family be so kind, why should there be such jarrings, and
heart-burnings amongst the Children? And if it will not yet be received, that
these are Seals of Gods Approbation of your great change of Government, which
indeed was no more yours, then these Victories and Successes are ours: with us
say even the most unsatisfied heart, That both are the Righteous Judgments, and
Mighty Works of God; that he has pulled down the Mighty from his Seat; that
calls to account innocent blood; that he thus breaks the Enemies of his Church
in pieces; and let them not be sullen, but praise the Lord; and think of us as
they please, and we shall be satisfied, and pray for them, and wait upon our
God; and we hope we shall seek the Welfare and Peace of our Native Country;
and the Lord give them hearts to do so too. Indeed I was constrained in my
Bowels to write thus much: I ask your pardon, and rest

Your most humble Servant, O. CROMWELL.

FINIS.

