Babel's Builders Unmasking Themselves,

As appears by the following PAPER from Barbados, (promoted by George For his
Party, and subscribed by Eighty two of them.)

With a LETTER of G. F's, G. W's, etc. in Answer thereunto; and OBSERVATIONS
thereupon.

Also, a FALSE PROPHECY of that Lying Prophet, SOLOMON ECCLES.

Published for undeceiving the Simple, and in Abhorrence and Detestation of the
Principle and Practice contained in the said Paper; they being of an evil
tendency, and contrary to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, or of any
sincere-hearted Protestants, or true Christians this day.

By T. C.

Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Hearken not unto the words of the Prophets that
prophesy unto you; -- they speak a Vision of their own hearts, and not out of
the Mouth of the Lord. Jer. 23. 16.

Thy Prophets have seen vain and foolish things for thee, and they have not
discovered thine Iniquity -- but seen for thee false Prophecies. Lam. 2. 14.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1681.

THE PREFACE.
THE Intent of the Publication of this ensuing Paper and Letter, etc. is not to
reflect or reproach in general the People called Quakers, or in contempt of
their Principle: for God has a People among them, many of whom have long been
reviled and falsely accused and slandered, because they have conscientiously
refused to conform to Prescriptions without Conviction, and are therefore
termed Separates, Stubborn, Cains, Judases, Apostats, and what not, that may
make them odious to honest People? But this is to manifest the Apostasy and
Innovasions of a few of them that are of the Foxonian Sect, which love
Pre-eminence, and term themselves the Body and Elders, and the Church, and
presume to give Laws and Orders to others to conform to, or else be accounted
Infidels, Rebels, etc. when it is evident the cause of their Rage against them
(they call Separates, etc.) is, because they will not rebel against the Light
in their own Hearts: So it is those that pretend themselves the Church, Elders,
etc. that would cause the People to rebel, therefore may be said, they are like
Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. Also G. F. etc. have
manifested themselves to be Lo here is (which Christ commanded should not be
gone after) as appears by their Letter herein, produced and pretended as a
disowning that Paper or Judgment, but does chiefly endeavor to stifle it from
going abroad, because it manifests their Confusion.

And that G. F.'s etc. Universal Spirit they so often mention, is not that
which Peter had, Acts 10. 24. which accepts all that fear God, and work
Righteousness, but they hedge up the way to Acceptance with God, and leave no
Entrance, but by their Forms of Men and Women's Meetings; contrary to Christ,
who said, I am the Way, etc. Also they ascribe that to their Orders and
Meetings, which the Scripture ascribes to Christ. And G. F. etc. are so fond of
Proselytes to their Orders and Meetings, that notwithstanding this Paper and
Judgment is so repugnant to their pretended Foundation-Principle, yet they give
not a word of sharp Reproof to it in all their Letter; as the Apostle to the
Galatians, Who has bewitched you? but they, instead thereof, give high
Commendations: Therefore with sorrow it may be said, as formerly of literal
Jerusalem, so now of Jerusalem from above, Her Adversaries are the Chief, her
Enemies prevail; and Blindness is in part happened to Israel. This has the Lord
suffered to come to pass, that no Flesh should glory in his sight. Therefore be
humbled and fear before Him, for their presuming that they are God's People,
and that they have his Wisdom and Power with them, therefore they conclude what
they do act as the Body or Church, is of God, and must stand as his Will and
Counsel, and for want of his Power (which alone makes his People willing) they
fly to their pretended Church Power and Authority, and, Saul-like, desire to
have Honor before the People; but what Power theirs is, on which they ground
their Authority to proceed against the Dissenters from their prescribed Forms
of Meetings, etc. hear Isaac Pennington's Judgment, That Power therefore in the
Church which spares the Hypocrites (who can easily comply with an outward
Conformity in Worship without feeling an inward Life and Virtue) but lights
heavy on that which is tender and shy in matters of Worship, that is not the
true Church Power, at best but a Counterfeit of the True.

The Lord God preserve and deliver us from those of the Spirit of Gehazi, who
falsely use the Master's Name, when he never sent them. Even so, Amen, says T.
Crisp.

At a Quarterly Meeting at Ralph Fretwell's House in Barbados the 23d day of
the tenth Month, 1680.
THE sum of the Testimony this day born amounts to this: That there is this day
a Choice to be made, viz. Whether Friends will cleave and abide unto the
Universal Spirit of the living God, and each give up their whole Concerns; with
which Spirit the Faithful have Unity? Or, Whether they will give up unto the
Judgment unto their own Particular, or Particulars only, with which the
Judgment General of the Meeting have not Urity?

After very many Testimonies given, to the further opening of the Question, the
Judgment underneath was written, being voluntarily subscribed unto by each
Particular of this Meeting, or by their Order their Names were hereunto put.

I desire to give up my whole Concern, if required, both Spiritual and
Temporal, unto the Judgment of the Spirit of God in the Men and Women's
Meetings: as believing it to be more according to the Universal Wisdom of God,
than any particular measure in my self, or any particulars with which the Men
and Women^s Meetings have not Unity.

Subscribed by Men 39. Women 43. Total 82.

The Party that sent the abovesaid, writes thus, viz. This Paper has been
promoted in sundry other Meetings since, and subscribed: some few have refused:
in abhorrence whereof other Persuasions have Posted it.

Here follows the Letter of G. F. etc. to the Quarterly Meeting at Barbados
touching the said Paper; whereby it may be seen how, and wherein they own or
disown it.

NOw dear Friends, if this Order or Judgment should come into the hands of any
Apostates or Opposers, they would make ill work with it, and say that we set up
an Arbitrary Power over Men's Consciences and Properties, and an implicit Faith
and Submission, without inward Conviction What more true?
; And that we divided the measure of God in a Particular, from the Universal
Spirit of God in other Particulars in Men and Women's Meetings. And as for
subscribing unto such an Order or Judgment, they would say, it was like the
Scots Covenant But G. F. G. W. etc. do not say so.
; and as tho the measure of the Faith and Spirit of God in themselves, was not
agreeable to the Universal Spirit and Faith in the Men and Women's Meetings; and
that if they should go from the measure of Faith and Spirit of God in their own
particulaers, and to give up both their Spiritual and Temporal Concerns to the
Universal Spirit in Men and Women's Meetings. This would be the way to bring
them all from the measure of the Spirit in their own particulars. For how can
the Men and Women in the Universal Spirit receive that which is not given up
from the Universal Spirit: therefore all must be left to the Universal Spirit
in their own measures thereof; and as for the Stubborn and Wilful, that are
against Men and Women's Meetings, the Universal Spirit cannot receive that. And
all are to give up to the Universal Spirit of God in their own Particulars, in
which Spirit they have Unity and Fellowship without outward Subscription, and
to be led by the same Spirit to see their Names written in Heaven in this
Gospel-day of Light and Life, and this is and was the Saints Testimony in the
New Covenant of Light and Life, and their Heavenly Subcription, which is above
all outward Subcriptions both among the Jews and Professors, for one ties them
below, and the other ties them above. And for any to say they desire to give up
their whole concerns both Spiritual and Temporal unto the Judgment of the
Spirit of God in Men and Women's Meetings, as believing it to be more according
to the universal Wisdom of God, than any particular measure in my self, or any
particulars.

Now this would make the belief which is in the Light, and the measure of the
Spirit in their own particulars, not one with the Universal Spirit in the said
Meetings. And as for those that the Men and Women's meetings in the universal
Spirit of God have not Unity with, they are erred from their own measures of
the Spirit of God; but the Universal Spirit of God has Unity with the least
measure now, as it was in the Apostles days, who kept every one to their own
measure; which was both the great Rule and Line of the New Creature in the
Believers and Saints then, and so with that the Universal Spirit in the
Apostles and Elders then had, and now have Unity. And therefore, dear Friends,
we know your care and tenderness of Truth, and that you aim at the best things
Contrary to S. Crisp, who said, The Paper was not only ill worded, but he
believed 'twas ill meant
, and have had much to do with some loose Spirits there: and therefore our
desires are, that you would stop this Paper from going any further, lest some
should get Copies of it, and spread amongst bad Spirits; and keep in the
general tender Spirit of God, that in love you may answer the measure of the
Spirit of God in them that are convinced by it, and in them that err from it.
And the Man of God must not strive, but be gentle toward all. And so
concluding with the Apostle's tender Advice, 1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I beseech you,
Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same
thing, and that there be no Divisions amongst you, but that you be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. And Phil. 2. 2, 3.
Fulfill you my joy; that you be like-minded, having the same Love, being of one
accord, of one mind. Let nothing be done through strife, or vainglory, but in
lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves. And 1 Pet. 3.
8. Finally, be all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love as
Brethren: Be pitiful, be* courteous.

Now as for your Subscription to an outward tie, be above such things;
forasmuch as You are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ, What
higher Testimony can be given to the Saints and Servants of the most high God,
than G. F. G. W. and A. P. give the Authors and Subscribers of this wicked and
ungodly Paper?
written not with Ink, but, with the Spirit of the living God; which Spirit
has given you Life, and will bring you to the City of the living God, the
Heavenly Jerusalem, and to the General Assembly and Church of the firstborn,
which are written in Heaven, etc.

London the 20th of the 4th Month, 1681. Your dear Friends and Brethren in our
Lord Jesus Christ, in whom you have Peace, Life, and Salvation. GEORGE FOX.
ALEX. PARKER. GEO. WHITEHEAD.


Now by this Letter of G. F. etc. they either condemn the aforesaid Paper, or
not: if they condemn it, then these three particular Persons condemn the
Judgment of the Universal Spirit of God (as they call it) in the Men and Women's
Meetings: if they do not condemn it, then they fall in with them in
contradiction to their first Principles. But it is observed, that they rather
dislike the wording it, than the matter of it, and would have it believed that
those Measures in Particular Persons which Men and Women's Meetings have not
Unity with, They are erred from their own Measures of the Spirit of God, and
are stubborn, wilful, and the like. Thus do they condemn the conscientious
Refusers, and greatly magnify the Authors of the said Paper, and do fully
assert their Authority.

As for their advising against such Subscriptions, it may be observed that
their Reasons are, Lest Apostats or Opposers (as they call them) should make
ill work with it, and say such and such things as do clearly follow from it.
Not that these three Men are against the Substance or Doctrine couched in the
subscribed Paper; but they are afraid to give the World (that which some have
long seen) such a clear instance of their Apostasy from their former
Principles; and their Ambition in having all the Quakers subject to them: for
these Men and Women's Meetings must do nothing which does not agree with the
Judgment of G. F. and his Elders. Let all sober Men judge of the turnings and
twinings that are to be discovered in these two Papers, that from Barbados,
and that from London; and how inconsistent they are with themselves, and their
first Principles.

A^ for the aforesaid Paper from Barbados, wherein is expressed the Judgment of
the Quarterly Meeting, I take it to be neither according to Scripture, nor the
Principles of Truth!

And first, for Scripture; By it you make void the New Covenant, or Law written
in the Heart. Of which it is said, Heb. 8. 11. They shall not need to teach
every Man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; but all shall know me from the
least to the greatest. And John 2. The Anointing which you have received of
Him, abides in you, you need not any Man to teach you, but as That teaches,
etc. But your Judgment contradicts these, (viz. Give up your whole Concern,
Spiritual and Temporal, if required, unto the Spirit of God (as you say) in Men
and Women's Meetings, believing it to be more according to the Universal Wisdom
of God, than any particular measure in your selves, etc. But the Scripture
says, None know the things of God but the Spirit of God. And how shall any one
know what the Meeting requires is according to the Spirit of God, if not by a
measure of it in themselves? It is also said, If our Heart condemn us, God is
greater: but if that condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. For
if it please God to reveal any thing to any Particular, and the General deny or
disown it, then that Particular must deny that Revelation, and give up to the
General. According to this Doctrine I cannot see how the Church should ever be
restored out of the Apostasy, unless God first reveal Himself to the General;
which seems to be contrary to His way of Manifestation to this very day: For
what must John have done with his Revelations and Message to the Asian
Churches, Sardis and Laodicea, who had a name to live, and were dead? and said,
they were rich, and increased in Goods, and wanted nothing. They thought well
of themselves, and had but few Names left, (not the Generality) yet were
mistaken, and Apostatized, and reproved by a Particular. Now, according to your
Judgment, John, and the few Names, ought to have given up to the General, and
not to his Particular Revelation. Also all the Reformations since the Apostasy,
have been begun by Particulars, and opposed and persecuted by the General;
therefore it is not, as you say, most agreeing to the Wisdom of God, to cleave
to the Judgment of the General, but to the Particular Manifestation; although
the Judgment General have not unity therewith. For if a Particular may reprove
the General, surely he ought to cleave to his Particular measure for his own
Belief and Practice, although the General have not unity therewith: for what is
not of Faith, is Sin, much more what is contrary thereto. For if any Meeting
require any one to do or believe contrary to their own measure: whoever obeys
them, becomes therein a Servant to these Persons or Meetings; for it is said,
His Servants ye are, whom ye obey. Hereby you call such Men, or Meetings, your
Master, or Father, which is contrary to Christ's Command. O Friends, strain not
at Gnats, and swallow such Camels! which the 82 seem to me to have done.

Secondly; That it is against the Principles of Truth, is plain enough, and
needs no proof: For by that we are taught to be guided by the manifestation of
God's Spirit in our hearts, to speak and act, as thereby instructed, and that
the Judgment of Truth through a part of Christ's Members, cannot become a Bond
on others further than their Understandings are illuminated thereby. These two
Positions the Judgment aforesaid seems to contradict. Also read E. B. and I.
P's Works, or any ancient Friends, they all direct to the Light in our own
Hearts or Consciences, as the only and sufficient Guide and Leader* But you not
only contradict Scripture, and Friends Testimonies, but have given such an
unlimited power to Meetings, and not contented to give that to Men which never
before was given, since Protestantism, but to Women also, in which the
Scripture is silent; or what it says is rather against their having any power
or rule, but to be subject. Nay, this unlimited Power was one of the heavy
weights in the Pope's Yoke, that made it so uneasy to England in times of
Popery; neither can I find that ever in England the Pope, or any Church, gained
this Point by all their Stratagems, Wars, etc. as you have granted, ( viz.
Spirituals and Temporals.) The Christian State is said to be a Glorious
Liberty, but your Judgment makes them Slaves and Vassals, and will cause any
Understanding Men to avoid submitting to such a Church that has so unlimited a
Power; it is much safer submitting to a Church which makes the Scripture their
Rule; for there one may know what they may or can require of one, but yours
(after one has given up Spirituals, etc.) may still require more without
measure, if you pretend or stamp such Requirings with the name of the Universal
Spirit of God, as Experience teaches has been too frequent. What is become of
all our Protesting Forefathers, according to your judgment? for you seem to
have acquitted Rome of all their Blood, and yet they had not only the Judgment
of the generality of the Church, but of the Magistracy and Law of the Nation
against them, which was of greater Authority than your Women's Meetings, for
which there is no Precept, Precedent, nor Law, but against. I am ashamed that
after all this Light and Knowledge pretended, any should make such a long stride
toward Rome, which now is very unseasonable; for if but one more such, I know
not but you may both too soon meet and embrace each other. But if any say we
mistake you, you do not give up to the Meeting, but to the Spirit of God, etc.
But W. Pen's Address, etc. and other Testimonies, I think answer that, viz. A
Man may falsely believe, as the true Church believes: and if I believe only,
because she believes, and not because I am convinced in my own Understanding
and Conscience, my Faith is false, tho hers be true. p. 146. Also E. Borough
says, Every one is to mind the Teachings of the Spirit of Christ in himself,
for to that he is to stand or fall. p. 852. Now that which further aggravates
and makes this Judgment the worse, is, that it should come from such persons as
G. F. etc. writes, the 82 Subscribers to be, viz* manifestly declared the
Epistle of Christ, written with the Spirit of the living God, which Spirit has
given you Life, and will bring you to the City of the living God, etc.
High-grown Christians, or G. F. etc. highly mistaken!

Thus what you have done seems to be to the dishonor of Truth, and contrary to
what you once professed: for the sufficiency of light in your own hearts was
that Gospel you received, and they preached at first, for all to cleave to, and
abide by, and give up to. But now to give up to the Requirings of others, although
contrary to That; what more like another Gospel? Therefore I beseech you mind
the Exhortation, If We, or an Angel from Heaven bring any other Gospel, than
that you have received, let him be accursed. And avoid all such Questions as
these are, and the Propounders thereof, for they are but foolish Questions,
yea, worse, and will gender to strife; therefore let no Men (nor Women
especially) rule over you, neither receive their Traditions for Doctrines,
further than manifested by the Truth in your own Hearts, and in the Scriptures.
Are ye so foolish as to believe that the Requirings of Men and Women's Meetings,
without Scripture-evidence, or manifestation by the Light in your own Hearts,
can give you acceptance with God? when as Christ said to them that said they
had prophesied, and cast out Devils, and done many mighty works in his Name,
Depart, I know you not, etc. And think you such unwarrantable requirings, and
implicit giving up, can stand you in stead? Nay, this persuasion comes not of
God, but, as was prophesied in Scripture, Some shall arise from among your
selves, speaking perverse things. Remember from whence ye are fallen, and
return to the measure of Truth in your own selves, and arise and depart from
such Judgments, for fear it be fulfilled on you, as was said against some of
old, when they knew God, they glorified him not as God; they became vain in
their imaginations, and their foolish hearts were darkened: Therefore I pray be
not so soon moved and tossed up and down by these windy, Arbitrary and implicit
Judgments of Men, who have Men's Persons and Orders in admiration, because of
advantage; for such serve not Christ but themselves: but mind the Truth in your
own Hearts, and according, as the Apostle said, let every one be fully
persuaded in his own mind. You must answer for your selves to God, when it
shall be said, Who required these things at your hands? Will any Men or Women,
or outward written Orders, have greater force than Moses and the Prophets? Nay;
but as many as are led by the Spirit of God are the Sons of God; this Spirit,
Christ said he would send, should be in them.

Think me not your Enemy, because I deal plainly with you: For it is in Love to
Truth (and abhorrence of Arbitrary and Unlimited Power, and implicit, blind and
unacceptable Obedience) that I write to you, desiring the Lord may open your
Understandings to know his Will, and what is acceptable; and I recommend you to
the Spirit of Grace in your own Hearts, which is able through Faith in Christ,
to preserve you blameless and harmless in this crooked Generation; to God alone
be Glory and Dominion for ever. Friends, mind the good Sermon of Christ on the
Mount; also the sound Exhortations in the Epistles of Paul and Peter, etc.
which, as in Faith read and considered, may be helpful and useful to the Man of
God in words and works.

Forasmuch as the foregoing Letter of G. F. etc. to Barbados was produced, as
a proof of their denial of the said Paper, I have read it, and observe this
therefrom, That they are more afraid of its Publication, than ashamed of the
Matter; and do more object the subscribing the Paper, than owning the
Principle: as appears by their words, If it should come into the hands of
Opposers, etc. they would say we set up Arbitrary Power, and Implicit Faith,
etc. which are the plain tendency thereof.

But it is needful to know what they mean by the Universal Spirit, being that
is so often mentioned. I take it to be the Opinion or Judgment of the Ruling
Party (or Foxonians) among the Quakers; because they exclude those who oppose
their Orders, as being Apostats, and gone out from the Universal Spirit. Also I
take this Spirit of theirs not to be the Universal Spirit of God, but a private
selfish Spirit of their own: Because they say, As for the Stubborn and Wilful
that are against Men and Women's Meetings, the Universal Spirit cannot receive
that. Now those they term Stubborn, etc. are not against Men and Women's
Meetings, but differ about the Form and Power thereof; they are only against
Women having Meetings apart from the Men, when they have no business requires
it: not against them in Cities, great Towns and Places where they live near
together, and occasions require; but only in Counties where they live remote
from each other, and have no business. Also about the Form of Marriages, etc.
For these Persons, who they say are against Meetings, do, and are willing to
use them on necessary occasions. This is the state of the Difference, and the
Case of those Persons G. F. etc. terms Apostats, bad Spirits, etc. G. F. etc.
say, the Universal Spirit cannot receive that. I shall show by Testimonies of
other Friends, that notwithstanding Differences, yet Christians ought to
receive each other, and walk in Love as Brethren.

E. Borough says, Every one was to walk in that measure of Truth they had
attained to; and notwithstanding their difference in Judgment, whether in Cases
substantial or ceremonial, yet they were still to be in love and unity. p. 809.
and every one to mind the teachings of the Spirit in himself. Hereby you may
see that E. B. could receive in love, and walk in unity with such as differed
in Cases substantial: which is as high a Difference as any about Women's
Meetings.

Also W. Pen says ( Address to Protestants, p. 70.) I cannot see how such Men
can excuse themselves from great presumption, etc. who deny those Persons to be
Members of Christ's Church, that in Conscience refuse to subscribe any other
draught than their Lord has given them. Then how can G. F. etc. excuse
themselves, who say, Those that be against Women's Meetings the Universal Spirit
cannot receive? unless G. F. etc. prove that such Dissenters have had their
Form of Women's Meetings from their Lord. G. F. etc. must admit them Members of
Christ's Church, or prove they refuse that which the Lord has given them; or
else G. F. etc. are inexcusable, and condemnable by their own owned
Testimonies. Also 2 Pet. 1. 5. Give all diligence thereunto: add to Faith,
Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, Godliness, Brotherly-kindness, Love:
for if these things be in you, and abound, ye shall not be unfruitful, nor
barren, etc. -- Wherefore give all diligence to make your Calling and Election
sure: for if you do these things, ye shall never fail; for an entrance shall be
ministered unto you into the everlasting Kingdom. Now I appeal to any sober
Christian, Whether all these qualifications may not be in one, and yet
conscienciously dissent from a Form of Women's Meetings, as used and ordered by
G. F. If it can be, as I am sure it may be, that one may be so qualified and
assisted by God's Spirit, as to attain these Virtues expressed by the Apostle
Peter, and not comply with G. F's Women's Meetings; then a sure entrance is made
into the everlasting Kingdom, and they are received by the Universal Spirit of
God: therefore G. F's, etc. Spirit, is not that of God, nor of E. B. or I. P.
nor the Spirit of Christ and his Apostles, for they said, Judge not; and that
the Tree was known by its Fruit. But G. F. etc. will judge and condemn for
evil, and gone from the Spirit, although no evil Fruit appears. Also, where
evil Fruit does appear, as in this their Judgment, yet he can say to them,
because they own his Form, and Women's Meetings, We know your care, and that you
aim at the best things. So that to give up to his Orders, tho contrary to their
own measures, is by him termed the best things, and they are manifestly
declared the Epistle of Christ, writ with the Spirit of the living God, etc.
whereby he seems to place more Virtue and Power in conforming to his Orders of
Women's Meetings, than in all Faith and fruits of the Spirit, expressed in the
Scripture. And wherever G. F. mentions the Universal Spirit, I take him he
means the Spirit that set up these Meetings, and persecutes all such who cannot
for Conscience sake conform to his Women's Meetings. Now Christ said, Whatever
ye would another should do to you, that do unto them: Love thy Neighbor as thy
self, etc. This is the Universal Spirit, to desire no more Liberty nor Charity
from another, than one would be content to allow them; and impose no more on
another, than one would have them impose on ones self. G. F. etc. once cried
for Liberty of Conscience; none must perform any Worship, but taught and led
thereinto by the Light in their own Hearts: but having gathered a People to
themselves, now (say they) Submit to your Elders: and if not conform to his
Orders for Conscience sake, then, Wilful, stubborn, out of the Universal Spirit
and Truth, and all that is Good, etc.

Also it appears that the Subscribers of the Paper, and G. F. etc. do differ*
for G. F. etc. say, This would make the belief which is in the Light, and the
measure of the Spirit in their own Particulars, not one with the Universal
Spirit, etc. Indeed so it does: for there be many that believe in the Light,
and measure of the Spirit, and its sufficiency, not one with G. F's etc.
imposing Spirit, which he calls Universal, but against it; although the true
Universal Spirit of Christ, and in all His, has now, as formerly, unity with
the least measure in any Member, tho for Conscience sake they may be of a
differing apprehension in some things; and therefore says the Apostle, he
became all to all, weak, or strong; and said, bear one another Burdens, and
bear one with another; and therefore he condescended to baptize, and
circumcise, to win over, and endeavored the increase of their Faith and
Understandings; not blind Conformity before Convincement, but said, If any be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal, etc. As their Faith increased, so should
their Obedience. The Spirit, the Apostle was in, could receive those that
differed in Judgment and Practice in some things, and did not say they were
erred from their measures; and if against Women's Meetings, that the Universal
Spirit could not receive them, but were careful not to offend the weak; would
deny themselves that which was lawful, for the benefit of the weak: therefore
not of G. F's, etc. pretended Universal Spirit.

Now G. F. etc. Letter is so jumbled together, seemingly disowning, and yet
owning the Paper too: but take them either ways; if they disown, then that
manifests a difference; if they own it, then they plainly manifest themselves
to be what the Dissenting Party have objected against them many years, (only G.
F. etc. have imperiously and wrongfully born them down) viz. that they do in
their Actings contradict their Principles and Doctrine; that is, they (as the
Pharisees) say, and do not: for it is evident by the whole scope of their
Letter, that they only are dissatisfied with the wording of it, and afraid of
its publication, knowing they cannot justify it, and that it is that they have
been charged for practicing these many years, and for this cause many have and
do dissent from them, whom they term, -- gone from the Power of God, and
Opposers of the Order of the Gospel: Setters up of Standards against Truth: and
many other names and marks of Sons of Perdition; when they have nothing else
against them, only not submitting to G. F.'s Orders without conviction: for G.
F, etc. do not at all contradict the Principle, only the Subscribing to it; nor
deny but their Meetings have such Power, or ought to be given up to, only would
insinuate that it is done from the Universal Spirit of God: and all who do not
so believe and act, the Universal Spirit cannot receive, etc. But all that fear
God, beware of such Men, who be thus given to change, and believe and act so
contrary to what they say and pretend; and notwithstanding the good words of
the Apostles in the latter end of G. F's Letter, which be found; and had they
kept themselves to their primitive Testimony and sound Doctrine, as in
Scripture, there had not been this Separation: but having followed the devices
of their own Heads, with fair words and speeches beguile the many simple ones;
but now their folly is made manifest, and that they have only a Form of
Godliness, but deny the Power thereof; from such turn away. And it is better to
be by such accounted Separates, than for their favor to deprive your selves of
the benefit of your own measures of Light and Life, according to which all
shall be at last judged.

WHat is here afore-wrote, is not as a full Answer or Detection of the Depths
of Satan, and Mystery of Iniquity that is couched under, or lies hidden in this
Judgment asserted in the Paper from Barbados, and the seeming Answer of
dislike thereto, given by G. F. etc. but only as a Mite from one, and according
to present ability, to manifest his detestation of all such Principles and
Practices. The aforesaid Judgment being publicly read in
Gracechurch-street-Meeting, with a Protestation against it, that it would be
printed unless disowned by them, and as a stop to the printing of the same, and
in vindication of G. F, etc. this Letter or Answer was produced, which indeed
is more subtly worded, but denies not, nor disowns the Principles therein,
neither refuses nor denies to receive what is in that Judgment given up to
them; but I doubt not but that there will be some of greater ability, who shall
contribute much more to the uncovering Her who has long sat as a Queen, and
deceived many, yet says, I shall not see Widowhood nor Sorrow; because her
Children are many and mighty, through the Power they have received from that
Beast on which she rides, and will suffer none to buy nor sell in their Market,
but who receive her Mark in their Forehead or Hand. For notwithstanding their
Judgment is such barefaced Popery, and so contrary to their pretended
Principles, yet observe how G. F. etc. treat the Authors, viz. We know your
care and tenderness for Truth, and that you aim at the best things, and are
manifestly declared the Epistle of Christ, written with the Spirit of the
living God, which will bring you to the City of the living God, etc. And not
one Reproof in all, only Caution for fear of its Publication, etc. But when we
consider the Names and Terms which are given to others that profess the same
Faith, and agree in all things, except as aforesaid, viz. Something about
Women's Meetings, and some Forms of Marriages, etc. they for this conscientious
forbearing to practice such things as they have no faith in, are termed
Apostats, departed from the Truth, such as the Universal Spirit cannot receive,
etc. By all which we may see how they would hedge up the way to God, and leave
no door to come in by, but G. F's. Forms; nay, not only so, but tie up or limit
God, that if he reveals any thing to any particular, he must give up all to
the general, and if they have not unity with it, must cleave to the general
against that particular measure of knowledge or manifestation in himself; but I
think hereby is plainly manifested, that there be such Innovators as W. Rogers
has mentioned in his Book, viz. The Christian Quaker distinguished from the
Apostate and Innovator, which Title C. Tailor says is notorious Blasphemy. But
hereby it not only appears that the Title is proper, and no Blasphemy: but also
that there was just cause for W. R's* writing that Book; for the cause that
those, they call Apostates, separate from them, is not out of any dislike or
denial of the Principles of Truth (although they say all that oppose them be gone
from Truth) but in opposition to their usurping Authority over Peoples
Consciences in Religious Matters, and requiring Conformity to their Orders,
before, or without conviction. This is the chief cause of all their hard
Speeches, and false Accusations against J. S. J. W. and those they term
Apostats and Separates, and say, In the Name of the Lord they resolve to give
Battle wherever they meet that Spirit. But others are resolved in the Spirit
of the Lamb not to bow to their Image, having seen that they should, as they
have done, manifested themselves to be what they are, even empty Clouds. The
Lord open the Understandings of all the Simple-hearted among them, (as I
believe there be many) and preserve all blameless and in love, that they may
have no just cause to speak evil of you: but separate from such who have a Form
of Godliness, and high swelling Words of Church Power and Gospel Order (which
they have made to themselves, and are bowing to, even the work of their own
hands, as appears by the foregoing and following lying Prophecy of Sol.
Eccles) and have your minds girt up toward the Lord, and your Conversation as
becomes the Gospel, in Meekness and Fear, not terrified by their high swelling
Words; and seeing the evil effects of forsaking the Teaching of the Lord by his
Spirit, to give up to Men and Women's Meetings, and Orders, beware lest you be
carried away with the error of the wicked, and fall from your own stedfastness;
but endeavor to grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to whom alone be Obedience and Glory for ever: which is the desire of my Heart,
as for my self, so for all that desire to follow the Lord, and that we may be
kept from Idols.

AMICUS VERITATI.

Here follows the false Prophecy of S. E. taken out of his Letter which he
(accompanied with two eminent Friends and Espousers of G. F. and his Party)
delivered to J. S. who is still alive, notwithstanding his predicting the
contrary several years ago.
O JOHN STORY, what have thou done against the Lord, and thy own Soul! Thou
have divided the Heritage of God; and the Good Ordinances which Christ Jesus
has set up in his Church have thou contemned, especially Women's Preachings,
and Women's Meetings; therefore will the Lord throw Contempt upon thee; and if
thou do not repent speedily, miserable will be thy end. O how have thou lost
thy Place and Dignity which thou had amongst the Saints in Light! and now to be
numbered amongst the Rebellious! If ever thou find mercy with the Lord, go home
to the North with speed, and break up the Divided Meetings, which thou and John
Wilkinson have been instrumental to divide from the Body of the Lord Jesus
Christ. The Anger of the Lord is chiefly against thee; and thou art bound with
two Bonds: for the Church and Brethren have bound thee on Earth, and thou art
surely bound in Heaven; and this is the Testimony of Jesus to thee, neither
shall thou be able to get from under these Bonds, till thou art reconciled to
the Brethren. Have, O haste to the Work above said, lest the Wrath of the Lord
over-take thee before it be done, and be reconciled to GEORGE FOX, who is God's
Friend, and the Servant of the living God, and Great Apostle of Jesus Christ.
-- haste away to the North, for thy time is short, and go quickly thou and thy
Brother, if possible you may bring again to the Body of Jesus Christ, those ye
have scattered, lest their Blood be required at your hands -- Arise quickly,
and be going, for this is the Word of the Lord to thee, viz. That this Year
shall thou (John Story) die, because thou have Taught Rebellion against the
living God.

1st day of the 1st month, 1677. SOLOMON ECCLES.

READER,
OBserve what this S. E. delivers in the Name of the LORD, viz.

1. Their Women's Preachings and Women's Meetings are the good Ordinances which
Christ has set up in his Church. 2. That being reconciled, (i. e. submitting)
to G. F. etc. is the only way to find Mercy with the Lord. 3. G. F. etc. (who
call themselves the Body of Friends) these he terms the Body of Jesus Christ.
4. That great Lie he delivered as the Word of the Lord, This Year shall thou
(John Story) Die, 1677, who was then very ill, and not like to live, but is now
alive and well, although above three years since.
This is here inserted, that all who read or hear it, may fear, and beware of
taking the Name of the Lord in vain, as these so frequently do, and of having
Men's Persons in Admiration; as this S. E. and others have done by G. F. as
appears by the Titles they have given him, viz. One greater than Moses: A
Prophet indeed, etc. It was said of Christ, that he was in the World, and the
World was made by him, and the World knew him not: So it may be said of this
true Prophet, whom John said he was not; but thou shall feel this Prophet one
day as heavy as a Millstone upon thee, and although the World knows him not, yet he
is known.

Again, they style G. F. The Father of many Nations, whose Life has reached
through us thy Children, even to the Isles afar off; whose being and habitation
is in the Power of the Highest, in which thou rules and governs in
Righteousness, and thy Kingdom is established in Peace, and the increase
thereof is without end. These, and many more have been given him, which he has
received.

Now these things are covered, excused, or justified: but if any
conscientiously dissent from their Ceremonies, they shall be persecuted with
rigor and false Accusations. O was ever greater Partiality, and respect of
Persons manifested from any pretending to Christianity! And if Trees may be
known by their Fruits, these are evil ones: Therefore, dear Friends, come out
from amongst them, be ye separate, and touch none of these unclean things: for
such Principles and Practices are the Brats of Babylon; and happy shall those
be who dash them against the Stones; but, Woe to them that give suck, nourish,
or countenance them.

THE END.

