A Short NARRATIVE Of the Discovery of a College of Jesuits, At a Place called
the COME, In the County of HEREFORD: Which was sent up unto the Right
Honorable, The LORDS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, at the End of the last Sessions,
by the Right Reverend Father in God HERBERT, Lord Bishop of Hereford, according
to an Order sent unto him by the said Lords, to make diligent Search, and
return an Account thereof. To which is added A true Relation of the Knavery of
Father LEWIS, The Pretended Bishop of Landaffe; Now a Prisoner in Monmouth Gaol.

London, Printed by T. N. for Charles Harper, at the Flower-de-luce against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1679.

A short Narrative of the Discovery of a College of Jesuits, at a place called
The Come, in the County of Hereford. Together with an Account of the Knavery of
Father Lewis, the pretended Bishop of Landaffe, etc.
IN the Parish of Llanro^hall in the County of Hereford, there are two Houses,
called, The Upper and Lower Comes, or Middle and Lower Comes, with a walled
Court before each of them, having Lands belonging to them worth about
Threescore pounds per Annum, S^e the Examination. of Mr. Bo^thby. Lord of the
(...).
(they pay Taxes at Eight and fifty pounds per Annum.)

This Estate did formerly belong to Edward Lord Marquis of Worcester, who by
his Lease dated November. 10. in the Twelfth year of King Charles the I. did Let
it for Fourscore and nineteen years to one William Morton, who dying, left it
to one Robert Hutton living in St. Giles's in the Fields, London, styled
Merchant; which Hutton has by his Lease dated the second day of February 1677.
and sealed and delivered in the presence of William Ireland, John Fenwick, I.
Groves, set the Lower Come to one William Williams, for One and twenty years,
at Forty pounds per Annum: And he has likewise m de a Letter of Attorney to
one Peter Pullen a Servant, intrusting him with the management of the Profits
of both the Comes, which is dated the 27th day of April 1678. and the Witnesses
to it are W. Ireland, Io. Fenwick, and William Cornelius.

One of these Houses is a fair gentile House, wherein there are six lodging
Chambers; each one a convenient Study to it, with a Standish left in them,
besides several other lodging Rooms.

The other House is also a good Country House, with several Chambers, and
Studies to some of them, all in very good repair: But the Furniture now
removed, we cannot yet find whither.

The remaining Dwellers in the House, who were but Under-Servants, will not
confess: They are apparently Perjured; For they flatly denied, upon Oath,
several things, which were made out by others, and then they confessed them.

There are One and twenty Chimnies in both Houses, and a great many Doors to go
in and out at; and likewise many private Passages from one Room to the other.

These Houses are seated at the bottom of a thick woody and rocky Hill, with
several hollow places in the Rocks, wherein Men may conceal themselves; and
there is a very private Passage from one of the Houses, into this Wood.

In one of these Houses there was a Study found, the Door thereof very hardly
to be discovered, being placed behind a Bed, and plaistred over like the Wall
adjoining, in which was found great store of Divinity Books, and others, in
Folio and Quarto, and many other lesser Books, several Horse-loads, (but they
are not yet brought to me, it being Christmas Holy Days, but they remain in a
safe hand) many whereof are written by the principal learned Jesuits.

And there were found two Paper Books in Folio, in the Front of one written,
Ordinationes variae pro Collegio Sancti Xaverii.
(Xaverius was the Co-founder with Ignatius of the Jesuits Order, and his
Picture was there set up.)

Ordinationes, does not here signify Ordination, as we commonly understand it;
but Orders and Rules sent from the Generals of the Jesuits Carassa and Paulus
Oliva, to the Jesuits here inhabiting; as also Instructions from the
Provincials of the Jesuits living in London, unto those here.

The other Paper Book contains the great Benefactors, being Queens, Princes,
Nobles, and several others of this and diverse other Nations, who have
contributed toward the Foundation of Jesuit Colleges, or the Maintenance of
them; and likewise the number of Masses appointed to be said for their Souls.

There was also found a Latin Book in Folio, declaring, That there is in London
a College dedicated to St Ignatius, with Revenues belonging to it, for the
Jesuit Novices in the time of Probation.

One in Wales (which I suppose are these two Houses) dedicated to St Xaverius.

A third is (the Book says) in Staffordshire, or Lancashire, dedicated to St
Aloysius, another prime Jesuit: which Colleges, when England shall be reduced
to the Obedience of the Pope, shall never be altered, as this Book directs.
This printed Book, and the other two Paper Books in Folio, I have.

There are about Fifteen or Sixteen several printed Books, containing the
Decrees of the several Congregations of that Society at Rome, that contain
only the Rules of the Society of Jesus.

There are several Books lately written and printed against the Protestant
Religion, and many small Popish Catechisms printed and tied up in a bundle; and
some Welsh Popish Books lately printed, and some Popish Manuscripts fairly and
lately written.

Likewise there is a Picture of Ignatius Loiola, the Founder of the Society,
and the most remarkable Actions and pretended Miracles of his Life, not only
written in printed Books, but in Pictures in several sheets, which Pictures
refer to Ribadeneira's Book of Loiola's Life.

There is a loose Paper dated the First day of March 1652. (it seems this was
then founded a College) in which directions were given, that an Account of the
Revenue and Disbursments should be sent yearly to the College in Rome: It is
there also mentioned, that the same year there were baptized 34; reconciled to
the Church of Rome 155 (a great number;) of those that were fallen from the
Church and regained 15, and other matters.

One Letter seems written by the Provincial to them of this House, wherein
Complaint is made, That there was not Care enough taken to send Young Men to
Rome, to be there bred up in the English College; and for which, he says, the
Pope was much displeased, and threatened to take away their College there, and
fill it up with Scholars of some other Nation and Order.

In one of these Houses lived a mean Servant, called Peter Pullen, (a Papist)
yet entrusted (...) Peter Pullen' s Examination.
with the management of these Houses and Estates for Eight years past, as he
confesses; and was entrusted to receive a Rent of 30 l. per Annum, from an
Estate called Amberley in the Parish of Monmouth, and another Rent of 18 l. per
Annum, from an Estate called Langunuill in the Parish of Dixton in the County
of Monmouth, and to manage them also: part whereof defrayed the Expenses of the
College, as appears in part by an Account Book, where there are many Leaves cut
o^t, (I suppose they had timely Notice given them, before the Order was sent me
by the House of Lords, and did thereupon do this, and remove what they could
before hand) and part paid in money to such Jesuit Priests as were a^pointed to
receive it: but for these Eight years that he has been Servant there, he never
has made any Account unto, nor held any Correspondence with the said Hutton,
who carries the name of this Estate.

This Pullen names seven several Jesuit Priests, viz. Prichard, Archer, Harris,
Lewis, Price, Humfreys, and Draicot, who were used to resort thither, and say
Mass there: but the Altar, with all the Ornaments thereof, was taken down, and
conveyed away, only the Altar Stone remaining with five Crosses cut in it one
at each corner, and one in the middle.

Two Vestments, with some other small matters, were found in two Boxes hid in
the Wood above-specifi'd (it seems the other things were but newly removed; and
they had begun also to remove the Library, for they had carried out and hid in
a Pigs-Cot adjoining, about two Horse-loads of Books.)

There were found many Bottles of Oil, a Box of White Wafers stamped, several
Popish Pictures and Crucifixes, some Relics, a little Saints Bell, and an
Incense Pot.

It does appear by several Examinations, that on Sundays and Holidays many
Papists did resort to these Comes, and the greater part of Mr. Milburn' s
Family near unto them, but I do not find that ever he himself frequented it.

A Relation of the Knavery of Father LEWIS, the pretended Bishop of LANDAFFE.
Amongst other things which fell out in the Examination of the Jesuits College
at Come in Herefordshire, there is fully proved by several Witnesses, this true
Story following; which being matter of Fact, cannot be denied.

THere is, amongst the Foxes of this Kennel, one Lewis, one of the established
number of Jesuits of the College; who is reported to be the Titular Bishop of
Landaffe, and who is now Prisoner in Monmouth.

There was a poor Woman, to whom this Lewis was a Confessor; her Father was a
vicious Liver, and dyed about half a year ago

This poor Woman having been taught the Doctrine of Purgatory, and being (it
seems) of a very tender nature, and reflecting upon the condition of her
Father^ Soul, which she apprehended, by their doctrine, was in great torment in
Purgatory: S^e thereupon fell into a great grief and sorrow; and, with tears in
her eyes, addressed her self to this Father. Lewis, and told him, She was
informed, that he could use means to fetch her Fathers Soul immediately out of
Purgatory into Heaven; and that she would give him all she had in the world to
have it done with speed, though she did not leave her self one penny to live on

To this, Father Lewis, after a long pause, told her, thus: Daughter, I am glad
to see so much grace in you, as to believe the Holy Doctrine of Purgatory, so
firmly as to be so truly sensible of the Torture of your Fathers Soul therein:
True it is, I can (with the assistance of our most Holy Father the Pope) bring
your Fathers Soul out of Purgatory into Heaven; but it will cost a great deal
of money: For I must send over to Rome, to have power herein, and several
Masses must be celebrated both in Rome, and all other Colleges of Jesuits, and
other Offices performed to do the work; which, Father Lewis said, would cost a
great deal of money.

The poor Woman answered, She did not care what it cost her; so dear, so
precious was her Fathers Soul to her, that she would give all she had to have
it done.

And then she asked him, How much it would cost to have it done?

Who, after a pause, and reckoning upon his fingers-ends, told her, It would
cost One Hundred pound to have it well done.

With that the Woman cried bitterly, and said, She was not worth half so much
money in the world.

Then Father Lewis told her, He would do it for Fourscore pounds.

The Woman replied, She was not worth half Fourscore.

Then Father Lewis asked her, What she was worth in the whole world?

To which she answered very honestly and truly, That she was worth but Thirty
five pound.

Then Father Lewis told her, Because she was poor, that he would take but
Thirty pound: And thereupon they agreed.

But when Father Lewis understood after from the Woman, that she had no ready
money, he began to storm, and to be in a great passion; yet at last he was
contented to take her own Bond for the Thirty pound: but took the Bond in a
Friends name, and caused the Woman to give a Warrant to an Attorney to confess
Judgment upon the Bond, which was done accordingly; and the money was to be
paid within six Weeks, within which time Father Lewis undertook peremptorily to
have the Man's Soul out of Purgatory into Heaven, and so they parted, and the
Woman hereby much comforted.

Afterward, as soon as ever the six Weeks were over, and the money became due,
Father Lewis sent to the poor Woman, to come to him again, and as soon as ever
she came, he produced unto her a Book with gilded Leaves, and red Letters; and
after he had tumbled the Leaves of the Book backward and forward, he clapped the
Book to his car, and then said thus, looking into the Book,

Here it is, I am sure now your business is done; this I tell you to your
comfort that your Father's Soul is as surely in Heaven at this very time, as I
am here in this Chair.

And then after a little time that the Woman had expressed her joy at these
good tidings, Father Lewis asked her, Whether she had brought him his money,
the Thirty pound she was engaged for?

She answered, She had not brought him all, because her money was out in other
men's hands, and could not get it in so soon; but she had brought him Ten pound,
and humbly entreated him to receive that at present, and he should have the
residue as soon as possibly she could get it in.

But at this Father Lewis was startled, that she had not brought the whole Sum,
and fell into a violent fury with the poor Woman, reviled her, gave her many
harsh and bitter Words, threatened the poor Woman to send Bailiffs to take her
in Execution upon her Judgment, and cast her Body into Prison; and not only so,
but threatened to Excommunicate her also, for the breach of her faith, in not
paying the Thirty pound, according to her Engagement.

But, upon second thoughts, Father Lewis took the Ten pound, and he came to
this farther agreement with her, which was, that she should pay Five pound more
forthwith, and the other Fifteen pound within a quarter of a year after; and if
she failed, then to render her Body to Prison, and suffer Excommunication.

After this, the poor Woman made hard shift to pay Father Lewis the Five pound,
but before the other Fifteen was due, a man of the Protestant Religion,
solicited the poor Woman for Marriage. The poor Woman ingenuously and
conscientiously confessed unto him, That she was worth nothing, but was in debt
to her Ghostly Father Lewis Fifteen pound: And acquainted him how, and for what
she came to be so indebted. This man, notwithstanding, marries her, and
afterward, by degrees, drew her from the Roman Church, to the Church of
England; and then brought her before a Justice of Peace, to whom she discovered
all this upon Oath.

And this Woman knowing where her holy Confessor Lewis used to hide himself,
under Ground, under a clay Floor, cunningly contrived in a poor despicable
Cottage; and being now exasperated at the Holy Cheat and desirous, as is most
just, to catch his person, as he would have catched hers; and endeavoring to
have satisfaction from him for the money he (with so much uncharitableness)
cheated her of, did conduct a Justice of Peace to the place, where they found
and unkennel'd the Fox, and from thence the Justice of Peace sent Father Lewis
to Monmouth Gaol, where he now continues.

FINIS.

