The Discovery of the ACCURSED THING in the Foxonian Quakers Camp Englarged.
THIS Discovery, being before Printed, The Foxonian Quakers Accuse me for false
quoting G. Foxes words: Therefore to clear my self, I think fit to Re-print it
more at large, and leave it to the Judgment of the Impartial Reader whether or
no these Quotations do not prove what I produce them for. I use the terms Jesus
of Nazareth, because I find our Lord mostly Preached by that Name by the
Apostle Peter, to whom our Lord after his Resurrection said, (three times
repeated) Feed my Sheep, and my Lambs. And I believe St. Peter knew best how to
Preach him; and this was the Food he fed them with, even Salvation by our Lord
Jesus of Nazareth, as in the Acts. And he did not Preach him as a Christ in
him, our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, or a Light in every Man: But directed to him,
even the Person of our Lord Jesus of Nazareth in Heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Even him
Whom the Heavens must receive till the restitution of all things, 3 Acts 21.
And in the 1 Heb. 6. it is said, When he brings in the first begotten into the
world, let all the Angels worship him. Now if this refer not to the Birth of
our Lord Jesus (who was made of a Woman made under the Law) the Son of Mary,
but to a Light in every Man, Then this Prophecy was not fulfilled at his Birth,
but always was, and is a fulfilling to the World's end. And indeed their
Printed Expressions imply as much, viz. That the Light in every Man is the
Savior. For one J. S. who does own that Christ as God is in every Man -- a
spark of his Godhead-Light is in every Man. (But says he) there is not that
Redemption-Light which leads to the Father as a Father, reconciling sinners to
himself in Christ as Mediator, p. 52. R. Hubberthorn, in Answer to this Man,
says, It Is Confusion, and a Lie, and Blasphemy, saying, That he has no less
than denied the Lord that bought him, because he terms their Light within, the
perverse Principle of their self-adoring Light, R. H. p. And they do confound
the Godhead being into one with the Spark or Ray of Light from him in every Man
by applying all the Attributes of the Almighty to that Light in every Man,
saying, As God is, so is his Light, R. Hubberthorn's Works, p. 112. And it is
not because they say, Christ is the Light which enlighteneth every Man; or,
That the Light in every Man is from Christ, that others do generally oppose G.
F. etc. for. But for their over-valuing it, and giving our Lord's Titles
thereto, and thereby they do degrade his Person; and in order thereto do they
pervert the Scripture. For I think there is no Book in the Bible that does more
sully prove the Worth and Dignity of that Man or Person, our Lord Jesus of
Nazareth, than the Epistle to the Hebrews does. And yet these Quakers do
pervert some Expressions therein to Contemn his Person, as the 10 Heb. 5. The
Apostle cites a Passage out of the salms, A Body have thou prepared me; from
hence they take Advantage to term our Lord's Person, The, a, it, or that,
prepared Body; so dividing him, our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, from Christ, as J.
Cole, p. 329. denies him to be Savior as he was Man, in Opposition to J. N.
who affirmed, That he was not Jesus, or a Savior, as he was God, but as he was
Man. Now I think J. N. should have said, Only as God. But I take J. N's. words
to be more sound than J. C's. For although our Lord Jesus was God before, or
without his being Man, yet he never was Man without the Divine Nature, or being
God also; and J. C. seems to exclude his Manhood, and therewith his Sufferings
and Blood. But J. N's. Terms [as Man] does not exclude his Divine Nature,
because he never was Man without the Godhead or Divine Nature; but he was God
before, or without being Man, and if as such, he was the Savior. (The Dispute
is not about his Power, or Ability, but about in what Capacity or Condition the
Savior of the World was a Savior.) Now as God only he was not the promised
Seed of the Woman, nor made of a Woman under the Law, nor had a Body to offer,
or Blood to shed, nor laid wicked hands on, nor betrayed, nor murdered, hanged
on a Tree, laid in the Sepulcher. But all these were prophesied of, and acted
by and to our Lord Jesus. And he ought to suffer those things, and without
Blood there was no Remission. Therefore to me it seems more proper to say, He
was Savior as he was Man, than to deny it, as J. C. does. But I find they all
agree to degrade and contemn his Person. And as any Injury done to the Person
of a Man affects the whole Man, Soul and Spirit, as well as Body; so does their
Contempts of our Lord's Person affect him wholly, as both God and Man
inseparable. And therefore was the wiping his Feet, and anointing his Body, so
much by him taken notice of. And as J. C. has, so does W. Baily, by his
distinctions in his Book, Deep to Deep, etc. p. 25. He says, Says Christ, a
Body have thou prepared me; mark the distinction (says W. B.) Thou, me, and a
Body. This me, that spoke in the Body, was the Christ, which had a Body
prepared to do his will that prepared it. Now (says W. B.) was it the Body, or
an invisible Power that said, A Body have thou prepared me? Now by his Term
Body, he excludes the Person or Man, our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, from being
Christ the Savior, and makes him, as Is. P. does, but a Garment, a Vessel, or
Body that Christ suffered in. But this him or me W. B. mentions, which, as he
says, spoke in the Body, and was the Christ, the Jews could not lay wicked
hands on, and hang on a Tree, and lay in a Sepulcher, all which was done to our
Lord Jesus of Nazareth, whom the Scriptures Preach as Christ the Savior. But
these Quakers Doctrines imply them Scripture-Testimonies to and of him to be
false. Also because the Apostle says, 10 Heb. 20. Through the Vail, that is to
say, his Flesh, they take advantage to term him Vail; and these terms, a
Vessel, a Garment, they can coin to degrade him, although not in Scripture. And
for that before expression, a Body, etc. in the Margent it is said, Thou have
pierced mine Ears through. And for that term of a Vail, it is to show, how that
by that one Offering of himself, he purchased for us admission to God through
himself, as Mediator between God and Man, as he was the Man Christ Jesus. And
neither of those terms, A Body, or the Vail, were used or intended by the
Apostle to degrade his Person, but contrariwise, to set forth his Dignity and
Excellency. And the same Apostle, speaking but of Melchisedeck, says, Consider
how great this Man was. But these Quak(...) they say of our Lord, His Person
was mean and contemptible. Therefore the Spirit cannot be the same with the
Apostles, but a contrary one, therefore An^^christ. For, as G. K. well
observed, our Lord said, The Spirit he would send, should Glorify him. But
theirs Contemn him, as farther appears; says W. Baily, p. 29. When he had the
Body prepared, which he took up, and laid down, and took up without the Gates
of Jerusalem. This I grant (says W. B.) was a Personal coming, or the Godhead
dwelt in that Person bodily. And page 30. says W. B. He taught them to Pray,
our Father, and not to look at his Person, and pray to his Person without them,
etc. And whereas the Apostle says, the Godhead dwells as present, they say,
dwelt as past. And the Scripture says, They shall look on him whom they
pierced. And he did show them his hands and side, and bid them feel and handle
him, saying, A Spirit has not flesh and bones as I have. And St. Peter, first
Epistle, 1. Chap. 8 ver. Preached the same Christ without them, whom they did
not, nor had not seen. Although these Quakers say, He did not bid them Pray, or
look at his Person without them; but they do not prove where he ever forbid
them, and unless they can prove there was, or is such a Body or Person, Jesus
of Nazareth, without or distinct from the Divine Nature, their Distinctions are
vain at best. But it is too much the scope of their Books, to contemn his
Person, under pretense of advancing his Divine Nature. For farther says W. B.
of our Lord Jesus, which in process of time was born of a Virgin, had a Body
prepared to do the will of his Father, as it is at this day, says W. B. p. 20.
And again, says he, p. 21. That which may be known of God and Christ, which is
one (says he) is manifest in People, there he is, and is only to be found.
Here you see they agree to degrade and contemn his Person from being the
Savior, and ascribe it to something in themselves. A Holy thing in People,
there he is only to be found, say they, in their, or our prepared bodies.
Allegorizing his Conception, and Birth, and Person, as but Figures and Facile
Representations of something within, or to be acted in the Saints Bodies. But I
do not find this Birth and Body W. B. mentions, prophesied of in the Scripture,
as our Lord was; nor such Joy in Heaven, as was at the Birth of our Lord, whom
the Angels and Shepherds, Elizabeth, and Simeon, and all the Prophets from
Samuel, prophesied of, and the Apostles Preached. And as a Man is not a Man
without Soul, Spirit, and Body, no more was our Lord Jesus of Nazareth ever
without his Divine Nature. And for farther Proof of their Contempt of him, see
G. K's. Book, A True Copy of a Paper, etc. from page 17. to the end, where S.
Eagles, one of their Blasphemous Brother Preachers, saying, The blood shed out
of him (Christ) after he was dead -- was no more than the blood of another
Saint. Is this all the preference you can afford his Blood, and Himself, to be
one or a Saint with your selves? And this does G. Whitehead excuse, which is
Proof enough of their Contempt of his Person, Sufferings, and Blood; as also
their now excusing their Blasphemy, The Jews never saw the World's Savior, as
in their Book, The Discoverer Discovered, etc. p. 7. If there was no other
Proof of their Contempt of his Person and Blood but this, it is enough.

For as the Mystery of Godliness was great, so is there a great Mystery of
Iniquity or Antichrist, described first Epist. St. John, 2d. Chap. He that
denies that Jesus is the Christ, is Antichrist. This Spirit has shown it self
through many of the Chief Priests among these Foxonian Quakers (as he did in
their Forefathers the Jews) especially in W. Bingley, whose Enmity was such
against Preaching the Faith in our Lord Jesus of Nazareth. That he in a Public
Meeting hindered G. K. from Preaching; and as the Jews did by Stephen, so they
gnash their Teeth on G. K. W. Bingley by interrupting him, and when himself had
done speaking, went out of the Meeting, bidding the People pass away, as the
Jews served our Lord, who said, He is mad, why hear ye him? And W: Pen has
done worse by him at Ratcliff since, whereby they have proved their Spirit not
to be the same that Paul's was, who although some preached Christ out of Envy
to him, yet because Christ was preached, he rejoiced. But Antichrist in these
G. K's. Persecutors, is so far from Preaching our Lord Jesus of Nazareth as the
Savior, that they are so bold as to Preach, That the Jews never saw the
World's Savior: As is testified in a Book, entitled, A Call, etc. By E.
Burlin, from Pensilvania, p. 17, 18. And now also by them excused in their
Book, entitled, The Discoverer Discovered, p. 7. saying, Though they saw the
Man Jesus -- yet the Eyes of their minds were blinded, etc. As if because they
saw him not to be the Savior, therefore he was not so. But you say, He was
both God and Man, but yet the Jews did not see him to be so; therefore by your
Argument, because they did not see him God and Man, he was not so. For they no
more saw him to be God and Man, than they saw him to be the Savior; and by
your Doctrine either he was not the Savior, or the Jews did not see him. For
the difference is not about what the Jews saw him to be, but what he really
was; and if this your Doctrine had been only to prove the blindness of the
Jews, your excusing it might have been born with: But being in Contempt of his
Person, and contrary to the Scriptures, ought to be denied. For our Lord said
to the Woman of Samaria, and to the Man whom he cured, 9 John 36. Thou have
both seen him, and it is he that talks with thee. And the 4 John 26. I that
talk with thee am he. But these Quakers in Print say, in their Book, entitled,
The Sword of the Lord drawn, p. 5. To say, that this Christ is God and Man in
one Person, is a Lie. These are so contemptible of our Lord Jesus of Nazareth,
as being Christ and the Savior, as the Scriptures declare him, that none that
love him would utter or excuse them, as these Quakers do: For it is no less than
denying him to be the Savior, and therein they deny the Lord that bought them,
and trample his precious and inestimable Blood under foot. For the Jews did
both see him, and handle him, and that with wicked hands too. Therefore,
according to our Lord's Command, go not after them, for although his Name be in
their Mouths, yet he is not in their Hearts. That is, they do not mean him our
Lord Jesus of Nazareth, as will further appear, but something that was in him,
and the like in every Man. For, say they, The same Christ therein crucified
ascended, in a Book, entitled, Christian Doctrine and Society of the Quakers
cleared, etc. p. 5. Whereby it is plain they do not mean that Person our Lord
Jesus of Nazareth, but something in him, and themselves, was and is Christ. And
say they, The Apostle brought the Saints to hear, and see, and handle the Word
of God; and they that will have fellowship with the Father, must see with their
Eyes, and handle with their Hands, in their Book, entitled, The Saints and
their Communion, etc. p. 14, 15. But St. Peter, first Epist. 1. 8. v. says of
our Lord Jesus, Whom having not seen, ye love -- Although now you see him not,
yet believing, ye rejoice. Here St. Peter preached a Christ whom they had not,
nor did not see, therefore surely they could not handle him, as G. F. says. And
although they falsely say, in their Discoverer Discovered, p. 8. That T. C. set
St. John and St. Peter at variance; but T. C. mentions not St. John, only shows
how G. F's. Doctrine opposed St. Peter's; and it is they who sets them at
variance, and not me, by falsely pretending St. John's Doctrine and G. F's. to
agree. But these Quakers Christ they Preach, being not the same with St.
Peter's, but another, is Antichrist. And they endeavor to overthrow the
Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles (even our Lord Jesus of Nazareth) in a
Mysterious way; for they do not begin with the uppermost, or outer parts of the
Christian Building, because then their Design would be too obvious. But this
Mystery of Iniquity works more secretly and dangerously, (for why is it termed
Antichrist, but because it pretends to be Christ.) But its work is to
undervalue and contemn our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, his Sufferings and Blood,
and thereby make the Testimonies of most of the Prophets and Apostles to, and
of him, in great part false Witnesses, and his Sufferings, Blood, and Gospel
made void, and of no effect. And such an open Gap, or great Road made for the
cruel Jews and Mahumetans to excuse themselves, and Impeach or Condemn the
Evangelists, that I am not only ashamed, but astonished to behold, how the
Watchmen slumber, and mind not how these deceitful workers are laying another
Foundation than that on which the Holy Men were built upon. And although I have
been a constant Hearer and Lover of them above Thirty Years, and by the love I
had for some of them, ensnared in some of their Errors, and did not so fully
see the danger thereof until lately, and mostly by their opposing and
contradicting G. K. and Persecuting him and his Friends, greatly convinced me
that they did not Preach the same Gospel and Faith as the Apostles did. 1 Cor.
15. Nor am I ashamed to confess, my self was not sound in my Faith: But it was
the Mercy of God to let me see my Error, and give me a mind to be more
perfectly instructed therein: And I desire the Lord, for the sake of our dear
Lord Jesus of Nazareth, to keep me under a due sense of my Unworthiness and
Ignorance, and humbly thankful for his great Mercy and Love, more especially in
giving his dear Son, who dyed for my Sins. And I earnestly entreat all you
Quakers, who be honest minded, not to be obstinate and high-conceited of your
selves, rather than come under some blame or reproach: For I can by Experience
tell you, that you will in the end find a better Peace in confessing than
maintaining your selves in Error. Flatter not your selves that you have True
Saving Faith, because you do believe the Relation in Scripture concerning our
Lord Jesus: That he was, and suffered, as is recorded; and because you believe
he was a good Man, and had the Spirit of God in him, and in a greater measure
than you have; and that whereas the Jews said, He deceived the People, and that
he did those Mighty Works by the Power of Satan. You on the contrary, believe
it was the Mighty Power of God in him that wrought. The Jews indeed seems to be
more Blasphemous against the Holy Ghost: But your Contempt of his Person, Blood
and Sufferings, is Blasphemy against the Son of Man at least, and therefore a
great Sin. But I say this of yours in the best sense is but a bare belief of
Christ, and is not True and Saving Faith in him, because it is not fixed in him
as the Foundation, and fast-hold of your Souls for Salvation, but a Principle
of Light within you. But the True Saving Faith fixes in him, our Lord Jesus of
Nazareth, and his Sufferings, Blood, and Obedience, in becoming a Sacrifice or
Passover for us: And the Satisfaction in the sufficiency of the Object or
Subject, and so relyance thereon, is Faith; and that which People most value or
rely on, in that properly is their Faith sixth: As the Jews professed they
believed in God, but would not believe in our Lord Jesus as the Messiah.
Therefore said our Lord to them, Ye believe in God, believe also in me. That
is, as he became Flesh or Man, so he was our Savior, and so he is our Mediator
and Intercessor in Heaven, whole Christ, even Jesus of Nazareth, born of the
Virgin Mary. And seeing since his Ascension both Stephen and Paul see him so,
how and when since was our Lord Jesus of Nazareth separated from Christ? Were
it not better for you to acquiesce with the plain genuine sense of the
Scripture, than to stretch and strain some Expressions against the general
scope thereof, to countenance some erroneous Expressions of G. F. and others?
You are now to me as some other Persuasions were to you formerly, you having
been among them. So I having so many Years owned and heard you, can tell you by
Experience, that the Light within every Man only, nor the most exactest and
strictest Obedience thereto, will not be a good Foundation for your Faith to
fasten on, or build upon. Be not high-minded, but take up your Cross, and own
this contemned Jesus, for God has highly exalted him; and I can do no less
than bear my Testimony against, and disown this self-exalted Spirit of G. Fox,
and them who join with him in these unchristian Doctrines; and do think that
every individual Quaker is chargeable with them, and all other their Errors
publicly printed and allowed by your Chief Priests and Rulers, until there be
some public Testimony given out by or on your behalf against them; and
whatever my Lot may be from you, I am satisfied greater is he in whom I believe
and trust, even the same Jesus of Nazareth whom Peter preached, whom you term
Vessel, Garment, etc. than the Light in every Man in the World: Therefore you
may, as your forefathers did, cry aloud until Evening against me, I cannot
fear the whole Host of you (although I know you be many Thousands) for my trust
and hope is in the Mercy of God, for the sake of my Lord Jesus of Nazareth,
(without me) and his Obedience, and Sufferings, and shedding his inestimable
Blood of his Body, his Stripes, his Death, and his Mediatorship, and
Intercessing with the Father now in Heaven. The Satisfaction he made to the
Father, I say, in him only do I by Faith fix and rely for Salvation; and my
Soul says to him (as the Disciples in the Ship, when they were in a Storm) Lord
save me, or I perish. Even the same Jesus who lived in Capernaum, I which sat
in Darkness among you many Years, through Mercy (by that little weak belief in
him that I have obtained) found Light to spring up, as in the 4th. of Matthew.
13. 16. I say again, my Redeemer and Savior, in whom I trust, is the same Lord
Jesus St. Peter Preached, and St. Paul, Acts 13. Who was taken down from the
Tree, and laid in a Sepulcher, whom God raised from the dead: Through this Man
do I expect forgiveness of my sins, and by him to be justified. I am not
ashamed of this my belief and hope in him whom ye contemn, and now term an
outward Man, in p. II. Discoverer Discovered. And to cover your Errors, you
would divide his two Natures, under pretense of distinguishing, whereas there
never was a Jesus of Nazareth an outward Man only; and there is great
difference between your Doctrine and the Apostles, for you Preach a Christ
therein crucified, i. e. in him, and a Light in every Man; but the Apostles
Preached him, even him that was taken down from the Tree, and laid in the
Sepulcher: This could not be the Godhead only distinct from his Manhood, nor
could this Jesus be Personally or Substantially in Man, nor his Flesh and
Blood. Therefore the Light within every Man alone cannot be him, even Jesus of
Nazareth, who is the Son of God, and Savior of the World, and your contempt of
his Person is offensive. You say in Print of his Disciples, For they loved his
Person for the sake of the frame and quality of the Spirit that dwelt in him;
or else what was his Person (being mean and contemptible) to them, more than
another Person, but for that which dwelt in him they loved him; let none
mistake, I do not slight it, nor the Person of any of his Brethren, or
Children, as they are prepared to do the will of their Father; but I do know in
God's Counsel that it was even so, as it bath been also in these days among
whom God the Father of Mercies has as it were deprived some of his Disciples
of the Personal Presence of some of his dear sons and Servants, which may be to
this end, that the same Spirit and Life might be felt, possessed, lived in, and
enjoyed in themselves, in their own particulars, in which only their Eternal
well-being consists, Deep to Deep, by W. B. page 30.

Here observe, it is not the Body, but it is the Person, our Lord Jesus, they
contemn, and as is proved by their aforesaid terms (HIM) and (HIS PERSON) and
in this their Contempt of his Person, his Blood, must be included; and, as is
here shown, they say, His blood was no more than the blood of another Saint;
and so here above his Person is made to be but equal with theirs: There is more
Contempt in this above Sentence than I can express, and if it be not also
contrary to the 13 Acts, judge ye? But to discover the depth of the Mystery of
Iniquity, couched hereunder, is more than I can do; but you cannot be good
Christians, until you disown these Contempts: And it is but deceit for you to
pretend you own Jesus of Nazareth as the Savior, as long as you do not disown,
but excuse these Contempts. Remember how you charged the Baptists, that if they
did not condemn or disown Tho. Hicks, for abusing you, that they were
chargeable, so also are you Foxonian Quakers, the whole Body, chargeable with
these Errors, until by or for you disowned, much more by your excusing them.

Awake, awake all Christians, especially you Overseers, who love our Lord
Jesus, and the Gospel of Salvation, and contend earnestly for the true Faith in
him, for certain Men are crept in, speaking great swelling words, pretending to
the Power and Spirit of Christ, exalting themselves above (and opposing) all
other Christians. This is the very Mystery of Iniquity now at work: Do but
consider how furiously they prosecuted F. Bugg, for putting a jest upon twelve
of them, by a Mock-Pillory: They Indicted him in London, when he above Sixty
miles absent, and knew nothing of it, nor could defend himself; and complained
of him to the Secretary of State, and to the Parliament, as one Seditious, and
of ill Consequence to the Government, which was false, and a gross Slander:
Now, shall they be so concerned for the Reputation of Twelve Men among them,
that the whole Nation must be alarmed? And shall our Lord Jesus of Nazareth,
his Blood and Sufferings, and the Holy Scriptures be contemned, and you not
affected, nor concerned? Surely if our Lord took so much notice of them that
had not fed, nor clothed, nor visited his Disciples, insomuch that he took it
as to himself, 25 Matthew. 42. surely much more will he take notice of them who
do not (in this evil day and time) own and confess him before men, take his
Holy Apostles for an Example of suffering Afflictions, Bonds, and
Imprisonments; for Preaching and Testifying to our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, as
the only Savior. What though they will not suffer you to Buy or Sell in their
Markets, but thrust you out of their Synagogues, and Defame, and Persecute, and
Imprison, and Fine, take away Goods, as they the Chief Priests of the Foxonian
Quakers have done by G. K. and his Friends. Yet he is Faithful that has
promised, and has greater Power than they. And because (as they say) The only
way to recover the Deceived, is to discover the Deceivers. Therefore are these
Errors of theirs published, and not (as they falsely say) out of Envy, or to
incense the Government against them, their false boasting of themselves and
Spirit, and condemning others.

G. Fox being charged to have said he was Christ; he answered, It was a Lie;
but says he, Christ in the Male or Female, if he speak, he was Christ the
Seed, and the Seed was Christ; but he said, He did not speak it as a Creature,
p. 299. I take him to mean, it was not the Creature G. F. but Christ in him,
that said, he was Christ.

Now in their Discoverer Discovered, p. 14. They charge T. C. for abusing G. F.
by misrepresenting him: Now I charge them in the top of this Paragraph with
False Boasting, and I leave it to the Reader to judge whether or no these
Instances I give do not prove it. For they themselves say, page 14. He, G. F.
gives the name Christ to something in him, and spoke through him, yet it was no
Creature, nor of him G. F. but of the Seed, which is Christ. But now if it was
as they say, no Creature, then it must be the Creator; and I see no difference
between my Explanation of his words and their own, but they delight to Quarrel,
and falsely Accuse. But for further proof of the Pride of G. F's. Spirit, one C.
Wade charges them to say, They are Christ, and totally without sin, as Christ
is, saying, as he so are we in this World. To this G. F. answers, p. 248. He
calls it Satanical, (says G. F.) Thou have denied John's words. Again, says
the same C. W. This proves that you Quakers are not Christ. as you brag you are
-- And yet (says C. W.) you say, as Christ is, so are we in this World, in p.
249. G. F. Answers him thus, Which was the Apostle's words, and he was not
ashamed to speak them; but thou that live in the Power of Darkness art
ashamed to hear them. Says G. F. implying by this his Answer they are without
sin, as Christ is, and quotes the 1 John 4. 17. But the Apostle in that Epistle
sets out the Love of God, and the necessity of their living in love one with
another: But does not mention nor intend their being, as God is, in Perfection
without sin. But G. F. does hereby, not only prove his Spirit to be a proud,
boasting one, but he does pervert the Scripture also. And they say in the
Epistle to this Great Mystery, etc. p. 3. The Elect is risen among us, whom you
cannot deceive. But some of their Preachers have been deceived, and Deceivers,
notwithstanding they say, The Quakers are in the Authority of the Lamb -- upon
the Throne, p. 31. Also in p. 78. say they, God has said, we are after his
heart. Also by contradicting an Opponent, they do imply they are equal with
God. For say they to one, Thou make a great Pudder that any should witness he
is equal with God. And further, says G. F. in a Catechism they have put forth
to Learn, they have laid down, That the Holy Ghost is equal with the Father in
Power and Glory: Yet (says G. F.) If any come to witness the Holy Ghost in
them as they that gave forth Scriptures, or witness the mind of Christ, and
witness that Equal with the Father, that Equality you speak of, you Priests
destroy, that which you have put forth to the Nation, page 67. Now that which
was objected against them, was not for saying, that the Holy Ghost was equal
with God, but for pretending that they, or the Spirit that guides them, was
so. And G. F. cites it as an Error in an Opponent for blaming the Quakers for
saying, Their speakings are from the Word Christ in them, (Mark, it is not the
words of Christ) and to this G. F. Answers, All you are apostatized that do not
speak from the Word Christ in you, page 68. Again, G. F. being charged to
profess Equality with God; he Answers, G. F's. words were spoken beyond and out
of all Creatures, page 127. And again, G. F. says, The Assembly gave forth a
Catechism, wherein they say, the Holy Ghost is equal with the Father -- And is
it Blasphemy (says G. F.) for to come to witness this you have given forth, and
the mind which was in Christ; yet (says he) G. F's. words were not spoke as
you Preach them, but beyond and out of all Creatures, he did not say G. F. p.
127. That is, he did not mean his Flesh and Bone, but his Spirit or Christ in
him: But Men are generally esteemed according as the Spirit is which they be
influenced by. But says G. F. The Quakers have a Spirit given them beyond all
the forefathers, which we do witness since the days of the Apostles in the
Apostasy: And they (Quakers) can discern who be Saints, and who are Devils, and
who are Apostates, without speaking ever a word, p. 89. And further, says G. F.
Thou art an ignorant Man -- nor can minister unto the People, not knowing
their condition they be in, unless they tell thee. Is not this a wicked, proud,
boasting Spirit? Yea, the Glover, a Quaker, that was robbed, and the
Circumstances thereabout, sufficiently prove it, (I hope you will not be Angry
for not naming the Persons) besides them in F. B's. Cage. And I question
whether or no St. Peter knew Simon Magus's Condition before he proffered Money.
But these Quakers say (although fa^sly) An Infallible Spirit is now possessed
amongst the Quakers, p. 105. Yet now they would Quibble themselves off in their
Discoverer Discovered, p. 17. Pretending they do not ascribe Infallibility to
Persons, but as influenced by the Infallible Spirit. But their Deceit is
manifested, That G. F. does not only pretend they possess an Infallible Spirit,
but he also blames others for confessing they are Fallible. But I shall farther
manifest their Wickedness, as well as the Fallibility of their Spirit: It was
by them put to one W. Thomas, a Minister, to say plainly, whether they were
Infallible or Fallible. To which he very Christian-like Answers, We willingly
acknowledge that we are fallible, or Men that may be deceived. In Answer
thereto, says G. F. We do believe you, that you are Fallible Men, and are not
Infallible -- It Is contrary to your Experience to be Infallible. Now, by G.
F's. Bantering Answer he does imply the Quakers are Infallible Men, or else why
does he so Banter W. T. for acknowledging they are Fallible Men. And then
farther, says G. F. You are Apostatized from the Infallible Spirit, in which we
are come, with which you are judged -- So not to have the Spirit of Christ.
Then G. F. goes on, saying, They who witness that which they were in who gave
forth Scripture, they witness Infallibility, an Infallible Spirit now possessed
among the Quakers. And so (says G. F.) the Devil, false Prophets, etc. none of
these can witness an Infallible Spirit -- but being out of the Spirit that
Christ, etc. was in, they are not Infallible, p. 105. (says G. F.) But this
Infallibility being about Thirty six Years ago, they may have lost it since;
yet G. F. says, The Quakers be of Abraham 's Stock, of Christ, before
Antichrist was, are made free from the wrath to come. And says G. F. Thou have
discovered thy self to be no Minister of Christ, who cannot give an Infallible
Character of another Man, p. 107. Again, they say, They are the Ministers of
Righteousness, declared to be so in all your Consciences, (an untruth) To be in
the life of all the Prophets, and Christ -- in the Truth; and by opposing the
contrary, does imply they do perfectly keep God's Commands, p. 360. And say,
The Quakers are the Preservers and Saviors of Souls, p. 249. Also they say,
How can you but delude People, who are not Infallible, and are none of
Christ's, which have not the Spirit, which is Infallible, are not Ministers of
the Gospel, which is the Power of God, p. 82. Hereby it is apparent they do
imply not only their Spirit but themselves to be Infallible; but they are not
Infallible, but Fallible, and delude the People by G. F's. Doctrine.

Excuse me for troubling you with so much of G. F's. impertinent stuff, for I
am forced to it by their Clamours, they hoping thereby to tire me and you too.
And what regard is there to be had to these Men's Writings, who notwithstanding
all these, and twenty times more I could produce of their proud boastings of
themselves and Spirit, as being Infallible; yet they have the Face, in their
Discoverer Discovered, p. 17. to Challenge T. C. to prove that ever they
ascribed Infallibility to Men, but as influenced by the Infallible Spirit. But
if G. F. and his Spirit were not both Infallible, he was, according to his own
Judgment in Print, a Bantring Conjurer, a Diviner, and false Prophet. For
besides what I have before quoted, he says, How can you be Ministers of the
Spirit, and not of the Letter, if you be not Infallible -- And ye do well to
confess you have not the Infallible Spirit, are not Infallible; and how can
they but delude People, which are not Infallible, p. 82. All these prove that
G. F. did ascribe Infallibility to Persons as well as to his wicked Spirit. And
this also proves, that these Foxonian Quakers are so notoriously false, that
they are not to be believed: For it is the Fallibility of themselves, as Men,
that these Men whom G. F. opposes, do acknowledge, and for which this Juggler,
G. F. does so Banter them; for it is not the Spirit of God's being Infallible,
that they oppose. And I shall further manifest the Fallibility and Wickedness
of G. F's. Spirit, who brings in W. T. saying, We are justified by Christ
without us, and not within us, p. 104. Now W. T. says in his Epistle, We are
freely justified by the Grace of God through the Redemption and Righteousness
of Jesus Christ, which is not within us, but without us. Now W. T's. words
refer to the Righteousness and Redemption of our Lord, as performed in his own
Person without us, as is plain by his term which, and not as G. F. perverts his
words, as if he opposed Christ's Spiritual working in us, for, as is here
showed, he owns that: And W. T's. Sentence is 24 words, and G. F. takes but 12
of them, and perverts them too. Also in p. 106. G. F. brings W. T. saying,
Christ is not come to them in the Flesh. Now W. T's. words in his 45 Page are
thus: Christ is come already in the Flesh to us, in the Spirit into us, etc.
But is not come yet, nor till the last day is to come in his Power and Glory.
Here W. T's. Sentence is 32 words, and G. F. takes but 10 of them, transposing,
perverting, and falsely accusing W. T. for he says, Christ is come already in
the Flesh to us; and G. F. says, that W. T. says, Christ is not come to them in
the Flesh: Here is a Lie, a false Accusation, and false Quotation, all these
wicked deeds in this one Sentence of G. F's. Again, in page 106. G. F. brings
W. T. saying, Men are saved, but not by Christ within us. But W. T. says, page
42. Whether he build his Salvation on Christ as be is within, that is (says he)
on that of Christ, which is within, I grant Christ is in us, except we be
Reprobates; this grant of W. T's. proves G. F. a false Accuser. (says W. T.)
But it is true also, Christ does not save us as within us, nor by any thing he
has put within us, as if that were the cause of our Justification, or Christ
by that, etc. Here W. T's. sentence is 40 words, and G. F. takes but 8 of them,
and perverts them, and falsely accuses him. And this is that fame W. Thomas
that G. F. does so banter, as before, for acknowledging they were Fallible Men.
Therefore if G. F. had any Honesty, or Infallibility, he would here have showed
it, when he so highly pretended to it; but indeed he has herein proved himself
and his Spirit to be Infallibly wicked. This is an Infallible Truth proved
here, and in my Essay, etc. Where I omitted many of his false Quotations of
those two men's words, because I would not burden the Reader. And he often
omits to mention Pages, but says, be says, but no body knows where, for some
of them I cannot find in all the Books; therefore do not you think to delude
People with your sham Stories, That these are from F. B. or I. P. for I can
produce the Books; but if they were from them, they are not the less true, for
neither of them are guilty of such wickedness, as your great Prophet G. F. is.
And hereby is not only G. F. discovered, but his Spirit also, in hopes that it
may not trouble Christendom so much as it has done, or was intended by you: And
I question not, but a more serviceable and truer Journal than yours will be
published of him and his Spirit, of which, says he, Readiness Errand to Dam^scus,
etc. p. 6. He does not say, G. F. is Christ, but he says, I and my Father are
one, and where the same is revealed this is witnessed. And then he cites the 2
Phil. 5, 6. Let the same mind be in you that was also in Christ, who being in
the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, and yet made
himself of no Reputation. And then says G. F. And this I witness to be
fulfulled, for the same Spirit where it is, is equal with God; for he that
sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are all of one, and it is God that
sanctifies, says G. F. But this does not prove G. F. or his Spirit more Holy
than another, for all are of him. Again, says G. F. I am the way, ^aith Christ,
Christ is but one in all his Saints, and he speaks in them. So that it is the
Spirit that he, G. F. speaks by, and writes these Falsehoods, that he gives the
Title of Christ to, although not to his Flesh and Bone. And what shall he said
to such a People as these Foxonian Chief Priests, who so Revile me for leaving
out some of G. F's. impertinent words, an And and a Parenthesis, and yet
themselves so grossly guilty of false Citing and perverting men's words, that I
question whether any Popish Writers do exceed this G. F. therein; he not only
perverting men's words, but the Scriptures also; for to warrant being Equal with
God, he brings 2 Phil. 4, 5. which I desire you to read, and you will find the
whole scope thereor to exhort to Humility in lowlyness of mind: Says the
Apostle, Let each esteem others better than themselves. And, says the Apostle
concerning our Lord, He humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, etc.
Now, here is not any word spoke, or intended to exalt any Man or Spirit in him,
but on the contrary, according to our Lord's Example, to humble our selves: Let
the same mind be in you; that is, to humble our selves, and not as G. F. does,
exalt himself and his false Spirit, under the Notion of the same Spirit that
Christ had, but the contrary Fruit shows it a contrary Spirit. Also for that
Text which G. F. brings to make himself one with God, 2 Heb. 11. He that
sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are all of one. And says G. F. It Is
God that sanctifies, thereby implying his Spirit was one with God; for says
he, the same Spirit where it is, is equal with God, etc. And then in the
conclusion of that Paragraph, says he, This I witness what the Scripture says,
etc. p. 6. And all this not in denial, but in confirmation of his claiming
Equality with God. But this Text does set out the great Condesension of our
dear Lord Jesus, how he became one with us, and not to exalt any to equality
with God; but to the contrary, as says the Apostle, We see Jesus, who was made
lower than the Angels, for the suffering of Death -- For it became him for
whom, and by whom, are all things -- To make the Captain of Salvation perfect
through Sufferings, 2 Heb. 9. Therefore hereby it is evident, that G. F. does
pervert the Scripture as well as men's words. And observe in the second of the
Philippians it is said of our Lord, And being found in fashion, or shape, as a
Man, he humbled himself. And it is not said, he was found in that Man, but he
was that very Person, God and Man, and not a mere Man, without or distinct from
the Divine Life, for the Word was made flesh; and as Body and Soul make but one
Man, so the Divine and Humane Natures are both one Lord Jesus Christ. I have
made a long Digression, but am by their Clamours forced to it.

For farther Proof of their Contempt of our Lord, and his Sufferings, They say
in Print, The Sufferings of the People of God (themselves) in this Age, are
greater, and more unjust than in the days of Christ, or of the Apostles -- For
what was done to Christ or his Apostles, was chiefly done by a Law, and in
great part by the due execution of a Law, Edw. Buroughs Works, p. 273. If this
be not abominable Contempt of our Lord's Sufferings, and excusing the Jews, I
know not what is. And I am sure it was no Christian Spirit, that wrote, or
excused such Antichristian Doctrine. Judge ye, if this be not more properly
denying the Lord that bought them, than J. S's. calling their Light within,
perverse Principle of Self-adoring Light. Of this they say in Print, it is
Blasphemy, and no less than denying the Lord that bought him, R. Hubberthorn's
Works, in Answer to J. S. p. 89. And for Proof of their Contempts of the
Magistrates and Laws of the Nation, and their Uncharitableness and Arrogance.
Observe, They say in Print, Truth allows no Payment of Tithes at all, but
condemns it, so would you also, were your hearts right to God. They who pay
Tithes, do thereby deny Christ to be come in the Flesh, which is a mark of
Antichrist, in their Book, An Antidote against Infection, etc. p. 78. This
cruel and illegal Sentence of theirs is against W. R. a Christian Quaker, who
does not plead the Right of Tithes, but for Liberty of Conscience, for these
who could freely pay them, and not by constraint. And it is this just Liberty
that they oppose, and will-not allow such to be Christians, but condemn them as
Antichrists, and Denyers of Christ, and so for Damnation. And this affects no
less than all Christendom, even ever since the Apostles to the World's end;
even Kings and all Estates and Degrees whatsoever, who pay Tithes; nay, their
own dearest and nearest Relations. And if it do not condemn Judge Fell, yet I
am sure it does that Divine Judge Hale, whom they pretend in their Journal to
speak well of, and I am sure did deserve better from them. And this their
Testimony is so Uncharitable and Unchristian a Judgment, that it concerns all
true Christians to disown it. But these Foxonian Quakers are so hardy, that
they are not ashamed to tell the Parliament, That their Testimony against
Tithes, is not a Law of their making, but of Christ's, Counterfeit Convert,
etc. p. 73. Also they say, They cannot hold up Tithes in the War, nor in the
Law -- nor they that give them -- and do see that they that give them, and they
that take them, are neither agreeable to Law nor Gospel, in a Book, entitled,
These several Papers were sent to the Parliament, 1659. Now, until they disown
this aforesaid unchristian Testimony of theirs, all the Foxonian Quakers are
chargeable therewith. And hereby it is evident, That a Liberty for such as
cannot for Conscience Sake pay Tithes, will not satisfy them; but they will
impose upon them who can freely pay them without constraint, under the Penalty
of being Antichrist, and denyers of Christ. And it is of concernment to be
determined which is most binding, the Foxonian Quakers Testimony against
Tithes, being a Law of Christ's making, as they say, or the Laws of the Nation:
For by these Quakers Doctrine, all who pay them are in a damnable condition,
although they pay them freely without Constraint; and more especially they who
receive and make the Laws for the Payment of them. For G. F. also says, Tithes
must be taken away from Men as well as Ministers, page 368. So here is a Law
made by Christ in G. F. that Tithes must be taken away,, not only from
Ministers, but from other Men; and it is confirmed by G. W. etc. to the
Parliament. And also they say, That Antichristian Generation, the National
Ministry, have received a deadly blow by our Witness against their forced
Maintenance and Tithes, against which we have witnessed by cruel Sufferings, as
our Chronicles shall make known to Ages to come; so that their Kingdom in the
hearts of thousands begins to totter, and shall assuredly fall to the ground.
In their Book, The Anarchy of the Ranters, etc. p. 42. And also above Thirty
Years since did one S. T. say in a Public Meeting, As there was not then a
Bishop in England, so there should not be a Priest. And in the Epistle to G.
F's. Great Mystery; they say, Our Spirits were first filled with Indignation
against the Priests and Teachers, and against them we first began War. Also in
R. Hubberthorn's Works, in Answer to J. S. page 130. They say, When the Law of
the Land cease to maintain them, which will come sooner than they expect,
then may they beg their Bread, or perish for want. Also W. P. in his Guide
Mistaken, says, The Idle, Gormandizing Priests of England run away with 150000
l. a Year, under pretense of being God's Ministers -- No sort of People have
been so universally the bane of Soul and Body, as that abominable Tribe, for
whom the Theater of God's most dreadful Vengeance is reserved to Act their
Eternal Tragedy upon. What Mouth all these uncharitable and wrathful Sentences
came forth of, it is not difficult to judge: And if they were not from the
Mouth of the Lord, then G. F. W. P. etc. were Conjurers, Diviners, and false
Prophets, by their own Printed Doctrine. And as Jeroboam took Counsel, and made
two Calves, and said to the People, it is too much for you to go up to
Jerusalem, behold your Gods: So they have made their Female Prelates for
Licensing Marriages, and Laws against paying of Tithes, to hinder People from
conversing with the Ministers, and them from what benefit they can: This G. F.
as the Carpenter, hews them out, and G. W. and W. P. etc. they have been the
Carvers and Painters thereof. He says, he was moved, and they say, they be
Ordinances of Christ. And much more such of their deadly Fury I could produce,
which plainly proves their Indignation is, as they say, against the Ministers
of all sorts, and to bring them into contempt and want; and therefore do defame
them, and all who pay Tithes, although willingly, and not by constraint. But I
believe if a true Account were given, of what Charges G. F. and some others of
them, have been to some Persons, it would appear he has run away with, or
there has been spent for and about him, as much or more than on many a Priest
and Teacher in England, considering his Circumstances; and has been the Bane
of more Souls than any one Priest in England. And it is time for them concerned
to consider what Foundation they have, or stand on, considering the Number,
Strength, Riches, Interest, and Design of these Foxonian Quakers, whose Spirits
are filled with Indignation against them; and have declared in Print, their
Kingdom shall fall, and they beg their Bread, or perish for want.

And to plead for Liberty of Conscience in the case of Tithes, for such as can
freely pay them, is so great a Crime among them, that they made it the Heads of
two Articles against J. Story, one of their Ministers, for saying, He knew an
honest Friend, who had, and would pay Tithes. And that he believed all Friends
had not a Testimony against Tithes. And against this J. S. and one J. W. they
sent out a more fierce Roating Bull, than that now against G. K. All these show
their great Hypocrisy, in that they now, in Answer to F. B's. Impeachment,
pretend they desire People may keep their Consciences clear, and that their
Orders are but Counsel and Advice. But they are so arrogant (as is proved by
these before Instances) in thus affronting the Law and Government, that it is the
Duty of all good Christians and Subjects concerned, to Testify against them.
And if you Christian Quakers do not disown all these their Errors, you are
great respecters of Persons, and therein great Sinners, and indeed great Slaves
to your Chief Priests. But notwithstanding they have uttered all this Fury and
Uncharitableness against all Christendom but themselves, yet they pretend great
Charity for the Pious Gentiles, saying in their Book, The Christian Society and
Doctrine, etc. p. 9. Must all be excluded any true knowledge or Faith of Christ
within them, unless they have the knowledge of Christ without them? No sure,
for that would imply insufficiency in Christ as within them. Here is much of
their Secret, Mysterious undermining the Faith in our Lord Jesus of Nazareth,
and the Authority of the Evangelists, in this their pretended Charity to the
Gentiles. And it shows there was but little Love to our Lord, or the
Evangelists Testimony in the Contrivers of this piece of Antichristian Charity:
For at the best it does but advance Morality, and degrade the Faith in our Lord
Jesus according to the Evangelists Testimony. And I pray Judge who be most
likely to be denyers of Christ, and Antichrist, they who freely pay Tithes
without constraint, or they who uttered, and do now excuse these Contempts of
our Lord Jesus, Scriptures, Governors, Laws, and all Christians besides
themselves.

Again, say they, The Priests work has been to teach People to keep in their
Lusts, and not forsake and come out of them to Christ, p. 228. And You all
Priests and Teachers, since the days of the Apostles, who are inwardly ravened
from the Spirit, have kept Millions of Souls in Damnation, keeping them in the
way of Hell, who are Satan's Ministers, p. 267. If it be objected, that they do
not mean the Ministers in General, it is before proved they have condemned all,
from the Throne to the Dunghill: Also they say, Them, called Quakers, the only
Ministers of Christ, p. 267. Therefore they mean all National and
Congregational, as is further evident by their saying, Equivocating, deluding
Hypocrites, he has proved himself and all others, except the Quakers, p. 249.
Again, say they, They must all come to the Quakers, if ever they own Christ, p.
119.

What they boast concerning the Light within (not only within themselves, but)
in every Man, they say to two Baptists, who, they say, are out of Peace, If you
look to the Light within, it will not let you have Peace -- The Saints Peace is
in the Light within; For the Light is Christ the Covenant of God, p. 295. And
one Objecting against them, because they say, There is no other way to bring
People to God, but by the Light in them. G. F. Answers, which is Christ, the
way to God, p. 38. Another Objecting against the Light within, says G. F. which
is Christ, p. 49. Also they quote these following as Errors: One saying, They
that seek for Righteousness by Obedience to the Light within, differ nothing
from the Jews -- And them who Preach Redemption by the Light in every Man, are
not of God, p. 60, 61. Again, one says, To call that Light in every Man Christ,
is to slight his Glorious Person in Heaven. G. F. Answers, The Apostle said,
Christ is all in all, p. 94. One says, There is not in every Man that Redeeming
Light, nor is the Light every man has his Meditation, p. 154. Now although G.
F. does not positively deny these, yet they are cited as Errors. Again, one
says, To say the Light in every Man is Christ, the Redeemer, is an Error. Also
that they who affirm the Light in every Man is Christ the Redeemer, sets up an
Idol, p. 58. Long, side-long Answers G. F. makes to these, and in his
Conclusion says to the Person who affirms these Truths, For the rest of thy
Lies, etc. Thereby implying these aforesaid Affirmations false, and owning the
contrary, That the Light in every Man is Christ the Redeemer. For says G. F. He
(the Devil) teaches them not to have the Light within them, the Seed Christ --
The Root of God. Now, in their Discoverer Discovered, p. 18. they charge me for
Quarrelling with G. F. for calling Christ the Root of God: But they are false
Accusers, for it is his terming the Light in every Man the Root of God, that I
objected against, as the head of that Paragraph shows, where I say, What they
boast concerning the Light within every man; and G. F's own words do prove that
he does term the Light within, the Root of God. For he says, The Devil teaches
them in whom he sows his Seed, not to have the Light in them, the Seed
Christ, the Tree of Righteousness, the Root of God, p. 185. Now, were you not
past shame, you durst not Print such gross falsehood, as that I Quarrel with G.
F. for calling Christ the Root of God, when as his own words be, The Light in
them (even in them whom the Devil teaches) says G. F. The Root of God. And
it is the Light in them whom the Devil teaches, that G. F. gives these terms
to, The Seed Christ, Tree of Righteousness, The Root of God. And as I said
before, so I now say, I think this is the Root of Rantism. And I have examined
all the Scriptures you mention, and do not find therein The Light in them whom
the Devil teaches is termed the Root of God, as G. F. Blasphemously does. And
I desire the Reader to consider what Consistency there is between G. F's.
giving these high Titles to the Light within every Man, and your Pretensions in
your page 7. to say, The Rays, or Beams of Light which proceed from him, the
Son of Righteousness, shine into the hearts of all Mankind. This is granted by
most Protestants, but differs much from G. F's. Expressions; and how can you
expect to be thought sincere in this or any other Confessions you now make, so
long as you by Slanders and Quibbles endeavor to excuse and cover your Old
Blasphemous Expressions in Print: And if it is a Sin to Lie for God, it is gross
Wickedness to do it for such an one as G. F. etc.

One says, Man has received a Light from Christ as a Creature, but not as a
Redeemer. G. F. Answers, That Is false, whosoever has received Light from Christ,
has received a Redeemer and a Savior, and he that believes in it is saved, p.
215. This I think is false, for hereby G. F. makes the Savior but a Principle,
and not a Person: But G. F's. Gospel and the Apostles differ much, and, as they
say in the Epistle to this Book, We cannot own both, but we must deny one;
therefore I deny G. F's. Again, says G. F. They that have Christ within have
Sanctification, Redemption, and Justification, p. 230. Now he says, Every man
has the Light, and the Light is Christ. Now I Appeal to common Experience,
nay, G. F's. own words before cited; If you look to the Light within, it will
not let you have Peace, says G. F. Now those who are condemned by the Light
within, have they Sanctification, Redemption, and Justification? According to
his own Doctrine above, they had not Peace, and therefore had not
Justification, etc. But such a Man needed a better Memory. Again, one says,
There is not whole Christ, God and Man, in Men. To this G. F. Answers, How then
must Men grow in Christ? p. 249. And in his Conclusion says to this Man, These
be thy Principles -- all People may Judge thee. This plainly shows he denies
our Lord Jesus of Nazareth to be Christ, for he as God and Man cannot be in
Men. One says, Such be in Error, that know no Christ but a Christ within. G. F.
Answers, They that profess a Christ without them, have another Christ within
them; here is two, says G. F. For if it be not the same Christ that ended all
Types, etc. -- If it be not him that is within them, they have not the
possession of the Substance, nor the comfort of the true Christ: But those who
have not Christ, the end of all Types, in them, they are among Antichrists,
etc. -- And they that have a form of Godliness, can confess a Christ without
them, and not within them, p. 225. Now, from the first part of this Sentence I
observe G. F. does make two Christ's, as his own words prove; and being two, his
Christ within must be another than him without us: For if there be, as he
says, two, that is more than one; nay he, G. F. also says, another Christ
within them. And in all this side-long Answer of G. F's. he does not contradict
his first Assertion, that there is a Christ within, and another without, and
here is two, says G. F. And observe, the Objection was not made against
Christ's being Spiritually within, but against them who know no Christ but a
Christ within. As C. W. does Object against their saying, That whole Christ is
in them, and that Christ, God and Man, Flesh and Spirit, is in them. All which
G. F. does not deny, but by his long, side-long Answers does imply it is so,
and thereby disown our Lord Jesus of Nazareth to be Christ, or else there is
two; for he as God and Man, Flesh and Spirit, whole Christ, cannot be in Man,
as G. F. by his opposing C. W. does imply. Again, one saying, The Lord Jesus is
afar off in his Bodily Presence, p. 8. And the Son of Mary, God-man, is absent
from his Church. G. F. Answers, Contrary to Christ. Again, says G. F. The Body
of Christ is not out of the sight of his Saints, p. 12. But hear what the
Scripture says, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Whom having not seen, ye love -- whom though now
you see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice. Here is the Scripture and the
Foxonian Quakers contrary to each other, Judge ye which is to be believed.
Again, one says, Christ says, he shall be absent from his Apostles touching
his Body, page 205. Again, He is absent from them touching his Flesh, page 210.
And the Man Christ, that was crucified, his Body is absent from his People, as
touching his bodily Presence, p. 211. All these G. F. cites as Errors, and in
his Conclusion says to the Man, Thou have lifted up thy self against the Lamb
-- the Witness in thy Conscience shall Witness against thee. Again, one says,
The Person Christ is Personally absent from Believers. G. F. Answers, The
Saints he is not absent from, p. 135. And now for further Proof of their
Contempt of the Person of our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, this following is enough,
if there were no other; For, says G. F. to C. Wade, The Devil was in thee, thou
say, thou art saved by Christ without thee, and so have recorded thy self a
Reprobate, and ignorant of the Mystery of Christ within thee, for without that
thou do not know Salvation. Now, the first part of this Cruel Sentence I
brought to prove their Contempt of our Lord's Person, because that G. F. does
show no other Reason for his Deviling and Reprobating C. W. but because he had
in Print (which G. F. calls a Record) acknowledged Salvation by Christ without
him, as appears by G. F's. words [so.] And for the latter words of G. F's.
which in my former Quotations I left out, they show no other Reason for his
Deviling and Reprobating C. W. only they do show his Enmity against C. W's.
Christian Confession to Christ without him. And G. F. thinking that Deviling
and Reprobating him not enough, but to aggravate the wretchedness of his state,
that he was not only a Reprobate, but an ignorant one too. This is that C.
Wade, whom G. F. so grossly abused, as I have showed in my Essay, etc. Also G.
F. says, he says, but no body knows where, for he quotes no Page, and I have
read the Book all over, containing 60 Pages, and cannot find some Sentences,
that G. F. says, he says so. And although G. F. has so Devilled and Reprobated
him, and says, he is ignorant of Christ within; I shall show you what he says
of Christ within: In page 36. says C. W. The Saints are said to be the
Habitation of God through the Spirit. And page 4. God whose Throne is in Heaven
-- is in his gracious and spiritual Presence in and through his Son dwelling in
the hearts of his People. And in p. 7. Christ is by his Spiritual Influences in
all his Saints. And page 19. Christ that is Personally absent from Believers,
is dwelling in their hearts by Faith. All these Confessions to Christ within by
C. W. be in that one Book G. F. pretends to Answer. Now, if C. W. believed this
with his heart, I do not see, but according to the Tenth of the Romans, he
might be saved; and G. F. has rather recorded his own Reprobate state, than C.
W's. and his own Spirit more like the Devil's than C. W's. But it was C. W's.
bold and open Confession to Jesus of Nazareth that did torment G. F. as he did
the same Spirit, Luke 4. 34. And so the same Confession how does torment the
same Spirit in G. F's Successors, the Chief Priests and Rulers of the Foxonian
Quakers, W. P. W. B. and G. W. etc. And for their Pretense in their Discoverer
Discovered, p. 20. That they see not how the Apostle can be Orthodox, and G. F.
Erroneous, (their Blindness is to be pitied) but to them who are not blinded it
is plain that G. F. was erroneous and wicked. For C. W. as is afore-shewn, does
Confess to Christ within, according to these Scriptures, 3 Ephesians. 17. 3 Gal. 26.
4 Gal. 6. read them. And Paul does no where say, The Devil was in thee, thou
say, thou art saved by Christ without thee, and have recorded thy self a
Reprobate, as G. F. wickedly does. But in 10 Romans 9. St. Paul says quite
contrary, and neither does St. John countenance G. F's. Contempts, although you
would shelter him under them both.

And further, says G. F. Can you call him Christ in Man, without the Man being
there? p. 68. This is in Answer to one who charges them to say, Christ is in
them as Man. By these you may see what a Man Christ they mean, when they say,
they believe in the Man Christ Jesus. And that, he became Man, they mean even
such a Man as is in them: For says G. F. If they must eat his flesh, is it not
in them? Again, one says, That Christ our Justification should be in us, that
dyed, that suffered, and ascended, to fancy him in a particular Person, etc.
And in p. 130. says, the same Man Christ is Personally absent from a Believer.
So that it is our Lord Jesus, as God and Man, Personally being in People, that
this T. M. opposes, and not his enlightening men, for that he acknowledges, as
G. F. cites him, p. 130. saying, Yea, when enlightened by that Heavenly Light
from Jesus. And in p. 131. says T. M. There is something of God in Man. And G.
F. does by his opposing these sound Doctrines imply, there is no Man or Person
Jesus absent from Believers, nor no other Christ suffered and dyed, but what is
in us Personally, or whole Christ, as by his Answer. And so all be in the fancy
that be out of the state of witnessing Christ (that suffered) within them. Now
in the Discoverer Discovered, p. 20. They blame me for leaving out the word
And, and the Parenthesis, which I did not to wrong his sense, nor is there any
Emphasis in them, nor did I quote this place to prove that G. F. did make
Christ's Sufferings within Man only, as they falsely insinuate, p. 21. nor made
any Observations on this place particularly. But I do believe that in this
place, as well as in many others, his design was to contemn the Person of our
Lord, and consequently his Blood and Sufferings, as more fully appears by your
saying, That Blood of his let out of his Side by the Spear, after he was dead,
was no more than the Blood of another Saint. This is a wicked Contempt: And for
your fallacious Pretense, p. 21. That G. F. means no other, but that Christ who
suffered without, to be revealed within. That is acknowledged by all
Protestants, and would not be contradicted. But if he meant so, why did he not
express it as you do? And at best, in this he shows himself a very perverse
Disputer, and causer of Divisions, and therefore to be avoided. And although G.
F. do not in that place make Christ's Sufferings to be in Man only, yet he does
say, And all be in the fancy who be out of the state of witnessing Christ (that
suffered) within them. Now, it was the Man our Lord Jesus of Nazareth that
suffered, and he as such cannot be Personally in any Man; therefore in this he
does contemn our Lord's Person. And for your so severe charging me for omitting
the word and, and the Parenthesis, now you have them in, they will not excuse
his Contempt: But you have hereby aggravated his gross wickedness; for if that
be so great a sin in me, how wicked was he, to falsify Men's words and sense,
as he has done, and is proved in my Essay, and this Discovery.

Let Us see now what just Judges you will approve your selves, in condemning his
erroneous Spirit; but I know you dare not touch that, it being your Foundation,
for if you do, down comes your Building of Infallibility and Church Power.

Further, says G. F. Christ is come now, who treads the Wine Press alone
without the City; so making the Work now a doing, which our Lord finished in
his own Person, as by the Prophet is said, Has trod the Wine Press alone.
Again, one says, If there be not a distinction between the Righteousness
imputed on account of the Blood of Christ, and that wrought in us by his
Spirit. G. F. Answers, Christ's Righteousness, his Blood and Spirit, are all
one, p. 183. And says to the Man, For the rest of thy confused stuff, it is not
worth mentioning: Thereby making these sound words confused stuff. Again, one
says, The work in us is not the ground and Purchase of true Peace. To this he
makes a perverse Answer, and says to the Person, For the rest of thy Lies, they
turn on thy self, p. 171. Thereby implying that before was one. One says, The
Flesh of Christ is not in them. G. F. Answers, They that eat it, have it in
them, p. 222. But where was it before they eat it? Or how came they by it to
eat? By all these it is evident, They, G. F. etc. reject the Person of our Lord
Jesus of Nazareth, as the only Christ and Savior, his Flesh, Blood, and Body,
which was laid hands on, and slain, and laid in the Sepulcher; whom the Apostle
bore witness to, Acts 13. As the Word of Salvation, and the Savior; and not
only the Godhead in him, but him, that Person our Lord Jesus. Nay, such was
their Reverence toward his Holy Person and Body, that the Apostle treats of
him as the Meritorious Cause of Justification. But he is by these Quakers
contemned, and the Light within every Man dignified with his Titles and
Offices, and to be his Flesh, and his Blood, contrary to the Scriptures; for in
the 13 Heb. it is said, That he might sanctify the People with his own Blood,
he suffered without the Gate. 10 Heb. By the which will we are sanctified, by
the offering of the Body of Jesus once for all. Now judge ye which is safest,
to take that Person our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, his Body and Blood, for the
Object of our Faith, and Hope of Salvation, through the Satisfaction he made to
the Father in his own Person, and being thereby justified in the sight of God,
according to the Scriptures; or the Light in every Man, which these Quakers
make to be Christ, his Flesh and Blood, Justification, Sanctification, etc.
nay, the very Root of God; but I think this their Doctrine is the Root of
Blasphemous Rantism. I could give many more Instances of the perverseness and
erroneousness of their Spirit; but these and a few more that follow are enough
and too many, to testify against them, and manifest that this Spirit, they
blasphemously term Christ his Infallible Spirit and Power, is that mentioned 2 Thessalonians 2. The man of sin, that exalts himself above all that is called God.
But according as is prophesied, he is (in measure) revealed. Therefore all who
love the Lord Jesus beware. -- Again, one says, The Seed, to whom the Promise
of Salvation is made, is, or has been sinners. G. F. Answers, The Promise is
to the Seed, which Seed is the hope Christ, that purifieth even as God is pure;
and here is the Creature come to know his Liberty among the Sons of God, and
the Seed Christ never sins, p. 324. From G. F's. Answer I observed, that he
did imply, as if Christ, (whom he terms the Seed) had need of Salvation; and I
leave it to the Reader to Judge, considering the Affirmation and his Answer
thereto; and notwithstanding they Quarrel with me, yet they seem to allow as
much. For in their Discoverer Discovered, p. 21, 22. say they, For G. F's.
asserting that the Seed, to whom the Promises were made, was Christ; read Gal.
3. 16. Pray observe their deceit here, for the difference between T. T. and G.
F. was not whether or no, there were not Promises to Christ as the Seed: But
says T. T. The Seed, to whom the Promises of Salvation are made. And although
Christ be in Scripture termed the Seed, and the Seed said to be Christ; yet in
a Scripture-sense, Men also are termed the Seed; as all the Posterity of a Man
are his Seed. And in the 3 Gal. 29. If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham 's
Seed. These were Persons, and had been sinners, as T. T. affirms, and G. F.
opposes him therein. Also in page 325. T. T. says, The Seed of Israel are Men,
and not only something in Man. Now, by his words not only, it is evident he
does allow that something in Man, may in a sense, be also called the Seed; but
G. F. by opposing him herein, does imply, as if the Promise of Salvation was to
Christ, as if he had need of Salvation. And besides the unsoundness of G. F's.
Juggling, long, two-faced Answers, he has showed himself void of Charity; and
therefore his Spirit cannot be the Spirit of Christ: And by the Fruits they
bring forth, it is easy to Judge into what Root G. F. etc. are grafted, and
grown out of.

And they are as Scandalous and Offensive in some Expressions above Civil
Government. They say, Are not all those Elders, Christians, that will dote so
much on an Earthly King, Traitors against Christ -- Neither do you read that
there were any Earthly Kings since the days of the Apostles, but among the
Apostate Christians -- Herod the King was mad at the Child Jesus, and sought to
slay all the Children in Bethlehem. There is the Fruit of Earthly Kings, and
such a King would our false Christians have, etc. G. F. To the Presbyterians,
etc.

Also observe how they treated the Peers of the Realm: Say they, What a
Sincerity was there once in the Nation? What a dirty, nasty thing would it have
been to have heard talk of a House of Lords among them. In a Book, To the
Council and Officers of the Army, p. 7. Again, say they, Let all those Fines
that belong to Lords of Manors, be given to the Poor People, for the Lords
have enough. G. F's. Counsel to the Parliament, etc. p. 8.

Also concerning Episcopacy, they say in their Book, entitled, An Alarm, etc.
by T. E. p. 6. Did not you make a Solemn Covenant with God, that you would
utterly extirpate Episcopacy, that dead, loathsome Form -- Did not you spew it
up, and will you turn again and lick up your own Vomit? Oh, do not so, do not
run wilfully into Destruction.

Also G. F. in his Great Mystery, etc. page 90. says, M. B. says, If an
Hypocrite Reign, his Power is of God, and Saints are to yield to the Power; and
it must have Honor and Obedience from the Saints. This is sound Christian
Doctrine, but G. F. he opposes it, and says to this M. B. in Answer, Such as
are turned into Corruption, and are Hypocrites, they are gone from the Higher
Power, and so for the Lord's sake the Saints cannot be subject to that Power --
Again, says G. F. The Saints cannot now bow to that which the Pope, Kings and
Queens set up, although they call it a Supreme Power that commands the things
-- For the Beast's Power has set up your Tithes; Temples, and Colleges. This
is against M. B. who does not plead for Obedience to things contrary to the
Will of God. And this of G. F's. is unchristian; because it represents all
those who be of one mind, or the same mind and Judgment with him, not
profitable Subjects to the Government. Notwithstanding they thus contemptuously
Print of others, whose Degree and Station is far more considerable than theirs,
in respect of their Interest in the Government. Yet in a Book, called Certain
Certificates, etc. by J. P. I find they are greatly offended, and resent it
very highly, and of ill consequence, that one of their Preachers, being a
Justice in Pensilvania, was by one termed Prick-louse Tailor (although he was
by Trade a Tailor before) for which he was punished.

And G. K. I find is represented a very ill Person, because he takes notice of
the Severity of the Punishment, as from them who pretend to be Ministers of
Christ; but this Action shows their Spirit is not the same with the Apostles,
for they being defamed, they entreated, and did not Whip, and Fine, and take
away their Goods, as the Foxonian Preaching Quakers have done. Also to magnify
their Sufferings in Print, they fill their Books with many frivolous Stories;
as in their Cry of the Oppressed, etc. p. 19. They tell a Story of a rude Boy's
coming within their Meeting door when they were there, and brake wind backward,
and said, the Spirit moved him. This is but a Windy Story to trouble the King
and both Houses of Parliament with; but by this, and such like Stories as this
they Print, it may be judged what kind of Chronicles we shall have of their
Sufferings hereafter, and whether or no ought not some inspection to be made
therein while Persons concerned are living.) But some of your way have done
worse by and in some Parochial Churches, calling them Bawdy-Houses, or
Whore-Houses, as one now living knows this to be truth, and that by one who was
of higher Pretensions than a Boy. Also some other unseemly carriages have been
acted by some of you more offensive than breaking Wind backwards, and that not
by Boys, but Persons of higher Pretensions. But if these, and giving a
contemptible name to one of your Preachers, were so heinous a Crime, and
deserved such severe Punishment also, but by observing the severity or rigor
that you used in Punishment, be of so scandalous and dangerous as they
represent G. K. because thereof, and if the Lad deserved Punishment; therefore
by the same Rule ought your Printed Books, which speak contemptuously of the
Government of England, accordingly be taken notice of, and punished
accordingly, for they are more hurtful than Boys words; and as England and the
Government and Governors thereof, have preference before Pensilvania, so is
the contempts of the Laws and Governors of England Offenses of greater
concernment. And if it were such a great Crime in G. K. to take notice of this
Severity in Punishing for speaking contemptuously of but one of them, a
Preacher, they are guilty also who excuse and countenance these Printed
Contempts; as for that in page of their Contempt of our Lord's and the Apostles
Sufferings, and Magnifying their own. Also in these against the Peers and
Episcopacy, as before, and more especially in their dooming all Estates and
Degrees, from the Throne to the Dunghill, who pay, receive, or uphold Tithes,
for Antichrists, and denyers of Christ. These are on Record in Print, and I am
sure more scandalous to the Persons concerned, and more dirty, nasty, and
loathsome to good Protestants and Englishmen, than to term a Man Prick-louse
Tailor, who was a Tailor, although one of their Foxonian Preachers and Justices
in Pensilvania; for that affects but that one Person, but theirs affects and
reflects on the whole Nation in all the Estates of the Government; and other
foul-mouthed printed Expressions of theirs here inserted of their foul-mouthed
Language of W. P. and G. F's. of the Ministry of England in general, and
whether these, the Fruits of these Foxonian Priests, do not manifest them more
like the grievous Wolves foretold, than Christ's Sheep or Lambs.

Much more such loathsome, dirty, nasty stuff of theirs may be seen in a Book,
entitled, The Quakers Unmasked, etc. And these arrogant Expressions being in
their printed Books, reflect on their whole Body, until by some on their
behalf, testified against, being Unchristian and Seditious. Yet such is their
Pride and Partiality, that they will not, or dare not disown what their Chief
Priests have done; but 24 of the Chief of them in London could Publish in the
Weekly Intelligence, Their disowning of D. S. (a Christian Quaker) because he
honestly confessed (as they all ought) that G. F. and some others of their
Chief Priests were blameable. But let the Reader observe that honest Answer of
D. S's. to F. B. and their Errors here mentioned, and judge whether they are
not of a much more dangerous Consequence, and scandalous to Protestantism in
general, than any thing of F. B. or D. S's. and thereby it will appear, that
the Body of Foxonian Duakers (especially those 26 in London) are guilty of
great Partiality, and respecting Persons in the highest degree; and thereby are
great sinners, and proved themselves false Witnesses in their forementioned
high boastings. For I did but speak to a great Rabby and Teacher among them, R.
S. of some of these Errors, who was so confident and offended, that he
challenged me to show him one in all the Book; and I being from my own, where I
had marked some, knew not that I could find them then: But his confidence put
me on a stricter search into that Book, viz. The Great Mystery of the Great
Whore, G. F's. Spirit, where I found abundance more than I mentioned; and
indeed is so wicked and false, that it deserves to be burnt. And I complained
by Letter to three Eminent ones of them in London, of some of these Errors and
Evil Deeds. I also wrote to another Eminent Preacher of them, of my being
dissatisfied in their countenancing the Errors of them in Pensilvania, who
opposed G. K. and persecured him, but little notice they took. All these
considered, and how they have in Print reviled that Christian Quaker D. S. not
only disowning him as a Quaker, but have reflected on his Credit, in relation
to his Employment, by base Insinuations, as they have done by me, and several
others who discover them, as may be seen in Animadversions, etc. p. 10. and 40.
Also their Imprisoning, Fining, and taking away of Goods from G. K's. Friends
in Pensilvania, and Presented Geo. Keith as guilty of Crimes which are Death by
their La^; and had not the Power been taken from them, it is probable they would
have (...) him accordingly. It Is the Chief Preachers among the Foxonian Quakers
which are guilty of these wickednesses, Reflecting on Persons, and striking at
Creatures (as they say) for these Actions of theirs affect the Persons as
Creatures. Hear then own Doctrine, They say, Thou that art reflecting on
Persons, thou art a false Prophet, p. 237. Again, say they, To cause People to
be put in Prison, and have their Goods taken away, such are disorderly
Teachers, p. 366. Again, they say, You are inwardly ravened who strike at
Creatures, p. 126. Behold how they have condemned themselves, and are contrary
to their own Doctrines (as they are to the Apostles) in their Defaming,
Indicting, Imprisoning, Fining, and taking away Goods; and out of their own
Mouths are they proved Guilty (in Matter of Fact) as being False Prophets,
Conjurers, and Diviners, and inwardly ravened; and are them our Lord commanded
should not be gone after. Therefore all that love our Lord Jesus (which we do
not if we keep not his Commands) turn from them, and deny them, and their
Practice and Doctrine, being indeed another Gospel. And although they will what
they can hinder People from Reading this, or any thing that discovers them: Yet
you who love our Lord Jesus, who be of other Persuasions, who have Relations or
Acquaintance that are deceived by their good words, and perceive not the depths
of Satan among them, if you judge this Discovery Serviceable, use your
endeavor to possess them with the danger of their Errors, for surely they are
the grievous Wolves foretold of, although they have the Sheeps Clothing of
Good Words.

It Is not my intent hereby to make void, or undervalue the Light of Christ, or
Spirit of God within, and Obedience thereto; for it is our Duty to walk in the
Light within, but not to build thereon only, the Foundation, our Lord Jesus of
Nazareth, being already laid, according to the Purpose and Promise of God. But
yet that Faith, that brings not forth Fruits of Holiness, is not the Holy
Saving Faith. And the Apostle does not mention the Word, or Faith within, as
the Foundation, or Object for them to trust in only, but as the Evidence or
Proof of their Faith; nor does not ascribe Salvation to that only, and give all
our Lord's Titles and Offices to the Light within, as G. F. does: He says, Now
the Seed of the Woman is come, in which Seed, Christ, all Nations are blessed, G.
F. to all Friends every where, etc. p. 2. By these his words, now is come, he
implies a Principle within; but the Apostles Testimony was to him, even our
Lord Jesus of Nazareth, who was before come, Heb. 1. God has spoken unto us by
his Son, (mind these words) it is not does speak, but has spoke; and says
further, How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation -- began to be
spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed by those that heard him. These refer to
the words of our Lord Jesus outwardly spoken, as often in the Epistles the
Saints are put in mind of the Words and Commandments of our Lord Jesus as words
without. And I Appeal to all true Christians, if it be not the chief scope of
the Gospel, especially Peter and Paul, who have in their Preaching Jesus, used
for substance mostly the same words, and testified to the same Jesus of
Nazareth, slain, taken from the Tree, and laid in the Sepulcher. But if those
wise Greeks, the Foxonians, had been in the Apostles time, might not they have
opposed with their own Reason, and said, What, a Man that was killed and
buried, laid in a Sepulcher, can he, a Finite Being, a Garment; a Vessel;
satisfy Infinite Justice? Yea, such a Man as he was, can: But that within (say
these) Quakers, is the only Principle, and admits not of another, W. S 's.
Gatechism, p. 57. What, not out Lord Jesus? Also; say they, That the same
Spirit and Life may be enjoyed within themselves, wherein only their Eternal
well-being consists, Deep to Deep, p. 30. What Part or Office have these Men
left for our Lord Jesus of Nazareth's Sufferings in our Eternal well-being? But
in this as well as many other of their Doctrines, they have degraded and robbed
our Lord Jesus, dividing him from Christ; for says J. Cole; The Body of the
true Christ in which he suffered, etc. And in their Book, entitled, The
Christian Society and Doctrine, etc. They say, The same Christ that was therein
crucified ascended, page 5. Hereby they imply a Christ in Jesus of Nazareth,
besides him whom they term Vessel or Garment, mean, contemptible, it, that; and
a Christ in him, or therein crucified: But in your next let us know who
scourged, pierced, and laid hands on, and took down, and put into the Sepulcher
this your Christ. But if you say, it is the Son or Word that was with the
Father in the beginning: But as such, without not only coming into Man or
Flesh, but becoming Flesh, or Man, could he, or was it possible for those
things to be accomplished on him as such? Your Notion makes the Prophets false
as well as the New Testament, and his Blood and Death ineffectual; for it was
not him, Jesus of Nazareth, but one in him, as your Notion makes to be the
Savior, and so the same in Men. But the Apostles Testimonies are to him, whom
you call the Flesh and the Body he took up, but he took it into himself, and
both Natures are but one individual Jesus Christ; neither had he any other
Flesh and Blood, to be the Atonement but that of the Man Jesus of Nazareth.
And if there was no Remission without Blood, it behoved him to become Man made
of a Woman, made under the Law, and not as you would have it, he only came into
that Man Jesus to suffer those things, which as the Word in the beginning only
he could not, for it was his Death gave force to, and made the Promises
Effectual to us, as himself said to the two Disciples, Ought not Christ to
suffer those things? Luke 24. And who is this Christ? Even Jesus of Nazareth,
whom the Jews crucified; it was him the Disciples trusted in as the Redeemer,
whom you say, You can never call Christ, but something that dwelt in that Body,
Is. P. Again, you say, Is not the Life called Christ where ever it is found --
does not the Name belong to every Member in the Body, as well as to the Head?
For shame! no, The Name of Jesus of Nazareth, the Savior, belongs to none but
to him the Head; for your Notion implies a Monstrous Body, all Head. Again, you
say, Such as be false Ministers preach Christ without, and bid believe in him
as he is in Heaven above, W. S's. Primmer, p. 8. Then St. Peter was a false
Minister in Acts 3. 21. 1 Pet. 1. 8. Again, you say, That of God within us, is
the only Foundation, it is Christ, and being Christ, it must needs be only, and
principle, admits not of another -- is greatest in being -- And thus we know
Christ in us, to be the only Principle, W. S's. Catechism, p. 57. They have not
only hereby laid another Foundation than our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, but have
rejected him; for say they, Your imagined God beyond the Stars, and your Carnal
Christ is denied. To say, this Christ is God and Man in one Person, is a Lie.,
The Sword of the Lord drawn, p. 5. Again, say they, The Name is not given to
the Vessel, but that of him in Vessel, Is. P. But was him, whom you
contemptuously term Vessel, ever distinct from or without that which you say,
was in the Vessel? And him you call Vessel, the Scripture says is the Savior,
and Justifier, and the Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the World.
Although you say, Nothing that was Mortal was called Christ, Quakers Refuge, p.
38. Was not Jesus Mortal when taken from thee, and laid in the Sepulcher? 30
Acts. And see Luke 24. This was he whom the Disciples trusted in, to Redeem
Israel, whom you contemn. But whereas G. F. etc. does here before make the Light
in every Man to be whole Christ, as by their ascribing all the Offices and
Names of our Lord Jesus to it, making that the only Principle, and admits of no
other. But yet contrary thereto, says G. W. in his Book, The Life of Christ,
etc. p. 13. As to Christ's being in every Man, that is not our Affirmation, nor
Words; But that there is a Light of Christ in every Man. This I take to be
sound Doctrine, and if G. W. be sincere herein, he opposes G. F. and they are
not all of one mind, as they falsely boast, although they are generally guilty
of that great Evil the Wise Man complains of, even to advance the Servant, and
degrade the Master. For in their treating on the Belief of what our Lord did
and suffered without us, also of the belief of the Light within, they state the
Case unequally, (and therein are unjust) to the undervaluing of the true Faith
in our Lord Jesus, and give preference to the Light within, in the Book
entitled, Truth's Principles, p. 11. (my great Respect to that good Man, whose
Name is to it, and the Truths therein, caused me to omit the Book and Name in
my former Discovery, and I question whether this Passage be of his wording.)
There may be (say they) a Belief of what Christ did and suffered without, etc.
(mind these words) and the work of Regeneration not known, etc. But it may be
the same also with a Belief of the Light within: And I appeal to your own
Consciences whether you do not believe it is so now with many among you.
Therefore this Argument of yours is of as much force against the Light within,
as against the Faith in our Lord Jesus without us. But now observe farther,
when they come to speak of the Light within, in what advantageous terms to that
they express themselves, above what they do the Belief of our Lord Jesus
without. For, say they, in the same Book and Page, It cannot be so (the Work of
Regeneration not known, etc.) where the Light within is believed on and obeyed,
so as to have its perfect work in the Heart, to Regenerate and make all things
new. Now I appeal to their Consciences, whether or no, if our Lord Jesus is so
believed on and obeyed, so as to have his perfect work in the heart to
regenerate and make all things new, whether this can be, and the Work of
Regeneration not known. In the variation of their terms they have undervalued
our Lord Jesus and the true Belief in him. For they say, a belief of Christ;
but of the Light they say, believed on. Now, there is great difference between
believed of and believing on; but it is not a bare belief of, but true Faith in
Jesus Christ that G. K. contends for; and their Injustice and Partiality (even
in the Case betwixt our Lord Jesus of Nazareth and the Light within) shows that
they are not his Ministers, nor is it his Gospel they Preach. Do but compare
St. Paul's Gospel of Salvation, 1 Cor. 15. (it is worth reading) and theirs, and
you will find theirs is another; and therefore, as in 1 Gal. 8. is accursed,
and ought to be put out of the Christian Camp. And although they say, Christ
and his Light are not divided, yet here to serve their turn, they can divide
them; for if they be not divided, then they who Preach or believe in one, do
the same in the other also. There is a silly Argument G. F. much makes use of
to undervalue and contemn the Worth and Authority of the Scriptures, viz. says
he, p. 137. For the Pharisees crucified Christ had that which testified of
Christ, the Scriptures, etc. Now this Argument is of no more force against the
Scriptures, than it is against the Light in every Man, which G. F. says is
Christ; for the Pharisees and wicked Men have that Light, as well as the
Scriptures, and more universally; for you say, every Man in the World have
that, but few have the Scriptures in comparison. But can you produce any since
our Lord's Ascension, who have come to Faith in him as Preached in the New
Testament by the Power or Influence of that Light, without some special
Revelation or outward Instructions by Words or Writings? We can find some that
have been deprived of these outward means, have lost that knowledge they had,
as the Ten Tribes.

Now having shown their Contempt of our Lord Jesus, Scriptures, Governors, and
Laws, and all Christendom besides themselves; as in 2 Phil. This Man of (...)n
(their Spirit) exalts it self above all that is called God. See how
Blasphemoussy a Preacher of theirs Deified Geo. Fox. Says he,

Dear and presious one, in whom my Life is bound up and my strenth in thee
stands, by thy breathings I am nurished and refreshed: and by thee my strenth
is renewed: blessed art thou for evermore: and blessed are all they that enjoy
thee: Life and strenth comes from thee holy One: and thou art the blessed of
the Lord for evermore, dear dear reach unto me, that I may be strenthened, to
stand in the mighty power and dread of the Lord, for the Servise is very great,
my travel and burden was never so as now since I saw thee. But daily do I
find thy Presence with me, which does exceedingly preserve me: for I cannot
^eane but in thy Presence and Power: Pray for me that I may stand in thy dread
for evermore: Dear, my dear Brother John Came has been exceeding sick and
he is very weak I can say little of his recovering as yet, his Wife is with him
she is dear and preciously keepte: their dear love is to thee, oh reach
through all in thy mighty power to him, this bearer can declare to thee of the
work this way: Jo: Wilkinson and Jo: Storey is here: their love is dearly to
thee: dear heart there is one thing that lies upon me: I shall lay it before
thee: as tuching thy comeing into Wilteshire: I was there at Justice Stocks
House: and the Famaley is all pretty loveing and convinced: and he is a sober
wise Man and there is honesty in him which will stand: and there is a pretty
People that way: it has laid exceedingly upon me these 3 days of thy being
at that place: I know not such another place in all the Counterey: for thee:
dear: I was much wounded to know, that thou was in such a rude place, and
sufers so amongst them: and this was I moved to lay before thee: and great is
my disere that it may be so. The place is about 20 mill from Bristoll in
Wiltshire one mill from Chipenam a Market Town: Justice Stocks House, Jo: Came
told me that the Justice he was with was very loveing and a pretty man: this
bearer was there he can declare to thee more: but oh that thou wear but at
that place I mention: it is free and suitable for Friends coming to thee: it
lies much upon me: and if thou find movings strike over thither I shall say no
more of it: the Work is great here away pray for us all that in thy power we
may abide for evermore: I am thine begotten and nurished by thee and in thy
Power am I preserved glory unto thee holy one for ever:

John Audland.


This Blasphemous Letter above is by me composed out of an old Manuscript
Verbatim, and spelled and pointed according as it is in the said Copy. T. F.

These Blasphemous Expressions are to and of G. F. the Author of most of these
Errors and Wickednesses; and he is extolled and magnified by J. Cole and S.
Eagles, two of their Chief Priests with unfitting Titles (as well as this J.
A.) which are justified by W. P. in Print, and indeed all confirmed by him in
his Preface to the Journal, saying, Many have done well, but thou, Dear George,
excellest them all; but it has been in Wickedness: And he that-saith to the
wicked, thou are Righteous, him shall the People curse, 24 Proverbs 24. And
it is but a silly threadbare Quibble of yours, p. 27. That this Letter is an old
threadbare Story; for it is not the less true for being old: But it cannot be
very old, because your beginning is but of late comparatively. But your Story,
p. 40. is old, threadbare, and false in Fact in some things, and shows your
Envy; and let them among you who can see, (not you who cannot) look into F.
B's. Cage, and read Romans 2d. and your own Doctrine also; and although you
cannot, yet others can see your Wickedness, and may see more of it ere long if
you go on; for your Slanders and Quibbles cannot blind all People; for your
Story of Merchant-Taylors-Hall has no relation to this Controversy with you
about your Contempts, and great part of the Disorders there were occasioned by
the rudeness of two of your Preachers, J. B. and S. N. of whom I could tell you
something of worse consequence. And it is astonishing to behold how they
contemn our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, and so Blasphemously Deisie this G. F. and
make way for themselves to be Christ's, as appears by Is. P's. saying, Does not
the Name belong to every Member, as well as to the Head? And yet they can in
Print say of our Lord Jesus, His Person was mean and contemptible. But
Tradition gives a better Character of his Person, and that the Comeliness of his
Person was one Argument that Martha used, and which prevaild on her Sister Mary
first to go to hear him; and doubtless he was, and is so, to all that truly
love him, although made contemptible by these false Apostles, in order to
advance G. F's. wicked Spirit.

And for your endeavoring to cover your wickedness, pretending that some of
these Quotations are from J. P's. Book; if so, they are no less true, deny them
if you think good, for your slandering of him as you do, in something in Matter
of Fact in your Discoverer Discovered, besides what you basely insinuate. But
his Reputation, both as a Christian and a Citizen, is above your reach to hurt
by all your barking; but through Mercy you cannot bite here, as you did G. K.
and his Friends in Pensilvania, and Fine, and take away Goods, and Imprison, as
you did by W. Bradford, as may be seen in their Trials, Sold by J. Gwillam
within Bishopsgate; but yet you will venture hard, although to the slaying of
your selves, 5 Job 2. by slanderous Insinuations. Page 40: say you, He employed
Porters to carry some Religious Books, among which the Bible (mark this, a
Bible would not serve their turn, but the Bible) is said to be one) with design
to burn them, say you; but how do you know that? I am sure he never told you
so, but to the contrary; but whatever his Design was, it is evident your Design
is wicked, to slander him, and slay his Reputation if you could; see, you may
read your Portion, 101 Psalm 5. But for the Readers better Information, I shall
set down some of his own words in Print about it, and I am sure he is better to
be credited than G. Fox, G. Whitehead, etc. of your Masters the Chief Priests,
or thee, Ed. Pennington, their Servant; for no such Untruths, Slanders,
Blasphemies, and other gross Wickedness, as are in Print proved against them,
can be justly laid to his charge. Says he, Whereas it is said, I would have
burnt all those Books; I say, I would not have burnt any more than what was
already burnt, (which was about a quarter of a sheet of Paper, and a News Book
or two at most, therefore not the Bible to be sure, as you wickedly and falsely
say.) I say (says he) I should not have done it to gain the World. Again, says
he, The Rumor is, I would have burnt the Bible -- rather than I would burn
that, or the least Leaf thereof that may be serviceable, I should rather
Sacrifice my Life. This, and much more of his in Print above 25 Years since
about that Slander, these Foxonian Priests now spread against him: Rather than
want a Sacrifice for their Fury, they will, as far as they can, slay a Man's
Reputation, although it be so false and scandalous a Work, that the Chief
Priests themselves dare not appear in it, but it must be done by this their
Servant Edward Pennington, Acts 24. 2. Because this Mr. P. has been
serviceable to discover their Wickedness, therefore they are tormented and rage
(as one Sanders, a Wine-Cooper, did lately on the Exchange come to him, and
there openly give him worse Language than that that they punished one for
giving to S. Jennings, one of their Chief Priests; and yet this of that foul
mouthed Sanders was without any Provocation, or word spoken to him.) And the
Bible is but a fallacious pretense for them to cover their Envy with, but their
Envy and Rage was because Contempt was justly shown to their Erroneous
Pamphlets; for they contemn the Scripture, terming it Blasphemy to say, it is
the Word of God, but entitle G. F's. Pamphlets so; and they excuse this G. F.
but can slander others on Credible Information: And it is said, but it is not
only said, but proved, that G. Fox, etc. were wicked Men in matter of Fact, and
so is this the High-Priest's Servant, Edward Pennington. Also in their Title
Page they make C. C. Achan, and they can bring Scripture, as their fore-Father
did, that T. C. ought to be stoned. But they are in this, as in abundance more,
proved self-condemned Apostates, according to their own Printed Doctrine, as
well as by Scripture; for they do that to others they would not have done to
themselves, and therein show they love not Christ, because they keep not his
Commands: And indeed the whole Work of this false, envious, self-exalted,
contemptuous Spirit of theirs, shows it is the Great Mystery of the Great
Whore, as themselves entitle their Book, not only by their Reproaches and
Slanders, but by their Flatteries, p. 45. He that hates, dissembles with his
lips -- when he speaks fair, believe him not -- but his hatred being covered
with deceit, his wickedness shall be showed, 26 Proverbs. And although they
endeavor to excuse their Errors by some sound Expressions in their Books, but
there are few if any Heretics, or their Books, but speak some Truths; but they
must not excuse the Errors, for it is them which be objected against, and not
the Truths; but them Truths are but as the Golden Cup in the Hand of the Great
Whore, to allure People to drink of her deadly Poison; and do, as the dead-Fly,
cause the Ointment to send forth a stinking savor. And that People may not be
thereby deceived, I am concerned to discover the wicked Mystery of this Great
Whore, G. F's. Spirit, which, as they say, excels all; therefore I expect they
will allow me to give it the preference, and not be angry. I do not attend
their Lot, but if I should take their Example, and Print against them what I
have by Credible Information, as it is said, much filthiness would appear to be
under their Skirts: And this Spirit of theirs cannot be the Spirit of Truth,
for that was to lead into Truth, but theirs have lead them into Untruth and
Error, therefore is Antichrist, although they call it Light. And there was a
Generation who called Darkness Light, but if that Light in you be Darkness, how
great is that Darkness? And for your Charge, p. 22. that I incense the
Magistrates against you, because I cite some of G. F's. Errors about Civil
Government; that is also false, and your own Printed Doctrine and Practices
sufficiently warrant me therein. See your wicked Pamphlets, Truth's Character,
etc. p. 15. Say you, Must not Jealousy be stirred up in the Powers of the
Earth against them, as they have against others -- (and say you) As they have
sought to make others ridiculous, even so shall they become contemptible. I can
give you an whole Book of these your wickedness, and not out of the Quaker
unmasked neither, as you falsely insinuate, although I refer to that, because
much of your Wickedness is there collected together out of some others. I wish
you had minded what I before said to you in Animadversions, etc. p. 11. Lay
your hands on your mouths, if you have any shame left: But I shall not now
trouble my self to take notice of all your Slanders and Untruths, because it is
not for my own Vindication that I contend, but for the true Faith in our Lord
Jesus, as it was delivered to us by the Holy Evangelists and Apostles;
therefore I no more mind this Servant of the High-Priest's, Edward Pennington's
smiting me, than was taken of his Predecessor, in 23d. of the Acts; but I
rather observe the Advice in 26 Proverbs, 4 and 5 Verses. For such evil men
must grow worse and worse, foaming out their own shame, but their Folly must be
made manifest unto all Men. And I fear not but the same Lord Jesus of Nazareth,
who has delivered me from the Paw of J. Field, and from the Mouth of G.
Whitehead, Foxonian Chief Priests, will also deliver me from this uncircumcised
Philistine, the High-Priest's Servant, Ed. Pennington. And for their Rage
because I discover G. Fox's Errors now he is dead, but these Errors are living;
and they have done much worse by J. Perrat since his Death, slandering him in
Print near Twenty Years after his Death, although no such occasion given as
has been by G. F. also agravated by you in endeavoring to preserve that which
is for Destruction, 10 Proverbs 7. And its not intended to prejudice any, as
you falsely surmise, nor can any harm be to you, but good. If you be Christians,
you must deny those gross Errors in Print; for either G. Fox, W. Pen, etc. had
them from the mouth of the Lord, or they were Conjurers, Diviners, and False
Prophets, (you must own or condemn them) and such their mouths must be stopped,
much more their Books, being much worse than Verbal Errors, especially as you
magnify the Authors; for the Devil may no more speak in your Books than by
word of mouth. See your Discoverers, etc. p. 5. And whereas these Foxonian
Priests charge me for abusing G. F. because I say he claimed to be Equal with
God. I have now the Book which G. F. pretends to Answer in Great Mystery, p.
67. from whence I took that Sentence; and although there G. F. only says, Thou
make a great pudder that any should witness he is equal with God; but he, G.
F. is there positively charged in the Book, entitled, A Brief Relation of the
Irreligion, etc. p. 2. The words be thus: G. F. has avowed himself over and
over, to be equal with God; and being asked in presence of many Persons there
named, whether he was equal with God, as he had before been heard to affirm? He
answered, I am equal with God. And says the Book, this has been attested on
Oath before the Justices of the Sessions, and also the Judge at Lancaster
Assizes, 1652. Now, to all this, and more, G. F. Answers, as above, Thou make
a great pudder, etc. as if he had not so affirmed of himself. But if he did not
so say, why did not he deny it? But that he durst not, because of so many
Witnesses. But he, G. F. takes no notice of the Man's charging him as avowing
it, but would by his Juggling Answer blind the Readers, that they might not
know he had so affirmed of himself, but that he were only a Witness. But the
Charge was not for saying, the Holy Ghost was equal with God, but that he, G.
F. was so, and he answered in the Affirmative. Also in page 3. he is charged to
have said, he was the Christ, the Eternal Judge of the World, -- he passes it
by, and does not deny it, but answers to other impertinent things, and spends
almost a Page to prove the false Prophets were come in the Apostles time,
thereby to blind People, that he may not be suspected as one, as if because
there were such then, therefore he could not be one; but although there had
been many before him, yet he might be one also: But I observe it was his way to
make People believe him to be in the Truth by manifesting others Errors, and
thereby prevailed on People to believe him without due Trial. And
notwithstanding it is so plainly charged in Print that G. F. did say, he was
equal with God, and he does not deny it, but by shifts and Quibbles vindicates
it, as from the Assemblies Catechism, allowing the Holy Ghost equal with God;
which is besides the Question, which was, whether he, G. F. was so, and not
whether the Holy Ghost was equal with God; and G. F. answered, he was. Yet
these Foxonian Priests, to blind People, charge me with abusing him, because I
do not cite his long side-long Quibbles. And I have now another Book,
entitled, The Perfect Pharisee, etc. and in page 1. where it is said, it was
proposed to G. F. Whether he was equal with God? In Answer thereto, he, G. F.
positively affirmed, I am equal with God. Also in the same Page it is said, J.
N. was asked, Whether he believed any could be as Holy -- as God himself? And
he, J. N. answered, He did witness that he himself was as Holy as God. Several
other Errors are there charged on them, which G. F. does not deny, but
over-looks them (although they be in the beginning of the Book) unto the 19th.
Page, where he begins to take notice of some Impertinencies, and so all along
the Book, being 51 Pages. Also I have another Book, entitled, The Scornful
Quaker, etc. where G. F. practices his old Trade of false Citing and
Perverting, as I shall show in time; but this is now to prove the Pride and
Self-exaltedness of his Spirit. One M. B. says of our Lord Jesus, he knew our
thoughts -- all our ways, and who should betray him -- never the least
Error-nor deceived, etc. Much more he says in three or four Pages, how far our
Lord Jesus excelled all Saints, and they inferior to him in Knowledge and
Infallibility: But he, M. B. does allow the Saints do partake of the Nature and
Fullness of God, p. 92. But, says he, They are not the Father, nor the Godhead
in fullness, nor in part. Yet G. F. is so wicked in his 89 Page to say, in
Answer to this, Thou say, they (Saints) have no part of the fullness of God,
quite contrary to what the Man says. Here is an Untruth, and a false
Accusation, and Perversion, and false Quotation in these few words; and yet
this Spirit that is thus grossly wicked in him, the Foxonian High Priest, W.
Penn, says, he excels them all; and nothing less than being equal with God, and
as he is in this World, will satisfy this Self-exalted Spirit; but as I have
said before, so I say again, this Spirit could not be the Spirit of Truth our
Lord promised the Disciples he would send, because it is so wicked and untrue,
therefore is Antichrist. But to return to this good humble Christian, M. B.
After he had showed how our Lord surpassed any Saint, yet he allows that they
partake of his fullness in measure, etc. But this would not serve G. F. because
he, M. B. says, Our knowledge of others is by Observation, or by Fruits, or by
special Revelation, etc. -- We know not the way of God in their Spirits until
it be written on their foreheads, and so (says he) are not as Christ in that
respect. And again (says M. B.) But the Quaker is bolder than all his
forefathers, he knows a Man as soon as ever he sees him, or whether he be a
Saint or a Devil, though the Man discover not himself by word or action, yet
the Quaker knows him, and all that he may be, as Christ is. Much of this G. F.
quotes (although not truly) in his 89 Page; and in Answer, says to this M. B.
Here thou have shown that the Quakers have a Spirit given to them beyond all
the forefathers (which we do witness) since the days of the Apostles in the
Apostasy; and they (Quakers) can discern who be Saints, and who are Devils, --
without speaking ever a word. And in page 31. says G. F. Are upon the Throne --
And then farther, says G. F. As Christ is, so are we in this present World; and
these words are not put in a different Character for Scripture. And then
farther on, says G. F. Thou art an ignorant Man -- not knowing the condition
they (People) be in, unless they tell thee. Observe, G. F. cites this M. B's.
words as an Error, because he, M. B. said, We are not as Christ is in this
respect; and does banter this good humble Christian, M. B. for so saying; and
in opposition to M. B. says, As he is so are we, etc. All this plainly proves
G. F. did claim himself and wicked Spirit to be Infallible in Knowledge, and as
Christ is in that respect; and not only that God's Spirit was so (for that was
not denied) but that himself and the Quakers was so, as further appears,
comparing this with p. 5, 10, 11. in his opposing W. T. and R. F. when he, G.
F. so Luciferian-like assumes to himself and his wicked Spirit Infallibility,
he with both the same Persons is guilty of false Citing, false Accusing,
Perversion, and Lies: And it is not, as G. W. in his Charitable Essay, etc. p.
6. by his wicked Quibbles would insinuate, as if G. F. intended to know Peoples
states only by their proud and lofty Looks, wanton, scornful, envious, and
fallen Countenances, which testify against them, says G. W. But I am into
this wilful wickedness of his will testify against him, for his Conscience
knows better, because this M. B. did allow, and say, p. 93. Our knowledge of
others is by Observation, Fruit, and appearance of Things in the outward Man,
or by special Revelation from God: Otherwise (says M. B.) all other men's
Spirits are in the dark to us. Here it is plain this M. B. allows as much as G.
W. by his Quibbles would make believe G. F. claimed. But this would not content
G. F. nothing less than being as Christ is in this respect of knowing men's
inward conditions, without discovery by word or action; for that which G. W.
pretends to by Looks or Actions, is a sort of telling; but says G. F. Thou art
an ignorant Man -- not knowing the condition they be in, unless they tell thee.
And also G. F. opposes M. B's. saying the Saints are not the Father, they are
not the Godhead, neither in fullness nor part, although this M. B. do allow they
partake of the Nature and Fullness of God. And for further Proof of G. F's.
assuming Infallibility, in page 5. he says, S. E. says, That which is within
them is not Eternal and Infallible, etc. Now in page 31. S. E. Although all the
Saints have the Spirit of Christ dwelling in them, which is Eternal and
Infallible, etc. Now here is a gross Slander G. F. Prints against this Man,
quite contrary to his express words, and this proves him and his Spirit wicked
and fallible, and a deluder of the People. Therefore what heed or Credit can be
given to these men's Printed Books, that dare now Print such gross Slanders and
Lies? What may not they Print hereafter, when these Persons and their Books be
extinct? For most that are wrote against them are sticht Pamphlets, now they
re-print theirs in Volumes, and so preserve them to Posterity, to defame this
Generation and their Religion, and thereby exalt themselves and their Errors.
And as I said before, S. E. did not deny they had the Infallible Spirit in
them, but owns it; but does deny that that Spirit should do and say all that
Saints do or say, and should judge for them both, for persons and of things
after an Infallible manner; and that they should neither say, nor do, nor judge
any thing by any understanding of their own, but the Spirit; all this we deny,
says S. E. -- And farther, says he, So far as we judge according to this word,
(of Christ) our Judgment becomes Infallible; and so we may speak of Peoples
present condition with much certainty -- (but says he) in reference to their
future, final state, we must leave them to the Judgment of God. And
correspondent with this humble Christian does W. Thomas say. But this would not
serve G. F. but to oppose this S. E. and says, p. 5. Which is contrary to the
Apostles, who says, as many as are the Sons of God, are led by the Spirit of
God, and Christ acts all in them, and for them -- and that is it which leads
the Saints to divide and discern all things both Spiritual and Temporal. Now
here you may see, although G. F. does not ascribe Infallibility to his Flesh
and Bone, yet he pretends its the Infallible Spirit guides him and them in all
they do or say; for it is that this S. E. disowns, and G. F. opposes him. And
although G. F. does, as above, falsely quote him, as saying, That within them is
not Infallible, etc. yet but three lines lower himself quotes him allowing all
Saints have the Spirit in them, which is Infallible; therefore such a false
Accuser as G. F. needs a better memory: For its not the having of the
Infallible Spirit, that this S. E. denies, but, as he also says in page 2.
Though there be the same Spirit in Saints that gave forth Scripture, yet all
Saints have not the same Inspiration as the Prophets and Apostles had, so as
they should he able to give forth Infallible Truths, and immediately discover
the pure and clear will of God, as the Prophets and Apostles did. This compared
with what is just before, shows he allowed enough for any Christian, although it
would not serve G. F. but he and his wicked false Spirit must be as God (...).
And this S. E. says, page 30. The Spirit that they call Christ within them,
speaking and acting all Infallible that they do or say; and that it is not they,
but Christ and the Spirit within them. Says S. E. Now it does appear it is a
Spirit of Delusion, because it contradicts both Christ and the Scriptures. And
although G. F. does not here ascribe Infallibility to his Flesh and Bone, yet
he does imply that all he said and did, was by that Infallible Spirit in him;
and so this and all other his untruths, are not his, but his Infallible Spirit
within, which was Infallibly a wicked one. And this shows G. W. a mere Quibbler
in his Pretenses about G. F. assuming Infallibility, as if it were only a
knowing by looks or outward appearance, or, as he falsely says, by a Spirit of
Discerning given to some in the Church. But that, as I have showed, was allowed
G. F. yet it would not content him; and the Objections are not made against the
possibility of such a Gift, but against the Saints or Ministers of the Gospel
in general having it, and G. F. etc. themselves in particular, which he, G. F.
did, in opposition to them, maintain they had. And for your shameless Quibble,
that G. F. did not ascribe Infallibility to Persons but as influenced by the
Spirit; it is fully proved he has by blaming others, as I have showed it,
ascribed it to themselves as Persons; and who of you that are not Infallible,
are by his Doctrine Conjurers, False Prophets, and Diviners: But that is also
but a pitiful Evasion, as I aforesaid, although he does not ascribe it to his
Flesh and Bone, yet he does pretend he was acted by that, and that which spoke
and acted by or through him, was Christ, or the Infallible Spirit; and as you
say in your Discoverer, etc. He gave the Name Christ to something in him. And
it is justly come on him to be detected of so many Untruths and false
Accusations of Men, and perverting and mangling their words and sense, (and
making them speak Nonsense) as a warning to others, not to be so presomptious;
for I think this his Great Mystery, etc. is the greatest Mystery of Wickedness
this Age has produced of a Book. And his, G. F's. Errors and Falseness is not
easily found out by reading only his own Writings or Sayings, for he writes so
fallaciously, seldom plainly affirming or denying, but in a double, two-fac'd,
loose way, mostly by Queries; that it is difficult to know his meaning, so as to
prove a thing against him; but by reading those Men's Writings whom he opposes,
his drift is better understood than by his own, for they, like honest
Christians, plainly affirm and deny, which he seldom does. And therefore who
would fully and truly understand G. F. etc. their Principles, they must read
their Opponents Books. But for this Great Mystery, it is so false in Fact, that
I fear many more of theirs be of the same kind, if strictly examined by
understanding Persons, capacitated for so great and serviceable a Work; for I
think it is of great Concernment to the whole Nation, especially who take on
them Care and Cure of Souls; and it is observable, where ever G. F. so highly
pleads for his Infallibility against those humble Christians, who honestly
acknowledge they have it not, (as the Apostles) he, G. F. in the same place,
and with the same Persons, is guilty of some more than usual Falsity, as I have
in this and other Instances showed; indeed he has abundantly proved the
Fallibility and Wickedness of himself and Spirit, and not only as to himself,
but as the same Spirit does influence and guide the now High Priest, and the
other Chief Priests, who Rule now among these Foxonian Quakers; who, although
they may alter their terms or words about our Lord Jesus, as they do about
their Infallibility, yet that is no Evidence of their altering their Judgment;
and as the Infallibility of them and their Spirit is gone, so is also their
Perfection; for neither they nor their Spirit is no more Perfect than
Infallible, which is not at all, but on the contrary false and Fallible. I
could give you a whole Book of Proofs of their Pretenses to Infallibility, but
these are enough to show them and their Spirit's wickedness and falseness.

Also to further manifest the wickedness of these Foxonian Chief Priests,
whereas I quoted G. F. opposing T. M. and saying, And so all be in the fancy
who be out of the state of Witnessing Christ (that suffered) within them, p.
131. Now, they in their Discoverer, etc. p. 21. make that G. F's. intent herein
was only, That Christ that suffered without, to be revealed within them; but G.
F. mentions not the words without, nor revealed, as they do: Nor did this T. M.
oppose that, for, says he in his Antidote, page 32. The same Jesus that is in
our Nature in that Body then and there prepared for him, set down -- in Heaven;
even he, that Person, that is Personally absent from Believers, is dwelling in
their hearts by Faith of and in him. This G. F. quotes as an Error, and says in
Opposition to him, But the Saints in the Light receive Christ the hope of
Glory, and so he is not absent from them, p. 135. Now, although T. M. does own
Christ in them by Faith, yet that will not serve G. F. but he opposes T. M's.
saying, That Person that is Personally absent, etc. And in Opposition, says G.
F. So he is not absent from them; and therefore this implies he, G. F. owned no
other Personal Jesus but that is in him, and did intend and mean hereby to
contemn and undervalue our Lord Jesus of Nazareth his Sufferings without us,
(for can he dwell in their Hearts by Faith, and not be revealed within them)
and it was not his being revealed within would satisfy G. F. who not only
opposes the Truth, but in citing T. M's. words in his 135 page does by him
there, as his usual manner was; he here also leaves out, and adds, and of forty
words takes but eight, and adds the word Christ; and cutting the Sentence in
two, leaves out the most material words, and takes a few out of the middle of
the Sentence. Now from all these judge ye who is wicked; T. C. in forgetting an
insignificant Parenthesis and and, or G. F. in thus wickedly abusing, mangling,
perverting, adding, and diminishing men's words; falsely accusing and belying
them, and these Foxonian Chief Priests, in excusing and covering his Errors?
And who most deserves the Pillory, T. C. or they, who Forge and Print false
Accusations against T. C. to defame him, and cover their own wickedness.

And in my former Discovery, etc. I cited G. F. saying, page 131. All be in the
Fancy that he out of the state of Witnessing Christ (that suffered) within
them. Now G. F. has the word and, at the beginning of this Sentence, which I
left out as useless, and the Parenthesis I over-looked, but neither of them are
of stress, nor did I leave them out to wrong his sense, nor did I make any
Observations on those words, only cited them; but these Foxonian Chief Priests
take great occasion against me therefrom, and say, It Is very unfair if
designed; and nothing less than my Plea of Ignorance, or want of Understanding,
will excuse ^e with them from being therein guilty of great wickedness. This is
already spoken to, page 18; but now having T. M's. Book before me, in Answer to
whom those aforesaid words of G. F's. be, who in his 131 page brings in T. M.
thus saying. And the Righteousness of God wrought by Christ for us, which need
not be wrought over again in us: And then G. F. Answers, Whosoever has not
Christ within, are Reprobates; and whosoever has Christ within, has the
Righteousness. Now here G. F. does endeavor falsely to represent T. M. as
opposing Christ or his Righteousness being within the Saints, which T. M. does
not, as I shall show. He, T. M. does say in the next leaf, page 61. So that
though they Preach the same Jesus that is in them, and in and to them (being
received by Faith) the hope of glory, etc. Now, hereby it is evident T. M. did
not oppose or deny Christ being in them, as G. F. falsely represents him; and so
by his Answer opposes his own Imagination, and proves himself a Perverter: But
that is not all, he is guilty of much worse wickedness in this very place than
that they make me so wicked for; for T. M's. words be thus, in his Answer to J.
N. Says he, Not caring how full he (J. N.) make his acknowledgment of the
Righteousness of God wrought in the Death and Resurrection of that Person
(Jesus) in that Personal Body, if the Works of Redemption and Righteousness
therein wrought, be not asserted and understood to be therein f^^ished, and
made Perfect in him for us, so as they need not to be wrought over again in us.
Now, of T. M's. 50 words, G. F. takes but 20, and cuts off the Sentence, and
takes out these most material words, the Death and Resurrection of that Person
in that Personal Body, if the Works of Redemption -- therein -- be not asserted
and understood to be therein finished, and made perfect in him for us. All
these he, G. F. leaves out in the middle, but steals out from the midst of
them, where the strokes be, these two words, viz. Righteousness and wrought,
and changes T. M's. word in into by, and for the word Person he puts Christ.
Behold now according to these Foxonian Priests own Judgment what mangling work
here is, which is no part of a good Christian, and grossly misrepresented,
abused, misquoted, curtailed, and misapp(...)d Passages. But of this enough to
show his corrupt dealing, in abusing a Man, but Mali^^ abounding, etc. And as
they say, page 18. by my consent (their Servant E. Bennington) shall stand on
F. (...) Pillory with his Masters next time as a false Accuser, when there is
any room for him there. This is their own Judgment and (...)ge vented against
me, because I discover the wickedness of these Foxonian Chief Priests; and much
more such Rage and Slanders do they foam out falsely against me, which I shall
not mind, only to show their Partiality: But I would not be guilty of such
gross wickedness as this G. F. is for much, especially if they were to have the
Punishing of me; but they do sufficiently show the Fallibility of their Spirit,
although their Pride will not let them acknowledge it. But to (...) to G. F's.
abuse of T. M. It Is evident it was the efficacy and value of the (...) and
Obedience of our Lord Jesus that T. M. pleads for; and that he opp(...) was, as
he says, page 56. Taking away from us the Personal Sufferings of (...) in his
own Body, and the infinite and abiding Virtues of them for our help, and (...)g
in the room of it his (i. e. J. N's.) imaginary or fancified Christ or Light in
Men. This and much more that he says as the very words G. F. cites, proves,
viz. which need not be wrought over again in as, show it was not Christ's being
manifest within that T. M. opposed, nor that G. F. principally intended. But G.
F. was tormented, and raged because our Lord Jesus, his Person and sufferings
without us, was preferred (before his, G. F's. Spirit or Light, as in the work
of our Salvation.) Although he dare not deny, yet sidelongly misrepresents T.
M's. Doctrine; as farther, he brings in T. M. saying, And that Christ our
Justification should be in us, that dyed and suffered, that ascended, this
(says G. F.) he calls a fancy, to fancy him in a particular Person. But T. M's.
words in page 59. are thus, (speaking of J. N.) Does he not mean (says T. M.) a
receiving the apprehension of the same Jesus that was in that particular Body,
to be in a like manner in our particular Personal Bodies, bearing sin in us,
rising for our Justification, ascending and appearing in the Presence of God
for us, and all this in us, (as in that Person) and this fancy of the same
Jesus in their particular Persons (as once in that one Body) working the same
works of Salvation over again in us. Now, of T. M's. 70 words, G. F. takes but
24, and changes the word Jesus into Christ, and adds the words dyed and
suffered, and leaves out the most material words, as in like manner in our
Bodies, bearing sin in us, rising for our -- appearing in the Presence of God
for us, and all this in us (as in that Person) and this of the same Jesus as
once in that one Body. All this he leaves out, and steals out of these where
the strokes are these words, Person, Justifications, Fancy; and then G. F.
Answers as before, And so all be in the fancy that be out of the state of
Witnessing Christ (that suffered) within them, and rose again. Now my opposers
say, because I left out the Parenthesis, I represent G. F. as undervaluing the
Sufferings of Christ, etc. and that his Sufferings were within Man only. In
Answer, I say, G. F. is guilty enough of undervaluing of our Lord Jesus of
Nazareth and his Sufferings; but that in this place he did mean his Sufferings
were within Man only, I do not think he did so mean, and I believe no body else
did so think of G. F. as from these words; therefore that is but their own
wilful Forgery, on purpose to defame me. And whereas they further falsely
insinuate as if G. F. only meant That Christ who suffered without, to be
revealed within. Were it only so, I see no harm in it, but it is apparent his
design was deeper, because as I have before showed, T. M. did not oppose but
allow that; but it was the being of the same Jesus in their particular Persons
or Bodies, as in his own Person, to be in like manner, as once in that one Body
working the same works over again in them, etc. It was Jesus his being and
working thus in them which T. M. opposed, and G. F. by his opposing him herein
does imply is, as also his saying he was equal with God, and as he is so are
we; and his Devilling and Reprobating C. W. for confessing Salvation by our
Lord Jesus without him. And much more of his opposing this sound Doctrine does
show he did contemn and undervalue our Lord and his Sufferings, although he
does not make them to be in these words, within Man only.

And (...) further Proof of the wickedness of these Foxonians, I find G. F.
again at his old Trade of abusing and mangling words, and not only so, but
opposing the Dignity and Worth of our Lord Jesus his Sufferings in his own
Person: For page 136. he says, T. M. says, That Christ is distinct from every
one of us, and without us in our particular Persons. Now, page 61. T. M. says
to J. N. thus: Do not thou herein signify that the end of thy Message -- was
to Preach down that Person, and those Works wrought and finished in that Person
in his own Body, as distinct from every one of us, and without us in our
particular Persons, which the Apostle said, shall remain in the Essence of the
Person -- with the Father for ever. Now, of T. M's. 40 words G. F. takes but
16, and changes his word Person into the word Christ, and leaves out all the
most material words, wickedly misrepresenting T. M. as opposing Christ's being
in his People, and as if that were the chief matter of their difference, as by
his Answer, the Apostle said, Christ was in them, etc. Which, as I have showed,
this T. M. did own, and not deny; therefore G. F. herein is not only a perverse
Disputer, but very fallacious; for by the word Person, which T. M. uses so
often, and G. F. leaves out, he means our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, etc. For it
was the denial of him and the works wrought and finished in that one Person in
his own Body without us, etc. All these G. F. leaves out; and it was not, as I
before showed, Christ's being in them, but the contemning the Sufferings of our
Lord Jesus in his own Person and Body, that this T. M. opposes J. N. for, and
does assert the Dignity and abiding Worth and Merit of them for Salvation, in
Opposition to any thing wrought in any Man, as G. F. himself quotes him,
saying, They need not be wrought over again in us. I find by farther reading T.
M's. Books, that it was as I said, not Christ being in the Saints, as Scripture
holds, for that this T. M. opposed J. N. in, but J. N's. preferring the Works
of the Light or Spirit within his Flesh or Person, to the Works wrought and
finished in and by the Person our Lord Jesus in his own Person, or Body
distinct from and without us. This was the chief matter in debate between J. N.
and T. M. and in Vindication of the Value and Dignity of our Lord's Sufferings
as without us in his own Person distinct from us, did he, T. M. make those
Ass(...)ons, which G. F. does oppose him in, and therein does undervalue our
Lords Sufferings as without, although he does not make them to be within only,
yet his drift is to undervalue and contemn them. And now I find their
wickedness in pretending that G. F. meant, That Christ, who suffered without,
should be revealed within us, as they say, page 21. Discoverer, etc. No, I find
that was no part of the Controversy, but about the Value and Dignity of our
Lord Jesus of Nazareth his Personal Sufferings and Righteousness in his own
Person, which this T. M. did magnify, in opposition to J. N's. Preaching them
down, and magnify and exalt something in themselves in room thereof: And I now
find it apparently that G. F. as well as J. N. did here intend to undervalue
the Person, Blood, and Sufferings of our Lord Jesus, although not publish that
Christ's Sufferings were within man only; for you may allow he did suffer
without, but that does not excuse G. F's. contempt of his Sufferings, as you
allow his Blood was shed, but allow it to be no more than the Blood of another
Saint, and so his Person and Sufferings; and although you pretend a high value
for the Blood of Christ, it is not that Blood of the Body of that Man and Person
our Lord Jesus of Nazareth that you mean, but such a Person, and such Blood as
J. N. and G. Fox had in them; for says G. F. They eat his Flesh, and drank his
Blood, then it was within them, etc. p. 136. But could the Apostle Paul be
present in Spirit, although absent in Body, and cannot our Lord Jesus his Flesh
and Blood likewise? Take the Pillory to your selves, there is no room for T. C.
nor would he be which such a cursed Company, who Preach another Gospel, and
trample under foot the Precious Blood of the Cross of our dear Lord Jesus of
Nazareth, making it no more than the Blood of another Saint, and therein worse
than the Blood of Beasts, for that as shed in Sacrifice, according to the
Lord's Appointment, sanctified as to the Purifying of the Flesh, which the
Blood of a Saint could not do.

Here is a great deal of Wickedness as well as Envy against me manifest in this
one Passage more than I can discover; but I hope the Lord will raise up some
more abler to detect their Wickedness, and defend the true Faith; for indeed
they are so Rich and Numerous, that without a Miracle it is not likely such
inconsiderable Persons as G. K. E. B. and my self should be able to carry on so
great a Work; for by their strength of Purse and Persons, and Interest they
have so spread their Erroneous Books, they have great Advantage, and Truth
suffers; but I am not out of hopes but that our Lord Jesus and the true Faith
shall and will overcome, whatever my Lot may be from them who take such a small
and causeless occasion to revile me, when themselves are guilty in such an
abominable degree: This shows that if they had Power they would be as kind to
me as they were to the poor Lad they cruelly whipped for throwing a little dirt
or dust on one of them. And for further Proof of their contempt of our Lord
Jesus of Nazareth, his Blood and Sufferings, I find they in Pensilvania charge
G. K. with Heresy, and for Proof of their Charge bring his saying, The Light
within was not sufficient to Salvation without something else; and he, G. K.
explains, that by something else he means the Man Christ Jesus, and what he did
and suffered without us, yet they persist in condemning him as an Heretic; and
this shows the falseness of their Pretense, that it is not for or about his
Doctrine, that they deny him: See this more at large in a Book, entitled,
Heresy and Hatred, etc. by G. K. Printed in Pensilvania. In which Book, page
3. it is said, that when G. K. desired them to prove him guilty of Heresy by
Scripture, S. Jennings answered, They were not to prove it from Scripture, but
from Friends Books; for the Question was not, who was the best Christian, but
who was the best Quaker. So that by their own Rule, the best Christian is not
the best Quaker, nor the best Quaker the best Christian; but a good Christian
and a good Quaker are two several and distinct Persons or things. And hereby
they show that they prefer Quakeris^ and their own Books before the Scriptures
and Christianity, although G. W. has the confidence to say, They prefer the
Scriptures before any other Books. But in this and other things he is proved
guilty of bearing false Witness: For had W. Penn, and the rest of their Chief
Priests of the last Yearly Meeting been good Christians, they would have
condemned their Brethren, S. Jennings, etc. (who condemned G. K. for Heresy)
and vindicated, G. K. and his Doctrine; but that they dare not do, for then
they must condemn G. Fox and themselves also. And although they have given so
many Hellish Names to the Ministers in general, and some others G.W. in Print
calls Devils, Dogs, Wolves, Devils Incarnate, etc. See New Rome Arraigned, etc.
Yet these People have the Face to complain in Print because they are termed
Quakers, as in their Book, entitled, West answering to the North, etc. G. Fox
and two more in a Warrant for their Commitment, are styled Quakers; and
although their Names and places of abode is also expressed in the Warrant, yet
they are so offended at those terms, Who go under the Name of Quakers, and
acknowledge themselves to be such, that they say in their page 8. He who
distinguishes (whatever he be, Judge or Justice) a Generation of Men under one
and the same Government from the rest, and puts upon them a hateful Name of
distinction and reproach, whereby they and others are set in Opposition, breaks
the Peace -- overthrows the end of the Law -- and leads into War and every evil
work, -- for from (...) very distinguishing of Men, and branding them with
terms of Reproach, was the War brought forth, etc. -- And such an one is an
evil doer in a high degree, to whom the Sword of the Magistrate of God -- is a
terror, and on whom it is to pass, etc. Much more such exclamations in the
whole Book of 170 Pages they make, filling it with trivial ^^ssages, as of a
rude Jaylor's bidding them kiss, and put their Noses into his Breec(...) and
such silly sluff; and in the Title Page of this Book say they, The fierce and
cruel Persecution of the manifestation of the Son of God, unheard of and
inhumane Sufferings of G. Fox, etc. Also in the Warrant for their Commitment,
after some Misdemeanors are alleged as cause for their Commitment, it is said,
they refuse to take the Oath of Abjuration, etc. Now after they, G. F. etc. had
exclaimed against their being termed Quakers, of the Justice, say they, He is a
shame to the Government; and say they of him, After he had mustered up his
black Troops of Lies -- to destroy the Innocent -- it to accomplish by a
Familiar Spirit, he raises up the Ghost of the great Monster et cetera, whose
Mouth is as large as Hell, etc. who was begotten by the late Bishops on the
Whore of Babylon, and damned by the Parliament, with that whole Generation that
brought it forth, of whom it was the sudden destruction Root and Branch, etc.
p. 15. (Much more such I could cite out of this Book, but I believe they will
think this enough.) But if it be such a damnable sin in this Justice to use one
et caetera, how will they damn me, who have used so many et caetera's in
Controversy with them? Can any one Copy out their own Condemnation more
exacter and effectually than these, G. F. etc. have done theirs, by this before
exclaiming against others for calling them Quakers, and putting et cetera into
their Mittimus. For if their Persecuting by Fine, and Imprisoning R Bradford,
and taking away his Working-Tools in Pensilvania; also their Prosecuting of F.
Bugg by Indictment, as Seditious, and for Scandal or Desaming them, and
Printing without License, and complaint against him to the Secretary of State,
when themselves greatly guilty of the same Crimes they falsely and maliciously
prosecuted F. Bugg for. I say, these truly considered, they, the Foxonian
Quakers, have manifested themselves as unjust, and as great Offenders as this
Justice they so exclaim against, and their Proceedings as unchristian, and
deserving Punishment more than what they so complain of. And if they be not
Self-condemned Apostates, there is none in this Age; for these Actions of
theirs be much worse than terming them Quakers, and using the word et caetera,
which they so damn and the users thereof. I shall not trouble you with
Observations hereon, there needs little, only I mind how they here also
endeavor to magnify and exalt their own Sufferings, to undervalue them of our
Lord and the Apostles and Martyrs, as is before showed by E. B. And if it be
such a heinous Crime, and so punishable, to term them Quakers, how much more
guilty and punishable are they by their own Judgment, who have so grossly
distinguished by hateful names and terms of Reproach, Magistrates and
Ministers, and other Christians, as is a fore shown, it deserves to be taken
notice of. I find their Books stufft with such base Insinuations and
Defamations of almost all People, that the chief drift of them seems to be to
render the New Testament and the true Faith in our Lord Jesus, and the
Ministers and Professors thereof Infamous and worse than the Papists, and are
so bold to advise and direct to the taking away and destroying of Property: Let
their own above (...)ence or Judgment be considered, and if 2d. of Romans be
true, they are inexcusable. I have much more of the wickedness of G. F. and his
Spirit to publish, but must abbreviate; but God permitting, I may carry on the
Essay to allay G. F 's. Spirit; therefore it is convenient that they who have
that one Sheet, keep it and this also, to add to what I farther Print. And it is
no wonder they defa^^ G. K. F. B. and my self, seeing our Lord Jesus himself,
the Scriptures, Laws, Magistrates, and Ministers, and all Christendom, have not
escaped their contempts. Now, G. W. and W. P. to try you by your own Laws, If
the Sword of the Magistrate of God, etc. is to pass on such as put hateful
Names of Reproach on Men, then how think you to escape? For your own Judgment
is in general terms, Whoever he be. For here is more of your Envious terms
given to the Ministry in general; as Conjurers, raising dead Doctrines out of
the Letter, which is Death; notable Conjurers, Thieves, Robbers, Antichrists,
Priests of Baal, -- cannot show any Scripture for their beastly Worship,
Witches, Devils, Liars -- Stewards of the Devil's Magazine, Dissemblers, a
Viperous and Serpentine Generation, going about to murder and strangle the
Child Jesus, Blasphemers -- yea, of the Devil, Scarlet-colour'd Beasts --
selling beastly Ware -- the Letter, which is Dust and Death -- greedy Dogs,
really they are Bloodhounds, still hunting and gasping after their Prey, like
the mouth of Hell, barking and raging like Sodomites, of the Devil -- woe is
the Portion of the upholders of that Generation. And ask W. Crouch, if he did
not give large Money, and promised more, if he could have effected his Revenge
on F. B. to have his Book burnt: Yet notwithstanding they are guilty of all
this Wickedness, they are so far from acknowledging, or asking God Pardon, that
they Banter others, saying, Alas, poor Souls! are you not at Have mercy on us,
miserable sinners, etc. from 7 to 70. Truth exalted, p 9. by the High Priest W.
Penn. But this his Pride rather bespeaks him to be one of them forward Children
which are past Grace, than an humble Christian; and W. P. if thou art not come
back to Lord have mercy on me, miserable sinner since then, thou art a poor and
miserable wretch. Now I have discovered so much of their wickedness, I expect
they will damn me worse than they have done the Bishops and Justice (for
terming them Quakers, and using the et caetera, for surely they are the fierce
Despisers foretold of) but I am not afraid of the whole Host of them, if they
Curse me, as G. W. has done G. K. and Blasphemously put to it, as he, G. W.
did, Thus says the Lord: And as W. P. did foam out his Rage against G. K.
saying, He pronounced him an Apostate in the Name of the Lord. For as long as
you continue in this wicked Luciferian false Spirit, I had rather be cursed
than blessed by you; for what Concord has Christ and Belial? But as G. F.
says, I am not the Man that gives out things to lay open wickednesses, but that
Men my take warning, and fear, and come to know themselves.

THOMAS CRISPE.

London: Printed, and are to be Sold by John Gwillam within Bishopsgate. 1695.


