An Essay toward the Allaying of George Fox his Spirit.
CHristian Friend, I desire that my Imperfections, nor these Quakers revilings
may not prejudice thee, against the impartial and serious reading of this
Discovery, for they cannot represent me a greater sinner than (I thank God) I
think my self to be, but they by their villifying of me show the weakness of
their cause and the wickedness of their spirits; for the controversy between us
is not what T. C. is, but whether or no G. Fox, etc. have printed so as I
charge them, and whether or no those Expressions objected against by me be not
unchristian and contemptable; if they be not, then I have wronged them, but if
they be the product of Ignorance or worse, then the Authors thereof were false
Prophets, Diviners and Conjurers by G. Fox's own judgment in print. I desire
you only to judge of the Tree by its fruit, and remember that although the poor
Ass was beat by the mad, angry and covetous Prophet, yet the poor Ass saw the
Angel when he did not. These Quakers charge me for short quoting of G. F's
words, of which fault G. F. is herein proved grossly guilty: My charge was not
on the Quakers in general, but particular Persons, which I distinguished from
christian Quakers by the Term of Foxonian Quakers, but others by covering and
justifying the wicked have made themselves guilty, and this Discovery is not
uncovering of Nakedness, but warranted by their own practice and in print. This
is not in Answer to the High Priest's Servant Ed. Pennington.

AS is said in Acts. 8. so it has been in these days, there was a Man called
G. Fox, into whom a Spirit entered, giving out that himself was some great One,
to whom most of the Quakers gave heed, saying, This is the great power of God,
and having in his life, and also since his death, extolled this G. Fox above
what they ought, W. P. especially, saying, Many have done well, but thou Dear
George excellest them all, but it was in self-exalting and abusing others, and
having contemned Water-baptisme, Lord's Supper and the Scriptures, he invents
an Image of Female-prelates in their Church, and these his chief Priests make
an Idol thereof, and deck it with high Titles, as the great and good Ordinances
of Jesus Christ, which he has set up in his Church, and he G. F. says to these
Women when so met by his Order about the 10th. hour of the day, G. F. says,
whose mouth the Lord opens in the Women's meeting to praise him, they are to be
obedient, as if the Lords opening their mouths were not sufficient without his
license, and of this Image they have in print also since his death, with other
of his Appointments said, You know Friends that all the meetings men's and
Women's, etc. were set up by the Power, Spirit and wisdom of God, so
indespensable Duties as they say, in the room of them two, Water-baptisme and
the Lord's -supper. I considering the evil consequences of these things, and
knowing by the rule given in Scripture, (viz. That the Tree may be known by its
fruit) that this Spirit of theirs is not of Christ but that Man of Sin, who
exalts himself above all that is called God, etc. I say, these considerations
me to discover ^o others the fruits of the Spirit of G. F. in hopes that many
amongst them who be honest would condemn those Wickednessess, and so clear
themselves thereof; for indeed although they charge me with Envy, etc. God
knows its false, for they are to me many of them, as St. Paul says the Jews
were to him, and I never had any prejudice against any of them, but know they
exalted themselves too much and despised others, as the proud Pharisees,
excusing their Contempts of our Lord Jesus of Nazareth his sufferings and
blood, and the Scriptures, Magistrates, and almost all Christians ever since
the Apostles to the worlds end, except themselves, and this I have in print
proved, and in this and other their wickedness they are uncharitable and
unchristian, and scandalous to the protestant Religion, especially England, and
if they do own the true Faith and Scriptures, and our Lord Jesus of Nazareth
truly, they must condemn and disown them printed Expressions tending to the
contrary; for the Matter in controversy is not what thy now say they believe,
but about what is in print from G. Fox, and others their chief Rulers and
Teachers, whom they give these high Titles to, and write such Epistles and high
Commendations of them and their Writings, as will more fully be made appear W.
P. and many more of them have done of and to G. Fox and others, considering W.
P's great power in Pensilvania, and great interest in all the Quakers in
England and elsewhere, and influence over them, I think they may be 100000 and
1000 of them preachers, and may have 1000 Meetings in England, Scotland,
Ireland and Wales, and I fear W. P's influences 80000 of them; so that what
Interest, Doctrine or Men he espouses is most likely to prevail, Experience
have proved the truth of this, but they are but sowing their Seed now, but the
full Crop and effect of these their evil Labors may not be known in this Age,
and indeed many of their printed Expressions are so contemptious of our Lord
Jesus of Nazareth, that the Jews or Mahometans may from them take great
advantages to deny the New Testament in part, saying, Your new Testament says,
That him whom our Rulers killed was the Savior, and that they by wicked hands
slew him; but the Quakers says, what was done to him was done by Law, and in a
great part by due execution of a Law; also they say the Jews never see the
World's Savior, your New Testament says, that Jesus with his own blood shed
without the gate sanctifies the People, but these Quakers say his Blood was no
more than the Blood of another Saint. Excused by G. W. as in G. K's paper.

Their Scripture accuse our Rulers for cruelty to Jesus of Nazareth and his
Disciples, when as you are more cruel to them, as they say, and these Quakers
say, His Disciples loved his person for the sake of the frame, and quality of
the Spirit that dwelt in him, or else what is his person more than another
person: But our Rulers did not condemn him for saying the Son of God was in his
prepared Body, but because he said of himself he was the Son of God, for they
meddled with nothing in that body, only a Soldier with his sphere let out some
of his blood, which these Quakers say was no more than the blood of another
Saint, therefore your New Testament seems by these their printed Doctrines to
charge our Rulers too hardly in saying of him whom they took down from the Tree
and laid in the Sepulcher -- That through this Man his preaching Remission of
Sins, and that by him all that believe are justified, but by their Doctrine it
seems to us that Man our Rulers crucified was but a Garment or Vessel that
Christ dwelt in saying, The same Christ therein crucified ascended into Heaven,
but they meddled with nothing within that body, nor laid no hands on Christ, as
your New Testament charges them.

Indeed I have not capacity to express how destructive to the new Testament
Doctrine many printed Expressions of G. Fox's, W. P. G. W. etc. are or may be,
besides what formerly published, see more now published by G. K. in a book
entitled A true Copy of a Paper, etc. from page 17 to the end, I say if the
Enemies of the Christian Religion should but take the advantage of their
printed Contempts they may be of ill consequence, and hinder the propagation of
the christian Faith, as in the new Testament, if not to the subversion thereof.

But if any object, why should these Quakers now living be blamed, for the
Errors (of the dead) seeing they say they believe rightly in Jesus Christ. I
do believe many of them are not so guilty as them who wrote those Errors, but
it may be doubted that few of them are sound in the Faith, if we may judge by
their dubious and too-faced expressions thereabouts; also their great enmity
against G. K. and others for preaching and defending it, and if they do truly
believe than they should disown them printed Errors of G. Fox, etc. or else
they are likely to remain and poison more people hereafter, and much more
dangerous than verbal Preaching, for that usually reaches no other than the
present hearers, but printed books are for posterity also; especially
considering what Monuments of high praises they have printed of G. Fox; and
others the broachers of them; But the reason why they so strive to excuse and
cover, and will not disown G. Fox's errors is not commonly understood; for he
having arrogated to himself to be moved and guided by the infallible Spirit,
and no less than equallity with God and Christ, and they having owned his
inventions or dictates, as from God immediately, and his Writings allowing to
be Titled The Word of the Lord, and yet called Blasphemy to term the Scripture
so; nay, D. S. a christian Quaker did but propose to have some Amendments or
Corrections of his and others Errors they exceedingly reviled him in print,
and give a caution to whom presume (mind that) to amend what they apprehend
offiensive, least they be found touching the Lord's Anointed, as to hurt his
Prophets, Thus you may see the high value they put on G. F. etc: and indeed I
question not but it will appear to the the impartial that G. Fox's spirit is
the Foundation or chief Cornerstone of their Buildining, and if that prove
fallible and erroneous, (as is proved) than their building of Church Power must
fall; therefore it is as I fear that so many wise Men having been deceived by
this false Spirit, they cannot deny themselves and take up their cross to
acknowledge it, but whether their Reputation or the Authority of the New
Testament be of most advantage or concernment to the Protestant Interest, let
the true Christians judge. And let but these Quakers consider their Dealings to
and with G. K. and the Reason they give therefore, i. e. they enjoin in him to
clear them of those Errors charged on the Brethren-preachers in Pensilvania,
but these Errors of theirs in print are of greater concernment, therefore by
the same rule they ought (to clear the protestant Religion) to condemn and
disown these printed contempts of our Lord Jesus, the Scriptures and
Magistrates, and all Christendom almost ever since the Apostles to the end of
time, more especially considering how the endeavor by high Commendations in
print to exalt this G. Fox, as the only or chief Luminary of this Age, whereby
they are so far from disowning his Errors that they thereby do more
effectually spread them, than if twenty of the ablest of them went all over
England preaching the same, and so far as this contemptious and self-exalted
spirit prevails, so much must the true Faith decline, and is undiscernable
under mined by their so extolling G. F. as they have done in print, in a
Journal and Preface thereto in Folio, the folly and wickedness thereof will in
time appear, and I have warrant from themselves for my discovering them, for
they say in print The only way to recover the Deceived is to discover the
Deceivers, and for their shuffling in among their Errors some sound
Expressions its for their Advantage, if you consider they must be very silly
Cheats that intend to deceive with false Coin if they should not put some Good
among the Bad, but although the Good be good yet that does not make the Bad
good.

And pray take notice that the matter now in controversy is not so much what
these Modern Quakers say they now believe but about those printed Errors, for
if these believe otherways than they must condemn and disown them, but they
contrariwise excuse and cover them, and thereby make themselves guilty and
chargeable with them, but I having printed a Discovery of some of G. Fox's
errors, and for brevity sake I took his Sentences short, but not willingly to
wrong his Sense, but they to excuse him pretend I have abused him, by my short
citation, but I shall have an Opportunity to cite them at large, wherein I
doubt not but it will appear that they falsely accuse me; but seeing they so
revile me for short Quotations, by the same rule if they be guilty of the same
Fault they deserve the same punishment and more abundantly, in as much as I
acknowledge my self a fallible sinner, for which they have banterr'd me, as G.
Fox, have done other Christians; therefore the chief end of these following
Citations is to show how grossly wicked G. Fox was in short and false quoting
and perverting Men's words and meaning.

G. Fox his false Quotations and pervertions of J. Timson's words in his Book,
The great Mystery, etc. In page 17. G. F. brings J. T. saying, It is an
Expression of a dark deluded mind to say God is not distinct from his Saints,
but J. T.'s words be these, would they counfound God and Man into one, denying
God to be distinct from his Saints, would they renounce all former Teachings
and Practices received from the Lord by the means of his Word and Ordinances,
and wholly follow the Imaginations of a deluded heart; consider are not such
things as these expresses of a dark deluded mind, etc. Now observe J. T.
sentence is above 50 words, and G. F. takes but 10 of them, and transposes them
to, and, its confounding the being of God into one with Man that J. T. opposes,
as in 8th page he says, Is every gift and work of God in Man, God that made all
things, its this confusion J. T. opposes, and not God being by his divine power
in the Soul.

Again page 16. G. F. brings J. T. saying, we (Quakers) have broken the
everlasting Covenant of God, because (says G. F.) we own the Teachings of God
by his spirit and light, etc; but J. T's Reasons why he says they have broken
the everlasting Covenant be these, while you (says he) deny the Ordinances --
you are none of God's Saints but Apostates -- and broken the everlasting
Covenant, whereby its evident J. T. does not say you have broken the
everlasting Covenant because you own God's teaching by his spirit and light,
etc. as G. F. falsely says, but because you deny those Ordinances, for J. T.
does in page 11. own the spirit is the Rule, and in page 47. J. T. says, I have
owned that to the means must be added a divine hand in working effectually upon
the Souls of Men, and G. F. does not only falsely quote the Man's Words, but
falsely Accuse him too. Again, G. F. brings in J. T. saying, its a contradiction
and confused senseless thing to preach the Word of Faith in the Mouth and in the
Heart; but J. T's words be these, In your Answer you say none know the
Scriptures by the outward Declaration but by the Word of Faith in the mouth and
in the heart which we preach, and then says he, I told you that was a senseless
thing -- confused and contradiction, and then J. T. says, I quered you whether
any of you know what is written in Scripture without the outward Declaration,
so that J. T. termed it senseless, etc. to affirm none knew the Scriptures or
what was wrote in them but by the word of Faith in the Mouth and Heart, etc.
but he did not say it was senseless etc. to preach the word of Faith within, as
G. F. falsely says. Again in page 17. says G. F. I. T. says, Its Blasphemy to
say that Christ is in them as God and Man, but J. T. words be these, Its
Blasphemy to say Christ in them by his Person as God and Man, and to deny the
glorified Body of Christ which God had raised from the dead, as the Quakers do,
says J. T. but G. F. leaves out the material Words of J. T's (by his person)
and cut off from the sentence these following words of J. T's and deny his
glorified Person which God has raised from the dead, as the Quakers do: Also in
the same 23d. page, J. T. says they make Christ's sufferings in them make
satisfaction for their sins, and call him a Christ without, a Type, a Figure,
also in page 4. of his Preface J. T. charges them with saying They are as
perfect as Christ that died at Jerusalem, and that they which trust in him for
Salvation shall be deceived, but G. F. takes no notice of all this, but wrongs
the Man's words and sense, by leaving out the middle words and cutting off the
latter part of his sentence, and by opposing J. T. he G. F. seems to own no
other personal Christ but what is in them, and thereby denies our Lord Jesus of
Nazareth to be Christ, for he as God and Man in one person cannot be in them,
and it is such a Man Christ, such Blood and such Sufferings of Christ as is in
them that G. F. means when he mentioned Christ or his Blood and Sufferings,
etc. as further appears by his Answer to those afore-cited words of J. T. says
G. F. How are they of his Flesh and Bone, and does not the Scripture say that
Christ in you, God will dwell in you, and walk in you, and are they not
partakers of divine Nature, therefore it seems by G. F's Doctrine that Christ
had no other Person, Flesh, bone, nor Blood, that was Christ's but what was in
them, and that him whom showed himself to his Disciples, and bid them feel and
handle him saying, a Spirit has not Flesh and Bone as I have is not G. F's
Christ, but a Person God and Man in him, and our Lord Jesus of Nazareth but a
Vessel or Garment in which Christ appeared in, but I can think these Doctrines
of G. F. no less than denying the Lord that bought them, and trampling under
foot the blood of Christ.

Again page 17. G. F. says that J. T. says, its abhorred Dotage they are
bewitched with to say they witness Forgiveness within, but J. T's words be
thus, Does Christ (says he) undergo the stripes of a just God, and shed his
Blood for our Redemption and Forgiveness within you, what abhorred Dotage are
you bewitched with. Here J. T's sentence is twenty six words, and G. F. culls
out six of them and transposes them to make a sentence contrary to J. T's
meaning, for its the Sufferings of Christ being acted within them for our
Redemption that he opposes, but G. F. contrariwise represents him as denying
having the Witness of Forgiveness within, as G. F's answer also shows, for
says he to J. T. thou never knew a Saints life and that which cleanses, and
the Testimony within of forgiveness of Sin, for where its forgiven its forgiven
within, in this G. F. perverts the Man's words and falsely accuses him.

Again G. F. brings J. T. saying, None ever had such Seize of Christ a
Redeemer without the help of Scripture. Now J. T's words be these pages 65, 66.
says he, Themselves are no strangers to those Scriptures that give such
Discoveries of the Person, Natures and Offices of a redeeming Christ that never
any have attained unto and discovered, either by Words or Writings, which never
had nor heard of the help of the Gospel as contained in the Scripture; here J.
T's sentence is 48 Words, and G. F. takes but 8 of them dodging from one place
to another perverting them. Again page 18. G. F. brings J. T. saying, Where did
ever any say they went through the Law to Christ, they be strangers to the Life
of God that say so, but J. T. says thus, Must a sinner go through the Law in
perfect Obedience, until nothing remains to oblige him further, and is this the
way to Christ in whom is Justification only witnessed -- whether I or you be
aleniated from the Life of God as you censure me let the sober judge. Here J.
T's sentence is above 40 words and G. F. takes but 10 of them and transposes
them also, and its the attaining salvation through or by our Obedience, or
fulfilling the Law in our selves that J. T. is against, and G. F. opposes him
perverting his Words.

Again G. F. brings J. T. saying, Christ Jesus was not in all Ages and Places
of the World; but G. F. dishonestly cuts off from his sentence these following
Words, In his Person, Ministry and powerful Workings visibly, herein G. F. is
guilty of mangling and cutting in two the Man's sentence as well as perverting
his sense. Again page 19. G. F. brings J. T. saying, he knows not what, the
true Light, eternal Word, the everlasting Gospel, the Light which gave forth
the Scriptures, the Judge of the World, the Kingdom of Heaven within, the Law
of the New Covenant and Christ within, these says G. F. he knows not, but in p.
84. J. T. having reckoned up all these aforementioned Titles that they give to the
Light within them, then J. T. adds these words, And I know not what, that is,
he knew not what more Titles they dignifie the Light within with, and not as G.
F. falsely says he does not know what those aforementioned things were.

Again p. 246. G. F. brings C. Wade saying, O horrible! to say the infallible
Spirit must open the Scripture, but C. W. speaking of the Pope, etc. taking on
them to open scriptures, and says C. W. The Quakers differ not much, for they
say it must be some Spirit of or in them which they suppose to be infallible, O
horrible insolency! does T. M. hereby (says C. W.) deny the Spirit of God to
give the sense of the Scriptures, does he not deny, the falsle spirit in them
to give the sense of Scriptures, here C. W's sentence is 78 words and G. F.
takes but six of them, transposing them and perverting the sense. Again p. 246.
says G. F. its C. W's principle, flesh and bone cannot be a measure in one and
a measure in another. But C. W. in his 7th. says thus, Christ spiritualized and
glorified Person, of real Flesh and Bone, cannot be part thereof in one Man,
and the other part of his real flesh and bone in other Men, as you falsely
imply, although by his spiritual influences he is in all his Saints. Now C.
W.'s sentence is 42 words, and G. F. takes but 8 of of them and transposes
them, and by opposing C. W. do deny Christ to have or had any flesh or bone as
his, but what they have in them.

Again G. F. says C. W. cries, O Luceferian pride to save Souls. But C. W's
words be to one J. Milner to whom he says, Thou by thy Luceferian pride to save
Souls as Christ did thou must come under the Lash. Now here is C. W's own Answer
to G. F. in print, says he, I do no where say so as thou lyingly affirms, but
do in my 8th. page accuse J. Milner Quaker with Luceferian pride, because he
pretended to be Christ, and audaciously took on him to save Souls, as Christ
did, and his Blood was shed, and that he gave up the Ghost, as Christ did, and
says C. W. I no where accuse any Quakers of saving Souls, but as they pretend
to be Christ, and apply to themselves his Titles to save Souls; and says C. W.
to G. F. This must stand up as a Lie against you.

Again p. 246. G. F. brings C. W. saying, God the Father never took on him
Human Nature; but C. W's Words be thus, God the Father who is and ever was
totally spiritual never took on him any person of Human Nature, as God the Son
has done. Now C. W's sentence is 26 Words, and G. F. takes but 10 of them, and
by opposing of C. W. do imply no difference between the Person of Jesus Christ
and God the Father, and so Christ no more or otherwise a Man, but as God the
Father was, and so consequently if our Lord Jesus of Nazareth was not God the
Father he was not Christ. Again p. 246. G. F. says to C. W. the Scriptures are
not the Word of God, as thou blasphemously affirmed, but in C. W's sense the
Scriptures may be termed the Word of God, for says he, they are the Word or
Words of Christ who is God, but says C. W. p. 13, 14. we do not expect to be
taught by the Letter of the Scripture written with Ink and Paper, but by the
spirit of Christ therewith, and this might have satisfied a Christian that C.
W. did not intend the Scriptures the Word of God, as Christ is, but one would
think by G. F's niceness herein that he were a conscientious humble Man, but
his Fruits proves him otherwise, for in three several places in this Book says
he, This is the Word of the Lord, pages 123. 211. 225. and on a silly, idle,
pamphlet-sheet of his own he clapped on the Title Page This is the Word of the
Lord God unto you all, Luceferian-like exalting himself. Again page 247. G. F.
brings C. W. saying, God limiteth the supreme holy One, by his inspired
Writings of the Apostles; but C. W's Words and Sense are quite contrary to G.
F. for in page 13. says he, As the Devil of old he over-powers you Quakers --
to deny the Scriptures to be any help -- and as he thereby limits the supreme
holy One, so he overrules you, etc. -- In this G. F. is guilty of no less
Error then applying GOD's Name to the Devil, and it may be he has been so
mistaken in his pretenses to the Infallible Spirit. Again p. 247. G. F. brings
C. W. saying, the Scripture contains the immediate inspired Teaching, Written
Word of God, that was and is God. C. W's words being in page 16. The very
Letter of the New Testament or Gospel contains in it the immediate inspired
teaching and written Word of Christ, who was and is God. Now of his 26 Words G.
F. takes but 12, and change his words New Testament for Scripture, and Christ
for God, so representing C. W. as terming the New Testament God, whereas C. W.
says, Christ who was and is God, but of such Falsehoods this Book of G. F's is
full of. Again 247. G. F. brings C. W. saying, Its a Lie to say the Saints
shall judge the World, but in page 21. C. W. says, Thy saying not that thou
shall be, but that thou art the Judge of the world is a Lie, for no Saint can
be a Judge of the World, -- during this their Life of Mortality: Hereby G. F.
does not only falsely accuse C. W. but implys that they (Quakers) are the Judges
of the World.

Again p. 248. G. F. says, that C. W. denies the Son to be revealed in Man only
by Adoption; but C. W. says in p. 24, The Saints are not God's Sons, any
otherway but by Adoption, only by Christ, not as being Christ, as you foolishly
fancy; so that its evident C. W. did not deny the Revelation of Christ in Man,
as G. F. falsely says, but their being Sons as Christ. Again G. F. says that C.
W. cries against Equality with the Father; but pray hear what Equality it is
that C. W. does oppose; in page 24 says C. W. Creature adopted Sons cannot be
equal with the heavenly uncreated Father -- neither can any creature adopted
Sons be equal with God's only begotten Son, and by thy making no reserve or
distinction says C. W. in thy pretended Equality with God shows -- that thou
art a Liar; and G. F. by opposing C. W. does claim Equality with the Father.
Again page 248. G. F. brings C. W. saying, it is a false thing to say Christ's
person is in Man, but C. W's words be page 25. Christ's Person in them God and
Man, but them words God and Man G. F. leaves out. Again page 248. G. F. says C.
W. calls it Satanical to say, as he is so are we in this World. In page 26. C.
W. says, They (Quakers) do declare themselves to be totally without Sin as
Christ is -- Satanically perverting that Scripture -- and affirm, That they are
without Sin in them,as some of them have said in my hearing of themselves.
Again page 249 G. F. brings C. W. saying, no People on Earth go about to save
Souls but the Quakers, C. W's words in page 32, Where is to be found any People
-- as the Quakers in a false way do declare themselves to be Christ, and do
apply to themselves Christ's Titles and take on them to save Souls. Again G. F.
brings C. W. saying, There is not whole Christ God and Man in Man; G. F.
mangles this Sentence by cutting off the latter part of C. W's words, By his
Spirit, by faith. All these false and short Quotations, pervertions and
Untruths aforementioned of G. F's considered, it may be said of him more truly
than as W. P. Many have done wickedly, but thou dear George excels them all.

LONDON, Printed for T. C. and sold by John Gwillim Bookseller within
Bishopgat^, 1695.


