THE COMMISSION FOR DISCOVERIES: As it passed under THE GREAT SEAL OF ENGLAND.

seal or coat of arms showing the cross of St George on one side and a harp on
the other

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb dwelling in Thames Street, over against
Baynards Castle, 1656.

OLIVER, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and the Dominions thereto belonging, To Our Trusty and Welbeloved Ralph Hall,
Peter Elliston of Grays Inn, in our County of Middlesex, John Griffith, Edward
Carey, John Wilsby, William Bridges, and Nathanael Stirrup, Esquires; Greeting.

Whereas, We have been informed, That several Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Arrears of Rents, Debts, Duties, Goods, Chattels, Moneys, Plate, and Jewels,
and other things to a very great value, belonging unto Us, in Right of the
Common weal^h, are by Fraud, Collusion, or otherwise, unjustly concealed or
detained, to the prejudice of the State, and great Diminution of the Public
Revenue;

Whereupon several persons well-affected to the Commonwealth, and to Our
Sevice, are able, ready, and willing, to discover diverse and sundry Manors,
Lands, Tenements, Rents, Arrears of Rents, Debts, Duties, Goods, and Chattels,
Moneys, Plate, and Jewels, and other things so belonging unto Us (not pa^doned)
and unjustly concealed, or detained as aforesaid; if some more speedy and less
chargeable way, and course, then by Bills or Informations in Our Court of
Exchequer, were found out and d^rected, for proving and making good such the r
Discoveries, and they assured to receive some competent Reward and Recompense,
for their service, pains, and charges therein.

And We being willing, that such Persons may receive all due, and fitting
encouragement in a work and service, so advan^agious to the Commonwealth, and
that they or others, whom it may concern (except only such persons as shall
prove very obstinate and refractory) may not be troubled with long and
chargable Suits, upon Bills or Informations to be exhibited in Our said Court
of Exchequer, for discovering such Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents and other
the premises belonging unto us (not pardoned) unjustly concealed or detained
as aforesaid: But that the same may more speedily be seized into Our Hands, and
duly charged in the great Roll of of the Pipe, in Our said Exchequer; Know ye
therefore, That We for the better effecting of this Our Service, have
nominated, constituted and appointed, and by these presents do nominate,
constitute, and appoint you the said Ralph Hall, Peter Elliston, John Griffith,
Edward Carey, John Wilsby, William Bridges, and Nath. Stirrup, to be our
Commissioners.

And We do by these presents, empower, authorize, and appoint you, or any four
or more of you, to receive for, and on Our behalf, all such Informations as
shall by any person or persons, be exhibited before you, touching or any way
concerning any Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Arrears of Rents, Debts,
Duties, Moneys, Plate, Jewels, Goods, Chattels, or other things so belonging
unto Us (and not pardoned) which are unjustly concealed or detained as
aforesaid; and by all such good and lawful ways and means as to you, or any
four or more of you shall seem meet; to send for any Persons, Parties,
Witnesses, Records, Accounts, Books and Writings whatsoever.

Provided always, and Our Will and Pleasure is, That before any person or
persons shall be molested or summoned upon any such Information or
Informations, the person or persons so informing, shall give such good Security
with Sureties, as by you, Our said Commissioners, or any four or more of you,
shall be allowed and approved of, to prove and make good such, his or their
Information or Informations, or else to pay such reasonable Costs and Damages
unto the party or parties, so molested or summoned, as you Our said
Commissioners, or any four or more of you, shall award.

And if upon any such Information, Examination and Enquiry, and full hearing of
the Parties concerned, and mature considerati^n had of the whole matter, it
shall appear unto you, Our said Commissioners, or any four or more of you, That
any such Lands, Tenements, Rents, Arrears of Rents, Debts, Duties, Moneys,
Goods, Chattels, Pla^e, Jewels, or other things, so belonging unto Us, in Right
of the Commonwealth, (and not heretofore pardoned) are unjustly concealed or
detained as aforesaid; then Our Will and Pleasure is, That you Our said
Commissioners, or any four or more of you, shall forthwith from time to time,
under your Hands and Seals, certify all such Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Arrears of Rents, Debts, Duties, Moneys, Goods, Chattels, Plate, Jewels, and
other things so discovered, together with the whole matter touching such
D^scovery o^ D^scoveries, unto Our Commissioners of Our Treasury, for the time
being; to the end. The said Comm^ssioners of Our Treasury, may forthwith cause
the premises by Process out of Our said Court of Exchequer, to be duly seized
into Our Hands, and to that purpose put in charge in the great Roll, of the
Pipe there.

And that this Our present Commission may be the better, and more eff^ctually
executed, and with less charge and expense unto the persons so discovering,
without delay, Our further Will and Pleasure is, That there be a Register
attending you Our said Commissioners in this Our Service: And We conceiving Our
welbeloved Ferdinando Parkhu^st Gentleman, to be a fit person for that purpose,
have nominated, constituted, and appointed; and by these presents do nominate,
constable tute, and appoint him the said Fe dinando Parkhurst, to be Register to
you Our said Commissioners for this Service.

And We do likewise by these presents, constitute, and appoint, Our welbeloved
Richard Hatter, Gentleman, to be Assistant unto the said Ferdinando Parkhurst,
in the said business and employment; who shall have and receive such competent
yearly Sallaries and Allowances, as We shall think fit to allow and appoint
unto them, the same to be paid unto them, and either of them respectively at
the Receipt of Our Exchequer quarterly, by even portions; so long as they, and
either of them shall continue in the employment aforesaid And therefore We
Will, and do hereby Declare Our Pleasure to be, That they the said Ferdinando
Parkhurst and Richard Hatter, or either of them, shall not take any other Fee
or Fees, of any person or persons, so informing as aforesaid, or of any other
person or persons whatsoever, Except only such small Fees for writing, as by
you, Our said Commissioners, or any four or more of you, shall be limited and
appointed.

And We Will, and by these presents do require you Our said Commissioners, That
you or any four or more of you shall meet upon Monday, the Six and twentieth
day of May instant, next ensuing the date hereof, by nine of the Clock in the
Morning, at Worcester-house in the Strand, in Our County of Middlesex in some
convenient Room there, to be appointed for that purpose, then and there, to
enter upon the Execution of this Our Commission; and so to proceed therein, and
to sit from day to day, or at least three days in every week, for the space of
one whole year, from the date of this Our present Commission, or till We shall
signify Our Pleasure to the contrary.

And to the end, that ample Encouragement, Reward, and Recompense maybe given
unto all such persons, as have made or shall hereafter make any Discovery of
any such Manors, L^nds, Tenements, Rents, Moneys, Plate, Jewels, or other the
premises so belonging to Us, and not pardoned, but concealed, or detained as
aforesaid. We do by these presents Declare Our further Will and Pleasure to be,
and do hereby with the Advice and Consent of Our Council, Grant, That all and
every person and persons, who before the Commissioners of, and for Our
Treasury, have already discovered, or upon any Information or Informations to
be exhibited before you Our said Commissioners herein before named, or any four
or more of you, shall discover, or upon any Bill or Information, exhibited or
to be exh bited in Our said Court of Exchequer, ^ath or have discovered, or
shall hereafter discover any such M^nors, Lands, Tenements, Moneys, Plate,
Jewels, or other the premises so belonging to Us, and not pardoned, but
unjustly concealed or detained as aforesaid: And the respective Heirs,
Executor^, Administrators, and Assigns, of all and every such person and
persons so discovering, shall from time to time, and at all times, have and
enjoy to their own use and behoof, one full fifth part, or so much more as the
said Commissioners of Our Treasury, for the time being, shall think fi^ to
allow, of all annual and other sum and sums of Money, which shall be paid into
the Receipt of Our Exchequer, upon any such Dis^ (...)

And if any person or persons being seized or possessed of any such Manors,
Lands, Rents, Moneys, Plate, Jewels, Goods or Chattels, or owing any such
Arrears of Rents, Debts and Duties, so belonging unto Us, and not pardoned, but
unjustly concealed or detained as aforesaid, shall voluntarily first discover
the same unto the said Commissioners of Our Treasury, for the time being,
before any such Discovery thereof made as aforesaid, and shall submit unto such
Orders and Directions as shall by the Commissioners of Our Treasury be given;
for the more speedy seizing into Our Hands, and due charging in the great Roll
of the Pipe aforesaid, all such Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Arrears of
Rents, Debts, Duties, Goods and Chattels, so voluntarily discovered as
aforesaid, then, and in such case only, We Will, That such person or persons
so voluntarily discovering, and his, her, and their respective Heirs,
Executors, Adminstrators and Assigns, shall from time to time, and at all
times, have and enjoy to their own use and behoof, one full fifth part, or so
much more as the Commissioners of Our Treasury shall think fit to allow, of all
annual or other sum or sums of money, which shall be paid into the Receipt of
Our Exchequer, upon such voluntary Discovery or Discoveries of any such Manors,
Lands, Tenements, Goods, Chattels, or other the premises; and shall likewise
have allowance, deduction, defalcation, and retainer to him, her, or
themselves, of one full fifth part, or of so much more, as the Commissioners of
Our Treasury shall think fit to allow of all such Arrears of Rents; Debts,
Duties, sums of Money, Plate and Jewels, so voluntarily discovered, to be in
his, her, or their possession, or by him, her, or them, owing, concealed, or
detained as aforesaid: And such person and persons so voluntarily discovering
as aforesaid, shall likewise have Our Free and Gracious Pardon, for such his,
her, and their former concealments thereof.

And Our further Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby Declare the same to be,
That if any person or persons, having compounded, and having any Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Arrears of Rents, Debts, Duties, Moneys, Plate, Jewels, Goods
or Chattels, omitted out of his, her, or their Composition or Compositions, not
pardoned, but unjustly concealed or detained as aforesaid, or being now under
Sequestration for Delinquency or Recusancy, and having any Manors Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Arrears of Rents, Debts, Duties, Moneys Plate, Jewels Goods
or Chattels, not sequestered, nor pardoned, but concealed or detained as
aforesaid, or being comprised in any Act for sale; and having any Copihold or
Customary Land, or Arrears of Rents; Debts; Duties, Goods or Chattels, not
sequestered nor pardoned, but concealed, or detained as aforesaid; do and shall,
before any such Discovery thereof made as aforesaid, Petition the Commissioners
of Our Treasury, for the time being; to be admitted to compound for the same;
then We do hereby Will and Authorize the said Commissioners of our Treasury,
that in such case, They compound with such person or persons so Petitioning,
after the rate of one fourth part of the value of such Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Arrears of Rents, Debts, Duties, Moneys, Goods and Chattels,
respectively. And further, We do by these presents, Declare and Grant, by and
with the Advice and Consent of Our Council, That all and every person and
persons who shall so Compound as aforesaid, and after submit unto such Orders
and Directions, as by the said Commissioners of Our Treasury shall be given for
duly charging such sum or sums of money, as shall be due and owing upon such
Composition or Compositions in the great Roll of the Pipe, and shall duly pay
the same into the Receipt of Our said Exchequer; and the Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns of such person and persons, so compounding,
submitting, and paying, shall and may peaceably hold and enjoy all such Manors,
Land, Tenements, Rents, Arrears of Rents, Debts, Duties, Goods and Chattels, so
compounded for, free and clear of, and from any Seizure, Sequestration, or
Molestation whatsoever, any thing in this our present Commission, or otherwise
to the contrary notwithstanding.

And to the end, that such competent Sallaries as aforesaid, to be allowed to
the Register, and his Assistant, before in these presents named; as also the
fifths and other sums of Money before mentioned, may be duly paid, and the
Allowances, Defalcations and Compositions aforesaid made, according to the
tenor and true meaning of this Our Commission, We have by Our Letters of Privy
Seal, bearing even date with these presents, given full Warrant and Authority
in that behalf, to the said Commissioners of, and for Our Treasury to allow and
pay the same accordingly.

And the better to enable you Our said Commissioners, to carry on the Service
aforesaid with effect, We do by these presents Empower and Authorize you, or
any four or more of you, in all Cases, Matters, and things touching and
concerning the Premises, to examine Witnesses upon Oath, or otherwise: Which
Oath, We do hereby Authorize you, or any four or more of you to administer.

And lastly, We Will and Require you, Our said Commissioners to observe and
pursue such Rules and Instructions concerning the Management of our said
Service, as you shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter, receive
from U^, by and with the Advice of Our Council.

In Witness whereof etc


