A VINDICATION OF ROBERT III. KING OF SCOTLAND,

From the Imputation of Bastardy, by the clear Proof of ELIZABETH MURE
(Daughter to Sir Adam Mure of Rowallan) her being the first Lawful Wife of
ROBERT the II. then STEWART of SCOTLAND and Earl of Strathern.

By GEORGE Viscount of TARBAT, etc. Clerk to His MAJESTY'S Councils, Registers
and Rolls.

To be Sold at Thomas Carruthers's Shop in the Parliament-Closs.

EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printers to
His most Excellent MAJESTY, Anno Dom. 1695.

At Edinburgh, the Twenty third day of July, 1695 years.
THE Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, having Considered a Petition given
in to them, by Charles Chalmers, Showing, that the Viscount of Tarbat Lord
Register, having from the Authentic Records of the Kingdom, wrote a
Vindication of Robert the third King of Scotland, from the Imputation of
Bastardy, etc. and given the Benefit of Printing the same to the Petitioner,
which he has caused do well, but at Considerable Expenses; And therefore
Humbly Craving to the Effect underwritten as the said Petition bears: They
hereby Discharge any to Print the said Book within this Kingdom, or to Import
or Vend the same for the space of Twenty One years after the date hereof,
without the Petitioners License, under the Penalty of Confiscating the Books so
Printed, Imported, or Vended to the said Petitioner his use.

Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Consilii. GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Consilii.

To the KING,
Sir,
ALbeit all the Crowned Heads of Europe, who are so by Inheritance, be
concerned in the Vindication of the Marriage of Robert the 2 d. King of
Scotland with Elizabeth Mure, yet Your Majesty has the greatest interest
therein: the Collection of the Proofs now Published, was made by me many years
ago, and Presented formerly in Write to Your Majesty; I did likewise Communicate
them to others, who have Printed imperfect Accounts thereof: and some
Englishmen having lately Endeavored by their scandalous Pasquels, to cast
Reproach on the Series of all the English Kings and Queens; and desirous to
pull those of Scotland into the Contagion, Allege this only Tash of the
Bastardy of K. Robert the 3 d. Son to Elisabeth Mure. If any Englishman
zealous of the Honor of their Crown and Kingdom shall Vindicat their Royal
Family from the Libels as clearly as I have done ours, his Book may have a due
Reception. this Vindication was the Design of my Travel, and if with that it be
Acceptable to Your Majesty, all that is wished to it is then attained by,

May it please Your Majesty, Your Majesty's most Humble, most Faithful, and
most obedient Subject and Servant. TARBAT.

A VINDICATION OF ROBERT the III. KING OF SCOTLAND,
From the Imputation of Bastardy, by the clear Proof of ELIZABETH MURE (
Daughter to Sir Adam Mure of Rowallan) her being the first lawful Wife to
ROBERT the II. then STEWART of SCOTLAND and Earl of Strathern.

THe Excellence of History is so well writ of, by some few, that it were
Indiscretion to repeat, and vanity to add to what they have said: yet it is
allowable enough to regrate the frequent Error even of great Historians, in
writing what they too easily believe, without sufficient A vouchers, and
thereby imposeing Falsehoods for Truth. If these Errors fall on Things and
Actions, they oft-times cause, at least occasion great Mischeifs; Thus our
Scots Writers, though justly placed in the first Rank, have injured the Nation,
whilst on Design to give a Frame to our Ius Regni, some of them have screwed
the Soveraignity up to Precipices; Others with as little Truth, and less
Civility, depressing it to unsufferable Lowness: whence the great evil of Civil
War has too often Sprung. At other times they have cast dirt on persons, either
by their Supine Ignorance in not searching Records, before they publish their
Collections; or upon malicious Designs to avenge some Disappointments. Amongst
others, our Historians have foully failed, in relating what concerned King
Robert the seconds Marriage, and the Legitimacy of his Succession; and the
fairest Excuse that can be made for them, is to cover their fault with the
shade of others, who, though prior to them, yet did writ at a great distance from
the Actions and Persons of whom they wrote, and rushed into Falsehoods, because
they did writ without proof, and choosed rather to make a Criminal Noise, than
to keep Innocent Silence: For had our Historians been at the trouble to look
into our Records before they wrote our History, they had saved mine in
vindicating our Royal Line and all the Hereditary CROWNED HEADS in Europe from
the Tash of Bastardie, in their Descent from Robert the second, King of
Scotland, and from Elizabeth Mure, or More his Wife, who in their Relations, is
falsely stated a Concubine; whereas what hereafter follows, will prove near to a
Demonstration, that She was his lawful Wife, and so well secured in that
Title, that her Husband could not be allowed to quarrel it, though he had
inclined to do so, as indeed he never did. Our four Historians Major, Boethius,
Lesly and Buchanan have followed one another, in relating that Robert the
STUART of SCOTLAND, Grandchild by a Daughter to Robert the first, and Nephew
to David the second, whilst he was STUART of SCOTLAND and Earl of Strathern,
had several Children by Elizabeth Mure, who was not his Wife, and since it were
needless to repeat the words of all the four; I shall take Buchanans as the
last, and of greatest credit, who speaking of the beginning of King Robert the
2 ds. Reign, page 318 in the Francfort Edition of his History in Octavo, gives
this account.

Rebus ita primo biennio, feliciter succedentibus, tertio ab inito Regno anno,
Euphemia Regina, Hugonis Comitis, Rosiae filia moritur, Ex ea ternos Liberos
genuer at Walterum posterius Jerniae, and Davidem Atholiae Comites, and
Euphemiam, quam Jacobo Douglassio nupsisse a nobis ante commemoratum est.
Robertus non tam impatientia caelibatus quam amore filiorum, ex Elizabetha
Mora, prius gentorum ipsam Vxorem duxit. Hanc enim eleganti forma Adami Mori
illustris equitis filiam, adhuc adolescens vehementer amaverat, ex eaquae tres
filios ac duas filias susceperat, eamq; Giffardo, viro nobili in Lothianam
curaverat collocandam, verum sub idemfere tempus Euphemia Regina, and Giffardo
Elizabethae marito defunctis, Rex sive consuetudine vetere Morae inductus, sive
(quod a multis traditur) ut filios quos ex eagenuerat legitimos faceret, matrem
eorum sibi matrimonio conjunxit, filios statim divitiis and honoribus auxit,
Johannes natu maximus Carrictae. Robertus Taichiae, Alexander Buchaniae Comites
sunt facti, adjecta etiam Badinacha: nec hac munificentia contentus, Comitis ad
Sconam indictis, obtinuit, ut praeteritis Euphemiae liberis, in Rege creando,
gradus aetatis observarentur: Quae res postea tam numerosam Familiam prope
extinxit.

From whence he and many Writers since have imposed this Comment as a Truth.

Proposition
But if I prove that Eupheme Ross died not in the 2 d. year of King Robert's
Reign, but lived many years thereafter; that will falsify the first Assertion
of the foresaid Paragraph. If Elizabeth Mure, whom he calls the Daughter of
Adam Mure, did not only bear two Daughters to Robert, but six, then our
Historians have not been well informed of the State and Concerns of that
Family. If John, Elizabeth's eldest Son was Earl of Carrick, Robert Earl of
Menteith, and Alexander Earl of Badinoch, in the first year of King Roberts
Reign; then it is false that these Honors and Estates were bestowed upon them
by their Father after the 3 d. year of his Reign: If they were bestowed upon
them in Eupheme Ross's Lifetime, then it is false that they were bestowed upon
them sometime after her Death. If the Convention of Estates or Parliament, who
declared John the eldest Son of Robert by Elizabeth Mure to be his Successor in
the Crown, was kept and did so declare in the first year of King Roberts Reign,
and whilst Queen Eupheme was alive; then it is false that this Convention was
kept, and did give this Declaration after her death, and after the 3 d. year of
King Roberts Reign. And if it appear plainly, that Robert Stuart of Scotland,
and Earl of Stratherne, did, whilst he was in these Stations, and long before
he was King, own John his eldest Son by Elizabeth Mure, to be his eldest Son
and Heir, and did share his Fortune and Honors with him, and that he was so
owned in all public Writings by his Father, by his Fathers Vassals, and by
those who contracted with his Father and him, both Laics and Ecclesiastics,
and that by many reiterated Acts; If he was so owned openly by King David Bruce
before his Death; then it is a sure Truth that he was so, nor could his Right
of Legitimacy, and Filiation be taken from him, no not by his Father. And if it
be true, that not only his Father, but the whole Estates of the Kingdom in
Parliament conveen'd, immediately upon Robert the 2 ds. coming to the Crown, and
in the first year of his Reign, did own John as the undoubted Heir and
Successor to Robert; and if at that time he was so owned by Queen Eupheme and
all her Relations; And if Elizabeth Mure was dead before the year 1364; then it
is false that her Children were advanced by her being married to the King in
the year 1373, or after Eupheme Rosses death: And John the eldest Son's Right
and Title is beyond all Controversy, though not beyond all Calumny. And lastly,
If Elizabeth Mure was so far from being a mean Person or a Concubine, that she
was a Person of such Quality, and near Relation to Robert her Husband, that he
was at the Trouble to procure a Dispensation from the Pope, and that at
considerable Expenses, for Allowance to marry her, before he obtained her: And
if this Dispensation was granted several years before he was King, and many
years before Euphame Ross's death; Then the Insinuation of her Meanness, the
Imputation of her being a Concubine, the Untruth of her being married three
years, at least, after King Robert was KING, and indeed the whole of this
Comment and false Relation, appears to be a scandalous Libel.

But all these Positions, in favors of JOHN, appear from what follows.
1. Fordon says, Assumption
that Queen Eupheme and Bishop Wardlaw died about the same time, in the year
1387; King David Bruce died on the 7 th of May 1370, and Robert did hold his
first Parliament on the 27 th day of March 1371 at Scoon, and was then Crowned,
as an authentic Record verifies; to which also Buchanan and all the other
Historians agree, so that Queen Eupheme died not, till the 17 th. year of King
Roberts Regin.

There is a Charter granted by King Robert the 2 d. of the Earldom of Murray,
excepting Lochquhaber, Badinoch, Castle and Barony of Vrquhart, on the 9 th. of
March Anno Regni 2 do. dilecto filio nostro Joanni de Dumbar, and Mariotae
Sponsae ejus, filiae nostre charissimae.

There is a Charter by Robert the 2 d. Apud Scoon tempore Parliamenti, Anno
Regni 2 d. Dilecto filio nostro Joanni de Yla, of the Lands of Moydart, Morvarn
and many others: And there are two other Charters in the Rolls of the
Great-Seal to the said John of Yla, and Margaretae ejus Sponsae filiae nostrae
charissimae, Anno Regni 6 to of the Lands of Lochaber and Knoydart.

There is a Charter granted by Kobert the 2 d. Anno Regni nono to Thomas Hay
Constable of Scotland, filio nostro charissimo.

There is another Charter in the Rolls, to him under the same Designation, Anno
Regni secundo: And another to him and Elizabethae ejus sponsae nostrae filiae,
on the eighteen Merks Sterling of Inchtuthill.

A Charter in the Rolls by Robert the 3 d. Anno Regni primo, of 200 lib.
Sterling of the Customs of Aberdeen, to David Lindsay of Glenesk, Dilecto
nostro Fratri; and John Dumbar Earl of Murray, and David Lindsay of Glenesk,
are designed in several of King Robert the third's Charters, Fratres nostri.

There is a Charter in the Rolls granted by King Robert the second, to William
Douglas, Son to the Earl of Galloway, and Aegidae filiae nostrae charissimae,
of the Earldom of Nithsdale, Anno Kegni

Nota, they had only one Daughter, who was called the Fair Maid of Nithsdale,
who married Henry de sancto claro, with whom he had the Earledom of Nithsdale,
but his Successors exchanged it with King James the second for the Earldom of
Caithness.

John Lion of Glames did marry another Daughter of King Robert's the second,
with whom he got the Lordship of Glames, and the Original Charter granted to
the said John, and to his Daughter is yet in the Custody of the Earl of
Strathmore his Successor.

Both the Historians and several Charters in the Rolls do instruct, that the
Douglas married King Roberts Daughter by Eupheme Ross.

These authentic Records of King Robert's having seven Daughters, do
sufficiently show, how ill acquainted our Historians were with the State and
Condition of the King's Children, who say that he had but one Daughter by
Eupheme Ross, and two by Elizabeth Mure.

There is in the Rolls a Charter by Robert the second, in June Anno Regni
primo, to his Son Alexander of the sixty Davachs of Badinoch. One the 13 of
June, and the first year of King Roberts Reign, in a Charter granted to Allan
Lawder of the Lands of Whitsled and others, Testibus Willielm and Patric.
Episcopis sancti, Andrae and Brechen, Joanne filio nostro natu maximo Comite de
Carrick, Roberto Comite de Menteith (which Buchannan calls Taichiae) and
Alexandero Senescallo filiis nostris, Gulielmo Comite de Douglas, etc. On the
28 of May Anno Regni primo, there is a Charter of Confirmation granted by King
Robert to John Kennedy, of the half of the Barony of Dalrymple, on a
Disposition from Malcolm Son to Gilchrist, Son to Adam Dalrymple of that Ilk,
Testibus Episcopis sancti Andreae and Dunkelden, Johanne primogenito nostro and
haerede, Comite de Carrick. Another Charter in June, primo Anno Regni, of the
Lands of Badinoch, to Alexander his Son ( Nota, he was the youngest Son of
Elizabeth Mure) and his Heirs, and failzing of him, to David his Son and his
Heirs. Nota, David was the eldest Son of Eupheme Ross) and at the same time,
there was a Charter granted to David Earl of Strathern, of the Lands of
Vrquhart, etc. And the Reddendo of both these Charters, are, for Services to
him and his Heirs Successors to the CROWN of SCOTLAND. In these Charters,
amongst other Witnesses, Joannes filius noster Comes de Carrick, is always one.
Another Charter on the 8. of May, Anno Regni secundo, confirming to Paul
Macktyre some Lands disponed to him by William Earl of Ross, Testibus Wilielm
and Patric. Episcopis sancti Andreae and Brechen. Joanne primo-genito nostro
and haerede Comite de Carrick, etc.

In the Charters granted the first year of his Reign, to David Earl of
Strathern, of the Lands of Vrquhart; and the 2 d. year of his Reign to Queen
Eupheme, of the Lands and Castle of Kinross, amongst the Witnesses, Joannes
filius noster natu maximus and Haeres Comes de Carrick, is always one. There
are twenty other Charters of the like Tenor, which were needless to adduce for
Confirmation of this Truth; That in the very first year of his Reign, John was
Earl of Carrick, Robert was Earl of Menteith, and Alexander was Earl of
Badinoch: And therefore Buchannan and the other Historians are wrong in
asserting, that they were preferred to these Estates and Dignities after
Eupheme Rosses Death, and after the 3 d. year of his Reign.

But now we come to the more solid confutation of our Historians assertions,
and to show, that not after the 3 d. year of King Robert the 2 ds Reign, and
after Queen Euphem's Death, but in the first year of his Reign, and on the 27
th of March that year, being 1371, the King and Parliament do Recognosce John
who was afterward called Robert the 3 d. and was eldest Son of Elizabeth Mure,
to be the undoubted Lineal and Legal Successor to Robert his Father, as his
eldest Son and Heir.

The Evidence whereof is an authentic Act and Record of Parliament, yet extant
amongst the Kings Records, to which the great Seal of the Kingdom is appended,
together with other 52 Seals of the Prelates, Noblemen and Barons in Parliament
assembled, a full and true Abstract whereof follows.

In Nomine sanctae and individuae Trinitatis, Patris, Filii and Spiritus Sancti
Amen, Anno ab Incarnatione Domini millesimo tricentesimo, septuagesimo primo,
secundum morem and Computationem Ecclesiae Scoticanae, Mensis Martii die
vicesimo septimo; serenissimus Princeps Dominus Robertus Rex Scotorum
illustris, Apud Sconam tempore suae Coronationis existens, assistentibus sibi
praelatis, Comitibus, Baronibus, ac caeteris de Clero and Populo, Regni sui;
post sacra Vnctionis and Coronationis suae Peracta solennia, factaque
Declaratione Juris, quo idem serenissimus Princeps successit ac succedere
debuit Domino David Regi Scotiae Avunculo and Praedecessori suo, tam
proximitate sanguinis, quam ex quadam declaratione per quaedam instrumenta
confecta, tempore inclytae memoriae Domini Roberti Regis Scotiae, avi and
praedecessoris ipsius Domini nostri Regis, ibidem exhibita atque lecta; Nec non
receptis homagii and fidelitatis solitis juramentis ab ipsis Praelatis,
Comitibus, Baronibus and aliis de clero and populo ibidem existentibus, in
Coronatione Regum Scotiae ab olim praestari consuetis and debitis, volens more
and exemplo celebris memoriae ejusdem boni Regis Roberti avi sui, coram Clero
and populo, Successorem and verum Haredem suum declare ibidem, licet de ipso
clare constitit atque constet ex abundanti and unanimi consensu and assensu
dictorum Praelatorum, Comitum, procerum and magnatum, indicavit, asseruit and
recognovit, declaravit and voluit, quod cum ipsum contigerit, pro dispositione
divina, ab hac luce migrare, Dominus Joannes filius suus primogenitus Comes de
Carrick, and SENESCALLVS SCOTIAE erit and esse debet verus and legitimus haeres
fuus, ac sibi post mortem suam in Regno Scotiae, domino disponente, succedet
and succedere debet, and posteum sedebit, and sedere debebit super SOLIVM Regni
sui. Qua Declaratione sic facta per ipsum Dominum nostrum Regem de praefato
primogenito and haerede suo ex abundanti, ut supra, unusquisque praelatorum,
Comitum procerum magnatum and aliorum, ibidem existentium, voce propria,
singulatim, pro se, haeredibus and successoribus suis, asseruit, affirmavit,
declaravit, recognovit and voluit; Quod idem Dominus Joannes post mortem
praefati patris sui superstes and vivus, sit, divina favente gratia, futurus
Rex Scotiae tanquam haeres legitimus ejusdem patris sui. Promittens quilibet,
bona fide, and manu in signum fidei dationis levata, quod eum pro Rege, and
haerede legitimo ejusdem patris sui habiturus crit, ipsumque juvabit atque
defendet contra quoscunque mortales, nec non sigillum suum scripto seu
juramento super hoc fiendo apponens in signum suorum consensus and promissionis
praedictorum, cum ipsi super hoc fuerint requisiti. Quibus recognitione,
promisso, and fidei datione in consilio Domini nostri Regis sic praemissis and
actis, idem Dominus noster Rex per venerabilem virum magistrum Joannem de
Peebles Doctorem Decretorum canonicum Glasguen. Clericum suum, proponi fecit in
publicum, qualiter ex abundanti indicavit and declaravit prefatum Dominum
Joannem filium suum primogenitum, verum suum heredem nunc esse, and esse debere
de jure, Et post mortem suam regni Scotiae, volente Deo REGEM futurum. Et
qualiter praefati Comites, Proceres and alii de consilio, affirmarunt,
cognoverunt, consenserunt and fide media, ut praemittitur, promiserunt: and
quod populum cum clero convocari fecerat, ut in eorum praesentia and de eorum
consensu unanimi fieret and publicaretur, Ne aliquis super hoc ignorantiam
praetendere posset aliqualiter in futurum: Tota autem multitudo, Praelatorum
Comitum and Baronum and aliorum tam cleri quam populi unanimi voluntate and
clamore consono, nullo penitus reclamante affirmaverunt, recognoverunt and
voluerunt ipsum Dominum Joannem tanquam primogenitum and haeredem Domininostri
Regis patris sui, suum fore Regem futurum, ac manu levata in signum fidei
dationis promiserunt, quod eum pro Rege suo futuro, volente Deo, habiturierant
post mortem patris sui, ipsumque juvabunt atque defendent de toto posse, contra
quoscunque mortales. Quibus sic actis, praefati Praelati Comites and Barons
ibidem existentes sigilla sua huic scripto apposuerunt, ad perpetuam and
futuram memoriam in testimonium omnium praemissorum, una cum signo and
subscriptione publici tabellionis subscripti. Acta fuerunt haec apud Abatiam de
Sconae Mense die and annis supradictis.

Et ego Joannes Rollo Clericus Moravien. Diocaesis, publicus auctoritate
Apostolica Notarius, praedictis indicationi, Declarationi, Affirmationi, nec
non Promissioni, manuum levationi, ac Magistri Joannis de Peebles populo
publicationi, una cum venerabilibus in Christo patribus, Dominis Wilielmo,
Waltero and Patricio sancti Andreae, Glasguen. Brechen. Ecclesiarum Episcopis,
ac discretis viris Dominis Joanne de Carrick Canonico Glasguen. Wilielmo de
Biggar, Rectore Ecclesiae de Errol, Cancellario, and Camerario Scotiae;
nobilibus viris and potentibus Dominis, Thoma de Mar, Gulielmo de Douglas, and
Roberto senescal. Comitibus, Thoma de Hay and Gulielmo de Keith Constabulario
and Mariscallo Scotiae, Archibaldo de Douglass, Jacobo de Douglass, Roberto de
Erskin, Alexandro de Lindsay, Thoma de Erskin and Duncano Wallace Baronibus ac
Militib, Magistro Joanne de Peebles supradicto, and multis aliis praesentibus,
ad praemissa vocatis pariter and rogatis primo in secreta camera praedicti
Domini nostri Regisin suo secreto Concilio, and post in Camera ut dictum -- in
publicum coram populi multitudine hoc approbante factum, not legible.
Anno, Die, Mense and locis supradictis indictione nona pontificatus
sanctissimi in Christo patris Gregorii undecimi divina providentia Papae; quia
presens interfui itaque omnia and singula superius expressa dum sic agerentur
scivi vidi and audivi, praesens Instrumentum manu alterius scriptum signo meo
consueto ad instantiam predicti Domini Joannis, Domini Regis primo-geniti
Comitis de Carrick SCOTIAE SENESCALI I, signavi mea propria manu subscribens,
vocatus pariter and rogatus, in testimonium omnium praemissorum.

The Names of the Subscribers, whose Names and Seals are at this day extant,
and appended to the Declaration and Act above insert.
Bishops, St. Andreae, Glasguen, Dunkelden, Aberdonen, Moravien, Rossen,
Dumblanen, Caitenen, Brechenen, Ergaden, Gallovidien, Cancellarius, Comerarius,
Dumfermling, Aberbroth; Melros, Sconen, Prior Sti. Andreae, E. Mar, E.
Marchiae, E. Strathern, E. Menteith, E. Levenax. Dominus Jacobus de Lindsay,
Constabular, Mariscall, D. Jacobus de Douglass, Walterus de Lesly, D.R. de
Erskin, D. Alexander de Lindsay, D. Walterus de Halyburtoun, D. Wilielmus de
Cuninghame, D. Jac de Danielstoun, D.H. de Eglintoun; Prior: St Crucis, Kelcho,
Jedworth, Kilwyning, Cambustionel, Couper, Lindors, Newbottle, Driburgh, D.
Alexander de Gordon, D. filius Walthi, D. Pat. de Heburn, D. de Dinisdeer.

The said Act and Declaration rendered in English.
IN the Name of the Blessed and undivided TRINITY of the Father, Son and Holy
Spirit, Amen. Upon the 27 th day of the Month of March, and year from the
Incarnation of Christ 1371, according to the Custom and Computation of the
Church of SCOTLAND; The most Renowned Prince ROEBRT KING of SCOTS, at Scoon the
time of his Highness Coronation, (the Bishops, Earls, Barons and others of the
Clergy, and People of his Kingdom standing by and there present) after the
sacred Solemnities of His Anointment and Coronation were ended, and the
Declaration of his Right, by which the said Illustrious PRINCE did succeed, and
ought to succeed to David KING of SCOTLAND his Uncle and Predecessor, as well
by propinquity of Blood, as upon the Account, and by Reason, and by virtue of
certain instruments made in the time of ROBERT KING of SCOTLAND his Goodsir and
Predecessor of worthy Memory, then opened up and publicly read; And the usual
Oaths of Homage and Fidelity being taken by the said Prelates, Earls, Barons,
and others of the Clergy and People there present, used and wont of old to be
exacted at the Coronation of the KINGS of SCOTLAND: Being desirous after the
Custom and Example of the foresaid Good KING ROBERT his Grandfather of blessed
Memory, to declare before the Clergy and People his Successor and true Heir,
though the same did clearly appear, and might abundantly be known by the
unanimous Consent and Assent of the said Prelates, Earls, Lords and Barons: His
Sacred Majesty did Declare, Assert, Acknowledge, Manifest and Will, that
whenever it should happen his Highness, at the pleasure of Almighty GOD, to
depart from this Life, Lord JOHN his Majesty's eldest Son Earl of Carrick and
STEWART of of SCOTLAND, should and ought to be his lawful Heir, and after his
Highness Death, should succeed to him in the Kingdom of SCOTLAND, by the
providence of GOD; And that after him, he should sit, and ought to sit upon the
THRONE of the Kingdom: Which Declaration being so emitted by our Sovereign Lord
the KING himself, concerning his said eldest Son and Heir; Every one of the
said Prelates, Earls, Lords, Barons and others there present, with a full Voice,
one by one, for himself, Heirs and Successors did Assert, Affirm, Acknowledge,
Declare and Will, that the said Lord JOHN after the death of his said Father,
being to the sore, and on Life, by the grace of GOD, should be KING of
SCOTLAND, as lawful Heir of his said Father; Promising each of them, bona fide,
and having their Hands lifted up to Heaven, in token of their Sincerity, that
he should be had and esteemed as their KING, and lawful Heir of his said
Father; And that they should Assist and Defend him against all Mortals: As
also, that they should Append and put their Seal to the Act or Statute to be
made thereupon, in token of their Consent and Promise of these things, whenever
they should be required thereto: Which Acknowledgment, Promise and Oath, given
by them in the Council of our Sovereign Lord; the King's Majesty, did cause the
Right Venerable Mr. John Peebles, Clerk of the Records of the Diocese of
Glasgow, to Insert and Record in public Register; That forasmuch as he had
sufficiently declared the said Lord JOHN, his eldest Son, to be now his true
Heir, and that by Law, he ought after his death, at the Disposal of GOD, to be
KING of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND; And that forasmuch as the said Earls, Lords,
and others of the Council, did Affirm, Acknowledge, Consent and by Oath, as
said is, Promise; And that his Highness had called the People with the Clergy,
to the effect, in their presence, and by their unanimous Consent, the same
might be Decreed and Published, least any should pretend Ignorance of this, any
manner of way in time-coming: The whole Multitude of Prelates, Earls, and
Barons, and others as well of the Clergy as People, with one accord, unanimous
Consent, and Will (none at all gainsaying) Did Affirm, Acknowledge and Will,
That the said Lord JOHN, as eldest Son and Heir of our Sovereign Lord the KING
his Father, should be their KING; And with Hands lifted up to Heaven, in token
of their sincerity, promised, that they should have and esteem him, after the
death of his Father, for their future KING, by the strength of Almighty GOD;
and that they should Defend and Assist him, with all their Might, against all
deadly. Which things being so done, the s^ids bishops, Earls and Barons there
present, did Append and put their Seals to this Decree for ever; In testimony
of all the Premises, together with the Sign and Sub^tion of the public Clerk
under-subscribing. These things were done at the Abbacy of Scoon, Day, Month
and year of GOD above-written. etc.

Here is only the Most authentic Evident, which perhaps Europe can show,
giving an irrefragable Proof, that John afterward called Robert, eldest Son to
Elizabeth Mure, was in the first year of his Fathers Reign, owned and
acknowledged, as his eldest lawful Son and Heir, and undoubted Successor to the
Crown; and that in the lifetime of Queen Eupheme, to which her Son in law the
Earl of Douglass his Seal amongst others, is appended: And therefore Elizabeth
Mure, his Mother, was lawful Wife to Robert Earl of Strathern, afterward KING;
and consequently it is false that these Children were only legitimat by King
Roberts marrying their Mother after Queen Euphems death, and after the third
year of his Reign, And that the Act of Parliament recognizing John as such, was
past in the fourth year of the said King's Reign. This solemn Act and
authentic Record yet extant, does evidence to a Demonstration, to the
dishonor of those negligent Historiographers, who did write so confidently,
what this Act and Instrument does so clearly canvel: Nor is it so by this great
Act only, but by very many other authentic Documents standing in Record, as a
Charter granted on the 13 th of June Anno Regni primo to Allan Lawder of
Whitsled, and the other Charters before mentioned, and twenty others not
mentioned, which all bear Record, that in the first year of King Robert the
seconds Reign, and in Queen Euphems Lifetime, the KING, the Prelates, the Lords,
and all who received Charters from the King, did look on the said John as his
undoubted eldest Son and Heir, Earl of Carrick and STEWART of SCOTLAND, and the
Charters granted to, and received by Queen Eupheme; by her Son David and her
Son Walter for services to the King and his Heirs, do carry in them, John is
the undoubted eldest Son and Heir.

Albeit what is said seems demonstrative enough, yet to leave no part of this
injurious Lybel unransaked; We shall next show, that before Robert the second,
yea very many years before, whilst he was Earl of Strathern and STEWART of
SCOTLAND, JOHN his Son was owned by him, and by the whole Nation, as his eldest
Son and Heir.

There is a Charter, wherein Robertus Senescallus Scotiae, Comes de Strathern,
and Joannes Senescallus filius noster primo-genius and Haeres, confirm a
Mortification made by Reginaldus More, Pater Wilielmi More, Equitis to the
Abbacy of Pasly, recorded in their Register, which, though it want a Date, yet
there follows in the same Register, a Charter given by the said Robert
Senescallus Scotiae, confirming all Gifts given by his Predecessors and himself
to the Abbacy of Pasly, dated anno 1361, which was nine years before he was
KING; In which, amongst other Witnesses, Joannes Senescallus Dominus de Kyle
primogenitus noster, is one: Which verifies also, that his Father did
communicate his Honors and Estate with him at that time. This Charter is
recorded in Fol. 39. of the Register of Pasly.

In the year 1328. on the thirteenth of February, there is a Submission
recorded in the said Register of Pasly, betwixt the Procurator of the said
Abbacy, called Andrew Kelcho, who was Prior of the Abbacy on the one part, and
Reginald More or Mure Procurator for the Master Channons and Monks of
Simpringhame, concerning 40 Merks of Annuity, payable by the Abbacy of Pasly to
Simpringhame; and assigned by them to the said Reginald: On which submission,
the Abbot is decerned to pay the 40 Merks to Reginald and his Successors, he
getting a sufficient Write from those of Simpringhame, to secure Pasly for what
they pay: And for further Security to the Abbacy Reginald and his Son Sir
William consign a Write disponing his Lands of Sanackar, Camsestrang,
Doulargis, Cowdams, Stafflour and Hormisdale, lying in the Baronies of Renfrew
and Cowall, in Warrandice to the Abbacy, for securing them until he produced
the said Writing from Simpringhame, as said is; he having failed for two years
to procure the said security from Simpringhame, those of Pasly addressed to
Robert Earl of Strathern STEWART of SCOTLAND, and to JOHN his eldest Son and
Heir, Who were Superiors of the Lands disponed by Reginald to them, for their
Security, desiring a Charter, whereby they might be seized in the said Lands;
Which Robert and his said Son did grant, and it is recorded in Folio 16. of the
old Register of Pasly: The Charter is long, and therefore I have only
abstracted out of it, what is useful for our purpose, as follows.

OMnibus hanc Cartam visuris vel audituris, Robertus SENESCALLUS Scotiae, Comes
de Strathern, and JOANNES SENESCALLVS primo-genitus and Haeres ipsius, Dominus
Baroniae de Kyle salutem in Domino sempiternam, cum dudum Reginaldus More pater
domini Wilelmi More militis concesserit, and pro se and haeredibus suis
firmiter obligaverit, omnes terras suas subscriptas in Baronia de Kyle, and de
Cowall. viz. Terras de Sanakar, de Camsestrang, de Doulargis, de Cowdams, de
Stafflour and terram de Hormisdale, and quascunque alias terras suas and
possessiones, infra dominum nostrum existentes, religiosis viris Abboti and
conventui monasterii de Pasleto, ordinis cluniacensis, Glascuensis diocesis,
fore applicandas and perpetuis eorum usibus appropriandas, in casu quo ante
primam solutionem sibi faciendam, cujusdem annui redditus quadraginta Mercarum.
In quo dicebat idem Reginaldus dictos Abbatem and conventum magistro,
Canonicis, and Monialibus de Sympringhame in Anglia singulis annis obligat,
Literas quietae clamationis and perpetuae securitatis, a praedicto Magistro
Canonicis and Monialibus de Sympringhame non procuraret, ac eisdem Abbati and
conventui Monastrii de Pasleto, praedictarum literarum praetextu and virtute
munitis, praedictis Magistro Canonicis and Monialibus de Sympringhame de
praedicto annuo redditu, in toto vel in part, non tenerentur in perpetuum,
ulterius respondere, ac super hoc praedictus Reginaldus, pro se and haeredibus
suis subjecerit praedictas terras voluntati, ordinationi and cognitioni
SENESCALLI scotiae, qui pro tempore fuerit patronus dicti Monasterii de
Pasleto, quod libere possit in favorem dictorum religiosorum virorum Abbatis
and Conventus Monasterii de Pasleto ad requisitionem earundem, sine aliqua
difficultate, ipsis dare sasinam de terris and possessionibus supradictis;
prout haec and alia in patentibus literis Reginaldi More sigillo suo ac sigillo
nostro Roberti SENESCALLI scotiae supradicti, necnon sigillo officarii Curiae
Glascuensis, before vidimus tineri. Nos vero Robertus SENESCALLVS scotiae
supradictus, and Joannes Senescallus ipsius filius dominus de Kyle, per Abbatem
and Conventum Monasterii de Pasleto, cum constantia requisiti, quod cum dictus
Reginaldus and dominus Wilielmus filius suus and haeres per dictum annuum
redditum per plures annos a tempore dictae obligationis and promissionis
factarum adictis religiosis viris percepit, ac ipsi per captionem Namorum and
compulsionem terrarum suarum aliquando, maxim per dictum dominum Wilielmum
More coacti and compulsi, ipsum annuum redditum persolverunt, nulla Litera
Quittationis aut securitatis promissa, pro part dicti Reginaldi, aut dicti
Domini Gulielmi, juxta formam dictae suae obligationis eisdem Abbati and
conventui Monasterii de Pasleto deportata, exhibita vel ostensa cederemus
addandam sasinam eisdem religiosis viris, Abbati and conventui Monasterii de
Pasleto, de terris and possessionibus supradictis, juxta dictarum literarum
continentiam atque formam, volentes ad requisitionem earundem and virtute
obligationis praedictae submissionis in nos factae praedictis Abbati and
Conventui Monasterii de Pasleto super praemissis de remedio debito providere,
ipsas terras, viz. Terram de sanakar, de Camsestrang, de Doulargis, de Coudams,
de Stafflour, terram de Hormiesdale, in manibus nostris, ex unanimi nostro
consensu, propter hoc prius sasitas ad tempus, and ex causa Deo, beatae Mariae,
sancto Jacobo, sancto Marino, and religiosis viris, Abbati and Conventui
Monasterii de Pasleto ibidem Deo servientibus and servituris in perpetuum,
Damus concedimus and hac praesenti Carta nostra confirmamus, etc. In cujus rei
testimonium praesenti Cartae sigilla nostra sunt appensa, his testibus
venerabili patre domino Roberto Abbate de Kilwinning, Domino Hugone de
Eglingtone, Domino ejusdem, Domino Alexandro Senescallo Domino Cruickstoun,
Domino Joanne de Danielstoun domino ejusdem, Domino Adam Fullartoun Domino de
Corsbe militibus, Thoma Sempil Domino de Eglistoun, Joanne de Maxweltoun Domino
de Pollock and aliis.

This Charter alone were proof enough, for here are many Witnesses of good
Quality, and the nearest Neighbors, who being Witnesses, that JOHN the Son of
Elizabeth Mure was repute and known to be the eldest Son and Heir of Robert
STEWART of SCOTLAND, long before he was King, long before the decease of
Eupheme Ross, and that as such, he shared with his Father in his Estate and
Honors; and albeit it want a date, yet since it confirms a Writing made by
Reginald More in the year 1320, and that it is registrat shortly after the
Registration of the same Writing, there is no reason to doubt that it was made
long before he was KING.

But not to rely on one Testimony or Proof, there are many Mediums which prove
our Assumption. There is another Charter dated in the year 1361, on the 20 of
July, as follows, Omnibus hanc Chartam visuris vel audituris, obertus
SENESCALLVS Scotiae Comes de Strathern, salutem; sciatis nos ob reverentiam
Domini nostri Jesu Christi, beatissimae virginis Mariae, beati Jacobi, sancti
marini, ac omnium sanctorum, and pro salute animae nostrae, and antecessorum
and successorum nostrorum, Ratificasse approbasse and confirmasse religiosis
viris Abbati and Conventui Monasterii de Pasleto, ibidem Deo servientibus and
servituris, in inviolabilem, puram and perpetuam Elymosinam, omnes Donationes,
Concessiones, Confirmationes and infeodationes, quas antecessores nostri eisdem
religiosis viris caritative contulerunt: Et ut voluntatis nostrae intentio
lucidius elucesscat iterando concedimus and donamus totales terras de Aldhouse,
de Ardestoun, de Insula Monachorum, inter Kert and Grief de Fultoun, etc.
Eosdem etiam viros religiosos, ex gratiae nostrae ferventis abundantia, ab
omnimodis servitiis secularibus eximimus, eruimus, liberamus: In cujus rei
testimonium sigillum nostrum praesentibus est appensum apud Clunie secundo die
Julii A. D. 1361. Testibus Joanne SENESCALLO Domino de Kyle primo-genito
nostro, Waltero senescallo dilecto fitio nostro, Joanne de Ross, Stephano de
Ross, Gulielmo de Balcaskie, Gulielmo de Lindsay and multis aliis.



Take yet another Charter.

Robertus SENESCALLVS Scotiae, Comes de Strathern, salutem in Domino
sempiternam, noverit universitas vestra, nos de consensu and assensu dilecti
primo-geniti nostri and haeredis Jonnis SENESCALLI Comitis de Carrick, dedisse
and concessisse, and hoc praesenti scripto nostro confirmasse dilecto nostro
Allano de Laudre tenente nostro in Whitsled, pro bono and fideli servitio nobis
impenso and impendendo, omnia proficua and servitia debita seu debenda, viz.
Wardas cum Maritagiis, relevia, albas firmas and eorum duplicationescum
Eschaetis Curiarum, and servitiis libere tenentium de tenendriis de Lukieside,
Legerwood, Monston and Aldinniston cum pertinen. inperpetuum, infra Comitatum
de Berwick super Twedam, tenend. de nobis etc. Reddendo dictus Allanus and
haeredes sui, Domini de Whitsled unum denarium, etc. Nos vero Robertus
SENESCALLVS scotiae praedictus and haeredes nostri praedicti, Barons de
Renfrew totam terram praedictam warrantizabimus and defendemus dicto Allano and
haeredibus, etc. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Cartae nostrae
sigillum nostrum est appositum, una cum sigillo haeredis nostri praedicti, apud
Renfrew, Testibus Domino Roberto de Erskin, Joanne de Danielstoun and Adam de
Fullartoun militibus.

Whilst Robert the 2 d. was Earl of Strathern, John as Lord of Kyle did grant a
Charter to John Fullertoun, Son to Adam Fullertoun of Harperland and Easter and
Wester Calnes in Kyle Stewart; which Charter of his, is confirmed to the said
John Fullertoun, by his Father King Robert anno regni primo.

There is a Charter granted by King Robert the 2 d. whilst he was Earl of
Strathern, with Consent of John his eldest Son and Heir to Allan Lawder of the
Lands of Whitslet and Moristoun in Berwick Shire, sealed by his own Seal, and
by the Seal of John his eldest Son and Heir; Which Charter is confirmed by him
when KING, annoregni primo: This Allan is afterward designed Allan Lawder of
Hattoun, in a Charter granted to him by the said KING of the Lands of Ratha in
Edinburgh Shire, Anno Regni septimo.

These Charters and many others extant on Record, do sufficiently evince, that
John Son to Robert Earl of Strathern, was owned by his Father, as his eldest
Son and Heir, and did share with him, in his Honors and Estate long before he
was KING, longer before Eupheme Rosses death; yea, in the whole tract of her
Lifetime, and likeways by Eupheme Ross her self, and by her Children, who did
take all their Charters, either with the said John's Consent, or admitting him
as Witness in their Writings, under the Designation of the King's eldest Son
and Heir. It is also clear, that he was owned under that Designation by his
Fathers Vassals, who did take their Charters from the Father always with His
Consent, with the solemnity of his Seal, as well as his Fathers, and always
under the Designation of his eldest Son and Heir. The Bishops, Lords and
Gentlemen of the best Quality in the adjacent Country owned him as such, in
being Witnesses with him, under that Designation: But if such a Cloud of
Witnesses and Writings do leave any doubt, then that of a whole Kingdom can
leave none: And this we have also; For the Bishops of Scotland had no Right to
dispose of their Movables by Testament: King Robert the Bruce had promised ta
give them this Privilege, yet had not performed it before his death; King
David Bruce his son, in one of his last Parliaments, passes a Deed, by way of
Act, narrating his Fathers Promise and Resolution; And therefore he ratifies
the said Promise, and of new grants and confirms to all the Bishops in Scotland
Power and Privilege to dispone their Movables by Testament: Which authentic
Act and Deed stands recorded in the Records of the Great-Seal, and is as
follows.

DAVID Deigratia Rex Scotorum, notum facimus universis, quod licet ex
consuetudine ab antiquis introducta, temporibus and continuata usque praesens,
per nos and praedecessores nostros extitit, tanquam pro privilegio speciali
servatum, quod bona quecunque mobilia, Episcopis Regni nostri, temporemortis
ipsorum, Regiis sic applicata sunt usibus, quod ab ipsis Episcopis, in suis
testamentibus condendis super bonis disponen. hujusmodi omnino fuerit hactenus
adempta facultas; Quia tamen tam per cleri nostri, quam aliorum de nostro
Consilio prudentiam, sumus cum veris and lucidis rationibus informati, quod
consuctudo hujusmodi cessit hactenus and in posterum cedere demonstratur in
indecentiam honestatis Ecclesiae, and in opprobrum status cleri: Nos ob
reverentiam divini Nominis, and ad instantiam Praelatorum, super hoc nobis
instanter supplicantium, and de consensu and assensu Roberti SENESCALLI Scotiae
nepotis nostri and liberorum suorum, nec non aliorum Baronum and procerum, ac
communi Comitatuum Regni nostri in pleno nostro Parliamento, tento apud Perth,
pro nobis, nostrisque haeredibus and successoribus, de gratia nostra speciali
concedimus and praesentium literarum serie confirmamus, quod omnes and singuli
Episcopi Regni nostri, tam postea quam praesentes de quibuscunque Mobilibus
suis, tempore mortis suae, sua testamenta condere valiant, and pro sua
voluntate disponere sine aliquo objectu, contradictione vel impedimento, dicta
consuetudine, sive usu longaevi temporis in contrarium non obstante, terris
tamen, redditibus, dominiis and servitiis quibuscunque ipsorum episcopatuum cum
pertinentiis, nec non juribus patronanum ecclesiarum, quae ad regaliam nostram
pertinere consueverint and adhuc pertinent, sede vacant and omnibus and
singulis aliis praeter expressa superius juri regio, voluntatique and
dispositioni nostri, haredum ac successorum nostrorum in omnibus and per omnia
reservatis: Et si contigerit aliquem ipsorum Episcoporum Regninostri, aliquo
unquam tempore, quod absit, ab intestato decedere, volumus and tenore
praesentium concedimus, pro nobis and nostris haeredibus and successoribus in
perpetuum, quod Amici propinquiores dictorum Episcoporum, de universis suis
bonis Mobilibus, absque quocunque impedimento per nos aut Ministros nostros
faciendo, disponere, pro suae libito volunta* it is, prout pro salute animarum
ipsorum Episcoporum melius videat expedire. Et propter praefatam gratiam, ipsis
Episcopis praesentibus and futuris concessam, ipsi and eorum singuli ac
successores eorundem, pro nobis in vita nostra, and post mortem, pro anima
nostra and anima, recolendae memoriae, Domini patris nostri, nec non pro
salubri statu cujuslibet haeredum and successorum nostrorum, dum vixerint, and
pro animabus eorundem, cum ab hac luce migraverint in Cathredralibus Ecclesiis
continuo unam Capellam perpetuam, qualibet cathedrali Ecclesia constituend:
unam missam facient in perpetuum specialiter celebrari, praeter mifsas and alia
orationum suffragia, ad quae antecessoribus and successoribns nostris ex debito
jam tenentur. In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras ad perpetuam rei
memoriam duraturas sigilli nostri authentici fecimus appensione muniri,
testibus Roberto SENESCALLO Comite de Stratherne Nepote nostro supradicto,
Ioanne SENESCALLO comite de Carrick filio suo primogenito and haerede, Thoma
Comite de Mar -- Georgio de Dumbar Comite Marchiae, Willelmo Comite de

By this notable Charter, verbatim Extracted from the authentic Records, it is
evident that JOHN afterward called Robert the 3 d. was eldest Son and Heir to
Robert the 2 d. not after the third year of Robert the 2 ds. Reign, nor after
Eupheme Ross's Death, but in King David Bruces Reign, 37. years before Eupheme
Ross's Death.

Now if King David Bruce, and the whole States of the Kingdom do solemnly
Recognize and own JOHN eldest Son and Heir to Robert Earl of Strathern, before
Robert was KING, and whilst he was married on Eupheme Ross, and if all his
Vassals and Neighbors did own him also as such, and his Father likewise doing
always so.

And if his Father, Queen Eupheme, and Queen Euphem's Children did own him as
such, after he was KING; And if the whole Estates of the Kingdom have, by the
most solemn and authentic Document that is extant in all our Records, or
perhaps in Christendom, and sealed it with their Seals, which is as yet extant
in public Custody; then our Historians Assertion of Elizabeth Mure's being a
Concubine, and of her Children's being Bastards, until they were forsooth
legitimat by a Marriage, after Eupheme Rosses death (And which Marriage was
many years after Elizabeth Mur's death, since in an autentick Document after
adduced, she is spoke of, as dead, anno 1364, and her eldest Son is Witness in
that Document) which had been both fraudulent and without Fond in Law, is
false, and the whole Superstructure against the Honor of that Lady and her
Children, and against the lawful Succession and just Rights of the Crown do
fall, as founded on groundless Assertions and Untruths; Since the
aforementioned Papers do prove, that Elizabeth Mure was lawful Wife, and her
Children, lawful and eldest Children to Robert the second, and that the Right
of Succession was due to them thereby, and not by any subsequent Marriage, nor
by any Act of Parliament: And therefore Elizabeth Mure or More was first and
lawful Wife to Robert Earl of Strathern, STEWART, and thereafter KING of
SCOTLAND, and John was his eldest Son and apparent Heir, antecedently to the
Act of Parliament, and to Eupheme Rosses death.

As the foregoing Collection and Abstracts do fully verify, that Elizabeth
Mure's Children were recognized and owned as King Robert the seconds eldest
lawful Children, and his Son as his eldest Son and undoubted Heir, before
Robert was King, so soon as he was Crowned King, and in the whole Tract of his
Reign, before he married Eupheme Ross, during her Marriage, and after her
Death, and that by no less evidence, than authentic Deeds and Instruments
extant, both on Record, and in their Originals, and with no lower Avouchers
than Kings and Parliaments in Parliament conveened, and many other authentic
Documents of undoubted Faith besides; a few of which, much more all do make so
strong a Probation of Elisabeth Mure's Marriage, and the Legitimation of her
Children, that they could not be redargued by Robert the 2 d. himself, if he
would, and are stronger proofs thereof, than any perhaps in the World, can
produce after so long a time; yet to confirm this truth, I shall add one, whch
is not in our Records, but in a very public one, the notice whereof, came to
my knoledge lately by Mr. Forbes who came from Doway, and had an authentic
Extract, which he gave me, whilst he was Prisoner here; And very long after I
had made the former Collection. It is an Abstract of a Charter gtanted by
Robert STEWART of SCOTLAND, Earl of Strathern in the year 1364. Whereby he
gives, grants and founds a Chaplanary in the Church of Glasgow, and that for
performing an Obligation, under which he did ly to the Bishop of Glasgow, as
delegate from the Pope, to grant to the said Robert Earl of Strathern a
Dispensation for a Marriage to be contracted betwixt him and Elisabeth Mure, by
reason of his Affinity, and Consanguinity with her. The Original of which
Charter, with its Seals and Subscriptions, is as yet extant and entire in the
Scots College of Paris, whether it was carried by James Beton Archbishop of
Glasgow, and depositat there with many other authentic Records of that
Bishopric. The Abstract of which Deed and Instrument follows.

Nos infra scripti rogati a clarissimo viro Ludovico, Innese Reginae magnae
Britaniae Eleemosinario and Primario Collegii Scotorum in Academia Parisiensi,
ut conveniremus in regale monasterium sancti Germani, a pratis situm, in hac
urbe parisiensi, illic inspecturi and diligenter examinaturi Chartam Roberti
SENESCALLI Scotiae, datam apud Perth, Anno Domini millesimo, trecentesimo,
sexagesimo quarto, duodecimo die Mensis Januarii quae servatur authentica in
archivo ejusdem collegii denuo instaurati per reverendissimum in Christo patrem
Jacobnm a Bethum Archepiscopum Glascuensem in Scotia, quisecum vetera Ecclesiae
suae monumenta in hanc Vrbem transtulit, and partim in eodem Collegio, ad
perpetuam rei memoriam, deposuit, convenientes anno Domini millesimo
sexcentesimo, nonagesimo quarto, die vigesima sexta mensis Maii, chartam supra
commemoratam, nobis ab eodem clarissimo viro Ludovico Innese exhibitam,
diligenter inspeximus, examinavimus, and eacura, qua major adhiberi non potuit,
excussimus; eam jue testamur esse antiquam, genuinam scriptam charactere
illorum omnino temporum nullam falsi aut suppositionis suspicionem facere posse
sigillis duobus sigillatam, quae testamur etiam esse antiqua and integra: Ad
majorem autem testimonii, judiciique nostri fidem, eandem Chartam, hic de verbo
ad verbum describi curavi mus: Que talis est.

OMnibus hanc Cartam, visuris vel audituris, Robertus SENESCALLVS Scotiae,
Comes de Stratratherne salutem in Domino sempiternam, cum dudum venerabili
patri Domino Zuillano Dei gratia episcopo Glascuensi fuerit per literas
apostolicas specialiter delegatum, ut supra matrimonio contrahendo inter nos
and quondam Elisabeth More dum ageret in humanis, non obstante impedimento
consanguinitatis and affinitatis contractui matrimoniali praedicto
impedimentum, praestante authoritaate apostolica dispensaret, dummodo duas
Capellas las velunam pro arbitrio ipsius episcopi perpetuo fundaremus; ac
dictus venerablis pater, consideratis in hac part considerandis, nobiscum
super impedimento praedicto, authoritate qua supra, dispensans nobis injunxit
ut una Capellania in Ecclesia Glascuensi, ad unum certum Altar ad pensionem
december mercarum Sterling annuatim percipend. de certis Redditibus nostris
fundaretur perpetuo nosque eandem capellaniam sic fundare, fideliter promisimus
infra certum tempus jam transactum, nobis per dictum Episcopum limitatum.
Noverit universitas vistra, nos ex causa praemissa dedisse, concessisse, and
hac presenti carta nostra Confirmasse pro nobis and haeredibus nostris
perpetuo, Deo, beatae Mariae Virgini, beato Kentigerno, and uni Capellano
celebrat: and celebraturo perpetuo in Ecclesia Glascuensi praedicta, december
mercas Sterling ad sustentationem ejusdem Capellani anuatim percipend: de annuo
redditu quadraginta Librarum Sterling, exeunte de terra de Cars Abbatis, infra
vice-comitatum de Stryveline and nobis and haeredibus nostris debet. per
religiosos viros Abbatem and conventum monasterii sanctae crucis de Edinburg.
Tenen. haben. and percipien. annuatim in perpetuum eidem Capellano, qui pro
tempore fuerit per manus dictorum Religiosorum ad terminos Pentecostes, and
sancti Martini in hyeme, per portiones aequales in liberam puram and perpetuam
Eleemosynam, adeo libere, quiet, plenarie and honorifice, sicut aliqua
Elymosina per totum Regnum Scotiae liberius conceditur, percipitur sive datur:
Et nihilominus totum jus nobis competens per Chartam infeodationis recolendae
memorae Domini Regis Roberti avi nostri, sive obligatorum dictorum Abbatis and
Conventus, seu quascunque alias Evidentias ad compellendum dictos Abbatum and
Conventum adsolutionem dicti annui redditus december Mercarum in Episcopum
Glascuensem, qui pro tempore fuerit, and Capitulum Glascuense, sede vacant,
per hanc Chartam nostram perpetuo transferimus, ipsosque and eorum alterum,
quantum ad hoc nostros and haeredum nostrorum Assignatos and Assignatum
facimus, constituimus and etiam ordinamus, si forte contingat quod absit, quod
dictae december Mercae annuae per dictum Capellanum, qui pro tempore fuerit
percipi non potuerint, ut est dictum, vel ex eo quod dicti Abbas and Conventus
solvere noluerint, aut compelli non potuerint ad solutionem earundem, vel ex eo
quod nos, aut aliquis haeredum nostrorum contra praesentem infeodationem and
concessionem nostram solutionem dictarum december Mercarum impediverimus aut
impediverit, aut per nos, seu alium vel alios, clam vel Palam, direct
velindirecte procuraverimus, seu procuraverit impediri, obligamus nos and
haeredes nostros, per omniabona nostra, Mobilia and Immobilia ad solvend.
dictas december Mercas de aliis Redditibus nostris, ubi Episcopus Glascuensis, qui
pro tempore fuerit, vel Capitulum ejusdem, sede vacant, duxerit eligendum,
toto tempore quo cessatum fuerit, a solutione dictarum december Mercarum percipen.
de annuo Redditu supradicto, subjicientes nos and haeredes nostros
jurisdictioni and coertioni Episcopi Glascuensis and ipsius Officialis, qui pro
tempore fuerint, ut ipsi per omnimodam censuram Ecclesiasticam, nos and
haeredes nostros compellere valiant ad percipienda omnia and singula
supradicta, in quo casu defecerimus vel defecerint, quod absit, in aliquo
praemissorum, and ultra omnia praenotata, nos and haeredes nostri praedict.
Donationem and Concessionem nostram de dictis december Mercis annuis precipien. ut
supra de annuo Redditu, praedictis Episcopo, Ecclesiae Glascuensi and
Capellano, qui` pro tempore fuerint contra omnes homines and faeminas
warrantizabimus, acquitabimus and in perpetuum defendemus. In cujus rei
testimoniumo sigillum nostrum, una cum sigillo Joannis SENESCALLI Domini de
Kyle, primo-geneti and haeredis nostri praesentibus est appensum, his testibus
venerabili patre Domino Roberto Abbate Monasterii Killwyning and Dominis Joanne
SENESCALLO fratre nostro, Hugone de Eglingtoun and Thoma de Fauside militibus,
Joanne Merser Burgensi de Perth, Joanne de Ross, and Joanne Tayt armigeris, and
aliis, apud Perth duodecimo die Mensis Januarii, anno Domini millesimo
trecentesimo sexagesimo quarto.

Sigilibatur autem dicta Charta duobus sigillis rotundis ex cera rubra super
alba, quorum unum refert fasciam tesselatam in Circumferentia, scriptum habens
literis legibilibus sigillum Roberti SENESCALLI Scotiae, Alterum item refert
fasciam tessalatam duplario limbo, liliis contra positis, consitam in
Circumferentia, scriptum habens literis legibilibus. S. Johis SENESCALLI. in
quorum omnium fidem praesentes literas omnium nostrorum manu subscriptas,
sigillo Regalis monasterii insigniri voluimus Datum in eodem monasterio, die
and anno suprascripis, Camillus Lesellice, Abbas de Louuois. H. Caille. F.
Joannes Mabillon, Jalaze Eusebius Renaudot, Nicolaus Clement. F. Theodoricus
Ruinavt.

Et Nos Hilarious Rouilli, Dominus du Caudray Regi and sanctioribus Consiliis
Regiis in supra Rationum Curia procurator; Qui huic virorum eruditissimorum and
rerum antiquarum peritissimorum Conventui interfuimus, and Chartam illam
inspeximus and examinavimus eorum sententiam suffragio nostro approbandam
duximus, censemusque nullomodo dubitari a quoquam posse, quin ea sit verissima
and omniprorsus supicione carcus, in quorum omnium sidem hoc nos manu nostra
propria subscripsimus, and Sigillum apponi fecimus datum ut supra Rouille du
Caudray.

Et Comites Barons and alii Regis magnae Britanniae subditi infra scripti,
presents sumus dum praedicta Charta inspiceretur and examinaretur a supra
scriptis viris eruditissimis and eorum antiquorum peritissimis, candemque nos
pariter vidimus, and sanam and integram reperimus, in quorum fidem has
praesentes literas Chyrographis nostris and sigillis firmavimus, datum ut supra.

This Charter granted on the 12. day of January, 1364. in performance of a
former Obligation, and on so long before, that the eldest Son of the Marriage
with Elisabeth, viz. JOHN, is a Witness in this Deed, under the Designation of
the Lord of Kyle, and eldest Son and Heir to the said Robert; so that the
Dispensation, for a Marriage to be contracted, could be no less than ten or
twelve years before that Date. And consequently the Marriage with Elizabeth
Mure, was not in the year 1373. although Eupheme Ross had then died, as she did
not for six years thereafter: but the Marriage behoved to be, at least 20 years
before he was King, and 29 years before Eupheme Ross died, according to
Fordan's account of her Death, and 23 years before her Death, according to
Buchannan and Boethius; and if there were no more to canvell the Authority of
the groundles Histories, but this single Document it were more than sufficient:
For it first proves that Elisabeth Mure was a person of Quality, of
Consanguinty and near Relation to the King; and it is very probable she might
have been so, since the Baron of Rowallan was of near neighbor head to the
Lords of Kyle, and a proper Match for any of the Daughters of that Family: and
who by authenitck Documents yet upon Record, and extent in Rowallans
Charter-Chest, appears to have been Heretor of 100 Merk-lands, of Property and
Superiority, of old extant above these 300 years, which is more than the Estate
of ordinary Barons: and our Historians telling she was the Daughter of a Knight
called Sir Adam Mure, and there being then no Families of that Name in
Scotland, and of that Quality but Rowallan and Abercorn, those of Abercorn, who
were co-temporary with Robert Earl of Strathern, were Reginald the Father, and
Sir William the Son, and Reginald Son to Sir William, but no Sir Adam, as
appears by several Writs extant in the Records of Pasly, in the Reigns of K.
David Bruce, Robert the 2d. and Robert the 3d. there are several Charters and
Writings on Record, granted to those of Abercorn, by the said Robert of
Strathern, but never with the Designation of Consanguineus, or importing any
Relation, whereas this Dispensation evinces, that the Family of Elisabeth Mure,
was in Consanguinity to the said Robert: Nor was it a Disparagement for any
Earl to marry a Knights Daughter: and about that very time, King David Bruce
did marry the Daughter of Sir John Logie; and Robert the third then called JOHN
shortly thereafter, whilst PRINCE of SCOTLAND, did marry the Daughter of Sir
Drummond, Predecessor to the now Earl of Perth, as appears by a Charter
following on a Contract of Marriage, confirming the PRINCE, and the said Lady
in several Lands, anno Regni 3. which is extant in the Rolls of the Great Seal.

This Charter of Mortification to the Church of Glasgow likewise evinces, that
this Lady was so far from being a Concubine, that the Earl of Strathern was at
the pains to procure a Dispensation from the Pope, before he could have her in
Marriage: And by the tenor of the Paper, it is clear that the Dispensation was
obtained before the Marriage was consumate. And yet the eldest Son of the
Marriage is a conjunct Disponer in this Charter with his Father, of ten Merks
Sterling to the Chaplain of Glasgow in the year 1364. In which year, and in
this most authentic Document, under the Sign and Seal of her Husband, before
famous Witnesses, she is spoke of as dead at that time.

Nor was there so great a Disparity betwixt the first and second Marriage, for
Eupheme Ross was but a Widow, when he married her, and Widow to the Earl of
Murray; as a Charter granted by David Bruce, anno, 1341. to Robert SENESCALLVS
his Nephew, and Eupheme Countess of Murray his Wife, of the Lands of Methven
does prove, and is extant in the Records.

And to evince further, that there is certainty enough of Elisabeth Mures being
Rowallans Daughter, there are in Rowallans Charter-chest, these following
Writings. Rex,

we charge you to gife seizing till Muir the Son and Air to of the Lands

Reservand to us the Ward and Releif of ye said Landis, reservand also the
frank tenendry to Dame Iannet Mure, whyleom wife to Adam Mure Knight; halding
yir our Lers. for your Warrant. Gifen under Our Signet at Dumfermling, last day
of Feb. and of Our Reign, the 23. yheir. Which Precept of Seasin, is directed
thus at the end thereof; Dilectis and fidel. nostris vicec. de Air and Beliv.
de Cunninghame.

Nota, Where Blanks are left in this Precept, the Words are worn out in the
Original, the Paper being torn in several Places.

It is likewise to be Noted, that in the Circumference of the Seal appended to
this Precept, there appears yet visibly, DAVID REX in plain characters.

RObertus Dei gratia Rex Scotorum, Omnibus probis Hominibus totius terrae suae
Clericis and laicis salutem, sciatis nos dedisse, concessisse and hac praesenti
Carta nostra confirmasse, Dilecto Consanguineo nostro Adae Mure de Rowallane
Militi pro Homagio and servitio suo nobis impensis and impendendis, omnes
terras de Rowallane cum pertinen. jacen. in Baronia de Conyghame, infra
Vice-comitatum de Air. Quaequidem terrae cum pertinentiis fuerunt dicti Adae,
and quas dictus Adam, non vi aut metu ductus, nec errore lapsus, sed mera and
spontanea voluntate sua, in propria persona sua, in praesentia plurium Regni
nostri procerum and fidelium nobis per fustem and Baculum sursum reddidit,
pureque and simpliciter Resignavit, ac totum jus and Clameum, quae in dictis
terris; cum pertinentiis habuit, vel habere, potuit pro si and haeredibus suis,
die Confectionis praesentium in manus nostras omnino quietem clamavit in
perpetuum: Tenendas and Habendas dictas terras de Rowallane cum pertinentiis
dicto Adae, and haeredibus suis, de nobis and haeredibus nostris in feodo and
hereditate, per omnes rectas metas and divisas suas, in unam integram and
liberam Baroniam, in boscis and planis, pratis, pascuis and pasturis, moris
maresiis, aquis, stagnis and vinariis, viis, semitis, molendinis, multuris, and
earum sequelis, aucupationibus, venationibus and piscariis, brasinis and
fabrinis, cum furca and fossa, sok and sak, Tholl and Theme, Infang-thief, and
outfang-thief, cum servitiis libere tenentium earundem Terrarum de Rowallane,
cum curiis and earum exitibus; nec non cum omnibus aliis and singulis
Libertatibus, Commoditatibus, asiamentis ac justis pertinentiis, quibuscunque
tam non nominatis, quam nominatis; tam sub terra, quamsupra terram, prope and
procul, ad dictas terras cum pertinen. Spe^^antibus, seu quovismodo just^
spectare valentibus in futurum, libere quiet, plenarie integre and honorifice,
been and in pace, Faciendo inde nobis and haeredibus nostris dictus Adam, and
haeredes sui tres sectas, ad tria placita nostra Capitalia Baroniae nostrae de
Cuninghame, quolibet anno, apud Irwin. tenend. In cujus rei testimonium
praesenti Cartae nostrum magnum praecipimus apponi sigillum, testibus
venerabilibus in Christo patribus, Mattheo and Gilberto Glasguen. and
Abredonen. Eclesiarum Episcopis, Roberto de Fife and de Menteth fratre nostro
dilecto, Archibaldo de Douglass Domino Galawidiae consanguineo nostro,
Comitibus; Jacobo de Duglass Domino de Dalkeith, Thoma de Erskin consanguineis
nostris dilectis militibus; and Alexandro de Cockburne de Langtoune Custode
magni sigilli nostri, apud Irwing, undecimo die Novembris, Anno Regni nostri
secundo,

ROBERT Duke of Albany, Earl of Fife and of Menteith, and Governor of
Scotland, til al and sundry to quhais Knawladge yir presents Letters shall to
come, Greeting; for quhy that is meritable thing to bear Witness to the
suthfastness; and yarefore it is yat we do Witness by their our Letters, yat in
our last general Counsale halden at Perth, with Dliverance of the three Estates
yair beand assemblit, we let to Borch til Dame JOHANNE of Danyelstoun wife to
Quhileme our Cousin Adam Muir of Rowallan Knight, all and sundry his Lands of
the Barony of Polkelly, and all uthurs her Lands pertenand til her by way of
her Terce, or otherways of Right and of Law, the whilks were recognist of lang
time in our hands, of before: and this til all and sundry that it efferis, or
may effere, we make it kend by their our presents Letters; to the quhilks we
have gart set our Sele at Down in Menteth, the penultim day of August, the
yheir of our Lord, mill. cccc and fifteen, and of our Governal the tend year.

BY which Evidents, it is clear, that in the time of David the 2 d. there was a
Sir Adam Muir of Rowallan; that he was also in the time of Robert the 2 d. that
he had a Son called also Sir Adam, who in K. ROBERT the 3 ds time, is designed
in the Charter, CONSANGVINEVS Noster, and was indeed his Cousin German by
Elizabeth Mure.

AND for further proof, Mr. David Chalmers, one of the Senators of the College
of Justice, a man of Learning and Probity; in an Abridgement writ by him, of
all the Popes, Emperors, Kings of FRANCE, SCOTLAND and ENGLAND, which was
Printed at Paris, and dedicated to King HENRY the 3 d of France; and grounding
his Proofs, as to Scots matters on Turgot and Bishop Elphinston, (who indeed
only transcribed, and gave some Addition to Veremudus) and on the Collections
of John Swinton, and John Campbel two Churchmen; in Relation to this Subject,
has these words: Ce Roy de Escosse (viz. ROBERT the 2 d,) meurant laissa de
Elizabeth fille, d' Adam Mure Baron de Rowallan, trois fills and deux filles,
etc.

And Mr. John Lermond, Chaplain to Alexander Bishop. of St. Andrews, in his
Collection of the Scots Antiquities, asserts that he saw a Testificat under the
hand of Roger Mcadam a Priest, bearing, that he the said Roger did marry Robert
the great STEWART of SCOTLAND, to Elisabeth Mure Daughter to Rowallan.

These Testimonies are Proofs, as much as is ordinarily required for Historical
Narrations: But the forementioned Writs bearing the first Sir Adam of Rowallan
and Polkelly, to have been co-temporary with King David Bruce, and consequently
when Robert the Great STEWART was a Youth; and that the 2 d. Sir Adam is alwise
designed CONSANGVINEVS by King Robert the 3 d. and by his Brother Robert Duke
of Albany, Earl of Fife, Governor of Scotland, and both Sons to to the said
Elisabeth Mure, puts it out of all Reasonable Doubt, that this Lady was a
Daughter of that Family.

There is such a heap of Absurdities and Inconsistencies, as well as Falsehoods
in the Forgery of this Fable, that in pity to our Historiographers, I will
prosecute it no further, hoping it may teach all future Writers, to have better
Avouchers for their Assertions, than common bruit and open Fame, or to take on
Trust; what is writ by former Authors, without authentic Evidence.

The Proofs of this Marriage are so strong and clear, Objest. 1.
as to leave no Doubt, except that of their being too clear; for why should one
design his Son always his eldest Son and Heir, unless it had been doubtful that
he was so?

As this is but a silly Conjecture, in balance with the least of the former
Evidences, so it will only occur to those, who are little acquainted with the
Style of Writings at that time; for there are hundreds of Charters by private
Subjects standing on Record, then and thereafter with the very like
Designations.

A second scruple is, why should a Parliament recognize JOHN to be King Robert
the 2 ds. Son and Heir, Object. 2.
unless there were ground to doubt it? And that an Act of Parliament was
necessary to make that be believed.

But if they read this, that they call an Act of Parliament Recognizing John's
Title, they will find a Narration sufficient to answer their Objection; and
those who are acquaint with our History, know that it was ordinary for our
Kings to make public Declarations of their eldest Sons Succession: David the
first did send Malcolm his eldest Grandchild, by Henry the Prince, with Mcduff
Earl of Fife, through the whole Kingdom, to be shown and declared as his
successor and Heir: but this Custom was judged more necessary by King Robert
Bruce and his Successors; For the debate in the Succession, betwixt the Baliol
and the Bruce, having brought the Kingdom to the very Brink of Ruin; King
Robert the Bruce before his Death, did in Parliament declare, that David his
Son was his undoubted Heir and Successor; albeit, at that time, he had, neither
Son nor Brother but David only. Which is one of Mr. Cooks mistakes, who writes
as if Edward Bruce his Brother were then alive, whereas he was dead long before.

King David Bruce, after his Fathers Example, did in a Parliament at Scoon,
Publish and Declare that Robert Earl of Strathern, his Sisters Son, was his
undoubted Heir and Successor, albeit, at that time, there was none of that
Family to compete with him.

And as this Instrument, before insert, does narrate that this wise King, in
Example of his Predecessors did publish this Document; so neither wanted their
good Reasons, why these three last Kings should have done so; the Crown having
been, but lately before transported from the Baliols to their Family: so that
albeit there was no shadow of Competition in their own Family; yet there was no
imprudence in engaging the Parliament to own their Succession, and to put
frequent Bars upon the Door against the Race of the Baliol, which then did
exist both in the Baliol and the Cumming.

The last frivolous Objection is: Objest. 3.
why did our Historians unanimously assert Elisabeth Mure's being married to
Robert the 2 d. after Eupheme Ross's Death, that is to say, there are very
great proofs that Elisabeth Mure was King Roberts Wife, but some will not
believe the truth, unless you tell why our Historiographers did ly: to which
this is a sufficient Answer; you should believe truth, because it is proven,
and reject the Assertion, which is redargued by so many Demonstrations: but if
you will allow me, after clear Demonstrations of their Error, to make some
Excuse for their rash Injuries; I offer these Conjectures, viz.

Major, the eldest of these Historians, wrote his History in the beginning of
Queen Mary's Reign, some 200. years after Elisabeth Mure's Marriage, he cites
no Author, nor can we learn of any that he had, except the Manuscript of the
Continuator of Fordan, an obscure man whose Writings show, that he did take
common Reports as Proofs and Warrants for his Assertions; but Fordan, who wrote
before that time, has not the least Assertion of this, so considerable a
matter, had it been true; and Majors Philosophy, as well as his History, does
sufficiently show, that he did take for truth, what others reported at Random.

Boetius's Business was to give good Latin to the Collections of his
Predecessors, and he was happy enough in Writing, had he not unhappily stuffed
it, with too many Fables, which we must only impute to his easy Nature.

Lesly, had no Design in writing his History, but to assert his Queens Right,
and resent the Injuries done her; and therefore minded little to put his
Authors to the Test of Record.

Buchanan, who was to support a bad Design by writing excellently, his care was
not to canvell Fashoods, especialy when they contributed to his purpose, as
this Imputation, bound on Elisabeth Mure and her Succession, did; and albeit
the first must needs have founded the Account on false Report, and never looked
into the Records, which had they done, that which now appears clearly to us in
redarguing that Falsehood, would certainly have done so to them: so the
succeeding Authors have this Excuse (though I confess a bad one) that they found
their Falsehood on what was writ before them: And perhaps even the first of
them, by a supine inadvertence having heard, that Robert the 2 d. after Queen
Euphem's Death, had Children by a Concubine, to whom he had great Kindness and
that this Concubin's Name was Moram, did ignorantly confound this Concubine
Moram, with his first Wife Mure.

My Conjecture is founded on this following Charter.

ROBERTUS Dei gratia, Rex Scotorum, sciatis nos dedisse, and hac praesenti
Carta nostra Confirmasse JOANNI SENESCALL. genito inter nos and dilectam
nostram Moram, omnes and singulas terras nostras de Ballachie, and de
Moncreiff, cum pertinen. in Thanagio de Kinclaven* infra vice-comitatum, and
Perth, Tenen and Haben. eidem Joanni, and haeredibus suis de Corpore suo
legitime procreandis, quibus utique forsitan deficientibus, dilecto filio
nostro JACOBO SENESCALL. genito inter nos and Mariotam de Cairden, and
haeredibus suis de Corpore suo legitime procreandis, Quibus utique forsitan
deficien. ALEXANDRO SENESCALL. dilecto filio nostro de dicta Mariota genito,
and haeredibus suis, de Corpore suo legitime procreandis: quibus similiter
fortasse deficientibus, ad nos and haeredes nostros Reges Scotiae, plenarie and
perpetuo revrsuris, etc. Reddendo unum denarium, etc. apud Perth, 15. January,
anno Regni nostri 12.

This Charter gives you Account of 4. ^Sons of King Robert the 2 d. and two
Concubines, never mentioned in our Histories, Moram seems to have been the last
of the two Concubines, because her Son John's Charter bears a Tailzie of his
Lands to the youngest Son of Mariota, and failing of him to the second Son of
Mariota, and failing of him to the eldest Son of Mariota: For another Charter,
granted to Mariota of the Lands de nigra Aula, and others makes JOHN to be her
eldest Son, Alexander the 2 d. and James the 3 d. what this Mariota or Moram
were, I know not, that being nothing to our purpose: But if any pleases to
palliate our Historians Error, by their placing Moram the last Concubine, for
Elisabeth Mure the first undoubted Wife, they may for me, so they likewise tell
that Elisabeth Mure was dead long before the year 1364.

And thus the Propsition of this whole syllogism being undeniable, the
Assumption being proven by so many Mediums, I presume no rational man will deny
his Assent to the Conclusion, and confess that Elisabeth Mure was the first and
lawful Wife of Robert Earl of Strathern, STEWART of SCOTLAND, and that all her
Children were lawful Children, and the eldest called first JOHN, and thereafter
ROBERT the 3 d. was the lawful undoubted Heir of the Crown.

And his Title behoved to be esteemed sacred by the whole Nation, when they so
peaceably obeyed him and owned his Soveraignity, although he was one of the
weakest men, both of Body and Mind, that ever was amongst our Kings: which also
Guarded him and his Infant Children from the Rebellion of his Subjects, and the
Usurpation of his Relations, albeit Occasions seemed to favor such
Inclinations in his Uncle the Governor, a man of great Wisdom and Action, and
Vicegerent very long in the Royal Power; and who as some write, wanted not
Inclinations to aspire, had he not been keep't down, by his Brother and
Nephew's just Title.

And had there been a Shadow of Right in the Children of Eupheme Ross, who were
strengthened with so many and so great Relations in the Kingdom, it had been a
meanness in them, never to claim their Right, from so silly a Brother, and
infant Nephews,

But the Impediment did ly in the undoubted Title of ROBERT the 3 d. and of his
Son James the 1 st. which made the whole Nation resent the Attempt made for the
Crown by the Children of Eupheme Ross, in the Earl of Athol's murdering of
James the first, by a Revenge of that Deed famous over Europe; and moved most
certainly from the then Notoriety of King JAMES'S Title.

FINIS.
The Descent of K. Charles the 2 d from Fergus the 1 st.
Charles 2 Son to Charles 1 Son to James 6 Son to Queen Mary Daughter to James
5 Son to James 4 Son to James 3 Son to James 2 Son to James 1 Son to Robert 3
Son to Robert 2 Son to -- Marjory Sister to David, and Daughter to Robert 1 Son
to -- Robert Earl of Carrick, Son to Robert Bruce, who competed with the
Baliol, Son to Isabel Daughter to David Earl of Huntingtoun, Son to Henry
Prince of Scotland, Son to David 1 Son to Malcolme Canmoir Son to Duncan Son to
-- Beatrix Daughter to Malcolme 2 Son to Kenneth 3 Son to Malcolme 1 Son to
Donald 6 Son to Constantine 2 Son to Kenneth 2 Son to Alpine Son to Achaius Son
to Etsinus Son to Eugenius 7 Son to Finnanus Son to Eugenius 5 Son to --
Dongard, Brother to Maldum, and Son to Donald 4 Son to Eugenius 4 Son to
Aidanus Son to Connanus, Son to Dongardus, Son to Fergus 2 Son to Erthus Son to
Ethodius 3 Son to Fincormachus Son to -- Alduin, Son to Baldus Son to Findocus
Son to Athirco Son to Ethodius 2 Son to Ethodius 1 Son to -- Adona Sister to
Mogallus, and Daughter to Bengillis, Sister to Corbred 2, and Daughter to
Corbred 1 Son to -- Cadallam, Son to Egelfa, Sister to Metellanus, and Daughter
to Birsa, Brother to Ederus, and Son to Dochamus Son to Durstus Son to Finnanus
Son to Josina Son to Reutherus Son to Dornadilla Son to Mainus Son to FERGUS 1*
FINIS.

