THE Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence; OR, THE FOOLISHNESS OF THEIR TEACHING
DISCOVERED FROM THEIR Books, Sermons, and Prayers; And some REMARKS on Mr.
RULE's LATE VINDICATION of the KIRK.

It grieveth my Soul to think, what Pitiful, Raw, and Ignorant Preaching is
crowded most after, merely for the loudness of the Preacher's Voice: How often
have I known the ablest Preacher undervalued, and an Ignorant Man by Crowds
applauded, when I, who have been acquainted with the Preacher, ab incunabilis,
have known him to be unable to answer most Questions in the Common Catechism.
Baxter's Cure of Church: Divisions, Direct. x.

Follow not the Pastors of this Land, for the Sun is gone down upon them; as
the Lord lives, they lead you from Christ and the good old way. Sam.
Rutherford, Epist. 2. To his Parishioners.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1692.

To the R. H. P. and P. of the K; the most G. and very G. P. of the present P.
of the C. in Scotland, E. C.
My L.
AS there was never any Book and Patron more suited to one another, than this
Book is to your Lp; so there were never any Reasons more satisfying than those
that have iniduced me to this Dedication: For, first, if in this Incredulous
Age, some men should charge the following Relatitions of any falsehoods; it were
an injustice done to your Lp, to pretend, that any man is so capaable to
vindicate them as your Lp; who amidst the throng of so much Ecclesiastic and
Civil Busiess at Court (from which you are now fain to retire for case and
refreshment to your wonted Solitude in the Country) have been very constant and
close in the study of those extraordinary Books cited in this Pamphlet; and so
unwearied a hearer of those wonderful Preachers of whom I now treat, that you
have every day heard them with joy for many hours together; and never failed,
with your own hand, to write those learned and Elaborate Discourses I have here
published; and many more of the like nature; in which Zeal (to your glory and
to the shame of other Professors be it spoken) you had no equal, but one
Reverend Ruling Elder, a Bonnet-maker in Leithweind.

So that, My L* this Dedication is but only the offering to you some few of the
rare Sayings, and comprehensive Sentences which grace and adorn those Papers
that your Lp. has been at such pains to collect, and are still so careful to
preserve; and which you justly value more than all the Rights and Charters of
your very oppulent and flourishing Fortune. My L. the easy access which these
high and mighty Preachers have ever allowed your Lp. to their company, joined
to that vast Experience which you have now acquired in the Style of the
Cura^es, by your allowing them so fairly and fully to make their defenses at
the Council Board, gives you such a title to judge of the Works of these
Contending Parties, as ^o^e but your self can pretend to: Your Lp. knows well,
that it is in possible for the ablest Curate or Prelate amongst them all, to
imitate the precious, powerful, Soul-ravishing, Heart-serarching Elequence of
those Sons of Thunder, Kirkrone, Rule, Schilds, Areskine, Chrightone, Dickson,
etc. and that there is such a real difference betwixt their Sermons and that of
the Prelatical Party, that if the first be Gospel, as your Lp. is fully
persuaded; then it must be received by all men, for an unquestionable truth,
that the Gospel was never preached in Scotland when Prelacy prevailed in it, as
your Lp. and the Godly party you Patronize, have often affirmed: And though this
were not evident to all that compare the Works of the present Professors with
those of their Opposits, yet your Lps. simple word would pass in the World for
a sufficient proof of it, Lying, Slandering, or the least known falsehood being
infinitely below such a true Gentleman: Nay, there is no Heroic Virtue more
conspicuous in your Lp, than your Veracity, which has so filled the Minds and
Mouths of all who intimately know you, that it must needs one day make a
considerable figure in the account of your Lps. Life, which cannot miss to see
the light in a short time, being, that for those three years last past, you
have so successfully labored to furnish plenty of Memoirs and Authors for such
a work.

But, 2dly. Some of the Malignants, who have no taste for such Spiritual
Sayings, as daily drop from the Pens and Tongues of the Covenanted Brethren,
may accuse the Books and Sermons here cited of Nonsense; but for as ill natured
as the World is grown, they must own, that your Lp. has been very long, and
very intimately acquainted with the truest and best Nonsense; so that being a
complete Master of it your self, it must be allowed that you are also a very
good Judge. Besides, My L. the Curates themselves cannot deny, but that your
Lp. is fully qualified to judge of the Works of such learned men as are spoke
of in this Treatise; if they consider your wonderful knowledge of, and great
concern for the Mother University at St. Andrews, which had the happiness to be
nearest to your Lp, and to be your particular charge; and the Kingdom is not
unsensible how you Reformed and Purged it thoroughly, with such unspeakable
Justice and Impartially, that even aged Gentlemen, Drs. of Divinity, and Heads
of Colleges, some who had been your Lordships own Masters, and one your
Kinsman, had not he least regard nor respect from you, because of their wanting
Covenant Grace, without which no man is valuable in your Lps. Eyes: Let men but
consider with what deliberation and forefight you did proceed, and what Prudent
and Learned Advice you did follow in providing for the Education of the rising
Generation in that Society; and then they can never doubt of your being
wonderfully qualified both to be a Patron and a Judge of this Book.

These Considerations, joined to that of your Lps. unexpressible Merit (for
which I want a Comparison) naturally led me to beg you would take the following
Flowers of Presbyterian Eloquence into your Protection, as cordially as you do
the Anthors of them: If your Lps. unknown Modesty would allow it, I could tell
the World in a few words, some of your natural and acquired Endowments: To your
Courage and Conduct which are equal, you have added such a success, as to raise
the Church and State of Scotland to be the wonder and amazement of the World:
Such burning and unquenchable Zeal; such strange and unaccountable Prudence,
and unparalled Piety has appeared in all your public Actions, that if
others had but wrought together with your Lp. in any measure, then I dare say
(as your Lp. excellently words it, in your pious printed Speech to the
Parliament) A greater dispatch had been made of the Prelatists, and many honest
suffering Ministers e're now had been delivered of their pinches; and the
Enemies of the Kirk and Covenant had evanished, as they did lately from Court,
when your Lp. condescended to appear in person at it: It is to you that the
Nation owes her miraculous deliverance from the Idolatries of the Creed,
Lords-Prayer, and Gloria Patri: It Is your Lp. that has rescued us from the
Superstitions of observing Christmas, Easter, and Whitsunday, and from all the
Popish fopperies of Cassocks, close sleev'd Gowns and Girdles: It Is your Lp.
that enriched Their Majesty's Treasure with the Revenues of fourteen fat
Bishops, and with admirable expedition have voided more than half of the
Churches of the Kingdom; and advanced such a set of Preachers as it is certain,
never flourished in any period of the Church of Scotland under any of their
Majesty's Predecessors; and now that some malignant Lords have been brought
into the Council again; your Lp. has retired from it, bravely scorning to sit
at the same Board with the Opposers of the Cause.

My L. though the times have been reeling and dangerous, yet your Lp. has, by
extraordinary management, put your self beyond the greatest reach and Malice of
Fortune, for you have, indeed, deserved well of all Parties; K. James is
obliged to thank you for the real Service you have done him; and K. William for
your good Will to serve His Majesty: The Presbyterian Clergy own their good
Livings to you; and the Episcopal Divines are bound to you, for advancing them
to the Honor of being Confessors: The stubborn Highlanders owe all their
Composition-money to your Lp; and the West Country Rabble were highly enriched
by your Lp's Countenauce and Protection: You scorn that malignant way of making
your Palace a Cooks Shop for Strangers; but though your Commons be short, yet,
it is well known, that your Graces are long; at least after Dinner, the full
length of a Curates Sermon, and that is three quarters of an hour: There is one
thing more that your Lordship is most remarkable for, and that is, your daily
practice of Family Duty; it is well known, that there have been more new
Creatures begotten in your Lp's Family, than in any other we have yet heard of;
and in this matter, such is your great Goodness and Humility, that you
condescend often to allow to some of your Servants, the Paternal Honor that is
known to be due to your Lp. But all these, and many more such like
extraordinary Qualifications which the World admire in your Lordship, are
nothing to those Supernatural Gifts and Graces which are so evident in all your
Actions, that you often take God to witness, that you never make one step
without the special Assistance and Direction of the Holy Ghost.

My L. these and other Reasons (that I now omit, since I hope this shall not be
the last Address of this nature) makes me bold to give your Lp. this trouble,
and humbly to beg your Protection to what you so much value, and that you would
but once at least, grant the Petition of,

My L. Your Lp's most Obedient, and most Obliged Servant, Jacob Curate.

SECT. 1.
The true Character of the Presbyterian Pastors and People in Scotland.
OUR Blessed Savior, in his Sermon on the Mount, bids us beware of false
Teachers; and tells us, That by their Fruits we may know them: Such Fruits are
not open and public Scandals, for then the simple Multitude (that measure
Religion by the Sound and not by the Sense) could not so easily be deluded by
them. It must be acknowledged, that the End of Preaching should be the
Edification of the Hearers; the Design of it being to persuade Men to Piety
toward God, and Charity toward one another, and to draw the Image of God upon
the Souls of Men. But it will appear from what follows, That the Scotch
Presbyterians Sermons have no such tendency; for the Preachers themselves (who
would have the world believe, that they only are the Powerful, and
Soul-refreshing Gospellers) have not been industrious to draw the likeness of
God upon the Hearts of their Hearers, but merely to impress their own Image
there; that is, they labored not to make good Christians, but rigid
Prebyterians*

That I may not be thought to assert this without ground (for I would not
slander the Devil) I shall first give you the true Character of the
Presbyterian Pastors and People. 2. I shall say before you, some remarkable
passages taken out of their own Printed Books, to confirm this Character. 3.
Some special Notes (written from their own Mouths) as they preached them under
the happy Reign of K. Charles II, and since the late Revolution. Lastly, I
shall give you some taste of that Extemporary Gibberish, which they use instead
of Prayer, and for which they have justled out, not only all the Liturgies of
the Pure and Primitive Church, but even the Lord's Prayer it self, because it
is an evident Argument and Pattern for Christians praying in a set Form; and in
all this I shall say nothing but what I know to be true, and what I am ready to
make appear to be so, upon a fair and free trial, if that may be had where
Presbyterians Rule.

In the first Place, then I am to give you the true Character of Presbyterian
Pastors and People. I shall begin with the People, for they are truly the
Guides, and their Pastors must follow them, whom they pretend to Conduct. For
the Preachers of the new Gospel, knowing that their trade has no old nor sure
Foundation, they are forced to flee to this new and unaccountable Notion, that
the Calling and Constituting of Ministers is in the Power of the Mob: Now the
World knows by too long and sad Experience, that their Mobile is not led by
Reason nor Religion, but by Fancy and Imagination; so that we may be sure when
the Election of Ministers is put in their hands, they will choose none but such
as will readily sooth and indulge them in their most extravagant and mad
Humors: What Ministers can be expected from the choice of a People void of
common Sense, and guided by irregular Passions, who torture the Scripture,
making it speak the Language of their deluded Imaginations. They will tell you,
that ye ought to fight the Battles of the Lord, because the Scripture says in
the Epistle to the Hebrews, Without shedding of Blood there is no Remission.
They are generally Covetous and Deceitful; and the Preaching they are bred
with, has no tendency to work them into the contrary Virtues. They call Peace,
Love, Charity, and Justice, not Gospel, but dry Morality only. I had once very
great difficulty to convince one of them, that it was a Sin for him to cheat
and impose upon his Neighbor in matters of Trade, by concealing the faults of
his Goods from the Buyer. He asked my Reason: I told him, Because he would not
wish one to deal so with himself. That is (said he again) but Morality: for if
I shall believe in Christ I shall be saved. I asked him, Was not this Christ's
saying, Whatsoever ye would that others should do unto you, that do you unto
others? Yes, he said, that was good, but that Christ, because of the hardness
of the Jews Hearts spoke very much Morality with his Gospel. The poor man spoke
as he was taught and bred in the Conventicles; for it will be very long e're
they hear a Sermon upon Just Dealing, or Restitution of ill-gotten Goods; and
who knows not that despising of Dominions, speaking evil of Dignities, and
rising in Arms against the Lord's Anointed, is with them but fighting the
Battles of the Lord. One George Flint, in the Parish of Smalholm, in the Shire
of Teviotdate, was looked upon as a very great Saint among them; and yet out of
Zeal against the Government, he kept a Dog whom he named Charles, after the
King; and a Cat which he named Katherine, after the Queen; and another Dog whom
he named Gideon, after the Minister of the Parish. They are a People that will
not Swear in common Discourse for a World, yet they never scruple before a
Judge, any Perjury that may seem to advance the Cause, nor stand in their
ordinary dealings to cheat for a penny; nay, Murder it self becomes a Virtue
when the work of the Covenant seems to require it; and the new Gospel which
they Profess is so far from condemning Lying, Cheating, Murder and Rebellion,
when committed to fulfill the Ends of the Solemn League, that many of these whom
they reckon Martyrs, have at their Execution gloried in these Crimes, as the
sure Evidences of their Salvation.

Morality being thus discountenanced by the generality of that Party, the poor
People are thereby locked up in a Cell of Ignorance. This did clearly appear,
when the Laws, in the former Government, discharged Conventicles, the people
being brought thereby home to the Churches: When the Ministers began to
Catechize them in the Principles of the Christian Religion, they found them
grossly Ignorant; for when they were desired to repeat the Creed, Lord's-Prayer,
and Ten Commandments; they told they were above these childish Ordinances; for
if they believed in Christ, they were certainly well: And yet these Ignorants
would Adventure to pray Ex tempore, and in their Families to Lecture on the
most mysterious Chapters of Ezekiel, Daniel, or the Revelation. A grave and
good Minister told me, that upon a certain occasion he desired a very zealous
She-Saint to repeat the Creed: And that she returned this Answer, I know not
what ye mean by the Creed. Did not your Father, says the Minister, promise to
bring you up in that Faith? Indeed did he not (said she) for I thank my
Savior, that Superstition was not in my Father's time. What then was in your
Father's time? (said the Minister.) It was (said she) the holy Covenant, which
you have put away. Whether was it the Covenant of Works or Grace? said the
Minister. Covenant of Works, said she, that is handy Labor. It was the
Covenent of Grace which was made with Adam, and which all of you have put away.
At Night she went home, and a number of the sighing Fraternity flocked after,
pretending to hear her pray: Their Family Exercise being ended, she told them
the Conference that passed betwixt the Curate and her, and they all concluded
she had the better, and that she was certainly more than match for the ablest
Curate in that Country.

Generally their Conventicles produced very many Bastards, and the Excuses they
made for that, was, Where Sin abounds, the Grace of God superabounds. There is
no Condemnation to them that are in Christ. Sometimes this, The Lambs of Christ
may sport together: To the pure all things are pure. Nay, generally they are of
Opinion, That a Man is never a true Saint, till he have a sound fall, such as
that of David's with Bathsheba. The following Narration of a well known Truth
shall serve for Instance.

A party of King Charles II. his Guards being sent to apprehend Mr. Dav.
Williamson (one of the most Eminent of their Ministers now in Edinburgh) for
the frequent Rebellion and Treason he preached then at Field Meetings; and the
party having surrounded the House where he was, a Zealous Lady, Mistress of the
House, being very Solicitous to conceal him, rose in all haste from her Bed,
where she left her Daughter of about Eighteen Years of Age, and having dressed
up the Holy Man's Head with some of her own Night Clothes, she wittily advised
him to take her place in the warm Bed with her Girl; to which he modestly and
readly consented: And knowing well how to employ his time, especially upon such
and extraordinary Call, to propagate the Image of the Party; while the Mother,
to divert the Troopers enquiry, was treating them with strong drink in the
Parlour; he to express his gratitude, applies himself with extraordinary
Kindness to the Daughter, who finding him like to prove a very useful Man in
his Generation, told her Mother she would have him for her Husband; to which
the Mother, though otherwise unwilling, yet for concealing the Scandal, out of
Love to the Cause consented, when the mystery of the Iniquity, was wholly
disclosed to her. This whole Story is as well known in Scotland, as that the
Covenant was begun and carried on by Rebellion and Oppression.

Nor was the Actor, who is at this day one of the chief Props of the cause, Me
was but last Year sent to Agent their Affairs at Court.
more admired for his extraordinary diligence and courage in this Matter, than
for his excellent Invention in finding a passage of St. Paul's, to prove that
the Scandal of this was very consistent with the state of a person truly
Regenerate; Verily, I do not, said he, deny, but that, with St. Paul, I have a
Law in my Members, warring against the Law of my Mind, and bringing me into
Captivity into the Law of Sin, which is in my Members. Now according to the
Gloss which that whole Party puts upon this Scripture, saying, That St. Paul
here speaks of himself, and does not personate an Unregenerate Man, this
Defense of Williamson's must be allowed to be good; as also that the height of
Carnality is consistent with the greatest Grace. Even so the Heretics, in St.
Peter's Days, wrested some things hard to be understood in St. Paul's Epistles,
to their own Destruction.

There was among them a married Woman near Edinburgh, who had paid several
Fines for not going to Church, yet scrupled not to commit Adultery with one of
the Earl of Marr's Regiment, and the Fellow himself: that was Guilty, told, out
of detestation to their damnable Hypocrisy, that the vile Woman had the
confidence, in time of her Abomination, to say to him; O you that are in Mar
's Regiment, but you be pretty able Men, but yet ye art great Covenant
Breakers; alas, few or none of you are Godly.

There are very many Instances of this Nature, but I shall only add one more
which was old me by a Gentleman of good Reputation and Credit, who himself
confessed to me, with regret, that in the heat of his Youth, he had been guilty
of the Sin of Fornication with a Gentlewoman of that Holy Sect; he says, that
being with her in a Garret, and she hearing some body coming up Stairs, she
said to him, Ah, here is my Aunt, I must devise a Trick to divert her; upon
which she ^ell a whining and howling aloud, as these People use to do at their
most private Devotions, O to believe, to believe; O to have Experience, said
she. And by that means she diverted her Aunts further Approaching, who
instantly retired, commending her Niece's Zeal and Devotion. The Gentleman
conceals the Woman's Name, out of regard to her Honor and his own; begs Pardon
for the Sin, and tells it only to discover the abominable Nature of their
Hypocrisy.

They are generally deluded by Persons that have but specious pretenses to
Godliness. And such is the force, that a loud Voice and a whining Tone, in
broken and smothered words, have upon the Animal Spirits of the Presbyterian
Rabble; that they look not upon a Man as endued with the Spirit of God, without
such canting and deformity of Holiness. A person that has the dexterity of
whining, may make a great Congreation of them weep with an Ode of Horace, or
Eclogue of Virgil, especially if he can but drivel a little either at Mouth, or
Eyes, when he repeats them. And such a person may pass for a Soul-ravishing
spiritualist, if he can but set off his Nonsense with a wry mouth, which with
them is called, A Grace pouring down Countenance. The snuffling and twang of
the Nose, passes for the Gospel sound; and the throwings of the Face, for the
motions of the Spirit. They are more concerned at the reading the Speeches of
their Covenant Martyrs, yea such Martyrs as died for Rebellion and Murder, than
in reading the Martyrdom of St. Stephen, or any of his Followers. A Sermon of
mere Railing and Nonsense will af^ect them more than Christ's Sermon on the
Mount; and no wonder, for all they do is to affect the Passions, and not the
Judgment.

One Mr. Daniel Douglass, an old Presbyterian Preacher in the Mers, simple man
as to the World, yet of more Learning, Ingenuity and good Nature than most of
them; he was not long ago preaching before the meeting of his Brethren, and
ago annalysing a Text Logically, and very remote from vulgar Capacities, yet
so powerful and melting was his Tone and Actions, that in the Congregation he
spies a Woman weeping, and pointing toward her, he cries out, Wife, what makes
you weep? I am sure thou understandest not what I am saying; my Disourse is
directed to the Brethren, and not to the like of you; nay, I question whether
the Brethren themselves understand this that I am speaking.

Several Instances can be given of their strong delusions; this is none of the
least, that they take it for a sure Evidence upon their Deathbeds, that it is
well with them, because they never heard a Curate in their lifetime. For an
indulged Presbyterian, who is the Author of the Review of the History of the
Indulgence, tells us thus much, Page 527, and Page 528, That some of the
leading people among the Presbyterians, were of Opinion, that Baptism by
Episcopal Ministers is the mark of the Beast; and the hearing of them as
unlawful as Fornication, Adultery, or the worshipping the Calves of Dan and
Bethel: And I think that a Curate can tell no worse tale of them, than this,
which a Presbyterian himself owns and declares to the World in Print.

I cannot here pass by what happened a few Years ago, in the Parish of Tindrum
in the South-west; a person that was Executed for Bestiality there, in his
Prayers blessed God, that for a long time he had heard no Curate preach; at
which the Hearts of some Presbyterian Saints began to warm with Affection to
him, and expressed so much Charity, that upon that account they doubted not but
that he might be saved; and were sorry that he was not allowed to live, because
of the good that such a Zealous man might have done.

It is a well known truth in the Parish of Teviotdale, that two or three
sighing Sisters, coming to a Man in Prison, the Night before he was burnt for
Bestiality; the wholsomest Advice they gave him was this, O Andrew, Andrew,
Andrew, all the Sins that ever you committed are nothing to your hearing the
cursed Curates; if you get Pardon for that Sin, Andrew, all is right with you.

A young Woman in Fife, Daughter to a Presbyterian Preacher there, reading that
of St. Peter, Christ the Bishop of our Souls, blotted out the word ( Bishop)
and in the place thereof incerted Presbyterian of our Souls. And by the same
Spirit of Biggotry, one of her Zealous Sisters in the same Family, tore every
where out of her Bible the word Lord; Because, said she, it is polluted by
being applied to the Profane Prelates.

Instances of their Madness and Delusions might swell into an huge Volume, but
I shall only mention two or three which are commonly known. What greater
Instance of Delusion, than that Seven or Eight thousand people should be raised
to Rebellion at Bothwel-bridge, from laboring their ground, and keeping their
Sheep; and that by Sermons assuring them, that the very Windlestraws, the Grass
in the Field, and Stars in Heaven would fight for them: And that after the
Victory they should possess the Kingdom themselves. O it is the promised Land,
and you Israelites shall inherit it: but in this they found their Preachers to
prove salve Prophets. After their Defeat, a Gentleman told me; that going to
view the Field, where the Battle was fought, he saw one in the Agony of death,
crying out, Ah, cheated out of Life and Soul: The Gentleman inquired what he
meant by that expression, Ah (said he) our Preachers, our Preachers, they made
us believe, that as sure as the Bible was the word of God, we should gain the
day, for that the Windlestraws should fight for us.

About the same time a person of Quality returning from the West, with some of
the King's Forces, being necessitate to lodge in a Country House, where there
was but one Woman, and she with child; for the Men and all that were able to
run, had fled out of the way. The Nobleman encouraged the poor Woman, desiring
her not to be afraid; sent one upon his own Horse for Midwife and other Women
to attend her. The poor Woman surprised and encouraged with this unexpected
kindness, began to talk more freely, and said, Sir, I see you that are
Kings-men are not so ill as we heard ye were; for we heard that it was ordinary
for you to rip up Women with Child; but pray will you tell me, Sir, what sort
of Men are your Bishops? They are, said he, very good Men, and they are chosen
out from among the Clergy to oversee the rest of the Ministers. But are they,
says she, shapen like other Men? Why ask you that, said he? Because our
Preachers made us believe, the Bishops were all cloven-footed. There is scarce
one of an hundred among the Presbyterian Vulgar, that will be either reasoned
or laughed out of the strange Opinions they have of Bishops; as particularly,
that they will not suffer Witches to be burnt, because ( as they allege) every
Bishop loses five hundred Marks Scots, for every Witch that is burnt in his
Diocese. Nay, the generality of The Presbyterian Rabble in the West, will not
believe that Bishops have any Shadows, being persuaded by some of their
Teachers, that the Devil has taken away their Shadow as an earnest of the
Substance, for their opposing of Covenant Work in the Land.

I shall add but one Instance more of the silliness of the Presbyterian People,
and that is of a certain person well known both in the North and South of
Scotland, for being not a degree and an half from an Idiot, and to be a Man
that can scarcely read an English Book. This person takes on him to be a
Preacher, and among Presbyterian People has procured a great esteem to himself
for a wonderful and rare Gospeller, for having not the least degree either of
natural or acquired Parts, they therefore conclude him to have a large stock of
Grace, and to be a most heavenly Man. He came lately to the Mers, where he was
never known before, and lodging on a Saturday's Night in a Country-town, he
caused call in the good people in the Town to Prayers. Immediately the House
was filled with a Crow'd, then he lectures to them on the first of Ezekiel, and
he told them, that the Wheel spoken of in the Sixteenth Verse, was the
Antichrist, and the Wheel in the middle was the Bishops and the Curates; For
(says he) here is a Wheel within a Wheel, just so the Curates are within the
Bishops, and both of them within Antichrist. Then the Wheels are (says my Text)
lifted up; even so, Beloved the Bishops and Curates are lifted up; lifted up
upon Coaches with four Wheels, just as Satan lifted up Christ to the Pinnacle
of the Temple, but God will take the Hammer of the Covenant in his own Hand,
and knock down these proud Prelates, and break all their Coaches and their
Wheels to pieces, Beloved, and lay the Curates on their Backs, so that they
shall never rise again; for the Prophet says here, that when they went they
went upon their four sides, and they returned not when they went, Beloved: That
you may see it very plain and clear, for though they may go out and Persecute
God's own Covenanted People, yet they shall return falling upon their
Broad-sides, and get such a fall that they shall never be able to stand or
return to persecute the Godly, so long as they go upon their four sides, and
are lifted up upon four Wheels. The people said, they never heard such a sweet
Tongue in a Gracious Man's Head. He spoke much against those that took an
Indulgence from K. James. The next day he told them, that the Episcopal
Minister in the Parish was his Cousin, therefore he would go to Church, and
hear how he could Preach. Truly, Sir (says the people) we shall go along with
you wherever you go, albeit it be our ordinary to go to the Meeting house in
the Parish. And that same very day he brought all the Dissenters in the Parish
to the Church. The people entreated him to deal with the Minister to turn
Presbyterian, and promised to desert the Meeting House Preacher, whom they
ordinarily heard, and to hear the Episcopal Minister upon his Conversion. He
promised to deal very seriously with him: For that purpose, the next day he
came to the Ministers House, and after a few sighs and affected groans, he
expostulates thus, Dear Cousin, what makes you own perjured Episcopacy? What
have you to say against that Office? replies the Minister. I have many
Arguments, said he, and one I am sure you can never answer; and you will find
it in Psalm. 45. 1. My Heart enditeth a good thing: Now is not this, says he, a
plain Argument against Bishops; for when will they endite good things? The
people wondered that the Minister could not be persuaded by so clear an
Argument, and said, Poor Soul, his Heart is heardened, he has not Grace enough
to believe and be Converted. This Account is proved before very many famous
witnesses in the City of Edinburgh. All I have told of them is truth, but the
hundred part is not told. You may judge of the Tree by these Fruits; and of
what a delicate Set of Reformers we have at his time in the West and South of
Scotland.

I come in the next place, to give you a true Character of their Preachers. And
truly, to be plain, they are a Proud, Sour, Inconversable Tribe, looking
perfectly like the Pharisees, having Faces like their horrid Decree of
Reprobation. They are without Humanity, void of common Civility, as well as
Catholic Charity, so wholly enslaved to the Humors of their people, that they
give no other Reason why they converse not with Men of a different Opinon, but
only that their People would take it very ill if they should. However, I fear
there is something in it more, and that is, lest their Ignorance should be
discovered; for it is certain, they have as little Learning as good Nature: And
we have both felt and seen, that that is next Neighbor to none at all.

They have their Souls cast into a different mould from all Christians in the
World. There is no Church but they differ from, both in Worship and Practice:
They have quite banished the use of the Lord's Prayer, and what ridiculous
stuff they have foisted in for it, shall be told in its proper Place, The
smoothest reason that they allege for their forbearing it, is, That the use
thereof is inconvenient. This is Dr. Rule's own Reason in that pretended Answer
he has published to the Ten Questions concerning Episcopal and Presbyterian
Government in Scotland. Their famous Preacher James Kirktown, when one of the
Magistrates of Edinburgh enquired why they did forbear the public use of the
Lord's Prayer? told downright, because it was the badge of the Episcopal
Worship. I doubt not but many have heard long ere now of a Conference that past
betwixt my Lord B... and a ruling Elder in the North. In short it is this, Five
Presbyterian Preachers, last Year, appointed themselves Judges, to purge Two or
Three Diocesses in the North. They took to assist, or to accompany them, some
whom they call Ruling-Elders, one of whom entreated my Lord B... to further
with his help the happy and blessed Reformation, particularly by giving in
Complaints against Ignorant, Scandalous, and Erroneous Ministers, that the
Church of God might be replenished with the Faithful: Truly then (says my
Lord) there is one whom I can prove to be very Atheistical, Ignorant and
Scandalous. At which the Ruling-Elder began to prick up is Ears; And pray you,
Sir, (says he) who is the Man? Indeed (says my Lord) I will be free with you,
it is Mr. James Urquhart, one of your own Preachers, who is come with you now
to sit as a Judge upon others; and by Witnesses of unquestionable Honesty I can
make it appear that he said, If ever Christ was drunk upon Earth, it was when
he made the Lords Prayer. And I appeal to your self, who are a Ruling-Elder,
whether or not this be Blasphemy? Some other things of Scandalous Nature I can
prove against him. O but (says he) we are not come here to Judge our Brethren,
our Business is with the Curates.

It is ordinary to hear their People say, That if Christ were on Earth again,
he would think shame of that Form, that they could make better themselves, and
that he was but young when he composed it. All which Blasphemies must needs be
the Effects or Consequent of what they hear from their Preachers. And as for
the Apostles Creed, it is not so much as once mentioned at the Baptising of
Infants; for all that they require at Baptism, is, That the Father promise to
breed up the Child in the Belief of the Westminster Confession of Faith, and
that he shall adhere to all the National Engagements laying on them to be
Presbyterians. Though Mr. Rule. who defends the New Gospellers by denying their
Prints, and by palpable untruths, seems to disown this in his Second
Vindication of his Kirk. Yet much honester Presbyterians affirm it, and glory
in it. Vid. Covenants with acknowledgment of Sins and Engagement to Duties,
renewed at Lesmahago. 1688. Et Hind let loose.


Here I cannot forget what Mr. John Dickson, Preacher in the Meeting House at
Kelso, said once in a Sermon; Ask ( said he) an old dying Wife, if she has any
Evidence of Salvation, she will tell you, I hope so; for I believe the Apostles
Creed, I am taken with the Lord's Prayer, and I know my Duty to the be Ten
Commands. But I tell you, Sirs, there are but old rotten Wheel-barrows, to
carry Souls to Hell. These are Idols that the false Prelates and Curates have
set up, to obstruct the Covenant and the Work of God in the Land.

For reading the Scriptures in Churches, they have abolished that with the
rest, and in place thereof, he that raises the Psalm reads the Sermon that was
preached the Sabbath before; And for the Gospel Hymn, called the Doxology, or
Gloria Patri, they reject that as a superstitious prelatical Addition to the
Word of God. A certain Maid being lately Catechized by one of these Preachers,
the first question he proposed to her was, Maggi, Now what think you are the
Saints doing in Heaven? I know not, Sir: O Maggy, that is a very easy
question, answer it, Maggy. I think then (said she) they are doing that in
Heaven which ye will not let us do on Earth; What is that, Maggy? says he. They
are singing Glory to the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, Sir. Now that is your
Mistake, Maggy (said he) for there is no such malignant Songs sung there; you
have been quite wrong taught, Maggy, the Curates have deceived you, Maggy.

They have no distinguishing Garb from Laymen, and yet they took upon them to
admonish the King's Commissioner to their last Assembly, for wearing a Scarlet
Cloak, and told him plainly, That it was not decent for his Grace to appear
before them in such a Garb; upon which my Lord told them, That he thought it as
undecent for them to appear before him in gray Cloaks and Cravats. When the
Church of Arrol was last Year made Vacant by the Expulsion of the Reverend and
Learned Dr. Niclson, the Elders and Heritors there, whereof many were Gentlemen
of the best quality met together, that according to the present Law and
constant Practice of the Presbyterians they might choose and call another
Minister to be their Parson; after they had unanimously agreed, and signed, and
sent a formal Legal Call to Mr. Lisk, a person of indisputable Qualifications
for the Ministry, in which he has been employed with great Reputation for
several Years in the North, and one who has given signal Evidence of his good
Affections to heir present Majesty's; my Lord Kinnard, Chief Heritor, went with
the rest to signify their Calling of Mr. Lisk to the Presbytery; at my Lords
entering into the place where the Presbytery was sitting, he asked if they were
the Ministers of the Presbytery; Do not you see that we are? said the
Moderator. My Lord replied, That by their Garb no Body could know them, and
that their Spirit was invisible; now whether it was for this Jest, or because
they knew Mr. Lisk to be Episcopal in his Judgment I know not; but this I know,
that these grave New Gospellers, rejected the Call, in despite both of the
Heritors and of their own Law, brought in a Hotheaded Young Man of their own
Stamp and Election. However, that they use no distinguishing Garb, must be
acknowledged to be very Congruous; for truly they are but Laics, and it will
surpass all their Learning, to prove that they are Ministers of Jesus Christ,
but merely Preachers sent and called by the People, who are generally but very
ill Judges of Men's Qualifications for the Ministry; hence their constant and
vast Heats and Divisions about their calling of able Men. The Mobile ordinarily
take their Measures only from the appearances of things, and indeed a
Presbyterian Preachers Outside is not his worst, for they appear commonly,
though in Lay-garb, yet in Sheeps-clothing; but as we have often formerly, so
do we now, feel that they are inwardly nothing but ravenous Wolves.

Now as to their Sermons (which is the main design of this Paper) they are
still upon the Government and the Times, preaching up the Excellency of their
Kirk-Government, which they call Christ, the Crown, Scepter, and Government of
Christ. This was an old Custom among them to preach up the Times, and the
neglect thereof they called sinful Silence. When in the former Confusions of
the State they violently intruded themselves and Usurped the Government of the
Church, which they never had in settled Times. In those Days at a public Synod
they openly reproved one Mr. Lighton for not preaching up the Times. Who (says
he) does preach up the Times? It was answered, That all the Brethren did it.
The (says Mr. Lighton) if all you preach up the Times, you may allow one poor
Brother to preach up Christ Jesus and Eternity. But this was never, not is like
to be the Design of their Sermons; for, trace them in their Politics, Morals,
Mysticks, and Metaphysics, you shall find them Selfish, Singular, and full of
Nonsensick Rhapsodies, These perhaps may seem hard Words, but an Ethiopian
must be painted black, and that is no sault in the Painter.

For their Politics, there is no Government under the Sun could tolerate them,
if they but act in other Nations as they have done in Scotland since their
Intrusion there; to instance but in our Times, Did nor Mr. Cargill, one of
their Celebrated Preachers, Excommunicate all the Royal Family, the Bishops and
Curates, and all that should hear them and adhere to them? They, indeed, that
affect the Name of Sober Presbyterians disowned these Hill-men, particularly
because they refused to join with them in thanking King James for the
Toleration, which he granted to them. And yet such is the Disingenuity of these
who would be called Sober Presbyterians, that they cry out that they suffered
Persecution; whereas it was the Cameronians only, whom they disown, that did
suffer any thing: For these others were settled in Churches by an Indulgence
granted by the King. Against which Indulgence all the Sufferers, like true
Presbyterians, gave their Testimony, calling it a mere brat of Erastianism.
What Government could tolerate such Ministers, as John Deckson, whom I named
before, who in a Sermon Preached by him in the Parish of Gallashiels, declared,
That it was all one to Sacrifice to Devils, as to pay Cess to King Charles. The
Author of the Review of the History of Indulgence, one of the Sober sort of
Presbyterians, tells, Page 610. the same of a Preacher of his Acquaintance.

I shall say no more of their Sentiments concerning Government, but only referr
the Readers to their Printed Acts of General Assemblies, and to those Covenants
which themselves have Printed, often Subscribed and Sworn, and which are now
again, for the benefit of Strangers, published in that Excellent Vindication of
King Charles II. his Happy Government in Scotland by Sir George Mac Kenze, in
which it is Evident, that they plainly renounce Monarchy and all Power, but that
of the Covenanted Kirk.

As to their Disposition to live peaceably, I appeal not only to their
Principles vented in these Covenants and Acts of their general Assemblies, but
also to the many private Murders, and open Rebellions which they have been
guilty of under every Reign, since their first entry into Britain. Even in our
own Days, since 1666, they have raised no less than Three formidable
Rebellions, besides many lesser Insurrections and Tumults, wherein many
Christians have suffered. With what Violence did they flee to Arms, and
persecute all who were not of their Party, upon the occasion of the late
Revolution; when, if it had not been for their indiscreet and fiery Zeal, this
Kingdom might have been happily united to England: But what ever Advantage such
an Union might have brought to the Church and State; yet, because it seemed to
have no good Aspect to the covenanted cause, therefore the motion of it, though
offered, was industriously stifled, and that Opportunity, which we can hardly
hope to recover, quite lost. Nay, under the present Government, for which they
in the beginning pretended to be so zealous, it is well known over all the
Kingdom, that they were last Year contriving by force, without any regard to
Authority, to have the Solemn League renewed, and imposed after the old manner,
upon all Men, Women and Children; and in order to this good end, many Thousands
of them, at Field meetings in the West, conveened after their ordinary way,
with Bibles and Muskets, Psalm-Books and rusty Swords, and subscrbed a new
Association for raising of Men, Horse and Arms, to advance the Old Cause,
repurge the holy Kirk, and make a through Reformation in the Land. But I shall
take occasion by and by to give you some later and more evident Instances of
their Neglect and Contempt of their present Governors.

In the next place survey them in their Learning, and you shall find that it
lies only in the study of some Anti-Arminian Metaphysics, and in the practical
Divinity they pretend to draw from the Heads of Election and Reprobation,
whereby they preach Men out of their Wits, and very often into Despair and
Self-murder. It Is generally known, that Joseph Brodie, Preacher in Forress in
the time of the late Presbytery, did in the presence of a very Learned and
Eminent Person, take occasion in the Pulpit to speak of a poor Man, who was
then in such a desperate Condition, that it was judged necessary to bind up his
Hands, lest otherwise he should cut his own Throat, as he continually
threatened; of this desperate Wretch the pious Preacher abovenamed pronounced
thus; Sirs, this is the best Man in my Parish, would to God ye were all like
him; he does truly fear Reprobation, which most of you are not aware of.

There is a common printed Pamphlet composed and published by a Presbyterian
Preacher, concerning one Bessie Clarkson, a Woman that lived at Lanark, who was
three Years in despair, or to speak in their Cant, under Exercise. Whosoever
reads that Pamphlet will find, that the poor Woman's Distemper proceeded only
form their indiscreet Preaching, representing God as a sower, severe and
unmerciful Being. It is known in the Shire of Teviotdale that Mr. William Veach
murdered the Bodies, as well as Souls, of two or three Persons with one Sermon;
For, preaching in the Town of Jedburgh to a great Congregation, he said, There
are Tow thousand of you here to day, but I am sure Fourscore of you will not he
saved; upon which Three of his ignorant Hearers, being in Despair, dispatched
themselves soon after. And lately in Edinburgh Mr. James Kirkton, (the
Everlasting Comedian of their Party) one of their famous Preachers in that
City, praying publicly for a poor Woman much troubled in Spirit, said, A
wholesome Disease, good Lord, a wholesome Disease, Lord, for the Soul. Alas,
said he, few in the Land are troubled with this Disease. Lord, grant that she
may have many fellows in this Disease.

Not only do they make their People distracted with such desperate Doctrine as
this, but moreover they encourage them in direct Impieties. Mr. Selkirk
preaching at Musselburgh expressed himself thus, God seed no Sin in his Chosen;
Now, Sirs, be you guilty of Murder, Adultery, Bestiality, or any other gross
Sin, if you be of the Election of Grace there is no fear of you, for God sees
no Sin in his Chosen covenanted People. And this is consonant to an expression
of Mr. Samuel Rutherford's printed Letters, Hellfulls of Sins cannot separate
is from Christ.

In the Parish of Mr. Macmath, Minister of Leswade, some of those who were
lately the most active in persecuting and driving him form his Residence (even
after he had the Privy Councils Protection, and a Guard assigned him for his
Defense) have since suffered violent deaths; two of them prevented the
Hangman's pains by becoming their own Murderers. When the Earl of Lauderdale
and Sir George Mackenzie dyed last year much about one time, the party who
pretend to unriddle all the most secret Causes of God's Providence, called
their Deaths a visible Judgment, for their being Enemies to the good Cause,
although it be well known that both these honorable Persons dyed of a natural
Death, in a good age, being both of them worn out with their great diligence in
their King and Country's Service (perhaps, indeed, their days were shortened,
by seeing such Firebrands able again to force themselves into the Church, as
had before ruined both it and the State, and were the Scandal of Christianity
as well as Disgrace of their Nation.) But when these abovenamed Self-Murtherers
of the Parish of Leswade had divided Judas's death betwixt them, the one
hanging himself, the other ripping up his own Belly, till all his Bowels gushed
out: The Presbyterian Preacher in that Parish, holding forth next Sunday, was
so ready of Invention as to find Arguments from thence for the Confirmation of
the good Cause: Ab Sirs (says he) nothing has befallen these Men but what God
had from Eternity decreed; and I can tell you, Sirs, why he decreed it, indeed
it was even because they had gone sometimes to hear the Graceless Curates. Ah,
Sirs, ye may see in this Judgment the danger of that Sin, beware of hearing
Curates, Sirs, you see it is a dangerous thing, Sirs, but I Will tell you more yet
anent this, Sirs, this is a plain proof that the Gospel has non been preached
in this Parish these twenty eight Years, for in all that time you have no:
heard so much as of one that had a tender Conscience like these men; but now
when we begin again to preach the Gospel, it is so powerful, that it awakes men's
Consciences, and pricks them so at the Heart, that they cannot bear it, nor
live under it.

And now I leave the World to Judge, whether this sort of Learning and manner
of Preaching, does not stand in diametrical opposition to all Religion and
Reason, and does not in its Tenure and Effects, appear to be indeed the
Doctrine of Devils, and another Gospel; and yet by it our Rabble Reformation
has been wrought. All true and solid Learning, particularly Antiquity is
decryed by them, because in it there is no vestige, no not so much as any
shadow of Presbytery to be found; to preach Peace and Righteousness (though that
be the design of the Gospel) yet since it does not answer the Ends of the
Covenant, it must be condemned as temporizing, time-serving, and the pleasing
of men more than God, who, they are sure, can never be pleased but in their
Covenanted way.

Morality with them is but old, out-dated, heathenish Virtue, and therefore
such a Book as The whole Duty of Man, is looked upon with wonderful contempt by
them: Frazer of Bray, one of the greatest among them, professes downright, that
there is no Gospel, nor any relish of it in that Book, and that Aristotle's
Ethics have as much true Divinity as that Book has. And John Vetch of
Woolstruthers says, That that Book is too much upon Moral Duty. A certain Lady
of their Stamp, getting it once into her hands, and hearing that it was a Moral
Book, done by an Episcopal Divine, she made a Burnt Offering of it, out of her
great Zeal against Episcopacy and Morality. Mr. Macquire, one of their
celebrated Professors and Preachers, in his Preface to Brown's Book, entitled,
Christ the Truth, Way, and Life, calls the people that are taken up with the
whole Duty of Man, or any such Books, a Moralizing, or rather, says he, a
Muddizing Generation.

The most of their Sermons are Nonsensick Raptures, the abuse of Mystic
Divinity, in canting and compounded Vocables, oft-times stuffed with
impertinent and base Similes and always with homely, course, and ridiculous
Expressions, very unsuitable to the Gravity and Solemnity that becomes
Divinity. They are for the most part upon Believe, Believe; and mistaking Faith
for a mere Recumbency, they value no Works but such as tend to propagate
Presbytery. When they speak of Christ, they represent him as a Gallant,
Courting and Kissing, by their Fulsome, Amorous Discourses on the mysterious
Parables of the Canticles; and making Christ and his Gospel to be their own
Kirk Government; they have quite debased Divinity, and debauched the Morals of
the People: This is evident, not only from their manner of Preaching, but also
from their way of Writing most of their Books, whereof some Instances shall be
given in the next Section.

Some of them have an odd way of acting in the Pulpit, personating Discourses
often by way of Dialogue betwixt them and the Devil. Such ways were of old
familiar to the Monks, as appears from Monsieur Claude in his Second part of
the Defense of the Reformation, Chap. 10. where he vindicates Luther from an
aspersion cast upon him by the Church of Rome. For, say the Papists, Luther
professes in his Writings, that he had a Conference with the Devil concerning
the Mass, and that the Devil accused him for being an Idolater. To which Luther
answers, That he was then in Ignorance, and that he obeyed his Superiors.
Hence the Papists conclude, that Luther was the Devil's Scholar. But Monsieur
Claude lets them see* that Luther spoke in a Monkish Style, and that the Style
of the Convent did represent conflicts betwixt the Flesh and Spirit, as
personal exploits with the Devil: To prove this, he instances St. Dominick, who
says, That he saw the Devil one Night, in his Iron Hands carry a Paper to him,
which he read by the light of a Lamp, and told it was a Catalogue of his sins,
and the sins of his Brethren, upon which St. Dominick commanded him to leave
the Paper with him, which was done accordingly; and afterward he and his
Brethren found cause to correct something in their Lives. All that is said for
this, is, that it is a Romantic Style proper to the Monks, and all that is
meant thereby is this, that the Devil could lay such and sins to their charge,
their Consciences did smite them, therefore they corrected what they found
amiss. But such a Style did create wrong Ideas in the Litteral Interpreters of
such Narrations: And it is like some of our Reformers reading Books of this
nature, either thought such Apparisions real, or that they affected the Style;
for it its reported of Mr. Robert Bruce, one of our Scotch Reformers, that
having studied the Civil Law, and going one day to the College of Justice, to
pass his Trials in order to commence Advocate, he said, that he saw a great
Gulf in the Close or Court of the Parliament House, like the mouth of Hell,
and this diverted his entrance into the House, upon which he gave over the
Study of the Law, and applied himself to Theology. Whether the thing was
literally true, or whether the man had a disturbed Imagination (as good men
may have) or whether he affected the Style of the Convent, and meant thus much
buy it, That the employment of a Jurist was dangerous, and apt to lead men into
such Temptations as he feared might be too strong for him, I know not which to
conclude; but this I am sure of, That one Mr. Thomas Hogg, a very popular
Presbyterian Preacher in the North, asked a person of great Learning, in a
Religious Conference, whether or not he had seen the Devil? It was answered
him, That he had never seen him in any visible apperance: Then I assure you
(says Mr. Hogg) that you can never be happy till you see him in that manner;
that is, until you have both a personal Converse and Combat with him. I know
nothing more apt to create a more Religious Madness in poor well-meaning
people, that this sort of Divinity, in which our Presbyterians have quite
outdone the senseless old Monks.

Their Principles and Doctrine being, as ye have heard, opposite to Morality,
it will not be thought strange that the height of Pride and Rusticitie should
appear in their Conversation: The common Civilities due to Mankind, they allow
not to Persons of the Quality, that are of a different Opinion from themselves.
To avoid and flee from the Company where a Curate is, as if it were a
Pesthouse is a common sign of Grace: To affront a Prelate openly is a most
meritorious Work, and such as becomes a true Saint: To approve and applaud the
Murderers of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, is an infallible Evidence of one
thoroughly reformed. That the World may be satisfied of their Behavior toward
ordinary Men, I shall give you some late Instances of their Carriage toward
those of the highest Rank and Quality; the matters of Fact are such as are
known to be true by Multitudes of People before whom they were acted; and
themseves have the Impudence still to Glory in them; and yet I will not say,
but some of the Party may deny them upon occasion at Court, as they do other
things as evident; for I know what Metal their Foreheads are made of.

1. Then when their Majesty's Privy Council, by advice of all the Judges
conform to a standing Act of Parliament, and common Practice, appointed a
Sermon upon the thirtieth Day of January, 1690: The Council some time before
sent a Person of Quality, one of their own Stamp and Kidney, to the
Commissioners of the General Assembly, to desire them in their Majesty's and
Council's Name, to appoint one of their number to preach before them in St.
Giles's Church on that Day, and to put them in mind that it was the Anniversary
for the Martyrdom of King Charles the First, and that a Sermon proper for the
occasion was expected according to the Religion, Law, and Custom of the Nation.
The grave Noddies of the Assembly answered thus, Let the Council to do their
own Business, for we are to receive no Directions from the State, nor to the
take our Measures from the Council, especiallly in preaching
Anniversary-Sermons. Upon which they appointed Shields, a Cameronian, one of
the most wild and violent of the Hillmen, to preach in the Tron-Church,
where-in they used to have Weekly Lectures, as it happened upon that Day of the
Week, but where neither the Lords of Council nor Judges were used to come. All
that he spoke concerning the King's Murder was this, Ye Sirs, perhaps some of
you may foolishly fanoy that I came here to day to preach to you concerning the
Death of King Charles the First: What? preach for a Man that died forty Years
ago; if it be true what some Histories tells of him, he is very match wronged;
but if it be true what we believe of him; and have ground for, he is suffering
the Vengeance of God in Hell this day for his own and Forefathers Sing. The
same Shields as he was holding forth sometime before at Edinburgh, said, That
for ought he saw, King William and Queen Mary were rather seeking an earthly
Crown to themselves, than seeking to put the Crown on Christ's Head. That is,
in the Conventicle style, to settle Presbyterian Government.

This same Year again they peremptorily refused and despised the Privy
Council's Order, requiring them, according to a standing Act of Parliament, to
preach upon that day.

2. Inst. Mr. Areskme preaching in the Tron Church at Edinburgh, the day after
the King by open Proclamation had adjourned the General Assembly, said, Sirs,
Ye heard a strange Proclamation the other day, which I hope the Authors of may
Repent some day: It brings to my mind, Sirs, an old story of King Cyrus who
once set his Hands fairly to the building of God's House, but his Hand was not
well in the Work, when he drew it out again: All is well that ends well, Sirs;
for what think ye become of King Cyrus, Sirs? I Will tell you that Sirs; He even
made an ill end, he even died a bloody death in a strange Land. I wish the like
may not befall our King; they say Comparisons are odious, but I hope ye will not
think that Scripture-comparisons are so; whatever you may think, I am sure of
this, that no King but King Jesus, had Power to Adjourn our General Assembly.
This was spoken so lately, before so great an Auditory, that whatever Rule may
say in his next Book, yet I think the Author himself will not have the
Impudence to deny it.

3. When last Summer their Commissioners returned from King William in
Flanders, and told the General Assembly, That the King had possitively told
them, that he would not any longer suffer them to oppress and persecute the
Episcopal Subjects; and desired them in his Name to acquaint the General
Assembly with his Mind, that for the time to come they should proceed more
moderately, otherwise he would let them know that he is their Master. The
Moderators said openly, That if it were not for the great Army he had with him,
he durst not have said so to them; and however, he had been wiser to have held
his peace, for that they owned no Master but Christ.

When King William in January last desired them, by his Letter to the General
Assembly, to re-admit into the Exercise of the Ministry, so many of the
Episcopal Presbyters as should be willing to submit to and comply with a
Formula which his Majesty sent to them, and appointed to be the Terms of
Communion betwixt the Parties: This Proposal of Peace and Union, which moderate
Presbyterians might have been thought to have rejoiced in, was insolently
rejected, and exclaimed against by all the Assembly, except one Mr. Orack A
Person who was well educated, and justly esteemed at St. Andrew's University.
. Then the common discourse and preaching of Presbyterians was. That King
William designed to Dethrone King Jesus; that the prescribing to them any
Formula was an Incroachment upon Christ's Kingdom, and a violent Usurpation of
his Privileges; that any Formula but the Covenant, is of the Devil's making,
and ought not to be tolerated by Presbyterians. The Moderator of the General
Assembly, in his Prayer immediately after its Dissolution, reflected upon King
William as sent in Wrath to be a Curse to God's Kirk. He and the whole Assembly
protested against the King's Power to dissolve them, and before his
Commissioner disclaimed all his Authority that way: Afterward, to make their
Testimony (that is their word for Treason) public, they went to the Cross of
Edinburgh, and took a formal Protestation after the old manner against the King
in behalf of the People of God (by which they intend their own Subjects.) The
Magnanimous Earl of Crawford vowed before the Commissioners, that he would
adhere to the Protestation with his Life and Fortune, two things equally great
and valuable.

Their ordinary Doctrine and Discourse in the Pulpit and out of it, speaking of
the Kirk and King, is, Deliverance will come from another hand, but thou and
thy house shall perish. Mr. Matthew Red, holding forth the New Gospel at his
Kirk in North Berwick, Feb. 20th, 1691-92, said, The Kirk of Scotland is
presently under the same condition that David was, when he was so sore
persecuted and pursued by Saul, that he seemed to have no way left him to
escape; but then a Messenger came and told Saul, that the Philistines had
invaded the Land; this gave Saul some other That is in English some other Fish
to fry.
Tow in his Rock, and by that David was delivered. This Mr. Red being that same
night with another of his Brethren at Supper at a Knight's House in that
Parish, told plainly, That by the Philistines in his Sermon, he meant the
French. And both the New Gospellers agreed, that the Kirk of Scotland could not
now be otherwise delivered but by an Invasion of the French to restore King
James. This acconnt I had from a Gentleman of good Credit who was present both
at the Sermon and Supper. Mr. Stenton, one of their noted Preachers, said in an
open Company, the day after the Assembly was dissolved, That they had appointed
their next Meeting in 1693, hoping that before that time they might have
another King who would allow them better Conditions. They now lay great stress
upon the Prophecy of an old Man in the West, who at his dying in 1689, said,
The perfect Deliverance of God's Kirk must come after all by the French, for
this King William will not do it. And say commonly, that they brought in a Dog
for God's sake, and that he now begins to bite the Barnes.

This being their way of treating a King who has condescended to oblige them
even to his own loss, and to the wonder of Mankind; what may their
Fellow Subjects, especially such as are not of their Biggotry of Opinion,
expect from them? That this is no new thing to them, nor the actings only of
some few of the more rigid sort of them, is evident from their extravagant and
constant course of Rudeness to King James the Sixth, and to both the Charles's,
whereof many instances are to be seen in their own Books, some of them you may
meet with in the next Section.

All the Presbyterians profess, that the keeping of Anniversary Days, even for
the greatest Blessing of the Gospel, is Superstition and Popery. For the
modestest of them that ever spoke last Year against Christmas, was Frazer of
Bray, who preaching in the High Church of Edinburgh, in his ordinary turn upon
that day on which Christmas fell, all that he said was, Some will think that I
will speak either for the Day or against it: To speak against it I see no
reason, and to speak for it I see as little; for why should we keep our
Savior's Birthday, and not his Conception. Had this Man been but acquainted
with the Liturgy of the Primitive Church, or of that in the Neighbour-Nation,
he might have found that they keep Annunciation-day for the Conception, and
this would have broke the strongest Horn of his Presbyterian Dilemma. But for
all the Abhorrence that Presbyterians have, and do profess against the
Observation of Anniversary-days, yet they never missed to preach an Anniversary
Sermon on Mr. Heriot, who built and endued the great Hospital in the City of
Edinburgh; the reason is, that for every Sermon on Heriot's Commendation, they
get five Ponds, a new Hat and a Bible. If they could have made but the same
Purchase by preaching on Christmas, it is more than probable that they would
have thought the Annual Observation of our Savior's Birth, as little
superstitious as that of Mr. Heriot's Memory.

But the Disingenuity, Hypocrisy, and Covetousness of that Party appears not
only in this, but in many other particulars; for who clamoured more than
Presbyterians against Plurality of Benefices, which was never allowed nor
practiced under Episcopacy in our Kingdom, and now severals of them are suing
for five or six ^tipends at once, viz. the great Apostles of the New Gospel,
Dr. Bule, Mr. John and Mr. William Vetches, Mr. David Williamson, John Dickson.
I cannot here omit a passage of Mr. James Kirkton, now a famous Preacher in
Edinburgh, who held forth formerly in a Meeting House about three and twenty
Miles from it, in the Parish of St. Martine, within the Shire of the Mers, in
which Parish there was an Episcopal Minister that gave Obedience to the present
Laws, but this Kirkton by the Act restoring Presbyterian Preachers to their
former Charges, out of Malice against the Episcopal Minister, and Covetousness
to get the Stipend of the place, Charity it self cannot put a better
Construction on so foul an Action.
comes from Edinburgh and preaches one Sermon in the Parish of St. Martine, and
returning some days after, left the Church without a Minister, by which means
he obtained to himself the Stipend of that Parish, though he lived and preaches
in the City of Edinburgh ever since.

There is another, Mr. Anthony Murray, who has a considerable Estate in
Dunsire, he ordinarily uses this Phrase as a Proverb, That he desires no more in
the World but a Bit and a Brat; that is, only as much Food and Raiment as
Nature craves; and yet this very Man that would seem so denied to the World,
got himself into the possession of two fat Benefices, viz. that of Counter in
which he never did preach, and that of Dunsire Parish, in which the Regular
Pastor had served for the whole Year, 1688, and for the greater part of the
Year 1689, and yet was not allowed one Farthing of the Living for either:
although when he was drove away he had eight young Motherless Children, and no
Bread for them, whereof Murray it seems not having one Child, had no sense at
all.

Who cried out more against the Covetousness of Prelates, and complying
Ministers, than Mr. John Johnston, yet in the time of his supposed Persecution,
he made up two thousand and five hundred Pounds Sterling; and to the certain
knowledge of his Acquantances he was two hundred Pounds Sterling in debt when
he abdicated his Parish. This same Johnston being called to a dying Gentleman
in East Lotham, who was always Episcopal, (but the Call was by some Phanatical
Friends, without the knowledge of the dying Person) Johnston having come to his
Chamber, advances with many Hums and Has close to the Gentleman's Bedside,
and after stairing a while upon him, at last with a great Groan he gave his
Judgment of his State and Condition in these words: I see nothing there in that
Face, ah, I see nothing but Damnation, Hell and Reprobation! At which words, a
merry Man standing by, whispers in the ears of the said Mr. Johnston, He has
left you two hundred Marks. Mr. Johnston at this changed his mind (like the
Barbarians in the Isle of Malta,) and says, But methinks I see the Sun of
Righteousness rising with healing under his wings, sayng, Son be of good cheer,
thy sins are forgiven thee.

Who cried out more against Ministers Scandals, than one Balfour in the Mers,
and yet but a few Months ago he fled for the Sin of Adultery himself. This
among them is called but a Slip of the Saints; but far less Slips in others are
aggravated into heinous Scandals and crying Sins, as that ought indeed to be
esteemed.

What greater act of Injustice than that done to Mr. Alexander Heriot, Minister
of Dalkeith, who gave all Obedience to the Civil Law, and yet the Presbytery of
Dalkeith permitted one Calderwood, a declared Enemy of Mr. Heriot's, and some
others of his Accusers, to sit as Judges among them, and not only admitted, but
also invited and encouraged two or three Knights of the Post to swear, That the
Minister had danced about a Bon-fire the 14th of October 1688. And when it was
made appear to the conviction of all Men, that there was no Bon-fires in the
Town upon that Day, and that the Town was never wont to use any such Solemnity
upon the occasion of that Day; all that the Presbytery said, was, That they
could not help it, for the matter was sworn and deponed, and and they behoved
to proceed, having a Call to Purge the Church.

Besides, their not having good Notions of the Gospel, nor of any good Heathen
Morals; one reason of their malicious and crabbed Nature may be, that they
never suffered Affliction, for after they abdicated their Churches in 1662,
they began everywhere in their Sermons to cant about the Persecution of the
Godly, and to magnify their own Sufferings; by this means they were pampered
instead of being persecuted; some of the godly Sisters supplying them with
plentiful Gratuities to their Families, and Money to their Purses; they really
lived better then ever they did before, by their Stipends. They themseves
boasted that they were sure of Crowns for their Sufferings; and that Angels
visited them often in their Troubles; and both were materially true. I know
severals of them who got Estates this way, and that grew fat and lusty under
their Persecutions. Mr. Shields, one of their honestest and best Writers, being
well acquainted with all that they suffered, and a great Sharer in it, glories
in this, that they were highly provided for in their greatest Difficulties, and
makes an Argument for it of their being God's People: In his Annalysis (as he
calls it) on the 29th of Deuteronomy, delivered in a Discourse to the People on
the Preparation-day before they renewed the Covenants, p. 10. l. 8. these are
his words: Though in the Wilderness of Prelatick, Erastian, and Antichristian
Usurpations, we did not meet with Miracles, yet truly we have experienced
Wonders of the Lord's Care and Kindness, and for all the Harassings and
Persecutions, etc. the poor Wilderness-Wanderers have looked as Meat-like and
Cloath-like a others that sat at Ease in their Houses, and drank their Wine and
their strong Drink. The Party finding such good Fruits of their Itinerary
Labors, continued to preach the unthinking Mobile out of their Money and
Senses, and well as out of their Duty to God and Man, receiving in the mean
time, instead of Cups of cold Water, The name of a ridiculous and rebellious
Book emitted by them in K. Charles the Second's time.
many Bowls of warm Sack; the true Covenant-Liquor, and the best Spirit that
inspires the New Gospellers. By these means the Malignity of their Nature was
rather kindled than abated; the only Men and suffered any thing, being the poor
silly Plow-men and Shepherds in the West, whom the false Teachers hounded out
to die for a broken Covenant: It Is true indeed that many such Men being deluded
into several Rebellions, put the State under a necessity of defending it self,
by punishing some of them, and killing others in Battles; but yet before the
danger of these Battles, the Preachers were generally so wise as to save
themselves, by running first; for ad they been so honest as to have born but a
part of these Burdens which they imposed upon their Proselytes, or so
courageous as to have but showed their Faces in the day of Battle (to which
they always sounded the Allarm by their Sermons) then it is like we should not
have been now infested with such swarms of these Locusts as have overspread
our Land, and again filled our King's Chambers, as the Frogs and Lice of Egypt
did that of Pharaoh's.

Though upon certain occasions the more subtle and cunning Presbyterians,
knowing that no art can defend or disguise the unaccountable wildness and
madness of some of their party, are forced, to disprove and condemn them; Yet
they never fail to make use of the Sufferings of these same wild Men, to
magnify that Persecution which themselves pretend to have undergone, but had
not the least share in. Eminent instances of this we have in Rule's late book.
To whom among other favors we owe this new distinction of wild and sober
Presbyterians. Truly if the Presbyterians had met with the same measure with
which they formerly served the Prelatists, if they had been used as they did
good Bishop Wishart, whom they made to lie seven Months in a dark stinking
close Prison, without the convenience of so much as changing his Shirt but
once, so that he was like to be eaten up of himself, and the Vermin which that
nasty place produced; its probable that by such Severities (which I am glad
they suffered not) they might have been brought to something of that good Man's
Christian Temper and Disposition: And that this was very great, the worst of
themselves were constrained to own, when upon changing of the Scene, he being
deservedly advanced to the Bishopric of Edinburgh, was so Charitable as to
convey large supplies to such of them as were Imprisoned for their Notorious
Rebellion at ^entland Hills, 1666, and that without letting them know from what
hand it came, nay his Compassion to them was such, that he continued such
Presbyterian Preachers as were any thing tolerable, in their Churches and
Office; without imposing on them the conditions of Conformity which the Law
then required: But now Presbyterian Preachers, even those that are called the
soberest, as we may see by their daily Practices, and Expressions, are highly
galled, because they are not allowed to treat the Bishops and other Ministers
of God's Word, after the same Barbarous manner that they formerly did, that is,
Hew them in pieces before the Lord, as they were wont to Phrase it, for they
commonly compare Bishops to Agag, and those ordained by them to the Amalekites.

The Episcopal Ministers and Rulers used all Christian and discreet Methods
when they had Power to gain and oblige the Dissenters, and to save them from
the Penalties of the Law. But now such is the ingratitude of some, even of
those same Presbyterians, whom the Episcopal Ministers had saved from the
Gibbet, to which the Law had justly doomed them; that they were the only
Persons that invented false Stories, forged malicious Lybels, and raised
Tumults against those very Ministers who had been formerly so exceeding kind to
them; we have but too many instances of their rendering Evil for Good in this
manner: And that which makes this the more strange and odious, is, that it is
Acted under a pretense to Religion, and Reformation, and that the giddy People
are instigated to this Wickedness by their Preachers; I shall trouble the
Reader at present only with two Particulars to this purpose: Mr. Monro, Parson
of Sterling, was lately lybelled and accused before the Brethren of the
Inquisition, by one whom, as all the Neighbourhead knows, he preserved from
being Hanged, when he well deserved it. And now, though the said Parson Monro has
visibly baffled all the Articles of his Lybel to the disgrace of his ungrateful
Accuser, and of those Preachers who openly prompted him to this Villainy, yet
they daily molest and disquiet him, because of his constant adherence to the
Sacred Order of Episcopacy, which is the greatest Fault his Judges can accuse
him of, except that of his possessing a good Living, and that his Parts and
Piety darken the whole Presbytery, of which his Parishoners being fully
convinced, Love him so well, that they resolve, cost what it may, they will not
part with him as their Minister; and have therefore, to the great mortification
of the Presbytery there, jointly signified so much to them under their hands.

The other particular instance of this Nature, shall be that of one Ronaldson,
a Tenant in the Parish of Cranston, whom the Orthodox Minister there, Mr.
Burnet, by his Intercession with Persons of Quality, preserved from having his
Goods confiscated, and Person Banished; after Ronaldson by his signal
Disobedience to the Law had exposed himself to that Sentence: This kindness
Ronaldson then looked on as so great and surprising, That he often and openly
professed he knew not how to be thankful enough for it; he and his Family
constantly kept the Church thereafter, and upon every occasion acknowledged the
Minister's singular favor, with all the Signs of sincere gratitude; But yet
upon the new light of the late Revolution, he appeared the most open and avowed
Enemy that the Minister had: The Minister justly surprised with this,
challenged his many promises of continuing grateful. To whom Ronaldson gravely
replied, that the Thanks of his Preservation was not due to him, but only to
God; who oft-times (said he) stirs up ill Men to befriend his own People. This
change was wrought upon the Man, and this answer put in his Mouth (as himself
sometimes owns and professes) by frequent Conferences with their Preachers, who
in their private Discourses and public Sermons have assured him, that he is
not to look to the Instrument, but to the Cause of his Preservation.

I shall shut up this head concerning the Persecution they pretended to have
suffered, with a remarkable note of a Sermon preached lately by Mr. Daniel
Douglass, one of their great * Mufties, Now Sirs, (says he) I will be even
plain with you, and perhaps even more plain than pleasant, Sirs, I Will tell you
now, Sirs, its ordinary for us to cry out that we were persecuted under
Episcopacy, but we are yet living, Sirs; and why were we not Hanged as well as
others were, beloved? It is even because we thought they did cast away their
Lives needlessly, and that we would not venture our Lives for such matters as
they ventured their Lives, for I knew to meet with kindness both from the
Churchmen and the Statesmen: And particularly I knew that the Clerks of
Council and Session would take nothing from us, but there are no such Clerks
now: For there is one Gibbie Eliot, Sirs, that has no Charity nor Discretion,
for if we were all made up of Dollars, he would swallow us up; pray God, Sirs,
to keep our Purses from that false lown Eliot.

Ingenuity is a thing they are not concerned about, for that is but a Branch of
dry Morality, below Men so full of Grace; some young Men among them that have
had the Advantage of being abroad are more affable, and in their Conferences
with Men of Sense, they ordinarily exclaim against the peevish sour and
unconversable Temper of Scotch Presbyterians; but yet these same Sparks of the
Cause, sing to a quite contrary Tune when they are in a collective or
representative body. I have read of a certain Monk who being wearied of the
Cloister aimed at a vacant Dignity, the possession whereof he knew would set
him free: For this end he applied himself to every one of his Acquaintances
that had a Suffrage in the Election, and from every singular and individual
Person he received very fair and satisfying promises, bet yet he found himself
still disappointed when they met together in Assemblies for the Election,
whereupon he invites most or all of them upon a set Day to Dine and be merry
with him. They that were invited knew that he was not in condition to make any
competent Provision for so many Guests; Wherefore according to the usual Custom
of that Fraternity, they sent each of them some material or other, proper to
make up the Feast; some sent Flesh, some Fish of diverse Kinds, some sent
Butter, some Cheese, some Wine, and others Oil. All which he boiled in one
Kettle together, and his Guests being conveen'd, he caused serve up that
Hotch-potch in several large Dishes to them, so that every Dish as they tasted
it equally disgusted them: Where upon they asked what manner of Victuals it
was? He said it was just such as themselves had sent, all well boiled in a
large Kettle together. That, say they, is the worst Meat in the World when thus
jumbled together, but very good when every thing is dressed by it self. Just so
are ye to me, says the Monk, you are very fair and kind, when single, and one
by one: But I can find nothing worse than you, when you are all together. The
Presbyterians resemble the Monks in this, as in many other things, for take
them singly, and they generally condemn the Methods and Proceedings of their
Brethren, as rigid and severe, but take the same Men met together in a
Presbytery, Synod, or Assembly, and the whole Body is the most unpalatable and
most unsavory Hotch-potch in the World.

And now to hasten to a close of this Section, Strangers may justly wonder that
Men of such Temper and Qualification, as ye have now heard the Pretbyterian
Preachers to be, should have any followers. But this will not seem so strange
to such as confider what Multitudes of the Rabble, crowd after Jack Bowels in
his Drunken Fits, Women and Children are ordinarily led by noise and show, though
it were but of Hobby-Horses and Rattles. And indeed the Presbyterian Preachers
are only flocked after by such a Herd, some out of a blind Zeal and Itch after
novelty and change, some again loving to Fish in the troubled Waters of such
Confusions as are inseparable from Presbytery, hoping thereby ^o mend their
broken Fortunes. And to palliate their want of Sense, and greater Faults, by a
pretense to strict Religion: Others frequent them for sport and diversion, as
Men of little Sense and less business run after Stage Players and Rope-dancers.

Sometimes ago these Preachers were conversant only with Shepherds, and a few
silly Women, laden with diverse Lusts, whose hot Zeal had no knowledge to guide
it; the Preachers then indeed admired themselves for Persons of great Gifts and
Learning, because of the esteem that these ignorant Creatures had for them; but
now that they are brought to Act in public, and possess the Pulpits of Learned
Men, they are at a great Disadvantage, for their better Auditories expect solid
Divinity, Rational and close Discourses, and that being none of their Talent,
puts them quite out of their Road and Element, and hence it is that the People
generally forsake and abhor them, and nothing but a few of the Rabble frequent
their best Churches and Preachers: So that now their own dear followers begin
to complain and cry out, That Christ did more good in the Hills than he does
now in the Churches. And if they hold on at their usual manner of Raving in
Pulpits, they cannot fail to render themselves as Ridiculous and odious as they
deserve, which they have made pretty good Advances to already. They frequently
upbraid Curates, as deserted of the Spirit, because they own that in the
composing of their Sermons they make use of Books, and yet Mr. David
Williamson, one of their ablest Men, Preaching before the Parliament, on Ps. 2.
and verse 10. stole most of his Sermon from Herle's Tripus of Wisdom, and had
the Confidence to reprint the same at Edinburgh. Indeed the nonsense and
railing of that Sermon is wholly his own; for none but himself ever pretended
or presumed as he does there, That Christ dyed a Martyr for the Presbyterian
Government; because forsooth this Inscription was written on his Cross, Jesus
of Nazareth King of the Jews. I do not discommend the use of Books, but the
Hypocrisy of these Men, who give out that they Preach merely by Inspiration
and Meditation, as Mr. Areskine did in a Sermon which he Preached lately in the
Tron Church at Edinburgh, his words were these, The Curates goes to their Books
for Preachings, but we go to our Knees for our Preachings. And yet such is the
silliness of some deluded People, that they proclaim these for Soulrefreshing
and powerful Preachers, and for Men that, as they Phrase it, have an inbearing
Gift, speaking home to their Hearts: Indeed make some People judges, we know
Presbyterian Sermons will gain the applause. I remember the Old Fable of the
Cuckoo and the Nightingale, both contended who should Sing sweetest, the Ass
because of his long Ears is made judge, the Nightingale Sung first, the Cuckoo
next, the Asse's determination was, that truly the Nightingale Sung pretty
well, but for a good sweet plain taking Song, and a fine Note, the Cuckoo Sung
far better.

Some who are not so well acquainted with the Scotch Presbyterian's manner of
Preaching and praying may, perhaps, think that matters are here aggravated
against them, because things so very Ridiculous were never vented by any former
Sect, as these I have and am hereafter to discover of them; but they are too
well known to be denied among us: And that Strangers may not think themselves
imposed upon, I shall in the next Section give the Reader some little taste of
their Printed Books, and leave him to judge from the Ridiculousness of what
they have deliberately published to the World that way, what extravagancy they
may be Guilty of in these extemporary Ravings, which they mis-call Spiritual
Preaching and Praying.

SECT. II.
Containing some Expressions out of their printed Books.
AND first for their Sermons; Mr. William Guthry at Fenwick, has printed one
full of Curses and Imprecations, Viz.

Will you gang Man to the cursed Curates? Gang, and the Vengeance of God gang
with thee: The cursed Curates bids us side with them; the Devil rugg Tear.
their Hearts out of their sides. The Sermon in every Page is to the same
purpose. The People in the West are mightily taken with it; and the Author is
held for a great Saint among them, chiefly upon the account, as themselves
phrase it, of his sharp Pen against Prelates and Curates.

Mr. Walwood, Brother to Mercurius, in a printed Sermon on this Text, If the
righteous shall scarcely be saved, etc. says, among other as ridiculous things,
these words, Men think that every Dog will win to Heaven, but I assure you, it
is a great matter to win there; for Noblemen that will be saved I believe
there is not twenty, I trow I doubled them: for Gentlemen I could write them all
in three inch of Paper. Ibid. Men thought much when a part of the City of
Glascow was burnt, but for my part I would not shed a Tear though Glascow and
Edinburgh both were burnt; and a great matter, they burnt the Covenant.

The best of their Preachers were singled out to hold forth to the Parliament,
Notes of printed Sermons before the Parliament.
and the L. Commissioner M. a Person equally fitted to judge of Ministers and
Statesmen, appointed such of these Sermons to be printed, as he in his Godly
Wisdom thought fittest for advancing the designs of Omnipotent Presbytery.
These Sermons are generally inhanced by the Party, and preserved as infallible
Evidences of the great Learning and Piety of the New Gospel Professors, upon
which account they are carefully kept from malignant Hands and Eyes: However, I
once had the favor allowed me to read three of the choicest of them, published
by Williamson, Rule, and Spalding; wherein they extol Presbyterian Government,
with all the glorious Epithets due to the Gospel and the Christian Church, viz.
Christ's Bride, his Virgin, his Spouse, his Glory, his Honor, his Church, his
precious Remnant, his glorious Elect, his pure People. God's House, Tabernacle,
Dwelling place and Sanctuary, his Holy Ark, his chosen Generation, his dear
Children, his Kingdom, his Mountain, his Jewels, his Crown, Scepter, and
Diadem; in a word, the most obscure and darkest Prophesies and Revelations were
all spoke with an eye to the present Scotch Model, though that be so new as never
to have been heard of in Scotland, or any other Church before: and the
Presbyterians themselves will as soon prove that the High Priesthood of Aaron
among the Jews was a Type of Presbyterian Democracy in the Church, as show any
Footsteps, or the least mention of Presbyterianism in any of the ancient
Monuments and Records of the Church, except they will say that Christianity
began with Calvin; and yet if you will believe the Sermons of the former
Triumvirate, they that oppose the Rigor of Scotch Presbytery are Enemies to
God and his Cause, to Christ and to his Gospel, they are worse than Heathens,
they are Philistines, which are not to be suffered to live in the Holy Land,
Spaldin's Discourse to Parliament.
nay they that concur not to advance it to its former height, (and that is
above King and Parliament) not only their Estates and Lives, but their Souls
may go for it: You Members of Parliament who are not forward for this, you
shall with Jehoiakim, be buried with the Burial of an Ass: Think but seriously
what an Epitaph may be written on your Tomb, and what Discourses may be of you
when ye are gone, Here lies a Man that never was a Friend to Christ, or his
Interest, now he is dead, but he was an Opposer and Persecutor of Christ of his
Truth and People. But dying is not all, what shall ye say when, ye shall be
cited at the great Assize, before the Tribunal of Christ, to that Question,
What Justice and Vote gave ye to we in my afflicted Church, in the first
Parliament of King William and Queen Mary in Scotland, was ye for me or against
met?

Spalding's Sermon before the Parliament, on 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. p. 20. Versus
finem and p. 21 Initio.

Mr. Gilbert Rule in his Sermon before the Parliament, on Isaiah 2. 2. (for
their Texts are generally out of the obscurest places of the Old Testament,)
takes it for granted, that the Mountain of the Lord's House there spoke of, is
expressly meant of Scotch Presbytery; Which, he says, is terrible as an Army
with Banners. This last, I confess, has often been found true in the most
litteral sense; but why Presbytery should be called a Mountain, I cannot so
well say, except it be because it was exalted at The Hill on which they first
drew up their Army against K. Chapter 1.
Dunce-law above the tops of the Mountains, that is, Monarchy and Episcopacy,
at which time the Phanaticks and Rebels were the Nations that flocked unto it,
and established it upon the ruins of their own former Oaths and Obligations.
But to speak in his own words, The exalting and establishing of Scotch
Presbytery, (for that is the only true Religion,) the flourishing of it, is the
means to advance the poorest and most contemptible People Such the Scoth
Phanaticks are indeed.
to Reputation both with God and all good Men, yea, often in the eyes of them
that are but moral and intelligent, though Enemies, as is evident from Deuteronomy. 4.
6. This is your wisdom in the sight of the Nations, which shall say, Surely
this Nation is a wise and understanding People: for what Nation is there so
great, who have God so nigh unto them, etc. Now that no body might mistake, as
in this he meant Religion in general, and not Scotch Presbytery, he makes
Application particularly to the Kirk in these words, If ye will set Christ on
high in this poor Church, he will set the Church and Nation on high; Scotland
has in former times been The glorious days of the Covenant.
renowned and esteemed among the Churches of the Reformation upon this account:
It may be an Honor in after Ages to your Posterity, that such a Man was active
in that happy Parliament that settled Religion in the Church; yea, this way
will render us more formidable to our Enemies, and Vnfriends to our Way, That
is true blue Presbytery.
, than strong Armies or Navies could do. 1 Samuel 4. 7. And the Philistines were
afraid, etc. for they said, that God is come to the camp. Rule's Sermon before
the Parliament, p. 13. The plain meaning of this is, All the Land and
Sea-Forces of England and the Confederates, can signify nothing against their
Enemies, so long as they entertain or suffer amongst them these Enemies of
Religion, the Bishops.

That famous Man in his Generation, Mr. David Williamson, preached before the
Reforming Parliament on this Text, Be wise ye Kings, be instucted ye Judges of
the Earth, Psalm. 2. 10. I cannot but approve the choice of this Text, because
those Kings had need be very wise indeed, that have to do with Presbyterians;
and those Civil Judges must be stronger than the Kirk, that will not condescend
to be instructed by them in all things. In the former part of that Sermon he
divides and subdivides Government so often, till (as the Presbyterian Author,
from whom he steals these ridiculous Distinctions Herle 's Tripus.
,) he at last divides the King's and Judges from all Power: It Is no new thing
for some Men first to distinguish the King's Person from his Authority, and
then to divide his Head from his Body; Well, it is granted by all hands, that
such Men are well acquainted with all the ways of dividing Government. In the
latter part of that Sermon, the Author speaking of Presbyterial Government,
uses these words, which we easily grant to be peculiarly his own: It Is no light
matter, (says he) it is an Ordinance of God, the Royal Diadem of Christ; he was
a Martyr on this Head, for it was his Ditty on the Cross, John 19. 19. Jesus of
Nazareth King of the Jews. If this Scripture do not prove that Christ died a
Martyr for Scots Presbytery, I am sure there is no other place either in
Scripture or Antiquity that will.

The next Notes shall be from a Sermon that is highly valued by all true
Presbyterians, viz. That which according to the Author's dating it, was printed
the 40 Year of our public breach of Covenant; the Year, as the Author at the
end of the Title Page describes it, wherein there was much Zeal for
confederating among Men, but little for covenanting with GOD. In the 1, 2, 3,
4, and 5 Pages, he compares the Scotch Covenants to the Covenant of Grace, and
to the Covenants at Horeb and in Moab. In the 6th Page he says, The Covenant
may be tendered and taken without the consent of the Magistrate, but his after
Dissent or Discharge cannot loose the Obligation of it.

Page 9. He says, As Israel in the Wilderness, so have we had our Marahs, and
our Massa's, and Meribahs, Taberahs, and Kibroth Hataavahs at Pentland-hills,
Bothwel-bridge, Ardsmoss, Three notable Rebellions raised by the Presbyterians
against K. Charles, the Second.
etc. From this consideration he presses the renewing of the Covenant.

Page 10. God's removing two Kings who withstood the covenanted Reformation,
and the abolishing two wicked Establishments, Tyranny and Prelacy, should stir
up all Lovers of Religion to the Duty of Covenanting. Page 12. All the meaner
sort of all Sexes and Ages, Wives and Children, are obliged to this, though the
Primores and Primates regni do not concur: if the Children be not capable,
Parents are to engage for them. Accordingly ( says he) in Scotland it has been
in use for faithful Ministers, to take Parents, engaged to the Covenant, when
they presented their Children to Baptism Mr. Rule denies this in his late Book,
although himself and every Man acquainted: with the Doctrine and Practice of the
Kirk, knows it to be very true.
. Page 14. Subjects are relaxed from their sworn Allegiance to a King or
Magistrate, by his rescinding or disowning the Covenant; as is plain from the
third Article of the Solemn League: But there is nothing that can any way
enervate the sacred Obligation of Scotland's Holy Covenant, which still must
stand in inviolable force. Page 16. It is a Covenant obliging not only the
present, but the absent, and not only the absent in regard of place, but in
regard of time: It obliges all the Children of Israel, binds all Posterity
with Annexation of Curses to the Breakers. Page 17. It Is the Foundation of the
People's Compact with the King at his Inauguration: therefore as long as
Scotland is Scotland, and God unchangeable, Scotland's Reformation in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government, must be endeavored to be performed in a
Conformity to the Covenant: The matter of it is Moral, containing nothing but
what is antecedently and eternally binding, albeit there had never been a
formal Covenant; the ends of it are perpetually good. Page 18. The express
Command from Exodus 23. obliges to banish all Covenant-breakers out of the Land;
for the example of the Popish, Prelatical, and Malignant Faction in Britain and
Ireland, the suffering them to dwell in the Land, and to creep into places of
Trust, and especially the stupid Submission to the Restitution of Church and
State, and to the Re-introduction of their wicked Establishments, abjured by
Covenant, did gradually induce Parishes and Provinces to this dreadful Sin of
Covenant Breaking. Then in some subsequent Pages he enumerates all the Curses
and Plagues, national or personal, spoken of in Scripture, as threatened with a
special regard to the breaking of this Covenant, and who can tell (says he) but
the Sword now drawn in Scotland and Ireland may avenge the Quarrel of God's
broken Covenant. Page 27. The breaking of the Covenant is the most Heinous of
all Sins: Profainity of all sorts, Hypocrisy, Idolatry, Adultery, Treachery,
Pride, Blood, and Oppression, and all that ever brought down Vengeance upon any
Generation recorded in Scripture, or in any History, with these indeed, and the
greatest aggravations of them, the Land has been Polluted; but chiefly that
which incenses the Anger of the Lord, has been, and remains to be Breach of
Covenant, and all these Abominations not simply because Breaches of the Law if
God, but as under this special Aggravation, that they have been and are
Breaches of the Covenant, as is evident from Deuterom. 29. 25. Because they
have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord God of their Fathers. etc.

Compare this with making Presbytery the Foundation of the present Civil
Government, without which he says it cannot subsist. Second Vindication, Page
9. at the end.
Page 33. The great Reason why Men should renew the Covenant at this time, and
why those of the true Presbyterian Party did it in the end of 1688. They though
it then ( says he) expedient, as it is still, by renewing of these Ancient
Covenants, to declare what Cause they would avouch and appear for, what King
they would own, and upon what Terms they would offer their Submission to the
present Government then to be Established, who had before declared their Revolt
from the former, and for this end to make this the Band of their Association.

The same Author, in his Solemn Confession of Sins page 53. says most
ingenuously, We and our Teachers in a great measure complied with, submitted
unto, and connived, at the encroachments of the Supremacy, and absolute Power,
both in accepting and countenancing the former Indulgences, and the late
Tolleration. We have taken and subscribed Oaths, and Bonds, all which have been
contrary to the Reformation we were Sworn to preserve.

Page 54. We are obliged to confess the offensive Carriage and Conversation of
many that have gone to England, who have proven very stumbling to the
Sectarians there. Yea of late, many have embraced the Toleration introductive
of a Sectarian multiformity, without so much as a Testimony against the
Toleration of Popery it self. The general Toleration, which in its own Nature
tended, and in its Design intended, to introduce Popery and Slavery by
Arbitrary and Absolute Power, has been accepted and addressed for, by many of
our Ministers; and countenanced, complied, and concurred with by many of our
People, without a Testimony or endeavor to understand it. -- Many dregs of,
Popish Superstition have been observed, Popish Festival days as Easter,
Christmas, Shrove-Tuesday.
Pasch, Yule, and Fastings Eve, etc. have been kept by many: And prelatical
Anniversary days devised of their own Heart, appointed for Commemorating the
Kings Birth Days, as May 29. October. 14. etc. Who were born as Scourges to this
Realm, being complied with by many, page 58. As it was our Fathers Sin to
inaugurate the late King, after such Discoveries of his Hypocritical enmity to
Religion and Liberty, upon his subscription of the Covenant; to when he burnt
and buried that Holy Covenant, and degenerated into manifest Tyranny, and had
razed the very Foundation on which both his Right to Govern, and the Peoples
Allegiance were founded, and remitted the Subjects Allegiance, by annulling the
bond of it; we sinned in continuing to own his Authority: When all he had was
engaged and exerted in Rebellion against God; for which the Lord put us to
shame, and went not out with our Armies at Pentland Hills and Bothwell Bridge.

Notes out of the Hind let loose, Printed 1687. which Book is the great Oracle
and Idol of the true Covenanters.

Page 3. It Is observable how reproachfully he speaks of Princes, and even of
such as are now our Kings Allies, in these words, The Protestants of Hungary
are under the tearing Laws of that Ravenous Eagle the Tyrant of Austria: Those
of Piedmont under the Grassant Tyranny of that little Tiger of Savoy.

Page 24. Our first Reformers never resigned nor abandoned that first and most
just privilege of Resistance. Nay nor of bringing public Beasts of prey to
condign Punishment, in an extraordinary way of vindictive justice; E. G.
Cardinal Beaton that was Slain in the Tower of St. Andrew's by James Melvin,
who perceiving his consorts moved with Passion withdrew them, and said, This
work and Judgment of God, although it be Secret, ought to be done with greater
Gravity; and presentnig the point of his Sword to the Cardinal, said, Repent
thee of thy former wicked Life, but especially of the shedding of the Blood of
Mr. George Wisheart, which yet Cries for Vengeance from God upon thee: And we
from God are sent to revenge it; for here before my God, I protest that --
Nothing moves me to strike thee, but only because thou have been, and
remainest an obstinate Enemy agoinst Christ Jesus and his holy Gospel; Of which
fast, says my Author, the faithful and famous Historian Mr. Knox, speaks very
Honorably, and after the Slaughter joined himself with them; yet now such a
fact committed upon such another Bloody and Treacherous Beast, the Cardinal
prelate of Scotland Eight years agon, is generally Condemned as Horrid Murder.

Page 75. Speaking of the King's defeat at Worcester, he says, Israel had
Sinned and Transgressed the Covenant. -- Having taken the accursed thing, and
put it even amongst their own stuff; therefore the Children of Israel could not
stand before their Enemies, but an Army of them near 30000. was totally Routed
at Worcester; and the Achan, the cause of the overthrow, was forced to hide
himself beyond Sea, where he continued a wandering Fugitive in Exile till 1660.
False Monk, then General, with a Combination of Malignants, and public
Resolutioners, did machinate our Misery, and effectuated it, by bringing the
King home to England from his Banishment, wherein he was habituate into an
implacable hatred against the Work of God.

Page 96. The Covenant is our Magna Charta of Religion and Righteousness, our
greatest Security for all our Interests.

Page 99. That same perfidious Parliament framed an Act for an Anniversary
Thanksgiving, Commemorating every 29th of May, that Blasphemy against the
Spirit and Work of God; and Celebrating that unhappy Restoration of the
Rescinder of the Reformation, which had not only the Concurrence of the
Universality of the Nation, but (alas for shame that it should be told in
Gath,) even of some Presbyterian Ministers, who afterward accepted the
Indulgence; one of which, a Pillar among them, was seen scandalously Dancing
about the Bonfires. -- O Holy and Astonishing Justice, thus to Recompense our
way upon our own Head; To suffer this holy Work and Cause to be ruined under
our unhappy Hands, who suffered the Destroyer to come in, who had it in his
Heart, swelled with enmity against Christ, to raze and ruin the Work, as he
most Wickedly did.

Page 110. The King gave us many proofs and Demonstrations of his being true to
Antichrist, in minding all the Promises and Treaties with him, as he had of his
being false to Christ, in all his Covenant-Engagements with his People: For in
the Year, 1666. He, with his Dear and Royal Brother the Duke of York,
contrived, Countenanced, and Abetted, the burning of London, evident by their
employing their Guards to hinder the People from saving their own; and to
dismiss the Incendiaries, the Papists, who were taken in the Fact.

Page 123. At length the virulent Traitor, James Sharp, the Arch Prelate,
received the just Demerit of his Perfidy, Perjuries, Apostacies, Sorceries,
Villainies, and Murders, sharp Arrows of the mighty, and Coals of Juniper, for
upon the 3d of May, 1679. several worthy Gentlemen, with some other Men of
Courage and Zeal for the Cause of God, and the good of the Country, executed
Righteous judgment upon him at Magus Moor, near St. Andrew's: And the same
Month on the 29th of May, the Testimony at Rutherglen, was published against
that Abomination of Celebrating an Anniversary day for setting up an usurped
Power, destroying the Interest of Christ in the Land, and against all sinful
and unlawful Acts emitted and executed, published and prosecuted against our
Covenanted Reformation; where also they burnt the Acts of Supremacy,, the
Declaration, the Act Rescessory, for the burning the Covenant.

Page 146. At length the King of Terrors, a Terror to all Kings, cut off that
Supreme Author and Authoriser of Mischief, Charles the Second, by the
suspicious Intervention of an unnatural Hand, as the Instrument thereof;
wherein much of the Justice of God was to be observed, and of his Faithfulness
verified; That bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days: His
bloody Violence was recompensed with the unnatural Villainy of his Brother, and
his unparalled Perjury was justly rewarded with the most ungrateful and
treacherous Monster of a Parricide; for all the numerous Brood of his
adulterous and incestuous Brats, begotten of a Multitude of Whores, at home and
abroad, yea, with his own Sister too, he died a Childless Pultron, and had the
unlamented Burial of an Ass: and for all his Hypocritical Pretentions to a
Protestant Profession, he drunk his Death in a Popish Potion, contrived by his
own dear Brother that succeeded him; -- passionately resenting Charles his Vow,
to suffer the Murder of the Earl of Ess^x to come to a Trial, which was
extorted by the reiterated Solicitations of some, who offered to discover by
whom it was contrived and acted; which made the Duke's guilty Conscience to
dread a Detection of his deep Accession to it: whereupon the Potion quickly
after prepared, put a stop to that, and an end to his Life, February 6th, 1685:
of which horrid Villainy time will disclose the Mystery, and give the History
when it shall be seasonable.

Page 237. A Prelate's Depute is no Minister of Christ, but a Curate is a
Prelate's Depute, Ergo. -- That a Prelate's-Depute is no Minister of Christ, I
prove not only from that, that a Prelate, qua talis, is not a Servant of
Christ, but an Enemy; and therefore cannot confer upon another that Dignity to
be Christ's Servant; but also from this, that the Scriptures allow no
derivation of deputed Officers, Romans 12. 7, 9.

Page 255. Never can it be instanced these twenty seven Years, that the Curates
have brought one Soul to Christ, but many instances may be given of their
murdering Souls: Hence these who cannot but be Soul-murderers, may not be heard
or entertaind as Soul-Physicians; but the Curates cannot but be Soul-murderers,
Ergo.

Page 256. The Meetings of the Curates, for Administration of Ordinances in
their way, the Lord hates, and has signally forsaken: therefore we should hate
and forsake them. This is confirmed by Mr. Durhame, Rev. 1. p. 55.

Page 259. Hearing of Curates reductively involves us under the guilt of
Idolatry, and breach of the second Commandment; therefore we ought not to let
them dwell in the Land, lest they make us sin, Exodus 23. 32. We should destroy
their very names out of the place, Deuteronomy. 12. 3. Jud. 2. 7.

Page 285. Jus Populi, cap. 16. (says he) Make this one Character of a Tyrant,
that living in Luxury, Whoredom, Greed and Idleness, he neglects, or is unfit
for his Office. How these suit to our times, we need not express; what
effrontery of Impudence is it for such Monsters to pretend to rule. P. 296.
Kings and Tyrants for the most part are reciprocal terms.

Page 306. We own the obligation of our sacred Covenants unrepealably and
indispensably binding to all. But we deny that hereby we are bound either to
maintain Monarchy, or to own the Authority of either of the two Monarchs that
have monarchized or tyrannized over us these twenty seven Years past. In the
Covenants we are not bound, but only conditionally, tomaintain the King's
Person and Authority, that is only upon the terms that he should be a Loyal
Subject to Christ, Mr. Rule upon the matter affirms the same Second Vindic. p.
90.
and a faithful Servant to the People, which he cannot be thought who does not
cause all stand to their Covenant-Engagements, as Josiah did, 2 Chronicles. 34. But,
alas, there was never a Jostah in the Race of our Kings; they rose up to the
height of Rebellion against God and the People, with Heaven-daring Insolency,
not only breaking but burning the Holy Covenant.

Concerning owning of Tyrants Authority, p. 308. When Monarchy becomes opposite
to the Ends of Government, the Contagion of it affects that very Species of
Government; and then the House is to be pulled down, when the Leprosy is got
into the Walls and Foundation. The People may make their public Servant
sensible, that he is at his highest Elevation but a Servant: Hence now when the
Species named in the Covenant, viz. Monarchy, is so vitiate, that it is become
the Instrument of the Destruction of all the Ends of that Covenant, and now by
Law transmitted to all Successors, as an hereditary, perfect, and perpetual
Opposition to the coming of Christ's Kingdom; so that as long as there is one
to wear that Crown, (but Jehovah will in Righteousness execute Coniah's Doom
upon the Race, Jerem 22. ult. write this Man Childless,) and to enter Heir to
the Government as now established, he must be an Enemy to Christ: There is no
other way left, but to think on a new Model, molded according to the true
Pattern.

Page 311. As he is not, nor will not be our covenantted and sworn King, and
therefore we cannot be his covenanted and sworn Subjects; so he is not, nor can
be our crowned King, and therefore we cannot be his liege Subjects, owning
Fealty and Obedience to him.

Page 340. It will be found that there is no Title on Earth now to the Crowns,
to Families, to Persons, but the People's Suffrage; for the Institution of
Magistracy does not made James Stuart a King, no more than John Chamberlain.

Page 375. Kings must be like Dogs that are best Hunters, not those who are
born of best Dogs; therefore Dominion is not hereditary.

Page 389. The Inferior is accountable to the Superior, the King is
inferior, the People is superior; Ergo, the King is accountable to the
People. The Proposition is plain; for if the King's Superiority make the People
accountable to him, in case of transgressing the Laws, then why should not the
People's Superiority make the King accountable to them, in case of
transgressing the Laws.

Page 411. In the fourth Article of the Covenant, we are obliged to endeavor
that all Incendiaries and Malignants, etc. be brought to condign Punishment;
therefore is it imaginable that the Head of that unhallowed Party, the great
Malignant Enemy, who is the Spring, and gives life to all these Abominations,
should be exempted from punishment? shall we be obliged to discover and bring
to punishment the little petty Malignants, and this implacably stated Enemy to
Christ, escape with a Crown on his head? Nay, we are by this obliged, if ever
we be in condition, to bring these stated Enemies to God and the Country, to
condign Punishment, from the highest to the lowest: And this we are to do, as
we would have the Anger of the Lord turned away from us, which cannot not be
without hanging up their Heads before the Lord against the Sun, Numb. 25. 4.

Page 412. By the fifth Article of the Covenant, we are obliged to endeavor
that Justice be done upon such as oppose the Peace and Union between the
Kingdoms; abut this Man and his Brother have destroyed and annulled that which
was the Bond of these Kingdoms Union, viz. the Solemn League and Covenant.

Page 459. That form God save the King, now imposed, as it is found in the
Original, is only paraphrastically expounded, and most catachrestically applied
to Tyrants, being in the native sense of the words only, Let the King live;
which as it is now extorted most illegally, so it can be rendered neither
civilly, nor sincerely, nor christianly: It is a horrid mocking of God, and a
heinous taking of his Name in vain, contrary to the third Commandment: If it be
a congratulation, it is the more abominable, not only for the Hypocrisy that
is in it, but the Blasphemy, in giving Thanks for the Promoter of the Devil's
Interest, and the Destroyer of Christ's and the Liberties of Mankind.

Page 466. Let us consider the Person and Matter for whom and for what, this
Prayer ( God save the King;) is extorted: Either it is for the Salvation of
James the Papist, or of James the Tyrant; Now it is not the Will of God, that
they that have, and keep, and will not part with the Mark of the Beast, should
be saved; for he is adjudged of God to drink the Wine of his Wrath, Rev. 14. 9,
10. We cannot pray for him as a Christian, or as King, because he is neither;
and as a Tyrant he can no more be saved that as a Papist; for, Tophet is
ordained of old, yea, for the King it is prepared, Isai. 3. 33. Now while he
continues such, we must complain in Prayers, not for his Mis-government only,
but for that he governs, and desire to be delivered from him; for, considering
what a Man, and what a King he is, guilty of Murder, Adultery, Idolatry, under
the Sentence of the Law both of God and Man; we can pray no otherwise for him
than for a Murderer, Adulterer, Idolater; we cannot pray that the Lord may
bless his Government, for it is his Sin and our Misery, that he is a Governor,
and his Throne is a Throne of Iniquity. What Form of Prayer this Author uses
for the King, may be seen at the end of the Notes of their Prayers.

Page 482 and 483. These that now would impose Bonds upon us, are such Sons of
Belial as cannot be taken by the hand. There is one general Argument that will
condemn coming in any Terms or Bonds with that Party that have broken the
Covenant, because such Transactions are a sort of Confederacy with the known
Enemies of the Truth and Godliness Compare this with the late Assembly's
refusing, at the King's desire, to admit of any of the Episcopal Clergy with
them into the Exercise of the Ministry.
Mr. Gillespy demonstrates that to be unlawful; when in capacity, we should not
suffer them to dwell in the Land; if we are not to be familiar with Heathens,
far less with Apostates; for the Apostle lays much more restraint from
Communion with them than with Pagans, 1 Cor. 5. 10. And again, Exodus 34. 12.
All sacred Transactions are discharged upon a moral and perpetually binding
ground: And all Toleration is prohibited, and all conjugal Affinity. Such
Compliances brought on the first desolating Judgment, the Flood, on the old
World, Genesis 6. when the Godly conformed and incorporated with the Ungodly Crew.
-- The Scriptures frequently disprove all Confederacies, Covenants, Concord,
and, without distinction, all Transactions and Unitive Agreements with the Men
of Belial, that overturn the Reformation, p. 487.

Page 501. It Is clear from the Form, the Object, and from the Ends of the
Covenant, which are all Moral, and of indispensable Obligation, that it is of
perpetual and unalterably binding force, obliging the present and and all
future Generations.

Page 500. By Allegiance and Loyalty, can be meant nothing else, by our present
Governors, but an Obligation to own and Obey, and never to oppose the Design of
advancing Tyranny; and by Peaceableness and Orderliness, nothing else can be
intended, than an Obligation never to oppose either the present Settlement, or
future Establishment of Popery and Arbitrary Power, upon the Ruins of the
Reformation, and our Civil and Religious Rights and Liberties; whence they that
take these Oaths and Bonds, in any other sense, look more to the Liberties of
Worldly Interest, than to the Dictates of Conscience, and by quibling Evasions
do but mock God, deceive the World, and illude the Enemies, and delude
themselves.

Page 505. The Covenant is the Foundation of the People's Compact with the King
at his Inauguration, the fundamental Law of the Government, and among the very
Leges and regulae reganndi; so that the Rescinders of of it are chargeable not
only with Perjury but of Treason and Tyranny, in breaking and altering the
Constitution of the Government, and are liable to the Curse of the Covenant;
for they cannot rescind that, nor escape it is Vengeance; whereof we have a
Speaking-pledge already, in that the Rescinder of these Covenants was so
terribly rescinded, and cut off by the hands of unnatural Violence; God thereby
fulfilling that threatened Judgment of Covenant-breakers, That he that has
broken his Covenant shall be brought to Destruction; and bloody and deceitful
Men shall not live out half their days: So Charles the Second got not leave to
live out half of the days he projected to himself.

Page 508. To require Men to subscribe to a Declaration asserting that the
National Covenant, and the Solemn League and Covenant, were and are in
themselves unlawful Oaths, is to require Men to enter into a Confederacy
against the Lord, at which the Heavens might stand astonished; it is an
unparalled breach of the third Commandment, and could no more be taken tin
Truth and Righteousness, that an Oath renouncing the Bible.

Page 513. Compare this with the Presbyterians now denying the Power to the
King of dissolving the Assembly.
An acknowledgment of Ecclesiastical Supremacy resident in the King, is the
most blasphemous Usurpation on the Prerogatives of Christ, that ever the
greatest Monster among Men durst arrogate; yea, the Roman Beast never claimed
more; and in effect it is nothing else but one of his Names of Blasphemy,
twisted out of the Pope's hands by King Henry the Eighth, and handed down to
Queen Elizabeth, etc. By this many intolerable Encroachments, made upon the
Liberties and Privileges of the Church of Christ, are yielded unto; as that
there must be no Church Assemblies without the Magistrates Consent, but that
the Power of Convocating and Indicting Assemblies does belong only to him, that
he may dissolve them when he pleases, and that his Presence, or his
Commissioners, is necessary to each National Assembly.

Page 516. To engage in Bonds of living peaceably, is to engage in Bonds of
Iniquity; they are Covenants of Peace with God's Enemies, whom we should count
our Enemies; and hate them because they hate him, Psalm. 139. It Is more suitable
to answer as Jehu did to Joram, What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy
mother Jezabel, and her witchcrafts are so many? than to engage to be at Peace
with those who are carrying on Babylon's Interest, the Mother of Harlots and
Witchcrafts Upon this consideration the late Assembly refused at K. W.'s
desire, to receive the Episcopal Party into any terms of Peace or Communion.


Page 658. For private Persons to destroy and rid the Commonwealth, of such
Burdens and vile Vermin, so pernicious to it as Tyrants are, was thought a
Virtue meriting Commendation by all Nations; among the rudest Nations this is a
Relict of Reason; as the Oriental Indidians have a Custom when ever any Persons
run a Muck, that is, in a revengeful Fury take such a quantity of Opium as
distracts them into such a Rage of mad Animosity, that they fear not to Assault
and go through destroying whom they can find in their way; then every Man arms
against him, and is ambitious of the Honor of first killing him; which is very
rational: And it seems to be as rational, to take the same couse with out mad
Malignant Mucks All that are not true Covenanters.
, who are drunk with Hellish Fury, and are running in a Rage to destroy the
People of God.

Page 701. The exacting Taxations for maintaining of the Army, and the paying
of Subsidies, was and remains to be a Consummating Crimson Wickedness, the Cry
whereof reaches Heaven; since upon the matter it exceeded the Gadarens
Wickedness, and was short of their Civility; they did not beseech Christ and
his Gospel to be gone out of Scotland, but with armed Violence declared, they
would with the strong Hand drive him out of his Possession, in order to which
their Legions are levied with a professed Declaration, That there shall not be
a Soul left in the Nation, who shall not be slain, shut up, or sold as Slaves,
who will own CHRIST and his Interest.

Page 712. The paying of Subsidies to the present Government, is to surnish that
Party of the Dragon's Legions, in their War against Prince Michael and his
Angels, with Supplies; which no Moral Force can excuse, no more than it can do
the shedding of the Blood of their innocent Children, or sacrificing them to
Moloch; for no Sacrifice they can offer to the Devil, can be more real, or so
acceptable, as what they declare by this; being so direct not only in
opposition to the coming of the Kingdom of Christ, but the Deletion of his
precious Interests, and the giving Satan such an absolute Dominion in the
Nation, as that they who have made the Decree, and all who put it in Execution,
practically declare thereby they have mancipate themselves to his Slavery, and
sold themselves to work Wickedness in the sight of the Lord: so likewise that
all the rest of the Nation may with themselves become his Vassals, and in
evidence of their Opposition to Christ, and in recognition to Satan's
Sovereignty, and their Subjection, they are appointed to pay these black Meals.
Taxes.


Mr. Rule. the great Scribe now of the Party, in his Second Vindication of the
Church of Scotland, owns at every turn, that there are many Presbyterians in
Scotland, who are neither moderate nor sober; and to these he imputes all the
Rebellions and Murders committed by the Party, and yet he calls the Legal
Restraints, put upon these wild or mad Presbyterians, (for so they must be
called, if they be neither moderate nor sober,) cruel Persecutions: Now their
whole pretended Martyrology being only made up of these Men, I would fain know
whose Martyrs such Men were; for the Devil has his Martys too. This is Mr.
Rule's best way of Reasoning, for which I am apt to think there is few of the
Party that will thank him; it being most evident, that those whom he so much
disowns and reflects upon, are the only true Scotch Presbyterians; for whereas
Rule, and some few with him, who would be thought moderate and sober, have
evidently deserted the old Cause, and seem to sit down upon the Lees of Dutch
Presbytery, unto which they have basely degenerated, while these others tread
exactly in the steps of their Forefathers, and act in a close Conformity to the
Covenants, and the Decrees of the General Assemblies; which must be
acknowledged to be the Rule for Scotch Presbyterians, or else it must be
confessed that they have none.

I shall leave the Reader to judge which of these two are indeed the truest
Scotch Presbyterians, by the account which one of their own famous Writers
gives of those whom Mr. Rule calls sober and moderate; in the Historical
Representation of the Testimonies of the Church of Scotland, (printed 1687, p.
162. and downwards,) speaking of the Toleration granted in that same Year by
the King, he says, and truly too, that those who embraced it, acted contrary
to the Presbyterian Principles of the Church of Scotland, particularly to the
Declaration of the General Assembly, July, 27, 1649; And contrary to the
Covenant. And on this Head his Arguments are infinitely beyond any that ever we
have heard from Mr. Rule; For (says he) this Toleration is founded on Sovereign
Authority, Prerogative Royal, and Absolute Power, which all are to obey without
reserve. Again, (says he) it comes through such a Conveyance, as suspends,
stops, and disables all Penal Laws against Papists, and thereby everts all the
Securities and Legal Bulwarks that Protestants can have for the Establishment
of their Religion, making them depend only upon the Arbitrary Word of an
Absolute Monarch, whose Principles oblige him to break it: So they that accept
this Toleration, do thereby recognize a Power in the King, to subvert all Laws,
Right, and Liberties; which is contrary to Reason as well as Religion, and a
clear breach of the Covenants: By this Toleration the Papists are encouraged
and increased in Numbers, the whole Nation overflowed with their Hellish
Locusts, and all places filled with Priests and Jesuits; yea, the Executive
Power of the Government is put in the Hands of the Romanists. -- Watever
Liberty this may be to some Consciences, it is none to the Tender: it is only a
Toleration which is always of Evil, for that which is good cannot be tolerated,
under the Notion of Good, but countenanced and encouraged as such: therefore
this reflects upon our Religion, when a Toleration is accepted, which implies
such a Reproach, and the annexed Indemnity and Pardon, tacitly condemns the
Profession thereof, as a Fault, or Crime; which no Christian can bear with, or
homologate by Acceptance; whatever some Addressers, particularly the
Presbyterians at London, have blasphemously alleged, that God is hereby
restored to his Empire over the Conscience: Moreover, Alsop and other London
Pesbyterians Address to K. J.
(says he) true Presbyterians can never closs themselves among them that are
hereby indulged, viz. Archbishops and Bishops, all the Prelatical and Malignant
Crew, all Quakers and Papists, reaching also all Idolatry, Blasphemy, Heresy,
and Truth; making the Professors of Christ Partners with Antichrist's Vassals.
Such a Toleration is contrary to the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament;
it is like Julian the Apostate's Toleration, designing to root out Chirstianity;
it is contrary to the Confession of Faith; and therefore to accept this
Toleration, is inconsistent with the Principles of the Church of Scotland,
National and Solemn Leagues and Covenants, and Solemn Acknowledgments of Sins,
and Engagements to Duties; in all which we are bound to Extirpate Popery and
Prelacy, as inconsistent with the whole Tract of our former Contendings, and
particularly with the Testimony of the Synod of Fi^e, and other Brethren,
against Cromwel' s vast Toleration and Liberty of Conscience.

The worst of all is, ( says he) that it is further declared in that Toleration,
that nothing must be preached or taught, which may any way tend to alienate the
Hearts of the People from the King or his Government: here is the Price at
which they ought to purchase their Freedom; a sad Bargain to buy Liberty and
sell Truth. But who can be faithful, but he must think it his Duty to alienate
the Hearts of the People from such an Enemy to Christ? What Watchman must not
see it his indispensable Duty, to preach so that the People may hate the Whore,
and this Pimp of Hers: It cannot be but very stumbling to see the Ministers of
Scotland purchasing a Liberty to themselves, at the rate of burying and
betraying the Cause into Bondage; and thus to be laid by, from all Opposition
to Antichrist's Design, in such a season: The World will be tempted to think,
that they are not governed by Principles, but their own Interest, and that it
was not the late overturning of Religion and Liberty that offended them; for if
that Arbitrary Power had been but exerted in their favors, though with the same
prejudice to the Cause of Christ, they would have complied with it, as they do
now.

Mr. Rule in his late Book is highly offended with the Author of the case of
the afflicted Clergy, for saying, That the Presbyterians Addressed and Thanked
K. James for this Toleration in a fawning and flattering manner; and yet our
honest Presbyterian Author deals more roundly with them, Page 173. his words
are these, The Addresses made thereupon, were with a strain of Fulsome and
Blasphemous Flatteries, to the Dishonor of God, the Reproach of the Cause, the
Betraying of the Church, the Detriment of the Nation, and the exposing
themselves to the Contempt of all. Again, (says he, Page 176, 177, 178.) The
Address it self is of such a dress, as makes the things addressed for to be
odious, and the Addressers to forefault the Respect, and merit the Indignation
of all that are friends to the Protestant and Presbyterian Cause. -- Nothing
could have been more cross to the real desires of the true Presbyterians than
this newly start-up Opinion, that Interest has led them to espouse. -- There is
nothing here sounds like the old Presbyterian strain; neither was there ever an
Address of this Style seen before from Presbyterians: It would have looked far
more Presbyterian like, to have sent a Protestation against the now openly
des^gn'd Introduction of Popery, and Subversion of all Laws and Liberties,
which they are Covenanted to maintain; or at least, an Address in the usual
Language of the Presbyterians, who used always to speak of the Covenants, and
work of Reformation; but here never a word of these, but of Loyalty to His
Excellent, to His Gracious, and to His Sacred Majesty; of Loyalty not to be
questioned; an entire Loyalty in Doctrine a resolved Loyalty in Practice, and a
fervent Loyalty in Prayers: All that they are sollicitous about, is not for the
Prerogatives of their Master, or the Liberties of the Church; but lest their
Loyalty be questioned, that they be otherwise represented; all that they
beseech for, is, Not that the Cause of Christ be not wronged, or Antichrist
introduced by this Liberty; but that those who promote any Disloyal Principles
and Practices may be looked upon as none of theirs: and all the hopes they
have, (...) great persuasions of His Majesty's Justice and Goodness.

Here is a Lawless, Unrestrained Loyalty to a Tyrant, claiming and absolute
Power, to be obeyed without reserve; not only professed, but solicitously
sought to be the Principle of Presbyterians, whereas it is the Principle of
Atheistical Hobes. -- This is not the Presbyterian Loyalty to the King,
according to the Restrictions in the Covenants; but Erastian Loyalty to a
Tyrant in his overturning Religion, Laws and Liberties, and in protecting and
encouraging all Iniquity. This Loyalty in Doctrine will be found Disloyalty to
Christ, in a sinful and shameful silence, that wrong is done to him. This
Loyalty in Practice, is a plain betraying of Religion and Liberty, and lying by
from all opposition to the destroyer of both. And this Loyalty in Prayers, for
all Blessings ever to attend His Person and Government, will be found
inconsistent with the Zeal of Christians, and the cries of the Elect unto God,
for Vengeance upon the Supporters of Antichrist; nor consonant to Presbyterian
Prayers in reference to Popish Tyrants; it were much more suitable for them to
pray, That God which has caused his Name to dwell in his Church, may destroy
all Kings that shall put to their Hands to alter and destroy the House of God,
Ezra* 6. 12.

Page 178. 179. This Address is so stuffed with sneaking Flatteries, that it
would more become Sycophants and Court Parasites, than Ministers of the Gospel.
-- Nothing but a Rhapsody of Flatteries, justifying all his Claim to
Absoluteness, and engaging to Demean themselves so, as that he may find cause
to enlarge rather than to diminish his Favors, which can be no other way but
in assisting him to destroy Religion and Liberty: O what an indelible Reproach
is this for Ministers, who pretend to be set for the Defense of the Gospel,
thus to be found betraying Religion. This is in effect not only Flattery, but
Blasphemy, as great as if they had said. They resolved, by the help of God, to
be as Unfaithful, Time-serving, and Silent Ministers, as ever plagued the
Church of God, p. 180.

Now the Presbyterians who accepted this Toleration, and made such bustling
Addresses of Thanks to King James for it, are they whom Mr. Rule calls the
sober Presbyterians: and now I leave him to Vindicate himself and them, from
what is thus charged upon them, by one who is well known to be a true
Presbyterian, Shields Chaplain to my Lord Angus's Regiment, one of their famous
Authors and Preachers.
and as such is at present owned, and employed in a considerable Trust by the
General Assembly: And if we may judge from all the Principles and Practices of
former Scotch Presbyterians, he is really a far honester Presbyterian, than
they who would now call themselves Moderate; and yet in contradiction to that
Title, persecute their Reformed Brethren with the greatest Rigor and Severity.
To conclude this Head, and to justify what may be thought most severe in the
Character giver of Presbyterians in the former Section; if we may believe the
account the Presbyterians of Scotland have published to the World themselves,
(as I think they ought not to blame us if we do) then the one half of our
Presbyterians are neither Moderate nor Sober, but Wild Hill-men, Separatists, a
robbing, lawless, ungovernable Rabble, a mad People, headstrong Traitors and
Rebels, that is, in a word, they are Cameronians, vide First and Second
Vindication, and further Vindication of the Church of Scotland. The other half
are Betrayers of all Religion, Covenant-breakers, Worldly, Fawning, Flattering
Court Parasites, Blasphemous, Unsaithful, Time-serving, Silent Ministers, and
the greatest Plagues of the Church of Scotland; vide, Hind let loose, Banders
disbanded. And even Dr. Rule, (as he Intitles himself, and is angry that others
do not call him so too,) in that Defense of the Presbyterians, which he writes
by the Order of the General Assembly, calls the Cameronians a People rendered
mad, p. 91. And in the same Page, speaking of the other Party of Presbyterians,
says, I deny not but many of them put force upon their Light. Again, p. 118.
They did hear renitente Conscientia. And what is this to say, in plain terms,
but that one Party of Presbyterians is without their Wits, and many of the
other without any Conscience: Now what may Prelatists look for from such Men,
Pudet haec opprobia nobis and dici potuisse and non potuisse refelli.

There are some famous Authors more, that are fit to have place here, because
in their Writings they discover the true Spirit of the Presbyterian New Gospel,
two of them own themselves to be present Pamphleteers for the Party,
pretending, forsooth, to answer Books too. The honestest and truest
Presbyterian of these two, shall have, as he deserves, the first place, that is
the Author of the brief and true Account of the Sufferings of the Kirk of
Scotland, occasioned by the Episcopalians, since the Year 1660; London, printed
1690.

In the very first Page, he seems to be struck with Astonishment at the
thinking but of Episcopalians, (as he calls them,) O ( says he) their
Superlative Impudence, their Hellish Dissimulation and Malice: They imitate the
Devil himself, who first tempts, and then accuses, though it is too visible that
their Consciences are past feeling, being seared as with a hot Iron. When their
Hierarchy was restored, the Devil, who seemed to be bound sometime before, That
was no doubt in the peaceful and godly days of the Holy Covenant: But how
seemed the Devil to be bound then? why, it was after the New Gospel way, he was
bound in the Chains of Blood, Murder, and Rebellion; being surfeited with
those Sacrifices, he seemed to lay himself down to rest, leaving all his
Drudgery upon Earth to be performed by his Covenanted Agents.
was let loose, the Floodgates of all Impiety and Wickedness were set open;
and Hell did triumph in its Conquests over the Nation, and displayed its Banner
not only against Religion, but even Morality: Which the Prelates, and their
Adherents were so far from opposing, that they indulged the People, but
especially the Gentry, in their Wickedness, as knowing that to be the only
Method to secure them on their side. Well, believe but this New Gospeller, and
the Scotch Gentry, as well as Clergy, are a rare sort of Monsters, indeed; for
the best Characters and softest Words he bestows upon them, are these, They are
Godless Miscreants, of the true Egyptian Brood, infamous Parracides,
Sorcerers, and incestuous Apostates, infamous Varlets, infamous Villains, left
to corrode their own viprous Bowels with their Inhumane Fury; the Devil's
Instruments, fit only to be Stallions and Pimps to Bawdy-Houses; the
Episcopalian Hireling Preachers, with their infernal Bawlings, the Scum and
Refuse of the Nation, they bore the Characters of Wickedness of their
Foreheads, liker Pagans than Professors, Bloodhounds, Children of Hell, the
Tyranno-papa-prelatical Host, the great Papa-prelatical Champion Dundee, Savage
Beasts in Humane Shape, a graceless untoward Generation of Prelatists, who use
nothing but Hectoring for Reason, and Cursing for Argument; ungodly Episcopal
Brutes, that reprobate Faction; that Limb of Antichrist, and infernal Locust,
the Apostate Archbishop Sharp, with a Malice like his Father the Devil, that
waspish formal Prelate. -- The Generation of Vipers, the Episcopalian Seed of
the Serpent, Hectors and Buffoons, the most obdurate, impenitent, spiteful,
base, impudent Priests, whose Fathers were not good enough to eat with the Dogs
of their Flocks, infamous, scandalous, lying, Runnagates, etc.

This is the way the Scotch Presbyterians use to argue and answer Books; and
these are the sweetest Flowers of our Authors Presbyterial Rhetoric, that he
liberally strows in every Page of his Book; which being quite contrary to the
Spirit and Genious of CHRIST must be allowed to pass for new minted, superfine
Presbyterian Gospel.

Well, so much for Scotland, that is his own Country perhaps our Author may be
more courteous and civil to Strangers. Next then let us see how he treats the
other Reformed Churches: As for the Church of England, he discharges most
furiously against her in many places, viz. p 7. She is the worst constitute
Church in the World; These Tantivees, let their Hyperbolical Pretensions of
Zeal for Religion and Loyalty, be what they will, if the King but put forth his
hand to touch them, they will curse him to his face; The Presbyterians indeed
ordinarily prevent the King's putting forth his hand against them, by
assaulting him first.
and rather than part with an Inch of Superstition, or a Swinish Lust, will, as
the Party have always done, lay a Confederacy with Hell and Rome, as times past
and present do evidence beyond contradiction. I wonder he did not add, and
times to come; for that would have been as true as the other.

And again, p. 8. For the new upstart slavish Doctrine of Passive Obedience, as
the Church of England had the Dishonor to be the Mother of it, she has also
the Ignominy to be the Murderer, having basely cut it is Throat, as Harlots use
to do sometimes with their spurious Brood. The great design of the New Gospel
to decry Passive Obedience, and to blaspheme the Church of England.


Page 27. If the English Clergy offer to assist the Prelatical Scots, as they
ate readier by a thousand to one to do it, The English Clergy, who scruple to
Swear, show, that they can patiently suffer, and therefore are not concerned at
what Presbyterians threaten; the Devil can go no farther than his Chain reaches.
than to Swear Allegiance to their Sovereigns, it may arm the good Women with
their Folding-stools once more against them; as it did formerly in King Charles
the First's time, when one of the Bishops began to read the Common Prayer,
which she called Popery And so do all the new Gospellers.
.

Page 28. Is it not as lawful for the Scots Presbyterians, to pray against the
English Hierarchy as Antichristian. As for the English Clergy and Prelates too,
to Plot, drink and plead in their Sessions at the Devil, against the Scots
Presbytery: And I believe they would pray against it also, but that they have
not a Form for it. To suppose, that the banihing the Prelatical Scots Clergy
was not encouraged by Authority, is Ignorance and Sawciness; for it is plain,
Authority in Scotland, has done what was proper for a Civil Government to do,
viz. They have declared the Hierarchy Antihumane; that is, contrary to the
peoples Inclination By the same argument, the Protestant Religion must be
Antihumane in France, Italy and Spain; and the Christian too in all the Grand
Seignior's vast Dominions.
: and, I suppose, are so good natured, to wish their Neighbors were rid of it
too; and so much the rather, that they have so often found, and do still find
them imposing Saucy Intrigues against the Kingdom of Scotland, wherein, if they
persist, it may perhaps, and let them blame themselves for it, prove as fatal
to them as it did in the days of Dr. Laud. Well, here is a severe and open
threatening, England then look to it. The Scots Presbyterians are sworn in their
Holy Covenant, to reform Britain and Ireland, (though it be by Club Law) and
let them but have Power, according to their Will, and they will soon visit you
once more, for all your Goods.

Page 29. The Bishops are generally found to be against that which is for the
Nations good, and howsoever the late opposition which they made to the late
King may be magnified, they seem quickly to have repented of it. But supposing
they had continued steadfast, yet whatever good Nature might have done, I am
sure, Justice would not have awarded them any thanks; which will appear
undeniably true, if we consider ( among many other things which he instances)
how most of the Bishops opposed the reversing of the Judgment of Perjury given
against: Dr. Oats, who did the Nation more service than Seven Idolized Stars,
so many of whom are now turned dark Lanthorns. Nor can it ever be forgot, how
many of the inferior Clergy, following the Conduct of their Tripple-headed
Guide, advanced the Interest of the Tripple-Crown, and some of them topping
ones too, at the hour of death, grated with their slavish nonsensical Doctrine
of Resistance upon the Consciences of the Noble Hero's, and Darlings of the
People, the Lord Russel and Duke of Monmouth, upon the very Scaffolds; and if
the contrary Doctrine be damnable, as they alleged, then I am sure their
Church has been guilty of damnable Practices since Every thing that is not
agreeable to the New Gospel must be slavish, nonsensical, and damnable.
.

This is the Charity that the New Gospel Professors have to the Church of
England, which the whole Christian World besides them, does so justly honor
and esteem, upon the account of their Government, Worship, Doctrine, and
Practice, which their Phanatical Neighbors so maliciously censure and
blaspheme. Well, but (say they) the Church of England is still laboring under
much Romish Superstition and Idolatry; and which is worse, she is
Papaprelatical, nay, she is Archipapaprelatical; and that is Antihumane, in the
New Gospel phrase. But I hope they will be kind, at least, to their Brethren of
the Presbyterian* Church beyond Sea. Are not the Dutch and French,
Presbyterians? Is not the Mother Church of Geneva thoroughly reformed? No, no,
they have never set up the Solemn League and Covenant for their Standard: Or to
speak in the Authors own words, page 27. They are strangers to the power of
Godliness, because not knowing how to pray, without they must have recourse to
a Form, which is as unreasonable and unnatural an imposition upon the Strong,
especially, on Ministers, as would be the imposing of Crutches upon the adult
and able part of Mankind, who can walk better without them. Well, Christ
prescribed a Form of Prayer to his Disciples; the first, and all the succeeding
Ages of the Church thought it not only convenient, but necessary to use Forms
in Public Worship; but, alas the Disciples themselves, and all preceding
Christians, are but weak, unable Infants, in respect of the adult, strong and
covenanted Professors of the new Gospel in the West of Scotland.

The next famous Author is Mr. Rule, who calls himself a Doctor of Medicine
(for they never pretended to have any in Divinity) in his Second Vindication of
the Kirk of Scotland, he says, page 113. That it is an unfair, injurious, and
false Imputation, to charge the severity of the Style of this Author upon the
Presbyterians, who he says, disown that Style, it being written by a
Cameronian, while they stood at a distance from the sober Presbyterians;
however those whom he calls Sober Presbyterians, have never yet, by any public
deed, condemned that Book, nor any other of the Barbarities of these unsober
Cameronian Presbyterians, but have, on the contrary, received them into their
Communion, without the least acknowledgment of any such Crimes; and Dr. Rule
(that I may not offend him) calls them the Zealous Party, and represents them
as pretty gentle, in that they made it their work only to deprive, and not to
Murder the Episcopal Ministers, page 125. Although the Doctor knows, that
Instances can be given of some Ministers that were even Murdered by that
Zealous Party, not long ago; and himself owns, in the beginning of his
Postscript, that five Men and six Women, Presbyterians, came to the House of
William Ferguson, Minister of Kilpatrick; and because he would not alter his
manner of Praying, and come out of his House, as they had charged him, they
therefore invaded his House, tore off his Clothes, and beat him on the Head and
Legs, which looked but too like a design to Murder him: Several other things of
this Nature were so notorious, that his ridiculous way of disguising, when he
cannot deny them, must needs satisfy the World, of the certain truth of the
Accounts that have been given by the Eyewitnesses and Sufferers in that
Persecution. Upon which Consideration, Mr. Pitcarne, a better Writer, and as it
appears, a much honester Man, declined the vindicating of these late
Proceedings of the Presbyterians; not that he did not like the Presbyterian
Cause, for he is through-paced that way; but because, after he had examined the
matters of Fact for several Months, as he had been enjoined by the Fraternity,
he found it impossible to speak any thing in their Vindication, but what the
greatest part of Scotland would know to be notoriously false; wherefore, as Dr.
Rule himself informs us, Preface to his Second Vindication, parag. 5, and 7. in
the end of the same Book, Page 190. When this Affair was committed to him,
after many Months he returned the Papers to be answered, without any Reply to
them. But passing this, I wonder that the Worthy Doctor should, in his late
Book (now cited) exactly imitate that severe Style, which he and his Sober
Party pretend to disown; but, perhaps, he sees not this Beam in his own Eye,
with which he must grant the Soberest Presbyterians to be justly chargeable;
because, as he himself is at great pains to inform the World, both in the
beginning and ending of his Book, the whole party committed that trust to him,
when others had refused it: Vid. Preface, parag. 5, and 7. pages, and Second
Vindication, page 192.

Upon which account, not only the Scurrilous Railing, but all the Untruths,
Contradictions, and Nonsense, which abounds in every Page, is justly chargeable
upon the whole Party, of which I shall give the World such a taste, as may be
sufficient to make them judge of all the rest, which would be too tedious and
nauseous here to insert. First then, as to Scurrilous Railing Accusations, in
the very first page of his Preface, he calls Prelatists, The Seed of the
Serpent, whose Enmity against the Seed of the Woman (that you must know, is
Scots Presbyterians) as it began, so it must end with the World; and that you
may not mistake him, he avers after in the same page, That they use the old
stratagems of Satan; and in the 2d. page he compares them to Heathens, Papists,
yea, they are Devils, both Greek and Syriack Devils; nay, they are Jesuits, Woe
to Posterity if they believe them, for then, to be sure, succeeding Ages will
turn absolute Scepticks: He adds, It Is evident, that many of them regarded not
the Civil Authority of the Nation, and others, by their lewdness of
Conversation, made themselves unworthy to be in the Holy Function of the
Ministry, Preface, Paragr. 2.

And in the Book it self, page 1. he charges the Authors of our late Books,
with Malice, Lies, Railing, and guilty of the fowlest and falsest
Misrepresentations that the Minds of Men can suggest, enraged by being deprived
of the occasion they once had to persecute their Neighbors, the end to which
they improved their Lucrative places. Page 4. Mean Spirits and Mercenary Souls,
that employ themselves in Mendicant Writings and Practices; -- beyond the
common size of Slanderous Malice, Page 7. Guilty of the highest Impudence and
Sauciness, page 12. Prelatital Party eminent for Spite, but has neither Truth
nor Charity to warrant it, page 21. They who know their temper, and the brow
and way of those for whom they plead, will not believe their Professions, their
Hypocrisy being shameful, and twisted with Malice, page 23. The temper of
Episcopalians is by unmanly, as well as unchristian, shifts, tobuoy up their
sinking Cause, page 25. This Historian's Ignorant Malice to be despised, Judas
Iscariot was his Predecessor, page 52. The contempt of the Ministry came from
the Atheism and Debauches of the Episcopal Clergy, page 64. And again, of an
Eminent Divine, Loved and honored by all but Presbyterians.
he says, That his Words are like those of a Madman, or of one raving in a
Fever, page 51. It would be tedious and nauseous to trace this his Presbyterian
Eloquence, through every page, as he vents it; or to show how falsely and boldly
he charges a whole Sacred Order of Men, with the faults, which he supposes, and
would have the World believe, some single persons among them, to be guilty of;
as that they are perfrictae frontis, Nothing manifestly false can check their
Conscience and Impudence: The whole party grossly Ignorant, Papising Prelates,
pages 126, 131, 133. Spuing out the most spiteful Venom that can lodge in a
Humane Breast, page 136. Impudence beyond Jesuitical, page 142. They glory
either in their having no Principle, or that they can yield over the Belly of
Conscience, to promote their Interest with Men, page 144. The differences
betwixt us and them, are not reconcilable; And yet they own the same Religion
with us page 1. l 3.
a heap of Lies, Men that have taught their Tongues and Pens to speak and write
Lies, page 146, 147. Lies and Calumnies, horrid lies, a broad lie, page 150,
151. This which they now call a broad lie, past for a Gospel Truth among the
Presbyterians, An. 1648. The Authority of their Assemblies above that of King
and Parliament.
Prelatical Incumbents were Scandalous, and unfit to edify the people, and do
rather harden them in Wickedness, page 162. A whole fardel of lies, malicious
Representations, coupled falsehoods, impudent and false assertions, brazen
Foreheads, page 166. Prelates spend their short Glass with gingling py-bald
Orations, page 168. Bitterness, Malice and Contempt is suitable to the
Hislorical Talent of many of the Prelatical Party: If the Debauchery of
Prelates did not tempt people to count all Religion a sham, it were well, page
173. He knows that his Impudent Assertions and Lies can be discovered, and his
Villainy come abroad at last, page 178. A Snarling Cur, -- a lying Spirit does
possess the Men with whom we have to do, Well Ranted Rule.
Page 191, 194.

This is the Meek, Lowly Strain of the Presbyterian new Gospel, whereby the
soberest of them, pretend to vindicate their own proceedings, and refute the
Writings of other Men I leave the World to judge, by this way of defending the
Party, what their Cause must be, and to determine, whether he who calls himself
a Sober Presbyterian; and says, That he was selected and appointed by the sober
General Assembly, to write in their defense; be not indeed as black and
foul-mouthed, as the most rank and rigid Cameronian among them all; for my
part, I can see no difference betwixt his Style and theirs, except this may
pass for one, that Mr. Rule seems to have learned his Style from the
Coal-stealers in Edinburgh, or at Buckhaven, of which College only he ought to
have been Principal; whereas the Cameronians seem to have learned their Style
from the Shepherds and Herring-fishers on the Western Coast, who, though they
have more Cant, yet they have less Knavery than the former: If Mr. Rule should
challenge me, as falling into the same fault for which I here blame him,
because of some sharpness which he may apprehend to be in that Character I have
given before of the Presbyterian Preachers and People, yet that is only
chargeable upon my single person, and not upon others of our Party, for I
neither do, nor pretend to write by a Commission from them: And besides, he
himself has provided me with an Apology, viz. Calling things by their true
names, is not to be reckoned inconsistent with Moderation and Calmness; A
petulant and effronted Adversary is not to be handled with that softness of
Style, which is fit for such as are more modest, Preface, Paragr.6.

But passing those Flowers of Presbyterian Eloquence, let us examine in the
next place, if this Author makes any amends for his Style, by the Truth and
Reason that he writes; it would be tedious to trace him through every Page, in
which his Nonsense, Contradictions, and Falsehoods abound, and therefore I shall
here mention only some generals.

There is one Principle suitable to the Genius of the New Gospel only, upon
which much of his Book is founded, and it is this, Do as ye have been done by;
by this he excuses the greatest Barbarities of the Presbyterian Rabble, and
often justifies their highest Severities against Episcopal Ministers Preface
Parag. 6. at the end, and p. 26. etc.
; it is true in other places he condemns them, and says, he will not defend
them; but he seems not concerned shamefully to contradict himself at every
turn: The People for whom he pleads are not so critical as to observe that, and
for others he says, that he despises and contemns them: Sometimes, if you will
believe him, Cameronians are zealous godly Men, eminent for their suffering for
Christ; by and by says he, They are a wild, ungovernable, desperate Rabble,
rendered mad by Oppression: the sum of all is, Revenge is a true Presbyterian
Virtue, and Contradiction Mr. Rule's best: way of Reasoning.

Preface, par. 6. these are his words: I have treated the Adversaries I deal
with as Brethren, desiring rather to exeeed, than come short in Civility, and
fair dealing with them. But at the same time he takes the liberty almost in
every Page, to call those he deals with. Of the Seed of the Serpent, Devils,
habitual Drunkards and Swearers, Traitors that deserve to have their Necks
stretched, profane Persons, constant Sabbath Breakers, horrid Liars and
Slanderers, Men who beat their Wives, and in their Dealings are most injurious
to Men, having no Conscience, p. 32. Ministers who are Opposers of Christ, and
his Institution, and who harden and encourage the People in their Sins, As may
be read in the Pages above cited, and many other of Rule's exceeding Civil
Book, which being written by the Design of the whole General Assembly, it is but
natural and just to conclude, that this is the only way of Scots Presbyterian
Civility and fair Dealing. Again in the same Preface, and Parag. 6. he says, I
build not on Hearsay, or common Talk, which is the best Foundation of many of
the Assertions of my Adversaries. And in the same page, these are his immediate
preceding words, The truth of matters of fact asserted in this Treatise, is
not to be taken from me, but from them who are my Informers, few of whom I
pretend to any personal knowledge of, therefore not my Veracity is pledged, but
that of others: if they have deceived, or been deceived, I am not to answer for
that. What can a Man believe of a Book that is ushered in with such a doubting
and contradictory Preface; if these were not Mr. Rule's own express Sayings, no
body could well believe, that the whole Faction could have singled out such a
Writer to Vindicate them; but Falsehood it seems has no Feet, and Liars who have
so little Wit and Memory, must needs be often entangled in their own Snares.

Some of the Church of England have meddled far beyond their Line in our
Affairs, though we be far from interposing in any of theirs, p. 16. only upon
occasion we take the Christian Liberty that our Predecessors have always done,
of calling them Superstitious, Popish, and Idolatrous in their Worship; and in
their Doctrine, scandalous for Arianism, Arminianism, Socinianism, Popery, and
that Turkish Bow-string Doctrine of Passive Obedience; and that in their
Government they are directly contrary to Christ's Institution, to the design of
the Reformation, and to the Holy Covenant, being Tyrannical, Prelatical, yea
and Archi-papa-prelatical; What we are bound to by the Covenant, says he again,
is not to reform them, but to concur with them, when lawfully called, to
advance the Reformation; that is, wholly to overturn their Church and State, as
we formerly did by our own glorious Gospel-Methods of Fire and Sword, having a
very lawful Call from a godly Party, who invited us to fight the Battles of the
Lord against the Mighty, the King who opposed Reformation-Work in the Land; And
now ( says he) its far from our thoughts to go beyond that Boundary, in being
concerned in their Affairs, we wish their Reformation, but leave the managing
of it to themselves; that is, till we find such a blessed Occasion as those
Worthies of the Lord, the Reformers, did in 48.

Page 23. he says that King James abdicated the Government, and that the
Parliament called it so; if he knows any thing of those Affairs, he knows that
the Parliament of Scotland did nor give it that name, though that of England did:
However, if he did Abdicate, I would fain know how this consists with Rule his
concluding just before, p. 22. That his Royal Authority was taken away by the
Nation; and with what he says p. 100. The Nation laid him aside, and chused
another; This is the constant Doctrine of Scotch Presbyterians, (and they
practice accordingly,) That the People can give and take away the Royal
Authority, can lay aside and choose Kings at their pleasure, vide Buchan. de
Jur. Reg. Jus Populi Vind. Lex. Rex, and Rule's Vind. Now to use Mr. Rule's
moderate Phrase in that place, Some Men's necks have been made to stretch for a
less Crime; than to assert under an Hereditary Monarchy, that Kings are or can
be elected; and it is certain they are as little Friends to their present
Majesty's, as to Monarchy, who would found their Authority upon such a
tottering bottom: nay, Mr. Rule in the name of the other Presbyterians, tells
plainly that they owe no Allegiance to King William, but in so far as he
supports Presbytery, and that it would overturn the very Foundations of his
Authority to restore Episcopacy, For (says he) it is declared against in, the
Claim of Right, as a Grievance, and therefore cannot be restored without
overturniing the Foundation of our present Civil Settlement, p. 90. parag.4.
And again p. 152. parag. 2. The Convention has voted Episcopacy to be a
Grievance to the Nation, and in the Claim of Right, made it a Fundamental
Article in the Government, that it should be abolished. Now what is the meaning
of all this, but that the present Government of, State must necessarily stand
and fall with Presbytery? So that all their great boasts of Loyalty to the
present King, amounts to no more than this, No Presbytery, no King William.

Page 36. par. 11. he says, Most of the Episcopal Ministers who went out, were
put out by their own Consciences; for they deserted their Charges without
either Sentence Threatening, or Compulsion. And yet before that Page 26, Parag.
6. he owns that the Presbyterian Rabble did persecute and drive them away. But
that this is no more imputable to the Presbyterians, than the Drunkenness,
Swearing, Whoredoms, and Persecutions, This is the Civil Style that he promised
to exceed in, Pref. par. 6.
that we charge many of the Prelatists with, are to be looked on as the Crimes
of all the, Episcopalians. And farther he excuses that Rabble, because as he
there avers, They were under the highest Provocations imaginable to do what
they did; yea, to have proceeded to farther Severities. And he adds out of the
abundance of Presbyterian sense, that these things were done in an Interregnum;
which by the bye, can never possibly fall out in an Hereditary Kingdom Where in
the sense of the Law the King never dies.
: And though he says we had then no Church Government, yet himself knows the
contrary, and that Prelacy stood then established by many Laws made in 27
Parliaments, freely and legally Elected in the most settled times, and that the
Prince of Orange, who had then at the desire of some of the Nobility and
Gentry, taken the Kingdom under his Protection, did by his solemn Proclamation
order all things in the Church and State to continue as the Laws had fixed
them, till the Convention of the States should meet: But says honest Mr. Rule,
These enraged People were chafed in their minds, and having now potentiam, though
not potestatem, therefore it was not to be wondered that they relieved
themselves It Is no new thing for Presbyterians to think Power a sufficient Call
to act Illegally.
; that is, by Rabbling the Legal Orthodox Clergy. Moreover, p. 161. he says
expressly, That in Galloway the Incumbents were generally driven away; but how
all this is consistent with what he said before, viz. That they deserted
without either Threating or Compulsionn, I leave the infallible Assembly who
employed this Author, to judge, and if they can, to reconcile what He writes in
the following Citations.

Page 34, par. 10. speaking of the Rabbling Cameronians, he says, That they
came into Mr. Skinner, Minister of Daly, his House, and after they had eaten,
they went away without doing any prejudice to any in the Family; again p. 27.
par. 10. he owns expressly, that those Rabble-Reformers by force took away the
Money out of the Poor's Box, from Mr. Russel Minister at Govan; but says he,
They did it with all Tenderness; and if you will credit those Sacrilegious
Robbers, Rule's Informers, both Mr. Russel and his Wife were drunk: but that
our Author may prove himself and his Book to be all of one Presbyterian Piece,
he tells again, p. 29. par. 5. That the Author of the Case of the Afflicted
Clergy, foully mis-represents the Cameronians, while he speaks of their
eating and drinking at the expense of them whom they rabbled; all the reports
that we have of them, give account of their not laying their hands on the prey,
Esth. 2. 15.

Page 145. It Is better that England and Scotland be two different Nations, than
that the Institutions of Christ should be thwarted, that they be made one. --
May not two Nations trade together, and be governed by the same Laws, and yet
bear with one another as to Church-ways? And may not also the West of Scotland,
and the other parts of that Kingdom, trade together and be governed by the same
Laws, and yet the West not impose their Kirk-ways upon the rest of the Kingdom?
Responde Gilberte.

The Presbyterian Government was settled by Christ, p. 151. Here he leaves it
to the Discretion of the Reader, to judge whether this be a simple Affirmation
only, or an Affirmation and Oath conjoined; though the first may be his meaning,
yet the latter sense seems most natural to the words, and in any other sense
there is no truth in them: and indeed the Arguments by which their Preachers
would persuade the People to this, are as ridiculous as the Assertion it self;
for their ordinary Cant is, Beloved, we read in the Word, that the Apostles
went up together, one did not go before the other; there was no Precedence
amongst them, Beloved; and therefore it is clear, that there was no Prelacy in
those days: And again we read, that honest Paul (they never call him St. Paul,
because he never swore the Solemn League and Covenant,) left his Cloak at
Troas: Why, Sirs, you see plainly from this Text, that Paul had not a Gown but
a Cloak, for says the Text, he left his Cloak, it does not say that he left his
Gown; never a Gown had that precious Man to leave, Beloved, and therefore you
may be sure he was no Prelate; for they, false Lowns, have no Cloaks but Gowns.
From these and such like Arguments, our Author allows no Church but the
Presbyterian to be of Divine Institution, and at one dash he Unchurches all the
Episcopal Churches; and yet says he, p. 154. Presbyterians deny not Papists to
be lawful Ministers. If he can but confute the Learned Dr. Pearson's Defense of
Ignatius' s Epistles; or show us from any Authentic Record, or received
Ancient Historian, that Presbytery was ever the Government of the Church, then
we shall yield the Cause, and believe, in spite of our Reason, that all Rule's
Vain and Empty Boasts of this Matter, are indeed well founded, that both parts
of his Contradictions are certainly true, and all the real foolishness of their
Preaching, solid Arguments.

Pages 154 and 155. He racks his Wit and Cunning to evade and shift this
notorious truth, That instead of fourteen Bishops, which were formerly in the
Church, the Kirk had new set up sixty: But in this matter all his Quibles and
Sophisms (and his best Arguments are no more) depend upon this Supposition,
That that Parliament was the Church, (which is directly contrary to the
Fundamental Principle of a Spiritual Power inherent in the Kirk, altogether
Independent on the Parliament, which has no Power over Christ's
Office-bearers,) for it was that Parliament in which there was not so much as
one Clergyman, that empowered these sixty Presbyters to govern the Kirk, and
restrained all the rest from that Privilege; it was that Parliament which took
upon them to judge of the Hability of these sixty, and of the Inhability of
other Presbyters to govern: well then, according to his way of arguing here,
it is the Parliament that, Pro Ecclesiae Statu, can empower or restra^^
Presbyters, notwithstanding of their Universal and Equal Privilege to govern.
Indeed this Parliament was excessively kind to Mr. Rule, and he for once will
be civil to them; and in contradiction to all the Principles and Practices of
former Presbyterians, they shall pass for the whole Omnipotent Kirk.

Page 156. We are for Moderation, maugre all the Reproaches cast upon us: The
Moderation of any Party is best known by their Practices when in power; now
when the Presbyterians were last in power, all the Evidences of their
Moderation were, the reeking of Fields and Scaffolds with the Blood of Princes,
Prelates, Nobles, Gentry, and Commons; the Cries and Tears of Widows and
Orphans; the Groans of Men Imprisoned, Banished, Excommunicated, Sequestered;
some Cathedrals razed, and others converted to Garrisons and Stables, and the
lesser Churches made Dens for Thieves, in the most litteral sense: and now that
they are in power again, all the Evidences of their Moderation, are Rabbling,
Robbing, Beating, Wounding, Imprisoning, and Banishing of Bishops, Curates,
Wives, and Children; the stigmatizing and slandering innocent and good Men;
invading the just Rights of the King, and of his best Subjects; rendering whole
Countries destitute of any Ministry, flying at every turn in the face of Civil
Authority; becoming false Accusers and Informers, and at the same time sitting
as judges of Men in Office, and the next day intruding into their Places As Mr.
Rule himself did.
: This Purging Work as they call it, Kirk Moderation with a witness; and to use
Mr. Rule's own words, it is even as essential to Presbyterians as Rationality it
self, which they pretend to be great Masters of, though their Scriblers be now
and then delirious.

Page 157. Speaking of the Protestation made by some Presbyters, against the
King and the Acts of Parliament to Assist and Deliver him, when perfidiously
Imprisoned by the English Rebels, he says it was no gross nor scandalous Crime,
but only a speculative Opinion in a controverted Point: This shows what is the
Opinion of Mr. Rule, and of the Party that employed him; but how it consists
with his telling the World so often in his two last Books, That Presbyterians
do not take upon them to meddle in matters of State, nor to control their
Civil Governors; I leave him to show us in his next Vindication: In the same
Page, and the following, Mr. Rule, vindicating the Proceedings of the General
Assembly in this matter, says, That the fatal Division about Protestation and
Remonstrance, was through the Mercy of GOD, not so much as mentioned among
them; and yet in the very next lines he says, That it was moved that the old
Sentence against the Remonstrators should be revoked; and the revoking of their
Sentence was confirmed by this Meeting: -- That Mr. Pitcairn, one of the
Reverend Brethren, was dissatisfied with the Determination of the Meeting in
that Affair, and was a little hot about it, and spoke of entering a
Protestation against it. Would any People but Scotch Presbyterians have
employed such a Scribler as dare thus profane the Mercies of GOD, to justify
his own foolish and palpable Contradictions.

Page 160. He grants that to make up their Meeting, some Presbyteries sent more
than was customary or allowable, and yet it was a Regular, Lawful, General
Assembly; and that they had none at all sent from other parts; which parts were
more than one half of the Nation: And was not this a pretty General indeed,
that included only the least part of the Particulars Just like the Roman
Catholic Church, an Universal Particular.
? This is true Presbyterian Logic, and the Author of it deserves well to be
Head of a College. In the same Page he denies confidently, that Presbyterians
were wont to appoint their Fasts on the Lord's Day; whereas he might have, with
at least as great show of truth, denied that ever they fasted on any Day: But
his two Reasons for the General Assembly's appointing this Fast on the Lord's
Day, will render this whole matter as plain as a Pikestaff; First, says he, It
was the Harvest time, and to fast then on a Weekday, would have been a high
Inconveniency; Well, we godly Presbyterians, that are the Children of the Lord,
may make bold with his Day, rather than seem by Religious Exercises to
incommode the People in their Worldly interest. Secondly, Religious Joy and
Religious Sorrow do very well agree: And even so Fasting and Feasting at the
same time may be very religiously and well observed by the Godly.

They that write Contradictions must needs speak some Truths, and Mr. Rule
stumbles upon one that is well known, Page 161. where he says, We confess that
planting work went more slowly on than purging work.

Well St. Paul was a Divine, and he was all for planting and healing; Dr. Rule
calls himself a Physician, and he is all for purging and launcing. The
Presbyterians are always for purging work. Now they are for purging the Kirk:
next have at the King Council and Household; there must be some purging work
there too. Again, There are many malignant Members, which like so many ill
humors corrupt the Body of the Parliament, therefore that must be also purged:
Then the filthiness of the Army (by which Reformation-Work must be carried on)
that must be likewise purged; and then that all the Streams may be pure
Presbyterian, the Fountains must be cleansed, the Universities must be purged
from the corruption of all ill-affected and suspected persons; and in a word,
to make a thorough Reformation in the Land, the whole Nation must be soundly
drenched, and purging work must go on in the Land after the old Presbyterian
manner, so long as there remains either Guts or Brains in it. My Lord C -- d
who is deservedly honored by all the party. Page 167.
His Godly Parks and Orchards are well planted already, and why then should the
General Assembly be any farther concerned about planting work? Purging work is
their Great Business.

There is another evident truth that Mr. Rule happens to Deviate into Page 188.
viz. The worst of the Prelaists would be readiest to profess Repentance for
conforming to Episcopacy, which they who acted from a principle could not do.
In this I heartily agree with him, and am sufficiently satisfied that that
Episcopal Renegado, who professed such a Repentance before their Assembly,
neither acted from any Principle, nor can be supposed to have any Conscience;
and we bless God that all the Presbyterian interest, art, and industry, now
that they have power, could not prevail with any but this one man, to
prostitute his Conscience to his interest, in such a base and scandalous
compliance.

I shall end my reflections on this Author's sayings, with some short Remarks
upon the Witnesses which he alleges to attest his assertions, and first in
general I say of them in his own words, Page 88. That they are the sworn
Enemies of the Episcopal Church Witness their many Covenants, and Engagements
to that purpose.
, and in a combination not only to defame them, but to root them out, and cut
them off from the face of the earth; and we have from the Pamphlet now under
consideration Rule's 2d Vindication of the Kirk.
, a taste of the veracity of the men with whom we have to do: If his witnesses
make no more conscience of speaking truth, than he himself does, then few
thinking men will be moved with what they say.

2ly, Of the Witnesses named by the Authors of our Books, he says, they are
mostly test me ipso, the Complainant is the witness, which is not fair. Now
all Rule his Evidences are by this exception to be rejected, for he himself,
and all others that know them, are fully satisfied that those very Cameronians,
whom he names as the Evidences to disguise and lessen the attested matters of
fact of our late Persecution, were themselves the principal actors of that
horrid Tragedy. Since then it is not fair to admit parties to be witnesses, why
should these Cameronians be received as such in this affair? Again he says,
that Ministers witnessing for one another derogateth much from the Credibility
of their Testimonies; but what say you to Cameronian Presbyterians witnessing
for one another? why, this derogates nothing from the credibility of their
Testimonoes, for they are not Ministers, that is one evident reason; and
moreover they are all men of strict Conscience, a godly generation, and very
faithful to their Solemn League, the Holy Scots Covenant. Upon these
considerations M. Rule, Defender of the New Gospel-Faith, would have the world
receive the testimony of that Cameronian Rabble, as infallible proofs of what
he asserts in his second vindication of the Presbyterian Kirk. And yet Preface
page 6. he says of them, That he will not pledge his veracity for theirs, that
he pretends to no Personal knowledge of but a few of them; and that if they
deceive, or have been deceived, not he but they are to blame for it.

After all this, if neither Bishops nor other Ministers, neither Laick, Lords
nor Gentry, both of the Scotch and English Nation, must be allowed to have any
Credit, when they are brought by our Authors to attest known Truths, and
matters of Fact whereof they were Eye Witnesses; then I beseech you, why should
men receive that high Character and Testimony which Mr. Rule gives of himself,
page 169? when he says, He did not only practice Medicine, but likewise took
the Degree of Doctor in it, yet never giving over the Work of preaching
frequently: This is a terrible Man indeed, who, it seems, can kill both Soul
and Body: He is far stricter to the Covenanted Work, than his Brethren the
Presbyterians in England; for they can upon occasion, for Interest and other
such holy Purposes unite and join with Independents, whereas he like a man of
unmovable Conscience, withstood the temptation of having an Independent
Congregation at Aberdeen, when great offers of that Charge were made to him
there; and in Northumberland he suffered no small loss, because he would not
fall in with that Independent way. Again, if you will believe himself, he hat no
want of Latin, and that he speaks false Lattin, is false; he is ready (as he
has done) to give proof to the contrary, and to compete with all such as
pretend to it; but when and where we must not know, till Elias come. Nay,
besides all this, he has an excellent hand at Latin Prayers, which he can make
longer or shorter, as the occasion requires, but never so short as some men
allege; neither does he use to pray VERY LONG in public, even in English, and
that is more indeed than any other of his Fraternity can allege for themselves:
Long Prayers serve the Party for many great ends; in them they can sound the
Alarms to Rebellion, commend themselves highly, defame the King, rail against
and revile Malignants, raise and inflame the Mob, vent false News and Stories,
and many other Hocus tricks their long ex Trumpry Prayers serve for: Moreover,
Mr. Rule, to show his Parts, longs for an Adversary like himself, I wish, says
he, a Sciolist would make it appear by a Solid Refutation, what Ignorance I
have discovered in my Writings, I am ready to defend it Even though it be solidly
refuted by a Sciolist.
with all the probability the subject matter is capable of: But my mistakes, if
I be in any, must not pass for proofs of my Ignorance: If any Momus will make
his censure on the Presbyterian Government, it is like Mr. Rule, the great Atlas
of the Cause, or some for him, will give him a farther Answer: Just such
another as this exceeding civil and fair Vindication: And then, to conclude his
own Character, he assures us, That he exceeds all other Presbyterians, both in
his tenderness to the Episcopal party, and in his Argumentative way, rather
than bitterness; of all which the new Gospel Modesty and Meekness, the Candor,
Ingenuity, and Argumentation that appears every where in his late Books is a
sufficient evidence. Now for a man to say all this of himself, because no body
else will, this sure is test me ipso with a witness:, unless it shall be
allowed, that Gilbert may witness for Rule, and Rule again for Gilbert; that
the Doctor may witness for the Principal, and the honest Principal again, by
way of Requital, does the like kindness to his beloved Doctor; this is the
Presbyterian way of proving things by Witnesses.

Mr. Rule answers our Books so thoroughly, that he imputes to the Authors, as a
fault in their Method, every little escape of the Printers about wrong
numbering the Pages Vid Rules 2d. Vindication, page 88. and 177.
, which is frequently occasioned by sending one and the same Book to several
Houses for the speedier dispatch; however the Alphabetical numbering of the
Sheets, ordinarily serves to help the misplaced Figures; but though Mr. Rule be
often dabling about the Press, yet it seems he either does not, or he will not
know this.

Mr. Rule, at last, to confirm all the Contradictions and Falsehoods of his
Book, brings in Mr. Meldrum, one of his own Kidney, and just such another
Scribler, as appears by his Letter, Page 195. where he says. That the
Prelatists way is to spread Reflective Pamphlets in England, keeping them as
secret as they can in Scotland, where the falsehood of matters of Fact are not
known, and they might soon have their Shame and Lying discovered. None but a
true Scots Presbyterian could have asserted this, for he himself too well
knows, that his Party, which domineers now in Scotland, allows no Episcopal
Pamphlets to be brought into, or dispersed in that Kingdom, and that sometime
before the writing of his Letter, several hundreds of these Pamphlets were, by
the Presbyterian Party, seized at Berwick, to prevent their being dispersed in
Scotland; and that contrary to all the Rules of Justice, and Commerce betwixt
the two Nations, and to the great prejudice of the Bookseller, these Books are
by the Arbitrary Power of Presbyterians still kept up: But we shall allow Mr.
Meldrum to be more candid in this than in his former dealings with us, if he
will but now obtain to us, the common liberty of the Press in Scotland, and
then we promise that he shall have a sight of all our Pamphlets sine praetio
aut praece, which now he says he cannot obtain by either of these means.

Page 196* None but a Cameronian will assert, as Mr. Meldrum does, That the
Covenant is a Sacred Oath; just as Sacred as that by which the Jews bound
themselves to murder St. Paul: The World is not now ignorant, how that
Covenant was by Subjects, who had no shadow or Authority, pressed upon their
Brethren in despite of the King, at the expense of much Treasure, and many
thousand Lives and Perjuries. Page 197. he says, That the submitting of some,
who had been ordained only by Presbyterians, to be re-ordained by Bishops, is
Scandalous: None but one of Rule's Evidences would have said this; the Reformed
French have been always justly reputed by all other Protestants, for the great
Learning and Piety of their Ministers, and yet the most Learned and Pious of
their Ministers, at their coming into England, when they could have the
advantage of being Ordained by Bishops, have cheerfully not only submitted to
it, but begged it of the Right Reverend Fathers of the Church: Of which we have
many late Instances.

The account he gives of his shufling and shifting about the Oath of Canonical
Obedience is very Comical; for he owns, That he Subscribed a Paper whereof he
did not seriously consider either the words or the matter, and he thinks
himself sufficiently absolved from that, because, forsooth, he was not present
when that paper was read in the Church, and by telling the People next Lord's
day, that he conceived he had yielded to nothing but what he first offered,
which they that know the matter of Fact call Canonical Obedience; for which, if
you will believe him, he lamented several years* after; all which time he still
continued both in his Lamentations and Canonical Obedience together; and now he
says he is obliged to those he calls his Enemies, for giving him the opportunity
to tell the World, that he repents of it.

The other matters narrated in that Letter, and in the Book to which it is
annexed, are only such as will at first view appear designed on purpose to
disguise and smother evident Truths, to extol and magnify themselves and their
Party, as very Innocent, Godly, and Candid Men; and to reproach and condemn all
others as Perjured Liars and Slanderers; to all which, as they neither need nor
deserve any particular answer, so I hope no body shall ever Vouchsafe them the
honor of it, and if they do, I wish it may have the good effect of opening
some men's Eyes.

But there is no Book so much admired by the whole Party as Samuel Rutherford's
Letters, there one may see, the genuine style of these new Gospellers, the
whole Book is uniform, all of a piece, and speaks out in their own Dialect the
Spirit of Scots Presbyterians, therefore I shall here set down some passages of
it.

Epist. 1. To Mr* Robert Cunningham, he says, Let us be faithful to him that
can ride through Hell and Death upon a Windlestraw, and his Horse never stumble.

Epist. 2. To his Parishioners. Christ sought his black Wife through Pain,
Fire, Shame, and the Grave, and swimm'd the Salt Sea for her; and she then
consented and said, even so I take him.

Ibid. Every man has Conversion and the New Birth, but it is not leel Honestly
come by.
come by, they had never a sick Night for Sin; when they go to take out their
Faith, they take out a fair nothing, or as we use to speak, a Bleaflum A sham.
.

Epist. 3. To the Professors of Christ in Ireland. It will be asked at every
one of us, on what terms we here brook Christ, for we have sitten long Meal
Rent.
free: we found Christ without a wet Foot, and he and his Gospel came upon
small charges.to our Doors, but now we must wet our Feet to seek him. Ibid.
Christ will not bring before Sun and Moon all the Infirmities of his Wife. It
is the modesty of Marriage-Anger, or Husband-wrath, that our sweet Lord Jesus
will not come with Chiding in the Streets, to let all the World hear what is
betwixt him and us* Ibid. O that I had my fill of his Love, but I know ill
Manners make an uncouth* and strange Bridegroom.

Epist. 5. To my Lady Kenmure. Madam, why should I smother Christ's honesty? he
looked Strange.
framed and uncouth-like upon me when I came first here, but I believe himself
better than his looks, I shall not again quarrel with Christ for a Frown.
Gloom: now he has taken the Mask off his Face, and says, Kiss thy fill.
Ibid. It Is little to talk of Christ by the Book and Tongue, but to come nigh
Christ and hauss Hugg.
him, and embrace him is another thing.

Epist. 11. To the Vicount of Kenmure. despair that ever I should win Get.
to the far end of Christ's Love, there are so many plies in it; I wonder what
he mean, to put such a Slave at the Board-head, at his own Elbow. Ah! that I
should lay my black Mouth to such a fair, fair, fair Face as Christ's; he got
neither bud nor hire of me, it cost me nothing.

Epist. 12. To my Lady Kenmure. If there were buying, and selling, and blocking
for as good again betwixt Christ and us, then Free grace might go play it self,
and a Savior might sing dumb, and Christ go and sleep.

Epist. 14. To John Gordon of Gordness. Many a sweet, sweet, soft Kiss, many a
perfumed well smelled Kiss, and Embracement have I received of my Royal Master.
Ibid. And now, whoever they be that have returned to their old vomit ( Prelacy)
since my departure, I bind upon their Back, in my Master's Name and Authority,
the long, lasting, weighty Vengeance and Curse of god; in the Lord's Name I
give them a doom of black and unmixed pure Wrath, which my Master shall ratify,
except they timeously repent and turn to the Lord.

Epist. 15. To my Lady Boyd. Christ delights to take up fallen Bairns, and to
mend broken Bones; he is content that ye lay broken Arms and Legs on his Knee,
that he may spelk them. Ibid. I think shame of the Board-head, and first Mess
Dish.
, and the Royal King's Dining-hall; and that my black hand should come on such
a Ruler's Table. Ibid. I know he has other things to do than to play with me,
and trinle an Apple with me.

Epist. 17 To my Lord Lowdon. You come out to the Streets with Christ on your
Forehead, when many are ashamed of him, and hid him under their Cloaks as if he
were a stolen Christ.

Epist. 19. To Mr. Huge Mc. Kel. O how many black Counts Accounts.
have Christ and I rounded over together? O how fat a Portion has he given to
an hungry Soul? I had rather have Christ's four hours, than have Dinner and
Supper both in one from any other.

Epist. 20. To my Lady Boyd. I see now a Sufferer for Christ will be holden at
the Door as well as another poor Sinner, and will be fain to eat with the
Bairns, and to take the By-board, and glad so.

Epist. 21. To Mr. David Dickson. I cannot get a House in Aberdeen wherein to
leave Drink-silver in my Master's Name, save one only; there is no sale for
Christ in the North, he is like to lie long on my Hand, e're any accept him.

Epist. 27. To Mr. Matthew Mowat. If I had Vessels I might fill them, but my
old riven Rent.
holely and running-out dish, ever when I am at the Well, can but bring little
away. Alas, I have skail'd Spilt.
more of God's Grace than I have brought with me. Ibid. I had not so much free
Gear Goods.
when I came to Christ's Camp as to buy a Sword, I wonder that Christ should
not laugh at such a Soldier.

Epist. 27. To Earlston Younger. I have seen the Devil as it were dead and
buried, and yet rise again, and be a worse Devil than ever he was; therefore,
Brother, beware of a green young Devil that has never been buried; the Devil
in his Flower is much to be feared: Better yoke Engage.
with an old Gray-hair'd, withered, dry Devil, etc The Saints in Heaven are
nothing but Christ's forborne, beggarly Dyvars Bankrupt debtors.
, a pack of redeemed Sinners. All Christ's good Bairns go to Heaven with a
broken Brow, and a crooked Leg. Ibid. It Is a hard matter for a poor hungry Man
to win Yearn.
his Meat upon hidden Christ, for then the Key of his Pantry Door is a seeking,
and cannot be had, but hunger must break through Iron-Locks: I bemoan not them
that can make a dinn Noise
and all. the Fields ado, for a lost Savior; yet must let him hear it, to say
so, on both sides of his Head, when he hides himself it stands you hard to
want Christ; and therefore that which idle onwaiting cannot do, misnurtered Ill
manner'd.
crying and knocking will do; Christ will not dance to your daft Spring Foolish
Song.
. Ibid. At our first Conversion the Lord puts the Meat in young Bairns
Mouths with his own hand. We love always to have the Pap put in our Mouth.
Ibid. If my Creditor Christ would take from me what he has lent, I would not
long keep the Causey. I think it Manhood to play the Coward, and jouke Sculk*
in the lee side of Christ, and thus I am saved. Ibid. I complain when Christ
comes, he Comes always to fetch Fire, he is ever in haste, hemay not tarry,
and poor I (a beggarly Dyvar) get but a standing Visit, and a standing Kiss,
and but, How do thou? in the by-going.

Epist. 28. To Alexander Gordon of Knockraig. O if I could be a Bridge over a
Water for my Lord Jesus to walk upon and keep his Feet dry. He can make a fair
Feast out of a black Devil. Ibid. If God were dead, and Christ buried and
rotten among Worms, indeed then we might look like dead folks.

Epist. 34. To Earltown. I would give him my Bond under my Faith to Give him
credit.
frist Heaven a hundred years longer, so being he would lay his holy Face to my
sometimes wet Cheeks.

Epist. 35. To Marion Mac Naught. Christ, who is your Head, has win through
with his Life, howbeit, not with a whole Skin. Sometimes King Jesus sends me
out a standing-drink, and whispereth a word through the Wall, and I am well
content of kindness at the second hand, his bode is ever welcome, but at other
times he will be Messenger himself, and I get the Cup of Salvation out of his
own hand, he drinking to me, and we cannot rest till we be in other's Arms.

Epist. 41. To my Lady Culross* O to be snattering and swimming over Head and
Ears in Christ's Love; Blessed be my rich Lord Jesus, who sends not away
Beggars from his House with a Empty.
toom-dish.

Epist. 45. To John Keanedy. It does a Soul good to get a A Box.
cuff with the lovely, sweet, and soft hand of Jesus; what power and strength
is in his Love, I am persuaded it can climb up a steep Hill and Hell upon its
back, shame may confound and fear me once to hold up my black mouth to receive
one of Christ's undeserved kisses.

Ep. 50. To James Bantie. The best Regenerate have their defilements, and, if I
may speak so, their Sack full of Grains
. draff-pock that will clog behind them, all their days; if my Lord had not
given me his love, I would have fallen through the Streets.
Causey of Aberdeen e're now; but for you that hunger ye shall be filled e're
you go, there is as much in our Lord's Pantry as will satisfy all this Bairns;
and as much wine in his Cellar as will quench all their thirst: I shall tell
you what ye shall do, treat him well, give him the armed Chair, and the Table
^ead.
boardhead, and make him welcome to the mean portion ye have.

Ep. 51. To John Stuart. That miscarried Journey is with child to you of mercy
and consolation, and shall bring forth a fair birth, and the Lord shall be
midwife to the birth. If our Lord ride upon a straw, his Horse shall neither
stumble nor fall.

Epist. 53. To John Stuart, Oh if my Lord will make dung of me to satin and
make fertile his own corn-ridges in Mount Zion. Ibid. God be pleased to take
home in his house my Harlot-mother. -- O if her Husband would be so kind as to
go and fetch her out of the Brothel-house, and chase her lovers to the hills;
but there will be sad days e're it come to that.

Epist. 54* To my Lady Busby. Wo's me that bits of living Clay dare come out to
rush hard heads with him, and that my unkind mother this Harlot Kirk, has
given her sweet Husband.
half-marrow such a meeting.

Epist. 56. To Mr. Thomas Garvan, I confidently believe that there is a Bed
made for Christ and me, and that we shall take our fill of love in it. Epist.
57. My Rent.
riven dish, and running-out vessel can hold little of Christ Jesus. Ibid. It Is
Christ's wisdom that his Bairns go wet-shod and cold-footed to Heaven.

Ep. 63. To the Earl of Cassils, Many now would go to Heaven the Land-way (for
they love not to be Sea-sick) riding up to Christ upon Foot-mantles, and
rattling Coaches, and rubbing their Velvet with the Princes of the Land in the
highest seats: If this be the narrow way I quit all skill to the way of
Salvation.

Ep. 89. to John Kennedy. O that the Courts fenced in the name of the Bastard
Prelates, (their Godfathers, the Popes Bailiffs, Sheriffs) were cried down. --
If this had not been I would have Toped over.
skinked over my part of Paradise for a breakfast of dead moth-eaten earth.

Ep. 92. To Mr. David Dickson. I have been these two Sabbaths or three in
private taking In the hand of a Notary.
instruments in the name of God, That my Lord Jesus and I have kissed each
other in Aberdeen; who can blame Christ to take me on behind him, (if I may say
so) on his white Horse through a water, will not a Father take his little
Fondled Darling.
dated Davie in his arms, and carry him over a Ditch or Mire; my short legs
could not step over this Lair (or sinking mire) and therefore, etc.

Ep. 108. To Robert Gordon of Knoxbrex. I love to be kissed and sit on Christ's
knee, but I cannot set my feet to the ground, for afflictions bring the cramp
upon my faith.

Ep. 118. To Bathia Aird. At my first entry hither, Christ and I agreed not
well upon it, now he is content to kiss my black mouth, to put his hand in mine,
and to feed me with as many consolations as would feed ten hungry souls, yet I
dare not say he is a waster of comforts.

Ep. 121. To Robert Gordon of Knocksbrek Christ seems to leave Heaven (to say
so) and his Court, and to come down to laugh and play and sport with a Foolish
Child.
Daft bairn. I deny nothing that the Mediator will challenge me of, but I turn
it all back upon himself, let him look his own old Accounts.
Counts, if he be angry, for he will get no more of me.

Ep. 122. To Earleston. There is a mystery of love in Christ that I never saw,
O that he would lay by the lap of the covering that is over it, and let my
Longing.
greening soul see it; I would break the door and be in upon him, to get my
womb full of love.

Ep. 128. To Mr. Hugh Henderson. Christ shuffleth up and down in his hands the
great Body of Heaven and Earth, and Kirk and Commonwealth are in his hand like
a stock of Cards, and he deals the Play to the Mourners in Zion. When Christ
has sleeped out his sleep, and his own are tried, he will arise as a strong man
after wine, etc. If Christ bud and grow green, and bloom and bear seed again in
Scotland, and his Father send him two Summers again in one year, and bless his
Crop, O what cause have we to rejoice, etc.

Ep. 139. To Mr. John Mein. I see Christ will not Higle.
prigg with me, nor stand upon stepping stones, but comes in at the broad side
without Ceremonies, or making of it nice.

Ep. 141. To the Earl of Lothian. If your Lordship and others shall go on to
dive to the lowest ground and bottom of the Knavery, and perfidious treachery
to Christ, of the cursed and wretched Prelates, the Antichrist's firstborn,
and the first-fruit of his foul womb, and shall deal with our Sovereign, then
your Righteousness shall break thorough the Clouds, etc.

Ep. 142. O for a long Play-day with Christ.

Ep. 145. Mr. John Ferguson. Were is not that I am Pampered.
dated now and then with pieces of Christ's sweet comforts, I fear I should
have made an ill Breding.
browst of this honorable Cross.

Ep. 162. To Mr. Hugh Mc Kell. I will verily give my Lord Jesus a free
discharge of all that I like a fool laid to his charge, and beg him pardon to
the Over and above.
mends. Ep. 163. I tremble at the remembrance of a new outcast betwixt him and
me, but I find Christ dare not be long unkind.

Ep. 137. To my Lady Boyd. Nothing has given my faith a greater back-set till
it cracked again, than my closed mouth.

Ep. 139. To Carletown. The Lord has done it, I will not go to Law with
Christ, for I would gain nothing of that. The Devil is but God's Master-fencer,
to teach us to handle our arms.

Ep. 198. To Mr. John Levingston. The Devil cannot get it denied but we suffer
for the apple of Christ's eye, his Royal Prerogatives as King and Lawgiver;
let us not fear, he will have his Gospel once again Put to Auction.
rouped in Scotland, and the matter go to Vows to see who will say, Let Christ
be Crowned King in Scotland: It is true Antichrist stirs his tail, but I
love a rumbling and raging Devil in the Kirk, rather than a subtle or sleeping
Devil, Christ never got a Bride without stroke of Sword. Epist. 200. O Hell
were a good cheap price to buy him at.

Ep. 207. A kiss of Christ blown over his shoulder, the parings and crumbs of
glory under his Table in Heaven; a shower like a thin May mist of his love,
would make me green, sappy and joyful.

Ep. 214. Go on as ye have worthily begun in purging of the Lord's House in
this Land, and plucking down the Stalls -- of Antichrist's filthy nest, this
wretched Prelacy, and that black Kingdom whose wicked aims have ever been and
still are to make this fat world, the only Compass they would have Faith and
Religion to sail by, and to mount up the man of sin, their Godfather the Pope
of Rome, upon the highest stair of Christ's Throne, and to make a
Velvet-church, etc. Ibid. These men mind nothing else but that by bringing in
the Pope's foul tail first upon us, their wretched and beggarly Ceremonies;
they may thrust in after them Antichrist's legs, thighs, and his belly, head
and shoulders; and then cry down Christ and the Gospel, and up the Merchandise
and Wares of the Great Whore. Ibid. Christ shall never be content with this
Land, neither shall his hot fiery indignation be turned away, so long as the
Prelate (the man that lay in Antichrist's foul womb, and the Antichrist's Lord
Bailiff) shall sit Lord Carver in the Lord Jesus Courts. The Prelate is both
the Egg and the Nest to cleck and bring forth Popery; plead therefore for the
pulling down of the Nest, and crushing of the Egg.

All that is meant here by Christ, is Presbyterian Government.

I shall conclude this Section with some of their most remarkable Principles
and Opinions concerning Civil Government.

The Presbyterians of late have talked much of their Loyalty, but if they have
any, it must be in contradiction to their Principles: For proof of this I shall
not trouble you with Citations from Private Men, but appeal to their Covenants
and Solemn Leagues, to their constant Doctrine as well as Practice of
Resistance; and some few Instances I must not omit, taken from the Acts of
their General Assemblies, and those Books which have the general Approbation of
the Party, in which they express themselves thus; Unless Men blot out of their
Hearts, the Love of Religion, and Cause of God, and cast off all care of their
Country, Laws, and Liberties, etc. they must now or never appear active
(against the King) each one stretching himself to, yea, and beyond their Power;
it is not time to dally, or go about the Business by halves; nor to be almost,
but altogether Zealous: Cursed is he that does the Work of the Lord negligently.

Solemn and seasonable warning to all Ranks, Feb. 12. 1645. Sess. 18.

In another seasonable and necessary warning, dated July 27. 1649. Sess. 27.
they say; But if his Majesty, or any having or pretending Power and Commission
from him, shall Invade this Kingdom, upon pretext of establishing him in the
exercise of his Royal Power; as it will be a high provocation against God to be
accessory or assisting thereto, so it will be a necessary Duty to resist and
oppose the same.

The Author of the Hind let loose Page 80.
reflecting on these passages, says, These Fathers could well distinguish
betwixt Authority and the Person, and were not so Loyal as now their degenerate
Children are Ambitious to show themselves stupidly stooping to the Shadow
thereof, and yet will be called, The only Assertors of Presbyterian Principles.

The Presbytery has the Power of making Peace and War, and the Parliament
ought not to enter into any War without them; more than Joshua did without the
consent of Eliazar.

Any Union or Engagement of the Nation, to defend the King's Person, Honor, or
Prerogative, is unlawful, unless allowed by the Presbytery.

The Presbytery alone knows, and it only can determine, what the Cause of God
is; the King and Parliament are not to be complied with, but in Subordination
to the Covenant.

The Presbytery can Counter-act the Acts of the States of Parliament, and
discharge the Subjects from obeying such Acts as are imposed without the
consent of the Presbytery.

Act General Assembly, Aug. 3. 1648.

Act and Declaration against the Act of Parliament, July 13. 1648.

Act General Assembly, Aug 13. 1650.

Though our Savior told his Disciples, That his Kingdom was not of this World,
and that therefore they ought not to fight for him, yet that Doctrine does not
now oblige Covenanted Christians, for they may fight without, yea, and against
the Consent of the Supreme Magistrate for the Cause of God; and a probable
capacity to effectuate their Designs, is the Call of God to do it.

Jus Pop. Preface to the Reader. Naph* Page 7, 8, 16, 159.

Not only is it necessary to resist the King by force, in defense of the Solemn
League and Covenant, but also to resist King and Parliament, when they pervert
the right ways of the Lord, and hinder the Work of Reformation: The crying Sins
of the Land which we should confess with sorrow before the Lord, are, That the
Graceless Prelates and Curates are not hung up before the Sun, and that Men
should be so Godless, as to assist the King in his distress, before he had
satisfied the Kirk by public Penance, for opposing the Work of God in the
Covenant.

Jus Pop. Throughout.

Act General Assembly, Aug. 13. 1650.

Acknowledgment of Sins and Engagement to Duties appointed and published, 1648.

And again renewed at Lesmachago, March 3. 1688. with Accommodation to the
present times.

SECT. III.
Containing Notes of the Presbyterian Sermons taken in Writing from their
Mouths.
AT first I begin with one I heard from Zetland, who Preaching on David and
Goliath, he told the Hearers, Sirs, this David was but a little manekine like my
beddle Davie Gaddies there but Goliath was a meckle strong fellow, like the
Lord of Quandal there; this David gets a Scrippie and Baggie, that is, a Sling
and a Stone in it; he slings a Stone into Goliah' s Face, down falls Goliath and
David above him: After that David was made a King; he that was keeping Sheep
before, in truth he came very well too, Sirs: Well said, Davie, see what comes
of it, Sirs; after that he commits Adultery with Uriah: Nay, (said the beddal
Davie Gaddies) it was but with Uriah' s Wife, Sir. In Faith, thou art right, it
was Uriah's Wife, indeed man; said Mr. John.

One Ker at his entering into a Church at Teviotdale, told the People the
Relation that was to be between him and them in these following words:

Sirs, I am coming home to be your Shepherd, and you must be my Sheep, and the
Bible will be my Tar-bottle, for I will mark you with it; ( and laying his Hand
on the Clark or Precentor's Head) he says, Andrew, you shall be my Dog: The
sorrow a bit of your Dog will I be, said Andrew. O Andrew, I speak mystically,
said the Preacher: Yea, but you speak mischievously, said And^ew.

Mr. William Guthry preaching on Peter' s Confidence, said, Peter, Sirs, was as
Stalliard a Fellow as ever had cold Iron at his Arse, and yet a Hussie with a
Distaff.
Rock feared him.

Another preaching against Drunkenness, told the Hearers, There were four sorts
of Drunkenness* 1. To be drunk like a Sow, tumbling in the Mire like many of
this Parish. 2. There is to be drunk like a Dog; the Dog fills the Stomach of
him, and spues all out again, and thou John Jamison was this way drunk the
other day. 3. There is to be drunk like a Goose: Of all Drunkenness, Sirs,
beware of the Drunkenness of the Goose, for it never rests, but constantly dips
the Beke.
Gobb of it in the Water: You are all drunk this way, Sirs, I need name none of
you. 4. There is to be drunk like a Sheep; the silly Sheep seldom or never
drinks, but sometimes wets the Mouth of it in the Water, and rises up as well
as ever; and I my self use to be, drunk this way, Sirs. But now, I see ( said
he) two Gentlemen in the Kirk, and Gentlemen, you are both Strangers to me, but
I must vindicate my self at your hands; I have here the cursedest Parish that
ever God put Breath in, for all my preaching against Drunkenness, they will go
into a Change-house after Sermon, and the first thing they will get, is a meckle
Large dish.
cup full of hot Ale, and they will say, I wish we had the Minister in the
midst of it: Now, Gentlemen, judge ye how I am rewarded for my good Preaching.
After Sermon the Clerk gives him up, the name of a Fornicatrix, whose name was
Ann* Cantly; Here is (says he) one upon the Stool of Repentance, they call her
Cantly, she says her self she is an honest Woman, but I trow Scantly.

Mr. John Levingstone in Ancrum, once giving the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, said to his Hearers, Now, Sirs, you may take Christ piping hot; and
finding a Woman longsome in taking the Bread out of his Hand, he says, Woman,
if you take not Christ, take the Great.
meikle Devil then.

One John Simple, a very Zealous Preacher among them, used to personate and act
Sermons in the old Monkish Style spoken of Sect. 1. 16. At a certain time he
preached upon that Debate, Whether a Man* be Justified by Faith or by Works,
and acted it after this manner, Sirs, this is a very great Debate, but who is
that looking in at the Door, with his red Cap? follow your look, Sir; it is
very ill manners to be looking in, but what is your name? Robert Bellarmine:
Bellarmine, says he, Whether is a man justified by Faith or by Works? He is
justified by Works: Stand thou there man. But what is he, that honest-like-man
standing in the Floor with the long Beard, and Geneva Hood.
Coul? a very honest-like-man, draw near; What Is your name, Sir? My name is
John Calvin* Calvin, honest Calvin, Whether is a man justified by Faith or by
Works? He is justified by Faith. Very well John, thy Leg to my Leg and we shall
Trip.
hough down Bellarmine even now.

Another time Preaching on the day of Judgment, he told them, Sirs, this will
be a terrible day, we'll all be there, and in the throng I John Simple will be,
and all of you will stand at my back; Christ will look to me, and he will say,
Who is that standing there? I Will say again, yea even as ye Knew not.
ken'd not Lord: he will say, I know thou's honest John Simple; draw near, John;
now John, what good service have you done to me on Earth? I have brought hither
a company of Blew Bonnets for you, Lord: Blew Bonnets, John, what is become of
the brave Hats, the Silks, and the Satins, John? I Will tell, I know no Lord,
they went a A Course.
Gate of their own: Well, honest John, thou and thy blew Bonnets are welcome to
me, come to my right hand, and let the Devil take the Hats, the Silks, and the
Sattins.

This John was ordinarily called Fitch-cape and Claw-poll, because in the time
of Preaching or Praying he used to claw his Head, and rub his Callet. At a
certain time he was called to preach in a Neighboring Church, and his Preface
was in these words:

Sirs, I know what you will be saying among your selves the day, ye will say,
Here is Fitch-cape come to preach to us the day; but as the Lord lives, I had a
great deal of do e're I could come to you, for by the way I met the Devil, he
said to me, What now Fitch^cape, whither are you going? I am going, said I, to
preach to the People of God. People of God! said the Nasty.
foul thief, they are my People. They are not yours, thou soul thief, said I.
They are mine, Claw-poll, said he again to me: so the foul thief and I Pulled
and haled.
tugged, rugg'd, and riv'd at one another, and at last I got you out of his
Clutches*
Clooks: Now here is the good that Fitch-cape has done to you; now that ye may
be kept out of his Gripes, let us pray.

Another, Lecturing on the first of Job, said, Sirs, I will tell you this Story
very plainly.

The Devil comes to God one day, God said, What now Deel, thou foul thief,
whither are you going? I am going up and down now, Lord you have put me away
from you now, I must even do for my self now. Well, well, Deel ( says God) all
the* World kens that it is your fault; but do not you know that I have an
honest Servant they* call Job? is not he an honest Man, Deel? Sorrow to his
thank, says the Deel, you make his Cup stand full even, you make his Pot play
well, but give him a Sound bang.
cuff, I Will hazard he will be as ill as I am called. Go, Deel ( says God) I Will
yoke his Honesty with you: Fell Kill.
his Cows, worry his Sheep, do all mischief ye can, but for the very Saul of
you, touch not a hair of his Tail.

Mr. Robert Blair, that famous Presbyterian Preacher at St. Andrews, was very
much thought of for his familiar way of Preaching. He preached often against
the observation of Christmas; and once in this Scotch jingle; You will say,
Sirs, Good old Christmas.
Youle-day; I Will tell you, Good old Fool-day: You will say It is a brave
Haly-day; I tell you, it is a brave Belly-day; you will say, these are Gay.
bonny Formalities; but I tell you, they are bonny Fartalities.

Another enveighing against the Vanity and Gaddiness of Women, spoke thus;
Behold the Vanity of Women, look to them, you will see, first a Satin Peticoat;
lift that, there is a Tabby Petticoat; lift that, there is a Flanning
Petticoat; lift that, there is a Holland Smock.
Smarck; lift that and there you will see what they ought not to be proud of,
that is no very cleanly spectacle; Eve (said he) was never so vain, she sought
no covering but Fig Leaves.

Mr. Simple (whom I named before) told, That Samson was the greatest fool that
ever was born, for he revealed his Secrets to a Daft Foolish Wench.
hussie. Samson, you may well call him Fool Thomson, for of all the Hen-peckt
men.
John Thomson's men that ever was, he was the foolest.

I have a Sermon of theirs, written from the Preachers Mouth by one of their
own Zealots, whereof this is one passage, Jacob began to wrestle with God, an
able hand forsooth; I Sirs, but he had a good Second, that was Faith; Faith and
God gave two or three tousles together; at last God Beats.
Dings down Faith on its bottom; Faith gets up to his Heels, and says, Well,
God, is this your Promise to me? I trow I have a Ticket in my Pocket here;
Faith brings out the Ticket, and stops it in God's hand, and said, Now God! is
not this your own Write? deny your own Hand-write if you dare? Are these the
Promises? you gave me? Look how you guide me when I come to you. God reads the
Ticket, and said, Well, well, Faith, I remember I gave you such a Promise, good
sooth Faith, if you had been another, thou should get all the Bones in thy Skin
broken.

Mr. John Welsh, a Man of great esteem among their Vulgar, once preaching on
these words of Joshua, As for me and my House we will serve the Lord, etc. had
this Preface:

You think, Sirs, that I am come here to preach the old jocktrot Faith and
Repentance to you; not I, indeed: what think you then I am come to preach? I
come to preach a broken Covenant, Who brake it? Even the Devils Lairds, his
Bishops and his Curates; and the Deel, Deel, will get them all at last: I know
some of you are come out of Curiosity to hear what the Whigs will say. Who is a
Whig, Sirs? One that will not Swear, nor Curse, nor Bann, there a Whig to you:
But you are welcome, Sirs, that come out of Curiosity; you may get go e're ye
good back again. I Will give you an Instance of it, There was Zaccheus, a Man of
a low stature; that is, a little Dwarfie.
droichy body, and a Publican; that is, he was one of the Excise-men; he went
out of Curiosity to see Christ, and because he was little, he went up a Tree:
Do you think, Sirs, he went to Rifle a Magpies-Nest.
harry a Pyet's Nest? No, he went to see Christ; Christ looks up, and says,
Zaccheus, you are always proving pratticks, you are no Bairn now; go home, go
home, and make ready my Dinner; I Will be with you this day at Noon. After that,
Sirs, this little Zaccheus began to say his Prayers Evening and Morning, as
honest old Joshua did in my Text: As for me and my House, etc. as if he had
said, Go you to the Devil and you will, and I and my House will say our
Prayers, Sirs, as Zaccheus and the rest of the Apostles did.

Another time preaching in East Lotham, he told them the great danger of
hearing the Curates, in these words;

Sirs, if ever you hear these Rogues, you will cry out at the day of Judgment,
O Arthur-seat fall upon us, O Pentland. Hills fall upon us: The Grass and the
Corn that you see growing there, will be a Witness against you; yea, and that
Cows Horns Passing by, will be a Witness against you.

Another Preaching about God's sending Jonah to Nineveh, acted it thus, did you
never hear tell of a good God, and a Pettish.
cappet Prophet, Sirs? The good God said, Jonah, now billy Jonah, will thou go
to Nineveh for Old kindness.
ald lang syne; The Deel be on my feet then said Jonah: O Jonah said the good
God, be not ill natured, they are my people. What care I for you or your people
either, said the cappet Prophet; wherefore shall I go to be made a liar in my
face, I know thou will have mercy on that people: Alas, alas, we Wait not.
bide not the tenth part of that bidding; yet when we come to you, I fear we will
find you like Ephraim, a Cake unturned, that is, it is stonehard on one side
Entreating.
, and Thin Dung of young Children.
skitter-raw on the other.

Another Preaching in the West, near a Mountain called Tineock, cried out in a
loud voice thus, What think you, Sirs, would the Curates do with Christ if they
had him? they would even take him up to Tintock top, cut off his head, and
hurl his head down the hill, and laugh at it.

Another in the South of Teviotdale in his Sermon said, Our Neighbor Nation
will say of us, poor Scotland, beggarly Scotland, scabbed Scotland, lousie
Scotland, yea, but Covenanted Scotland, that makes amends for all.

One Preaching against Bishops, expressed himself thus, Sirs, at the day of
Judgment Christ will call the Prelates, and he will call one of the falsest
Knaves first, and say, Come hither, Sirrah, he will not call my Lord, do you
remember how you put out Such.
sike a sweet Saint of mine upon such and such a day? Sirrah, do you mind how
you persecuted one of my precious Saints that was Preaching my Word: Come,
come, Sirrah, stand there at my left hand* thou and the Devil shall together
even now.

There is nothing more ordinary among the Generality of their Preachers, than
to tell that Christ did not set his foot in Scotland this eight and twenty
years; or this, I brought a stranger to you now, and a very great stranger
indeed, this many a year; would you know who it is; it is Christ, Sirs, Hold.
hadd him fast then, for if once he get out of Scotland again, it is like he will
never return.

It is very well known in Perthshire, that one of their Rabbis Preaching a^
St. Johnstone, or thereabout, a little before the Battle of Killich ankie, upon
these words, Resist the Devil and he will sly from you; he begins very gravely
after this manner, ( Humph) my beloved, you are all here the day even for the
fashions cause, but wo^ ye who is amongst you the day? even the meikle horned
Devil, tho you cannot see him, yet I do: I see him, Sirs, by the eye of faith;
but you will say, now that we have him here, what shall we do with him, Sirs, (
Humph) what way will ye destroy him, some of you will say we will hang him; ha,
ha, my beloved, there are not so many tows in all the Parish as hung him;
besides, he is as light as a feather. What then will ye do with him? for he will
not hang. Then some of you will say, we will drown him. (Humph) my beloved,
there is too much cork in his Arse, he is as souple as an Eel, he will not sink.
Others of you will say we will burn him, Na, na, Sirs, ye may scald your
selves, but ye cannot burn him, for all the fire in Hell could never yet singe
a hair on his tail. Now, Sirs, you cannot find a way among you all to kill him,
but I will find it; what way will this be, Sirs? we shall even shoot him.
Wherewith shall we shoot him? We shall shoot him with the Bible. Now, Sirs, I
shall shoot him presently, so (presenting the Bible as Soldiers do their
Musket) he cries out, Touff, Touff, Touff. Now he is shot, there lies the foul
thief as dead as a Haron.

Some Eyewitnesses report of another that was to give the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, such as they can give, and having got into the Pulpit, he looks
about him, and says, Sirs, I miss somebody here to day, I miss Christ here the
day, but he promised to be here the day, I think he will be as good as his
word: however I will go out and see if he be coming; he at this went out of the
Pulpit; and staying out some little time, he comes in and tells them, Now,
Sirs, Christ is coming, I saw him on his white Horse coming to you: Now what
entertainment will you give him? I will tell you, Sirs, Will ye get among you
all but Two English Quarts.
one Pint of Faith, a Gill of Grace, and a English Pint.
Mutchkine of Sanctification, and this will make a good morning draught for him.

In the Mers there was a Communion given lately, and as it is ordinary, there
is a Discourse for every Table, one of the Preachers that is most cried up for
his Eloquence, said, You that are Wives ye will be saying ordinarily when ye
meet, Cummer, have ye spun your Yarn yet? But alas, I fear there are few of you
that have spun a Wedding Garment for Christ the day. But Christ will be among
you and see who is his well busked Bride, he will say to them that have not on
their Wedding Garment. Is that nasty Slut there my Bride? shame and lack fall
that Bride: Go nasty Slut, Haste.
swayed away to Hell.

It is ordinary among some Plebeians in the South of Scotland, to go about from
door to door upon New Years Eve, crying Hagmane, a corrupted word from the
Greek (...), which signifies the Holy Month. John Dickson holding forth against
this Custom once in a Sermon at Kelso, says, Sirs, do ye know what Hagmane
signifies? It is the Devil be in the house; that is the meaning of its Hebrew
Original.

Another time he told his Hearers what an Idolatrous Church the English Church
is, for lay two Eggs in a Dish, and the one is not so like the other, as the
Church of Rome and the Church of England are to one another.

I know a Minister that went purposely to hear this man, and declared upon his
real truth, that he held out a nonsensick rhapsody for an hour and an half time
on the third of Matthew. This is my beloved* Son in whom I am well pleased: All
the Graces of the Spirit ( said he) are mysterious, faith is a mystery, there
is a faith that is not saving, but that is no mystery; I believe if I should ask
any of you whether or no ye believe the words that I read to you, you will all
say ( Humf) we all believe that* Sirs, the Devil does more, and yet he is not
saved, nor like to be in haste. This is a passage of our Savior's
Transmigration, Sirs, ( says he) It tells how our blessed Savior was reformed
like an Angel of Light, when his Disciples saw that Glorious sight, they were
all like a Country man that had never tasted outlandish wine before, the wine
runs up into his head, and makes him dizzie; so the Disciples were dizzie, the
17. v. They knew not what they said*t that is they were dizzie. From the words
we learn this note of Doctrine, That Christ he is lovely, O he is lovely, O he
is lovely. First as he is the Son of God, 8. Prove. v. 15. By me Kings reign and
princes decree justice: That is lovely Christ has authority over all the Kings
of the world: The Great Turk can do nothing without him. The meikle Deel and
the black Pape can do nothing without him. There were a pack of Deels limbs a
year or two ago here, and they thought forsooth all would be their own, and now
lovely Christ in his Providential Providence is like to disappoint them all,
and who kens but they will come begging Pease and Pottage at ours doors yet.

Christ is lovely as he is Mediator, cut him all in pieces from head to foot,
every bit of him is lovely. They Will tell you now the young Prince is banished
Britain, but I Will tell you of a young Prince that has been banished Britain
these 28 years by the incoming of the perjured Prelates and drunken Curates;
lovely Christ is that young Prince, and now he is like to come back again to
get his Crown: O take him now, now when he is coming with a whip in his hand to
scourge out the cursed Curates, etc. This was preached in the Parish of Smallum
in Teviotdale, and the effect of this Preaching followed the next Sabbath, for
the rabble came and pulled the Minister out of his Pulpit in the time of his
Sermon.

One Mr. Thomas Ramsay in Mordington within the Shire of Berwick said in a
Sermon upon the foolishness of Preaching, these words: There are two sorts of
Preaching, Sirs, there is a Gentlemanny Preaching and a common manny Preaching;
for Gentlemanny Preaching they will feed you up with penny whistles, or Childrens
Toys and Rattles.
Nigg-nayes-bonny wallies: At which he perceived one of the Commons laugh. He
points out to him, and said, Man, do not that think to To Flout.
gull one of God's Ministres that way, lift up your Bonnet off your face, think
no shame of your shape.

I tell you, Sirs, there is gentlemany Preaching and commonmany Preaching. I
will give you commonmany Preaching, Sirs, I will give yon milk^pottage, and
this will make you bony fat and lusty in your journey to heaven. Ye Know.
ken Sirs, ye ken, to my great grief, I may say ye ken no: But I tell you there
is Gentlemany preaching, and a commonmany preaching. There are three sorts of
men that despise commonmany preaching, first the Politician. 2. The Gallant. 3.
The Ignorant man.

First, for the Politician he will go twenty miles to hear a Gentlemanny
preaching, what cares he for commonmany preaching? 2ly, for the Gallant give
him a glass of wine to drink, and give him a Lady to kiss, and what cares he
for preaching? 3ly, For the ignorant man give him a Deep Dish.
cogfull of A Strong Porrage.
Brose to his belly, and a pair of Breeches.
Brecks to his arse, what cares he for preaching. A little thereafter he saw a
little child looking to and fro, he said, Sit still little Rogue, else I Will cut
a lug out of your head, Sirrah. O the glorious days of the Gospel, the very
Little Children.
wie-ones, were then so serious that they would Pu^l.
rugg Christ out of my heart, but now they are all baudy faced, they look as if
the Curates and their Mothers were Too familiar.
over great.

This was written from his own mouth, by a person that is ready* to declare the
verity of it, were he to die just after.

Mr. John Veach in Wool struthers in a Nonsensical and incoherent Discourse, at
the opening up of a Presbyterian Synod at Jedburgh, said, That one duty of
Ministers was not to preach close and neat Discourses; his reason was this, Men
use not to bring the Spits and the Racs to the Table, when they bring the meat
to it.

There are many in Edinburgh who heard Mr. James Kirkton in a Sermon concerning
Joseph and Mary, say, The first night, says he, that they met together, he
laid his hand on her belly, and found her with Child.
Bairn* The honest man turned very angry, and would have put her away, as any
of us all would have done, had we met with the like; and who is it that ever
would suspect that the Holy Ghost should have another man's wife?

Another time he told his Hearers, That they might make a Lesson out of every
thing that occurred to sense; you may, faith he, get a good Lesson out of a
Goose-turd, for it is black at the bottom, green in the middle, and white at
the top: The blackness at the bottom let us us see the blackness of Hell; the
greenness in the middle lets us see the vanity of the world; and the whiteness
in the top lets us see the joys of Heaven: And this good Lesson (Sirs) ye will
find in a good turd. Now, Sirs, I would have you pray to him that sits upon the
white-end to keep you from a black end.

One Mr. John* Hepburn, Lecturing on the second Psalm, told, Tha^ there was a
Dialogue betwixt the Father and the Son in Heaven, the Son said, Father will
you give me my portion now? Your portion, Son, said the Father, indeed shall
you; thou have been a dutiful Son to me, thou never angered me in thy days;
What portion will you have, Son? Will you give me poor Scotland, says the Son?
Scotland, said the Father, truly thou shall get poor Scotland. And he proved
that it was Scotland he sought, from the 8* ver. I shall give thee the outmost
parts of the earth for a possession* Now, Sirs, Scotland is the outmost part of
the earth, and therefore it was given to the Son for a Patrimony.

One Mr. Mosman in Newbotle, past this Complement upon himself in a Sermon, All
the world knows that I am a learned man, a judicious man, and a man that can
clear the Scriptures well; but there are some in the Parish that have not such
thoughts for me; as for them I pity them, for they must be very silly. At that
time he was preaching against taking God's name in vain, he told, O Sirs, this
is a very great sin, for my own part I rather steal all the horned Neat or
Cattle.
nout in the Parish, before I took God's name in vain once.

One Mr. Robert Steidman in Caridden, told once, that the people of God had
many doubts about their Election, for proof of this, see (says he) the 2. Cant.
v. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his.

Another time he told, That the best of God's Saints have a little tincture of
Atheism for a plain proof of this you, may see, says he, Psalm. 14* 1. The fool
has said in his heart that there is no God.

Another time he tells, That Christ was not proud nor Lordly, for he rode upon
an Ass, which is a Low.
laigh beast, and wherefore think ye did he this? It was, Sirs, for the
convenience of the old Wives that followed him, that he might Whisper.
kuttle in the Gospel in their ears as he went along.

One Mr. Murray, marrying a couple, called the man, The Head, and the woman the
Tail: In the name of God then, says he, I join Head and Tail together, Sirs,
let no man ever separate them.

The same person preaching at Haddan, said, Christ is a great stranger to you
these 28 years, but I have brought him to you the day, Sirs, and if ye will
have him, Letters of Arrestment.
I will take him with Absconding.
horning and caption for you.

One Mr. Shields, preaching at Borthwick, said, Many had Religion the day, but
would have none the morn, their Religion was soon gone like a woman's virginity.

One Wedderburn, preaching in Irvin, said, Lord, we have over Nesty.
foul feet to come so far benn at Heaven, but yet as broken a Ship has come to
land.

Mr. Rutherford preaching at Jedburgh, said, These 28 years the grass is grown
long betwixt Jedburgh and Heaven.

Mr* William Stuart preaching lately in Forres upon these words, Our God is a
consuming fire, said, Sirs, I will explain these words in a very homely manner,
There was a Godly man of my acquaintance, Sirs, he had a young Bairn that was
dying, and he comes to him and said, Sandy, now my Cockie, believe in God now,
for ye will not live long: No, no, said the Bairn, I will not believe in God,
for God is a Boo, but I will believe in Christ, for he is sweet, Dady, and he
is good. Now ye may by this see, Sirs, that God without Christ is a Boo. Boo is
a word that is used in the North of Scotland to frighten crying Children.

Mr. William Vetch preaching in Linton in Teviotdale, said, Our Bishops thought
they were very secure this long time: Like Willie Willie Wastel, I am in my
Castle, A the Dogs in the Town Dare not ding me down. Yea but there is a doggie
in Heaven that has dung them all down.

Another preaching of the Dialogue betwixt God and Adam after his Fall. Adam
(said he) went to hide himself, God comes to him, and said, where art thou,
man? I am absconding
courring here, Lord: I Will hazard Twopence Halfpenny.
two and a plack, says God, there is a All Is not well.
whap in the Kape Ede, has thou been at Mischief doing.
Barne-breaking Ede, come out of thy holes and thy bores here Ede.

Mr. James Kirkson told several times in his Sermons at Edenling, That the
Devil had his Kirk-Government as well as God, and would ye ken what a
Government it is, indeed it is a Presbyterian Government, for he has his
Minister and his Ruling Elder; his Minister is the Pope, and his Ruling-Elder
is the King of France.

The same man once speaking of the Evils of the tongue, said, Your tongues,
Sirs, are as foul as a dog's tongue when he licks Thin Dung.
Skitter, before God it is true: But do not take this out of the House with you,
Sirs.

Mr. Matthew Selkirk preaching against keeping of days, said, They that keep
Yule-day, Christmas.
Sirs, deny that Christ came in the flesh, and are rank Jews; and they keep
that day in commemoration of J. Caesar the chief of the Jews.

Mr. Hugh Kennedy Moderator of the General Assembly, being about to Christen a
Child in the Colledg-Kirk, looked about him, and said, Look Sirs, and see the
Devil painted in that Bairns face, but we shall do the best we can to conjure
him out. I shall shortly nail his lug to Christ's trone, till from a Calf he
grow up to an Ox to draw in Christ's Plow.

Mr. Arskine in the Tron-Church, said, That the work of the Lord is like to be
ruined, for there are two sorts of people that have taken their hands from the
work of the Lord. First, the Malignants that never laid their hands to it. 2ly,
The Court-party: but you Lasses and Lads put your shoulders to that work, take
a good lift of it, for it will not break your backs; and ye can never use your
backs in a better work.

One Mr. Robert Gourly preaching on the Woman of Canaan, how our Savior called
her a Dog, told, Sirs, some of you may think that our Savior spoke very
improperly, for he should have called her a Bitch; but to this I answer, a Dog
is the Masculine or Feminine Gender, there is a He-dog and a She-dog. But you
will ask why did he miscall the poor Woman, and call her a Dog? There are God's
Dogs and the Devils Dogs, she was God's Dog, not the Devil's Dog.

Mr. Sheilds in a Sermon at Aberdeen, told the people, the only way to hold a
fast Hold.
grip of Christ, was to entertain him with three Liquors in three sundry Wooden
Cups.
Bickers, you must have a pint of hope, three pints of, faith, and nine pints
of hot, hot, hot burning zeal.

One Mr. Strange preaching on Act, 2. 37, 38. before several Ladies of the best
Quality of our Kingdom, They were pricked at their hearts, said, Some of you
are come hither the day to get a prick, I fear few of you have gotten a prick,
but some of you may get a prick within a short time. And seeing some laugh, he
said, Do not mistake me, Sirs, It is not a natural prick I mean, but a prick at
the heart. I mean not the pricks of the flesh, but the pricks of the spirit,
the sweet prick of Conscience.

One Mr. James Wilson now in Kirkmeddon in Galloway, told, That Faith had
wonderful effects, For by faith Noah saw the deluge before it came. But I will
tell you a far more wonderful effect of Faith than that, John the Baptist saw
Christ through Two Wombs.
two wymbs, was not that a clear-ey'd little one, (...)

One Mr. Melvin being sent by the Presbytery to the Parish of Monzie in
Struthern, to prepare the people by a Sermon for receiving a Presbyterian
Minister in the place of Mr. Drammond, a person of great Learning, who was
deprived at the false suggestions of a Weaver in that Parish, (whom he saved
from the Gibbet in King Charles 2d's time) the said Mr. Melvin Lecturing on
this Text, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, said, The Kings
and the great folks, and the cursed Bishops, for sooth were seeking to destroy
God's own people, but as sturk as they were, God is starker, and bad them bide
back, bide back, ( pointing with his finger) this is my folk, they are none of
your folks, and so God kept his own poor people, Sirs, except some few that
were hanged; but Oh Sirs, it is a sweet, sweet denth to go off the Gallows to
God for the holy Covenant. But for these cursed Bishops and Curates, Sirs, that
were leading many poor souls to Hell this long time, Sirs, ye see they are now
put out* they are put out, yea they are even trampled under our feet. This is
attested by a person that then lived within two miles of the place, and heard
him.

Mr. Areskine in the Trone-Church proposed in a Sermon, What is the new man? He
made this learned Answer in a Melancholy long tone, It is the new man. Mr.
Kirton lately in the Church he possesses at Edinburgh, began his Sermon thus,
Devil tuke me soul and body. The people startling at the expression, he
anticipates their wonder with this correction, You think, Sirs, this a strange
word in the Pulpit, out you think nothing of it out of Pulpit; but what if the
Devil should tuke many of you when ye utter such Language? Another time
preaching against Cockupps, he told, I have been this year of God preaching
against the vanity of Women, yet I see my own Daughter in the Kirk even now
have as high a Cockupp as any of you all. Another time giving the Sacramens of
the Lord's Supper in Crummond, at the breaking of the Bread, he told the
Participants, Take, eat, Sirs, your Bread is baken. And that was all the form
he used, as one of the Communicabsts told me the day after.

A Presbyterian Preacher in the Parish of Killpatrick Easter, above Glasgow, in
whose Parish there is one Captain Sanderson, a Church of England man, who is
looked on there by them as a rank Papist, he once went to Church to see their
way. The Preacher seeing him in Church, took a Piece of Money.
Fourteen our of his Pocket, and held it up before the Congregation, expressing
these words, Here I take instrument in the hand of God, that tho a man be
pardoned of all his original and actual sins, yet if he neglect to (...) our
Fasts he shall never go to Heaven. The Preacher owns what he said and did. And
the Captain desires the thing to be published in his name, he being ready to
justify it upon any occasion.

Mr. William Moncrief, in Summer last, preaching in the Church of (...) in
Fife, the first thing he pretended to prove, was, That all his Hearers were
Atheists and Reprobates* And having demonstrated that, as he said, from that
Psalm on which he lectur'd: He proceeded next to his Sermon on this Text, NOW
it the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation* on which he said, The Jews
had their Now, and the Papists had their Now, but ah now they have no Now, for
the Gospel is for ever hid from their Eyes. Scotland, poor Scotland had a
gracious Now in the glorious days of the Covenant, when Christ was freely
forced upon them; but alas, this Land breaking the Covenant has brought
darkness upon it, for many Years last, but yea God had been pleased at lust to
shine through the Cloud of Prelatical, which is worse than Egyptish darkness,
and to give us another Now; that is, to offer us again his Covenant, and the
Foundation of it, it Gospel, for which ye are all heartily to be thinkful, for
this is your Now.

And would ye know now how to express your thankfulness, I Will even tell you
now, Ye must do it by banishing out of the Covenanted Land, all the Enemies of
God, the Prelates, the Curates, and all their Adherents: Ye must not converse
with them, but (...) them Hip and Thigh * ye must (...) the Philistines quite
out; ye must hate them, and persecute them, and (...) upon (...) of Damnation;
^ for if ye neglect it now, your Now is past for ever* Now, Sirs, ye must not
think this strange Doctrine, for I can prove it by plain Scripture, for did not
God frequently command his People, to cut off the (...) Root and Branch; and
did not David positively hate and curse the Profane and Wicked who were God's
Enemies*

But ye'll say to me, Sirs, that Christ desired us to loveour Enemies: that is
true, indeed, but there is no word of God's Enemies there* mark that, Beloved;
though we love out own Enemies, yet we are bound to hate God's Enemies; that is,
all the Enemies of the Covenanted (...): This was heard by several Sober and
Judicious Persons, who were heartily sorry to hear the Scriptures so basely
perverted, who immediately after the Sermon wrote down this Account, tent them
to me attested under their Hands.

About two Years ago Mr. Shields, who is Chaplain to my Lord Angus's Regiment,
being with the said Regiment at the Town of Pe^^^, and hearing that the Colonel
to an English Regiment, which had been in that Town the Week before, had made
his Chaplain to read the English Service upon the Sunday before, in the Church
to his Soldiers (...) Shields upon this occasion thought to ra^^ nightly
against the Church of England and its Liturgy; among other things he said, That
there was no difference betwixt the Church of England and the Church of Rome,
but that the one said Mass in English, and the other in Latin; and that upon
the (...) they were both indeed equally Idolatrous* and ye know, Sirs, that
according to God's Law, all Idolaters should be stoned to death* Alas* all the
Water in The name of a great River which washes the Walls of that City.
Tay will not be able to wash away the filth of that Idolatry, with which the
Walls of this Kirk was last Sunday defiled* ah, the Service Boo^ was (...) and
(...) it smell rank and strong of the old Whore of Babylon.

Mr. Kirkton preaching in his Meeting House in the Castle-hill of Edinburgh
adduced several instances of the Poverty of the People of God; amongst others,
he had this remarkable one, Brethren, says he, Critics with their Trifles.
frim frams and whytie whaties, may imagine a hundred reasons for Abraham's
going out of the Land of Caldea, but I will tell you what was always my
Opinion, I believe Abraham, poor man, was forced to run out of the Land of
Judea for Debt.

Another Sunday, before several Gentlemen, who told me the Story so soon as
they returned from Church, preaching on the Allsufficiency of God, he told his
hearers, That they might make out of God what they pleased, Hose, Shoes,
Clothes, Meat and Drink, etc. One, says he, may have a good Stock, but he
cannot get in out of his Friends hands when he needs it; he must pursue him
first before the Raise on Action before the Judges, and Arrest him.
Lords of the Session; registrat his Bond, get a charge of Horning, and at last
take him with Caption; but no man ever needed to registrate God's Bond, or take
him with Caption, except Jacob, who took him once with Caption at the side of a
Hill, and he got a broken Leg for his pains.

Once in the monthly Fast Day, I heard him my self discourse to this purpose,
after he had read his Text, which if I rightly remember, was, In that day I
will not regard their Prayers nor their Tears, etc. In speaking to these words,
says he, I shall show you five lost Labors, three Opportunities, three Fears,
three Woes, three Lamentations, three Prophesies, and a word about poor
Scotland: for the three fears, the first is a great fear, and that is, lest
this King give us not all our Will. The 2d. is a very great fear, and that is,
if we should get all our Will. I fear we should not make good use of it. The 3d
fear is the greatest of all, but I must not tell you that fear, Sirs, for fear
it should fear you all to hear it. All the Town knows that this is true, and
that he never preaches but after this ridiculous manner.

I heard one Mr. Selkirk in a Sermon he preached in the Church of Inverask.
say, Sirs, Drink, Whore, and Debauch, and run Stark mad.
red wood through the World; yet, if you have but as much time as take hold of
Christ in your last gasp, I shall pawn my Soul for yours. It may seem
incredible, that one who ever heard of Christianity, should have used such an
expression; but it made such an impression on the Peoples Minds at that time,
that I believe there is hardly one of them who have forgot it to this hour; and
consequently, all of them will be ready to vindicate the truth of what I here
relate.

One preaching in Preston-pans, upon Joshua 's making the Sun to stand still,
resolving to make a very learned Discourse, began thus, Sirs, says he, you will
may be, ask me how Joshua could make the Sun to stand still? To that I answer,
it was by sisting of the motion of Primum Mobile, commonly called the
Zodiack-line; but as to the Quomodo, it is no great matter; but that the Story
was true, we have reason to believe from the Heathen Writers; for it was told
by them for a, base baudy tale, how Jupiter made a night as long as two, that
he might got a longer time to lie with Alemena.

Mr. Arskine in the Tron-Church, preaching on these words, Cry aloud and spare
not; told his People, There were three sorts of Cries. There is the cry of the
Mouth, says he, Psalm. 104. The young Lions roar after their Prey, that is, with
their Mouth. The cry of their Feet, I will run the ways of thy Commandments,
that is the cry of the Feet: And the cry of the Eye, They looked on him and
were lightened; that is the cry of the Eye: If we would go to Heaven, we must
not only cry with our Mouth, but likewise with out Hands, Feet, and Eyes.

The same Mr. Arskine said in another Sermon, What, Sirs, if the Devil should
come with a Drum at his side, saying, Hoyes, hoyes, hoyes, who will go to Hell
with me, boys? who will go to Hell with me? The Jacobines would answer, We'll
all go, we'll all go.

Mr. James Kirkton, preaching on Jezabel, said, That well-favoured Whore, what
became of her, Sirs? she fell over a Window, Arse over Head, and her black
bottom was discovered, you may all guess what the Beholders saw, beloved, a
black sight you may be sure.

One Mr. Mair, a Presbyterian Preacher, Son to Mr. John Mair, the Episcopal
Minister in Towch, being desired by the Father to preach for him; the Son said,
He would or could not preach in their Churches, because they were polluted, but
was content to preach in a Fire-house. This was provided for him, and the
Company (whereof his Father was one) being convened, he said, I will tell you a
sad truth, Sirs, You have been driven to Hell in a Coach this eight and twenty
years, and that old Stock, my Father ( pointing to him) has been the Coachman.

Mr. Kirkton in October last, preaching on Hymns and Spiritual Songs, told the
People, There be four kinds of Songs, Profane Songs, Malignant, Allowable, and
Spiritual Songs, Profane Songs, My Mother sent me to the Well, she had better
gone her self, for what I got I dare not tell, but kind Robin loves me.
Malignant Songs, such as, He, ho, Gillichrankie, and the King enjoys his own
again; against which I have not much to say. 3ly. Allowable Songs, like, Once I
lay with another man's Wife: Ye may be allowed, Sirs, to sing this, but I do
not say, that ye are allowed to do this, for that is a great deal of danger
indeed, Lastly, Spiritual Songs, which are the Psalms of David; but the Godless
Prelates add to these, Glory to the Father, the wrost of all I have yet spoken
of.

The same Kirkton, in March the year before that, in a Sermon upon Come into me
all ye that are heavy and weary laden; expressed himself thus, Christ invites
none to him but those that have a great burden of Sins upon their back; ay
but, beloved, ye little ken what Christ is to day; what Crafts-man do you think
him now? is there none of you all can tell me that, Sirs? truly then I must
even tell you; would you ken it now? in a word then, he is a Tinkar.
tell you; would you ken it about to day, Have ye any broken Hearts to mend,
bring them to me, and I Will soder them; that is, give them Rest, beloved, for
that is the words of my Text.

Mr. Arskin, in January last, holding forth in the Tron Church concerning
Noah's Ark, said, that the Wolf and the Lamb lodged most peaceably together in
it; and what do you think was the reason of this, Beloved? you may think it was
a strange thing, and so indeed it was, Sirs, but it was done to fufil that
Prophecy of Isaiah, Sirs, The Wolf and the Lamb shall lie down together;
there is a plain reason now for it, Sirs.

On Sunday, in January last, immediately after the King had recommended to the
General Assembly, a Formula, upon the Subscribing whereof, by the Episcopal
Presbyters, he desired they might be readmitted to the public Exercise of the
Ministry, I heard one Mr. Webster, a noted professor of the New Gospel,
lecturing upon Psalm 15 On the 1st Verse, he said, That none but God could
answer the Psalmist's Question there, and therefore, said he, it does not
belong to any Earthly King, Prince, or Potentate to determine who should be
Officers in God's House, or to prescribe Terms of Communion to his Kirk: On the
2d Verse he said, That it was necessary for God's People to walk uprightly;
that is, said he, never to betray the Cause of Christ's Kirk for sear of great
Men: Our way is God's own way; and sure to stand stiff to that, is the best way
to please God, and even great Men, at the long run: On the 3d Verse he appealed
to the Consciences of his Hearers, If Scots Presbyterians were not a holy,
harmless, innocent, sincere, modest, and moderate People, and whatever is said
to the contrary, but Lybels, Lies, and Slanders: On the 4th Verse he said, That
the Prelates, Curates, and Malignant Counselors are the vile persons spoke of
there, and whom all the fear God are bound to contemn and despise; especially (
said he) because they have sworn to the hurt of the Kirk, in taking the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy, the Test, and the Oath of Canonical Obedience, and
now think to expiate all this, by subscribing a bare foolish Formula, because
King William, forsooth, has sent it to us; as if the Presbyterians ought to
admit or allow any Form but the Covenant.

About that same time, I mean, in January last, Mr. Fraser of Bray, at
Edinburgh at the new Kirk, pretending to preach upon this Text of the
Revelation, There was joy in Heaven, Michael and his Angels fought against the
Dragon and his Angels: Michael and his Angels, why no good Christian can doubt,
but by this we are to understand Christ and this Kirk; and by the Dragon and
his Angels is plainly meant, the Prelates and Curates: You see from this then,
Sirs, betwixt whom this War and this Fighting was in Heaven; and since they
fight in Heaven for this Cause of the Kirk, why should not we fight for it also
upon Earth? What needs our Kirk be afraid of Kings, they are but men? but we
have Christ to fight for us, and we are his, his Angels, and must fight with
him till we destroy the Dragon Prelates, and their Curate Angels.

Ah, Sirs, ye read ( says he) that this Dragon's Tail swept down a third part
of the Stars of Heaven; I have a sad thing to tell you now, Sirs, Alas, this
Dragon's Tail has swept the North of Scotland, for few or none of Christ
Ministers are to be found there.

The same Frazer of Bray preaching at a Conventicle in the beginning of King
James his Reign, began his Discourse thus; I am come here to preach this day,
Sirs, in spite of the Curates, and in spite of the Prelates their Masters; and
in spite of the King their Master; and in spite of the Hector of France, his
Master; and in spite of the Pope of Rome that is both their Master; and in spite
of the Divil that is all their Master.

SECT. IV. Containing some few Expressions of the Presbyterian Prayers.
MR. James Kirkton said once in his Prayers, O Lord restore our banished King,
Lord restore our banished King; do not mistake my meaning, Lord, it is not K.
James whom thou have rejected that we seek; it is King Christ, that has been a
stranger these many years in poor Scotland. It is reported of Mr. Robert Blair
at St. Andrews, that he had this expression in his Prayers, Lord, thou art a
good Goose, for thou art still dropping. And severals in the Meeting Houses, of
late, have made use of it; to which they add, Lord thou rains down Dunghils.
middings of blessings upon us.

Mr. Anderson, a Phanatick Preacher in Perthshire, in a Prayer, said, Good
Lord, it is told us, That thou knows a proud man by his looks, as well as a
malignant by his works; but what tilt thou do with these malignants? I Will tell
thee, Lord, what thou will do, Even take them up by the heels and Smoke.
reest them in the Chimney of Hell, and dry them like Bervy Haddocks: Lord take
the Pistol of thy Vengeance, and the Mortar-piece of thy Wrath, and make the
Brains.
hairns of these malignants a hodge podge, but for thy own Bairns, Lord feed
them with the Pruins.
Plumdames and Raisons of thy Promises, and even give them the Spurs of
Confidence, and Boots of Hope, that like new Weaned.
spean'd fillies, they may Jump
soup over the fold-dikes of Grace.

A learned Divine of that Set, at Pitsligo, in his public Prayer, this last
Summer, said, O Lord, you are like a Little Mouse.
Mousie peeping out at the hole of a Wall, for thou sees us but we see not thee.

Mr. William Moncrif (whom I named before, page --.) after his Sermon is Summer
last, at Largo in Fife, in the Intercession of his Prayer, said, O God
establish and confirm thy Church in Scotland, and defend her from her bloody
and cruel Enemies Popery and Prelacy; O Lord prosper thy reformed Churches of
Portugal and Piedmont, and of the rest of the Low Countries; and carry on thy
work which is begun in Ireland; and sweet, good Lord, finally begin and carry
on a work in England.

Mr. Shields preaching near Dumfreis, in his Prayer for K William, said, Good
Lord bless him with a stated opposition in his Heart to the Antichristian
Church of England, and with Grace to destroy all the Idolatry and Superstition
of their foolish and foppish Worship; and bless all the people of the Land with
Strength, Zeal, and Courage thoroughly to reform the State as well as the
Church, in these Kingdoms; that they may be untied in the Bond of the Solemn
League and Covenant, and purified according to that pattern in the Mount, which
we and our Posterity are all sworn to.

Mr. John Welsh prayed. Lord we are come hither, a pack of poor Beggars of us
the day, alms to the poor blind here, for God's sake, that never saw the light
of the Gospel; alms to the poor deaf here, that never heard the joyful sound;
to the poor Cripples that have their Legs, the Covenant broken by the Bishops.
Lord pity thy poor Kirk the day, poor Woman, sad is she; Lord lend her a lift,
and God confound that filthy bitch, that Gumgal'd Whore, the Whore of Babylon.

One Mr. Hustone said, Lord give us Grace, for if theu give us not Grace we
shall not give thee Glory, and who will Gain.
win by that, Lord?

One B^rlands in Gallowshiels, a blasphemous ignorant Blockhead, said in his
Prayers before Sermon, Lord, when thou was electing to Eternity, grant, that we
have not got a wrong cast of thy hand to our Souls.

Another time praying at Jedburgh, he said, Lord confound the Tyrant of France,
God's Vengeance light on him* the Vengeance of God light on him, God's
Vengeance light on him: but if he be of the Election of Grace, Lord save him:
Lord confound the Antichristian crew in Ireland; indeed, Lord, for the great
King James was then in Ireland.
man time heads them, God knows we wish not his destruction, we wish him
Repentance of his sins, but not the rest: As for the crew of the Church of
England, that is gone in to fight against them, they are as profane a crew as
themselves, Lord; but thou can make one man destroy another for the Interest of
the people of God, and to give Gods people Elbow-room in the Land.

One who is now a Head of a College, and is looked upon by the party as their
great Advocate and Oracle, in a public Congregation at Edinburgh, 1690* in his
Prayer had these words, which one that heard them, and immediately committed
them to Writing, showed to me; O Lord give us, give us, good Lord; but Lord,
you will may be say to us, Ye are always troubling me, what shall I give you now?
but, Lord, whatever thou says, we know that thou in thy heart likes such
trouble; and now I Will tell thee what thou should give us Lord, I Will not be
greedy nor Ill mannered.
misleard now, Lord, then only give us thy self in earnest of better things.

Good Lord, what have ye been doing all this time, where have you been this 30
year, What good have ye done to your poor Kirk in Scotland, that has been so
many years spurgal'd with Antichrist's riding her; she has been long lying on
her back, and sadly defiled; and many a good lift have we lent her; O, how
often have we put our Shoulders to Christ's Cause, when his own When he could
not stand without a Supporter.
back was at the Wall: to be free with you, Lord, we have done many things for
thee that never entered in thy noddle, and yet we are content that thou take
all the glory; is not that fair and kind.

It Is true, good Lord, you have done Pretty.
gelly well for Scotland now at last, and we hope that thou have begun, and
will carry any thy work in England, that stands Much in need.
muckle in mister of a Reformation; but what have you done for Ireland, Lord,
ah poor Ireland; (then pointing with his Finger to his Nose, he said) I true, I
have nickt you there, Lord.

O God, thou have bidden us pray for Kings, and yet they have been always very
troublesome to thy Kirk, and very Troublesome.
fasious Company; Lord, either make them good or else make us quite of their
Company: They say that this new King thou have sent us, takes the Sacrament
kneeling, and from the hand of a Bishop; ah, that is black, that is fowl work;
Lord deliver him from Papary and Prelacy, from a Dutch Conscience, and from the
hardheartedness of the Stewarts, and let us never be Encountered.
trysted again with the bag and baggage of the Family, the black band of
Bishops to trouble and lord it over thy Church and Heritage. Good Lord, send
back our old King of poor Scotland, restore him to his Throne and Dignity, to
his absolute Power and Superemacy, from which he he hat been so long and so
unjustly banished: Lord, you ken what King I mean, I do not mean K. James, na
forsooth, I do no mean him, I mean, Lord, you ken well enough wha I mean, I
mean sweet K. Jesus, that is been long kept out of this his own Covenanted
Kingdom, by the Bishops and Godless Act of Supremacy.

Lord I have many more tales to tell you, and many sad complaint to make of our
Governors and great men, and of the malignants and Dundee's men; and many
Pardons to ask for a broken Covenant and a backsliding Ministry, but I must
refer them all till you and I be at more leisure, and I will not end without
that old musty Prayer that they now call our Lords.

Mr. Robert Kenedy, Brother to the very learned and moderate Hugh Kenedy, the
Moderator of the General Assembly, once praying at a Conventicle at Chidsdale,
said, Lord grant that all the Kings in the World may fall down before thy Son,
and kiss his Soles not the Pope's Soles, etc. no nor his stinking Slipper.
Panton either.

Mr. Boyd, the famous Preacher in Chidsdale, finding in the Forenoon, that
severals of his Hearers went away after the Forenoon Sermon, had this
expression in his Afternoon Prayers. Now Lord, thou sees that many People go
away from hearing thy word, but had we told them Stories of Robin Hood or Davie
Lindsay, they had stayed; and yet none of these are near so good as thy Word
that I Preach. Another praying against Church Government by Bishops and
Curates, said, Lord, will thou take the Keys of thy own House out of the hand
of those thieves and hirelings, and make them play clitter clatter upon their
Crowns till they cry Maw again -- ( he pronounced the word Maw like the noise
of a Cat) for thy locks have got many a wrong cast since they had the Keys.

About the beginning of March 1689 one prayed for a Presbyterian Election of
Members to the Parliament in the City of Edinburgh in these words: Good God now
when Christ's back is at the wall, put it in the heart of the Townsmen to choose
George Stirling and Baillif Hall. Another prayed, Lord thou have said, that he
is worse than an Insidel that provides not for his own Family; Give us not
reason to say this of thee Lord, for we are thine own family, and yet we have
been but scurvily provided for of a long time. Another praying after the
Baptism of a Child in the City of Edinburgh, said, Lord bless and preserve this
young Calf that he may grow an ox to draw in Christ's Plough. Mr. Areskine
praying in the Tron-Church last year, said, Lord have mercy on all Fools and
Idiots, and particularly on the Magistrates of Edinburgh.

Another Imprecating (as is very ordinary with them to do) said, Lord give thy
enemies the Papists and the Prelates a full cup of thy fury to drink; and if
they refuse to drink it off, then good Lord give them Another Cup full of it.
Kelty.

Mr. John Dickson praying for Grace, said, Lord dibble thou the kail-seed of
thy Grace in our hearts, and if we grow not up to good kail, Lord make us good
Sprouts, at least. Mr. Linning cursing the King or France in his Prayers, said,
Lord, curse him, confound him, and damn him, dress him, and guide him as thou
did Pharaoh, Senacherib, and our late King James and his Father.

One Frazer a young Fellow Preaching in Jedburgh, after Sermon blasphemously
inverted the Blessing thus, The Curse of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of God the
Father, and the Holy Ghost be upon all them that hear the Word and profit not
by it.

Mr. Arskine in the Tron-Church prayed, Lord be thou in Mons, Mons, Mons, be
thou in Mons, good Lord, meikle need has Mons of thee, Lord, for now they that
be Confederates we hope they may be made Covenanters. Bring the sworn enemy of
the Solemn League the Tyrant of France to the place whence he came, and cause
his Dragons shoot him in his Retreat, that he may cry out with Julian the
Apostate, Now Galilean thou have overcome me. One Mr. James Webster was admired
lately at my Lord Arbuthnet his zealous Patron's Table for this Grace before
Meat, Out of the boundless, bankless, brimless, bottomless, shoreless Ocean of
thy goodness we are daily foddered, filled, feasted, fatted, and half an hours
Discourse to the same purpose.

Mr. Kennedy before the late Assembly in which he had the name of Moderator;
said in his Prayer, Lord, Moderation is commended to us by the King, we all
know it is a Virtue that's sometimes is useful. Lord, but I cannot say that that
which they call Moduration is so convenient at this time for thy People and
Cause, for even to be free with you, Good Lord, I think it best to make a clean
House, by sweeping them all out at the door, and casting them out to the
Dunghill.
Midden.

Their famous Scrib Rule in a Prayer, not at Sermon, but upon another occasion
as public, a little after the dissolution of the General Assembly, expressed
himself thus, O Lord thou knows that Christ's Court the General Assembly ought
to protest against Usurpers upon Christ's Kingdom, but if we had known that King
William would have been angry with us in earnest, and if the Brethren would
have followed my advice, we should have pleased the King for this time, and
taken Christ in our own hand Run a Tick with him.
till some other opportunity. The Moderator Chrighton immediately after the
Assembly was dissolved, praying, (amongst many other reflections upon the King
and his Counselors) said these words, O Lord thou knows how great a Surprizal
this is to us, we looked upon King William at his first coming among us to have
been sent in mercy for deliverance to this poor Kirk, but now we see that our
Deliverance must come from another hand, Good God grant that he be not sent to
be a plague and a curse to thy Kirk.

Hind let loose by Mr. Shields, page 468. I conclude this Head, says he, with
that Form of Prayer that I use for the King, O Lord to whom vengeance belongs
show thy self, lift up thy self thou Judge of the Earth, render a reward to the
proud: Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph,
shall the Throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, that frames mischief
by a law, the mighty and terrible God destroy all Kings and people that put
their hand to alter and destroy the House of God; overturn, overturn, overturn
this Throne of Tyranny, and let it be no more until he come whose right it is.

These are but a few of many thousand instances that might be given of that
ridiculousness, profanity and blasphemy which the Scotch Presbyterians daily
use in their Preaching and Praying; and tho Strangers may think it incredible
that men professing Religion or Reason, should thus debase and prostitute both,
yet they who are unfortunately bound to converse with, and hear them
frequently, cannot be but sadly sensible that all that is here charged upon them
is but too true, and that many of the worst expressions they are daily guilty
of, are purposely here omitted, lest by such obscene, Godless, and fulsome
stuff, the ears and eyes of modest Readers should be nauseated and polluted;
which if these opposers of Truth and Religion should deny, there are thousands
in Scotland of the best quality and reputation ready to attest, by their Oaths
and Subscriptions, as shall be made appear in a 2d Edition of this Book, if the
clamors of the Party extort it, and very many are willing to join in this who
were not long ago their great friends, and have many of their Sermons and
Prayers in writing, which they are now willing to expose, having fully
discovered the vile hypocrisy and Pharasaick professions of that Faction; but
this trouble we can hardly suppose that the Presbyterians will put us or
themselves to, because it is not probable that they will deny what they so much
glory in, viz. this extraordinary way of Preaching and Praying, which they
think an excellency and perfection, and call it a holy familiarity with God,
and a peculiar privilege of the most refined Saints.

Some may perhaps think this Collection was published merely to render these
Puritans ridiculous; but it is plain enough to such as know them, that we have
not made but found them so, we hope that our discovering their snares may
prevent some men's being entangled, with them, they* compass Sea and Land, and
are fully as zealous as their Predecessors to make proselytes to their Party,
and new Gospel. Now the general intent of the Collectors of these Notes, was
that they might stand like Beacons to fright unwary Strangers from these Rocks
upon which so many have formerly made shipwreck both of faith and good
conscience. Alas it is but too too evident what havoc and desolation these
pretended Reformers have made in the Church and State, Gods Name, Honor and
Worship is profaned, the Gospel exposed to the scorn and contempt of its
enemies, the more modest and honest Heathens and Turks; the Floodgates of
Impiety and Atheism are set open, the foundations of all true piety or policy
are overturned, and all regard to things either Sacred or Civil quite destroyed
by these, who as the Royal Martyr (...) upon the Ordinance against the
Common Prayer Book.
speaks, seeking to gain reputation with the vulgar, for their extraordinary
Parts and Piety, must needs undo whatever was formerly settled, never so well
and wisely.

I wish ( as the same Royal Author did) that their Repentance may be their only
punishment, that seeing the mischiefs which the disuse of public Liturgies
has already produced, they may restore that credit, use and reverence to them,
which by the Ancient Churches were given to set forms of sound and wholesome
words.

King Chapter his most pious and pertinent Prayer.
And thou, O Lord, which art the same God, Blessed for ever, whose mercies are
full of variety* and yet of constancy; Thou deniest us not a new and fresh
sense of our old and daily wants, nor despisest renewed affections joined to
constant expressions: Let us not want the benefit of thy Churches united and
well-advised Devotions.

Keep men in that pious Moderation of their Judgments in matters of Religion,
that their ignorance may not offend others, not their opinion of their own
abilities tempt them to deprive others of what they may lawfully and devountly
use to help their infirmities. And since the advantage of Error consists in
novelty and variety, as Truth's in unity and constancy, suffer not thy Church
to be pestred with Erros, and deformed with undecencies in thy Service, under
the pretense of variety and novelty (...) nor to be deprived of truth, unity
and order, under this fallacy, that constancy is the cause of formality. Lord
keep us from formal Hypocrisy in our hearts, and then we know that praying to
thee, or praising of thee (with David and other holy men) in the same forms
cannot hurt us. Evermore defend and deliver thy Church from the effects of
blind zeal and over-bold Devotion. Amen.

FINIS.

