PAX QVAERITVR BELLO OLIVARIVS DEI GRA: REIPVB: ANGLIAE, SCOTIAE, ET HIBERNIAE,
andc PROTECTOR blazon of the Commonwealth
By the Protector.
A DECLARATION Of His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR, for a Day of Solemn Fasting
and HVMILIATION.
HIs Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and the Council, being (as becomes them) very
sensible of, and deeply affected with the hand of the Lord, in the present
general Visitation, with which not only these populous Cities, but mot parts
of the Nation are sorely afflicted, and many have been taken away; Do hold it
their duty to invite the People of this Nation to humble themselves greatly
before the Lord, whose displeasure We have highly provoked by Due unthankfulnes
for, and abuse of Gospel Mercies, and that Peace, Health, and Plenty, which for
diverse years last past We have (through his goodness) enjoyed, and by that
spirit of Division, murmurring, profaneness and enmity againt the power of
Godliness, which is so prevalent amongst Us, besides many other abominations:
His HIGHNESS therefore, with the advice of His Council, has thought fit to
declare and appoint, that Wednesday the Fifth of May next, be observed as a Day
of solemn Fasting and Humiliation within the Cities of London and Westminster,
the late lines of Communication, and Weekly Bills of Mortality, And Wednesday
the Nineteenth day of the same Month within the places aforesaid, and all
other places within England and Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed;
Exhorting all, especially those that fear the Lord, to humble themselves before
him, and turn from their evil ways, and seek the Lord, that he will be pleased
to forgive our sins, and heal Our Land; And that there may not only be a
lengthning out of our Tranquillity, but such returns of special Mercy, as may
evidence to his people, and convince all that have evil will unto their Peace,
that the Lord has not forsaken Us, but does yet for his own Great Names sake
take delight in Us, to make Us (though most unworthy) a People of his Praise.
And His Highness does earnestly recommend it unto all such as are touched with
the sense of Gods hand and displeasure, to set themselves to the performance of
this Duty, in such a Solemn and Spiritual manner as becomes such an
extraordinary Duty, and as so sad an Occasion as this calls for. His Highness
pleasure also is, that notice hereof be given in the several Churches and
Congregations by the respective Ministers, on the Lords Day before the
respective days aforesaid, for the better publication hereof.

Given at White Hall the Nine and twentieth Day of April, in the Year of Our
Lord, 1658.
London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1658.


