THE THIRD PART OF Babel's-Builders Vnmask't.
In a REPLY to a piece of Hypocrisy, etc. Published in the Name of T. Laurence,
whose great Age may somewhat mittigate his Crime: and therefore this is chiefly
intended for the Approvers thereof.
IN your Hypocrasy, etc. you have acted contrary to Christ's Command, which was,
what soever you would have another do unto you, do the same unto them: but if
Christ's Command have not Influence on you, I had thought G. F's great Champion
G. W's Doctrine might: because some of you so much boast, That you be all of
one Mind) he says, To condemn that in another which one allows in themselves,
is not Christian like. In page 11. of Hyp. you say, If G. W. is guilty of a --
lording Spirit -- thou ought to have told him before published. And in page
15. pretend kindness, and confess that our Acquaintance and Unity 20 years
since, was joyful: and yet you so forget what you say was my Duty, you never
sent me one of your Books, nor notice of them, but publicly exposed me as
Ranter, Rotten-heart, Painted Sepulcher; Erroneous, Schismatical, joined to the
Son of Perdition, and treacherous dividing Spirit: and other reproachful Names.
Page 1. What can not Preach without a Text? Hereby you show your selves more
like Ishmaels Race, than Christ's Disciples, by your vain scoffing: and do the
same you falsely charge, and scoff T. C. for: for you take your Text from J. P.
viz. took thine out of W. R's: but that Book you Answer, is not that J. P. and
T. C. discoursed on, but published since (as by the Title you may see) it is
the second Addition, and compared with Is. P's before published; therefore your
vain Scoff is a false Accusation also. And for your reproaching G. B's Sound
Testimony, as in page 7. Erroneous and Schismatical; it is not consistent with
what you say of him in page 5. That you hope he is at rest; (and I believe so)
and he deserves not such evil Treatment from you, nor dare you have done so in
his life time, also ye twice add to his words, in page 6. without respect of
Persons, and in page 7. without Persons, and then pervert them, inferring that
he excludes the Spirit from making use of Persons, by the addition of those
words: but G. B. does say, p. 10. Tes^ If the Spirit do move any to declare,
that is the Pastor, etc. That he opposes is fixing Offices on Persons, or
Persons in Offices, that they must for their Lives or Pleasures, Govern, Order,
and see for their Brethren. Remember Gehazai, although he was sometime a Servant
to the Prophet, and sent of Message by him, but not after Naaman, but he went
in his own Name, and falsely used his Masters Name, and deceived him, it may be
so with G. F. and that may be your Figure, and I fear is your Case. In page 6.
Hyp. Why do thou write, and many of your Side declare? Thou have cited some
of my Reasons, and may see more in the Preface and page 16. And in p. 7.
Hyp. You cast away Christ's Government, Discipline and Doctrine, and Ministers,
thou told'st me there was no need for any Discipline. I remember not those
words (but we had more discourse than that I am sure, and therefore by J. P s
Rule, you are in this, Crafty Manglers and Curtailers, etc.) but I intended
them not against Order and Discipline, but against imposing G. F's Forms on
others which in Conscience cannot submit to them as Christ's Government and
great Ordinances, etc. And if you mean by Christ's Government and Ordinances, G.
F 's Laws and Party, (as it seems to me you do) then I confess, as such, I do
cast them away as the Calf Aaron made to please the People, for I cannot
receive them as such Dignities, as you in your Hyp. would have them be, or as
C. T. says, From the Oracle of Divine Breath, for there appears to me as much
cause to protest against you and them, as for the Protestants against the
Papists Sacrament of the Altar, for they would have the Bread to be received as
Christ's Real Body; and your high dignifying G. F's Laws, do tend to the same
Idolatry. Hyp. in page 8. T. C 's Piece of stolen words which he does not
deny, but says he took them out of W. R's. I wonder you are not ashamed to
assert such Untruths (were this against S. Crisp, he would call, you, Liar, and
Palpable Lies, etc.) ye would think it unrighteous Judgment to accuse you for
Imposers, and to be Lords over the Consciences of your Brethren, and for proof
thereof, to say you do not deny it, but T. C. does deny it, and never did so
say, therefore your Accusation is unrighteous, and slanderous, and in it three
untruths: 1. That T. C. stole or took them from W. R. 2. That he does not deny
it. 3. But says so. For that discourse with J. P. was about his Fathers
Testimonies, and not any other part of that Book And in page 8. Hyp. Thou
say some have promoted Government and Orders to the compelling others before
convincement. Here you mangle and abuse, by picking out words to alter the
sense: for in p. 11. I say, Some have endeavored to promote, etc. But you, as
your usual manner is, drop what is not for your purpose, and leave out
Endeavored, also many other words, whereby the sense is altered, for there is
great difference between doing and endeavoring to do a thing; for that may be
endeavored which is never done, but I will show you what I mean by
Endeavoring to compel, constrain, or impose: I take to impart much one Gal.
2.14. Paul to Peter, Why compellest thou the Gentiles? etc. -- and they
constrain you to be Circumcised: now Peter had no power to compel them, but by
Preaching to them, That except they were Circumcised and kept the Law of Moses,
they could not be saved; as Acts 15. This is by Paul termed Compelling, or
Constraining, and by him withstood and testified against, although promoted by
Peter the Eldest Apole, and Peter etc. had more to say for themselves and
Moses's Law, than you have for G. F. and his Laws of Women's Meetings and
Marriages: and although the Church if Jerusalem at the Request of the Gentiles,
(and not by any assumed Power to enforce Laws) resolved on the Question; the
Gentiles need not observe Moses his Laws: yet we find in the Epistles to the
Romans, Corinthians and Galatians, that the Apostle permitted the Practice of
some things to some, that were conscious of them; as Days, Meats, etc. and
said, Let every one be fully persuaded in his own Mind. Judge not one another:
and it was the Preaching of Forms or Ceremonies of necessity to Salvation that
then was termed compelling: although such things as might be allowed to be
believed or practiced, yet when they would impose them on others, are termed a
Yoke, and not to be born, and caused Paul to say, If you be Circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing: now consider the high Dignities you have given G. F's
Laws, and what Sons of Perdition you render them that cannot so reverence them;
if it do not amount to what was by Paul termed Compelling or Constraining: for
you in effect say, Unless you will be Circumcised with G. F's Circumcision, and
keep his Law, no Salvation: for the Inquisition does not force any, but punish
Person or Estate; but you have not Power yet over either of them. And I shall
rather choose to be at the kindness of some now in power, than some of you, now
the Ruling Party, who I term G. F's Party, who are exalting the greatest and
highest Mystery of Iniquity that has appeared some Ages, which you are setting
up above all that is called God, viz. G. F 's Laws. For what was commanded in
Scripture must not be practiced unless required by the same Spirit: but if we
have not Unity with your Women's Meetings, etc. Idolizing G. F. his Laws then
the Universal Spirit cannot receive, but are erred from our measures, but you
have Unity with the least measure: therefore they that cannot so do, have not
the least measure. Whereby it seems that G. F. etc. have put a Lock on Heaven,
and given the Key to the Women's Meeting. Also in page 8. Hyp. Proudly saying,
away with calling your selves the People of God, and judge others: Here you
again dishonestly pick out words, for in p. 12. T. C. says, Away with calling
your selves the People of God, as a Body of People, etc. but them words, as a
Body of People, you dishonestly leave out and skip several lines, then take and
Judge others, where again you leave out all, for my words are, Judge all
others, and you wrong the sense, and pervert my words by leaving out words, and
ye be guilty of that you blame me for, viz. Harsh Judging, for it is that proud
Imagination, that you are the People of God, and none else (as some have said,
and that You be the Body of Christ) that I am against. And in p. 9 says, Art
not thou a Ranter, who says in thy Title Page You Quakers. That word was for
secresy, not for reproach, but your Term Ranter, gives greater cause to suspect
you be not Christian-Quakers, and I wish for your own Sakes, you were as free
from the Spirit that lusts to Envy and Lordship over your Brethren as T. C.
is from indulging any fleshly ease, or sinful Liberty, and ill were it for T.
C. if you had such Proofs of his Rantism and Looseness, as he has of your
Impositions: but I do believe Is. P's Testimonies, and if that he with you
Rantisin, I am content to be vile, with such, knowing it is the same Spirit as
called Christ Devil; and seeing you will be my Father-Confessors, I fear you
are of that Generation that Christ forbad to pull up the Tares for fear they
should spoil the Wheat, for you under pretense of fear of fleshly Liberty, will
destroy Liberty of Conference; only ye exceed them, for they staid until there
was Tares, but you for fear of Tares coming up will destroy the Wheat; as p.
145. Accu. We rather plead a fear -- they will be so confused -- that they are in
danger to let up a Libertin Spirit. What Impositions and Severities might not,
or may not be Justifiable, that has been, or may be exercised toward
Conscientious Dissenters, if such Arguments my be admitted: but for all this
golden Head full of gilded good Names, it stands but on Legs of Iron and Clay,
which are smitten, and in the Lords time it will fall; and in that day the God
of Heaven will set up a Kingdom, although you do what you can to hinder the
Exaltation thereof, etc. As some in the Apostles days, because he magnified the
Grace of God, saying, As Sin has abounded, so has Grace much more? therefore
they would infer that might do evil, that good might come of it, but he said,
God forbid: so it may be said to you who say, If People must excuse themselves
by saying, they must stay until they be convinced, then any slothful or
disobedient ones will pretend they be not convinced; but it may be said, God
forbid the Liberty of the Gospel should be so abused; but if any such should
be, their Conformity is not more acceptable than the Excuse; therefore I cannot
see what you get by your Imposing but Hypocrites, but a great number of
Conformists please G. F's Universal Spirit: but if all Power be committed to
the Son, he is able to preserve in Truth, (as to bring to it) and to keep out
of fleshly Liberty: but when I consider how easily Scriptures may be leaped
over, and G. F's Laws und undispensibly must be observed and bowed to, it
seems, as you would have them the only Girdle of Truth, and whole Armor of
God, thereby placing more Authority in them, then in Moses or John's, or any
Ministration; for they must not be practiced, but as Garments the Gospel
appeared in, and since the Harlot has dressed her self therewith, therefore
not worn by the true Spouse: but some bad enough have, and now are dressed in
G. F's comely Order exactly, and Maintainers thereof, and yet accepted. Also in
p. 8. Hyp. Uniformity is good, and to be desired, and the Intent and Work of
the Ministry is to bring into Unity, which being kept in, will come into
Uniformity at length. Here you curtail by your own Rule, for in p. 7. you take
six words, but leap over several lines, and then take a few more words, and
then again skip several Lines, and add a few more words: but Is. P. goes on and
says, To strive to bring to a fleshly Uniformity, which insnares and overbears
the tender Conscience, that is not good. And Is. P. says, Ministers are to
bring to Unity, as People are able to follow, and not force into one Practice.
And much more that you skip, that is against your compelling, or placing
Christian Unity in Forms; but this Unity that Is. P. here pleads for, T. C. is
not against. Also in p. 10. Is. P. says The Church was Clothed appearing in the
beautiful and glorious dress the Lord himself put on her. But Is. P. also goes
on and says, Another while she stripped of her Outward Garments, and the Harlot
dressed therewith; and more that you loave out, as not being for your turn. And
in p. 10. Hyp. If you seek to take away Outward Order from the Church of
Christ, is not this to take away from her Glory. Hereby you further manifest
your compelling Spirit, being that in Revelations that would compel all; for it
is only that T. C. is against, and this you term the Churches Glory,
manifesting your selves to mind Earthly things whose glory is their Shame.
Christ said, The Glory thou have given me, I have given them. This Glory was
not G. F's Laws, yet the Church had Glory: but your Glory can be but the
Outward Court which was given to the Gentiles, and it is but the Gentile Nature
that glories in Lording over their Brethren, and giving Laws to their
Consciences: for if G. F. should say, he is moved to set up Jewish or Romish
Ceremonies, and 66. in a London Metting, say, It is Christ's great Ordinance; as
such he may find, some who may be so blind as to deny their own Light, although
they think it true to obey G. F. but such a Submission once cost a Prophet
dear, and the Children of Israel were not to dance about the Calf, and say,
These be thy Gods, although no less Man than Aaron was concerned. And in p. 12.
Hyp. There are Outward Forms that God ownes and stays in. But these words of I.
N. by you cited, are much perverted, to make them speak for compelling or
conforming without or against Conviction, but are quite contrary, and are thus;
p. 27. Test. Who have Spiritual Worship, can no longer stay in any Form than
God stays therein, but by his Spirit are led into whatsoever he goes, and out
of whatever he departs. Here is no Outward Limitation to G. F's Laws. And Hyp.
in p. 12. We do own the Power of God, and the Form which he has led us into.
But would you but do as you would be done by, which is the Duty of all Christ's
Disciples, then you would allow others the same Liberty as you take, for what
proof give you, only you say so, but if those you call Apostates say so, then
Rotten Heart, and joined to the Son of Perdition, as in p. 9. of Hyp. you will
have all Judgment, and be sure to acquit your selves; and condemn others; but
the difference is not about what you own, but that you would compel others to
own the same: Would you but allow others their Liberty to enjoy their Faith in
God, and his Law in their Hearts, as you do yours in G. F. and his Laws; I know
not of any great difference, only you will manifest your selves to be some of
the Lo here is: (come to G. F's comely Order) but Christ said, go not forth: the
Lord knows who be his, and needs hot G. E's Livery to be known by, that will
not prove the Wedding Garment when the Muster views his Guests. And in p. 12.
Hyp. What Is. P. E. B. and W. P. apply to false Churches concerning Outward
Orders, that you apply to G. F. and Friends in Truth. Compelling and Imitation
without Inward Conviction is as false among you as any, and more detestable,
and Liberty of Conscience due from you of any People, because that was the
Foundation of your gathering every one to know the Light in his own Heart.

These following be your false and unrighteous Accusations and Assertions.

1st. p. 3., Thou say, in thy Title, You are Gods Israel, and all that oppose
you, Pharaohs Taskmasters. 2. And in the Postscript, You are followers of the
Lamb, all others worshippers of the Beast. 3 d. p. 8. Thou accountest all that
oppose thee and your side have the Beasts Mark. 4. p. Thou say, Thou have the
Saints Seal, and and others the Beasts Mark. 5 ly. p. 9. Thou do not only
disown the good Order of Truth, but the Language of Truth. 6th. p. 4. Thou
say is Is. P's Testimony which thou told his Son thou never read'st nor saw.
7th. p. 8. T. C. his stolen words which he does not deny, but says he took
them out of W. R. 8th. p. 8. In pretense to prevent ill Orders, thou will have
no Outward Orders. 9th. p. 5. Thou art for many folds out of Gods Protection.
10th. p. 6. Thou have found another Administration than God gave by his Spirit
at Pentecost. 11th. p. 7, You Villyfie with reproachful Terms, and call Christ's
Government set up by his Spirit and Power in his Instruments, Outward Orders
and Rotten Orders, etc. 12th. p. 1. The Foundation of thy work is not the Light
of Christ within thee, but W. R. his Book without thee: T. C. never used that
word Rotten, that he remembers: nor any ereverent Expression to any of Christ's
Laws, only against making G. G. his Laws and Traditions: Christ's Doctrine, and
all these Accusations of yours, thou say, or thou do, be false, and you
have not, nor cannot prove them; for T. C. does no where say so, nor believe
so, as the Preface makes appear; that I am against Judging others for
difference in Judgment or Practice, and that God has some sealed ones among
you, etc. 13th. p. 4. A perverting, and not Is. P 's Testimony, See p. 10: T.
L. says a little of that T. C. cites, is Is. P. his Testimony. 14th. p. 9.
More might be said to T. C 's stolen words: 15th: p. 5: T. C. mingles, and
perverts Is. P's Sense and Meaning. By mingle you must mean, put in other words
among Is. P's which be not his; which is false, and for perverting, let Truth
in all Judge whether those Testimonies of Is. P. cited by T. C. be for Liberty
of Conscience, or compelling all to an Outward Form. 16th. p. 5. Thou make
ill use of his words (i.e. Is. P.) to uphold a bad Cause. I do make no other
use of Is. P. words but to maintain Liberty of Conscience against Impositiou)
which once you thought a good Cause; but now having assumed to your selves
Power and Rule, change your Judgments, etc. As G. F. said, of Liberty of
Conscience, he liked not the word. 17th. p. 6. Thy Writings are obscure and
dark Counsel by words without Knowledge, and plainly prove that your Side is
joined to the Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition. If T. C. his Writings be
obscure, it is because you have given up all your Judgment also to G. F. etc.
i.e. as the Barbados Church did, and therefore cannot discern. 18th. p. 7. And
yet you own Persons going up and down preaching, which is false and
Contradiction. But the Apostles to the Hebrews, and John then were false and
contradicted; for they said in latter days God would write his Law in the
Heart, and should not need any to teach, but yet taught. 19th. p. 11. Erroneous
and Schismatical Doctrines broached by thee and such as thou art. These words
follow in answer to G. B. his Test. p. 11. Seek not to undervalue that to which
you were sent to Minister. Which words of G. B. be sound, for G. B. means not
that they preach to, or Minister to Christ, but to turn to the measure of
Christ's Light in their own Hearts, as the Seed is come -- to turn unto, or for
the good of which the Ministry was sent. It is plain he means to turn People
to the seed, and not that Christ was in want of, or bettered by the Creature.
Therefore thou have not, nor can not prove G. B's Erroneous and Schismatical,
but your selves False Accusers. 20th. Thy Copy is false subscribed, the chief
words left out, and other mords put in dishonesty to serve thy turn, as thy
usual manner has been through thy Book. If it had been all the Judgment, why
should T. C. call it an Abridgment, but there are no words left out that wrong
the sense of them cited, nor any words added, therefore that is false, and why
did you not cite what those added words were; but that you could not, for there
was none. These before mentioned be about 20 false and unrighteous Accusations
and Assertions, in your Hyp. And here follows some of your Contradictions. In
p. 4. of Hyp. you say, Here is a Perversion, but not Is. P 's Testimony: which
contain 4 pages and a half, in T. C's and not one word added, only some words
left out for brevity, but not to alter the sense. but in p. 10. you having
cited a few words from T. C. and from four several pages, and very imperfectly
too, and added and diminished to the altering the Sense, and pervert the
meaniug, and yet you say, this is Is. P. his. Testimony of them, few pieces of
Sentences, and have affirmed false, and contradicted your selves: also you
scoff T. C. What, cannot he preach without a Text, etc. p. 9. T. C. his stolen
words, and W. R. his Book is the foundation of T. C 's; all is proved false;
your selves do the same, you take your Text from Is. P. and therefore take back
to your selves what you wrongfully charge T. C. with; What, can not preach
without a Text? p. 5. Blush for shame and own your Condemnation before your
Hearts be wholly hardened. These following be the Quotations from T. C. by T.
L. in his Hyp. Those words that be of a different character, were by them left
out, and the Sense thereby altered: they have twice added to G. B. his words,
in p. 6. 7. without Persons, and withou respect of Persons; and in several
other places have added words, which be here omitted, and in p. 10. they say,
thou say, declaring and speaking is not in the disposition of Persons, and
the Form was once true, until the Dragon entered; and cite p. 19. but I cannot
find the Sentences in all that page. p. 3. Hyp. Thou say, the Seed is come,
and The Heir is many, who is not to be under Tutors and Gevernours which must
not be limited. Here they leave out in many, and so render the Sentence
general, when it is restrictive. Some have of late acted far contrary, and have
endeavored to promote Government and Orders, even to the compelling others
before Convincement: here they leave out many words; but that word endeavored
does manifestly alter the Sense. And you say in p. 4. Away with calling your
selves the People of God, as a Body of People; It is not hereby meant, but that
God has of your Tribe, many sealed ones but not more for being only of your
Tribe, let none boast, and think themselves the only People of God, and Judge
all others: they leave out the chief Scope of the Sentence, and mangle them in
pieces, and take but 8 words in the beginning, and two at the latter end, and
put to them, and leave out all, between Judge and others, and so pervert the
sense.

Let none boast and think themselves the only people of God, and Judge all
others, but rather esteem others better than your selves; Here they leave out,
Judge all others, in the midst, and take a word, numbers, from another page,
and add to these. And Page 12, the Kingdom of Heaven is within, and consists in
Righteousness, Joy and Peace in the Holy Ghost, and not in speaking one sort of
spech or language, and conformihg to Orders and Prescriptions from without.
There also they leave out, in the middle, what the Kingdom consists in, and is
the material Part of the Sentence. Again, Page 12. Has not God said by some of
you, He will teach his People himself, now according to Scripture, and you also
have declared he is come and known, yet you will not like good Joshua fall down
and give way, but still hold the People or limit them by your Orders and
Directions. Here by leaving out the middle and putting both ends together, they
jumble and misplace the words also. And again Page 7. you say, Uniformity is
good and to be desired, but to strive to bring to^ fleshly Uniformity, which
insnares, and overbears the tender Conscience is not good nor Christian: the
Apostle did not bid force another into one Mind, but bids walk together as they
had attained, and where any were otherwise minded, God should reveal. The work
of the Ministry, is to bring into the Unity, as Persons are able to follow, and
not force into one Practice, that is the way to destroy Faith, etc. Here you
may see they leap over all the chief of the Matter wherein the Unity is, and of
what it consists, and add nine words of another Sentence that stand near 20
lines from them, and add them to them in the beginning of the Sentence, but all
that treat of any Unity in difference of Practice that they leap over. 30th. We
do approve of Monthly and Quarterly Meetings for the necessary Service of the
Truth, so we further say, as this or any other Meetings of Friends in Truth
shall be continued to answer these Services we believe as it now is: It also
will become our Duty to be at Unity with our Brethren in the Service thereof.
Here they leave out, the Services, for which they approve of Meetings, and
apply the Approbation to the Forms and Times of those Meetings, Viz. Monthly
and Quarterly.

Now Friends, Who are the approvers of that Hypocrisy consider your work. I
present you with about twenty false Accusations or Assertions, and about ten
Citations, in every one you have added or diminished words; in some to the
pervertion of the sense: also consider how disingenious you have been in many
places, to say, Thou say, yet quotes not, nor referrest to what page; thereby
giving much trouble to find from whence you take your words. And tho you
reflect in the beginning of your Hypocrisy, etc. It this thy gentle beginning?
Yet prove no ungentleness, but proceed to scoff at T. C. and declare him joined
to the Son of Perdition, Rotten hearted, a painted Sepulcher, Stolen words. And
in page 9. and 14. Words putting in dishonestly; yet cannot prove any words so
put in, but have done that you wrogfully charge me with, viz. added, diminished
and curtailed, by picking out words; from several places, to the perverting the
sense much; which I should not have noted so much, but to show how contrary to
Christ's Rule you act, Do as you would be done by; for remember, What you mete,
shall be mete unto you. Again p. 4. of Hip. you say T. C. abuses I. Ps. words,
when he cites them to the same occasion as they were wrote to show, that
Compelling or Forcing to Unity, was, by Christ, excluded his Church, as the
Title of that Book T. C. wrote them from shows. Also the words themselves, and
I. Ns. in, p. 27, 29, etc. are all against Imitation and Outward Conformity
without the Spirits leading thereto, and for Unity and Love under different
Practices. Therefore your saying, p 10, Hypoc. That they be quoted by T. C.
against himself, is very perverse, for he is not against outward Unity, if as
Is. P. says, It be by the Lord effected; yet notwithstanding so many falsehoods
in this little Hypocrisy of yours, in Page 4. you say, You deny all evil
Opinions, and all that be in Truth be out of them; But these false Accusations
and Assertions forementioned be evil Opinions, and that is another false
Assertion. Therefore take your own saying, p. 8. Thou who condeninest another,
and do the same thing art inexcusable: And if your own words be true, your
are out of the Truth; Wherefore, as in your fifth Page, Blush for shame. I am
weary of raking in such dirty puddles. Page 9th.

Thomas Crisp.


