AN ANSWER OF A MINISTER OF THE Church of England, TO A Seasonable and
Important QUESTION, Proposed to him by a Loyal and Religious Member of the
present House of COMMONS:

VIZ. What Respect ought the True Sons of the Church of England, in point of
Conscience and Christian Prudence, to bear to the Religion of that Church,
whereof the King is a Member?

If it be possible, and as much as in you lies, live peaceably with all Men.
Romans xii. 18. LONDON, Printed for J. L. and are to be Sold by most Booksellers
in London and Westminster. 1687.

ANSWER OF A MINISTER OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND,
To a Seasonable and Important Question, proposed to him by a Loyal and
Religious Member of the present House of COMMONS.
SIR,
THE Support and Security of the Government, as now by Law established, both in
Church and State, is so public a good, that all good Christians and Subjects,
within these Kingdoms, are obliged to open their Veins and Purses for it; and,
a fortiori, to open their Mouths, and put their Pens to Paper for it, in a time
of Trial. And since you are pleased to condescend so far, as to ask my poor
private Judgment, as if you meant to rely upon it, in a Case of such public
Importance, I will save you and my self the trouble of any Apology, and trust
to your Candor, and my own good Intentions, in setting down what I judge to be
yours, and my duty in all sincerity, (which God knows I have done;) and leave
to him and you the pardoning of my Errors; which I hope you will at least cover
from being any common Nuisance to others, or any private Damage to my self. You
are always pleased to allow me as much freedom in Writing as in Thinking; and
therefore I do the more freely pour my indigested Thoughts into your Bosom, as
well to ease my own Mind, as to understand what yours will be of the whole
matter; for I am sensible, That the Commands you have laid upon me, are rather
directed to try my Obedience, than to supply want of Information in any Point,
which concerns your Duty to God or the King: And therefore I must rather expose
my own real Desects, than not endeavor to supply your imaginary ones; who will
be always, as much as I can, though not so much as I ought to be, your Servant.

They, who least consider hazard in the doing of their duty fare best still:
Men's Tongues are their own; nor is it in your power or mine, to prescribe what
shall be spoken for or against us, by them who make all Men Papists, who are
not Schismatics; nor will they ever believe us far enough from Rome, unless we
will bear them Company to Geneva. But we have not so learned Christ: We have
been taught how to govern our selves, both toward Papal and Popular Supremacy,
and to give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, 1 Cor. 1.15.
and to God the things that are Gods. What I now speak, in this Paper, is, I am
sure, to a wise Man; Judge you what I say.

Now, first, Sir, give me leave to premise, That a Case of Conscience, and a
Case of Prudence, are not always the same Case; and therefore would require
more than one Resolution; they seem to differ just as much, as what is Lawful
and what is Expedient. Terms that often meet together, may eidem competere, but
are not convertible, and very often cannot de eodem affirmari. Some things that
are lawful may not be expedient; and some things have of late years (as you
well remember) been thought expedient (as the Black-Bill of Exclusion) which
you, and I knew to be unlawful; and tho the calling it Christian Prudence do
distinguish it from that, and suchlike Unchristian Projects of some
State-Politicians, and suppose it only conversant about things lawful; yet
still there is a difference between what I ought, and must, as bound in
Conscience to do, that I may approve my self an honest Man, and a good Subject;
and what I may or should do at this juncture, to prove my self a discreet and
prudent Man: If I do not the former, I Sin both against God and the King; if
not the latter, I do not Sin mortally, though I act foolishly; which will prove
the Case of very many, whom it will be hard for you or me to make so Wise as
they should be, because they conceit themselves to be Wise enough already.

Prudence is not only a Moral but a Christian Virtue, and such as is necessary
to the constituting of all others, La^ant. ^ 10.
Nec Religio ulla sine sapientia suscipienda est, nec ulla sine Religione
probanda sapientia: Without Prudence our very Zeal for the Church of England,
would prove but a kind of pious Phrenesy: For though our Intentions to preserve
it, were never so justifiable, or commendable; yet if we did not prudently
choose appropriate means for the attainment of that Good End, we should
undermine the thing, which we would have established, and defeat our own Aims;
for a good Intention will never alter the Nature of an ill Action: We must
therefore have our Eyes in our Heads, that we be not practiced upon, to our
own, or the Churches Ruin; and be sure to judge of the things in question,
according to Truth and Charity: Non ex eo quod est fallimur, sed ex eo quod non
est; we are not cheated with Realities, but with Disguises and Appearances of
things; with those counterfeit Shapes which our selves or others have given
them: Sapiens est, cui res sapiunt, ut sunt, He is a Prudent Man to whom things
savor, and relish as they are. Who can abstract the Ill that may be, from the
Good that appears to be, and sever the Color from the Thing. Wise Men cannot
be content to be abused with Vmbrages; they will consider first, what is just
and honest, and then what is sit, decent and advantageous; they will first
argue the matter, in point of Conscience, what is lawful; both for the Church's
Interest and their own; and then in point of Prudence, what is Advisable; that
so in the Conclusion they may please both God and the King.

And accordingly, I suppose the meaning of your inquiry to be, What Respect the
True Sons of the Church of England may, salva Conscientia, (and therefore, as
things now stand, must, and ought) in Prudence to bear to the Religion, of that
Church, whereof the King is a Member?

Toward the stating and resolving of which Question, 'twill, perhaps, not be
impertinent to mention what is meant by the King's Religion, and who, by the
True Sons of the Church of England, and what sort of Respect or Honor it may
justly challenge from them, at this time especially. For when there is any,
though but little Difficulty or Ambiguity in the Terms, it is sit they should
be explained; nor may one presume, that they are generally understood aright,
because they are, by some.

The Roman Catholic Religion is capable of magis and minus; has Degrees of
Better and Worse: There is a Court, as well as Churh of Rome; and 'twill not be
impertinent to ask, Of which it is we speak in this Case? because the
determining that, will very much influence the respect here inquired of; and we
see that the Most, the Best, and the Truest Sons of the Church of England, have
more kindness and respect for one sort than another.

It Is fit, likewise, That the meaning of the True Sons of the Church of England
should be adjusted; and that the rather, because the World was very lately so
shamefully imposed on by the equivocal Signification of True Protestants; and
we know not, but there may be still some of that illegitimate and spurious
Offspring maintained under the disguise of the True Sons of the Church of
England; of whom both the Father of our Country, and our Mother Church have
reason to be ashamed. By a True Son of the Church of England, I mean one, who
gives his Assent and Consent unfeignedly to the Doctrines of the Church,
contained in the Thirty nine Articles and Homilies, as they were received and
expounded in the time of King Charles the Martyr, and in the Book of
Common Prayer; and who is truly conformable to the Worship and Discipline of
the same, (as far as he is or may be concerned,) contained in her Injunctions,
Canons and Rubricks; one who as strictly observes the Fasts and Festivals of
the Church, as they are solemnly bid, and the lawful Commands of the Ordinary.

Which Sons of the Church, may be also considered as Clergy or Laymen; and
these again as Private-men, or Magistrates, and Members of Parliament, (as you
your self are;) whom though I am not sit to advise or instruct when you sit on
that Bench; yet whilst you are yet at your Country House, you have given me no
Reason to question, but that my Counsel, as mean as it is, will challenge its
Welcome. Tertul. ad Meant.
Non tantus Ego sum ut vos alloquar; veruntamen and gladiatores persectissimos,
non tantum magistri, sed etiam idiotae adhortantur de longinquo, ut saepe de
ipso populo dictata suggesto profuerint;) For according to these differences of
Orders and Degrees, a different Respect will be expected from them, in the
present case of our debate.

Lastly, We must consider what it is, to Respect and Honor the King and his
Religion, and in what this Honor consists. And this is either internal or
external; the former consists in a due esteem of the Person and Thing so
Honored and Respected; and the latter in a suitable external Behavior toward
them; and both the one and the other are to be paid to the King; both the
internal, by maintaining an high esteem of him in our Hearts; and the external,
by behaving our selves so, as may best express that i^ward esteem we have of
him, and propagate it in others, with whom we converse: For our Most Gracious
Prince may justly require of us, as Saul did of Samuel, 1 Samuel 15 30.
That we should Honor him before the People; for as Kings are Gods by
deputation, so are they in some sense to be honored as God; and accordingly,
as we are to Honor God, 1 Cor. 10.31
Whether we Eat or Drink or whatsoever we do, by doing all to his Glory; that
is, so as to beget in others the highest esteem of him, and such as becomes his
transcendent Glory; so must we Honor his Vicegerent, by doing all things,
which we lawfully may, without intrenching upon God's Honor, for the King's
Glory, whereby we may beget and propagate in others, such an high esteem of
him, both as a Christian and Prince; such a due Veneration of his Royalty and
Religion, as becomes his supreme Dignity and his Christian Virtues.

The Terms of the Question being thus distinguished and explained, I proceed to
give a distinct Answer to the same, in these following Conclusions. 1 st. Every
Man, 1.
of what Rank or Order soever, is bound in Conscience to keep close to the
Religion which he verily believes to be True, which the Question it self
supposes. There always have been, there are, and there ever will be differences
in our Judgments, till there be none in the Faces of Men; only let them be
Sincere, Innocent and Inoffensive; which they will then be, when our
Conversations are all of a piece, and we delight to serve the Will of God
entirely and sincerely, and to attend upon his Providence without any
Reluctance or Disturbance, so as to bring our Wills and all our Actions, Ends
and Designs into a compliance with it, duly considering that we came into this
World by God's appointment, not to do our own Wills, but the Will of him that
sent us. When we devote our selves to the Will of God, as far as he has
revealed it to us, to serve it faithfully and entirely, and rest well satisfied
with the Wisdom of his Proceedings, Smith's Select disc. 437.
who determines all things by an eternal Rule of Goodness, we enroll our selves
in Eternity: For as Gods Kingdom is set up, Ibid. 473.
so may the Devil's Kingdom be pulled down, without the noise of Axe and
Hammers. We may then attain to the greatest Achievements against the Gates of
Death and Hell, when we most of all possess our own Souls in Patience, and
collect our Minds into the most peaceable composed and united Temper. The
motions of true practical Religion are like that of the Heavens, as silent as
they are swift: Though the motions of Grace are perpetual, yet are they soft
and gentle, and it acts most powerfully in them, in whom it acts most
peaceably. Every Person who owns any, pretends it to be the true Religion, like
Brutus and Cassius, Vbicunque ipsi essent, praetexebant esse Rempublicam; they
will allow none to be the True Church, but that of which they are Members; and
they will have the Gates of Heaven to be opened to none but themselves; and
allow no Wedding Garment, but such as is of their own Spinning: Ma^unt nullam
habere quam non suam, They had rather there should be no Religion professed in
the World, than that their own should not take place; and therefore a Man had
need count Doctrines and Opinions as well as Money after his Father; and if he
do so, he will find many of these (though never so fair without) to be
counterfeit within: And that whilst one is of Paul, and another of Apollo, and
a third of Cephas, there are but few of Christ: That these Distractions in
Religion are the Destruction of it, and that the conscionable part, which is
the Life of all True Religion, is lost in the Controversies of it. When there
is no mind of yielding on either side, there will be no end of Disputes, but
galling one another, of which the Apostle justly complains, Ephesians.4.2.
and persuades us rather to forbear, and forgive one another, as becomes the
Disciples of the Prince of Peace. Why should we show so much Violence in these
Points, of which we can have no certain Evidence? They are not Christians of a
sound Constitution, who labor under such Fits of unnatural Zeal; nor have they
their Conversation in Heaven: For this is not to Follow Peace with all Men,
Heb. 12.14.
and Holiness; without which none shall see God; who searches the Secrets of
the Hearts, and loves weak Sincerity better than strong Hypocrisy; which is the
Original of all such Unchristian Heats.

Every Man, as well the Prince as the Subject, is bound to stand up in his own
way, for the defense of that Religion, which he verily believes to be True. And
when the Foundations of Faith are shaken, either by Superstition or
Prosaneness, he who puts not out his Hand, as firmly as he can (with Justice
and Charity) to support it, is too wary, and may come to be condemned at the
last Day, for his Neutrality, and for having more care of himself than of the
Cause of Christ; and it may prove a wariness, which, in the end, will bring
more danger than it shuns. We think our selves therefore obliged to lay aside
the Rule of a late Philosopher of our own Country; That every Prince is God's
Interpreter, (and so consequently, That His Religion ought to be Ours:) For
except Contradictions could at the same time be true, it would make God the
Author of all the Religions in the World, of which there are many so called,
which are neither Pure nor Undefiled: But the Enquiry is, saving our own
Integrity, and walking Humbly and Uprightly with God, who hates Juggling, and
playing Fast and Loose, concerning a sort of Brotherly Forbearance and good
Manners; (to which Christ was never thought to be an Enemy.) Let us seriously
consider, what shall be done to that Religion, which the King desires to
honor, and which He embraces, as the best in his Judgment. To which I answer,

2 dly. That the True Sons of the Church of England, of what Quality or Degree
soever, ought not to have a less Respect for the King, for being of another
Church or Religion; because, as Dominion is not founded in Grace, so neither is
our Duty grounded upon having a Religion common, both to the King and his
Subjects. Neither will it suffice to say, That though we cannot pay him the
same high Respect that we would, if he were of our Church and Faith; yet we
will still be Loyal: For this High Respect is a main part of the Thing; and as
fast as this lessens and cools, the remainder of Loyalty will proportionably
grow fainter, as to its outward Exercise. And if Religion be once set up
against Loyalty, they will both be spoiled.

Though the Prince be of one Religion, and the People of another, yet he will
be Gracious if they are Loyal; and they may live very quietly together, if they
do their Duty to God and Him. The Elector of Brandenburgh is himself a strict
Calvinist, and most of his Subjects Lutherans; and a late Duke of Zell was a
Papist, and his Subjects of the Reformed Religion; and yet lived in all Love
and Concord, as we may do, I am sure, in this Kingdom, better than any People
in the World, if we are not wanting to our selves. And therefore he is neither
a Good Christian nor Subject; who does not do all things that are Lawful and
Honest, which his Sovereign expects or requires, with all Alacrity and Respect,
without Murmuring, Disputing or Repining: Or who would limit his Prince's
Pleasure where God has not done it? It Is no good Religion, whose Principles
destroy any Duty of Religion, or give any Disturbance to the Government, or
alienate the Hearts of his Subjects from the Supreme Governor. Ours, I am sure,
will not suffer it; nor matters it, what Religion any Man is of, that is a
Rebel. The Opinion of his Sect will neither satisfy the State, nor save his
Soul. Whatsoever is Peevish, Disrespectful, Unthankful, or Dispising of
Dignities, is against the Form of Sound Doctrine, which Christ and his Apostles
have taught us. Sedulius Hymn
Lex Christiana neminem suo jure aut dominio private, non eripit mortalia, qui
regna dat coelestia. And our Law is as clear as God's in this Point; Bract. de
Leg and Cons. l.^.8. n. 5.
Nemo de factis suis praesumat disquirere, multo minus contra sactum suum
venire, says the Learned Bracton, who was Lord-Chief-Justice Twenty Years
under Henry III. And therefore it is no new Law of new Judges, of a Popish
Prince's putting in, but the old Law of England. Nullus est qui ab eo factorum
aut rations exigere possit, Ibid.
aut poenas. It Is not Tyranny, Infidelity, Heresy, or Apostasy, that can
discharge the Subject's Duty to his Prince; as we are truly instructed in that
Excellent Book, which was formerly, and ought still to be read in our public
Schools, p. ^. v. 49, 50. and 65. ad 78.
called Deus and Rex. Neither Priest nor People must lessen their Respects to
the king, upon these, or any other Pretenses whatsoever. The deportment of the
Saints of God toward the persons of Princes, was always Humble, and their
Behavior Respectful. 1 Kings 1.23.
Nathan the Prophet bowed his Face to the Ground before David; the Mitre always
stooped to the Crown: And when the Prince sits on his Throne, the Prophet
himself must lie at his Footstool: Nay when Princes were themselves Unholy, the
Saints of God showed them all Respects imaginable; not as Sinners, but as
Sovereigns. Saul was none of the best of Princes to any, especially to David,
(to whom he could never afford a good Word) and yet David calls him My Lord the
King: and that not out of Flattery and Courtship, 1 Samuel 24.8.
but of Loyalty and Duty: Nor had he behaved himself like a Saint, nor a Man
after God's own Heart, if not like a Subject, and been afraid to speak evil of
Dignities; the worst of which, even Pharaoh himself, was of God's raising up,
and ought to be to his Subjects as an Angel of God, in Mephibosheth's Judgment:
Nay the Immortal King calls them Mortal Gods. 2 Samuel 19.27
I have said ye are Gods (tho Devils in Practice;) they are Fountains and
Objects of Honor; Ps. 82.6.
Nero as well as Augustus, Julian as well as Constantine; not as Holy (for
Dominion is not founded in Grace) but as Supreme; not for their Goodness, but
for their Greatness; for they are at worst more worth than Ten thousand of us:
They are the Lord-Treasurers of Heaven, 2 Samuel 18.3.
put in Places of more Trust and Honor than other Men; they arc entrusted with
our Estates, liberties and Lives, with our Religion and Souls; they are the
Churches Nursing-Fathers, and God's Vicegerents, his Prime Ministers: And who
may say to them, Eccl. 8.4.
What do thou? It Is not who dares say, but who may lawfully or ought to do
it, with Impunity? For so Elihu Interprets it. Job 34.18.
Is it sit to say to a King, Thou art Wicked, and to Princes, Ye are Ungodly?
It is not only unsafe, in respect of the danger, but it is an unsanctified and
sinful Saying; it is damnable and next to Blasphemy; it is a Wickedness against
God, and a Wound to our own Souls. Let the Powers set over us be what they
will, we must suffer them, and not attempt to right our selves. And therefore
Tertullian boasts with Confidence, that when Pescenius Niger in Syria, and
Clodius Albinus in France and Brittany, rebelled against Septimius Severus (a
Bloody and Cruel Emperor,) and pretended Piety and Public Good, yet none of
the Christians joined with either. The Thebaean Legion, in the Eighteenth Year
of Dioclesian, suffered themselves to be cut in Pieces every Man, 6666. in
number, by Maximianus the Emperor: No Man in that great advantage of Number,
Order and provocation, listing up their Hands except it were in Prayers: And
the Christians under Julian (tho an Apostate from his Religion) had Arms for
him, but none against him; though he brought the Commonwealth it self, as Well
as the Church in danger. The only diversion they gave to his damnable Counsels,
and Deligns, was their Prayers and Tears; which as it was St. Paul's, Faith, is
still an Article of the Christian Religion, to which great Truth and Duty none
has born, or ever will bear, g^^^^^^ ^^st^mony than the Church of England. No
Man of any Learning or Religion, in her Communion, will ever say or do any
thing against the Honor or Interest of his Prince; for it is God's Power in
the Supreme Magistrate, be it good or bad: And therefore whosoever rebels
against him, rebels against the Power and Dispensation of God; if he use the
Power for Destruction, which was given him for Edification, I have nothing to
do, but something to suffer; let God take care, if he please: We had better
suffer Inconveniences from one, than from every one. Religion without mixaures
of Ambition and Interest, works no violent effects on the State; and therefore,
when the Jewish Empire was destroyed, and they were carried captive into
Babylon, God commanded them to seek the Peace of the City, whither he had
caused them to be carried Captives, and to pray unto the Lord forit, J^r. 29.7.
for in the Peace thereof shall ye have Peace; i. e. they Were to minister to
the public, peace as Subjects and Servants, by paying a cheerful Obedience to
the Commands of the king of Babylon, and observing his Laws, though Contrary to
their own. There was no Law of the Romans by which Christ could have been put
to Death, and yet He suffered patiently and threatened not, 1 Pet. 2.19, 20, 21.
leaving us an Example that we should follow his steps: And accordingly the
Primitive Christians took their Lives in their Hands, to Fight the battles of
Pagan and Tyrannical Emperors, and patiently laid them down at last, rather
than make or countenance any Resistance against them; and if ever we learn
Purity of Doctrine or Innocence of Life, it must be from them, and from the
Councils of the Church, who for Twelve hundred Years, taught no other Doctrine.

Tertullian prayed for Domitian, as great a Tyrant as he was, That God would
give him a long Life, secure Empire, stout Armies, faithful Senators, and all
that his Heart could wish. They were subject to their Temporal Lords, and
honored them for his sake, who was their Eternal. And he who has read
Cardamus's Encomium Neronis will find, that the worst of Princes do much more
good than harm; and that none of them ever endeavored the Destruction of their
own Subjects; and yet if they did, and the People should be vexed into the Sin
of Rebellion, by such a temptation bigger than their strength, it may be, God
would cut him off, and yet punish the People for their Rebellion too. As the
Prince does not get his Authority over us by his virtue, so neither can he lose
it by his Vice; he does not Rule precariously over us, but by the Gift und
Grace of God. God alone is the Supreme Lord and Governor of our Consciences, in
all cases; Sherlock of Relig. asserts p. 144
and to pretend his Authority for disobeying our Governors, when we have it
not, is like counterfeiting the King's broad Seal to justify a Rebellion: Nor
is it any sign of a good Conscience to censure others, especially our
Superiors, for a bad one. But alas we have too much reason to complain, that
Christian Religion is fallen from this its Primitive Purity, and made to favor
that, which it formerly looked upon as Capital, and to deserve no better Wages,
than Death; its Sacred Name is now applied to every Humor, is not to every
Sin, which will be a Crime more unpardonable in us, than in any People under
the Sun; for God has given our King an Imperial Crown, and a Head sit to wear
it; a Sword and Scepter, and an Hand sit to manage them; and which is the
greatest Blessing of all, a gracious Heart, inclinable to do his Subjects all
the Good they will suffer him to do; his Piety and Pity are equal to his Power,
and his Throne is established in Righteonsuess: He has been long Afflicted
himself, Prove. 25.13.
and is not now to learn how to pity his Afflicted Subjects; he know what it
was to bear the Cross before ever he came to wear the Crown; he has selt the
smart of the Rod upon his own back, and the more he has been injured and
oppressed himself, the readier is he to pardon others, and the more unwilling
to punish them with Severities, whom he judges to be of truly tender
Consciences; and why should we like his Throne the worse, for being the Seat of
Mercy? God, to his own Glory, and our Comfort has miraculously preserved him
from his and our Enemies; let him not complain, that he is wounded in his
Honor, even in the House of his Friends. It will not legitimate an ill Word or
Action, though it should happen to be spoken or committed in defense of the
Truth, Christ would not suffer St. Peter to violate the Magistrate's Authority,
in wounding one of his Officers, no not to guard him, who was Truth it self; he
applauds not his Zeal, but reprehends his Rashness. God needs not our Sins to
serve his Concerns. I wish those who profess themselves the Churches greatest
Votaries, would frequent her Prayers daily, and study her Articles and
Doctrines, as much as some of your Fellow Members do the Journals of their
House, and then they would soon be satisfied, That though the King should
invade our Rights (of which he has given us no Jealousy) yet would it be no
ground for us to invade his, in whom the Public Happiness of these his
Kingdoms does consist; let us therefore never dispense with our Loyalty to
serve our worldly Ends; for if Honesty and Integrity be the best Policy, (as
all good Men believe it) our best and most Christian Course will be, to prefer
our Duty and Conscience before any Earthly advantage what soever, in Prospect
or Possession.

Let the Roman Catholic Religion be represented to you under any frightful
Circumstances whatsoever; let me request you to consider nevertheless, that it
is not impossible for a good, conscienious and well-meaning Man to turn Papist.
Men of good Understanding and of great Integrity, may as well be deceived as
Mr. Chilling worth was, who once thought that our Religion, of the Church of
England, was not a safe way to Salvation, though he died of another and better
Judgment: And why may not others, as Prudent, Pious and Conscientious Men as
he, be deceived and misled into Popery, by Men better skilled and instructed in
the Controversies than they are? They are Christians still, though crring ones,
and Members of the Catholic Church as well as we; and can their errors in
Judgment, which are injurious to none but themselves, forfeit their Civil
Rights? Or those in Practice, except they be such as are destructive of humane
Society? Would not the Primitive Christians, do you think, have been well
contented that their Emperors (if they had been of the same Communion of Rome)
should, with all of the same Communion, have enjoyed an uncensur'd use of their
Religion, and been ready to make Addresses of Thanks for the peaceable
Enjoyment of their own? Let the same mind be in you as was in them, and that
will adorn your Christian Profession. We cannot but bewail it as our great
Calamity, and a just Punishment of the last Age's Disloyalty, which most
horridly Murdered the best of Kings, at Noonday, before the Gates of his own
Royal Palace, and banished his Royal Progeny, and drove them into Foreign
Parts, to seek for that safety from others, which their own Unnatural and
Blood-thirsty Subjects would not afford them. That our Gracious King was then
tempted above measure, and has since joined himself to the Roman Church, and
lives in the Practice of a different Worship from us. But since God, in his
infinite Wisdom, has permitted it to be so, it is our Duty to acquiesce
therein, and behave our selves toward him so, as may be most consistent with
his Honor and our Duty, in the present Circumstances; and that the rather,
because we may be well assured, that our Gracious Sovereign had no Design nor
Interest to serve in the changing of his Religion, but an eternal one in the
saving of his Soul. To embrace a Religion, when it was decry'd, and kept down
by Penal Laws, is, in the Judgment of Charity, a great Argument of Sincerity
and Christian Resolution; when it was s^culi reatus, the greatest National
Crime of which he could have been guilty: To embrace a Religion when it was
every where spoken against, out of Fashion, and decry'd: When a Man follows
Christ to Jerusalem in Triumph, he may be an Hypocrite; but certainly if he
follow him to Golgotha, as he is going to the Cross, you have reason to believe
him a Sincere Disciple. Our Gracious Sovereign's joining himself at such a time
to the Church of Rome, when it brought his very Tule to the Crown in question,
and made his Life insecure and uneasy, was an instance of his, Gallant and
Great Soul, and much resembled on the part of the Person, the courage of the
First Christians, who were well aware, that in the very Prosession thereof,
they bid adieu to worldly interest and Tranquillity. This be^ing apparently
done out of no lower Principle, than the Glory of God, and the Salvation of his
own Soul; though not the Deed, yet inslead of it, the Sincere Will is
favorably accepted with God, and should be so with all good Men. Seeing it is
an Observation of Lactantius and St. Augustine concerning a Religion Infinitely
worse, that Almighty God was pleased to take kind notice of the honest Meanings
of those grossly mistaken Worshippers; for though an Erroneous Conscience could
not bind to the Act, yet if after all possible due Enquiry, it act Erroneously,
it does not certainly bind to Punishment, God winked at the days of Ignorance,
especially when accompanied with that Integrity of Heart, of which God gives
such an acquitting Character in the Case of King Abimelech; and if this were
not so, it would go ill with the Men of the highest Intellectual and Moral
Virtues, who confess themselves to be as truly short of being perfectly free
from all Sins of Ignorance, as they are from those of Frailty. When thus much
has been said, concerning his Majesty's Religion, it may be added, That his
Change proceeded, not merely from an easy Well-meaning, but from Arguments,
however they be less weighty to us, which had prevailed with many Wise and Good
Men, and had an advantage, perhaps, in his Case, from some Early Doubts, hardly
to be avoided in that Conversation, into which the Rebels (who had impudence
enough to call themselves English Protestants) had driven him, as I before told
you, against whom, and not against our Gracious Sovereign, should the
disrespects of all the True Sons of the Church of England be turned. The King
thinks us in the wrong and so pities and prays for us, That God would bring us
into the right Way; and it is a groundless and uncharitable Jealousy, that he
will ever hurt us, because it would neither be for his Honor nor Happiness, to
make them miserable who have always been his best Fric^ds; such mischiefs may
be feared by some, but will never be felt by any. Let us rather depend upon
God's wise and gracious Providence, in the use of Lawful Means, and put our
Trust and Confidence in his Power and Goodness, not doubting but: he ^areth for
us, rather than be jealous of our King without Cause; and so far as God sees it
conduce to his Glory and our Good, he will deliver us from all our Fears: Let
us commit the care of our Religion, Lives and Estates to him. And, indeed,
Where is our Faith, if we will not trust him, with the defense of it, but seek
to prop it up, and support it by base and unwarrantable Arts, as if every thing
were lawful that tends to keep out Popery? This will cast such a Reproach and
Insamy upon our Religion, as can never be wiped off; it will open the Mouths
and sharpen the Pens of our Enemies, shall we take more Liberty to our selves
than we will allow the King? What safety can our Sovereign expect, if he cannot
be allowed the free Exercise of his own Religion without his Subjects repining?
What Reputation can he have abroad, or what Reverence at home? Is this to
provide things honest in the sight of all Men? Will this put to Silence the
Ignorance of Foolish Men, to turn our Religion into a Cloak of Maliciousness,
to prove our selves Wolves in Sheeps Clothing? Cannot we abhor Idols, without
flying into his Face, who is the Image of God upon Earth? Is this to keep
Innocence, and to take heed to the thing that that is Right? Is not this rather
the ready course to create in him, and all the World besides, an ill Opinion of
us and our Religion? We may be just and dutiful to the King, without being
unfaithful to God; and if we be so, our Religion will not only keep its Ground,
but make new Conquest, and spread it self further in the World; nor shall any
Policy of Men or Devils be able to root it out; Number. 23.23.
there will then be no Tnchantment against Jacob, nor Divination against
Israel. The King thinks his own to be the True Religion, and that God requires
him indispensibly to believe and profess it, and to endeavor the Propagation
of it too, by all Lawful means among his Subjects, but not to make Sacrifices
of them that refuse it; because the using of such cruel and unlawful Means to
that purpose, were apparently destructive of that Salvation, which he hopes to
obtain by embracing the Roman Catholic Religion; to which, if he can win Men
by Arguments and Persuasions, or any other Allurements of his own Promotions,
he does that Religion all the Right and Service he can, without wronging ours,
(to which his Priests may modestly tempt him) without any the least violation
of his own Sacred Engagements to us, which his innate Clemency and Goodness
abhors in so high a degree, that he is found to be Temptation Proof against it:
To conclude this Point therefore, I say,

The Common Layman, whose Education, Assection and Practice may denominate him
a True Son of the Church of England, as he has learned in his Catechism, to
Honor and Obey the King, and all that are put in Authority under him; so he
has been taught by the Ministers of this Church, that this is his Duty, what
soever Religion the King be of: And though he hears his present Majesty be of
another Communion, he thanks God and the King, for the liberty he has to
Communicate with the Church of England. He takes care of himself and his
Family, that they may serve God after this way, which some call Heresy: But he
is, it seems, well assured and satisfied of the Truth and Safety of it: He
pities and prays for them that are in Error, but will not revile, affront or
abuse them; nor will he assist in Riots or Tumults, to disturb even the Public
Exercise of any Religion, wherever his Majesty things sit to appoint it.
Where the King's Religion is publicly exercised, he has neither Wit nor
Religion, who does not abstain from all rude and ind^cent Disturbance or
Assronts. I am no Apologist for the Roman Worship. But since the King is
pleased, in some places, to protect those of his Communion, in the Public
Exercise of it (as he justly may) for any Private Persons to disturb them, is
a piece of Rudeness to him, inconsistent with that Honor, which upon so many
accounts we are to pay him. Besides that, it is a piece of Profaneness, for
any, without Authority, to interrupt Men, whilst they are Worshipping God, after
that manner which they think the best: Nor can his Zeal against a false
Worship, justify him in any such unwarrantable Attempts, whilst he has no
Authority to reform or correct them; that being the work of Public Power and
not of Private Spirits. Whilst therefore the King is so Gracious as to protect
us in our Churches and Offices of Worship, let us not be so rude and
ungrateful, as to assault or disturb those of his Communion, in their Private
Oratories, least we provoke him to deprive us of our greater Privileges, for
envying him and those of his Communion. Alas, no True Son of the Church of
England will be guilty of this; he will neither be so unthankful nor so unholy;
nor will he go about with Lies and frightful Stories, and false News, to
disquiet his Neighbors or disturb the Government, nor make Scandalous
Reflections upon those that are in Authority. He will leave the Government of
the World to God and the King, and be careful to do his Duty to both, in that
State of Life to which he is called.

And if more Respect than this be required of them, that: have more and better
Breeding, and are of an higher Quality. I do not think that the Roman
Catholics themselves, will complain for want of it; but will rather gratefully
acknowledge the Respect and Kindness showed them in worse Times than these, by
the Gentlemen of the Church of England, even in the late Bloody days of Trial;
which has been so visible and observable, that another sort of Men (if it be
not a Scandal of Humanity to give them the Name of Men) have objected it to
them as a Crime; and, for that Reason, reckoned them Papists (at least) in
Masquerade (as they were then wont to speak.) This Respect, indeed, has been,
and is showed, rather to their Persons and Conditions, etc. than to their
Religion; and It is a Respect much becoming those, who would show themselves
True Sons of the Church of England: For their Religion, as well as their
Breeding, teaches them, To maintain a civil and amicable Conversation with
those of the King's Religion. I know no Reason to be angry with any Man,
because he sees not with my Eyes, or determines not with my Judgment, and so
consequently cannot be altogether of my Opinion; especially, since as they
differ from us, so we differ as much from them. Sure I am, our Religion obliges
us to a Catholic Charity as well as Faith, and an Universal Civility to
distinguish between the Person and his Errors or Vices; so as to love and
behave our selves Civilly toward him, where we cannot affectionately embrace
his Opinion. Christianity is, doubtless, the best natured Institution in the
World. At its first appearance it taught the most barbarous Nations to depose
their Fe^ity, and become tractable and courteous; and where it was once
heartily entertained, the World admired to see how civil and obliging those Men
were become, who before their Conversion were morose and inhospitable Pagans or
Jews. It was a great fault of tho Jews, for which they are severely branded by
Juvenal and Tacitus, That they were peevish and inhospitable to all that were
not of their own Religion, so as to refuse them the most common Courtesies of
telling them their Way, or directing them to the Refreshment of a common
Spring. Nec monstare vias, ^adem nisi sacra colenti: We ought then to make it
appear to the World, Juvenal.
that ours is a better Religion, by being better natured our selves; and that
we are the best Catholics, by expressing and practicing a Catholic Charity,
Joh. 13.35.
which of all other is the surest Note of a True Church. We ought to show our
selves quiet and obliging Neighbors to those Romanists, who dwell among us;
especially since both the Honor of our Religion and of our King requires it
from us: Incivility, upon the account of their differing from us in Religion,
being inconsistent with the Obligations of Christianity or Gentility, and a
Rudeness to the King's Majesty, of whose Communion they are, and whom we are so
far to Honor, as to pay all the Respects him, and to all such as he esteems,
that our Religion will indeed permit; much more all that it so strictly injoyns.

To speak next of the Cergy-men, as concerned in this Case, to whom indeed it
is so much a Case of Conscience, that it leaves them less Room than other Men,
for the Exercise even of their Christian Prudence: For, they, who are Priests,
promised at their Ordination, all faithful Diligence to banish and drive away
all erroneous and strange Doctrines, contrary to God's Word; and the Bishops at
their Consecration in like manner: And farther, that they will call upon and
encourage others to do the same; among which our Articles have reckoned many
Doctrines, now taught in the Roman Church, and every Clergyman licensed to
Preach, has (as the 36th. Canon requires) acknowledged, by Subscription, under
his own Hand, that every thing contained in the 39. Articles is agreeable to
the Word of God; and consequently, he must acknowledge, that many Romish
Doctrines are erroneous and strange Doctrines, repugnant to the Word of God, as
being so declared in those Articles; those therefore are evidently such
Doctrines, as he promised at his Ordination, to be ready with all faithful
Diligence, to banish and drive away: And is he not then bound in Conscience to
do this, in his Public Sermons and Private Discourses, as he has a good
Occasion and Opportunity? Is he not bound in Conscience, at convenient Seasons,
to show the Error and Danger of such Doctrines, without so much as naming those
who think more favorably of them, saving all Respect due to the King, when he
has not only Liberty granted him, but is required and directed by his Majesty
himself so to do? For in his Majesty's Directions for Preachers (which was sent
us by his Command,) and we accept with all Thankfulness, Dir. 3. He bids us
assert the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, from the Cavils
and Objections of such as are Adversaries to either. This resolves the Case of
Conscience; and as to Christian Prudence, his Majesty has been graciously
pleased to give excellent Directions as to that Case too, bidding Preachers
thus to vindicate the Church of England, when they arc occasioned by Invitation
from the Text they Preach upon; or that in regard of the Auditory they Preach
to, it may seem requisite and expedient so to do. Thus to Preach, That the Pope
or Church of Rome is not infallible, and that the Pope has no Authority or
Jurisdiction within these Realms, is expressly determined by the Church of
England, Art. 19. -- 37. And our Parliaments have in all Ages, as well before
the Reformation as since, expressed their just detestation of the Pope's
Pretensions to it, as appears by the Stat. of Carlisle, and by that of
Provisoes made 25. Edv. III. and by many more in King Henry VIII's Reign, who
was both Parliamentarily and Synodically invested with the Supremacy, in all
Canses, Spiritual as well as Temporal, (not that he had Power of Mission or
Ordination, but of Permission and Ordering Men, so sent by the Church, to
Preach the Gospel in his Dominions,) which was legally and essentially Inherent
in the Crown before, the Kings of England being Supreme Ordinaries, by the
ancient common Law of this Land, of which those Statutes were not Introductory
but Declarative. And the very First Canon of our Church does require, That all
Ecclesiastical Persons, Preachers, etc. shall several times every Year, to the
utmost of their Wit, Knowledge and Learning, sincerely, without any Color or
Dissimulation, teach in their Sermons, etc. that no manner of Obedience and
Subjection, within his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, is due to any Usurped or
Foreign Power; but that the King's Power, within his Realms, is the highest
under God, to whom all his Subjects do, by God's Laws, owe most Loyalty and
Obedience, before and above all other Powers and Potentates on Earth. Now, if a
Preacher, whilst he is doing the duty of this Canon, shall call the Pope
Usurper, for claiming or exercising that Jurisdiction here, which belongs not
to him; and should be thought for that Reason, not to bear Respect enough to
the King's Religion, he would indeed but show so much the more Respect to his
Royal Person, and Regal just Power (as he is obliged to do by the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy,) and could be censured only for his Fidelity and
Loyalty to the King, such as becomes a True Son of the Church of England.

But in Points wherein we are not determined by Authority, or other
Obligations, but at perfect liberty to declare, or not to declare our Opinions;
in these we have the sairest, if not the only Opportunities for the Exercise of
our Christian Prudence: And therefore, for a Preacher of the Church of England
to affirm positively, or go about to prove in a Public Auditory or Assembly,
That St. Peter was never at Rome; or that the Pope is Antichrist; or that no
Man, in his Right Wit, can turn Papist; must necessarily, under our
Circumstances, be reckoned Imprudent, if not Impudent.

These and such like Matters of Private Opinion, which when Published, are like
to give Offense to our Superiors, and if forborne could give no Scandal to any;
Christian Prudence will unquestionably direct, such should now be forborne out
of Respect to the King, and the Roman Catholic Religion, because it is His: The
daily decay of solid and substantial Piety, is the most unhappy effect of
Christians foolishly Fighting in a Mist, and Scuffling in the Dark among
themselves, against the Interest of Peace and Charity; and scrambling so
eagerly and so childishly as they do, for Nuts and Cherry Stones; or things fit
to be put into the same Bag with them, as being of no value with Men of
Judgment: And therefore a Prudent Man will always take care to avoid, as much
as is possible, unnecessary Controversies; and in handling such as he thinks
necessary, I know not how he can give better proof of his Prudence, as well as
Obedience, than by observing his Majesty's Directions to Preachers, which give
a full Resolution to the Case in hand; viz. by doing it with all Modesty,
Gravity and Candor, without Bitterness, Railing, J^ering, or other unnecessary
and unseemly Provocation; and he who shall transgress these his Royal and
Religious Directions, will those of the New Testament too. He that shsll use
the Liberty granted him by his Majesty, for a Cloak of Maliciousness, and upon
such Occasions, or indeed any other, act the Merry Andrew in the Pulpit,
deserves not only the Fools Coat, but the Rod too upon his Back: From whence I
inser in the next place;

3 ly. That those of our Communion, especially the Clergy, ought neither to
rail nor rally upon the Religion which the King owns. Religion with a Man of
Sense and Affections, is a tender Point, and the Affronts done it, do as doily
touch him, and wound him more feelingly, than any offered to his dearest
Relations, or to his own Honor, as a Gentleman; and howsoever the one part
resents, and the other takes it, it is a diseased heat of the Mind, and not
Christian Zeal, to make any fort of Religion the sport of our Wits, and the
triumph of our Drollery: They who are guilty of it, may have espoused the
Fortune, but have not the Faith of the Church of England. In a good Cause, the
fairest Language is most advantageous; a modest and friendly Style suits best
with the Truth; which like its Author usually resides, not in the blustering
Wind, the shaking Earthquake, or the rangeing Fire, but in a soft and still
Voice. 1 Kings 19.11, 12.
III Language is doubtless a very preposterous Method of Persuasion, being
likely to raise such Clouds of Passion, as will obs^ure the clearest Arguments,
and render their force unperceptible to the provoked Reader or Hearer; on which
account I cannot but appland that saying of the Jews, Josephus Aniq. 1.4.
That we ought not to blaspheme any thing, which others venerate for a God.
Railing therefore against Popery cannot produce any good Effect, and at this
time it may easily produce many bad ones; among which none can be worse, than
the Contempt which it will throw upon the King himself, on whom all III
Language against his Religion, does ultimately redound to the debasing of him
in the esteem of his Subjects. When the Powers of the World were Heathen, the
Christians in their Apologies, do not presume to cxpose the Religion of their
Emperors to Contempt; but only with great Modesty and Deference, to vindicate
their own from the unjust Criminations of their Adversaries, as may be seen in
both the Apologies of Justin Martyr, and of Tertullian. And, as I think, it
would be a Comandly deserting of a very good Cause, if the Learned Men of our
Church should suffer the busy Romanists to charge her with Schism, Heresy, or
other Misrepresentation, without appearing in her just and necessary
Vindication, and cannot but applaud some of the late modest and strenuous
Apologies, which their Provocations have extorted from the Press: So I must
confess, that I cannot see any present Necessity of troubling our Pulpits with
these Controversies, the Mysteries of our Faith would be best held in a pure
Conseience, which is peaceable; 1 T^n 3.^
and by Practical Discourses we may best preserve our People from those Vices,
which only can provoke God to give them up to strong Delusions. And if we
perceive any of them warping toward Popery, there will be more hopes of
reducing and confirming than by personal Conferences, applied to their
particular Scruples, than by shooting at random at so great a distance in
general Harangues, which tends not so much to arm the Hearers against Popery,
as to possess them with an hatred of their Sovereign for professing it. Since
then we are bound in Duty to ab^^ain from every thing (which without a Sin may
be omitted) that tends to the Dishonor and Contempt of him, whom God and our
Religion oblige us to honor, I doubt not to conclude, That as Railing against
Popery was never lawful; so Preaching against it farther than by the Canons,
and his Majesty's own Gracious Directions, we are obliged to do, is at this
time unseasonable; and so far as it is prejudical to the Government, utterly
unlawful too: We least of all fear the Seduction of those Members of our
Church, who practice strictly that excellent Religion, which they and we
profess: The best Service then we can do to prevent the Growth of Popery, will
be to persuade Men all we. can to become better Livers and better Subjects;
upon which account, Practical Preachers will do the Church more Service than
Polemical, and the Government no Disservice, nor the King no Dishonor. It Is
below them, who think themselves in the highest form of Christians, to sit down
in the seat of the scornful; they are of their Father the Devil, wheresoever
such Changelings are found. 'Pray' tell me, and tell me no more nor no less,
than your own Consciences will tell you; Is this Fooling the effect of that
Faith which was once delivered to the Saints? Or is it not rather a wounding of
Christianity it self to the very Heart? Who of this Rank, if he were at
Constantinople, would make it his Business to tell the Great Turk, that his
Prophet Mahomet were an Impostor; or, as some Oppressed Greeks think him,
Antichrist; or to ridicule the Alcoran? And why will they make more bold with a
Christian Prince, and their Lawful Sovereign, than with an Insided? This
certainly is a foul Offense, and as much against a good Conscience, as
Christian Prudence. Why are Men more enraged against those who agree with them
in most things, than with them who different from them in all? Christ will not
give his Spouse a Bill of Divorce upon every Error and Mistake, much less
should we deny her to be our Mother, because she is not of our Mind, this will
justly bring our Christianity as well as our Prudence in Question. These are
not the Sons of the Church of England, but the Standard-Bearers of Sedition,
who take no care to govern their Tongues nor Pens, who have no regard to the
King or his Ministers, to Truth or Charity, Justice or Honesty; which whether
they intend it or not, has a derect tendency to the defaming of our yet
untainted Religion. They who will not offer up a Peace Offering to the
Magistrate, are none of our Communion; and it is to be hoped, That the Fathers
of our Church will correct those Ill nurtured Children, who are of such surly,
peevish and insolent Tempers, that others may not grow immodest by their
uncontrol'd Extravagancies. Authority must at any rate be redeemed from
Contempt, since the very Life of Government is Reputation; and if you teach the
Rabble to scorn the Religion of the Supreme Magistrate, they will not continue
long to reverence his Person or Authority. If you will prove him to be an
Idolater, they will soon reply, that St. John reckons such with Murderers,
Dogs, Sorcerers and Whoremongers, which love and make Lies, Rev. 22.15. And St.
Paul ranks them with Sodomites and Thieves, 1 Cor. 6, 9, 10. That they hate
God, Exodus 20.5. Desile the Sanctuary, Ezekiel 5.11. Commit Adultery with
Stocks and Stones, Jer. 3.9. Isa. 16.17. Worship Devils, Rev. 9.20. and that as
they shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor 6.10. so we are not to come
among them, Josh. 23.7. but they are to be utterly destroyed by Commission from
God, Exodus 22, 20. that they are Sons of Belial whom we are to smite with the
Edge of the Sword till they be utterly destroyed, Deuteronomy. 13.13, 14, 15. What is
all this, but Sedition under disguise of Zeal? Let the Men look never so
honestly, they drive on an Interest against Peace and Charity, and though Truth
may be justified of her Children; so it be done with Moderation and Judgment,
when Necessity compels us, or Authority calls us to it; yet they who can find
no better treatment for their Auditors, than to prove all Papists to be
Idolaters, (as if they had no saving Truths to Preach them, but such as are
full of disgraceful, saucy and insolent Reflections upon their Prince (which
has already cost this Nation so many Millions of Money, and such Rivers of
Blood, to the shame of Christianity it self) would be as ready (if they durst)
to join with some of their own Spirit in the Prayers, which were justly made
Treason, 1.and 2. Q. Mar. cap 9.
Anno 1. and 2. Q. Mar. cap. 9. That God would turn her Heart from Idolatry to
the True Faith, or else shorten her days, and take her quickly out of the way.
And the Act says, That never such a Prayer was heard, or read to have been used
by any good Christian, against any Prince, though he were a Pagan: And
therefore in abhorrence of the Crime, it condemns the Authors of such libellous
and malicious Prayers, together with the Procurators and Abetters of them, to
be guilty of High Treason: And so they are before God, who takes every Injury
done to his Vicegerents as done to himself; Satyrs are bad every where, but
worst in the Pulpit, be it in Prayers or Sermons; where Men are to speak the
words of Truth and Soberness, as becomes the Ambassadors of Christ, and not to
use any petulant Girding or Reflections upon any, much less upon the Father of
their Country; nor to dress up any of his persuasion in such indecent Forms, or
to make them appear far worse than they are; for this is as great a Sin as to
make Widows more desolate: We are in Conscience and Prudence obliged calmly and
modestly to inlighten the Minds of our Hearers, though they count us heavy Men
for our pains, rather than by expressing more heat than light, to thunder in
their Ears such dreadful Apprehensions of the Religion of our Prince, as may
claw their itching Ears, and raise their Humors and Passions into such a
violent Ferment, as to transport them into the pangs of some furious Zeal
against him, and all of the same Persuasion with him. Our Religion obliges us
to be jealous of every Thing or Motion which tends to the Disunion, either of
Subjects from their Sovereign, or of the People among themselves; which that it
may be permanent. and cordial, which is the only thing that can disappoint the
Designs and Counsels of our Enemies, nothing can conduce more to our present or
future Safety, than the deposing of all Animosities, Rancor, and Ill Will
against one another; upon the account of Differences in Religion, and the going
on cheerfully in the narrow Path that leads to eternal Life, without fighting
with every one that does not keep the same way, though he be also traveling to
the same place; which has such a spirit of Opposition, Contradiction, and
Pertinacy in it, as speaks Men to be of distempered Brains, turbulent Passions,
and corrupt Hearts, rather than of Tender Conseiences. That there should be so
many pretended Admirers and professed lovers of Peace, and so few Followers of it
in this Kingdom; so much noise of Religion, and so little Charity; and
especially that Christianity which is (...), a quiet and gentle Institution,
intended to soften Men's natural Asperities, should spend it self in those
Quarrels, which are the greatest diminution to its interest imaginable: That
the Holy Spirit should bring the Gospel down from Heaven in the shape of a
Dove; and that yet there should be no more stinging Serpents than the
Professors of it one to another; and that after more than Sixteen hundred Years
Preaching the glad Tidings of Peace, there should still be such distractions
and wranglings in the Church, such seditions and convulsions in the body
Politic, such sidings and divisions in every Town, and such jarring and
dissension as we see and lament in private Families; and that the warmest
Zealots should, by Enormities of this kind, run farther on the score of divine
Vengeance, than Turks and Infidels do, upon the bare single Security of being
Christians, are such prodigies in Manners as may justly startle the wisest of
Men, and force them to conclude, That the best Religion has the worst
Professors of it, and Pretenders to it in the World. Might not the Pagan, Turk
and Atheist, upon the sight of our manifold Heats, Violences and Intemperances,
which are too visible in Christendom, reasonably cry out, Where is now their
God? and where is their Religion? Are these the Men that pray for Peace, or do
they ever mean to purchase it? Are not their Practices the great shame and
confutation of their Professions? and is not the Name of God blasphemed through
their Miscarriages? Is Christianity become an Enemy to Humanity, and turned
Incendiary? Is Zeal grown such a Cormorant as to eat up Charity? And are the
Elect of God, who should put on Bowels of Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Col
3.12, 14.
and above all, Charity, which is the Bond of Perfectness, grown so fierce, as
to fly upon every thing which Custom and Education has not rendered familiar to
them? Are they impatient with all who do not see with their Eyes? and will they
set themselves in battle array against all who are not Wise enough to be of
their Judgments, and damn all who are not of their Opinions? Could there be
such needless and endless Contentions among them, if they were not carnal? Is
this to sight under Christ's Banner, who was the Prince of Peace? Does not this
incontinency of Disputing make Rents in the seamless Garment, rather than
Reformation? If they were as sollicitous to save their own and their Peoples
Souls, as they are to propagate their Opinions; they would not trifle away and
lavish that time and pains in needless Controversies, in which they might make
their Peace with God and Men; nor take more pains to prove the Pope to be
Antichrist, than they do to prove themselves to be Christians, or make others
so; nor tread true Piety under Foot in scrambling for that which has nothing
of it, nor like it, but the Name. Would not their Congregations be more edified
by the Church-Catechism than a Controversy? Or how many have you seen healed
by being lead into these troubled Waters, though moved by the best Angels of
the Church? No doubt but it is a Truth which the Mufti told his Grand Seignior,
That where the public Exercise of Religion is allowed, it is judged that a
liberty is granted to defend all the distinguishing Points of it, without
reflecting on that of the Prince, (which would be more unpardonable in us than
in any Men in the World, because he is graciously pleased to act with us upon
the Square, and forbids his own Preachers to make any tart reflections on
ours.) Now the fault too common is the intemperance of most warm Disputers for
Religion; who if once they begin to declaim or write against any thing, think
they can never make it odious enough; and that they may defame it the more
effectually, they will hale and force Consequences as on a Rack, to confess
what the Principle never meant, and to catch greedily at some violent Man's
over-shooting both the Cause and the Communion, and to lay this to the Charge
of the whole Church, though it professes never so solemnly against that private
Doctor's Opinion; whereas as great Champions as they would be thought to be for
the Church of England, they ought not, in Point of Honor, to take every
advantage against her Enemies, nor to put every thrust so home as they do, but
restore them in the Spirit of Meekness, nor to throw dirt in their Faces to
disgrace them; (which as the Purity of our Church abhors) so the more they
handle, the more it will defile them. This is not to walk in Wisdom to them
that are without, nor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace.

There is yet another thing worse than barely calumniating the King's Religion,
and that is disturbing of the solemn Exercise of it, by Routs and Riots; which
would be so high an indecency, and so opposite to the gentleness of Christian
Religion, that about the time of the first general Council of Nice, under
Constantine the Great, it was made a Canon in the Council of Illiberis, Can. 60
That if any one should, out of any immoderate transports of Zeal, deface,
demolish or break down Idols or Images, and be thereupon slain (because it is
not commanded in the Gospel nor practiced by the Apostles) that they should not
be reckoned in the number of Martyrs: Nor need I remind you, that the Idols
were of the Heathens, and that Christian Religion was not only the private
Religion of the Emperor, but publicly established by him throughout the
Empire; and yet while the other had but a bare Toleration from the Emperor, and
Christianity had the Law of the Land on its side, yet the Holy Church
discouraged her Sons from injuring it by violence. The prevention of railing
against the Emperor's Religion by the Lutherans, was the wise care of the Diet
of Ratisbone, Anno Dom. 1532. which was in part made up of Protestants,
Electors, Free-Princes and Hans-Towns; 'twas their final Accord, That the
Ausburg Confession should be allowed, so that nothing was taught or written but
what was contained in that Confession. As to raillery upon the Religion
professed by our Prince; as it is bad Manners and worse Religion, so it can
never be good Wit; which though it be allowed its Seasons, yet this is none of
them, it is as much as a Man can well bear, to see it practiced upon Virgil the
Prince of Poets.

4 ly. The Church of England Men ought not to grudge the Privileges allowed by
the King to those of his own Communion; he does not desire that they should
stand upon equal Terms of public Privileges and Advantages of the tasting of
the Sweet of the Church Revenues, but only that they should lift up their Heads
above the danger of the Laws, and he be able to make life of their Services in
the State. He neither takes away our Rights, nor withholds his Favors from
any Men of our Persuasion, who cannot pretend to deserve them without blushing.
None ever found discouragement from our Gracious Sovereign upon the score of
their Religion, but have been advanced and esteemed according to their several
Capacities and Qualifications, so long as he found Charity and Unity maintained
amongst them; and why then should our Eye be evil, because he is also good to
some of his own? A Christian Magistrate owes something more than Protection to
the Religion which he sincerely professes, and to them that profess it with
him; they may reasonably expect his Countenance and fair quarter, if not hope
to enjoy some Provision under him; for certainly he may and ought to do all
that he is able and has opportunity to do, on this side of force and injustice
to help them; a Nursing-Father he is to them as well as us, and obliged to the
Protection and Tuition of all his Children, and not to suffer them to fare the
worse for their Zeal, either toward God or himself: And methinks we should have
more Wit, Honesty and Charity, more Modesty, Equity, Honor and Justice, more
good Breeding and ingenuous Education, if not more Religion than to repine at
it; for this implies such a want of them all, as any ingenuous Man must needs
be ashamed of. Is it not as fit the King should choose his Ministers, as we our
Servants? Whatsoever a Prince does, he is to be presumed to do it with great
Reason; his Actions are manifest, but his Thoughts secret; and it is our Duty to
tolerate the one, and not murmur against the other. The Results of his Councils
are like the current of a great River, we see their Streams but not the
Fountain from whence they flow; Reason of State is Reason of Law, though we see
but the plain side of that great Watch, within which all the Springs and Wheels
are enclosed and hid, yet we find their Motions regular. The King is our
Lawgiver, and his Conscience is his; and if it dictate these things to be
necessary, though he be deceived, they are become so to him, and by no means to
be declined by him, but he must follow his own Conscience; and if he mean it
for good, he has no reason to doubt but God will take it so, and all good
Subjects will pay him an Obedience of Acqutescence, if not of Conformity; we
have reason to believe he will do nothing beneath his own Honor, and the just
Interest of his People. And therefore St. Augustine in his Book against Faustus
the Manichee says, That a Christian Soldier, C.75.
fighting under an Heathen Prince, may lawfully pursue the War, or execute the
Commands of his immediate or superior Officers, in the course of his Service,
though he be not absolutely ^assured of the Justice of the one, or the the
Expediency of the other. And in the case in question it is no less evident, for
Sovereign Princes have Power to change the external Regiment of the Church. A
Christian Magistrate as such, is a Governor in the Church. Bramhall Repl. 229.
The Prerogatives and Preheminencies of Power and Greatness, which are involved
in the fundamental conception of Sovereignty, are the essential Rights, and
inseparably annexed to the Sovereign, Jer. 20.1
for which he is accountable to God alone; and all Bishops are subject to the
Imperial Power, Ductor dub. 190, 250;.
who is to determine what Doctrines are to be Preached and what not, least any
should be licensed to barangue to the People in Seditious Libels. His Power is
by the Law of God, and so can have no Inferior Power to limit it. The Father of
the Family governs, not by the Law and Will of his Sons or Servants, but by
God's and his own; nor were the best Kings of Judah or Israel tied to any Laws;
nor is it the municipal Law of the Land, but the natural Law of a Father, which
binds him to preserve the Lives and Fortunes of his Sons or Subjects. The
Church is always a Minor and Vnder-age, and the King its Guardian; how then can
she expect to be backed or countenanced any longer (as she has hitherto been,
thanks be to God and the King) by his civil Authority, or enjoy the Revenues
and Privileges she has any longer, if the King's Courtesy be so soon
forgotten, to deny him or his the free Exercise of their own Religion, whilst
we are so warm in ours, under his Gracious Protection and Royal Bounty and
Provisions, is beyond all Shame and Reason? Princes have an happy time of it,
to serve such Humors, as if he reigned over us by Courtesy, and had no more
but the Name of a King. Does this express our Duty or Gratitude to God or Him?
We need not debauch the present Generation, who are too bad already, by
teaching them to make spightful and peevish Reflections on our Prince's
Actions. Shall the Privileges which he and his Royal Predecessors have granted
us, be used as Weapons to fight and rebel against him? Shall we deprive him of
his Prerogative, which the Law of God, as well as of the Land, has given him?
Is not the Church of Rome a true Church, both in it self and in our Judgment
too? And why should you deny your own Prince, who is a Member of it, the same
Liberty which you daily see, without murmuring, granted to the Ambassadors of
Foreign Princes and their Followers? Is it not by his Piety and Juftice that we
have the free Exercise of our own Religion, as by Law established, and the
advantages of public Assemblies, and the encouragement of such liberal
Maintenance? And have not the Ministers of Religion always obeyed the Imperial
Laws, even when they liked them not, not upon prudential Considerations and
Necessity, but by divine Appointment, declaring with the Sixth Council of
Toledo, That it was impiety to call in question his Power, Can. 14
to whom the Government of all things was certainly deputed by the divine
Judgment, and that, as well Bishops as Curates, and Ecclesiastics as Laics,
must be subject to them; and that the supreme Power may determine whatsoever is
left undetermined by God: Nay, Bp. Taylor's Case of Conf. 1.3.192.
that he can derogate by his Power from an ordinary Right, by changing his
Will, and making, the contrary Law, that he has the judgment of Discretion and
knows best, when it is fittest for him, to govern himself by Zeal, and when by
gentler Counsels. Is he not Head of the Church? and must his Members teach him
how to govern it? It is by the Ties of Religion, and not of Power, that he is
bound to keep the Churches Laws,; and the very Con^^ssions and Privileges made
to them by him and his Royal Predecessors, are as revocable as their Duty is
alterable; for Princes are so far from being obliged to perpetuate such Rights
that themselves have indulged, that it is a ruled Case among the Greek Fathers,
That a King may recall his Gift, Ductor dub. 1.3. p. 238
in case the Beneficiary prove ungrateful. I wish our Brethren, who are now so
stubbornly resolved not to join with their respective Bishops, in an Address of
Thanks to his Majesty, for his Morgaging of his Honor under the Broad-Seal of
England, in his late Royal Declaration, in the first place, To protect and
maintain them, in the free Exercise of their Religion, as by Law established;
and in the quiet and full enjoyment of all their Possessions, without any
molestation or disturbance whatsoever, would study this Case a little better,
than they seem to have done; and then they would highly approve it, as some of
our Fathers have done, as prudently penned; and such an acknowledgment of his
Majesty's signal Favors to the Church of England, and all her Members, as our
Gratitude and Duty indispensibly oblige us to pay. Can you have any better
Precedents than those of the Kings of Judah? Look throughout the sacred History
of the Old Testament, and you will every where find, that the King's Religion,
though often Heathenish, had the privilege to be publicly used; and though the
High Priest and Sanhedrim had a Power, which Moses called The Judgment of God;
yet these did not think it either their Duty or Right to suppress the Exercise
of Idolatry, whilst the King was contented with it, though it was so manifestly
contrary to God's own Law given them by Moses; and when a King, who Worshipped
according to Moses's Prescriptions, succeeded, neither the Great Council nor
People desired the false Worship to be suppressed, till the King himself self
commanded it; which is an Argument, that it proceeded from his High
Prerogative, which the Kings of Judah laid equal claim to with the Eastern
Monarchs, as the Israelues desired a King, according to the Nations round about
them; upon which Samuel recites a large rightful Power, which would belong to
their Sovereign. Did not Solomon put Ab^a^her from the Priesthood and put
Zadock in his room; and though the High Priesthood came to be put out of its
due Channel of Primogeniture, established by Moses, and was sold in our
Savior's time; (so that sometimes the High Priest was but annual) yet Christ
acknowledged Caiphas to be High Priest; Joh. 11.51. 1 Cron. 28.3.
and for the inferior Priests, David divided them into Twenty four Orders; so
that the applying of the priestly Power to such a time, was wholly the Act of
the civil Government. Jehosophat named a President for the Sanhedrim, as well
for matters of the Lord as for those of the King; and both Ezra, though not the
High Priest, 2 Cron. 19.11. Ezra 7 25. Neh. 13.8.
and Nehemiah, though not at all a Priest, acted by a Commission from
Artaxerxes, to execute the Laws' of God and the King; by which Authority
Nehemiah turned out one of the Priests: so that though the priestly Office was
a divine Institution, yet the applying and suspending that Authority was a part
of the civil Power. Christian Emperors made also penal Laws with relation to
Churchmen, the pains of which were Suspension or Deprivation, of which there
are so many instances, both in the Old Roman Laws and in the Capitulars, that
it is needless to insist on the proof of it, to justify his Majesty's late
Proceedings by his High Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Affairs, against an
eminent Prelate of our Church, which proves them Lawful without committing
Sacrilege, or incroaching on the spiritual Power of the Church. I need not tell
you that it was declared in the Convocation of the Prelates and Clergy of this
Kingdom (which make the representative Body of the Church of England) Art. 37.
Anno Dom. 1562. That whereas they have attributed to the Queen's Majesty, the
chief Government of all the Estates of this Realm, whether Ecclesiastical or
Civil; in all Cases, they did not give unto their Princes the ministering of
either God's Word or Sacraments, but that only Prerogative, which was known to
have been given always to all Godly Princes, in Holy Scripture, by God himself;
that is to say, That they should rule all Estates and Degrees committed to
their Charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain
with the civil Sword the Stubborn and Evildoers. Less Power than this as good
Subjects could not give unto their Kings, so more than this there has not been
exercised; nor, I believe, ever will be by our Gracious Sovereign. Such Power
as was vouchsafed by God to the Godly Kings and Princes in Holy Scripture, may
serve abundantly to satisfy the unlimited Desires of the greatest Monarch in
Christendom; and therefore how unpardonable are we to deny our King that Power
which is inseparably annexed to his Royal Diadem, and without which he would be
no King, but a Royal Slave in Golden Chains; for the King's, the Church's, and
our own, if not for the Cause's sake, let us not grudge Men of his own
Persuasion in Religion, the free enjoyment of any Favors which he is
graciously pleased to afford them; and that especially considering that the
occasion upon which such Privileges were formerly denied them, viz. the
Jealousy the Government had of their Sincerity and Obedience, now ceases; and
this brings me to say something more particularly,

5 ly. To your self and your fellow Members of this Loyal Parliament (whom I
find to be concerned in this Case also.) 'Twould be presumption in me to offer
to direct your Votes, otherwise than as a Divine, by reciting the advice of our
Blessed Savior, Whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, do ye even so
to them, and be ye wise as Serpents, but harmless as Doves; and such like
general Sentences, the particular application of which, I must in good Manners
leave to your own Christian Discretion; nor can they fail of making a good
application of them, who consider that our Blessed Savior by these
Hicroglyphicks taught his Disciples Innocence as well as Prudence, in times of
greatest danger, that they may be able to say with St. Paul, That they are pure
from the Blood of all Men; and that the Church of England, by appointing the
former Sentence to be read at the Offertory, on the 5th. of November and 30th.
of January, does thereby teach us, whether we have escaped a Danger or suffered
Affliction, not to be revengeful, but be rather ready to return Good for Evil.
That some severe Laws, which might have Reason when they were made, should by
common consent of all any ways interested, cease, when the Reason does
universally cease, was, I think, never denied by good Casuists or good
Statesmen. Now the chief Reason alleged, and the only justifiable one for
these severe Laws against Romanists, was the Jealousy the Government conceived
of their Affections, and the Apprehensions that their private Zeal for their
Catholic Religion would make them cool in their services to the Public, which
their employments would often require should be against their Principles; and
that they, relying on an external Power, were incapable of Duty and true
Allegiance to their natural Sovereign, and rightful Monarchs: Kings
Proclamation 12th. of Fevruary, 1686/7. But who now can plausibly suspect their
Faithfulness to the present King, or that they will be backward in his Service?
And whilst the Case stands thus, what need will there be of sanguinary Laws for
Imprisonment during Life, or Consiscation of Goods? Or for those Tests which
exclude the Peers of the Romish Religion from sitting in the House of Lords
according to their Birthright? Especially seeing these Latter were made upon a
mistake of Matur of Fact, whereas it has since appeared to all discreet Men of
the most unquestionable Loyalty, That the Popish Plot was of that perjured
Villain Oats and other subtiler Heads making, to serve their Faction and
Revenge against the Government: And as it is the noblest Ingenuity to own any
sort of mistake, so methinks it touches a Man's Reputation but softly, to
retract what he had formerly believed and acted, upon a charitable Persuasion
that Men would not be Perjured, who after were legally convicted for being
notoriously such; and besides this, it is no safe matter to alter the
Foundations of Government, and deface the Original of a Right, which in the
case of all Privileges of Peerage has been taken to be either Writ or Patent;
for if these must give place in any one instance, no man knows where it will
end, or whose course to turn, or be turned out of that Highest Court of
National Justice, may next come. In the Parliament of 41. when the old Loyal
Assurances were laid aside, and instead of the former, the Presbyterians Tested
Men, with their Covenant, they were not aware, that they made a President
against themselves for an Engagement; and the Ingag^rs did not long prospicere
neither; they little thought that they furnished their Masters of the Army with
a countenancing Example to break them all in pieces, and to vote them all
Useless. And therefore it is a rule of Wisdom as well as of Justice, a point of
Prudence as well as Consience, not to remove the ancient Landmarks; and it is,
as useful to the State as to the Church, what the first general Council
decreed, Let the old Vsages prevail; suitable to which was the establishing
Saying of the Peers long ago, Nolumnus matare Leges Angliae, We will not that
the Laws of England be changed: and certainly, pursuant to this Resolution, if
by any cross chance or accident a change have surpised the Government, a
Restitution to the former fettlement should soon be made, and that the rather,
because we may say of those sanguinary Laws, as his Majesty in his Royal
Proclamation in Scotland does 12th. February 1686/7 of the like made in the
Minority of his Royal Grandfather, That they have been continued of course
without any design of executing them or any of them, ad terrorem only; and sure
we are, that our severest Laws did not proceed from Ill Nature, any otherwise
than the best do ex malis moribus: And it is obvious to remark, that the True
Sons of the Church of England, have always been better natured, than to press
or countenance the execution of them in cases of mere Religion; and they have
accordingly (blessed be God) been very sparingly executed, unless when the
byt-blows of a powerful Faction, and no True Sons of the Church of England, or
some violent attempt of the Enemies thereof, have forced it; so sparingly have
they been executed, that it is an old Proverb of Reproach upon the Legislators,
that their Laws were only made in Terrorem, for Mormoes and Scarecrows: And if
they will serve for that purpose, and to preserve the good Seed, or hinder the
Enemies of our Church and State from sowing rebellious and treasonable Tares
among us whilst we are asleep, we desire no more. The Holy Church, which so
passionately desires the saving of Men's Souls, never thirsts after the
destruction of their Bodies. Some Laws indeed there are, made since our
Reformation from Popery, which threaten death to the Romish Clergy, who are
Natives of it, if they be found in this Kingdom. But though the Wisdom of the
Nation thought fit to enact them at that time, for the security of those
Protestant Princes, to whom the Romish deposing Doctrine is not Propitious, yet
was it Treason and not Heresy which those Laws made Capital. And since there
is no question but that a Prince of their Communion, dare trust himself in
their Hands, and neither desires nor needs such Security from them; there seems
now no need at all of their continuance. And as it would show a great Respect
to the King to repeal them, so it would be a seasonable Vindication of us from
that cruelty, which the Romanists have charged us with upon the account of
them. It has been, I am persuaded, a real Grief to all tender hearted
Protestants, whenever the exigency of State Affairs has occasioned the
execution of those sanguinary Laws; and it would be the best Evidence we could
bring to convince the World, that it was not the Religion but Treason of Romish
Priests that we detested, if we take speedy care that their Religion be no
longer Capital, now that it may so easily be separated from Treason. Perhaps
some Inciters to Rebellion, do buz in your Ears, That the King has no more
business for Parliaments, and intends to govern by a standing Army of his own
Persuasion; but you and I know the King loves and honors Parliaments, as the
best means for the Kingdoms safety, and his own satisfaction: And I know this,
of which you are a Member, has so many active and loyal Subjects in it, as
will oblige him by all that can be desired, for acknowledging and the
establishing of his just Prerogative, and for his own Ease and Satisfaction,
and the quiet of his Friends, of his Religion; and that his Majesty will be as
ready to secure our national Religion, Liberties and Properties. The present
Parliament Men, who are most of them True Sons of the Church of England, are so
far from envying the RomanCatholicks, the advantages they now receive as
rewards of their Loyalty, that they would with a most respectful, humble and
dutiful Emulation, even strive with his Majesty who should reward them most: He
having published it to the World in his late Scotch Proclamation, That of his
own certain Knowledge and long Experience, he knows the Catholics, that as it
is their Principle to be good Christians, so it is to be dutiful Subjects,
hazzarding, and many of them actually losing their Lives in the defense of a
Prince, though of another Religion, (ours he means) and maintenance of the
King's Authority, against all Violences and Treasons. It were the highest
Impudence to deny but that there were a great many noble, brave, loyal Spirits
of the Romish Persuasion, who did with the greatest Integrity, and without any
other design than satisfying their Consciences, adventure their Lives in the
War, and leave their Bodies in the Field for the King's Service. There were a
great many generous Souls among them, whom the greatest Temptations in the
World could not have perverted, or made to desert their King in the height of
all his and their Miseries. Among the rest, Sr. Arthur Ashion, a Romanist,
being turned out of the King's Army, with most, if not all, of that Communion,
to please the Rebellious Parliament, who charged him for having so many Papists
about him. This noble Royalist as well as Romanist, was solicited by the
Parliament to take a Commission for a Colonel of Horse, and to put in what
Officers he pleased of his own Persuasion; he accepted their Commission: But to
mapifest their villainous Hypocrisy, as well as his own entire Loyalty, he
immediately went upon his Knees, and delivered it up to the King; upon which he
and the rest of that Religion were readmitted into the Royal Army. Whence it is
evident, that they wanted not an Opportunity of joining with the Rebels, to
their own Advantage, had not their innate principle of Loyalty kept them steady
in their Allegiance; so that they can have nothing laid to their Charge worthy
of Death or Bonds. Why then should they not have room in his Kingdoms? Security
for their Persons and Estates, and Rewards wards for their Services? Why should
we grudge his Majesty's Mercy to others, which we reckon so great a Blessing to
our selves? Were they not our fellow Soldiers and Sufferers too? And what have
they done since to incense the King or the Government, or their fellow Subjects
against them? You wish they were of our Religion, and so do I too; but Men
cannot easily wear off the prejudices of their Education, and most of them have
sucked in their Religion with their Milk. It were very unjust and unnatural to
attempt by force to reduce them to our way of serving God, who are in a
co-ordination to us; this being to assume the Prerogative of the civil Power;
and against Justice, which must be an Ingredient even into the best Religion,
because it would be a contradiction to build Religion upon the ruins of that
which founds all Religion, Samar. revised 54, 55.
as Tertullian Argues. It were unjust for us, who are coordinate, to impose
upon others their Faith or Worship. Our Prince is not to be reduced to the Rule
of our Consciences. Into what shameless Straits will this immodesty of ours
reduce us? Can we have so little Wit and Loyalty who pretend to so much of
both? It is worse than Barbarous, to attack any People merely upon the account
of Religion, not repugnant to the light of Nature; for otherwise, Religion,
whose chief end is to preserve Mankind in Peace and Justice, would turn the
World upside down, and fill it with incessant Combustions and Massacres; for it
will be as reasonable that the Insidels and Indians should invade the
Christians upon that score as the Christians them, P. 58.
and then where will Depredations end? To enforce and drag others to the True
Religion, who are absolutely at their own difposal, neither is, nor can seem
decent nor expedient: You will find, Lactant. 1.5. C.19. St. Ambrose in Luc.
1.7. and St. Hillary and all the ancient Fathers of that Judgment, against
Compulsion in point of Religion; 1 Cor. 5.12.
and what have we to do to judge them that are without, says St. Paul? Julian
would not suffer Christians to be forced to his gentile Altars, Epist. 52. What
if they are displeased for not enjoying as much of the benefit of the King's
Restoration as we do? The liberty of Repining, is a charitable allowance to be
indulged them of course, whom Providence has denied what we enjoy. It Is an
unmerciful thing not to give Lofers leave to speak, and the World will talk of
them and us too at their own rate. What if some few of them show more heat than
becomes them, and grasp at things not sit for their Enjoyment? Is it not the
same case with us too? Why should the indiscretion of a few incense us against
the rest? If they do not all of them, at all times, carry the selves prudently,
let not their Allegiance be buried in Oblivion. If we either love the King or
the Peace of the Kingdom, we must behave our selves as becomes Men of
Conscience and Prudence in this tender Point. Bishop Bramhall in his
Replication to the Bishop of Chalcedon, says, That in Eight Tearstime, in which
he had the Government of Ireland, committed to him by the Earl of Strafford,
there was not one Roman Catholic who suffered Death or Imprisonment, or so
much as a pecuniary Mulct of Twelve Pence, for his Religion, upon any penal
Statute; and yet he was as True a Son of the Church of England and as Wise; and
the Lord Lieutenant as great a Martyr for his Religion and Loyalty; and both of
them as sit to be our Guides, in this Point, as the best Men now living. Stay
till they have offended and done things worthy of Punishment, and then spare
them not. Men as wise and as good as we, thought we might be safe without their
king in danger; and it seems highly reasonable that their having done amiss,
and not our Fears and Jealousus of it, that they will do so, should make them
punishable. The Laws made against Roman Catholics, are either as Rebels or
Papists: If as Rebels, what need of particular Laws for them more than others?
Why not the same Law to punish them and others guilty of the same Treason? If
any Papist be found guilty, let that Law act against him which is thought
sufficient, not only to Punish but to prevent Treason in all Men of
Antimonarchical Principles; and therefore they cannot be made against them in
that sense, viz. as Rebels: Nor as Papists; for then it will follow, That he is
liable to most severer Punishments, who acts according to his Conscience, which
is the Rule and internal Law which God obliges us to follow and observe, under
pain of Sin, right or wrong; if our Conscience, after a serious Examination,
dictates so; therefore all hu^ ane Laws, which punish a sincere Obedience to
this internal Law, viz. Conference, are hard, in case (that is) of an
Invincible Error. Besides, we must acknowledge them to be a True Church, though
Infected with some Errors, and to have things necessary to Salvation; why then
such a severe Animadversion upon them? Do not Turks and Jews and some
Sectaries, who are worse than either, live quietly among us; and why then must
our Brethren of Rome be molested? And why may not either Church or State alter
many things concerning their own Constitutions, upon prudent consideration, as
the Reason and Circumstance of things very, upon new and better Reasons? No
Law, purely Humane, can be made perpetual; and when it is made, it must be
interpreted according to the mind of the Lawgiver; and when he interprets his
own Law he does not take off but suspends the Obligation; Ductor dub. p 143.
^.3.4^8.
and he may intervene between the Equity and Strictness; for the Intention more
than the Letter of the Law, R. 400.
is to be ragarded: And certainly, Men's stiffness in keeping what they have got
(though not upon such Grounds as themselves now approve of) is rather a Point
of mistaken Honor than of Conscience; a Contention of Spirit rather than a
Debate of Truth and Equity. And if this be the Case, I am sure all wise and
good Men will censure your Obstinacy and Frowardness if you persist; though the
Mobile, perhaps, may reproach you with Levity and Cowardice, if you retreat. To
change our Minds upon mature Deliberation and better Experience, and the
evidence of new and better Reason, is a great piece of Christian Generosity and
such as will speak you honest, though not crafty Men. And if the honor of your
Religion be of equal value to you with that of your personal Reputation, 'twere
well you studied, how much that were concerned, in the peaceable and obedient
Temper of such as pretend to have espoused it, as becomes the True Sons of the
Church of England. Nothing can stain the Reputation of the glorious Religion we
profess, more than your turbulent, stiff and ungovernable Tempers, who are the
chief Patriots and Professors of it. Shall we, who have hitherto endeavored to
strengthen the hands of the Magistrate, now strive to weaken them? Shall we,
who pretend to inact his Laws in the very Consciences of his Subjects, now
endeavor to put other Limitations and Conditions upon them than God has done;
or pretend the Revocation of the Broad-Seal of the King's civil Authority, by
the Privy-Signet of Religion? Wherever this is done, that Prince or
Magistrate had need be a very devout Man indeed, who casts a benign aspect upon
the profession of that Religion, which has so malignant an influence upon his
Government: And all considering Men will with great Reason doubt, whether that
Religion be of God which gives such disturbance and trouble to his Vicegerent;
and whether that will carry Men to Heaven hereafter, which makes such Tumults
and Confusions as will be an Hell upon Earth. I hope it is no 13th. Article of
your Creed or mine, That whatsoever a Parliament does is rightly done for that
were to bring Rome home to our own doors, by giving them that Infallibility
which they give the Pope: Men are not bound to build their Consciences upon
Acts of Parliament. I have heard, That to dissolve a Parliament in discontent,
is to pick a quarrel with the whole Nation; and I am of Opinion, That for them
to fly in the Face of the King's Religion, would be the ready way to pick a
quarrel with him; and whether it be a conscientious or prudent thing so to do;
or that a design to prevent a remote and contingent Inconvenience can atone for
a Disobedience at present, which may possibly dissolve the frame of Government,
I leave to you to j^dge of There may arise a Pharaoh who knew not Joseph, and
then you may come to be whipped with your own Rods. These violent Opposers of
the regal Prerogative, know not what Spirit they are of: Do they meet the same
Measure they would have meeted to themselves again? Is this their brotherly
Kindness, Meekness, or good Manners? Does not the Prince of Peace oblige his
Disciples, If it be possible, and as much as in them lies, Jam. 1.7.
to live peaceably with all Men? The Wisdom which is from above, is pure and
peaceable; it consults the public good; and it is a true Testimony of a
religious and generous Mind, in his most retired thoughts, to look out of
himself, and be mindful of the Public Welfare of the whole in all his private
Meditations; 'twas this made the Fabii and Fabricii and other Roman Worthies,
so renowned in those times, that they were content to expose themselves to the
greatest dangers, and to venture the losing of the good Opinion of the Mobile,
for the Prosperity and Safety of the Commonwealth. Lord, how rare a thing is
it, in out age, to find a private Man, who cordially devotes himself to the
good of the Community, which is of so much the nearer concernment than the
privete, as it is of larger Extension? Consider before it be too late, that the
Religion you are so justly inamoured with, will rather be prejudiced than
promoted by this peevishness of her Professors: Have thou the Faith of the
Chruch of England, have it to thy self, and take the Kingdom of Heaven by an
Holy violence, but do not attempt by any wicked violence to impose it upon
other? will you neither be obedient for Wrath nor yet for conscience sake? Did
ever Christ and his Apostles, who were armed and instructed with a greater
Power, for the vinidicating of the Truth, than ever any Persons since, either
Civil or Ecclesiastical, were, behave themselves so unseemly? Did not St. Paul
become all thing to all Men, that he might by all means gain some? And shall
not we interchangably use the duties of common Humanity to them of the Roman
Religion? Not show them the way (but out of the Land of the Living) who are
going toward the Land of Promise, as well as we, and yet think we do God and
the King good Service Does not St. Paul command every Soul to be subject to the
higher Powers, upon pain of Damnation? If they are in Errors, you may warn them
of their danger, as he did, Acts 20.31.
Night and Day with Tears; but you must by no means draw Blood of them, not
tempt other to despise them: Luke 9.26.
Let your moderation be known unto all Men; Christ came not to destroy but save
alive; we had better be persecuted our selves than become Persecutors of other;
nothing that in violent or injurious can have any thing Religion in it; and why
should we tempt the Romanists to combine togather (as they will do, if they
have not more Religion than we show in this Stubborness) to revenge the
Injuries that have been offered them, the Wounds that have been given them in
the House of their Friends? Of which we are as guilty, by being the unconcerned
and silent Spectators, as if we were the principal Assassins; and whosoever is
afraid of being reproached for a Papist by Pleading their Cause as far as
Justice and Charity favors it; or consults his Ease and Reputation more than
his Religion at this juncture; when such assaults are made upon the Principles
of the Church of England, even by them who pretend most kindness to it,
deserves the Punishment either of a Coward in his Religion, or a Traitor to it.
No Man, who loves his king or Country, can wish for more Liberty or
Encouragement than the Church of England Men enjoy; and for any of them to
grudge the King immunity for them of his own Religion, is such a composition of
Indiscretion, Popularity, Ingratitude and Insolence, as is little deserved by
so Good and Gracious a Prince. Peace is not the thing we pursue, but
Popularity, which may be the Fool's Paradise, but it is the Wise Man's Scorn:
He never attempts to keep up a Party against Authority with a Spirit of
Contradiction; not to make differences more or wider than they are to please
the People, who love to hear Well of themselves and Ill of their Princes, as
you cannot but have heard some degraded Courtiers do, who being outed of their
Employments, or disappointed and defeated of their secular Aims, never cease to
Harangue against what they have lost or missed, to satisfy, not their Reason,
but their Revenge. These are the great Champions for the church, whom the
Populacy admires. Popularity makes these Hectors bold as Lions now, who would
fly as fast from danger as any hunted Stag, if a Blood-bound were at their
Heels, according to Tertullian's Observation, Novi and Pastores eorum in pace
leones, in praelio cervos: He was a Wise Man that told us, That to sawn on the
People, is the lowest degree of Flattery, and I think he might have added, and
the highest degree of Folly; for nothing can be more foolish than to esteem
their Good Opinion, whose Judgments we approve not; for a Man to stand in the
king's Light, on purpose to draw the rolling Eyes of the Crowd upon himself; to
be looked at, and to be talked of, as a Man that would sain be thought
considerable by being trouble^ome; this is indeed the Poison of Hypocrisy,
which destroys many Souls as well as disturbs many States; and therefore when
you hear Men, so zealous in standing up for Goa's Glory; take heed that they
prove not Chapmen for their own. Popularis aurae, vilia mancipia; That they may
be Town talk for opposing the King, and attempting to eat them without Salt
whom the King honors; to which I am sure it is not the Spirit of christi^^ity
that provokes them, but a much worse Principle. I hope there are but a few of
these amongst your fellow Members, and that most of you are sincerely resolved
to go on in the peaceable way which you know to be right, as counting it your
Glory to have the Testimony of your own Consciences, bearing witness with you
of your Ingegrity. If the rest of your Brethren will bear you company, in
gratifying his Majesty in his just and reasonable Expectation, I know you will
be the better Pleased; if not I doubt not, but you have courage enough to act
Virtuously by your self, rather than to do Ill for Company; and that you will
rather be singular in a Loyal Vote, than So^iable in the contrary. I am better
acquainted with your Courage and Consience, than to be jealous of this; not is
it to hearten you, but other Men upon this occasion, that I say so much on this
Subject, as becomes every Man in my Station, who am one of them that watch for
your Souls, and therefore dare not betray them by my silence, and coolness in
God's or the King's Cause: My Crime would be as deep as my silence; and my not
proclaiming, next to my procuring, the danger you run your selves into, for
want of a timely foresight; the not discovering any Net in which you may be
unhappily ensnared, and not breaking it too, if we can, would be next to the
spreding of it if we could. And I know full well, That cowardice in a Minister
is worse than in a Soldier, by how much our warsare is more hono^^able than
theirs; and I reckon them the most prostigate con^^ards in the World, who are
asraid of opening their Mo^ths for the King, for fear the People sold open
their Mouths against them. The fear of offending a private Brother is a thing
not considerable in comparison of the Duty we owe to the public Magistrate;
for this would cut the Sin^ws of all Authority, and bring the King and his Laws
into Contempt, by gratifying some Men's causeless Scruples, and others
groundless. Jealousies: Do not therefore so consider Roman Catholics, as to
forget they are Englishmen and good Christians; let Anabaptists or
Prosbyterians act. this part, rather than any True Son of the Church of
England: Here Is in which you are embarked is not a Fire-ship designed for
Destruction, but for Edification; she is for winning Men over to her self, with
Mildness and the Spirit of Me^knes^, and not for inraging them with Violen^e
and Bitternej^; and therefore never seck for a loop-hole to creep out of, but
stand to her Principles; trouble not your self to enquire whether the thing,
which the King expcts, be expedi^nt or not, being well satisfied of its
Legality; let the King answer for that^; God will never lay it to your Charge.
God guides all Princes Actions to his own just and wise Ends, who can cause the
Wrath of Man to turn to his Praise; his Providence and Protection, and our
Prince's Conscience and Honor, are as good Security to our Church, as any we
can desire; and she has taught us to reft satisfied with it; and told us, That
Religion never prosper'd by any undue Practices to advance it. Meekness,
Patience anti Humility are those Graces of the Spirit which convince and
convert. I hope Time, and a right Understanding of our Princes exemplary
Justice, the scredness of his Royal Word, and the most obliging Temper of his
Person, will allay those dangerous Democratical Furies, which wheresoever they
prevail or enter, possess Men with Principles of Usurpation, upon the
fundamental Prerogatives of their Sovereign, and design to dives him of the
loyal and sincere Affections of his Peoples Hearts: He has done all that any
Prince can possibly do, to convince the World of his merciful Inclinations, to
make his Moderation known unto all Men, whom he can safely trust, as well as to
his Roman Catholic Subjects; and how far he is from incroaching upon any Man's
Conscience himself, or suffering others to do it; he has made it his Business
Night and Day, ever since he sat upon the Throne, to allay all Heats and
Animosities, arising from different Persuasions in Religion, and to unite the
Hearts and Affections of all his Subjects to God in Religion, to his Vicegerent
in Loyalty, and to their Neighbors in Charity; he longs to see us ^t Peace
with our selves and all the World; besides he hates to see us forward to do
such Bloody Offices one to another, as Turks and Jews would be ashamed of;
nothing is so displeasing to him, as to see fellow Christians and fellow
Subjects reviling and libeiling one another, as once Constantine did, in the
Council of Nice, killing and treading one another under Foot, as in the Council
of Ephesus, and as in the Schism of Damasus and Vrsicinus; as if Christ, the
Prince of P^^ce, were not yet come into the World, or at least not revealed in
this part of it. if there be any Incendiaries amongst us, Religion does not
inflame them; if there be any such Feuds Religion does not kindle them; she
cannot do that upon Earth which she damns to the Pit of Hell: That which makes
grievous to our selves or others cannot be Religion; she teaches us to love our
Brethren as our selves, and to dwell together in Unity; and if our Practices be
accordingly, our Principles will easily defend themselves. Now is the time for
us of the Church of England, to remember our Doctrine of sincere Obedience to
the supreme Power, a Doctrine pleasing to Almighty God, and of good report
among all Princes; and let us not show now, when we think our selves touched
that we were only Political and Mercenary in our Loyalty; and that as the Devil
said of Job's serving God, It was not for naught; it may be said of our serving
the King too, becausc we had all along the chief Countenance and Protection of
the Laws which he made; and as the Phrase there is, had a Hedge, made about us,
and about all that we had on every side; but in the case under debate, if any
of our Communion provoke the King to Anger (who is not, nor will not be angry
with us for cleaving to our Religion) let him be his own Casuist, whether he
pays an entire Christian Obedience, seeing he would conclude in lessr
Instances, that the first Provocation begins a Quarrel; 'twould now be but
bantring, to endeavor to commend the King out of resentment of a repulse; when
as indeed, setting aside home Reasons, he would appear less considerable in
Foreign Negotiations for the public Good; when Foreign Princes shall hear by
their Ministers, how small Influence he can have upon his own Subjects at Home.
It Is too well known, that in the Reign of our late Gracious Sovereign, the like
exceptions have been made abroad, upon some ^^^dutiful Carriages of his People
to him at Home, to the Dishonor and Damage of these Three Kingdoms. I wis^^ w^
did all well consider that all penal Laws imply a Power of Relaxation in the
Legislator, and that the King's Government con^sts in Imperial as well as
Political Laws; and therefore is not to be restrained upon any Pretense
whatsoever. Constantius settled the Arrian, and after him, Julian the Pagan
Religion, by their own Imperial Power and Edicts, yet the Christians did not
control them; nor have we any more Power to rise up against our King, or to
disobey him because he is a Catholic, than the Romanists had to rebel against
Queen Elizabeth (besides the Question of her Right of Succession:) For it is
not the Law that makes the King, but the King that makes the Law; and though
both for his own and the public Interest, which are inseparable, he ought to
act according to those Laws, which do the more powerfully oblige him, by being
his voluntary Establishment and the Effects of his Royal Will; yet Justice is
not against Charity; and both the Interpretation and Execution of those Laws
are in him. In him is acknowledged the sole Power of raising Forces, of
granting Commissions both by Land and Sea; of calling, adjourning, proroguing
ana dissolving Parliaments, when and where he judges it most expedient; and in
his Power it is to remit the Severities of penal Laws, whereby he may manifest
his Goodness and Clemency, as well as his Greatness and Justice; by graciously
Pardoning both the smaller Breaches of his Laws, and the more capital Offenses
which he might most justly punish. From him all Places of highest Trust derive
their Authority. It is his Commission they act by, when they put his Commands
and Laws in Execution; and without, or against his Will and Consent nothing can
be legally acted or done. His Parliaments Concurrence with his desires is
always kind and convenient, though not always absolutely necessary. And I do,
with ^^hmission offer to those of your Illustrious and Loyal Assemby, Whether
in this Affair, of which I am seaking, it be not consistent with your Wisdoms,
to follow a course used in many cases, by a Court as politic as any in the
World, that of R^me, who when they are advertised of something passing by a
Prince, which formerly came from them, do immediately dispatch away the Grant
to the same effect, to save their pretensions of Right to do it. Before King
James the First's time, you will hardly find, that the Sovereign's Proposa^
were ever rejected by Parliaments, and yet their Petitions have often, with good
Reason, been denied in Queen Elizabeth's time the public Bills were drawn by
the Privy Council, and underwent afterward very calm, gentle and short Debates
in Parliament. But that which may stick still with some of you, in the present
case, is, Your answering the King's expectation, will look like a giving away
your Religion: It may look so to some Pur-blind People, Who see but little
before them, and then the Reason is no better than Popularity, which is now
adays grown amongst Persons of Quality as common and great a fault as
Oppression was formerly. But how is our Religion given away by your consent to
that, which your dissent cannot hinder? It is our Interest as well as Our Duty,
not to be wanting to them whom the King esteems and honors in any acts of
Friendship which are consistent with a good Conscience; and to susser our City
Gates to stand wide open for them, that they may go in and out at pleasure, and
partake of all the Benefits and Privileges which we enjoy. No Man ever did a
good turn of Friendship to another, but at one time or other he himself eat the
Fruits of it. Let it be remembered, in what good condition the Protestant
Religion is in many Government within the German Empire, by allowing Privileges
to those of the Church of Rome: How well assured the Governments are of their
containing entirely Faithful, when these People have equal assurances with
other Subjects of their remaining safe. Waving, many Instances which that
Empire affords, let us look into that of Brandenburg the Religion of which
Country is Lutheranism, and is so preserved by the Elector, though he many
years ago became a Calvinist; nor will this Change seem small to those who are
acquainted with the mutual slender Amities of those two Persuasions the Men of
Ink and Gall, on both sides, blackning one another, and interchangably
representing the opposite Opinions to be sowler than Popery it self in their
Eyes: But yet in this Electorate, such was the Wisdom of his Highness, that he
freely gave in assurance to keep the public Religion as he found it; and such
has been his Faith and Honor, that he has been sacred to his Engagements. On
the other part, these Graces have been suitably received by his Subjects, that
as he makes them happy, so they, and his own Prince-like Virtues, have rendered
him the most glorious Prince that ever Brandenburgh enjoyed; and, if we do our
part like them, ve have no occsion to question his Majesty's doing His. Though
he keeps many Calvinist Ministers about him, and make use of the Laity who
Worship in his way; yet the others do not repine at it; much less ought we to
grudge them he Fruits of the King's Favor, who were as Loyal Actors, in the
late Times of Rebellion, and g^eater Sufferes than we; they who suffered with
and for him, might modestly have expected to have been restored to their
Privilegs of True English Subjects before now, and to have been raised above
Contempt and Danger. I speak not this to teach our Senators Wisdom but shall
pray to God who stands in the congregation of Princes, and observes, not only
all their Ways, Acting and Proceedings, but even the most secret Designs and
Intentions of the Hearts of every one of them from whom alone comes all
Council, Wisdom and Understanding; that when by the Authority of our Sovereign
Lord the King, you shall be lawfully gathered in his Name, to Consder, Debate
and Determine this, and other weighty Matters, both of Church and State, he
would send down his Heavenly Wisdom from above, to direct and guide you in all
your Consultations: That having his Fear always before your Eyes, and
endeavoring to lay aside, so far as humane Frailty will permit, all private
Interests, Prejudices and partial Affections, the result of your councils, may
tend to the glory of his blessed name, the maintenance of True Religion and
Justice, the Sa^ety, Honor and Happiness of the King, the public Wealth,
Peace and Tran^uillity of this Realm, and the uniting and knitting together of
the Hearts of all Estates and Persons, within the same, in true Christian Love
and Charity one toward another: which will be your greatest Honor here, and
the way to eternal Glory hereafter.

But if any in your high Station should say, such I mean who sit upon the same
Bench with you, we are so far from grudging Papists the Power into which his
Majesty has been pleased to put them, that we will leave all to them, and we
will be ever Loyal, but we will not act in the same Commission with them,
either Civil or Military. These Men, who are such Ne^er-passive Loyalists, may
do well to consider, That this their peevish Resolution is disagreeable to
their Allegiance at large, to their Duty by Law, and to the Interest they
espouse. Their Principle is wholly destructive of Loyalty; for to be Loyal and
not to serve the King when required, is a plain Contradiction; since Loyalty is
not like a civil Ceremony, but, an Obligation laid upon us by the highest Law,
to obey those placed over us; against whom he does passively rebel, who is
unactive in their Service. And therefore the Primitive Christians obeyed their
Emperors, though Heathens, with the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes; and
shall We, that are the Sons of the Charch of England, resuse the lawful
Services of a most Christian and Gracious King? whom we are obliged to serve
without Ifs and Ands, as well when he Frowns upon us as when he Favors us, for
this is the only way to be God's Favorites as well as his, and to prove our
selves Members of Christ as well as of the Commonwealth. It Is a known Maxim in
the civil Law, That Subjects ought not only to obey the Government, but to be
Instruments of it too; without which the Government could not be carried on,
and the greatest Princes would have less effectual Authority than a Centuriom
has, who says to one Go and he goes, to another, come and he comes, and to a
third, Soldier do this, and he does it: And our common Law has therefore
established this Sudalternacy of obeying and bearing part in the Government, of
which Sr. Thoma^ Overbury's Case and Imprisonment is a pregnant Instance (...)n
it be justly said, That it was an over-stretching of (...) Prerogative, for the
like was after practi^'d upon Sr Peter H^^^^n, who for behaving himself ^^ke
some other muti^^^^ (...) ^ons, in one of the last Parliaments of King Cha^^^
(...), was sent, against his ^iking, on ^r E(...) tinate; and though the
w(...)ce in the Parliament of F^ay (...) at that or any other t(...) him an
illegal. No Prince could (...) a K(...) ou^ this Right of compel^ing his
Subjects to m(...) respective Offices under him And as to acting in the
Commission of Peace, the Great Chancellor, in the late King's time, in the Case
of an Irish Noble Man seated in England, and refusing to take the Oath of a
Justice of Peace, declared, That he ought to do it, and every Man else named in
the King's Commission: and therefore they are unpardonable to dispute it now,
who have already taken their Oaths and acted many years accordingly.

Nor is it less against your Interest than your Duty, to withdraw your
Services; for if you quick-sighted Men, who sit higher than your Neighbors,
spy more Damages and Mischiefs coming on the Country, than we can see, from
those who are newly put into Commission, you have the more Reason not to desert
your Station.

There were many Gentlemen in the Rebellious Age before the King's
Restoration, who, acting under the Usurper's Commission, told their confiding
Friends, they endured it only in order to the serving the King and the Loyal
Party; how much rather should Men now serve the King, and subalternately those
that serve him, when they are called to do it by a lawful Authority? Let them
also consult their Honor as Gentlemen, and show a Courage besitting their
Quality, like that brave Roman, who did not, like other mean Spirits, sneak out
and quit his Post, but generously professed he did not despair of the
Commonwealth, nor would he desert its Service: If they to whom this is urged,
say, No more do we; we acquiesce in the Kin'gs Pleasure, but we care not for
Acting; their laying down thus, is an Impeachment of their loyalty; for hereby
do they raise or increase the groundless Fears and Jealousies of the People,
who will be over-apt to conclude, That if those leading Men in the Country,
upon whose Conduct they safely relied, Withdraw themselves, all is lost;
Religion and Property are vanished; whereas you are the only Men who can and
should take them off these mistakes, by giving them to understand, That the
current of the Law is as clear as ever, and that the King does no more for his
own Religion, than every Prince in the World does for his; nor less for ours,
than will suffice to make us Happy, if we had but Wit enough, to know when we
were so. That, as to the mixture of Popish and Protestant Justices, Ireland has
been long so Governed and with good Success; and as the greatest number of our
present Statute Laws were made by their Ancestors Council and Consent, then of
the same Religion they now are of; so we have no reason to question but they
will be as forward to execute, as the others were to get them inacted. And if,
after all, they confess, as all Ingenuous and Considering Men must, That they
could consent to the repealing and taking off the capital, penal, and disabling
Laws against the Roman Catholics, but they could not answer it to their
Counties for which they serve; they need not be told (who were such apt
Scholars in the tender Point of Privileges. of Parliament) that their Power is
more than that of the States General of the United Provinces, for they may not
only consult but consent without those who sent them; and if they dare deny it,
send a Sergeant at Arms for them (as you know they lately did, how legally I
Dispute not.) And since those States, in the late King's Time, concluded with
him a Point of mutual Benefit, without ever sending to their Principals, and
were afterward thanked by them for it; with more Right and with as good
Success, may they concur with the King's Motion, if it be considered, That they
were not chosen by Men of that Antimonarchical Spirit, who generally prevailed
in the Three Elections before this. And as to those of the opposite Party, who
can think their Thoughts are likely to be like Lycurgus his defense of his
Laws, That though they were not the best, they were as good as then could be
made; and seeing they surmize that some Men endeavor to bring Parliaments into
Disesteem, as stulborn and intractable, and therefore useless; in prospect of
this and what may probably ensue, it will undoubtedly be Prudent, to give up
many Points formerly contended for, with too much Eagerness and too little
Justice; by which Compli^^ces with the Royal Power and Goodness, they may have
fresh and larger Assurances of saving the main Sta^^ Thus have I honestly
esiay'd to give you the best Resol^uic^ I can of the Case in Q^j^ion, whether
the Thoughts which were to my satisfaction, will prove so to yours or others
more fearful and jealous in the Commun^^^, of our Church, I know not; but I
hope they will, and wish they (...) not only for the King's Service and
Satisfaction, but for their own and Peace sake. He was a sound Politicia^, who
told us, That for the maintenance of a Religion long in being, it is necessary
often times to reduce it to its first Grounds; Ma^hia. vel p 33^
nor do I think it would argue want of Policy or Piety in the Sons of the
Church of England, to study the Primitive Constitutions of the same, and to
re^ect upon the peaceable Temper of the first Reformers, and to con^^der what
one of our best Casuists, our Church ever bred, tests us, in the Case of One of
our Church Marrying with a Recusant, That in Points, wherein the Substance of
Christianity consists, Bp. Sanderson's 5. Cas. p 18.
the fundamental Articles of the Christian Religion, we both agree. And that he
who rightly understands those Catholic Truths, taught in the Catechisms of
both Churches; and concerning which all Christendom, in a manner, are at a
present accord; and will also suffer himself farther to consider, That the
Church of England does not impose upon the Judgments and Consciences of her
Members, any thing to be believed or received as of necessity to Salvation, but
what is truly Catholic, and confessed by her Adversaries so to be; and
consequently, that the Differences between her and the Romish Party, is wholly
about those Additionals or Superstructures, may easily rest; satisfied in his
Judgment and Conscience, That the thing desired is not simply evil, and
^o^ogenere, unlawful, but expedient; and as the exigencies and the conjunction
of our present Circumstances, and the probability of the good and evil
Consequences of it, prudently laid together and weighed one against another
require, are little less than necessary.

And in Truth, did we live up to the Rules and Canons of the Church, the
Differences between them and us would not appear so many and so great, but that
we might hope under so Gracious a Prince, who has a kindness for both, to
become at last, if not Men of one Judgment, yet at least of one Heart. Fergus.
Inter. of Reas. 593.
I will allow such a Casuist as Ferguson to repute the Terms of Union with
Rome, impossible and absurd, for so they must needs be, to such an
Arch-schismatick and Traitor as he is: But if we consider, that there are a
great many Truths of so little value, that a wise and good Man would part with
them all for a Grain of Charity; and how dangerous it is and damnable, to rend
the Peace of the Catholic C^^^^h, we shall not be so stiff and inflexible, so
tenacious and unyielding, even in Matters of so small moment, as we too
familiarly are to so shameful a degree of Obstinacy, that we will not stir an
hairs breadth to win a Brother, no not to gratify a Prince: Entreat, persuade
or convince them ( Non persuadebis, etiamsi persuaseris) still they hold their
Principle, which is none of the best; obtain all, yield nothing; so far are
they from being armed with Epaminondas his brave heroic Resolution, Totius
orbis ^^^itias despicere prae patriae charitate; to despise private Interests
for Love of the public Peace of Church and State. This were such a
Self-dental, as would adorn a Christian, and speak him truly Catholic; and if
Distempers in the Body Natural and Political are reduced by Physicians and
Politicians, not to what they should be, but what they can be; then let us not
strive to advance our Christian Liberty, above the Laws of Sobriety, Charity
and Government, nor endeavor to serve any Peg so high in the Church as to make
a discord in the State, but endeavor calmly to persuade and convince Men by
the Scriptures and Reason; for though the Ministry and Service be ours, yet the
Dominion is his who bears the Sword, and whose Friends must be ours, or else we
are not Chrict's nor our own. We may keep our Consciences Tender, but not so
raw as to kick and wince at all which touches us, or which we understand not.
Remember that of Lactantius, P. 487.
Quae, ubi, aut qualis est Pietas? n^mirum apud eos qui bella nesciunt, qui
concordiam cum omnibus servant, qui omnes homines pro sratribus diligunt, qui
^ohibere iram sciunt, omnemque animi furorem tranquilla moderatione lenire:
Such an Evangelium armatum as some warm Disputants would make our Religion
favor, would better become John Goodwin to publish, who was better skilled in
the methods of embroiling Three Kingdoms, than any True Sons of the Church of
England, whose Laws are not like Draco's the Athenian, written in Blood: Her
Heart is not so petresied as to rejoice in Evil; she abhors all living
Bonefires; she prays for the Conversion of here is and God's Enemies, and
delights in their Reformation, but not in their Ruin; her Commands are like
her Savior's with the Scepter and not with the Sword, unless it be of the
Spirit, which she never suffers to make way to Men's Consciences by cutting
through their Flesh. Let my Soul never come into such Bloody Councils at these.
Ifa. 29.4.
The Greek Church approves not to this day, the putting Heretics to Death; and
we have great Reason to Bless God and the King, that our Writ, de Haeretico
comburendo, is taken away by Act of Parliament; and may all other Sanguinary
Laws perish and be abolished as well as that, made in this or any Christian
State, against Men upon the score of Christian Religion, if the most notorious
Offenders against it be punished with a civil Death here, and an eternal
hereafter, it is sufficient: Defendenda est Religio non occidendo sed moriendo.
Aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut nos non sumus evangelici; fraterna
necessitudine cohaeremus, quam qui non agnoscit injustus est: Christianity
binds us to purchase Peace at Interest, rather than keep up a Party against it;
for there is such variety of Education, Interest, and Custom in the World, that
he who resolves to yield to no Body can agree with no Body. Christ complied
with the Rites and Customs he found in the World, and condeseended to the very
Humors of Stubborn People, to ingratiate himself and his Doctrine: And Erasmus
hated discord so much, that he loved not any Truth that might occasion it, Mihi
sane adeo invisa est discordia, ut veritas e^iam displiceat seditiosa: Nor can
any desire to keep the Wounds of the Church or Kingdom open, but such as would
he better pleased to suck the blood of both; and peaceable Princes have a happy
time of it, to serve the Humors of such Men, and receive such Encouragements
as they daily give them. There was to be no destructive Beast in all God's Holy
Mountain; the Beasts of prey came down from Mount Seir, ^^ 11 9.
and not from Mount Sion. If the Counsels of any of the Enemies of our Church
be of Men or Devils, it will come to naught; but if it be of God, we cannot
overthrow if, least happily we be sound Fighters against God; and if ever we
hope upon good Grounds to ride on and prosper, it must be because of our Truth,
and Right ^ousness, and Meekness, not of Humor and Petulancy; for this is a
time of healing, and not of troubling the Waters. There is nothing wanting to
make us live quietly one by another, though of several Judgments, whilst we
agree in the Fundamentals of Religion and loyalty, but the subduing of our own
inordinate Affections. Did we take up the Cross to lay it upon other Men's
Shoulders? or do we fellow Christ:, as the Jews did, to Crucisie him? This is
to love Christ and the King as Men do one another, till they be brought to the
Trial: Goodness is the best Note of the True Church, and I hope will prove the
inseparable Character of Ours; for, I am sure, none are so affable to their
Brethren on Earth, as they that have their Conversation in Heaven. If we will
suffer it, our Religion is ready to tie the Gordian-knot of Kindness between
us, and all who deserve the Name of Christians; it will breed an harmony in the
Affections of all the King's Subjects who receive it; it will sublimate and
spiritualize their Humanity, and draw it off from all the Dreggs of Malice and
Uncharitableness, and teaches us to love the King for his Goodness, as well as
others to fear him for his Resolution. The Samaritans held it an Abomination to
come near a Man of a different Religion or Persuasion from them, but we have
not so learned Christ; may there never any s^^i^e be heard amongst us, but who
shall strive first and most to serve God and the King; Unless you loath your
present Manna, and long for your old Egyptian Leeks and Garlicks, you will not
make others look like Devils, that you may look the more like Saints, but you
will join with the Church and the meanest of her Children, and say a hearty
Amen to this Prayer, Domine da pacem in diebus nostris; and spend your time in
Prayers to the God of Peace, that you may prevail to stisle and put out those
Dissentions which the Devil has kindled among us; and in Tears if you cannot,
so shall ye be sound in Peace by the Prince of Peace at his coming, without
spot and blameless, and our Jerusalem be built up as a City at Unity in it
self.

Sir, I have not martial'd my Thoughts into such a method as I should and would
have done, if my time and other Accomplishments had born any proportion to your
Expectations, and the duty of such an undertaking; but I hope I have said
enough to make it plain to all the True and Well-meaning Sons of the Church of
England; that what I have pressed you and them to do, and resolve, by God's
Assistance, to practice my self, Is

1 st. A Duty we owe to Almighty God, P^ 8.15.
by whom all Kings Reign (who are not the Peoples Creatures but his
Vicegerents) not entrusted with theirs, but invested with his Authority.

The Powers that be are ordained of God, and as he that resists them, resists
the Ordinance of God; so he that dishonours them, dishonours God's Ordinance,
and by consequence God himself. And as respect for the King's sake, is to be
paid to all such Persons as he deputes to sustain his Authority and represent
his Person; so much more for God's sake, is honor to be paid to the King, whom
God has commissioned to be his Deputy on Earth, and invested with the largest
share of his Authority. Besides, God has expressly commanded us to honor the
King, Prove. 24 21.
and twice joined it with a Precept to Fear Him, to denote that none can deny
the King Honor, 1 Pet. ^.13.
but such as have no fear of God before their Eyes; and that without
Disobedience to God we cannot refuse to honor the King, both as a Christian
and a King: And here, once for all, let it be observed, That when St. Peter
wrote his first Epistle, and therein gave Christians that Precept of Honoring
the King; he, who then governed them, was none of the best, but perhaps one of
the worst in the World who ever wore an Imperial Grown; a professed Enemy, not to
Christianity alone, but to Morality too. Nero was at that time the Roman
Emperor, who was not only an Heathen, and of a different Religion from them;
but also as Tertullian styles him, Dictator Damnationis^nostrae, the first
Persecutor of the Christian Religion, which shows him to be of none at all. And
yet such a King they are commanded to honor, which may assure us, That it is
the King's Authority, abstracted from his personal Qualifications, which we are
to honor; be his Religion what it will, be it any or none at all; if he be our
King, God requires us to consult his Honor in all things; and without
Disobedience to God, I hope I have sufficiently proved that we cannot do
otherwise. Every True Son, therefore, of the Church of England, who
acknowledges his Majesty's Title to the Imperial Crown of these Kingdoms to be
unquestionable, must conclude it to be an indispensible Duty, which he owes to
Almighty God, to say and do all that he lawfully may for the King's Honor.

2 dly. It Is a Duty which we owe to the King, and that not only because God
has by the divine Law given him a Right thereunto, but also because the
Benefits which we enjoy under his Government deserve if. Do we not enjoy
public Peace and Preferments, and the free and public Exercise of our
Religion, which is a blessing infinitely more valuable than any of which we can
be ambitious, on this side Heaven? He has not only indulged that to us, but by
many most gracious, solemn and reiterated Promises, engaged his Honor and
Fidelity to protect us in it; which we must honor for the Church's Magna
Charta, the more transcendent act of Grace, because not extorted by Rebellion,
and a security more firm than any Law, which cannot tie a King (who is declared
the supreme Judge of the Law and above it) so fast as the Obligations of his
own Royal Word and Honor do it. And is there nothing due for so high a Favor?
Are not we to be extremely ^ender of his Honor, who is so under of our
Happiness, as that he may justly be styled the Defender of our Faith, as well
by Desert as by Inheritance; as not only to protect it from real Dangers, but
also to protect the Professors of it from their own fears? If a Nero be to be
honored, much more a Titus or Vespasian: If a Tyrant (who was a disgrace to
Humanity,) much more an indulgent Father of our Church and Country; one whose
Clemency makes him the delight of Mankind, and one whole Royal Word gives his
Subjects the belt Security of which they are capable.

3 dly. It Is a Duty we owe to our Country: The King is the Light of our Israel,
as David is styled; 2 Samuel 21.7.
and the more bright and resplendant this Light, the more bright, powerful and
benign Rays and Influences will it diffuse among us. He is the breath of our
Nostrils; and if our undutiful and indecent Behavior toward him do eclipse
his Honor, Jer. 32.3
by interposing any thick Body between him and his Peoples Hearts, or taint the
Nations Breath with an ill Savor, it would be a sad Symptom of the decay of
its Vitals. Who knows not, that the usual Methods of Treason and Rebellion have
been first to blacken the Prince, and make him seem vile to the People, and
then to tempt them to oppose and resist him? First to represent him in some
soul shape (as the Heathen Persecutors did the Primitive Christians, when they
clothed them in Beasts Skins) and then expose them first to be derided, and at
last to be devoure'd? And what did any Nation ever get by Rebellion, but
expense of Treasure and Blood, Rapine, Misery and Ruin? In which Point, if we
are yet unsatisfied, let us lit down and cast up the Accounts of ours from
Forty to Sixty, the summa totalis of which will be found to be nothing on the
Balance, but the loss of our Liberties, Properties and Religion, with the
additional Interest of Slavery, intailed upon us and ours for so many Years.
Can we then better consult the Kingdoms good at this time, than by maintaining
the Kings Honor, or take a better course to keep it in Peace and Plenty, than
by keeping up a good Opinion of our most Gracious Prince among his Subjects; or
show our selves greater Patriots, or better Friends of our Country, than by
being zealous for our Prince's Honor, and jealo^ of all those Words or
Actions, which may secretly undermine it?

4 thly. Lastly, This is a Duty we owe to our Dear Mother the Church of
England, from whose Breasts we have sucked an untainted Loyalty, and by whom we
have been trained up to a most tender Zeal for the Honor and Service of our
King, without any relation had to his Religion. It is well known, That no
Church under Heaven ever taught her Children more Loyal Principles, or more
constantly than she has done; and therefore no Children on this side Hell,
would be more unpardonable for acting Distoyally than hers. She never allowed
any pretense whatsoever to dising age us from our Loyalty; nor did she ever
absolve us when we appeared to want it, but upon sound and sincere Repentance.
The more inexcusable then were we, if we should disgrace our Breeding and
Education under her most excellent Instructions with any contrary Practices:
And the more indispensibly are we obliged to lay hold of those Opportunities,
which the Providence of God does now offer us, to give the World such a
convincing Testimony of our Loyalty, as unless the True genuine Sons of the
Church of England show, I question whether it will ever see. Catholic Loyalty
I mean, not only bearing patiently, but dearly loving, and devoutly honoring
our Prince, though of a different Religion, and not speaking ill of any thing,
of which he has himself entertained a sacred, or would have us have a good
Opinion.

And thus far have I, in Obedience to your commands, expressed as plainly as I
could, the judgment of my own Mind, about this important and seasonable Duty. I
am so sensible of my own unfitness for an undertaking of this Nature, that
nothing but Yours or a greater command, could have drawn me to make such an
essay; least so good a Cause should suffer more by my Weakness than gain by my
Zeal: However, such as it is, I humbly submit it to your better Judgment; not
doubting but that whatever you judge to be said amiss, will be, by your
Charity, as if it had never been said by me, and corrected by your Christian
Prudence: And if any thing be said that may be capable of doing his Majesty any
Service, you will conceal the Author, least his obscurity prove an Obstacle to
the efficacy of his Arguments. Who will live and die a True Son of the Church
of England, a Loyal Subject to his Majesty, and

Your Humble Servant, A. B.

FINIS.

