A LETTER Written to a FRIEND Concerning Popish Idolatry.

LONDON, Printed for, and are to be Sold by Charles Harper, at the
Flower-de-luce, over against St. Dunstan's Church, in Fleet Street. 1674.

A Word to the READER.
A Person, whom I greatly honored, being much inclined to the Popish Religion,
was, as I heard, much altered by the ensuing Letter; which made me very
industrious to get first a View, and then a Copy of it. And conceiving it may
prove very beneficial to others also the same way inclined, I thought my self
in Conscience bound to present it to public view, I hope without offense to
the Writer, who seems zealous to withdraw men from such Erroneous and
Idolatrous Worship; and therefore doubtless will be pleased to see the fruit of
his labor much increased by the Blessing of God upon it.

Amen.
SIR,
I Am very sorry to find that the Books I directed you to, do not give you full
satisfaction, but still you press me to say something of my own; and what can I
say that has not been already said? Really most of the Books that are written
in these latter days of the World, are but as the same Cards shufflled and
dealt into a new Game. But you tell me, their Discourses are so long, as you
cannot carry them in your remembrance, the Quotations so numerous, pro and con,
as there is no end in searching after them; their Distinctions and way of
arguing many times intricate, and seem to you rather subtle Evasions, than
solid Answers: in sum, they do not satisfy, nor work much upon your
Understanding. In answer whereto, I must consess, I have found by experience,
that Men's Heads are like Locks with several Wards, which no Key will open, but
one fitted to those very Wards: So Men's Understandings must be fitted and
opened with such a way of arguing, as suits with their Apprehensions and Fancy;
and many times it happens, that weaker Arguments, in a method agreeable unto
them; prevail more than the Scholastic pressing form. This gives me some
encouragement to set Pen to Paper, with hopes that I may chance to light on
that Method, as may give you more agreeable satisfaction, especially you so
much desiring it: weak Remedies, strongly fancied for good, have done great
Cures, when Learned Physicians have. failed. I shall be as brief as may be, and
the rather because longer labor may have as little success, as the larger
Tracts of others have had.

You seem much to applaud and lean on Doctor Thorndick's Judgment, who in his
Just Weights, condemns those who charge the Papists with Idolatry, and therein
both wrongfully accuse them, and also cast a wrong and foul Prejudice on our
Church, and by necessary consequence make it no Church: For, if the Papists be
Idolaters, their Church is not a true saving Church, it is no Church; Idolatry,
as he conceives, being inconsistent with a saving Church; it is as a deadly
poison, which presently destroys the vitals and brings inevitable death. And
then, if the Papal Church be no saving Church, no Church now, they were none
when those of the Reformation came out of it, their Church being the same then
as it is now, and so consequently our Church can be no Church, coming out from
theirs which is none. Wherefore Dr. Thorndick is very desirous, that the
Papists gross erroneous Worship should be called Superstition rather than
Idolatry; for first, this grievous accusation much incenses them, by making
them no Church, and makes our Division the wider, and cuts off all hopes of
Reconciliation with them; Secondly, it makes by consequence our Church no
Church, as he said, we descending from them.

As to the first, I wonder, that this good Man, so knowing in Roman Principles,
could hope for Reconciliation with them, but by wholly submitting to them; for
their Prime Principle being Infallibility, whereon all that Babel is built, the
pulling down of any one Pinnacle eradicates the very Foundation; all being so
linked together with Infallibility, that one and all falls together. It Is
therefore bootless to talk of meeting them halfway, or three quarters and a
half, who are so fettered to this Infallible Pillar; you must be chained to it
also, no other way of being one with them.

As to the second, of nullifying their Church by Idolatry, and our own also as
from them: if they by their Infallible Spirit will declare the consequence
against themselves, let it be so; but I fear it not against us. They cannot
deny but the Head of their Church Pope Marcellinus, from whom their Popes ever
since descended, was an Idolater in the grossest sense, sacrificing to a
Heathen Idol in the time of Dioclesian's persecution; if this makes them no
Church, let them be no Church: but then we are none: hold there; I am not bound
to grant (though I pass) the Antecedent, much less the Consequent. First, it is
not so easy and quick a thing to determine what nullifies a Church, some
things are plain and easy, some not. It Is certain, the Jewish Church in our
Saviors time, was a Church wherein salvation was to be had; for our Savior
bid the people then hearken to those who sat in Moses Chair, and do what they
thence commanded; yet they were guilty of devilish practices and opinions
also; but still they believed in the only true God, and acknowledged his holy
Word, though they notoriously swerved from it. And it is as certain, that the
generality of the Jewish Church did often fall into Idolatry, yet they
continued still a Church to our Saviors days, as I showed before: so that for
my part I dare not presume to draw the exact Circular line of a Church, over
which the Transgression makes it cease to be a saving Church: but as I said
above, some cases are clear; General Infidelity, as to renounce God and his
Christ, doubtless makes it cease to be a Church; but Idolatry, though it be as
general as in Elijah's days, when he conceived himself only free from
Baal-worship, doubtless does make it not cease to be a Church: For we do not
find that the Priests and Levites were consecrated a new after their defection
to Idolatry. And therefore with Dr. Thorndick's good lieve, though we descend
from a Church too too much given to Idolatry, yet our Bishops consecrated by
them need no more a new Consecration, than those Jewish Priests who were most
certainly polluted with Idolatry; but relinquishing their Idolatry, and with
penitential hearts sacrificing to the true God, were reconciled again to God,
and in mercy accepted by the Divine Goodness. Who then can doubt that those
Bishops of this Nation, who with penitent hearts renounced the Romish Idolatry,
and so zealously embraced the truth of the Gospel, and God's sincere Worship in
Spirit and in Truth, as to die in defense of it, I say, who can doubt but
through the infinite goodness of the same merciful God, our Reformed Bishops
were likewise accepted by him, and thenceforth acknowledged true and faithful
Shepherds of his Church. Wherefore I hope you will be no more terrified with
Dr. Thorndick's Bugbear, the nullifying of our Church, which has been, and I
hope will continue a Church, professing One God the Creator of all, one Lord
Jesus Christ the Savior of all, one Faith, one Baptism.

And now I shall set before your eyes no Bugbear, but a just fear of the
Romish Idolatry, which pious Dr. Thorndick, out of a zealous desire of Unity
(which is impossible) would willingly cloak under a milder and less hateful
name. I am as willing to speak the truth in love as he, yet I must not out of
love to Unity conceal the truth, or palliate falsehood, but clearly set forth
the Romish gross erroneous practice of Idolatry, which their Doctors daub over
with plausible words, and make this heavy sin appear as light as a feather. I
beseech you read and ponder it well, and doubtless your neck and shoulders will
tremble at the weight.

The Papists take it very heinously to be called Idolaters, because in
Scripture the word Idolatry is applied, as they say, only to Heathens, who
denied the true God and worshipped false Gods. But I desire the Papists to tell
me, whether Solomon was not guilty of Idolatry, in worshipping the Gods of his
Wives, though he himself believed in the true God. And who doubts but a
Christian believing aright in God and Christ may be guilty of Idolatry, as many
true believing Christians were in the horrible persecutions under Heathen
Emperors, merely out of fear sacrificing unto them and their Gods, whom they
abhorred in their hearts. And certainly the Papists Idolatry is a degree beyond
this, for they worship the Saints both outwardly and inwardly with their
hearts: and moreover I may truly say, they worship false Gods, as the Heathens
did; for though the Papists do not call them Gods in word, yet they make them
Gods by deed, by their worship, as you shall see by and by. Idolatry is an act
of worship not of belief; error in belief is called Heresy or Infidelity,
error in worship is Superstition or Idolatry. And though Idolatry, originally
taken, signifies the worshipping of an Idol, yet it is commonly taken in a
larger sense, as to give divine Worship to any Creature. Now whether you call
this Creature God or not, this matters not, for it is not the Name, but the
Worship given to it, makes it Idolatry; Covetousness in Scripture is called
Idolatry, yet no man believes or calls Money a God, but in effect makes it a
God by trusting in it, which is a principal part of our duty to God, to trust
in him. And so a man is said to Idolize his Prince by trusting in his favor;
and so the Papists are said to Idolize the Saints and Blessed Virgin, by
praying and trusting to them in time of trouble, which God requires of us as
due to himself; and it were far less sinful (nay not sinful at all in some
sense) to call the Saints Gods, than to trust in them and pray to them; for our
Savior himself declared out of Scripture, that 'twas not unlawful to apply the
name of God unto men; I said ye are Gods. And the Heathens, who called their
Heroes Gods, and sacrificed unto them, did believe them to be men, but of
singular Virtue, for which after their death they were taken by the supreme God
into Heaven; and on this behalf the people sacrificed to them, gave them divine
Worship; just as the Papists do now their Saints, declared to be so by the
Roman Consistory. And as the ancient Roman Senate Deified many as Heroes in
Heaven, who were damned in Hell; it is not altogether improbable, I am sure it is
not impossible, but that some declared by the Roman Consistory for Saints in
Heaven, may be in the same dismal Dungeon; the hearts of men are known only to
God; the holiest out ward Professor may have a Devil's heart: for as the Devil
can transform himself into an Angel of Light, so may a devilish man. As for
the Popes Infallibility in the case, declaring such a one for a Saint, I will
not now enter into that dispute, I will only ask the question, why, if the Pope
cannot err in the Case, does he put the Inquisitors of the Rota to that
excessive trouble, as to make diligent search several years together, before he
determine the point, as if he himself feared (however others confidently
believe) that his pretended holy Spirit may err in the matter? But I return to
my business.

Idolatry then is an Act of wrong Worship, not of wrong Belief; and as Solomon
and other right believing Jews were guilty of Idolatry, by giving divine
Worship to Creatures, so may right believing Papists, if they in like manner
give divine Worship to Creatures, though they do not believe them Gods: for he
that believes in God a right, that believes him to be the Creator of all
things, cannot believe any thing else to be God in this sense, it is a flat
contradiction; for that thing would be a Creator and no Creator, being created,
a God and no God. Now I pray you observe, he that believes aright in God cannot
believe any Creature to be God; if then it were (as the Papists would have it)
that it is no Idolatry to worship the Creatures unless you believe them Gods
(which a right believer cannot do) it must needs follow, that a right believer,
let him adore Saint or Angel, Man or Devil, with all his heart, with all his
soul, yet not believing them Gods (which he cannot do) is not, cannot be guilty
of Idolatry: was there ever any thing more madly affirmed? It Is evident then,
as I said before, that Idolatry consists not in wrong Belief, but in wrong
Worship; and so, to give divine Worship to a Creature, consists not in
worshipping that Creature with belief it is a God (which a true believer cannot
do) but in worshipping it with such Worship wherewith we worship God; that is,
by kneeling, praying, making vows to it, and the like, which we do, and should
do to God only, we having no other Worship to render to his divine Majesty. And
this Worship the Papists give to their Saints, and are hereby guilty of gross
Idolatry, let their belief be what it will.

When the ancient Christian Fathers accused the Heathen Philosophers of
Idolatry, for giving divine Worship to their Heroes, the Philosophers
endeavored to retort it upon the Fathers, accusing them in like manner for
worshipping Saints; and I pray you how did the Fathers wipe off that calumny?
was it by distinguishing in point of Belief (as the Papists now do) and saying
that they did believe in the true God, and did not call the Saints Gods, but
the Creatures of God, and so worshipped them as Creatures only? no such matter,
the Fathers made no such reply, but absolutely denied the matter of fact, and
said, they did not at all worship the Saints, but God alone, and only honored
the Saints as holy men and their fellow servants of God, as you may see most
clearly set down by St. Austin in his Eighth and Tenth Books de Civ. Dei; where
he particularly enumerates the parts of Divine Worship; as Sacrifice,
Invocation, Dedication of Churches and Altars, Oblations and Vows (which the
Scripture appropriates to God) all which the Greeks, says he, comprise in one
word, viz. Latreia; but the Latins have not any one word of full signification
to express it: and then St. Austin flatly denies that the Christians do give
Latreia, that is, any part of this Divine Worship, to the Saints; and there
challenges the Heathens to prove the contrary if they can. Whereas it is as
evident as the Sun at noonday, that the Papists do give, not one, but all
those parts of Divine Worship, called in general Latreia, unto their Saints,
unless it be the sacrificing of Beasts; this they reserve to God alone, and
truly he is much beholding to them for it; they will give unto him the flesh of
Bulls, Rams, Goats, but unto the Saints their own, their Hearts and Lips; the
Saints shall have their living, holy and acceptable Sacrifice, the very Soul of
the Sacrifice, and God shall have the dead Body even stinking in his divine
nostrils, which his Soul loathes and abhorrs, as he has often declared in his
holy Word. It was the devout prayer of the heart that sanctified and made
acceptable the sacrifice of the Beasts, without which they were an abomination
unto God, and are now in the pure times of the Gospel wholly laid aside, and
the Calves of our Lips and of our Hearts and Souls, is the sacrifice of
Christians, and the principal part of Divine Worship. Now I ask a Papist, was
it lawful for the Jews to sacrifice Beasts to Angels or deceased Patriarchs,
the very chiefest of them, Noah, Abraham, Moses, had not this been Idolatry in
them, who can deny it? and why had this been Idolatry? Because Sacrifice is a
Divine Worship, and to give Divine Worship to any Creature is Idolatry: Is it
not much more Idolatry, to give unto Michael, Gabriel, Abraham, Moses, the
purer, the holier, the diviner part of God's Service, the Worship of Prayer? is
not this greater Idolatry, can any man of sense deny it? and yet this more holy
part, more divine Sacrifice the Papists give unto their Saints; and in sum,
there is not any one thing that true Christians do, or can do to God, but the
Papists do the very same to Saints, and transcendently to the Blessed Virgin,
to whom the generality of the Papists pay ten times as much devotion as to God;
and are so far from being reproved for it, as they are encouraged to it by
their greatest Doctors.

I cannot but wonder at the grossand ridiculous mistake, or rather abuse in
wresting of St. Austin's word Latreia, which he puts as a general word
comprising all parts of Divine Worship; but the Papists turn it quite to
another sense, and will understand thereby the Belief wherewith they worship,
which is not at all to St. Austin's purpose; for there he mentions not any
thing of Belief, but Matter of Fact, viz. what Worship is, and ought to be
given to God only; as invocation by Prayer, Dedication of Churches, Altars,
Oblations, Vows; all which in St. Austin's sense is Latreia: and all this the
Papists give to the Blessed Virgin and Saints. But (say the Papists) they do
not give this with Latreia, that is, they do not believe them Gods when they
worship them, which they cannot do, as I showed before. And thus they give them
Latreia, but not with Latreia, Divine Worship, but not with Divine Worship; a
most ridiculous juggling foppery. Perchance a Similitude may make this matter
plainer; thus, The King makes a Law that it shall be Treason punishable with
death, to give Kingly honors, to a subject, and then declares what he means by
Kingly honors; as to set a Crown on his head, to call him Majesty, to erect
for him a Chair of State, to serve him on the Knee, etc. all which the King
comprizes in one word Royalty, and, as I said, makes it treason to give Royalty
to any Subject. Now the Earl of Kent, to whom the people of that Country are
much devoted, comes thither to a Gentleman's House, who the more to magnify
this great Earl, sets a Crown on his head, calls him Majesty, erects him a
Chair of State, serves him on the knee, etc. my Gentleman is called in
question, accused of Treason for giving Royalty to the Earl; the Gentleman
confesses all the Fact, but pleads that he did not believe the Earl to be King,
nor did intend to set him up as King, but only to give him all the honor he
could; it is true he gave him Royalty in every part, but not with Royalty: the
King, though full of indignation for such a bold presumption and total breach
of his Law, burst out into laughter at the Gentleman's ridiculous Plea, and
answers the Gentleman; Well, you gave your honured Earl all the honor due to
me, you gave him Royalty, but not with Royalty; so you shall die the death of a
Traitor, but not as a Traitor. I suppose we shall at the day of Judgment hear
the Papists subtle Doctors make this rare plea and excuse for their Idolatry,
and distinguish the point; it is true they gave the Saints Latreia, but not with
Latreia; and I fear we shall hear their heavy doom for it. Alas, poor wretches!
the plain Text of Scripture must then take place, the subtle Distinctions of
Aquinas and Scotus will then be ridiculous and eternally deplorable folly, 1
Cor. 1. 20. Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of
this world? has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? God of his
infinite mercy open their eyes to see and bewail this their dangerous folly.

The plain and clear Truth is this: They worship the Saints and chiefly the
Blessed Virgin just as God, or rather more than God; it will be no excuse to
say they do not believe her to be the very God, nor call her God; for, as I
showed before, it is not the belief, nor the calling her God, makes it Idolatry,
but the giving her the Worship due to God. And for the fuller convicton of the
Papists, I pray observe, that though they do not call her in that very express
word, God; yet they give her words and titles fully declaring her a Goddess, as
much or more than the Heathens did their Goddesses: all which I cannot doubt
but she fully detests, her Humility being as great as her Dignity, and indeed
raised her to it, as she expresses in her Magnificat, That God regarded the
lowliness of his handmaiden; surely then she cannot but abhor that they should
call her Queen of Heaven and make Oblations to her, so expressly declared
Idolatry in Scripture, Jer. 7. 18. They make their supplications and call upon
her in time of trouble, and even in the point of death, which God expressly
requires to be performed to himself, Psalm. 50. 15. As God is called the Father
of Mercy, so is she called the Mother of Mercy: as Christ is called the Tree of
Life, so is she, and a hundred more such divine Attributes they give unto her,
as you may read in their printed Books of Litanies and Prayers to her,
sufficient to make a man tremble with horror and amazement to read the wild,
as well as wicked blasphemous Titles their extravagant fancies invent to give
her. Let any Christian Soul, who can but read the Scripture and understand
common Sense, judge if this be not Idolatry; for the Titles they give her do
much more imply a Deity, than the word, God, and so is far greater Idolatry.

There is one thing more, worthy your consideration in this business. All the
learned Papists know that the ancient Fathers did urge, as a main Argument to
prove the Diety of the Holy Ghost, the Ubiquity of his operation in the hearts
of the faithful all the world over; a clear evidence of a divine Power which no
Creature is capable of: and will not the same Argument hold, to prove the Deity
of the Blessed Virgin, if she, as the Papists believe, be able to be helpful to
all her devoted Supplicants from all the four Quarters of the World at the same
time? Upon her great Festival-days, how many millions of Papists do at the same
instant say unto her that Hymn, Ave Maris Stella, wherein are contained these
words, Thou that art the meekest of all, make us meek and chaste, grant unto us
a holy life and safe journey. These and a hundred the like Expressions they use
unto her. Now I pray observe; sure the Papists suppose she can do this which
they pray for, otherwise they are ridiculous to pray for it: so then they
believe that she can work upon the hearts of her supplicants all the World
over, making them meek and chaste, etc. at the same time; which was the
Argument to prove the Deity of the Holy Ghost: does it not in like manner prove
the Deity of the Blessed Virgin? and does not this their belief and practice
make her a Goddess? and does not this make them Idolaters in full measure? what
did the Heathens more? Nay, does not the praying to her or any other Saint at
so vast a distance, and supposing them to hear, imply a Deity in them? Is not
this far beyond the sphere of Activity in any Creature? Can any Creature hear
their praying voice one quarter of a mile? sure then they must be of a Divine
power, to hear so many millions and millions of miles; much more is it a Divine
property to see the thoughts of their hearts at that distance, or indeed to see
them at all, were they never so nigh; for God alone is the searcher of hearts:
yet the Papists often offer up to them the meditation of their hearts, as well
as the voice of their mouth, making both mental and vocal Prayer unto them; is
not this apparently to make them Gods? As for that rare excuse, That though the
Saints hear not our prayers, much less see our hearts at this distance, yet
they see all in God's infinite comprehensive Heart. Hold, I beseech you,
whither are we come? to excuse Idolatry, I fear, with horrid Blasphemy; are the
Saints then the searchers of God's Heart and know all his secrets? this is
Deity in the highest degree: no, but God of his infinite Goodness discovers
this to the Saints: may I be so bold as to ask, who discovered this to the
Papists? why, St. Francis, St. Dominick, St. Ignatius, and many others, in
their Seraphical Meditations, have been rapt up into the third Heaven, yea, far
higher than St. Paul, into the ninth Heaven, and have had this and much more
reveiled to them. Pardon me, I humbly conceive, it is far more unlawful for
these Seraphical Saints to utter these words, than it was for Saint Paul to
utter what he heard in the third Heaven.

Sir, I hope neither you nor any rational Man will build his Faith and
Salvation upon their vain Legends; well may they twattle these things to
Children, not to serious Men who build their Faith on the infallible Word of
God alone, where we find not one word of all this, but much to the contrary.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve; If God
only, sure no other. Wherefore St. John in his Revelation tells us, how he was
twice severely rebuked with a Cave, for his worshipping the Angel, See thou do
it not, I am thy fellow servants, worship God. But the Papists will needs have
this to be a Complement only of humility in the Angel, to this great Apostle
St. John; truly a very severe form of Complement; See thou do it not; which
sounds to me rather a Threat than a Complement, and in the Original, the Greek
sounds more a Threat than our English expresses: and sure we should the rather
take it so, because St. Paul does so expressly forbid the worshipping of Angels,
as a Will Worship according to to the Will and Doctrine of men, under pretense
of humility, but is indeed out of Pride, vainly puffed up in their fleshly
minds, intruding into those things they have not seen, and obtruding them as
saving Doctrines upon their ignorant Proselytes; which thing all that are godly
wise according to Scripture, must needs hold foolish and sinful, all being so
fully laid out unto us by St. Paul Col. 2. and again, 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one
Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. Come unto me all ye that
travel and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Call upon me in the time
of trouble, and I will hear thee. The Scripture says their is one Mediator
between God and man, the Papists will needs have many, whether more foolishly
or more sinfully it is hard to say: for, have they any Mediator more powerful,
or more merciful, or more willing to hear and help them? nay, put the Power,
the Love, the Mercy of all Saints and Blessed Virgin together, is it greater,
is it equal, is it near in any degree, can it add one degree to the infinite
Power and Love and Mercy of Christ God and Man? is it not blasphemy to affirm
it? is it not then great sinfulness, great madness to seek any other, as if he
were not complete? as if he could not, or as if he would not do what he
promises to do? Will not his Power, his Promises, his Command oblige these
Self-will-worshipping Papists to come to this One Mediotor? no, but they will
go to others to their own wilful destruction. As for that poor weak excuse,
That we may as well, or rather pray to Saints in Heaven to pray for us, than
pray Men on Earth to pray for us, it is not worth the answering, the disparity
is so great; for the latter is an act of mutual Charity, to which we are
commanded; the former an act of Religious worship which we are forbidden, as I
have showed. But had some great admirer of St. Francis here on earth then built
a Church in his honor, erected an Altar, set him or his Picture on it, kneeled
down and prayed to him, had not this been gross Idolatry? The Idolatry is the
same, and the folly greater, now he is in heaven, because there he neither
hears nor sees their Devotion. Certainly, Sir, I need say no more in this
point, but pass to another part of the Papists Idolatry, their worshipping of
Images.

A Papist lately had the strange confidence (I will not say impudence) to put
out a Pamphlet, wherein he affirmed, that they make no other use of Pictures
and Statues, than merely as Remembrancers of those persons or things they
represent; and so when they enter the Churches or other places where they are
set up they give them only some glancing looks to this end, far from any
Worship; and to assure you of this, he farther adds, that when they are by age
or accident decayed, so as not well to represent what they were made for, they
cut them in pieces and burn them, as any other common Wood; so little reverence
do they afford the Pictures or Statues themselves. What credit can you give
such persons who so monstrously prevaricate? who ever yet saw the Papists burn
any one ancient Picture, ever so decayed and defaced by Antiquity, but rather
reverence it much more; as you may see by the ancient Picture or Statue of the
Blessed Virgin, reported to be made by St. Luke, whereof more by and by. Let us
now see what passing glances they give to them.

Among the multitude of their various Devotions used on good Friday, this is
one; A Crucifix which stands on the Altar, is taken down and laid on a Cushion,
at the steps which ascend to the Altar; the Bishop or chief Priest their
present, falls down on his knees at a little distance from it, rising up and
advancing a step or two, falls down again; the third time comes to the Cross,
and there prostrate along kisses the Crucifix again and again, with all
reverence and affection; and so the rest of the Clergy in order, and many other
Devotees, as far as the time will permit: the mean while the Quoire chants
forth a Hymn, Dulce Lignum, dulces Clavi, etc. Sweet Wood, sweet Nails, etc.
Call you these passing glances, to prostrate on the ground and adore them? But
I pray farther observe; the Crucifix stood before on the Altar, a place most
conspicuous to be seen and put them in remembrance of Christ; were this all, as
they falsely pretend, why then take it down? merely to express their great
devotion to it, by humbling themselves to the ground to kiss it.

But they will tell you this their Devotion is to Christ, for the honor done
to his Image redounds to Christ: I answer, that is false however, that they use
Pictures only as remembrances, and give them no Worship; for they confess a
Worship to the Picture in relation to Christ, as we forsooth to the Kings Chair
of State. What would the Papists have done without this Chair of State? it is a
main Argument with them, and they are perpetually dunning our ears with it; and
I shall in requital now dunn them, and show their absurdity. First then, did
they ever see any, the most observant Courtier (the King himself being
personally present in some other part of the room) go up to the Chair of State,
make his leg formally to that, or kneel down and kiss it, and if he did, would
not all count him ridiculous? Yet the Papists do this to their Crucifix, Christ
himself being both personally and corporally (as they believe) their present on
the Altar in their Host; are not they then as ridiculous? Secondly, Do men
naturally of themselves perform this homage to the Chair of State, or by
Court-order? Bring a Country Gentleman ever so rational, ever so civil, to
Court; where at the Gate is erected (I will suppose it so for argument sake) a
goodly Statue of the King, then carry him up to the Guard-Chamber where hangs a
fair Picture of the King, then into the Presence Chamber where stands this
Chair of State: Let my ceremonious Papist take this civil Gentleman and conduct
him along, and say nothing to him of Court-order, but tell him, that is the
King's Statue, that is his Picture, that is his Chair of State; if my Gentleman
of himself take off his Hat, and make a Leg to the first, second or third, be
he ever so devoted to Royalty, then take off my Head: but when he comes into
the Presence Chamber, if his Conductor tell him, it is the Order of Court to put
off the Hat wherever he sees a Chair of State erected, as representing the
Kings Majesty, no doubt but Reason and Civility both, will move him to observe
Court-orders while he is there. But it is probable Reason may prompt this
Country Gentleman to ask, why he must not as well put off his Hat to the Statue
at the Gate, or Picture, so much more lively representing the King? I believe
my Papist Conductor will scarce find any other reasonable Answer to give him,
than that there is a Courtorder for the one, and none for the other. It Is
evident then that the Order only makes the Ceremony observed at Court, not the
Chair of State: So if my Papist can show me a Divine Order to kneel down, and
prostrate my self to a Crucifix, in honor to Christ, I shall as readily do it
as he, adore it, kiss it, hug it, any thing which God tells me is acceptable to
his divine Goodness: But seeing I cannot find any thing from God to this
purpose, but much to the contrary, and that which seems to my poor
Understanding as full and clear a Prohibition as can be; Thou shall not make to
thy self any graven Image to bow down to it or worship it. And therefore the
Popish Doctors (as you know Sir) do wisely in their Generation, dash out of
their Decalogue this Commandment, and supply it by dividing the last of
Coveting into two parts; pretending that this Commandment against Images was a
mere Ceremonial Command to the Jews, so prone to Idolatry, that it was not
lawful for them so much as to make Pictures, which has ever been allowed to
Christians by all sober moderate persons. And I pray what sober moderate person
will say it was unlawful for the Jews to make Pictures, seeing God himself
appointed them to make some, but neither appointed nor allowed them to worship
any, but absolutely forbad it; and therefore the Brazen Serpent, made by God's
own appointment, was broken when worshipped; which clearly confutes Dr.
Thorndick's supposal in his Nineteenth Chapter, That the Commandment only
forbids the worshipping of Idols, that is by his interpretation, Statues set up
in honor of false Gods: for the Brazen Serpent was not an Idol set up in
honor of any false God, but in honor of a Mercy conferred by the true God;
yet broken down when worshipped, contrary to this Commandment. And I pray you
observe how this Serpent is ranked with the Images and Groves, and other
Idolatrous things destroyed by good Hezekiah. And what was the Idolatrous
Worship given to this Brazen Serpent? They did burn Incense to it, the very
same the Papist Priests do to their Images of Christ, the blessed Virgin, and
Saints. And ought they not likewise to be broken down as well as the Brazen
Serpent set up in honor of the true God, and which is more, by the special
Command of the true God, which the Papists have not for their Images? Yet Dr.
Thorndick will needs have it, that there is no fear of Idolatry among
Christians now, though we now see such gross Idolatry committed by them.

It Is evident then that this Commandment concerns Christians as well as Jews
and all Mankind; for give me lieve to say, that all Mankind always were, and
will be, prone to Idolatry, as appeared by the gross Idolatrous Worship of the
wisest Heathens of old, the Greeks and Romans; the Chinese and Papists now. We
are by nature very sensual, much pleased with sensible things, but averse to
spiritual. To worship God in Spirit and in Truth is a sublime thing far above
Nature; this will always incline men to Idolatry and to worship God by sensible
things, by Pictures and Images, contrary to his Command. And you may be sure
the Devil will be more forward to tempt Christians to it, than ever he was to
tempt Jews or Heathens, his malice being more against us, which makes our
danger of Idolatry greater than theirs, being as prone by Nature, and more
tempted by the Devil. This made St. Austin very averse to Image Worship, and
gives the reason in his Tract on, Psalm. 113. Plus valent Simulacra ad curvandam
infoelicem animam, etc. Images having the appearance of men, with eyes, ears,
mouths, hands, and the like, do more deprave the minds of their Worshippers,
and more incline them to Idolatry, than they are rectified and kept from
Idolatry, in that the Image does not really see, hear, speak, and the like.
It Is strange the Papists will allow this holy Father for a Doctor and Saint of
the Church, for no man in the World can argue more against their Image Worship
than he does;' it is true his whole Discourse was intended against the Heathens,
because at that time there were no Christians that made use of Images by way of
Worship, as now the Papists do; but his Arguments are as clearly and fully
against the Papists now, as they were against the Heathen then. The Heathens
then told St. Austin, that they did not worship the Idol it self, but the Deity
represented by it; just as the Papists say now; and St. Austin in effect
replies to both: Let them excuse the matter how they please, yet their practice
was abominable; for, says he, the worshipping of any thing by an Image, does
soon bring the Worshippers to forget the thing represented, and apply their
whole Worship to the Statue representing, and come by degrees to be so affected
to it, as to believe the very Statue sees, hears, and furnishes them with those
things they pray for, The people set up a Statue in honor to the Sun, and at
length turn their backs to the Sun, but their faces to the Statue; pray, offer
Incense, sacrifice, and perform all their devotions to that. Here you have St.
Austin's Opinion of Statue and Picture-worship, how by degrees it draws away
the hearts of men from the Persons represented by them, and brings them at
length to worship the Statues themselves. And this Idolatrous inclination of
the people is very much advanced by the Popish Writers, who in their Legends
mention several Statues and Pictures, which have moved and spoken to their
Worshippers, and thereby have made the silly people run a madding, and as the
Scripture phrases it, run a whoring after their Idols. So that St. Austin's
Opinion is as fully verified among the Papist Christians, as ever it was among
Heathens, as you will see by that which follows.

When our late King of blessed memory went into Spain, several of this Nation
were Eyewitnesses of what I now relate; At Madrid, upon a Festival-day of the
Blessed Virgin, the Bishop, Priests, with hundreds of Monks and Friars, and
many thousands of the City, went in solemn Procession, carrying an Image of the
Blessed Virgin under a rich Canopy of State, born by several Noble persons,
with innumerable Torches and Wax-candles born by others, the Priests and
Religious Orders singing the Litany made to her, the houses and streets all
along garnished, and here and there, at the house of some great person, much
devoted to her, was erected an Altar most splendidly adorned, upon which the
Image was set down to rest, and some Hymn made to her was there sung; mean
while the Bishop and Priests putting Incense on Censers, offer it up to her: At
length they came to a large place, where was an Altar on the one side, and a
Theater on the other, magnificently set forth; the Image was placed on the
Altar, the Bishop, Priests, etc. attending, the Actors come forth on the
Theater, and begin a holy Comedy; the people eager Spectators, forgetting their
duty to their Lady on the Altar, flock round about the Theater; the Officers of
Misrule with great indignation fall on the people fiercely, and forcing them to
give place, make a Lane from the Altar to the Theater, that their Lady might
have a full view of the Play; a pleasant Comedy indeed, and made all our
English Protestants very merry: but some of the discreeter English Papists
there present, were much troubled at this, supposing (with good reason) it
would be laid home to their charge as gross Idolatry: for, just as Saint Austin
says, by the Papists great Devotion to this Statue, they came to believe it
had seeing Eyes and hearing Ears, and so partakes much of this Comical
entertainment; and if so, truly the Officers had just cause of indignation, to
see the people so rudely rush between their Lady and the Theater. In the word
of a Christian I affirm, that one of the discreeter English Papists, there
present, told me this passage, and therefore there can be no doubt of the truth.

In the principla Church at Rome, dedicated to the Blessed Virgin, called
Sancta Maria Majore, The great holy Mary, is a most stately high Altar, and a
little above it in the Wall is made a hollow place like a Cabinet, where is
reserved a Picture, reported to be made by St. Luke, which is commonly shut up;
but upon the special Feasts of the Blessed Virgin it is exposed to view, with
store of goodly rich silver Lamps burning before it, the smoke whereof has
black'd and quite defaced the Picture; (is it therefore cast away into the
fire? mark) on the Door of this Cabinet is another fresh and excellent Picture,
lively representing the Blessed Virgin; yet this is no way reverenced in
comparison of the other: for when it is exposed, it is just as if God should
visibly come down from Heaven; you may see persons of very good quality as soon
as they come within the Church-door fall down on their knees, and so on their
knees go creeping toward this Picture, and when they approach near it,
prostrate themselves on the Pavement, kiss the ground, then up again, stretch
forth their hands toward it, groan and sigh as if they would breath forth and
ejaculate their very Hearts unto it. What think you, Sir, of this? Again,

At that famous place Loretto, is reputed to be the very House where the
Blessed Virgin lived and nursed up our Savior, transported thither by Angels;
(Turselin the Jesuit's History of this is a rare Romamce:) this is now
converted into a Chapel, cased about with fine Marble, and stands in the
midst of a fair Church built over it; this Chapel of the House has an Altar
at one end divided from the rest, and above over the Altar an Image of the
Blessed Virgin with our Savior in her arms, reported likewise to be made by
St. Luke, no doubt of it, an excellent Painter and Statuarist, as well as
Physician; this Image also, with the continual smoke of Candles and Lamps, Gold
and Silver of mighty value, is made as black as any Gypsy; insomuch that the
Vulgar believe that she was made so by her abode in egypt. To this Image they
come in pilgrimage thousands of miles, leaving at home Pictures and Statues far
more lively representations, but all is nothing to this. When men are in any
danger by Sea, they vow some great offering for their deliverance, which has
filled several rooms there with a vast Treasure (the Turks have long been
greedy of this Prey:) the Devotion paid to this Image, by Pilgrims at their
approach, is of the same stamp and rate, as the beforementioned to the Picture.
There is at the upper corner of this little Chapel a Door, which lets men into
the place railed in for the Altar, over which the Image stands: and to be let
into this sanctum sanctorum, the holiest of holies, so near this divine Image
(which is seen as well without) is a favor for which you must well reward the
Doorkeeper; this is the very Paradise of Souls, blessed is the man that enters
here. And the reason why they pay this mighty veneration to this Image is,
because of the gteat Holiness and wonderful Virtue they fancy in it: so holy,
as whatsoever touches it, receives wonderful and powerful Virtue from it:
wherefore they humbly desire to have their Beads and Medals sanctified thereby,
and give them to the Keeper of the Closet, who hangs them on a forked Staff
reserved there for that purpose, and rubs them somewhat rudely on our Saviors
and Ladies faces, and if he be more than ordinarily fee'd, their Faces also pay
doubly for it, brushed and box'd with the Beads, to extract the more Virtue out
of them: If you ask, why so rude to their Faces? the Reason is, the rest is
covered with rich costly Garments, whereof they have great variety, and on the
great Festivals most magnificent; all being the Oblations of Devotees on
several occasions. If you ask again, why our Ladies Garments should not be able
to confer Virtue, as well as her Statue? I must leave the Papist Priests to
answer you, who reserve this divine Mystery close in their breasts; all that I
observe and learn is, how divine a Power they attribute to this Statue, which
is able to confer such Virtue to dead Beads, as to give them the same power
over Devils, as our Savior gave his Apostles. For a pair of these Beads put
about the neck of any possessed by the Devil, he is not able to endure the
Sanctity thereof, but crying and roaring rusheth forth. The Ephesian Image of
Diana, which fell from Jupiter, came much short of this; and therefore this
much better deserves to be worshipped by the whole World, of Papists at least.
And, Sir, never expect to be saved with them, unless you worship with them:
though the Priests, to get you to them, will tell you there is no necessity of
worshipping Images and praying to Saints, yet you must believe it is great Piety
and profitable Devotion to do both. Now he that believes this with them, and
yet will not worship with them sure deserves not Salvation, rejecting such
helpful means; and if ever he be saved at length, he shall be sure to fry in
Purgatory till Doomsday; who will pray for his Soul, who refuses to pray to our
Lady, the Queen of Heaven and Earth, of Angels and Saints, etc.

I could go on to relate the like Devotion to several other Statues of our
Lady. as that of Sicham, Foy, Goodnews, etc. and some of other Saints; but this
of Loretto carries the Bell clear away from them all; and I hope I have said
enough to keep you far from them all: for by what I have said, you plainly see
St. Austin's words verified, of the Papists, as well as of the Heathens, that
the Papists think there is powerful Virtue in the very Statues, and that the
Statues furnish them with those things they pray for; why else do they make
Vows and Pilgrimages to the Statue of Loretto, more than to any other Statue
they have at home? and the Blessed Virgin is as near them at home, as at
Loretto: sure they believe the Blessed Virgin also adores her own Statue at
Loretto (as he that was enamoured of his own Picture in the water) and confers
favors on them for that Statues sake, because she is honored for that Statues
sake; it is evident, because they will not afford her those rich Oblations
elsewhere, but she must go in Pilgrimage also to Loretto to receive them, and
thank that Image for them; and so at length, as St. Austin says, our Lady is
set aside, and become the Shadow of her own Statue. God of his infinite mercy
open their blind eyes, that they may see the grosness of their Idolatry.

Setting this their Idolatrous Worship aside, I honor the Blessed Virgin with
my heart, as much as any of them, and this they shall see, if ever I meet them
before her the Blessed Mother of my Savior, Blessed for ever. Amen.

There remains yet the Third part of Popish Idolatry, committed in adorning the
consecrated Host at the Mass, which will require no further proof than the
Confession of their prime Doctors; That this their Idolatry is as gross as ever
any Heathens were guilty of, if there be no Transubstantiation. Now that there
is no Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, there is a
large Volume learnedly written by Morton, Lord Bishop of Durham, never yet
answered. But you are not for such long Tracts and numerous Quotations; shall
we then consider what the Scripture says in this matter? where you conceive
the Papists have more advantage against us, than in any one point controverted
between us. Indeed it were strange if in so many points in difference, they
should not have some color at least in Scripture for one or two. Let us see
what Scripture they have for their Transubstantiation. A very clear one. Our
Savior taking Bread in his hand, said, This is my Body. Sure we believe our
Savior could change Bread into his Body, why then do not we believe that he
did change it? I pray you give me lieve to make the like Argument to you. Our
Savior as positively said, I am the bread which came down from heaven. Sure
you believe our Savior could change his Body into Bread, why then do not you
believe he did so? Are we not upon equal Terms? If then you deny the latter to
me, why may not I deny the former to you? You see how unconscionably they
accuse us as a sensual and faithless Generation, that will not believe any
thing beyond our Senses; do not we believe the Trinity, our Savior's
Incarnation, the Resurrection, and much more far above all Sense and Reason
also? and should as readily believe this, were there any just ground for it in
Scripture. But the Papists come upon us again and urge, does not our Savior
say, Joh. 6. My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed, and much
more in that Chapter? I must confess the words in this Chapter are far more
pressing upon us than those in Matthew: This is my body, etc. for'tis apparent
the words in John made many take them in a literal sense, as if Christ would
give his very Flesh and Blood to be eaten and drunk; whereat many of his
Disciples were much offended and went from him: but when at supper he said,
This is my body, and gave it his Disciples to eat, no man was offended at it,
or made any scruple to eat what he gave; which no doubt some one at least would
have done, had they apprehended it to be his very Flem. Thomas, who so hardly
believed his Resurrection, often declared unto him before hand, and attested to
him by all the rest after, and the thing it self so much more easy for him to
believe, that the Soul should enter the same Body but two whole days after
death, when he had seen Lazarus raised after four days; doubtless this slow
believing Thomas would have somewhat boggled at believing the bread converted
into Christ's Flesh, and to eat it; yet we do not find he or any other was
startled at it, but swallowed it down as readily as the former meat; for our
Savior had before informed them, that the words he spoke were spirit and life,
therefore they ought not to be offended at them: all which makes me confidently
believe, they did not believe it to be Christ's very Flesh, but took the words
as figuratively spoken, as you and all others do those words, I am the bread,
etc. And I do as confidently believe, that had they believed wrong, our Savior
would have rectified their belief, and would have fully instructed them. But
now, I beseech you consider those words in Joh. which are so much more pressing
for a literal sense of Christ's very flesh given; if those by the Papist Doctors
are taken in a figurative sense, and will not be endured by them in a literal
sense, have you not much more reason to take those in Matthew in a figurative
sense? The Papist Doctors dare not take the Words of St. John literally,
because they so clearly condemn the taking away the Cup from the Laity, and
denying them the Blood of Christ, which our Savior there so absolutely
requires to be drunk by every one that will enter into Life. Now consider into
what a strait the Papist Doctors have brought themselves into: if they take the
words literally, their taking away the Cup is declared damnable to the Laity;
if they take them figuratively, their Transubstantiation is condemned as a
grand Imposture. But, blessed be God, we are free from both, and fully
confirmed in the figurative sense by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 23. Where he tells
the Corinthians that he delivered to them what he received of the Lord, who
said, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood; which words differ much from
those spoken by our Savior, and are as different in the sense also, if taken
literally; for they denote a change of the Cup into Christ's Blood, and
therefore of necessity must and are taken by all figuratively, and then they
signify the same with our Savior's words: and I hope the Papists will not
accuse St. Paul to have told the Corinthians a false story, and delivered that
unto them which he never received of Christ. Sure you will rather stand up for
St. Paul, and accuse their Transubstantiation of falsity. I could dilate on
this Subject much more; but I love brevity as well as you, and when you desire
more there is enough to be seen in Bishop Morton,. ande. The Conclusion is made
by the Papist Doctors, that, there being no Transubstantiation, they are as
great Idolaters in adoring the consecrated Host, as any Heathens ever were.
God of his infinite mercy preserve you from having any Communion with them.

I shall now end this business, as I began with Dr. Thorndick's Judgment
thereon. He, in his Sixteenth Chapter, speaking of the Papists praying to
Saints, says, there was no such thing in use till a good while after
Constantine the Emperor, who died Anno Dom. 350. so that, by this Computation,
it must be about 400 years. And can any one in reason think it fit to venture
on so dangerous a practice in Religion, unknown to the Church 400 years, when
Faith was purest, Devotion most fervent, Sanctity most eminent, and when all
helps to Salvation were most eagerly pursued, yet no praying to Saints
practiced; which is now come to that height, as Dr. Thorndick himself there
calls it, A precipice of horrible danger; sor, says he, they ask the same
things of the Saints, and especially of the Blessed Virgin, in the same terms
in which they are desired of God, even in the holy Scripture. And this which
the Doctor affirms, is most evident in their printed Books of Prayer; wherein
though they sometimes mention the Saints Intercession (and this we do to Christ
also perfect God) yet other times they pray to the Saints and Blessed Virgin
directly for the things. Thus you see they make no distinction between God,
Christ, Blessed Virgin and Saints in their form of Prayer or things prayed for.
And is not this Idolatry, far greater than to sacrifice to them Bulls and Rams,
to give them the divinest part of God's Worship? Is not this to deifie them in
the highest degree? Is not this to worship false Gods? They make them Gods as
much as ever the Heathens made their Heroes Gods, for the Heathens believed
their Heroes to be mortal Men, they knew them living, they saw them dying, but
for their great Virtues believed their Souls were carried up into heaven. and
therefore worshipped God; is not this the very same that the Papists believe
and do to their Saints? is their any difference but only this, that the Papists
do not call their Saints Gods, which, as I showed before, matters not? I say
then again, that as the Heathens their Heroes, so the Papists make their Saints
Gods; and sure they are no true Gods, therefore false Gods, and they worship
these false Gods, are they not then Idolaters, according to Dr. Thorndick
himself, and Scripture also? Nor is this their Idolatry any way abated, but
rather aggravated, in that they know and believe the true God; for the
Heathens, who did not know the true God, were far more excusable in sacrificing
and communicating the same Worship to several Gods, there being no great
disparity between Jupiter, Mars, Apollo, etc. But for those that know one God,
the Creator of all things, and that the greatest Angels, or Archangels,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles or Martyrs, are but his Creatures, of infinite
degree inferior to the Eternal Almighty God; the poor creeping Worm in the
dust, is not so far inferior to an Emperor of the whole Earth; I say then,
for them, who know this infinite Almighty God, to give the divine Worship due
unto him, to poor wretched creatures, and also to Pictures and Images, even to
Stocks and Stones, is so high and presumptuous Idolatry, as Heathens, not
knowing the True One God, never were, nor could be guilty of. And yet
notwithstanding all this, Dr. Thorndick would fain excuse them from Idolatry,
because the Popish Church has put forth a Profession of Faith more tolerable
than their Practice; just as if the Papists having made some declaration of
Allegiance to the King, should be acquitted of the Gunpowder-Treason,
endeavoring to blow up the King, Queen, Prince, and Chief of the Kingdom at
one clap. Truly by this Rule they may sacrifice to Baal, and be excused from
Idolatry. I am amazed to find that so rational and sober a person should
discourse so irrationally, so wildly: he has fully verified the old Saying,

-- Semel insanivimus omnes As for your Postscript wherein you ask, why we
should so much fear the Growth of Popery, if their Practices be so gross and
Idolatrous, as to be even ridiculous? I conceive it is in part answered already,
where I showed how all Mankind is inclined to Idolatry. For sure no man is so
simple as to think, this Vice ran in the Blood of the Jews more than any other
Nations, but rather less; for they all came out of the loins of Abraham, the
Father of the faithful, and consequently according to Nature should be rather
better Believers than others: and therefore it is a very silly supposal, that
the Commandments against Idolatry were intended more for the Jews than for any
other Nation, but only out of God's special favor to them, and Fatherly care
to preserve them more from it than other Nations; whom he suffered to run on in
their natural blindness and sensual Worship, till the Fullness of Time came for
the Conversion of the Gentiles: Then God was pleased to make them equal
partakers of the Favors and Graces bestowed on the Jews; then was the Light
both of the Law and Gospel manifested to all; and all Laws, not purely
Ceremonial (which were abolished in Christ) equally concerned all the Nations
of the Earth, and ought to be esteemed as gracious helps to preserve us from
things unlawful, not burthensom restraints from things lawful. Wherefore
Idolatry being so grievous a sin, and our Nature so prone to carnal and sensual
Worship, Christians, who lie under so much a greater Obligation to serve God,
should be so much the more careful to avoid all temptations to it; as the
worshipping of Saints much more suitable to our carnal Nature, and more easily
comprehended by us, than the spiritual Worship of the incomprehensible God; in
which the sublimest part of Man, our Rational Faculty, labors hard, as we all
find by sad experience, and can scarce keep our thoughts raised up and fixed on
it two or three minutes. This makes the Papists so much inclinable to the more
easy Will Worship of their Fellow Creatures, and so expatiate in their
Devotions to the Saints, as God is at length almost forgotten by them, and all
his divine honors conferred on the Creatures. And so in like manner Statues
and Pictures being things very acceptable to our Senses, and, as St. Austin
observes, by them work so powerfully on our Minds, as to inveigle our hearts to
give them also much of God's Worship, we should be extreme wary in the use of
them, or having much converse with those that use them; which made God so
severely forbid the Jews matching with other Nations. Evil communication
corrupts good manners; very chaste persons, by degrees, become great
Whoremongers and Adulterers, Terms in Scripture frequently given to Idolaters,
to show the Sympathy our Carnal Nature has alike to both, and therefore ought
to be restrained alike from both, and severe Laws to be made against both. The
grossness of the Sin will never deterr our gross Nature from it, no nor the
folly of it neither; Stultorum plena sunt omnia: a great part of the World
consists of silly Women and Children, pleased with Toys, which makes the weaker
Sex much incline to the trinketting Ceremonies of the Papists; and a great part
of men are as weak as they; and as for the small remaining part of
understanding men, their Reason is so deprest by their affection to their Wives
and Children, as they are content to go to Puppit-plays with the one, and ride
Hobby-horses with the other. And when the general Current of men's Devotion runs
this filly carnal course, and he thought to have no Devotion that runs not with
them, wise men will soon deviate into the same silly course, condemned by
themselves, but applauded by others, rather than be condemned as irreligious by
others, though applauded by themselves. If Socrates, the wisest Heathen in the,
World, and Solomon, the wisest Believer in the World, forsook their own Reason
to sacrifice with the Vulgar and with Women; who may not be seduced into the
like Error? so vain a thing is Man. He that loves danger shall perish therein,
Ecclus. 3. 26. Thus I have endeavored to satisfy your Scruples, whereof if I
have failed, yet sure I have satisfied your desires, requiring it at my hands,
which I have obeyed, as,

SIR, Your humble Servant.


