THE FIRST PART OF Babel's-Builders Unmasking Themselves.

As appears by the following Judgment from Barbados (promoted by George Fox
his Party, and subscribed by Eighty two of them.) With a LETTER of G. F's. G.
W's. etc. in Answer thereunto; and Observations thereupon. Also, A False
Prophecy of that Lying Prophet Sol. Eccles.

Whereas the following Discourse was formerly Printed and privately Disposed,
to those Concerned, or privy to the Controversy depending, amongst those
called Quakers, but finding some of G. F's. Party have since Publicly Exposed
it with Slanderous and false Charges on the Author, This second Impression,
with some small Addition, is now made Public, in Detestation of the Principle
contained in the Judgment and Letter of G. F. etc. Being of Evil tendency, and
contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, his Apostles, and all sincere-hearted
Protestants.

Also, in Expectation it may be of Service to those who do not desire to GIVE
UP THEIR WHOLE CONCERNS SPIRETUAL AND TEMPORAL, IF RE-QUIRED, TO THE SPIRIT OF
GOD (as they term it) IN THEIR MEN AND WOMEN'S MEETINGS. But for those that have
so done, (as is too Obvious there be many such) that the Lord would give them
to see the Error of their Ways, and Repentance before it be too late, is the
Desire of, Thomas Crisp.

Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Hearken not unto the Words of the Prophets, that
Prophecy unto you -- They speak a Vision of their own Hearts, and not out of
the Mouth of the Lord,

Jer. 23.16. Thy Prophets have seen Vain and Foolish Things for thee, and they
have not discovered Thine Iniquity -- but seen for thee False Prophesies,

Lam. 2.14. London, Printed, and are to be sold by Enock Prosser, at the Rose
in Swithins-Alley, at the East end of the Royal Exchange, 1682.

The INTRODUCTION.
THE Intent of the Publication of this ensuing Paper and Letter, etc. is not to
riflect on, or reproach the People called Quakers, or in contempt of their
Principle: For God has a People among them, many of whom have long been
reviled, and falsely accused and slandered, because they have Conscientiously
refused to Conform to Prescriptions without Conviction, and are therefore
termed Seperates, Stubborn, Cains, Judas's, Apostates; and what not, that may
make them odious to honest People? But this is to manifest the Apostasy and
Innovations of a few of them that are of the Foxonian Sect [ the term,
Foxonion, is only for Distinction] which love Pre-eminence, and term themselves
the Body and Elders, and the Church, and presume to give Laws and Orders to
others to Conform to, or else be accounted Infidels, Rebels, etc. when it is
evident, the Cause of their Rage against them (they call Separates, etc.) is,
because they will not rebel against the Light in their own Hearts: So it is
those that pretend themselves the Church, Elders, etc. that would cause the
People to rebel, therefore it may be said, they are like Jeroboam the Son of
Nebat, who made Israel to Sin. Also G. F. etc. have manifested themselves to be
Lo here is (which Christ commanded should not be gone after) as appears by their
Letter herein, produced and pretended as a Disowning that Paper or Judgment,
but does chiefly endeavor to stifle it from going abroad, because it manifests
their Confusion.

And that G. F's, etc. Universal Spirit they so often mention, is not that
which Peter had, Acts 10, 24 which accepts all that fear God, and work
Righteousness, but they hedge up the way to Acceptance with God, and leave no
Entrance, but by their Forms of Men and Womens-Meetings; contrary to Christ,
who said, I am the Way; etc. Also they ascribe that to their Orders and
Meetings, which the Scripture ascribes to Christ. And G. F. etc. are so fond of
Proselites to their Orders and Meetings, that notwithstanding this Paper and
Judgment is so repugnant to their pretended Foundation-Principle, yet they give
not a word of sharp Reproof to it in all their Letter, as the Apostle to the
Galatians, Who has bewitched you? But they, instead thereof, give high
Commendations: Therefore with Sorrow it may be said, as formerly of Literal
Jerusalem, so now of Jerusalem from above, Her Adversaries are the Chief, her
Enemies prevail; and Blindness is in part happened to Israel. This has the
Lord suffered to come to pass, that no Flesh should glory in his Sight.
Therefore he humbled and fear before Him, for their presuming that they are
Gods People, and that they have his Wisdom and Power with them, therefore they
conclude, what they do act as the Body or Church, is of God, and must stand as
his Will and Counsel, and for want of his Power (which alone makes his Peeple
willing) they fly to their pretended Church Power and Authority, and Saul-like,
desire to have Honor before the People; but what Power theirs is, on which
they ground their Authority to proceed against the Dissenters from their
prescribed Forms of Meetings, etc. Hear Is. Penington's Judgment, That Power
therefore in the Church which spares the Hippocrites (who can easily comply
with an Outward Conformity in Worship, without feeling an Inward Life and
Virtue) but lights heavy on that which is tender and shy in Matters of Worship,
that is not the true Church Power, at best, but a Counterfeit of the True.

At a Quarterly Meeting at Ralph Fretwell's House in Barbados, the 23d. day of
the tenth Month, 1680.
THe Sum of the Testimony this day born, amounts to this: That there is this
day a Choice to be made, Viz. Whether Friends will cleave and abide unto the
Universal Spirit of the Living God, and each give up their whole Concerns; with
which Spirit the Faithful have Unity? Or, Whether they will give up unto the
Judgment in their own particular, or Particulars only, with which the Judgment
General of the Meeting have not Unity?

After very many Testimonies given, to the further opening of the Question, the
Judgment underneath was written, being voluntarily Subscribed unto by each
particular of this Meeting, or by their Orders, their Names were hereunto put.

Here follows that Detestable Judgment aforementioned.
I desire to give up my whole Concern [then all Faith and Conscience] if
required, both Spiritual and Temporal, unto the Judgment of the Spirit of God
in the Men and Women's Meetings: as believing it to be more according to the
Universal Wisdom of God, than any particular measure in my self, or any
particulars with which the Men and Womens-Meetings have not Unity.

This wicked Judgment was Subscribed by Men, 39. Women 43. Total 82.

The Party that sent the abovesaid, writes thus, Viz. This Paper has been
promoted in sundry other Meetings since, and Subscribed: some few have refused:
in abhorrence whereof, other Persuasions have Posted it.

Here follows the Letter of G. F. etc. to the Quarterly Meeting at Barbados,
touching the said Paper; whereby it may be seen how, and wherein they own or
disown it.

NOw dear Friends, if this Order or Judgment should come into the hands of any
Apostates or Opposers, they would make ill Work with it, and say, that we set
up an Arbitrary Power over Men's Consciences and Properties, and an Implicit
Faith and Submission, without Inward Conviction; [What more true] And that we
divided the Measure of God in a particular, from the Universal Spirit of God in
other Particulars in Men's and Womens-Meetings. And as for Subscribing unto such
an Order or Judgment, they would say, it was like the Scotch-Covenant; and as
tho the Measure of the Faith and Spirit of God in themselves, was not agreeable
to the Universal Spirit and Faith in the Men's and Womens-Meetings; and that if
they should go from the Measure of Faith and Spirit of God in their own
Particulars, and to give up both their Spiritual and Temporal Concerns to the
Universal Spirit in Men's and Womens-Meetings. This would be the way to bring
them all from the Measure of the Spirit in their own Particulars. For how can
the Men and Women in the Universal Spirit receive that which is not given up
from the Universal Spirit: therefore all must be left to the Universal Spirit
in their own Measures thereof; and as for the Stubborn and Wilful, that are
against Men and Womens-Meetings, the Universal Spirit cannot receive that. And
all are to give up to the Universal Spirit in their own Particulars, in which
Spirit they have Unity and Fellowship without outward Subscription, and to be
led by the same Spirit, to see their Names written in Heaven in this Gospel-day
of Light and Life; and this is, and was the Saints Testimony in the
New Covenant of Light and Life, and their Heavenly Subscription, which is above
all outward Subscriptions, both among the Jews and Professors, for the one ties
them below, and the other ties them above. And for any to say, They desire to
give up their whole Concerns, both Spiritual and Temporal unto the Judgment of
the Spirit of God in Men's and Womens-Meetings, as believing it to be more
according to the Universal Wisdom of God, than any particular Measure in my
self, or any Particulars.

Now this would make the Belief which is in the Light, and the Spirit in their
own Particulars, not one with the Universal Spirit in the said Meettings. And
as for those that the Men's and Womens-Meetings in the Universal Spirit of God
have not Unity with, they are erred from their own Measures of the Spirit of
God; but the Universal Spirit of God has Unity with the the least Measure now,
as it was in the Apostles days, who kept every one to their own Measures, which
was both the great Rule and Line of the new Creature in the Believers and
Saints then, and so with that the Universal Spirit in the Apostles and Elders
then had, and now have Unity. And therefore, dear Friends, we know your Care
and Tenderness of Truth, and that you aim at the best Things, (Contrary to S.
Crisp, who said, the Paper was not only ill worded, but he believed 'twas ill
meant) 'and have had much to do with some loose Spirits there: and therefore our
Desires are, that you would stop this Paper from going any further, lest some
should get Copies of it, and spread amongst bad Spirits; and keep in the
general tender Spirit of God, that in Love you may answer the Measure of the
Spirit of God in them that are Convinced by it, and in them that err from it.
And the Man of God must not strive, but be gentle toward all. And so
concluding with the Apostles tender Advice, 1 Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you
Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same
thing, and that there be no Divisions among you, but that you be perfectly
joined together in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment. And Phil. 2.2, 3.
Fulfill you my Joy, that you be like minded, having the same Love, being of one
Accord, of one Mind, let nothing be done through Strife or vain Glory, but in
lowliliness of Mind let each esteem other better than themselves. And 1 Pet.
5.8. Finally, be all of one Mind, having Compassion one of another, love as
Brethren: Be pitiful, be courteous.

Now as for your Subscription to an outward tie, be above such things;
forasmuch as you are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ, written
not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the Living God; which Spirit has given
you Life, and will bring you to the City of the Living God, the Heavenly
Jerusalem, and to the General Assembly and Church of the Firstborn, which are
written in Heaven, etc. Your dear Friends and Brethren in our Lord Jesus
Christ, in whom you have Peace, Life, and Salvation.

GEORGE FOX, etc.

As for the aforesaid Paper from Barbados, wherein is expressed the Judgment of
the Quarterly Meeting, I take it to be neither according to Scripture, nor the
Principles of Truth.

And first, for Scripture; By it you make void the New Covenant, or Law written
in the Heart. Of which it is said, Heb. 8.11. They shall not need to teach
every Man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; but all shall know me from the
least to the greatest. And John 2. The Anointing which you have received of
Him, abides in you, you need not any Man to teach you, but as that teaches,
etc. But your Judgment contradicts these, Viz. (Give up your whole Concern,
Spiritual and Temporal, if required, unto the Spirit of God, (as you say) in
Men and Womens-Meetings, believing it to be more according to the Universal
Wisdom of God, than any particular in your selves, etc. But the Scripture
says, None know the Things of God, but the Spirit of God. And how shall any
one know what the Meeting requires is according to the Spirit of God, if not by
a measure of it in themselves? It is also said, If our Heart Condemn us, God is
greater: but if that Coodemn us not, then have we Confidence toward God. For
if it please God to reveal any thing to any Particular, and the general deny,
or disown it, then that particular must deny Revelation, and give up to the
general. According to this Doctrine, I cannot see how the Church should ever be
restored out of the Apostasy, unless God first reveal Himself to the general;
which seems to be contrary to His way of Manifestation to this very day: For
what must John have done with his Revelations and Message to the Asian
Churches, Sardis and Laodicia, who had a Name to Live, and were Dead? And said,
they were rich, and increased in Goods, and wanted nothing. They thought well
of themselves, (as you do) and had but few Names left (not the generality) yet
were mistaken, and Apostatized, and reproved by a Particular. Now, according to
your Judgment, John and the few Names ought to have given up to the general,
and not to his particular Revelation. Also all the Reformations since the
Apostasy, have been begun by Particulars, and opposed and persecuted by the
general; therefore it is not as you say, most agreeing to the Wisdom of God, to
cleave to the Judgment of the general, but to the particular Manifestation;
although the Judgment general has not Unity therewith. For if a Particular may
reprove the general, surely he ought to cleave to his particular Measure for
his own Belief and Practice, although the general have not Unity therewith: for
what is not of Faith, is Sin, much more what is contrary thereto. For if any
Meeting requires one to do or believe contrary to their own Measure: whoever
obeys them, therein becomes a Servant to those Persons and Meetings: for his
Servants ye are whom you obey. Hereby you call such Men or Meetings your Master
or Father, contrary to Christ's Command. Oh Friends, strain not at Gnats, and
swallow such Camels! which the 82 seemed to have done.

That it is against the Principles of Truth, is plain enough, and needs no
proof: for by that we are taught to be guided by the Manifestation of Gods
Spirit in our own Hearts, to speak and act as thereby instructed, and that the
Judgment of Truth through a part of Christ's Members, cannot become a Bond on
others further than their Understandings are illuminated thereby. These two
Positions the Judgment aforesaid seems to contradict. Also read E. B. and Is.
P's Works, or any ancient Friends, they all direct to the Light in our own
Hearts or Consciences, as the only and sufficient Guide and Leader: But your
Judgment not only contradicts Scripture, and Friends Testimonies, but you have
given such an unlimited Power to Meetings, and not contented to give that to
Men which never before was given since Protestantism, but to Women also, in
which the Scripture is silent; or what it says is rather against their having
any Power or Rule, but to be subject. Nay, this unlimited Power was one of the
heavy weights in the Pope's Yoke, that made it so uneasy to England in times of
Popery; neither can I find that ever in England, the Pope, or any Church,
gained this point by all their Stratagems, Wars, etc. as you have granted, (
Viz. the giving up all Spirituals and Temporals) The Christian-State is said to
be a glorious Liberty, but your Judgment makes them Slaves and Vassals, and
will cause any Understanding Men to avoid submitting to such a Church that has
so unlimited a Power; it is much safer submitting to a Church which makes the
Scripture their Rule; for thereby one may know what they may or can require of
one, but yours, (after one has given up all Spirituals, etc.) may still
require more without measure, if you pretend or stamp such Requirings with the
Name of the Universal Spirit of God, as Experience teaches, has been too
frequent. What is become of all our Protesting Forefathers, according to your
Judgment? For you seem to have acquitted Rome of all their Blood, for they had
not only the Judgment of the generality of the Church, but of the Magistracy
and Law of the Nation against them, which was of greater Authority than your
Women's Meetings, for which there is no Precept, Precedent nor Law, but against,
viz. their Form and Power. I am ashamed, that after all this Light and
Knowledge pretended, any should make such a long stride toward Rome, which now
is very unseasonable; for if but one more such, I know not but you may both too
soon meet, and embrace each other. If any say we mistake you, you do not give
up to the Meeting, but to the Spirit of God, etc. W. Pen's Address, etc. and
other Testimonies, I think, answer that, Viz. A Man may falsely believe as the
True Church believes: and if I believe only, because She believes, and not
because I am convinced in my own Understanding and Conscience, my Faith is
false, tho Hens be true. p. 146. Also E. Borough says, Every one is to mind
the Teachings of the Spirit of Christ in himself, for to that he is to stand or
fall, p. 152. Also if a bare saying it is the Spirit without evidence will
serve, then the Pope may say so to. Now that which further aggravates, and
makes this Judgmen the worse, is, that it should come from such Persons as G.
F. etc. writes the 82 Subscribers to be, Viz. Manifestly declared the Epistle
of Christ, written with the Spirit of the Living God, which Spirit has given
you Life, and will bring you to the City of the Living GOD, etc. -- Aim at the
best Things, Viz. Give up all, etc.

HIGH GROWN CRISTIANS, OR G. F. etc. HIGHLY MISTAKEN!

Thus what you have done seems to be to the dishonor of Truth, and contrary to
what you once professed: for the sufficiency of Light in your own hearts was
that Gospel you received, and they Preached at first, for all to cleave to, and
abide by, and give up to. But now to give up to the Requirings of others although
con rary to that; what more like another Gospel? Therefore I beseech you, mind
the Exhortation, If We, or an Angel from Heaven bring any other Gospel than
that you have received, let Him be accursed. And avoid all such Questions as
these are, and the Propounders thereof, for they are but foolish Questions,
yea, worse, and will gender to S^rife and BONDAGE; therefore let no Men (nor
WOMEN especially) rule over you, nei her receive their Traditions for
Doctrines, further than manifested by the Truth in your own hearts, and in the
Scriptu es Are you so foolish as to believe that the R quirings of Men and
Women-Mee^ings, without Scripture-Evidence, or manifestation by the Light in
your own Hearts, can give you acceptance with God? wh n as Christ said to them
that said they had Prophesied, and cast out Devi s, and done many mighty Works
in his Name, Depart, I know you not, etc. And think you such unwarrantable
Requirings, and Implicit giving up, can stand you in stead? Nay, this
Persuasion comes not of God, but it is fulfilled, as was prophesied in
Scripture, Some shall arise from among your selves, speaking perve^se things.
Remember from whence ye are fallen, and return to the measure of Truth in your
own selves, and arise and depart from such Judgmen s, for fear it be fulfilled
on you, as was said against some of old, When they knew God, they glorified Him
not as God; they became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish hearts
were darkened. Therefore I pray be not so soon moved and tossed up and down by
these windy Arbitrary and Implicit Judgm^nts of men, who have men's Persons and
Orders in Admiration, because of Advantage; for such serve not Christ, but
themselves: but mind you the Truth in your own hearts, and according as the
Apostle said, Let every one be fully persuaded in his own Mind. You must answer
for your selves to God, when it shall be said, Who required these things at
your hands? Will any Men or Women, or outward written Orders, have greater
Force than Moses and the Prophets? Nay, but as many as are led by the Spirit of
God, are the Sons of God; this Spirit Christ said he would send, should be in
them.

Forasmuch as the foregoing Letter of G. F. etc. to Barbados was produced, as
a proof of their denial of the said Paper, I observe therein, That they are
more afraid of its Publication, than ashamed of the Matter, and do more object
the subscribing the Paper, than owning that Principle; (Viz, giving up all to
them) as appears by their Words, If it should come into the Hands of Opposers,
etc. they would say we set up Arbitrary Power, Implicit Faith, etc. (but they
say not so) which are the plain tendency thereof.

But it is needful to know what they mean by the Universal Spirit, being that
is so often mentioned. I take it to be the Opinion or Judgment of the Ruling
Party (or Foxonions) among the Quakers; because they exclude those who oppose
their Orders, as being Apostates, and gone out from the Universal Spirit. Also
I take this Spirit of theirs not to be the Universal Spirit of God, but a
private selfish Spirit of their own: because they say, As for the Stubborn and
Wilful, that are against Men and Womens-Meetings, the Universal Spirit cannot
receive that. Now those they term Stubborn, etc. are not against Men's and
Womens-Meetings, but differ about the Form and Power thereof; they are only
against Women having Meetings apart from the Men, when they have no business
requires it: not against them in Cities, great Towns and Places, where they
live near together, and Occasions require, but where they live remote from each
other, and have no business. Also the Form of Marriages, etc. This is great
part of the difference, and the Case of those Persons, G. F. etc. term
Apostates, Bad Spirits, etc. And G. F. etc. says, The Universal Spirit cannot
receive that. I shall show by Testimonies of Scripture and Friends, that
notwithstanding Differences, yet Christians ought to receive each other, and
walk in Love as Brethren.

E. Borough says, Notwithstanding their difference in Judgment, whether in
Cases Substantial or Ceremonial, yet they were still to be in Love and Unity,
page 809. And every one to mind the Teachings of the Spirit in himself. Hereby
you may see that E. B. could receive in Love, and walk in Unity with such as
differed in Cases Substantial: which is as high a difference as any about
Women's Meetings can be.

Also W. Pen says ( Address to Protestants, p. 70.) I cannot see how such Men
can excuse themselves from great presumption, etc. who deny those Persons to be
Members of Christ's Church, that in Conscience refuse to subscribe any other
Draught than their Lord has given them. Then how can G. F. etc. excuse
themselves, who say, Those that be against Womens-Meetings, the Universal
Spirit cannot receive? Unless G. F. etc. prove that such Dissenters have had
their Form of Womens-Meetings from the Lord. And G. F. etc. must admit them
Members of Christ's Church, or prove they refuse that which the Lord has given
them; or else G. F. etc. are inexcusable, and condemnable by their own
Testimonies. Also 2 Pet. 1.5. Give all diligence thereunto: add to Faith,
Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, Godliness, Brotherly-Kindness, Love:
for if these things be in you, and abound, ye shall not be unfruitful, nor
barren, etc. -- Wherefore give all diligence to make your Calling and Election
sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fail; for an Entrance shall be
ministered unto you into the Everlasting Kingdom. Now I appeal to any sober
Christian, Whether all these Qualifications may not be in one, and yet
conscientiously dissent from a Form of Marriage, or Womens-Meetings, as ordered
by G. F. If it can be, as I am sure it may, that one may be so qualified and
assisted by Gods Spirit, as to attain these Virtues expressed by the Apostle
Peter, and not comply with G. F's Womens-Meetings; then a sure entrance is made
into the Everlasting Kingdom, and they are received by the Universal Spirit of
God: therefore G. F's etc. Universal Spirit, so often mentioned, is not that of
God, nor of E. B. or Is. P. nor the Spirit of Christ nor his Apostles, for they
said, Judge not; and that the Tree was known by its Fruit. But G. F. etc. will
judge and condemn for evil, and gone from the Spirit, although no evil Fruit
appears, only Nonconformity to them. Also where evil Fruit does appear, as in
this their Judgment, yet he can say to them, because they own his Form, and
Women's Meetings, We know your Care, and that you aim at the best things. So
that to give up to his Orders, tho contrary to their own measures, seems by
him, termed the best Things, and they are manifestly declared the Epistle of
Christ, wrote with the Spirit of the Living God, etc. Whereby he seems to place
more Virtue and Power in conforming to his Orders of Women's Meetings, etc. than
in all Faith and Fruits of the Spirit, expressed in the Scripture. And
wherever G. F. mentions the Universal Spirit, I take him he means the Spirit
that set up, and adores those Meetings, and persecutes all such who cannot for
Conscience sake conform thereto. Now Christ said, Whatever you would another
should do unto you, that do unto them. Love thy Neighbor as thy self, etc.
This is the true Universal Spirit, to desire no more Liberty nor Charity from
another than one would be content to allow them; and Impose no more on another,
than one would have them Impose on ones self. G. F. etc. once cried for Liberty
of Conscience; none must perform any Worship, but as taught and led thereinto
by the Light in their own Hearts: but having gathered a People to themselves,
now (say they) Submit to your Elders: and if not Conform to his Orders (for
Conscience sake) then Wilful, Stubborn, out of the Universal Spirit and Truth,
Enemies, Rebels, accursed from all Eternity, etc.

And it appears that the Subscribers and G. F. etc. do differ: for he says,
This would make the Belief which is in the Light, and the measure of the Spirit
in their own particulars, not one with the Universal (i. e. G. F's) Spirit,
etc. Indeed so it does; for there be many that believe in the Light, and
measure of the Spirit, and its Sufficiency, that are not one with G. F's, etc.
Imposing Spirit, which he calls Universal, but against it; although the true
Universal Spirit of Christ, and in all His, has now, as formerly, Unity with
the least measure in any Member, tho for Conscience sake, they may be of a
differing apprehension in some things; and therefore, the Apostle, He became
all to all, weak, or strong; and said, bear one another Burdens, and bear one
with another; and therefore he condescended to Baptize and Circumcise, to win
over, and endeavored the increase of their Faith and Understandings; not blind
Conformity before Convincement, but said, If any be otherwise minded, God shall
reveal it, etc. As their Faith increased, so should their Obedience. The
Spirit, the Apostle was in, could receive those that differed in Judgment and
Practice in some things, and did not say they were erred from their measures;
and if against Womens-Meetings, that the Universal Spirit could not receive
them, but were careful not to offend the weak; would deny themselves that which
was lawful, for the benefit of the weak: therefore not of G. F's, pretended
Universal Spirit.

Now G. F's etc. Letter is so jumbled together, seemingly disowning, and yet
owning the Paper too: but take them either ways; if they disown, then that
manifests a difference; if they own it, then they plainly manifest themselves
to be what the Dissenting Party has objected against them many Years (only G.
F. etc. have imperiously and wrongfully born them down) Viz. That they do in
their Actings contradict their Principles and Doctrine; that is, they (as the
Pharisees) say, and do not: for it is evident by the scope of their Letter,
that they are dissatisfied with the wording of it, and that latter Clause which
admits a particular measure, may differ from the general, also afraid of its
Publication, knowing they cannot justify it, and that it is that they have
been charged for practicing these many years, and for this cause many have and
do dissent from them, whom they term, -- gone from the Power of God, and
Opposers of the Order of the Gospel: Setters up of Standards against Truth: and
many other Names and marks of Sons of Perdition; when they have nothing else
against them, only not submitting to G. F's Orders without Conviction: for G.
F. etc. do not at all contradict the Principle, Of giving up all, only the
subscribing to it; nor deny but their Meetings have such power, or ought to be
given up to, only would insinuate that it is done from the Universal Spirit of
God; and all who do not so believe and act, the Universal Spirit cannot
receive, etc. But all that fear God, beware of such, who be thus given to
change, and believe and act so contrary to what they say and pretend; and
notwithstanding the good words of the Apostle, in the latter end of G. F's
Letter, which be sound; and had they kept themselves to their primitive
Testimony, and sound Doctrine, as in Scripture, there had not been this
Separation: but having followed the Devices of their own Heads, with fair words
and speeches, they beguile many simple ones; but now their Folly is made
manifest, and that they have only a Form of Godliness, but deny the Power
thereof; therefore from such turn away. And it is better to be by such accounted
Separates, than for their favor to deprive your selves of the benefit of your
own measures of Light and Life, according to which all shall be at last Judged.

As for the seeming dislike (or blame) of the Judgment, from these following
words in G. F's Letter, Viz. This would make the Belief in the Light, and the
measure of the Spirit in their own particulars, not one with the Universal
Spirit in the said Meetings. That this is a disowning of, or a Reproof for the
Judgment in general, or the giving up of all, etc. is but a fallacious cover,
as appears by his high commending and extolling them in the latter part of his
Letter, in p. 5. Also his words to them he terms Stubborn and Wilful, that
cannot give up all, etc. of those he says, The Universal Spirit cannot receive
that -- those that the Men's and Women's Meetings have not Unity with in the
Universal Spirit of God, they are erred from their own measures, etc. What this
Universal Spirit is that they so often mention, is showed in the Introduction,
and page 9. Also they say in W. F's Book, Spiritual-Liberty, etc. page 4. Those
that be left with the one Spirit of Truth, must be of one Mind, they cannot be
otherwise. These words, be of one Mind, and having Unity with G. F's
Womens-Meetings, is all to the same effect as the Barbados Judgment, only that
is more naked, and plain, and not so subtly worded, as some here could have
done it, for we must believe and practice just as they do, or would have us, or
else no Unity, which implies as much ^iving up as the Barbados Judgment does,
as is further manifested by their severe Judgments against those that cannot so
do, and by rendering them Apostates, etc. And G. F's, etc. dislike or blameing
them is not for their giving up all, etc. but for the latter Clause of the
Judgment, which admits that a particular measure may differ, or not agree with
the generally in the Men's and Womens-Meetings, who be too much swayed and
overruled by his Party, and termed the Universal Spirit of God: but this
Judgment proves that their Universal Spirit, and Ruling Party have erred;
therefore Particulars ought not to have Unity with them, but testify against
them. It Is evident from the Asian, and all others Churches since down to this
very Barbados Church, that the Universal Ruling Part have erred, and been
testified against and reproved by particulars, as G. F's Lording Spirit in
himself and Party have been, although they seem to be so resolved, as that they
will have the Power, Authority, and Judgment, etc. and will Govern; and rather
than they will want a Place where, and Subjects over whom to govern, etc. they
will stretch their Power over the Consciences of their Brethren, even in the
Seat or Throne of Christ, as is further manifest from R. B's Anarchy, etc.
vindicated by the Second-days Meeting in their (false) Accuser, etc. page 57.
Where they ask this Question, If in no Case of Conscience the Church of Christ
has Power to give such positive Sentence as is just and righteous.

When they mention the Church of Christ in respect to this present Age, that
they mean only themselves, seems evident from the said R. B's Anarchy, etc. p.
43. Also Judas or the Jews, etc. p. 28. Where they term themselves the Body of
Christ: And in other Writings, they the People of God, and none else. Also when
they mention the Government and good Ordinances of Christ, or in his Church, it
is evident, they mean some new invented Formalities, and Ceremonies of their
own, and not fundamental Principles, according to the Precepts and Examples of
Christ and his Apostles, mentioned in the holy Scripture. Therefore their terms
of the Church of Christ, and pretentions to Just and Righteous Sentences and
Judgment, are but Covers, and such Robes has the Woman which sits on the
Scarlot colored Beast, been arrayed with in all Ages since the Apostasy,
pretending themselves the True Church, and their Sentences and Judgment, Just
and Righteous, as you do; and you have provided Weapons for them, that may in
time, prove to your own hurt, IF YOU BE NOT ALL OF ONE MIND AND JVDGMENT.

For if you gain but that Point, to have Power in any Case of Conscience, to
give positive Sentence, WHO but YOU (who say, you are the CHVRCH) must
determine in what Cases, so that it is in what Cases you please, which is as
good as if you had said, YOU HAVE POWER (IF YOU PLEASE) IN ANY CASE OF
CONSCIENCE, TO GIVE POSITIVE SENTENCE AND JVDGMENT. And I see not, but if that
you have such absolute Power in Cases of Conscience, but that you may also
claim it in Meum and Tuum, and have Power to determine, as R. B. says, To
remove such Differences by your positive Sentence. And let the wise in Heart
Judge how little this is less than all Spirituals and Temporals, according to
the Barbados Judgment, for if any difference be between the Lording, Ruling,
Universal Party, and some other Particular, the Universal Party will not fail
to say, They be the true Church, and have Power, and if we must be all of one
Mind and Judgment. Whose Judgment ought we to be of, but the Church's, (Viz.
YOURS) being in the true Faith, etc? BEHOLD WHETHER THIS DRIVES: And according
to C. Tailors Doctrine, it may be said, as in his Book Something, etc. p. 35.
FOR OUGHT I KNOW, you will center in ROME, and say, It is the positive, just,
and righteous Sentence of the Church. (It is truly said in Addr. to Prot. p.
144. An Imposing Church -- will be both Judge and Party) So that according to
this Doctrine, you have a Charter to give positive Sentence in any Cases of
Conscience, etc. TO HAVE AND TO HOLD, (if you can) until you please to give
Setence against your selves. And when the Second-days Meeting have resolved
when that shall be, and in what Cases, and in what not, you have Power to give
positive Sentence; then their needless Question before mentioned gendring to
Strife and Bondage, may be answered; but until then, them and their Question to
be avoided, according to the Advice of the Apostle, Beware of the Concision,
beware of Evil Workers.

Pray consider what sentence had poor Micajah, among the 400 Prophets, the 1
Kings 22.24. When Zedekiah went near and smote him, and said, Which way went
the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee.

Also Jeremiah, and other of the Prophets, from the Church in their days, who
could speak high words, saying, The Lord lived that brought them out of the
Land of Egypt, and out of the House of Bondage. Also consider what positive
Sentences Christ and his Apostles had from the Pharisees and Ruling Party of
the Church, who garnished the Sepulchers of the Prophets, saying, If they had
lived in their days, they would not have killed them: And thought highly of
themselves, saying, They were Abraham's Seed, and never were in Bondage, and
reputed themselves Elders, and Overseers, and those to whom God has given
Counsel, Authority, and Power to, and as the true Church; gave positive
Sentences, and as they thought, Just and Righteous, against the Servants of
Christ: and demanded by whose Authority they did those things, as some of you
have done, when one Speak, or Pray in your Meeting; and because not in exact
Conformity to G.F's Laws, therefore have asked, Does, or did G. F. allow, or
approve of it.

Also consider, when all Asia was turned aside, and all men forsook Paul, and
none stood by him, only some few Particulars, What was their positive
Sentences? Doubtless they thought them just and righteous, and obligatory, as
they were the Church, being the Universal and Ruling Party. Therefore without
Evidence from Scripture, or by the Spirit in our own Hearts, of the Justice and
Righteousness of your positive Sentences and Orders, they are but the
Traditions of Men, although taught for Doctrines.

And the Light or Spirit of Christ within, is a surer Guide and Leader to every
particular, than the Unity, or being of one Mind and Judgment with any of G.
F's, etc. Men's and Women's Meetings: For in the New Jerusalem coming down from
God out of Heaven, in which John saw no Temple, neither had it need of Sun or
Moon, but the Glory of the LORD and the LAMB is the Light thereof.

WHat is here afore-wrote, is not as a full Answer or Detection of the depths
of Satan, and Mystery of Iniquity that is couched under, or lies hidden in this
Judgment asserted in the Paper from Barbados, and the seeming Answer of
dislike thereto, given by G. F. etc. but only as a Mite from one, and according
to present Ability, to manifest his detestation of all such Principles and
Practices. But I doubt not but there will be some of greater Ability, who shall
contribute much more to the uncovering Her who has long sat as a Queen, and
deceived many, yet says, I shall not see Widdowhood nor Sorrow; because her
Children are many and mighty, through the Power they have received from that
Beast on which she rides, and will suffer none to buy nor sell in their Market,
but who receive her Mark in their Forehead or Hand. For notwithstanding their
Judgment seems such barefaced Popery, and so contrary to their pretended
Principles, yet observe how G.F. etc. treat the Authors, Viz. We know your Care
and tenderness for Truth, and that you aim at the best Things, and are
manifestly declared the Epistle of Christ, written with the Spirit of the
Living God, which will bring you to the City of the Living God, etc. And not
one sharp Reproof in all, only Caution for fear of its Publication, and dislike
that any particular measure should not be one with their Men and
Womens-Meetings, etc. But when we consider the Names and Terms are given to
others that profess the same Faith, and agree in all Things, except as
aforesaid, Viz. Something about Womens-Meetings, and some Forms of Marriages,
etc. they for this conscientious forbearing to practice such Things as they
have no Faith in, are termed Apostates, departed from the Truth, such as the
Universal Spirit cannot receive, etc. By all which we may see how they would
hedge up the way to God, and leave no Door to come in by, but G. F's Forms;
nay, not only so, but tie up, or limit God, that if he reveals any thing to any
particular, he must give up all to the general, and if they have not Unity with
it, must cleave to the general against that particular Measure of Knowledge or
Manifestation in himself; but I think hereby is plainly manifested that there
be such Innovators as W. Rogers has mentioned in his Book, Viz. The
Chrictian-Quaker distinguished from the Apostate and Innovator. Which Title C.
Tailor says, is notorious Blasphemy. But hereby it not only appears that the
Title is proper, and no Blasphemy: but also that there was just Cause for W.
R's writing that Book; for the Cause why those, they call Apostates, separate
from them, is not out of any dislike or denial of the Principles of Truth
(although they say all that oppose them be gone from Truth) but in opposition to
their Usurping Authority over Peoples Consciences in Religious Matters, and
requiring Conformity to their Orders, before or without Conviction.

This is the chief Cause of their hard Speeches, and false Accusations against
those they term Apostates, and Seperates, and say, In the Name of the Lord they
resolve to give Battle wherever they meet that Spirit. But others are
resolved in the Spirit of the Lamb, not to bow to their Image, having seen that
they should, as they have done, manifest themselves to be what they are, even
empty Clouds. The Lord open the Understandings of all the simple-hearted among
them (as I believe there be many) and preserve all blameless, and in Love, that
they may have no just Cause to speak evil of you: but separate from such who
have a Form of Godliness, and high swelling words of Church Power and
Gospel Order (which they have made to themselves, and are bowing to, even the
Work of their own hands, as appears by the foregoing and following Lying
Prophecy of S. Eccles.) and have your Minds girt up toward the Lord, and your
Conversation as becomes the Gospel, in Meekness and Fear, not terrified by
their high swelling Words; and seeing the evil Effects of forsaking the
Teaching of the Lord by his Spirit, to give up to Men's and Womens-Meetings, and
Orders, beware lest you be carried away with the Error of the wicked, and fall
from your own Stedfastness; but endeavor to grow in Grace, and of the
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom alone be Obedience and Glory for
ever: which is the desire of my Heart, as for my self, so for all that desire
to follow the Lord, and that we may be kept from Idols.

Here follows the False Prophesy of S. E. taken out of his Letter which he
(accompanied with two eminent Friends, and Espousers of G. F. and his Party)
delivered to J. S. who lived some years after, notwithstanding his predicting
the contrary.
O JOHN STORY, What have thou done against the Lord and thy own Soul! Thou have
divided the Heritage of God; and the good Ordinances which Christ Jesus has
set up in his Church have thou contemned, especially Womens-Preachings, and
Womens-Meetings; therefore will the Lord throw Contempt upon thee; and if thou
do not repent speedily, miserable will be thy End -- O how have thou lost thy
Place and Dignity which thou had amongst the Saints in Light! and now to be
numbered amongst the Rebellious. -- If ever thou find Mercy with the Lord, go
home to the North with speed, and break up the Divided Meetings, which thou and
John Wilkingson have been Instrumental to divide from the Body of the Lord
Jesus Christ -- The Anger of the Lord is chiefly against thee; and thou art
bound with two Bonds: for the Church and Brethren have bound thee on Earth, and
thou art surely bound in Heaven; and this is the Testimony of Jesus to thee;
neither shall thou be able to get from under these Bonds, till thou art
reconciled to the Brethren -- [i.e. submit to G. F. etc.] O have to the Work
abovesaid, lest the Wrath of the Lord overtake thee before it be done, and be
reconciled to G. F. who is God's Friend, and the Servant of the Living God, and
Great Apostle of Jesus Christ, -- Have away to the North, for thy time is
short, and go quickly thou and thy Brother, if possible you may bring again to
the Body of Jesus Christ, those ye have scattered, lest their Blood be required
at your Hands; -- Arise quickly, and be going, for this is the Word of the Lord
to thee, Viz. That this Year shall thou (John Story) die, because thou have
Taught Rebellion against the Living God.

SOLOMON ECCLES.
1st. day of the 1ct Month, 1677.
READER,
OBserve what this S. E. (one of G. F's Preachers) delivers in the Name of the
LORD, Viz.

1. That their Womens-Preachings and Womens-Meetings are the Good Ordinances
which Christ has set up in his Church.

2. That being reconciled ( i. e. submitting) to G. F. and his Imposing Party,
is the only way to find Mercy with the Lord.

3. G. F. etc. (who call themselves the Body of Friends) he terms the Body of
Jesus Christ.

4. That great Lie he delivered in the Name of the Lord, Viz. THIS YEAR SHALL
THOU (JOHN STORY) DIE, etc. Who was then Ill, and not like to live long, but
yet lived about four years after.

This is here inserted, that all who read or hear it, may fear, and beware of
taking the Name of the Lord in vain. Also of having G. F. or any Persons, or
their Orders in Admiration, as this S. E. and others his Brethren and Preachers
of G. F's Party have so frequently done, as appears by the Titles they have
given G. F. Viz. One greater than Moses, a Prophet indeed, -- It was said of
Christ, he was in the World, the World was made by Him, and the World knew Him
not; so it may be said of this true Prophet, whom John said he was not, but
thou shall feel this Prophet one day, as heavy as a Millstone upon thee, and
though the World knows him not, yet he is known.

Also G. F. has been styled, The Father of many Nations, whose Life has
reached to us thy Children, even to the Isles afar off, whose Being and
Habitation is in the Power of the Highest, in which thou Rules and Governs in
Righteousness, and thy Kingdom is Established in Peace, and the Increase
thereof is without End.

These and many more have been given him, which I do not understand that he
disowned or testified against, but rather owned and approved of them, as it
seems to appear by his causing, or at least suffering those Expressions, etc.
to be Communicated to others, See also a Blasphemous and Idolatrous Letter in
p. 7 of 5th. BABELS, etc. Now these have been covered, Justified, or excused,
but others that conscientiously dissent from their Ceremonies, they are
persecuted with Rigor and false Accusations. Oh Was ever greater Partiality
and respect of Persons from such high Pretenders to Christianity! And if Trees
may be known by their Fruits, these are evil Ones. Therefore dear Friends, be
separate from these unclean things, for such Principles and Practices, are
Babylons Brats (who is to be made naked to the shame of her Lovers) and happy
shall those be who dash them against the Stones, but woe to them that give suck
to, and nourish them. Think me not your Enemy, because I deal plainly with you,
for it is in Love to Truth, and abhorrence of Imposition, unlimited Power,
Implicit, blind, and unacceptable Obedience, I desire the Lord to give you to
know what is his good and acceptable Will. Recommending you to the Spirit of
Grace in your own Hearts, whereby you may be preserved blameless in this
crooked Generation. To God only be Glory and Eternal Honor for ever.

FINIS.

