THe Works of this Author have obtained such general Esteem, that many are
desirous nothing of his should be lost: I have already published two small
Volumes of his Sermons, the First containing Eight, and the Second Ten of his
Declarations; and the acceptance they have gained from Persons of different
Persuasions, has induced me to emit this Third and Last Collection, containing
Twelve Sermons more, upon several very necessary Subjects, none of which have
been yet Printed; One of them being his last Sermon, preached at
Devonshire-house, London, a while before his Death: So that now these are all
of this Author's, which are to be expected from

N. C.

THE Third and Last Volume OF THE Sermons OF Mr. STEPHEN CRISP, Late of
Colchester in Essex, Deceased.

Containing XII. DECLARATIONS upon several Divine Subjects.

Exactly taken in Shorthand, as they were delivered by him at the Public
Meeting Houses of the People called QUAKERS

In Grace Church Street, Devonshire-house and S. Martin's le-grand, London.

And now faithfully Transcribed and Published; with some of his Prayers after
Sermon.

London, Printed for Nath Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultry, near Cheap Side.
1694.

The Contents of the Three Volumes of the Sermons or Declarations of Mr.
Stephen Crisp.
THe First Volume contains Eight Sermons, upon the following Subjects,
I. The great Mediator of the Everlasting Covenant. II. Heart Preparation for
receiving the Gospel. III. The First and Great Commandment. IV. The Standard of
Truth. V. The necessary Duty of remembering our Creator. VI. The Divine Monitor,
or Light from Heaven. VII. The Inward Preacher, or the Office of Conscience.
VIII. Saving Faith the Gift of God alone.
THe Second Volume contains Ten Sermons upon the following Subjects.
I. Truth's Testimony against the Power of Sin and Satan. II. Bearing the
Cross, the right Mark of a Christian. III. The Spirit of Christ the only true
Guide. IV. Pure and Spiritual Worship. V. The Divine Life of Christ Jesus. VI.
The Kingdom of God within. VII. The undefiled way to Eternal Rest. VIII. The
dawning of the Day of Grace and Salvation. IX. The Excellency of Peace with
God. X. True Christianity.
THE Third and Last Volume contains Twelve Sermons upon the following Subjects,
I. The mighty Work of Man's Redemption. II. The Word of God a Christian's
Life. III. The necessity of an holy Life and Conversation. IV. Baptism and the
Lord's Supper, asserted. V. Christ the Way, the Truth and the Life. VI. Captive
Sinners ransomed by Jesus Christ. VII. The Sheep of Christ hear his Voice.
VIII. No True Worship without the right Knowledge of God. IX. The wonderful
Love of God to Mankind. X. Salvation from Sin by Jesus Christ. XI. The
acceptable Sacrifice. XII. Christians should often think on the Name of the
Lord: Being his last Sermon, preached at Devonshire-house, a while before his
Death.
And are all to be sold, either single or bound up in one Volume, by Nath.
Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultry, near Cheapside, Price Three Shillings.

SERMON I. The mighty Work of Man's Redemption, Preached at Grace Church Street,
Feb. 8. 1687.
My Friends,
WE are met upon the most weighty Affair that can be to every one of us, even
to wait that we may have a true knowledge of the beginning, carrying on and
perfecting the mighty Work of Redemption, that People may know that Redemption
is wrought in their Souls; for every ones Soul has been lost and captivated,
and led away from the pure Presence of God; all have been alienated by reason
of Sin; which has become an universal Wall of Partition, and has excluded and
shut out unholy Souls from the Holy God; all that have been defiled and
polluted they have been excluded from his Dewlling Place, they have been driven
out into the World, and the World has become a World of Misery, and of
Distraction and Confusion, to the Sons and Daughters of Men; there has been
Anguish, Tribulation and Wrath upon all their Souls, and an insensibility has
happened unto many that they have not been apprehensive of the great
Depravation they have lain under, and they have not been sensible of the Glory
of that State and Condition which they were to have enjoyed, and in that State
of Insensibility they have not sought after the Lord, but have been captivated
and led away by diverse Lusts and Pleasures, by which they have wounded their
own Souls more and more.

And in such a State as this, it is that the Lord has found us, he has sought
us out, and he has found us, cast out into the open Field, and wallowing as it
were in our Blood, and yet this has been a time of Love, and he has
manifested his Love to us in this respect in that he has awakened us and
brought us to a sense of our depraved and deplorable Condition; and given unto
a Remnant to perceive, that there is a more excellent Glory, a more excellent
Enjoyment to be had, than any this World can afford.

But a great many of those whose Eyes are so far opened, that they can see and
discern a more excellent Glory; yet they cannot receive it, for they are not in
a capacity for the Enjoyment o^ it; many have the Glimmerings, and some little
sight of Heavenly Things, but they themselves are earthly: Many perceive there
is a holy Life, but it is not theirs, for their own Life is unholy, and yet
they know there is a Life that is Holy and Pure. Hereupon Desires are begotten,
by the divine Word of Life in the Sons and Daughters of Men through the Lord
Jesus Christ the Mediator; by him Desires are begotten in People that they
might come to enjoy that Life of Holiness, that they might not only see a
better State than what they do enjoy, but that they might come to enjoy it and
have i^ for theirs.

There is an universal Desire in People that they might have Eternal Life; and
they believe there is an Eternal Life to be enjoyed; but every one has it not,
and the reason is, because they are not fitted and prepared for the enjoyment
of it; for it is a kind of Treasure that is never put into an unclean Vessel;
there must be a cleansing and purifying, that so earthen Vessels may come to
retain and hold this heavenly Treasure, and when it comes to this, that People
must be cleansed and purified, here the World turns out to diverse Means and
Methods; some have gone to outward Washings, outward Cleansings and
Observations of this and the other Ordinance, and when all that has been done,
they themselves being Judges, were yet unclean; when they have done all that
lies in their Power and Ability toward their Washing and Clea^sing, and
toward preparing themselves, they have found some secret Testimony in their
own Consciences that their Hearts were still unclean, and that there was
defilement still abiding and lodging in the Secret of their Souls; and this
has put a great many to a stand, what they should do; when they have come to
the end of all, they know not what to do: Many have cried secretly, what shall
we do to be saved? For all what we can do cannot save us. We have retained
this, and the other Doctrine, followed this and the other Way, and made many
Observations; but all this does not cleanse our Soul, nor purge our Consciences
from dead Works, this will not bring us to the Inheritance of that Immortal
Life that will give us satisfaction. We hear many speak of Satisfaction and of
Joy unspeakable and full of Glory, but here is a weight and burden still lying
upon our Souls.

Therefore, my Friends, that all such who are brought so far as to be under
such a Burden and Oppression, that they might be informed and come to
understand, where the true Rest is, and where that Power can be found, that is
able to answer those tender Desires that are begotten in them, for this cause
has the Lord our God communicated and given the Dispensation of the Gospel of
his Son, unto a Remnant whom he has sanctified, that they might Speak a word
in Season to the weary Soul. This is not a day to make a mock of Sin, this is
not a day to make a Covena^^ with ^^ath and Hell, and to resolve to go on in a
wicked Life, and continue in it all their Days.

But yet there are a sort of People that desire to have a Word spoken in Season
to them when they are weary. How many are there in our Age and Generation, that
one may reckon of this number, that are Sinners and overcome by their Lusts and
Corruptions, and by the Temptations of Satan and his Instruments? But they are
weary of it, it is a burden to their Souls, it costs them many a b^^ter Tear,
many a Sigh, and many a sad and sorrowful Thought in secret, that they shou^^
have a sight of a more excellent Glory, and of a better Life than that of their
own, and yet know not how to get into it.

My Friends, that same Divine Word of Life by which any of the People of the
Lord in any Age were ever restored, redeemed and purchased again to the Lord;
That Word of Life must have been at work in their Hearts, and has been at work
in them, or else ^hou had never been so far opened; there has been something
that has unstopped thine Ears, that thou might hear, and the reason of thy
Continuance in thy Bonds after thy knowing something that might have freed thee
is, because thou have not heartily closed with that which has begun the Work,
God b^ his redeeming Power in the Hearts of them that believe in Christ, to
raise an inclination in People to seek after the Lord.

You know what the Apostle sai^^, It is not of us so much as to think a good
Thought. But this all People will grant is a good Thought, when a Sinner thinks
of turning to God and leaving his evil Ways, if he had Power and Ability, and
cries out, If I knew how to stand against Tempation, I would never sin against
the Lord more; this must be a good Thought in thy Mind; How came it there? Who
is the Author of this Thought, you will say? This ought to be attribured to the
Love of God in Christ that he has convinced and persuaded us; and that though
there is Sin and Pollution, yet he has not so forsaken us utterly to cast us
off, he has sent forth his quickening Spirit, that is, the Lord from Heaven,
that he might stir up and quicken People to consider their condition, and bring
them to a sense of their present State, that they may come into a better State
than they are in at present.

If this may be granted, that the Spirit of God and the Grace of God is the
Author of all these Desires, then it will be granted at the same time, that
every one of you ought to be sensible, that such spiritual Desires stirring in
you are from the motion and operation of the Spirit of God that has raised
them in your Souls, and then I hope, you will grant, that if you had but joined
with that Spirit, and with the assistance of that Spirit, all things would have
been possible thereunto.

So that here is the first thing that I would have every one satisfied about in
their Understandings, whether they ar^ totally exempted from any such Touches
and Operations of God or no, for it is said by some ignorantly, That a great
part of Mankind have never had any such Divine Workings of the Spirit of God
upon them, in order to their Conversion; therefore it is not in vain for you to
consider your state and condition, for if you, or I, or any here be under such
Circumstances that they never had, nor are ever like to have any such Divine
Operations or Touches of the Spirit of Life, in order to Conversion, then I am
sure you and I had better never have been born.

If you will consider with your selves and lay aside the Disputes of Doctors
and Learned men, you may know the things pertaining to your selves. Things
relating to others, I may let Disputes alone about them, but as for things
relating to my Salvation, I must have a certain Knowledge of them. It concerns
you (my Friends) to know within your selves, by an infallible Evidence of the
Spirit of God, whether you have had such Divine Touches, Workings and
Operations upon your Hearts, as have inclined you to seek the Lord. I hope I
may believ there are none here but have in their Heatrs an Answer; I have had
such Touches and Operations in me: This is great Love from God more than my
Tongue can set forth; You will be ready to say, I have not deserved this, I
have not so behaved my self toward my Maker as to deserve that he should wait
upon me, and call upon me, When wilt tho^ turn and amend thy Life and hearken
to him that made thee? When will thou leave serving God's Enemy, and serve him
that is thy rightful Lord?

So that now this is a greater Aggravation of our Sin to continue in it, and
yet to have a Belief that God is still waiting upon us, and that he has such a
kindness for us, as now and then to touch our Hearts by the inward Operation of
his Spirit and Grace, in order to Conversion.

Now when this is agreed, and Men settle themselves in the belief of this, you
know what the consequence will be. When I consider with my self, I that have
been under these Workings, have been rebellious, wicked and disobedient to God,
yet the Lord is not so angry as utterly to cast me off, but is still waiting to
be gracious by the Operation of his Spirit, to gather me to himself, in order
to sanctify me and heal my my Backsliding, to cure my Weakness and
Infirmities, and at the last to save me, and make me an Heir of his Eternal
Kingdom, What is the consequence of this Love? Why, the next Resolve must be
this, I will rebel against his Grace and resist his Power, or I will submit to
him; Which of these is the best way, the safest way?

Are there not a great many in this Age that are as sensible of the Workings of
God's Grace for their Conversion as ever you and I were, that are as sensible
that God has called them to Holiness and Righteousness as any of us can be,
and yet they have resisted the Grace of God? They have said in their Hearts, We
will not submit to this Power, that will make us so holy and so watchful, and
so careful, diligent and obedient, for this very reason, because it will cross
my Interest, it will cross my Pleasure, it will hinder my Preferment in the
World and my Reputation among men; and for this reason I will not bear this
Yoke. I would be glad to hope there are none such here, that have made such a
Covenant with Death and Hell, and yielded themselves up to the Devil, to serve
him all their Days.

Let us, who are at this Time, and at this Meeting, under the Operation of
God's Grace, and do feel the Lord calling us by his Grace, and working upon us
by his Spirit; let us enter together into a holy solemn Resolution, That we
will obey this good Spirit, and take him for our Leader, and submit, though it
should be to a Cross: Thus People will think they will come to this Resolution;
when the Work of Redemption is begun in their Souls, and when they are
convinced of their Sin, and their Eyes are opened to see the way of Holiness;
and though they never take a Resolution to walk in it, yet every one shall be
convinced, and see there was a better wa^ than their own, and be convinced by
the Grace of God one time or other, that in respect of God's working of it, it
is a beginning, but in respect of Man that should join with the operation of
God, it is not beginning, for he ha^^ no desire to those things which he does
not know, he still depends upon himself; but when the Soul comes to be
satisfied, that it is the Visitation of God, and joins himself to him in a holy
Resignation of his own will, and says, This is the Lord, he is come to work
upon me, he is come to change and alter the Frame of my Mind, It is the Lord,
let him do what he will, here is a Mind brought to submit to the Grace of God,
God is able to do that for him which he cannot do for himself.

When People come to the right Object of their Faith, and act their Faith upon
that Object, they every Day find a Progress, a going forward in the Work of
Grace, according to the Work of Faith in their Souls; and there is a Power that
inclines them to believe; it is not for such to cry, If they had Power they
would do more; he that has the Spirit of Grace, the Spirit of Christ that had
all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him, to put it forth on purpose for the
bringing back of Men and Women home to God; he that has this Object of Faith
before him, he will not look for Power in his own Will and Affections to redeem
him, he expects a Power to be daily ministered and dispensed to him, as he has
need of it, through the Lord Jesus Christ, who is present with him in all his
Trials and Temptations; He cries, Here is a Temptation that will carry me away,
O Lord help me, Put forth the Arm of thy Power and save me, plant thy Fear in
my heart and deliver me, Their Eyes shall see their Savior, says the Prophet.

Thus when a Man comes to be joined to the right Object of Faith, and does
exercise and put forth lively Acts of Faith upon Christ, hi Eyes shall see his
Savior, the light that shines into his Heart discovers to him the Temptation,
and it also shows him a Redeemer at hand, his Savior is nigh him and he
trusts in him, and relies upon him, and says, This Word of God is in my
Heart, and I do really believe, that although the Temptation that assaults me
be strong, yet it shall not prevail; whether it be the Profits, the Pleasures
or the Honors of the World, if I put my Trust in this Power, I cannot go near
the Evil; I am a Christian, I am entered into a Covenant in Christianity that I
will join with nothing but what God approves of; now when I have represented to
my Mind the Temptation of the Devil, and that evil which he sets before me, and
I know it is contrary to the Mind of God, How can I go into that evil, and
break my Covenant with God, after I am entered into Covenant with him, to love
him, serve him and obey him? the Power of Grace upon such Souls, the Operation
of Grace is so powerful, that the Temptation comes and goes, and they are saved
and delivered out of it, because God helps them; but if they comply with the
Temptation, then Tribulation Wrath and Anguish pursues all such as are
rebellious and disobedient to the Will of God.

Now this Redemption is carried on gradually, from day to day, the Truth that
thou believe it operates by degrees; thou art delivered, first from one evil
Practice, and then from another evil Work; but there is a great deal more, thou
rejoicest and art glad that thou art delivered from one sin, but thou would
be more glad to be delivered from them all: I speak to those that are serious
for their immortal Souls, when they see themselves delivered out of one Evil,
that they were ready to run into, they would be glad that they were redeemed
out of every evil, that their crosness and perverseness, their frowardness and
Wantonness were removed, they should be glad to be delivered from all their
Sins.

What do you think, say some, that a Man, while he lives here may come to see
all Sin, all Evil and Corruption brought under, and nothing but Holiness and
Righteousness and Truth remain in him, and that there shall be nothing but
Simplicity and Innocence? Do you think that such a thing can be?

Why should not I think so? You will grant me, That the Power of Grace is able
to get such Power and Victory over Sin and Corruption, that you may come to
hate it as much as ever you have loved it, if you grant me that the Consequence
will follow, he that gave me Victory over Sin can give me Power over all Sin.
All Christians believe, That God's Power is infinite, the Scripture testifies,
All things to be possible to God, with whom we have to do: If all things be
possible to God, sure this is possible; there is nothing so contrary to God as
Sin is, and God will not suffer the Devil always to rule his Masterpiece, Man:
Mankind is God's Masterpiece, the most eminent Creature in this lower World,
made after God's likeness; and though the Devil has brought Men into his own
likeness now, yet nothing can be more contrary to the Mind of God, than that
the Devil should have the Rule of us, for God would have the Government of us
himself.

When we consider the infiniteness of God's Power for destroying that which is
contrary to him, who can believe that the Devil must ever stand and prevail? I
believe it is inconsonant and disagreeable with the true Faith, for People to
be Christians, and yet to believe that Christ the Eternal Son of God, to whom
all Power in Heaven and Earth is given, will suffer Sin and the Devil to have
dominion over them; There is no other Name under Heaven by which I can be
saved, therefore I have put my confidence in him: If the Devil must have the
Rule of me here, then I cannot be subject to Christ in all things; I may go to
Meetings, but I can never master the Devil and his Temptations; this is as
inconsis^ent with the Faith of a Christian as Light with Darkness, and Christ
with Belial: If Christians think themselves true Believers, then let them see
how far their Faith will reach, whither it be like that Faith, which was once
delivered to the Saints, for by that Faith their Hearts were cleansed, and they
became free from Sin, Romans 6.22. But now being made free from sin, and the
servants of God, says the Apostle, you have your Fruit unto holiness, and the
end everlasting life; you were Servants to Sin, but now you are free from Sin,
so that this Faith is but one, and if Men have got another it will do them no
good: Take heed thou art not mistaken about thy Faith.

I have heard some learned Men say, That a Believer is a Servant of Sin, and he
is ever like to be so; but he is not at the same time free from Righteousness,
for he has the Righteousness of Christ imputed to him, and God looks upon him
as righteous in his Righteousness; there cannot be a more Anti-apostolical
Doctrine, I may be a servant of Sin and yet have the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, I may be a Servant of Sin (say they) yet Christ is Righteous, he
is the Righteousness of God, and he has fulfilled the will of God, and has
purchased salvation for me, and he is the Object by which I am made righteous.

Consider this, the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness will never do me good,
till I come to partake of his Righteousness, till his Righteousness be made my
Righteousness in me and for me: Christ is made to us of God wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and re^emption; so that if a Sinner, one that was
a Sinner the other Day, come through F^^^^ in Christ to have his Heart cleansed
and purged, and true Righteousness planted in him, where Sin was planted, there
Sin through the Blood of Christ is cleansed and purged away.

So that Christ is made Righteousness to me, and not his Righteousness barely
imputed and reckoned to me; Christ is my Wisdom, I am a Fool without him;
Christ is made Righteousness to me; for my good Deeds and holy Living cannot be
acceptable to God till they be done in him, and commended to God by him; the
proper Work of Faith is to fix the Soul on him that works all things in us
and for us, that works in us both to will and to do, according to his good
pleasure, and it is the good pleasure of God that we should live in (...)
Righteousness.

They that come to receive this Faith at first, receive it from an inward
Feeling, they have the Operation of the Word of God in them; so the Apostle
reckons Faith, not because such a Man hears, and such a Man believes what
such a Man preaches, but Faith is the operation of God; you may hear me and a
Thousand preach, and you may die Unbelievers for all that, except you come to
thi^ to know the Operation of God, and the wo^^ of Faith in you. How does my
Heart close with this? how does my Soul join with this* What Virtue and Power
do I feel in my self* It may be others that preach feel the Pow^^ but do I feel
it? if not, I come but to a Noise and Sound: If People feel not their Hearts
joining with the Word preached, there comes no advantage to them; You read in
Scripture, That the word preached did not profit, because it was not mixed with
faith in them that heard it: This is your Cafe, you come to Meetings, and you
love to hear the Doctrine of Truth preached; I tell you, and I will speak
plainly to you, unless you come to feel the Operation of the Word of Truth in
your Hearts, you may hear the Gospel and the Word of Life preached to you, but
it will not profit you much.

How is it possible for a Man to have a Testimony against Drunkenness and yet
be drunk, a Testimony against Uncleanness and yet be unclean? How can a Man
hear such a Testimony and believe it, and yet commit the Sin? he heard it but
did not feel the Virtue of it within himself, and so he did not mortify the
Sin that he was inclinable to; but they that come to join with Truth, and with
meekness receive the ingrafted word, they find the Power and Ability of it,
they find how able it is to save their Souls, they find how it works not only
just when they hear it, but it goes along with them, and dwells with them, and
they feel the virtue of it overshadowing their Souls with the Dread and Terror
of the Lord, not with the Words that a Man speaks, I do not trust to them, but
here is the Power ^^d the Fea^ of the Lord, which will preserve my Soul, and
keep me in safety; this is that which will keep my Mind fixed upon him, and
keep my Mind inward that I do not gaze about me; so that every one may have an
Infallible Testimony of what they have heard and known.

I have known the Doctrine of several Sects that have been among us, and the
main thing that many have gone from one People to another about is this, that
they might know what such a Man holds forth more than such a one, and they
think the truth is more perspicuous among such a People than other People; if
you examine the Matter, it is this, Who preached and proved his Doctrine be^^*
Alas, if they did all concur together, and did preach as certain and infallible
Doctrine as ever Chr^^^^ and his Apostles preached, this will all ^^ thee and me
no good, unless we know the Power. You know there were Thousands that heard
Christ Preach, as you now hear me, and there were some so taken with him, that
they went away and said, Never Man spoke like this Man. But were they all
Christians, did they partake of Life by him? No, some of them were ready to
stone him.

Now bring this home and consider with your selves, whether you are not some of
yo^ in the same State; when you hear Trut^ preached, there is an assent and
agreemen^ with it in your Minds; but when a Command comes to be obeyed, and a
Cross to b^ taken up, and Self-denial to be shown; (...) some Increase of Trade
lies in the way, let Truth go where it will, you must follow your Interest;
there wants somewh^^ to fix you in the Principle of Truth, which is able to
sanctify you and perfect you, that you may be reconciled to God through Christ.

They that are resigned and given up to Truth, it is possible for them that
they may be satisfied, they have an Infallible Testimony of the Spirit of
Truth, witnessing with their Spirits, that such a thing is bad, and if they
might get the whole World to do it, they will not. What is Profit and Pleasure
to me? My Pleasure is at Gods right Hand, and my Profit is to get Grace, and to
have an abundant entrance into Gods Everlasting Kingdom. Those that have the
true knowledge of Christ, they have Profit and Advantage, Pleasure and Delight
enough, which is hid from the World, and ever will be. They are for Profit and
Pleasure which they may have with a good Conscience. Those Things which God
affords them as Blessings in this World; they despise them not, but take them
with Thanksgiving, and use them for his Glory: But if they cannot have Profit
and Pleasure without sinning against the Lord and their own Consciences, take
Profit and Pleasure that will.

They that come thus to close with Truth, they have an infallible Evidence
within them; they do not conceive it is thus and thus, because such a Man says
it is so, but they have an infallible Evidence in themselves. This is the Mind
of the Lord, God has signified it by his Spi^^t and sealed it upon my Spirit,
and I cannot but know it.

What do you profess Infallibility? Else I would hold my Tongue; if I did not
know what I assert infallibly, I would never Preach more; Truth may be many
times concealed. A Man may have wronged and cheated his Neighbor and he not
know it; this Man goes away and his Neighbor does not reproach him; but when
he comes to lie down in his Bed, he has a sting and a reproach in his
Conscience, I know I have done him harm. Whether is not this Infallible? Let me
consult some learned Men, that I may know w^^ther it was a Lie I told. I need
not go to learned Men and Logicians to know whether it was a Lie; I am
infallible in this, I know certainly it was a Lie, I have a certain Evidence,
and if a thousand Men tell me to the contrary, I will not believe them. If
there be Infallibility here, is there not then Infallibility in the word of
Truth? Shall I question it, or doubt it, if I have an infallible Testimony of
it?

Though Men have never so little proficiency, if they have it upon sure Terms and
lasting Foundations, let a thousand Men come with all their Logical Skill and
Sophism, yet they can never remove a Man from the Witness ^n himself. The
Remnant that God has ^rought to this Foundation, they have a certainty and
Infallibility in their Obedience they pay to the Will of God, a^^ in the
comfort they have in their Obedience to the Law of God, which he has written
in their Hearts. Let what will come, they can never be removed; for this
exceeds all the Precepts and Doctrine of Men, it is the Precept and Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles. Let People read them and endeavor to practice them;
but here comes the Testimony, the Divine Power by which the Precept was given
forth to them, and is now given forth again to thee and me, with as much
Liveliness and Power. Let us perform them as did the Primitive Christians.

Here now Comfort comes to flow forth from a settled Foundation that shall
never be moved. The Winds have come and blown upon Religion; let what Wind will
blow, and can blow, God has built his Church upon a Rock, and it will remain
unmovable against all opposition; blessed are they that are founded thereupon.
Has God fixed and established us in our Society with one another, and with our
Lord Jesus Christ? This is the Foundation that God has placed it upon: We
desire that all Men may come to the same stability and settlement, and never
more to be tosse^ with the Winds of Doctrine, but be built upon Christ Jesus the
Rock of Ages, the Rock of our Ages, the Rock of us and our Children. That God
will carry us ^n in this Society is the desire of our Souls, for our Selves and
all our Friends and Countrymen. The way for you to be blessed, and to have
(...) Advantage for your Immortal Souls by the Testimony that has been raised
up, is to have regard to the working of the same Power that you may come to
partake of the Benefit of those Gifts and Graces which God has bestowed upon
his Church.

His Prayer after Sermon.
MOST blessed and glorious God and Father of Life, how wonderful art thou in
thy Appearances to thy People in the Day of thy Power, in which thou has
stretched forth thine Arm, and have gathered a Remnant of those that were
scattered, and art yet gathering them and bringing them to thy self, those that
have been driven away; and thou have made known thy power and goodness in the
Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of Men, that they might love thee. That thou
might beget love to thy self, thou have made known* thy love to their
Hearts; if thou had not loved us first, we had never loved thee: But thou
have been shedding abroad thy love in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost to constrain
us to love thee. Thy love is manifested to all that are breathing after thee,
and none do breath after thee, but through the Life that thou give to them;
and those that were dead in Sins a^^ T^es^asses have thou quickened, and we w^^^
(...) forth thy Praises and Thanksgivings for the great things that thou have
done for us in Jesus Christ. All thy Works praise thee, and thy Saints bless
thee. Holy Father of Life, increase and multiply those Graces and holy Desires
which thou have begun to work in us, and pluck up every Plant that thy right
Hand has not planted. Let spiritual Sodom be burnt up, and all that are
Corrupt; let those things that thou have planted spring up to the Praise of thy
Name, and the Salvation of the Souls which thou have gathered. O powerful God
of Life, let thy blessed Presence and living Fear be among us, that all thy
Children may offer Praises and the Sacrifices of humble Thanksgivings upon thy
Holy Altar. Arise, O Lord, more and more in the greatness of thy Power, and
dispel the Clouds of Darkness that have been upon the Hearts of the Sons and
Daughters of Men, and raise up in every one of us more and more holy Desires
and Breathings after that Life that is Eternal. Those that have been scattered
let them be now gathered, and let those that have been driven away in a cloudy
and dark Night, be brought to a glorious and blessed Day, wherein they may
enjoy the Gospel that brings Light to dark Souls, that Praises and
Thanksgivings may be offered up in thy House for thy Holy Presence with us,
that we may be fed there, when we are assembled together in thy Name, accordi^^
to thy Promise. Continue to (...) ^midst of us, that living Praises and
Thanksgivings may be offered up to thee through Jesus Christ; for thou alone
art Worthy, who art God over all blessed for evermore,

Amen.
SERMON II. The Word of God a Christians Life. Preached at Grace Church Street,
March 14, 1687.
IT was the Doctrine of the great Master of the Christian Religion, the Lord
Jesus Christ, while he was preaching and publishing and making known the way of
Salvation among the Sons and Daughters of Men; he then preached and declared,
That it was not Bread only by which Man lived, but by ever^ Word that
proceeds out of the Mouth of Go^* Now the way and means of Man's Preserv^tion
in Life, in a living state, the Meth^^ and Course that the God of Heaven do^^
open to keep the Sons and Daughters of Me^ alive, is by this Word. Every Word
(...) proceeds out of the Mouth of God, has a Ministration of Life in it;
and, therefore, all that are desirous of the enjoyment of the Immortal Life,
and of the preserving and increasing of it, they are diligently to wait to be
made Partakers of this Divine Ministration. Outward Bread is for our outward
Preservation, but Man is made inward as well as outward, he has a Soul as well
as a Body. Now Christ to signify to us what the inward Man is nourished and fed
by, tells us, That Man lives not by Bread only, but by every Word that
proceeds out of the Mouth of God.

So now in this our day, as well as in former Days, it has pleased God to give
unto a Remnant an experimental knowledge of the Truth of this; that they have
been quickened and made alive by the Word of God; that is, they have heard, and
felt, and tasted of the Word of Life that was with the Father, before the World
began, that has been divinely ministered to them by the mercy of God through
Jesus Christ; many that were dead in Sins and Trespasses, he has said unto
them, Live. He has given unto many an inward sense of their State, who
sometimes had it not; he has brought many a one to feel sin to b a Burden and
an oppressing Load, who sometimes before have taken Pleasure and Delight in it.
This is a great change that is wrought in a Man's Mind, that he should come to
be laden with that, burdened and oppressed by that, which was before ^is
Pleasure and Delight; yet this great Ch^^ge has been wrought in many a Soul,
by the operation of the word of God, of that inward Word, that inward Voice,
when the Lord has taken Men in hand himself.

There are many have taken Sinners (...) hand, and have gone about to convince
the^ and convert them, but they were not able to do it; but when the Lord has
taken Man in hand himself, when his Creator has undertaken to deal with him
himself, then the Man cries out, I am a Worm, and no Man; then he cries out
under the sense of the judgment of God* then he cries out under the indignation
of the Lord, which he has kindled by his Sins, he cries out for Mercy, then he
prays for Remission, then he wishes that he had never provoked the Lord; for
the Word that goes out of the Mouth of God, has ^ mighty Force and Power upon
the Spirit of ^ Man, so that he is converted and changed ^^ it; as the Prophet
said of old, The Word ^^ God is pure, converting the Soul.

Now where any come to an experimenta^ knowledge of the Word of the Lord, of
the inward Voice, whereby God speaks to the Sons and Daughters of Men, they
have r^ceived thereby an infallible feeling of the own State and Condition;
this is the fir^^ Lesson learned by it. They come to have certain infallible
knowledge of their o^^ State, and they are sure that they cannot (...)
deceived; for it brings an Evidence with it in their Consciences, so that
whatsoever this Word of Life signifies to a Man, he has the knowledge of the
same thing evidencing it in his own Conscience, as the Apostle says, If our
Hearts condemn us, God is greater than our Hearts, and knows all things. Now
here is a way found out for Men to obtain divine Knowledge by a divine Means;
for the Lord speaks by his Spirit, and if Men come to hearken to that Voice,
unto that Speaking, they perceive readily what it says unto them: The Lord
tells People as well now as in former Days, what he has against them, and this
every one in the Closet of their own Hearts come to understand. We read in the
Book of Revelations, what our Lord Jesus Christ appointed John to write to the
seven Churches in Asia, that he had a few things against some, and many things
against others.

Now that which is the design of our Meet^ng when we are Assembled together is,
that we may know what the Mind and Judgment of God is concerning our Selves:
How shall we know that, unless we ask him, and come to wait upon him, and
enquire at the Oracle of Counsel, that God has appointed in the Bosom of
every man? For he signifies his mind unto the Children of men, by that Light
and Grace which Jesus Christ has Planted in them, he has Enlightened every man
that comes ^^to the world, with an undeceiving Light, and he has ministered of
his truth and Grace to every man; though the man be bad and untrue, and in the
Dark and there be Darkness in him, yet the Light shines in Darkness. The Man
may be a false Man, yet there is true knowledge in him, if this false Man harken
to the Voice of Truth, when the God of Truth signifies what his Mind and
Judgment is concerning him, and his present State.

So that here is an opportunity offered, and if a Man believe the word of Truth
which is administered to his own mind he cannot say such a Man has deceived
him; for it is Truth it self which is signified to him, which he believes: For
the Truth is the object of (...) Faith, and he believes it of himself; he
believes that while he remains wicked in (...) unrenewed state he is out of
the Covenant of God, and in the high Road to Destruction, if he does not get
out of it, and return to God, and mind his Duty: He believes this, and he
believes the Truth: It has been so with many, it has been so with us all;
this is the fir^^ kind of Faith, and Belief that ever we receive; for when
Truth signifies to us our fallen state our alinated state, when Truth signifies
and discovers to us the Partition Wall of Sin and iniquity which we have
builded up whereby the Glory and favor of God, was hid from the Soul, we
believed this to be true; we would have been looked upon as Heirs ^^ Gods
Kingdom, yet when we are come to hear^en to the Truth, we find that we are
Children (...) the Devil and do his works; shall a Man believe this after he
has been forty years a professor of Christanity? If a Man believe Truth, there
is no danger in believing it, though it be his own Destruction that is threatened.

Now the great thing that I would have ushered into the Hearts of Men, is that
they may believe the Truth, for Truths sake. If Men will believe the truth,
they must believe many things against themselves, which they are not willing to
believe; but says Christ no Man can be my Scholar, my Disciple, but be denying
himself: I must deny my self, my pretensions to Christianity, my supposed
Saintship and ^itle to the Kingdom of God; now if I would be convinced that I
am a wicked Man, a profane Man, one that does not live as becomes the Gospel;
I must believe truth, the Voice of truth being of infallible certainty; it is
signified Divinely, by the immortal Word that cannot deceive us; this ought to
be the reason why People should believe the Testimony of it, though it be against
themselves; they that do so, presently come to find the effects of it, for they
were in their Sins and Trespasses before, and so are still; they were before in
a kind of liberty, in a kind of ease, and indulgence of themselves, and still
their Sin remains in them, and they remain in it; but they are now under a
sense of Sorrow, under a weight, under a Burden, under an oppression, which
signifies they are alive, and quickened; for (if you take an outward comparison)
they remain not senseless and dead; now lay what Load you will upon a dead Man,
he will neither groan, nor grumble at it; but if he comes again to life, he
cries take off the Burden, the weight, and oppression, that lies heavy upon me,

This is the difference between being dea^ in sins and trespasses, and being
brought to li^^ and sense again; this word of life that com^ from the Mouth of
God, begets a sense in ev^ry one that receives it; it is of great servi^^ and
use to all People to be acquainted wit^ it that desire to be Heirs of life
eternal, tha^ desire to be Inheritors of the Kingdom of God* But how should
they come by it? they thin^ by this duty, and the other duty and this and the
other Temporary performance, to obtai^ it; no but if they will have life, they
mu^^ have it from the God of life, that created them, he must Create them again
to good works* they can have it but by one way, all must be brought to it that
way; it cannot be by hearing a Man preach; unless the Spirit do^^ cooperate
with the word of God, there is n^ possibility of being quickened, and necessi^^
binds me to hearken and have a regard to the one means: Now I say to you, says
Christ speaking of Peoples way of living to eterni^^ Man lives not by Bread
alone, but by ev^^ word that proceeds out of the Mouth of (...) now when we
come to understand this (...) as spoken by our Lord Jesus Christ, we (...)
conclude there was a possibility of understa^^ing and hearing that inward Voice
and Word of Truth in our own Hearts, that God did speak to us by his Son Jesus
Christ, who enlightened us. Hereupon Meetings were appointed at first, that the
Word should minister Life in them, and Life to them that attend them; and to
this Day, our Meetings are appointed for this purpose, that we may have ^he
ministration of Life and Virtue from Christ, the Fountain of Life and Virtue,
by whom we are to be quickened and strengthened, and by whom those that are dead
in Sins and Trespasses are to be quickened.

Therefore, I would have every one always to have a Reverence to the Word of
Life, that speaks in themselves; for, if we speak as we are moved by the Spirit
of God, and utter those things by verbal Testimony, which God has made known
to us; if you have not an Oracle in your Bosoms, if you do not at the same time
perceive an Echo of Truth in your own Souls, this will do you no good, but be
an empty sound which will pass away again; but the Mind that is serious and
settled in waiting upon God with an earnest Desire, that it may receive Benefit
in going to this and the other Meeting; such a^one will say, I pray God bless
this opportunity to me, that so I may receive Benefit to my Soul. Where People
meet in this manner, they have not only an administration of Doctrine from
without, from this and the other Instrument, but they have a Ministration of
the Word of God in ^^emselves, by which a Man lives.

Let us not be (...) and hurried away with the grand Error of the Times, the
great Error of this Age, and of the Ages bypast, that there is no possibility
for People to understand and hear this Voice of God, this inward Voice. There
are (say they) no immediate Teachings now adays, no Inspirations now adays;
they had as well said, that there are no Conversions now adays. I will prove it
from the Holy Scriptures, that there is no Man in this Age, is like to be
converted to God, or redeemed from his Iniquity and brought to the knowledge of
his Maker, unless he have it by the inward Working of the Eternal God: Not by
Man's Preaching and Instruction, nor by reading all the good Sermons that ever
were preached, without the Cooperation of the holy sanctifying Spirit which
begets Life in them that believe; and if these Men say none can be Converted,
then we must all go Headlong to Hell, and they and all.

These Quakers may say what they will there is no immediate Teaching now adays
no Man can know the mind of God, nor understand the Scriptures, none can open
the^ to you.

But blessed be God this Darkness is r^moved, this Vail is gone over and taken
^way; the brightness of the glory of the Go^pel has expelled this Darkness,
and thousan^ now adays do not onl^ hear the Minister reprove them, but they ^e^
a Voice within that does reprove them (...) ^^iquity, and they find and feel a
Judgment and Tribunal within themselves, and that God has an immediate way of
Counselling, and Instructing them, if they will hearken to him.

You that are under any sense of this, that are come to such an inward sense of
the operation of the Word of God, if you have heard it reprove you, exhort you,
judge you and condemn you, consider that this Word proceeded out of the Mouth
of God, and not out of the Mouth of any Man. You hear the sentence of God upon
you in your own Consciences: Whence comes it? This is out of the Mouth of God.
Every Word that comes out of the Mouth of God, administers Life, Sense and
Conviction; and you feel it and receive it, and you may have more familiar
Acquaintance with it. There is not a Day or Hour that passes over your Head
nor mine, but if we attend to this inward Voice, we may know what it speaks to
us, by its Counsels, Doctrins, Reproofs, Convictions and Illuminations; for the
Spirit, speaks expressly, with an express signification, unto the Spirit of
Man; and if he be under a Temptation to tell a Lie, and he comes to a little
Pause or Question, whether he shall tell it or no; if he hearken to this inward
Word he will not pause long about it, but such a Sentence will arise in him, as
that to Joseph, How can I do this great Wickedness, and sin against God? How
can I speak a Lie, tell a Lie, when in so doing I sin against God? Here is a
sentence of Truth, will thou receive it or not? No, say thou, I will venture
to tell a Lie; then shall thou come into the rank of them that do Despite to
the Spirit of Grace, that trample under Foot the Son of God, and count the
Blood of the Covenant an unholy thing. What Sentence such shall have at the
latter end, you may read at large in the Holy Scriptures.

Now there is a great necessity that every one be persuaded to hearken to this
Voice; not only at a Meeting, but on all Occasions they have in the World. I
hope I speak to many serious and religious Persons that are enquiring about
their Immortal Souls, what may be best for their Souls, whether it is better to
go on in Wickedness or leave off; and that resolve and say, I would be glad to
leave my Sins as well as you, if I had Power, and to live a holy Life. As for
the want of Power, that you have not Power, I do not wonder at it; for till you
come to an exercise of Faith, in that which has empowered the People of God,
in all Ages, I wonder not that you have not Power. You say I am so weak, that I
am overcome before I am aware; the Devil is so subtle and cunning with his
Temptations, that I am surprize^ and snatched into Temptations, and overcom^
with evil before I am aware: He is like (...) Roaring Lion, going about
continually so all (...) whom he may devour. But who can he devour? Can he
devour those that hearken and submit to the Word of God? If he could, then none
could escape him; if the Devil could pluck out of Gods Hands, then no Body
would go to Heaven, nor ever shall, if he have Power.

Where the Devil finds any in their own Hands, as suppose a religious Person of
this and the other Religion, who never experienced any thing of this Power of
God, but trusts to his Duties and Performances, this Man is at his own Hand;
now such a one the Tempter has Power over: He can make him cheat his
Neighbor, and lead him into Drunkenness and Uncleanness sometimes, and into
the greatest Abominations; but if a Man come into an exercise of Faith and
dependence upon God, and has left trusting in his own Hands, and says, I see
I cannot preserve my self from sin, I see a necessity of putting my trust in
the Lord, and of waiting upon Gods Power to keep me: If the Tempter come to
such a one he cannot prevail, all the Devils in Hell cannot stir him one jot;
the Devil may tempt him, but he stands in the Power of Faith; he knows his
Name, and says; Get thee behind me Satan; when the Devil comes before him, and
lays a Temptation before him, he casts it behind him; if the Devil rises up
against him, he can chain him down, he can say in the Name of the Lord, Get
thee behind me Satan.

This is the Reason why many are tempted, and not overtaken; why many are
tempted to sin, and not overcome: How comes it to pass that we do not do every
thing that we are Tempted to? There is something that keeps us; the Devil is
not so bad to Tempt, but we are as bad in our own Inclinations to yield to him;
The Heart is deceitful above all Things, and desperately wicked; who can know
it? There is more Wickedness in it, than can be uttered. If People be tempted
and not overcome, something must preserve them; if there be something that
preserves a Man from any Evil, it can preserve him from all Evil.

The Reason why some People are led into Temptation sometimes and resist it,
is, because sometimes the Temptation suits not their Inclination; sometimes
their Reputation lies in the way, sometimes one thing, sometimes another: But
when a thing they are Tempted to, suits their Profit and Pleasure, then away
with the fear of God, and nothing shall hinder them, I will have my Pleasure.

But they that understand the Keeper of Israel, and come to know his Power
living in their Hearts, these always bring their Deeds and Temper before him,
and they come to him for a Verdict and Judment, and they ask, Does this tend to
the Honor or Dishonor of God? Is it good or evil? The Oracle of God in the
Heart says do it not, it is evil, Thou, wilt kindle the Indignation of the Lord
against thee; what will it profit to gain the whole world and lose thy own
soul; or what will thou give in exchange for thy Soul? Here is one at hand that
can give Counsel to all of us, at all times; this is he that we must advance;
our Labor and Work upon the Stage of th^s World, among the Sons and Daughters
of Men, is to advance the Virtue and great Authority of this mighty Counselor
Christ Jesus; we do say and affirm, in the Name of God, that the same Light and
Grace by which God has brought us out of Darkness into his marvelous Light,
and from the Power of the Devil into the Kingdom of his dear Son; the same
Power is extended to you, that you may be sanctified and saved from your Sins.

One Sect will say, my Tenets are so and so, and our Ordinances are so and so,
will you come over to us? You shall be a Member of our Church.

Our duty is to come over to the Grace of God that shines in our Hearts; now we
are Witnesses for God that he does not desire the death of them that die, but
rather that they would turn and live, for his Word is gone forth and his Light
shines, and his Glory is risen upon the Nations, that they that inhabit the
Earth may fear him. Fear God and give Glory to God. The hour of his Judgment is
come; Do you know that to be true? that you may not be deluded, you shall
certainly know that the Hour of God's Judgment is come.

Thus when any one suffers himself to be led away with the Evil One, when he
feels after that a Remorse upon his own Heart, (...) finds a secret Judgment
and Tribunal set up in his own Bosom, against Whoredom, Lying, Drunkenness,
Fraud and other Sins, he knows he has done amiss; he is not going to a
Confessor, that will take off and remove the Guilt from his Conscience; he has
offended the Majesty of the great God, and God has signified to him. Is not
Judgment come, and has not God set it up in his own Heart? if through Custom
in Sin thou losest the Sense of this Judgment, it is not because God has
determined to take Advantage against thee, but because thou actest against thy
self, and come to be past feeling; thou wast once under a sense of these
things, and thou wast not past feeling; if thou at any time told thy Parents a
Lie, thou had Remorse; but now thou can tell a Lie, and not feel it, thou
art past feeling, whose Fault is this? The Lord would have brought thee to love
Truth, but thou chusest Lying; if thou peri^^ (...) Blood will be upon thine
own head, the (...) clear from it.

They that receive the Word of God (...) Life: for man lives not by bread
only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God: You are
sensible of God's speaking this Word to you: I exhort you all, in the Love of
God, that you would prize this manner of Speaking, and look upon it as the
grea^est Mercy that ever you enjoyed, that God has not given over speaking to
you, and that Conscience has not given over speaking to you, and that the
Spirit of the Lord does yet strive with you; he will not always strive; you may
be of that sort of Fools before you die, that make a mock of sin, and be as
trees, twice dead and plucked up by the roots. You that are sensible of this
inward Voice, prize it above all your Mercies: Health and Wealth, and all other
Mercies, are not worthy to be compared to this Voice of God speaking in you;
They that prize this, will never complain for want of Power; they will find
Power in it; all the Power in Heaven and Earth is contained in this Truth that
shines unto you; They that come to be exercised in this Word receive Power from
God, for God gives it to them; he gives them Power by degrees, from being Sons
of Belial, Sons of the Devil, to become Sons of God, to as many as believe in
his name. They that receive this Truth grow tender of a Lie, of a vain Word,
they find themselves grow tender, feeling and sensible; H^^e is a token that
the God of Life is quick^^^ them; I am now tender of speaking a Lie to my
Neighbor; I will not do that thing to another that I would not have another do
to me; when you come to a tender state, which is far better than an
hard-hearted state, you will have an Evidence in your selves, That man lives
not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Blessed are they that God has brought into Acquaintance with his Word; of all
Nations and People upon the Earth, they are a blessed People; though there are
manifold Blessings that reach indifferently to all, the sun shines and the rain
falls on the evil and the good, and on the just and unjust; yet this is a
Blessing that can only make the Soul happy, that an Intercourse between it and
its Maker is open* that there is an open Intercourse for the Lord to hear a Man
cry, and he to receive his Word, all those that God has brought into Covenant
with himself by Christ, he has made sensible of this Intercourse and way of
God's speaking to his People, which he spoke to them by in former days: Take
heed that this way be not stopped up; you know by what it was opened, and what
will stop it up again; when you were in much Trouble and Grief you cried to the
Lord, and he delivered you: But if I regard iniquity in my heart, said David,
the Lord will not hear me; You cried to the Lord again, it may be, and he did
not answer you; and the Lord cried to you and you answered him not, but
hearkened to your Lusts.

Yet the Lord, by his long-suffering and patience has won upon a Remnant, and
has brought them over to believe and trust in his Power, for Salvation; and as
soon as ever they came to believe in him, they found his Power to remove out of
the way that which hindered the Intercourse between God and their Souls. What a
great Stir was there in removing out of the way the Pride, Corruption, Enmity,
Looseness, Wantonness and abundance more of evil things, that made the Soul like
a Wilderness? What hacking up and burning up was there? God's Word, like a
hammer and like a fire, did break up and burn up these things; and the same
Word of God like a Sword did cut down those Sins and Lusts which prevailed over
you before: By this means God has opened a Way for you, to have access to him,
and for his Word to have access to you; When you come to the Lord in this way
you know you live by this Word, and if you hear the Word of the Lord spoken
immediately to you, your Joy and Consolation increases, and you have sweet
Communion and Fellowship with God and Christ, and with one another, by this
Covenant of Life. How came you into it? It was by removing a great deal of
Rubbish out of the way. If you should let this Rubbish grow up again, which
kept you from the Joy of the Holy Ghost, will it not do it again? If your
Pride, Corruption, Enmity, Prejudice, Looseness and Wantonness, if these be
suffered to grow up in any of you, they will do as they did before, they will
separate you from the Lord and from one another: As the Truth brought you to
God and this heavenly Fellowship with him, so if a wrathful Mind and wanton
Spirit get up again, it will separate you from God, and scatter you from one
another; then you will live in the outward Life, and die to the inward one and
perish Remember you were told so.

Every one that goes from this living Word, and suffers any thing to arise of
the old Nature, so much as that rises so much will your way of Intercourse
with God be stopped; sometimes Men cry to God, but they have a Bar in their way;
and they come for Comfort to the Throne of Grace, but they cannot receive those
Ministrations of Joy and Peace, which they desire; their foolish hearts are
darkened and their minds blinded, and they will go on in darkness, and be left
out of the Holy Covenant which God has called his People to.

You that God has engaged to be his, by the Operation of his Power, O live in
a holy Fear and watchfulness, and know this, That let your Understanding and
Gifts be what they will, you have nothing but what is given you, and what God
he has given you he can take away: Thou have decked thy self with my flax, and
my wool, and with my silver and gold, and other ornaments, and followed thy
lovers, therefore will I take them away from thee, and strip thee of all thou
gloriest in: Those that forget God, of whom they had these things, that forget
their brokenness of Heart, and the Subjection of their Spirits to God; if they
forget this, let them know, that let their Part^ be what they will, they will
certainly wither, and their inward Life will fail; you that have regard to your
own Souls, and do desire heartily (at this Time) to be quickened, a^^ find that
the Lord has removed your Deadness, and quickened and raised you to such a
degree and measure of Life, that you can say, I find Communion with God, and
Fellowship with my Friends and Brethren in that one Eternal Life, I pray God
you may continue in it long, and lay down your Heads in this Blessed heavenly
Life. Now that you may so do, keep your selves low and humble, and in the Fear
of God, and keep your Ears always open to his Word, and live as becomes those
that are born again and begotten of God, and are brought to partake of the
Divine Life. Let Temptations surround you, that Life will preserve you; he that
never sinned is with you, to keep you from Sin* and he that never deceived any,
will keep you from being deceived; To his Consel and Conduct, and to his Divin
Care and Protection, I do now commit you.

SERMON III. The Necessity of an Holy Life and Conversation. Preached at S.
Martin's-le-Grand, March 16th. 1687.
O How happy are they that have Bread in their own Houses! and that can draw
Water out of their own Wells! These have a blessed glorious Dewlling Place,
these are the Children that their Father provideth for: All the divine
Treasures and the Riches of Heavenly Things are laid up for these; O that all
that have a Sight of this blessed State, were got into it! that their Minds
might no more wander, that People might not be scattered in their Thoughts,
that when they meet together they might have their Expectations entirely from
that God whom they profess to worship: Lord thou have said that thou will teach
thy people thy self; here a Cry goes up to the Lord and their Expectations
through Faith are pitched upon God; they never meet in vain, but a well springs
up and the water of life comes to them, by which they meet with Divine
Refreshments; for, you know, the Promise that our Lord made to his Disciples,
He that drinks of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst more.
Why, will once Drinking serve? Because I have tasted of the Living Water that
the Lord Christ gives me, will that serve? No, but he gives me a substantial
River, that is the reason why I shall thirst no more, it shall be in me a well
of living water, springing up to everlasting life; blessed are the Witnesses of
it, these are they that are satisfied concerning Religion and Doctrine, they are
satisfied concerning Worship, they are looking after no new things; when these
meet together they meet in the Name of the Lord, and they have their Eyes to
him who is a Fountain and they discern a Brightness and a Glory that is
unspeakable; and the Glory that is speakable, that appears many times through
Instruments, will not satisfy them; there is something beyond that, which must
satisfy; this will never do it: People will never be satisfied with hearing,
nor never satisfied with seeing, till they come to hear and see that which is
unutterable, and then they are satisfied; Christ had preached many Sermons in
the hearing of his Disciples, and there were a great many said, That there was
never any man spoke like him, preached like him; yet one of them that was
nearest to him, and most acquainted and intimate with him, after some Years
meeting and hearing of his Sermons, he cries out, Show us the Father, and it
suffices us;

My Friends, this comes near to many of your States; many of you have heard
long, and have heard the speakable Word of God, that which could be uttered,
that which could be spoken forth, by the Demonstration of the Holy Ghost, by
them that have received it of the Father; this you have heard long, and yet
there are many of you, that if you come to a serious Search, you will find a
Want, you will find still that you have not that Satisfaction that puts you
beyond Doubt, beyond Fear; there is some thing that stands in the way, that
hinders your Enjoyment of the unspeakable Glory, of the unspeakable Word, and
this will never be removed, but by your innocent submitting to the Work of the
Power of God in your own Hearts, that so you may not only be Believers but come
to be really Baptized, and then all is out of doubt; for our Lord said, he that
believes and is baptized shall be saved; he does not say he may be saved, but
he shall be saved.

Woeful Experience has told us in our Days, That a great many have believed the
Truth, and yet they are never like to be saved, they have made shipwreck of
their faith; but if they had been baptized, if they would have endured the
Baptism, if they would have been buried with Christ in Baptism, they should
have been saved, every one of them; and now there are a great many that remain
in the Belief of the Truth, and yet they are not Baptized, they are not Dead,
not Buried, notwithstanding they have received like precious faith with us,
that faith which is of the operation of God, and that is alike precious in its
nature to all that do receive it, and would work the same effect in all too, if
it were not obstructed; but notwithstanding they have received Faith toward
the saving of their Souls, yet their Souls are Captives, their Souls are
subject to Lusts, and Pleasures, and Vanities, and unto empty and foolish
Things, and to Passions and Corruptions, after they have received Faith.

For if you take one that is a Believer of Truth, that is overtaken with his
Lusts, and Passions, and Corruptions, he will commonly own that he believes
the contrary, he believes that these things should not be, that it ought to be
otherwise: This is the signification of Truth against Untruth; If it should be
otherwise, why is it thus then? Why, he finds a Life to spring up in that which
is corruptible, that is always contrary to the life of God, and at enmity with
it: What shall I do? I believe the Truth, I know it is a holy thing, it leads
all that submit to it to a holy Life, and there is this and that unholy thing,
this and that corrupt thing remains, what shall I do?

It is an evident Demonstration that thou want the Baptism of him in whom
thou believe; thou have believed in Christ Jesus that comes after John, and
was before him, and now having believed in him, thou want to be baptized by
him, and for want of that, the Pollution and Corruption that was grown up in
thy nature, in the time of thy alienation, prevails still upon thee, contrary
to thy Faith; and there is no coming to obtain this Baptism but by sinking down
into that which will slay thee, that which will kill thee: But there is such a
shifting to save ones Life, there are so many twistings and twinings of People
to save their Lives, that at last they lose them; but there are none that could
ever find that Life that is Eternal, but those that are willing to be given up
to the Dead, and submit to this Baptism, that is by the Holy Ghost and by Fire:
these only do come to Life, they come to the Resurrection, for you never knew
any that dyed this Death but they rose again; it is as impossible for Death to
hold any one down that is buried in this Baptism, as it was impossible to hold
Christ down, when he was in the Grave; The same power that brought again our
Lord Christ from the dead, the same power it is that quickens us, while we
remain in these mortal Bodies, after we have sustained this Death and
Crucifiction.

But who can believe this Saying? for this is a hard saying, who can bear it?
Is it not enough that I am a Believer, which makes me a Friend, and entitles me
to a Community among you, and as long as I hold the Truth and profess the Truth
I am looked upon as one of your Society? This is very true, this does entitle
People unto the outward Privivileges of the Church of Christ; but there is
another inner Court, that lies under the Angel's Reed, the measuring Reed, that
is to be measured, the Temple is measured, and every Worshipper in the Temple
is measured; there was an outward Court, that was for representing the Church
of God in general from the particular; the outward Court was not measured, that
the Gentiles might come in; the unbaptized People which were never regenerated
they might come so far as the outward Court, but this did not entitle them to
the Privileges of the House of God, nor to any Worship or Sacrifice that was
accepted upon God's Altar.

It concerns you and me (my Friends) to be serious about Matters of this Moment
and Importance, and not spend your Days, and, as it were, speak by rote, under
an airy Profession, though of Truth it self, without considering what Progress
you have made, what benefit you have obtained, and whether you are come not
only to the shadow of good things to come, but to the very Substance of the
heavenly things; for the comers to the outward worship could never with those
Sacrifices they offered be made perfect; the comers thereunto were not made
perfect as to things pertaining to the conscience, speaking there of the
outward worship, Heb. 10.1. but coming to the heavenly things, whereof the
other were but a shadow, they made People perfect, as to the Conscience, and
did bring them to Salvation. The Apostle alludes to this Baptism, for he speaks
in a Figure of the Eight persons that were saved in Noah 's ark; then he brings
down the Allegory to Christian Baptism, not only to the Baptism of John, the
forerunner of Christ, that preached of Christ, but to the Christian Baptism it
self; by the like figure, whereof baptism now saves us, says the Apostle, not
the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
Conscience. What does he mean by Baptism saving us? He means, the answer of a
good Conscience toward God, through the resurrection of Christ from the dead;
so that Christian Baptism did bring along with it the cleansing and putting
away of all sin out of the conscience that might bring them under Doubts and
Scruples; and then there is an arising of Jesus, the Savior, in the
Conscience, the Mediator that brought them to answer for them in the Sight of
God; for if People be conscious of Sin, and do leave off their Sin, this does
not yet cleanse the Conscience; for there still remains a Conscience of Sin;
it is not the leaving off our Sin, that makes our Atonement with God, or that
expiates our Guilt, or does away the Guilt of the Sins that we have committed;
but there must be a forsaking and a leaving off Sin by the Virtue and Power of
the Spirit, by which we are enabled not only to leave off Sin, but are guided
and directed to the Mediator, whose blood alone reconcileth us to God, and
cleanses us from all sin. If I should never commit a sin, while I live, it is
not this simply in it self that will make me have the answer of a good
Conscience in the sight of God; for there remains the guilt of sin contracted
in the Days of unbelief, which is a bar and hinderance that none can approach
the Holy God but in the atonement and Salvation that comes by Jesus Christ;
for all that believe and obey the Gospel are accepted in Christ, and upon the
account of Christ's precious Blood that cleanses us from all sin and
unrighteousness. Whom does it cleanse? those only that forsake their sins and
by his power are brought to a holy life; they by the virtue of his power and
the cleansing of his Blood come to have their former sins removed from them, as
far as the East is from the West,

But what is this to them that remain in their Sins? what is this to them that
are not baptized? for the dead that have not put off the old Man, nor put on
the new Man, but have only put on the name and profession of Christ, and put on
the outside of him, his Garment, but have not put him on, they are not Created
again in Christ Jesus unto good works, that they might walk in them; no wonder
there remains a conscience of sin in them, there is a Bar that hinders them
from the sight of the glory of God, and from real and true satisfaction,
concerning their atonement and reconcilation with God, and this hinders them
from the enjoyment of that peace that passes understanding; and it is no
wonder, because they are not come to this baptism that brings the answer of a
good conscience in the sight of God; they are not risen with Christ; how should
they? for they are not buried with him, Romans 6.3. know ye not that so many of
us (says the Apostle) as were baptized into Christ were baptized into his
death; therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death, that like as
Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also
should walk in newness of life; here is a change figured out between them that
had partaken of the spiritual baptism, and were come again to the participation
of life in the resurrection of Christ Jesus; and those that were not baptized.

So it is now with every one that comes to believe the truth, and makes a
profession of it; there is a way cast up, and there is a door opened for
salvation; but the grand question that every one ought to enquire about, and
put to themselves is, What progress they have made in this way? Whether they
are Baptized yet or no? Whether they have Put off the old Man and his deeds,
and put on the new Man and the new Man's deeds, which are righteousness and
holiness? They that find that though they are believers, they are short of
this, they do also find that their shortness is their hinderance, their
shortness in not coming up to the pattern that has bin showed them, is their
hinderance so that they enjoy not the things here spoken of; the being under
this sense and really sitting under this sense in a Meeting, though there
should be no Man speaking to them outwardly, yet being come to this faith, and
made partakers of this baptism, People would find in their own Bosoms the
hidden Word of life ministering to their condition; they would have enough,
there would not be a famine of the Word unto them, nor they should not need to
be in expectation of going out to this or the other Instrument, but they would
be satisfied when they are met together with the presence of the Lord, that the
Lord is in midst of them, ministering to them the Word of life, in his operating
and working, speaking in a tongue that every one can understand it, speaking
with a kind of Voice and Language, that every one may understand his own state
and condition; and this is the way that God brought up People at the beginning,
to the knowledge of Heavenly things, and opening of the mysteries of Salvation;
we had it not of Men, but of Jesus our Lord; he was our great minister, we
waited upon him and trusted in him, and he taught us himself; he has ministered
to us at our silent and quiet waiting upon him those things that were
convenient for us; we might well say he gave us our Food in due season; he has
not only given strong Meat unto Men, but has ministered of the sincere Milk of
his word unto Babes, that lived in sincerity and self-denial, loving God above
all things; and he taught and conducted us in our way, this way of simplicity,
until our understandings came to be opened, until our Souls came to be prepared
to receive the mysteries of his Kingdom.

In those Days there were some that started up in Knowledge, and that built
their Nets on high, and took Flax and Wool, and Silver and Gold, and decked
themselves with them; but the Lord found them out, and brought them down, and
took the Crown from their Head, and clothed them with Dishonor: So God does
from Age to Age, his Judgments will begin at his own House; if you would Grow
in the grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, then
grow in humility and self-denial, and keep a constant watch upon your Hearts;
examine your Hearts, and Commune with your selves upon your Beds, and be still;
take heed lest you sin against the Lord, and provoke him: There were some that
provoked the Lord of old, and they committed two great evils: What be they? They
have gone away, and forsaken the Fountain of living Water; as much as to say,
they have not their dependence upon an invsiable power, as they ought to have;
for I am a living fountain and it is by an invisible power that I am able to
council, and teach, direct, and purify and open their understanding; but they
have forsaken me, that is one great evil; and the other is, they would not be
without somewhat, they have forsaken the Lord and they would have somewhat
instead of God; They have dug to themselves broken Cisterns, that will hold
no Water. And how many in this Age have committed these two great evils?

My Friends, examine your selves; are there not many that have been guilty of
these two great Evils? They do not keep their close dependence, trust and
reliance upon the invisible Power of God, as they profess they ought to do, but
are hurried away from it; some by the love of the World, some by Lusts and
Pleasures, some by Passions and others by worldly Interests, are drawn away
from the Power, to do and say that which the Power is against: Is not this a
forsaking of the Lord the living Fountain? What do they do then? Are they not
for this and that, and the other Man? for hearing this and the other Man's word,
and digging to themselves broken Cisterns? And have they not their trust and
confidence in going to Meetings, in commending this and the other way? Have
they not their trust in their Profession outwardly, when it ministers nothing
to their Souls, so that they secretly wither for all this? If you had all the
Men and Angels that were ever sent of God appointed to preach to you, that
could not minister Life to you, unless there be that Faith that stands in the
Power of God. The Faith that stands in any Man's Words, that will not overcome
your Lusts, but the Faith that stands in the Power purifies the Heart, it will
not suffer any unclean thing there. As for Preaching, let a Man preach against
this and the other Lust and Corruption, there it will remain for all his
Preaching, unless Men know Gods Power and Life in which there is Righteousness;
for Words and Knowledge, and Sight and Speculation, will never give People
Victory over their Sins.

Therefore you know, every one who is settled must be settled where the
Foundation of Religion is; it is not coming to Meetings, and owning this and
the other Doctrine which is the Foundation of our Religion; God has revealed
his Power to every one of us; God has not given his Spirit to Preachers and
Prophets only, for then there would be a Famine of the Word, as was in Israel,
The Priest's Lips preserved Knowledge. If you did take away the Priest you did
take away their Knowledge. The Prophets had the Word of God, and they only
spoke the Word of God. If the Prophet was taken away, then the Word of God was
taken away. The Lord threatened to send a Famine among them, they grieved and
vexed, and killed and destroyed the Priests and Prophets; therefore, says the
Lord, I will send a Famine among you, not of Bread but of the Word, and they
shall go from City to City, and enquire for the Word of the Lord.

Thus it was in the Jewish Church; if there was a Prophet they would go 30, 40
or 100 Miles to him that had the Word of the Lord, They shall go from City to
City, to enquire for the Word of the Lord: But blessed be God we are come to
another Day, for now the Word of the Lord is manifested in the Hearts of all
that believe; they know the Word: I do not say all that believe do preach the
Word, or ought to preach; but the Word preaches to them; they are not as
broken Cisterns that can hold no Water; when they find the Word and hear it,
they speak it presently; what is ministered to their own Condition, that they
tell to other Folks; when People come to the Blessing of this Dispensation that
Gods Word reveals in their Hearts, they then know what the signification of
it is, they understand the Doctrine of it, the Doctrine preaches Holiness to
them; not that they should preach Holiness and yet remain Unholy; not that they
should preach Humility, and yet remain Proud: It preaches Holiness, Humility
and Singleness of Heart to a Remnant, that like good Scholars and Disciples
learn the Lessons and Doctrine of the Word of God.

Now when thou have learned them well, and art come to see the effect of the
Word, and do bring forth the Deeds and Works which are the Fruits of
Holiness, Perfecting Holiness in the fear of God, and with Humility known and
witnessed in Christ Jesus, and art not only meek in show, but meek and lowly in
Heart; when People come to be meek and lowly, and of a clear Conscience, purged
from all dead Works to serve the living God; then if the Lord gives them a Word
of Exhortation, of Doctrine or Counsel, it is very welcome, and it has a Savor
through the Blessing of God, and they come by it to be built up in their most
holy Faith, and this Word is brought forth in Holiness and Righteousness in
their Lives, and shows it self in a Life of Holiness; then thou will shine in
thy Conversation to all that thou conversest with, so that they may see thee to
be such a Man or Woman as have been with Jesus, and learned of Jesus, and
receivedst a word ingrafted; when thou do receive the Word into thy Heart,
there is the engrafting of it: If it has not Root there, then, says Christ,
My Word does not abide in you. If you feel something of this Invisible Word in
your Hearts, it brings you to a Resolution to serve God, and to keep your
selves from sin, and to answer the Profession which you make of God, this is
the effect of the Word of God, if it does abide in you. Does it abide? You
shall know anon or to morrow, so soon as a Temptation comes to stir you up to
Pride or Passion, to Fraud or Deceit, then you will see whether the Word abide:
If it abide you sin not.

This is Scripture, a certain Foundation Doctrine, that may be as safely
preached as any Doctrine: If the Word abide in you, you sin not; What of that?
Let the Word go, and you will sin, when ever you are tempted to it. I write to
you young Men, because you have overcome the wicked one, you are strong, and
the Word of God abides in you, and you have overcome the wicked one. We shall
see as soon as a Temptation meets with thee, whether the Word abides in thee;
if it abide thou will not sin, but resist the Tempter. Set thy Foot upon the
Temptation, and go over it, and thou will have the Dominion; and this will make
thee a Freeman or Woman, and thou will stand fast in the liberty wherewith
Christ has made thee free. The Apostle supposes them free, and that they have
got Dominion; then Stand fast, says he, in the liberty wherewith Christ has
made thee free. It is a liberty not of Lust and Sin, but a liberty of the Soul;
the Soul now is not at the Devil's Will and Call.

For it is a shame to the Doctrine of Christianity, that we profess things, and
yet deny them in Practice: We profess that there is a Power in Christ to keep
and preserve us out of sin, and we profess to believe this Power is
communicated to them that do believe in the Lord Jesus Christ for their
Preservation; that is, he will not withold it from them: We profess these
things in the face of the whole World, and yet when the Devil calls one Man to
Covetousness, and another to defraud his Neighbor, and another to defile
himself, he is drawn away thereby; what Hypocrisy is here to profess this, and
act the contrary? I do not wonder that they that profess they cannot live a day
without Sin, that they should fall; but they that profess to believe there is
Power enough in Christ, and that it is offered to them, for them to live in sin
and yield to temptation, this is horrid Wickedness. They that are of an upright
single Mind, would die before they would sin, knowing that God is Almighty, and
gracious and willing to bestow his Power, and Wisdom, and Grace, upon them that
ask it; they would die rather than sin against God presumptuously: Let it cost
me my Goods, my Estate, my Liberty or my Life, How can I do this great
Wickedness, and sin against God? They love God above all; you never heard them
complain that they wanted Power, For the Lord is at their right Hand, and they
shall not be moved. They cannot fall; though they are Tempted, they will not fall
into Temptation. They have Power when they see the Devil before them, to put
him behind them; the Nobility of their Extract, of their new Birth and
Regeneration puts such a Temper and Disposition into their Souls, that they
scorn to be at the Devils Command, as if they were his Children.

Oh it is a noble and honorable thing to be a Child of God, a very high
Dignity to be in such an honorable Relation to God, and to have a Right to the
Heavenly Mansions, To sit down in heavenly Places in Christ Jesus. I would to
God you were all ready for it, that you had the Wedding Garment on, that you
might not be bound Hand and Foot, and cast into utter Darkness. What is the
reason that you do not sit down in this heavenly Frame and Temper, and draw the
Waters of Salvation our of your own Souls; Could the Lord do any thing more
than he has done, and could his Servants do any more than they have done for
your Help? Are not their Labors demonstrations of it? We have been as Epistles
of Christ written in your Consciences: We have been testifying that there is
something wanting in too too many, the want of resigning up themselves to the
Baptism of the Cross. People are willing to be counted Friends; but they are
Friends of God, that do whatsoever he commands 'em; that is the Christian
Lesson, not to say, I will be a Friend to you and a Friend to the Church, and
to such a sort of People; but I will be a Friend of God, and do whatsoever he
commands me, whatsoever Command God lays upon you, either to take up a Cross,
or to deny your selves and follow him.

Learn this Lesson, and you will be Disciples indeed, and Members of the Church
too; not Members of a Church privileged outwardly only, but members of a
church of the firstborn, and you will have your names written in heaven; when
one comes to have his Name written in Heaven, he comes to know his Name, it is a
white Stone, not a speckled one; they that have it they know it, they are not
ignorant of one another's Names, that are written in this Book; they have a
Fellowship that no body can declare; their Communion is in that Bread and that
Cup: This is a Cup of Blessing indeed, and this has blessed us and will bless
us; God will preserve a People in this Fellowship. You that are at a distance
now, you must come nearer to him; God will choose a People by whom his Name
shall be magnified; Because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, we
cannot but desire this for all, especially for the household of faith; we cannot
but desire their Perfection, their growing up in the Grace of God, that they
might come to be partakers of Heaven. And, in the next Place, our Love is to
all People, every where; we would be glad that all were saved; they that
despise us, when we are speaking of Heavenly things, speaking like a Child,
like a stammering Child, speaking of the glorious Excellencies of God, of the
loving kindness of God, speaking of those things which God has spoken to our
Souls, they that despise these things, we would be glad that they might be
saved: If they were partakers of these things, they would be glad as well as we
and they would be more really happy in respect of this World, for the Time that
they are to live here; they would live a happier Life, even in this World, and
they would have everlasting life in the world to come.

The love of Christ constrains men thus to judge, that every one that has
received like precious faith, ought to answer that Grace and Faith which God
has ministered to them in a holy Life and Conversation, and every one who is a
stranger to this thing, ought to be of an enquiring Mind and an open Heart to
wait for the Day when God will visit them with the same Grace; when you give up
your selves to a daily Cross, as Christ's Disciples, you will not be running
after any one to teach you to know the Lord, for you will all know the Lord,
from the least to the greatest; I that have been but a little convinced, shall
I know the Lord? Thou shall know the Lord, thou that art dead in thy sins and
trespasses, thou that have not known the Blood of cleansing, thou shall know
the Lord to be thy Judge, and thy Lawgiver, to teach thee how thou must live,
walk and act; and is not that a good knowledge? This is the way they reckoned
upon in old Time, it is a notable Expression, The Lord is our Judge; there is
the beginning, he began there, Judgment began at the house of God; those he
brings into his House, he brings them under the Discipline of his House, The
Lord is our judge, he is our king and lawgiver, and he will save us; this same
Exercise of Discipline under Judgment brought to them the Faith and Experience
of his being their Lawgiver, and this brought them to a Faith of the last
Sentence, we shall be saved; and the Lord answers such a People, That he will
bring salvation to them, Salvation shall be for walls and bulwarks: Did the
People of this Nation but know Salvation was brought near to them, and that it
was their Bulwark, there would not be a crying up this and the other rotten
thing for a Bulwark.

We talk of a Bulwark as well as others; we have a Bulwark, blessed be the God
of Heaven, made of better Stuff than theirs; for it is the Salvation of God
which has kept us from the Pollution of Sin, and from a running into all
excess and riot that others have run into; it has kept us from the Evil, it
has kept Evils out of us, and we have found that certainly true, That all
things work together for good, to them that love God and fear God; that all the
Providence of God together, they have all wrought for our good; and this is
the Bulwork that we have trusted in, and it has served hitherto, and it will
serve us and our Posterity to the end of the World: This is a Bulwark that will
never be stormed, that will never be thrown down nor laid waste: Though all the
Powers on Earth, and all the Potentates in this World should agree together,
they shall not prevail against it; we have salvation for walls and bulwarks; if
I be within these Walls, Salvation is round about me; If I am got into this
eternal Bulwark, I am safe from the Devil and his Instruments; here is a
Bulwark to be relied upon.

Many wonder we differ with them in some Opinions; we have that Confidence in
this Bulwark, that we desire not another; God will last and abide for ever, so
will this Bulwark; all the care that I take, and all the care that you should
take, is to keep within these Walls: Do not sally out, if you go out, the the
Devil is watching, and seeking continually whom he may devour; he will catch
Straglers; if that People will go out for Profit or for Pleasure, or Interest,
the Devil will catch them: What, such People talk of Salvation for Walls and
Bulwarks? the Devil has got them in his Snare, and they are caught in
Drunkenness, Uncleanness and other Sins; the reason is they have gone out of
their Bulwark, they have sallyed out of their Walls, for the Devil could never
have fetched them out.

O take heed, says the Apostle, lest there spring up in any of you an evil
heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God; as if he had said, You are
Christians now, you are a People come to a good estate in Christ; but consider
you have no strength to stand but in him, no Power to keep your selves but in
him; Take heed at all times that there spring not up in you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God; take heed lest there spring up in
you such a Thought as this; I may take this Pleasure and the other Profit;
Consider that thou die and witherest if thou depart from the living God; take
heed of taking Liberty above the fear of God: It is not our talk of Salvation
for Walls and Bulwarks, that will do us good, but our keeping within these
Walls.

I remember a notable Saying of the Apostle, which has a great Emphasis in it,
and a great deal of Doctrine, he writes to the Church, after they were become a
People of professing Christians, Take heed lest you come to be beguiled by the
serpent, as he beguiled Eve; he did not speak of Jezabel, a wicked Woman; but
he spoke of Eve a good Woman, created after the image of God, in righteousness
and holiness; They were come to a Life of Sanctification, to a Life that was
hidden from ages and generations; You must look to your selves, and look upon
your selves as in the state of your Mother Eve, a Woman brought forth in
Righteousness and Holiness, that might have stood in that Primitive state,
notwithstanding all the Subtilty of all the Serpents in the World; but letting
her Ear hearken to this Old Serpent, she was beguiled; there grew up a
Consultation in her reasoning part; It may be so as he says, I will try.

So I say to you that are come to a state of Sanctification, and in some
measure to know the cleansing Power of God, and that you have not believed in
it in vain, but it has effectually wrought some Change and Alteration in you,
and is still carrying on the Work of your Salvation: Many Temptations will
attend you, and many Snares will be laid in your way, but God has preserved
you to this Day: I know the Devil's Wiles and Temptations are manifold; they
are fitted to every one's Inclinations, fitted to every Opportunity and to
every occasion in this World; Men are tried every way by the Tempter, to see
which way he may ensnare them; he tries every way to ensnare and entangle the
simple, that he may turn them to the Right Hand or to the left, that their
Souls may be destroyed and perish.

I cannot speak to you by a more emphatical word, by a more familiar
Exhortation than this, Take heed you be not beguiled as Eve was; many will be
tempted as she was, but I would not have you do as she did, and yield to the
Temptation: Take heed that you do not defile your selves, but keep your
garments white; you that have been washed and cleansed, labor to keep your
selves unspotted from the world; this is pure religion and undefiled, that
which has enlightened many a Nation, and shall enlighten many of those whose
Religion is to be undefiled, and to keep themselves unspotted from the world: I
pray God increase the number of them, that so the blessed Work of
Sanctification that has begun in this way may be carried on, to his Praise and
the Salvation of our Souls, to the spreading forth of his Glory, and the
exalting of his Name; that the Strangers which are scattered and desolate may
be brought into his holy Way and walk in it; that we all, in a Fellowship
together, walking in that holy way, may through the Eternal Spirit offer Praise
and Tanksgiving to God, who is worthy to receive Glory and Honor, Power and
Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

SERMON IV. Baptism and the Lord's Supper, Asserted. Preached at Grace
Church-street, April 15th 1688. If any man has not the spirit of Christ, he is
none of his.
IF I should say no more, there is that in every ones Conscience that will make
Application; If he that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his you may
say, Whose is he then? If they be none of Christ's that have not his Spirit,
whose are they? They are all his whose Spirit rules them, every one of us does
belong to him whose Spirit rules over us, unto whose Power we are subjected.
You know this distinguishes People in the World, One King knows his Subjects
from another King's Subjects, they are under the Obedience of this, that and
the other King or Prince, his Law is over them, they are subject to it, so here
is a Decision of all the People in the World, who they belong to.

We, all of us, I hope, do expect there will be a Decision at the Day of
Judgment, and believe the things we read concerning that, That there will be a
Decision, and some will be placed on the Right Hand and some on the Left Hand;
some will have the Sentence of Come ye blessed, and others the Sentence of Go
ye cursed; but now there is a way of finding out the Decision of the Matter
before we go out of the World, before the Day of Judgment, when there will be
no Remedy, that is, then it must be and abide so; now there is no need it
should continue so; if it be amiss it may be mended, if I do not belong to the
right Prince, if I be not under the right Power and Spirit, I may be, for now
it is a day of Grace, a day of Mercy; I have been a Rebel to the right Prince.
I may be pardoned and taken into Favor; it is far better for People to know
their state now than to know it then, because then there will be no Remedy.

The Apostle, in laying down Fundamental Apostolical Doctrines that were to be
belived and taken notice of, and are in our Age, so that we may say, Things
written of old time were written for our learning, he makes this Affirmation
and Position of Doctrine, He that has not the spirit of Christ is none of his,
he does not belong to him; if he be called a Christian he is not a Christian,
if he has not the Spirit of Christ; It is but a Name he has got, he has not
that which makes him essentially so, for nothing can make a Christian but
having the Spirit of Christ; therefore when they would vindicate their being
Christians, they prove it thus; For he (speaking of God) has sent the spirit
of his Son into our hearts, and we know the mind of Christ, we know him that is
true, or we are in him that is true; These things, if they were right, if they
were true, were evident Demonstrations that they were a sort of Men who
depended more upon the Spirit and spiritual Teachings and Spiritual Guidance
than upon Rules and Methods of Teaching that were in the World.

I speak of this, Friends, because you know as well as I, how averse this Age
of ours has been, to have any thing spoken of Spiritual Dispensations, or
about spiritual Teachings; though a Man has been counted formerly a wise Man,
a learned Man, a Man of parts, if once he come to smatter out a little about
inward Teaching, it is enough to spot him and make him ridiculed of his
Acquaintance as if there were no such thing in the World; We have a Book,
called the Bible, it is from one end to the other full of such Expressions, of
being led by the Spirit, you have an anointing which teaches you all things;
The whole Tenor of the New Testament is about Spiritual Teaching and Divine
Operarations, and of Faith being the operation of God; and the Old Testament
has abundance of Expressions by way of Prophecy, that in the New Testament
Days, if People would look for the Law of God, they must look for it in their
Hearts, and if they would know God they must look to the mediator, the Lord
Jesus Christ; The New Testament seems to go that way, Christians should be the
most Spiritual People in the World, that is the Guide, the Rule.

But, say they, the Scripture is the Foundation of Faith and Manners, Belief
and Practice; this is but Dissimulation, I am afraid, that is to be found in
some; What is the Scripture the Rule of Faith? and may People believe what they
find in Scripture? Yes, but say some, it is best be aware for fear of Error;
What is in the Scripture is serious, sound and orthodox, and did Quakers, think
you, never find in Scripture that People were to wait for the Spirit, and pray
in the Spirit, and serve God in the Spirit, and that all Religion that is not
in Power is not available, did they not find it in the Scripture? And you that
are not Quakers, Did you ever read the New Testament? How came it to pass that
ye never found these Texts? But some People read and read the New Testament
twenty times over, and mock, and deride, and persecute a Man that shall speak
of the Spirits Teaching.

I have admired at it, how intelligent Men, to whom God has given a competent
Understanding, should be so blinded; they have learned to read English, and
they have read the New Testament over several times and the Old Testament too,
and they have read those Sentences of Christ's Doctrine, that do so currently
and unanimously speak of Divine Teachings and Spiritual Operations, Spiritual
Worship and Spiritual Religion, that mu^t have some Motion and Stirring of the
Holy Ghost to be the Original of it, and that al^ others are not acceptable to
God; doubtless they have read these things, but I have often desired and do
still desire that they would but read it again once more, and try and see what
God will do; he has oftentimes made use of the Holy Scripture as a means to
awaken People and to open their Understandings, and let them see the Mind of
the Spirit by which the Scripture is written, and the next time if they can
find Scripture Text and Apostolical Doctrine, to teach People to wait upon the
Spirit, I hope they will leave Scoffing and Mocing.

It has been hitherto looked upon as an Invention, to speak of the teaching of
the Spirit and waiting upon the Spirit, and being moved by the Spirit. This
Apostolical Doctrine, Prayer and Worship has been looked upon as an Invention
that we have brought in; To look for the Holy Ghost in that way that was never
known to our Fathers, is a fantastical Conceit of the Quakers, say they; To
tell People they must be led by the Spirit in Divine Things, as in Prayer and
Worship, and the like, that in these things they must wait for the spirit, was
there ever any Man that was counted good for any thing that ever preached so,
before they came? Do we read any such kind of thing in Scripture?

O the blindness that has happened to this Nation! I have considered not
without admiration, how the Devil (he is a spirit too and a wicked one) the
Devil should have power to shove out the knowledge, belief, sense, and feeling
of the Spirit of God, now a days; there are thousands in this Nation that have
formerly believed that it was as impossible for a Man to believe the divine
motions and struglings of the spirit of God in this life as to raise their
Fathers and Mothers out of their Graves; some of their learned Teachers have
told us it is a Whimsy and Fancy, and that there was no inspiration of the
spirit now a days, but that it was a foolish fancy in us to wait for such a
thing, it is needless say they, there was an Immediate Teaching in the Apostles
days and they had the sense of the spirit of Christ working in them, to teach
them to write Letters and Epistles to the Church, which Letters and Epistles
were written by the moving of the Holy Ghost, but we have no need of it now,
the Holy Ghost has brought order and government into the Church, we have it now
in black and white Printed in our Books, therefore say they, there is no need
of the spirit, and People need not be acquainted with the operation of the
spirit now a days in regard they have it in their Books what manner of Worship
they must perform.

I grant them their due, that they have the direction of the Scripture, I am
able to understand that People are to worship God and pray to him, and are to
meet together and to observe this and the other doctrinal precepts there laid
down; I confess I can make shift herew^th to frame out a form of Religion, and
if I do not mistake in the opening and explication of the Doctrine, I could
make a right form too, but I am liable to mistake, another Man that understands
Greek better than I, says that the Greek word ought to be translated so, and
the form ought to differ in such a respect; some say the only way of government
is by Bishops, and the word bears it in the original, and another says he has
streched the word, for the word means Presbyter; another says Presbyter
signifyes no more than choice of Church Elders and Deacons and such like, and
this is all out of one Book, the settlement of Bishops Presbyters and Elders.

Here a parcel of form-makers all fall out about the meaning of the word; what
remedy can any mortal Man provide for this? We must not be killing and slaying
one another about words; if I be an episcopal Man and say the word signifyes
Bishops, I may be a wicked Man still; and if another say it must be Presbyter,
he may be a wicked Man too, and if another say it should be Pastor, Elders, and
Deacons, he may be a wicked Man notwithstanding.

Thus they have rent and torn one another about Church Government, what remedy
shall we have for this that these quarrellings and contentions about terms and
words may come to an end? Could a Man prescribe a more certain remedy for all
these mistakes than this, if they had a measure of this spirit which did work
in the Apostles when they wrote down these Words, which the Apostles had in
Writing them, then I say they could tell you what the spirit meant, for the
spirit is the same and not changed, and the Words are the same to a small
matter, so that if a Man had that, he might end all the controversy; but where
shall we have a Man that has this spirit to end the controversy? There is
none now a days say the Protestants, and say the Papists there is none but one
that has this infallibility; and they will not suppose that neither, for some
of them say, that one Man is as infallible as another Man; there is a great
brangle, whether any one Man be infallible or a great many men together are
infallible about Doctrine and Worship: This might be cured all at once if we
could come to this conclusion, Papists, Protestant and Quakers, here is an end
of all their outside Worship, He that has not the spirit of Christ is none of
his: If there be not spirit in it it is not Christ's Religion and Worship.

So that they that jangle and bark and bite are without among Dogs and
Sorcerers, that are strangers to the spirit of Christ; there is a spirit in
them that denies the spirit of Christ, there is a spirit that rules in them
that are wit^out the spirit, for no Body that I know on acts things without a
spirit, and without being moved. What, are good and bad all moved by the
spirit, and yet are there no motions? I have sometimes turned the Question upon
People and asked them if there were no motions of the evil spirit, has it no
such kind of influence that it can move upon our spirits, that we can sensibly
feel our selves thrus^ forth to such an action? I never met any Man that would
deny it, they are so generally favorable to the wicked spirit; no Man will
deny but the Devil has a way of moving and stirring upon the spirit of a Man,
and to suggest to him such an evil thing, and as I have sometimes said, it is
so received an opinion that when the malefactor comes to be arraigned at the
Bar for some grievous crime, they lay the foundation of the indictment, such a
Day he was moved and instigated by the Devil to do such a thing; here is a
settled motion for the Devil for him to influence peoples spirits but no way for
the good spirit of God to influence Men's spirits; here is nothing left us but a
bad instigation; but to know inward motions to good things it is not to be
expected now a days.

How should ever the cunning Serpent, that would have Power over the best of us
all, be said to winnow us? Christ signified to Peter, a bold and resolute
Disciple, Satan desires to have thee, and winnow thee as wheat; if the Devil
had Power over every one, to make them his Servants and Slaves, wh^^^ Remedy
have we but we must all perish and go headlong to Hell with him, unless there
be some way of resisting him? That is true, say People, the Devil, must be
resisted, we find it in the New Testament, Resist the Devil; This is a good
Exercise, but tell me one thing, when I go about to resist the Devil, must I
resist him in my own Power? If I said you might do so, you would say I was an
erroneous Preacher, and well you might; This is an old Free Will Doctrine, that
a man may resist the Devil by his own Power, and escape his Snares and do the
Will of God; This has been cried down by the Doctors of the Church of England,
and by most of all sorts of Christians, and for our parts, since the Lord has
opened our Mouths, we did never speak a Word in favor of it, as if we went
about to resist the Devil in our own Strength, if we did the Devil would make
Fools of us; He that goes about to resist the Devil in his own Strength, he
will entrap and ensnare him, in that Men have a propensity to sin and by his
Cunning and Subtilty may be led into a Snare before they are aware.

Thus it is agreed on all Hands, that our Power, as Men, is too weak to resist
Satan's Temptation, so that you see we must have the Assistance of the Divine
Power or go all to Hell; there is no medium between these two Extremes, some
extraordinary Power must assist me or else the Devil will have me. If you will
not admit of a supernatural Power to come in to help me and you, we must all go
to Hell, there is no Remedy: I will say my Prayers, says one; do so, yet in
the best of your Prayers there will be Sin, and if I regard Iniquity in my
heart the Lord will not hear me: I will go and hear Sermons, say you; the very
Man that preaches will tell you, That hearing of Sermons will do you no good
at all, unless there be Motions of the Spirit of God, so that you will be warpt
from one thing to another, and have diversity of Doctrines and come to no
fixedness; and while you ^^ncern your selves about Doctrines, all the while the
Devil prevails upon you; For the Tongue, he has rule of that, and for the
Mind, he has rule of that, and as for the Hands, he has rule of them, and
makes you do those things that by his perpetual Suggestions he moves you to; So
that your going to Church and saying your Prayers signi^^e nothing to bring you
from under the Wrath of God and from the Captivity of the Devil, Has not the
Devil those in Captivity that go to Church, and say their Prayers and give
Alms? These are things that you can do in pour own Power, the saying of your
Prayers, and Fasting, and giving of Alms, these things thou may do, the
Devil will not hinder thee, for he knows that these will not bring thee out of
his Clutches, nor out of his Chains and Fetters.

There is but one Way and Means by which the Devil may be effectually resisted,
that (...) by taking to my Help one stronger than he: I have gone for Help to
many stronger than I in my young Days, that I thought to be stronger
Christians, and many of them did afford their Help in the Work, by Counsel, by
Persuasion, by Exhortation and by Doctrine, but all this did not do, and the
Reason was this, because the Devil was too strong for me, and so he was for
them. As long as you go for Help to this and the other Place, till you find one
stronger than the Devil, expect no Deliverance or Help from (...) thing in the
World, but lay aside all con^^^^^ in the flesh, in any Man on Earth, or in all
the Doctors Words and best Preaching you shall hear, lay aside your Confidence
in them, they will never do you any good in this respect, for they will never
break your Chains off; many are loaded with them, but some, I hope, are weary
and heavy laden and feel the weight of Sin, I pray God increase the Number,
though it be a state of Sorrow, it is better than the state of Fools, that make
a mock of sin; I would have you weary and heavy laden with your Sins, and
brought into this state, to see your selves captivated by the strong Power of
Darkness, and to see you are unable to deliver your selves out of it by your
own Power.

For me to fall into the Hands of a Tyrant that is stronger than I, and never a
Man to deliver me, how sad would it be? If I could ^^nd a Man stronger than
this Tyrant, and that would kill him, I should be his Servant and have a better
Master: ^o Man can kill t^^ Tyrant, that has led the Captive and made me a
Slave; if he say, Be drunk I must be drunk, if he bid me swear I must swear:
This is the Slavery that the Devil has got his Servants into, that whatsoever
he says that they must do, if he bids them do it: O wretche^ man that I am,
who shall deliver me? I cannot deliver my self, and no Man can deliver me; I
would be acquainted with all Christians, if they could help me; I would try all
Religions that are this Day in the World, to see if ^here be help for me: Many
are oppressed with Sin, and they go to and fro, to see what Help can be given
them, to fre^ them from the Bondage that the Devil ha^^ them in: This sort of
People are to be pitied and the Souls of all good People will pi^^ them, for
such as these seek the Living amo^^ the Dead; they seek to them to redeem the^
that cannot redeem them: We have sough^ say they, for Power and Strength from
them that had not enough for themselves, they were captivated as well as we,
and all this because we came not to him that is stronger than the Devil. You
will take the same course, and stay till gray Hairs come, and you go down to
the Grave with Sorrow, unless you come to one stronger than the Devil, and the^
trust in him, believe in him, and expect Deliverance by him. The Reason why
People do not expect Deliverance is, because t^^^ Two Things are shut out of
their Belief (...)

I. They believe not that a sinful Life will carry them to Destruction.

II. They think there is not any possibility in this World to live any other
than a sinful Life.

The Devil has brought Men to this pass, that they live as easily in a sinful
Life as a Fish in the Stream: We are in the way, say they; when we were
baptized we were initiated into the Christian Church, we were baptized with the
Sign of the Cross, that shows we are Soldiers of Christ and bear his Badge and
Banner upon us; and the Man said at that Time, I was made a Child of God and an
Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven; if this be not true then I am cheated and
deceived, for I am to believe this to be true; the Church has affirmed that
these things are to be belived, and to question the Verity of the Church is to
question all.

I would question whether thousands find the Truth of it. When thou were
baptized, there was a kind of Covenant and Bargain made for this Child of God
and Heir of Eternal Life, That he should forsake the Devil and all his Works,
and the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh: And there is Security given that this Child shall never serve the Devil
and sinful Lusts, and never be proud, but serve God and keep his Commandments:
Now this Security being taken, then they suppose that this Child will certainly
be an Heir of the Kingdom of God. It is very true, stand to thy Church; if this
Security that is taken for a Child be but effectual, then there is no doubt of
being a Child of God and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven. But if this
Security fail, is the Church to blame if Men's Hopes to Eternal Life fail? Was
it not my Condition, That thou should forsake the Devil and all his Works,
and the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh, and if thou break the Bargain and thy part of the Covenant, and miss of
Eternal Life, who is to blame? Look to the Security, see that thou forsake the
Devil and all his Works, and the Pomps and Vanities of the World. But thou
may rather say, I have enjoyed as many of them as I could; and for the Lusts
of the Flesh, I have enjoyed as much of them as I can, and what, do thou
believe thy self to be a Child of God and an Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven,
notwithstanding?

If I promise to deliver a Man such a Bail of Silk or other Goods, upon the
Payment of so much Money, if I fail in delivering the Goods he will not deliver
the Money; A Man must forsake the Devil and all his Works, and never lust after
the Pomps and Vanities of this World; that is a Child of God, let us see him
grow up, and if he goes on to be faithful in this Covenant till he die, I do
not at all question but he will be an H^^r of eternal Life; but when all this
is broken and the S^curity signifies nothing, and the Man is given up to serve
the Devil, breaks all God's holy Laws, erreth and strayeth from the Way of
God's Commandments like a lost Sheep, and Grasps at the Pomps and Vanities of
the World, as much as he can, and thinks he gets no more than comes to his
share; and when he shall indulge the Lusts of his Flesh this is a Child of the
Devil; he is a Child of that Spirit that was a Liar from the beginning. Never
talk of being a Child and an Heir of God's Kingdom, such a Man is in Fetters,
he is to go along with the Devil and his Angels, and there is a Kingdom
prepared for them, a Kingdom of Darkness, and he must have his Portion with
them in Everlasting Misery: Tophet is prepared of old for all the workers of
iniquity.

What, for those that are baptized? Yes. But do not you deny Baptism?

No, not I, I would have Men and Women baptized with a Baptism that will do
them some good. Some have seen the Vanity and Weakness of this kind of Baptism
and called it Baby Baptism, and therefore would go and be baptized and plunged
in the Water over head and Ears, but they came up again with the same Heart and
Mind, and the same Polluted Soul. John baptized in Jordan and all Jerusalem and
Judea came to be baptized of him: There were a sort of baptized Persons then
th^^ crucified the Lord Jesus Christ, that never did them harm in his Life, but
much good.

This Baptism had never an Apostolical Patron, but there is another Baptism
that is so infallible a Baptism* that if a Man were surely baptized withal he
was sure of Heaven, he would never need any other Assurance of Heaven than to
be baptized with this Baptism Jesus Christ: The Lip of Truth speaks of him, He
that believes and is baptized shall be saved; He shall be saved in spite of
the Devil and all his Temptations, in spite of Persecutions and the
Stumbling Blocks laid before him. Here is a Baptism worth a Man's while, worth
all his Labor, if he could obtain it; He that comes after me, says John the
Baptist, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire: Here is a
Baptism belongs to Christians, an Ordinance ordained. Far be it from us to deny
Baptism; but we would light of the right, since there are so many sorts: This
Baptism is so right and certain that it assertains a Man of his Salvation, but
it is done by the Holy Ghost and with fire; If it be by the Holy Ghost then it
is far enough off from us, for there is no Holy Ghost in our Days, say some, so
this Baptism is ceased and Inspiration is ceased: If the Holy Ghost and Fire be
the Matter of Baptism the thing being failed and ceased, the Consequence cannot
follow; thou and I cannot be baptized because there is no working of the Holy
Ghost in our Days; say some, this Baptism is with the Holy Ghost and with fire;
with Fire for burning (...) our Corruptions and purifying our Hearts. But the
Holy Ghost has done working upon Men, say they, why, then there is an end of
Baptism: A Man is hungry, and when his Time comes to eat, he has no Victuals,
yet he sits him down as if he did eat; will this feed and nourish him? So men
now a days, they have a Baptism wherewith they are baptized, but Baptism with
the Holy Ghost and with fire is the right Baptism, therefore do not baptize
until you find the Holy Ghost, this will be far better; this is the Baptism
that they which come to know it are sure of Salvation by it, for by this
Baptism they are born up and tinctured in their Souls with the Divine Spirit of
Christ Jesus, proceeding from the Father and the Son till they receive his
Likeness, and so die unto Sin; As many as were baptized were baptized into
Christ's death. He opens it himself, in that he died he died unto sin once,
but in that he lives he lives unto God; so that they that were baptized were
baptized into Christ's Death, and you that are dead unto sin, how should you
live any longer therein?

These that were baptized lived without Sin, can that be true, never any lived
without Sin but Christ only? Yes, says the Apostle, you that were free from
sin are alive to righteousness; their Life stood before in Sin, and now that
Life is taken away by Baptism, and they are alive to Christ, and he that lives
he lives to God. ^e that comes to be partaker of the first Resurrection, if he
live Ten, Twenty, Forty or an Hundred Years, he lives to God, he lives no
more in the Pomps and Vanities of the Wo^ld and the sinful Lusts of the Flesh,
but he lives unto God: This Baptism, whosoever comes to be baptized with it
shall be saved; so that we do not deny Baptism.

But we hear say, That you deny the Lord's Supper.

We had never such a Thought, God knows, there is nothing that our Souls long
after more; but people have been making a kind of Work of their own, they have
lost a Reality, and make Shadows as Children do, who when they see things made
in the House for Service, they will make the like in Sand and Clay: People do
not see what a great thing it is to attain to the Supper of the Lord; as things
came into an Evangelical Opening they spoke then more lively and freshly of
things, Behold I stand at the door and knock; if any man open to me I will come
in and sup with him, and he with me. For the understanding of this Text: If you
go and examine and search all the Commentators you can find, see what the
learned Men say of it, see if they do not apply this to the Inward Call of the
Spirit and Grace of Christ, to let him into our Hearts; and would one think
that those that wrote these things should be against the Spiritual Dispensation
of things? They say that this knocking at the Door of the Heart signifies the
Call of God's Spirit at the Door of the Heart: There are two sorts of Sinners
that God knocks at the Door of their Hearts: one is a Man that is weary of
his Sin; for his part, he wishes that he might never sin more: As soon as he
perceives the Knock, and is called upon to let in the Grace of God, to help him
against Temptation, he freely opens his Heart to receive it, and says; With
all my Heart, I will entertain and welcome the Grace of God; glad I am that God
has had so much Patience toward me, and since God offers his Grace I will
embrace this Grace of God above all Pleasures, and I will take it into my
Heart; the Grace of Christ is the greatest Jewel that I know. Honest Paul, he
took this Course, and prays, Lord take away this Tempter; here is a
Temptation that troubles me, and I am not willing to yield, for all the Devil
follows me with it; He cried unto the Lord, and besought him three times,
earnestly, to take away the Temptation: And the Lord answers him, My grace is
sufficient for thee. What matter if the Tempter buffet thee, and the Temptation
trouble thee, have thou not received my Grace into thy Heart? thou art a
Believer and thy Trust is in me, and my Grace is sufficient for thee: Let the
Tempter do his worst, keep thou to the Grace of God, and thou will withstand
and overcome the Temptation when it comes.

If a Man opens his Heart and receives Christ when he comes, then you shall
find such an Alteration in that Man, that go and carry him the same Temptation
which prevailed over him the last Week, it will not do with him now; though he be
as weak as Water, and as prone to Corruption and Iniquity as before, yet now
having a Faith begotten in him, that the grace of God will defend him, he keeps
out of the Devils Snares. Now this Man trusting in this grace till his Sin and
Iniquity be purged out; now is the time to spread the Table; there is a clean
Heart, and the Heavenly Guests are now come, and the Dainties of the Kingdom
are brought to him for his Nourishment. Now, says Christ, I I will come in and
sup with him, and my Father also will come, and we will sup with him, and he
with us. This never happens to any Body so long as the Table and Heart is foul;
for the Table must be clean, and the Devil and Sin thrown out, and then will
the Lord confirm and ratify and seal the Covenant; so that here is a Seal with
a Witness. When a Man has this Testimony of the Love of God that God is
reconciled to him in Christ, then Christ will come in, and he will bring his
Father, and they will sup with him; and this is that which will give complete
satisfaction to such a Soul.

All the Tongues of Men and Angels are too short to speak of these things, as
they are in themselves, but they are all manifested by the Spirit. All the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, are manifested by the Spirit of God; now to
say there is no Spirit to be regarded now adays, that is as much as to say, we
must never regard the Kingdom of God, for no Man can discern the things of God
but the Spirit of God, no Man can tell what they be; As no Man can know the
things of a Man bu^ the Spirit of God.

But I must look to this and the other Form and Mark and Method about them, for
we can know nothing of the things of God themselves.

I hope you are all of another Judgment, and believe that this is a Trick and
Cheat of the wicked one; People do find the Spirit and will feel it, if they
will wait upon the Motions of it. I do not only mean when you are here
together, but when you are separated one from another; when you feel the
Motions of thi^ good Spirit, embrace them and make them yours. This Spirit is a
Gift that is given; so may a Shilling or a piece of Bread be held forth to a
poor Creature, but if he receive it not, he may perish for all that; it is not
his, though I have appointed it to be his, and have separated it from my other
Substance to be his. If he receive not what I offer and would give him, he may
Perish for all that.

Here is Grace and Truth comes by Jesus Christ, and God has offered it to all
Men, in that he has raised up Christ from the Dead; the Grace of God which
brings Salvation, has appeared unto all Men; but all Men have not received
it, therefore all Men have it not; and they that have not the Grace of Christ
and the Spirit of Christ, are none of his; but it does not follow that they
never will be none of his. When they have received the Gift by Christ and say,
I will be his Sheep or Lamb, they will come into his Favor by that Gift, and
shall partake of the good things of his Fathers Kingdom; but till they have
received this Gift they are not the better for it, they have not any Benefit by
the death of Christ; they have no help no benefit by it, except it be the
Patience and long Suffering of God, who for Christ's sake bears with their
Weakness, and waits to (...) ^ious, and for Christ's sake offers them Favo^r,
but they are not come to the Possession of it, till they open their Hearts, and
receive the Grace of Christ; then they are convinced of Christ's end, and that
there is a possibility of enjoying the Spirit of God, and of being taught and
led by it.

Take this along with you, that it is your absolute and indispensible Duty to
wait from day to day upon the great God of Heaven, the Giver of every good and
perfect Gift, that you may have that blessed Gift, that you may have the
Assistance of a greater Power than your own to lead you out of Sin into
Righteousness, that through Jesus Christ you may be acceptable to God.

SERMON V. Christ the Way, the Truth, and the Life. Preached at
Grace Church Street, Ap^^^ 18, 1687.
I Fear the high Places are not taken away it has been so in all Ages, and it
is man^festly so in this Day; where the Heart is n^^ rightly prepared for the
Lord, there the hig^ Places are not taken away: For all the hig^ Places in the
time of Israel's Idolatry, the^ were ever set up when they departed from the
Lord, and all the high Places now they ar^ up in a time of Ignorance of God,
when People have forgotten the Lord, then they exal^ themselves, then Pride and
Arrogance, and every evil way prevails upon us; but when Men come to seek the
Lord with Uprightness that brings down their high Conceits, tha^ brings every
one into Humility; for every one comes to be convinced in themselves that none
can find the Lord, but as they are brought to be Humble; nay, indeed, none seek
after him aright bu^ such, none have the promise of finding him but the Humble.

Therefore it is the duty of every one that is a real inquirer and seeker after
God, to know the right preparation of the Mind, to know themsel^^^ in such a
frame of spirit, that they may see^ (...) hope, that they may have a right and
just expectation of finding him whom they are seeking after; for this has been
the reason that a great many (...) been frustrated in their endeavors and
(...) their purposes of seeking after the Lord (...) have not been rightly
prepared for him (...) ^^nifest himself ^^to them, they have no^ ^^wn the
Prepara^ion of his Sanctuary; there was a peculiar pre^aration that was
requis^^^ to those that drew near unto the Sanctuary of God, they were
Hallowed, that is, made Holy ere they drew near to the Holy Place; but alas
this has been greatly neglected in our Days, unholy People with unholy Minds
have been seeking after the Holy God, they have been enquiring after a Holy
way, and were not prepared to walk in it, there was nothing raised in their
Minds, in their Souls that was fit to walk in that way,

For so long as Men or Women stand in Unity with their Sins, with their Lusts
and Concupisence, with the spirit of this World and the way of it, they are not
capable of receiving that which should lead them into the way of Holiness; nay
if it appears to them they cannot receive it, for it is with them as with other
guests, there be other Lovers already let in, which employ the Powers, and
faculties of their Souls, so that if the most beloved of all, the most
excellent, if the Chiefest of Ten Thousand do appear, they cannot see (...)
comlyness in him. The Prophet speaki^^ o^ this state and condition of Men did
prophecy concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, when we shall see him there is no
comlyness in him why we should desire him; and so it has happened to a great
many now adays, though the Truth has appeared to them, yet they have not
looked upon it as a pleasant way, as a way desirable, but a (...) be shunned if
possible What shifts have (...) great many People made (...) keep themselves,
if possible, out of the way o^ Truth, arguing for this and that, and disp^t^^
for one way and another that was out of Truths way, out of the way of Holiness?
What was the meaning of all their arguments, but to tell us they might be
happy, they might be saved though they did not come into Truths way and walk in
Truths way? and though they did abide in those things, that were contrary to
the Testimony of Truth in their own Hearts, yet it might go well with them.

This is the strength of the arguments of all sorts, of all persuasions in the
World, that have been arguing themselves out of the Truth and would argue us
out of the Truth too, and would take the liberty to do those things which are
not agreeable therewith; but now the reason of this is because the preparation
is wanting, they are those that have no need of Truth and that have no need of
God, and of a Savior; but think they can make shift without them; he is not
become the chiefest to them, they can abide in the high places, the can call
upon the name of the Lord, and they can worship in the Groves, and in the high
places both together, like as those Nations that were brought to inhabit the
Kingdon of Israel when the ten Tribes were carried away, they sent for Priests
to teach them, they sent back to the King of Assyria to send them some Priests,
to teach them to worship the God of their Co^ntry, and when the Priest came to
teach them, he taught them the Ceremonies of the Law, and the diverse
observations that the Jews used to practice in that Country, and so they grew
into a formality of serving the God of Israel, They called upon the Name of the
Lord, and every Nation Worshipped their own Gods.

How is this Nation and the Nations of Europe now inhabited with such a People
that are calling upon the Name of the Lord, but every one worshipping their own
Gods; one makes Gold and Silver his God, another makes his Pleasure his God,
another his Honor, another this, that and the other Lust, and they bow down to
them, that is, they yield themselves to their Lusts, concupisence and
corruptions that they stand in unity with, but they call upon the Name of the
Lord too; they do apply themselves to some kind of form of worship which they
say is unto the immortal and invisible God, but alas they come not to the
Knowledge of God by this. All that the Priests could do, that the King of
Assyria sent back, they brought not the Samaritans to the Knowledge of the God
of Israel, they only brought them to a Report of such a God, that had set up
such a Law: They had the Report of it, and for fear that the Lions should tear
them in pieces, they would enter into that Form, but they worshipped their own
Gods still.

So it is now, People do not come to the Knowledge of the true God, the living
God, by entering into any Form of Religion; for instance, Prayer, Hearing or any
Ordinance or Church Fellowship, these give give not Men the Knowledge of God,
there is but one way to come to that, but only one. Men have found a great
many, it is past your Skill and mine to reckon up the many ways that Men have
found out upon the Face of the Earth, how they might come to the Knowledge of
God, and to Peace and Reconciliation with him; but they have only played the
Fools and spent their Time in vain, especially they that own the Scriptures of
Truth to be a true and faithful Record of the Mind and Will of God, they play
the Fool abominably; for the Scripture that they give so much Reputation to in
their Profession does testify the way is but one, and there is no other way
for People to be reconciled to God than by coming in to Christ; to be found in
him, to be regenerated and born into his Nature, and have his Qualities put
upon them, That as he was pure they may be pure, that (...) that sanctifies,
and they being sanctified (...) him may become both one, and so be rec^^ciled
to the father through him. This you know is the common Profession of
Christendom, or at least of our Nation: And in other Nations, the common
Profession is, There is no Mediator but one, no Reconciler but one: Indeed some
others hold there may be other Mediators, and that there are others that may
contribute to them by their Mediation, and by their Prayers and Merits, but the
generality of the Nation are otherwise.

Now for People to fall out, and say, my way is best, and thy way is not best,
and to fall into Contests about many ways, when the Scripture concludes but one
Way, is not well; We were better all agree about this Doctrine, That there is no
possibility of Reconciliation with God since we are fallen out with him, and
since Sin has made a separation, there is no way of being reconciled again to
God but by and through our Lord Jesus Christ, nor by him neither unless we
receive of his Spirit to quicken us; nothing can quicken us, enliven us or
recommend us to God but the Spirit of Christ operating and working in our
Hearts, that he may prepare us for the Father's Kingdom.

If People would agree upon this, there would be an end of all Labor, and
Toil, and Jangling about the right way, for the Consequence and Conclusion
would be thus; That Man that does not know in himself the ^anctifying Power of
the Spirit of Christ Jesus, he is out of the way to Reconciliation with God,
let his Form and Profession be what it will: If therefore he be reconciled to
God it must be by and through the Mediator, and he will never recommend him to
the Father till he has made him a Temple to let in the Spirit of Christ, to
work in his Heart, to fit him for the Kingdom of God: And Men have no other way
to come to it; for though they be zealous in every Prayer and Form it signifies
nothing to any great purpose, their Hope will be frustrated; There is no other
way (says Christ) of coming to the father but by me, I am the way, the truth
and the life. If I am out of the Truth I am out of the way; and if I am out of
the way, then I cannot come to the end of the Way. This is plain reasoning
among Men: If I tell a Lie, that is out of the Truth; If I have vain
Communication, or deceive or wrong my Neighbor, that is out of Truth; what is
manifest in my Conscience to be contrary to the Truth, if I am in it I am out
of the way; though I be strict in the way, as to Profession, yet I am out of
the Way to God, I am out of the Truth, there is no way to God but by Christ,
who is the Way, the Truth and the Life; whoever is out of him is out of the
Way, which made the Apostle say, That his labor, endeavor and desire was,
that he might be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness, but having
on the righteousness of Christ Jesus.

Many Men think to recommend themselves to God by their righteous, just and
honest Dealings, and doing Wrong to no Body: This is good in it self, but does
not recommend us to God, unless it be done by the righteous and holy Spirit of
Christ Jesus, unless it be of his Working; he must have the working of
Righteousness and Truth in us; he must plant it, and it must grow by his
working, if it be acceptable to the Father, for without me, says Christ, you
can do nothing. A Man out of Christ, a Stranger to his Spirit, may do
something, but nothing available to the well-being of his Soul, till he have
Reconciliation by Christ Jesus: If he be reconciled to God, this Mediator must
be the Reconciler, and he must fit and prepare him for Reconciliation with the
Father.

All the Divisions, Sorts and Sects of Religion, they all come to an end if
this Measuring Line be laid to them; they all appear too short; and there is
nothing will do a Man good but that Religion that obliges and ties him to the
good Pleasure of God, through the Spirit of the Mediator, which he feels
working in him, by which he is raised from Death to some degree of Life: When
he is sensible what a Burden sin is to his Life, and that godly Life which he
has is burdened with every Sin and oppressed with every vain Thought and
every vain Word: If he be not in some measure quickened (...) ^ot sensible of
this Burden, but being quickened he is sensible of the Burden that lies upon
his Life, by reason of his Sin; and then, being under the Weight of his Sin, he
calls to God for his Assistance; he cries to God to help him; he now knows that
he has striven and labored in vain. O God of all Grace, if thou vouchsafe not
Help to my Soul; if thou dos^ not interpose by the Assistance of thy Grace, I
cannot overcome this Sin. There is a continual Cry to God for Divine
Assistance, and as they cry to God for Assistance he ministers Assistance to
them, by which they are able to overcome the Enemy of their Souls and all
Temptations when they come: And when a Man finds such Divine Assistance his
Faith is strengthened and confirmed, and so he fights the good fight of faith,
and at last gets the Victory; Victory over his Sin and his own Lusts, and
Concupiscence, and Victory over the Assaults and Temptations of the Adversary,
and at last he comes, through the Grace of God to deny all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live righteously, soberly and godlily in this present
world.

Now when People do thus, it is by the Grace of God: This Life of
Righteousness, Sobriety and Godliness is not the effect of their Labor and
Exercise, and of their Endeavors herein, but it is the effect of the Holy
Spirit that has been the Teacher. When you see a Man is grown a good Scholar,
eminent in al^ (...) ^^^ning, you will conclude he di^ (...) to all this of
himself, he could not le^^n this and the other Language, this and the other Art
and Science of himself; No, he had some judicious and able Master and ^eacher,
who communicated of his Lea^ning and Knowledge to his Disciple and Scholar:
This is the efficient cause of his Improvement. Now if a Man, by the Grace and
the Spirit of God, and the Teachings of it, live a holy, godly Life, this is
the effect of something; he did not always live such a Life, How comes he to
live such a Life now? Is it by his own Industry, Labor and Exercise? No, it is
by being exercised, taught and led by the Spirit of God; so that it is the
effect of the Grace of God that he should live such a holy Life, though it is
not the meritorious cause of it, as he is a Creature, but acceptable to God in
Christ the Mediator.

Thus a Man comes to be justified and accepted, not because he is a godly Man,
but is made so by the Spirit of God: You are not under the law (says the
Apostle) but under grace: You are under the Teachings of it, under the
Directions of it: Grace can reprove People; for that Grace and that Truth that
comes by Christ, and manifests it self as a Light in the Hearts of
Transgressors, reproves their Sin, and calls them out of it; it reproves them
for it, and exhorts them to leave it, both at one Time; so that we must
acknowledge all our Righteousness, Holiness and Obedience to be o^ (...) ^^ll
that we do in order thereunto, a^ (...) done by the Teaching, by the Influence
and Operation of the Grace of God given us in Christ Jesus; it is the effect of
him who is our Mediator, he works it in us and for us of his good pleasure.

If we be justified, we are not justified for a righteous, holy Life, and for
our Obedience; but we are justified through Christ who works a godly Life in
them that believe, so that a Man is not justified by any other way or means;
and all other ways a Man takes of being reconciled to God are vain and
fruitless, and have been spoken against by all that were moved by the Holy
Ghost in the New Testament. Says the Prophet, What shall I come before the
Lord with all? I am fallen under Death and Sin and in a separation from God, I
would fain be reconciled to him; what shall I do to be reconciled to God? He
goes about to reckon without Christ, and without Faith and Holiness. Shall I
take a thousand Rams, and ten thousand Rivers of Oil? Shall I come nearer
still? Shall I make an Offering of the Fruit of my Body, for the sin of my
Soul? Shall I offer my firstborn to God; that I may not be rejected and
brought to a separation from him? Thus Men when they come to be sensible, do
feel in themselves that all this is to no purpose: The Answer comes, Thou may
live, but all thy Contrivances about making an Offering are vain: (...) ^^ewed
thee, O Man, (...) ^o do. It is no^ thy findin^ this way and t^^^ way, viz. thy
^^^^s, and thy Oil and (...) firstborn; it is no way of thy devising and
imagining that can reconcile thee to me, I have showed thee, O Man, what is
good. What is this that is showed? It is comprised in a short compass, It is to
love Mercy, to do Justice, and to walk humbly with thy God. Will this serve
without offering Rams and Oil, and offering my first born? This will do if thou
can but love Mercy when its shown thee; that is, embrace Mercy and love it.
He has showed Mercy to all Men; then love it and receive it; do justly, leave
every thing that is unrighteous, and do that which is just in the sight of God,
but do not boast of thy Justice and Righteousness, but walk humbly with thy
God; here is the whole Duty of Man. This looks as if I should go to Works, and
forbear something in order to my Justification.

Indeed the consideration of these kind of Lessons do corrupt some Men, and put
them upon doing this or that, and upon forbearing this or that, and has
brought many to Confession and great Abstinence, and put them upon great
doings, thinking this would answer the Justice of God; I have loved Mercy, and
given all I had to the Poor. If I do justly, and abstain from this and the
other Liberty; if I walk humbly, that is, if I humble my self by this and the
other manner of Penance and Contrition, then I do what God requires, and then
I have pleased God. Now all that have gone this wa^ of working to do justly and
love m^^cy, and to make themselves humble, and humbled themselves low in such a
manner, they have missed the Mark. He has showed thee, O Man, what is good;
that it is impossible for fallen Man to answer this himself; he may be
convinced of his Duty to do Justice, but by his own Power and Strength he
cannot do it; there are so many Temptations from without, and so many from
within, such a pro^^nsity in Nature, that will prevail against all ^^e ^onds of
Charity that he can make.

Therefore is Help laid upon one that is mighty; without the Grace (...) God
that comes by Christ Jesus, a Man can never do it, though Convinced: Though the
Lord has showed him what is good, he shows us that we are unable of our
selves, he has taken care to send his Son: God has so loved the World, that
he has sent his Son into the World, that he might help those that have need of
help, that every one that is in Distress might have an Eye to Christ, the
Author and Finisher of their Faith; when Men have a reference to their Faith in
Christ, this makes their Duty acceptable; I cannot do it except the Lord
strengthen me; therefore I will have respect to the Mediator Christ Jesus, who
was sent for a Light into the World. God sends forth his Grace to every one to
lay hold on, that generally believe that though they are unable to do what God
requires, ye^ he will enable them to do it; (...) a^ many as rece^ved him, to
them he gave Power to become the Sons of God, though they were the Devils
Children before: He is the same yes^erday, to day, and for ever. He abides
al^^^s the same in his Grace to Men, he is in his operation to them the same;
he offers Grace to them that are out of a frame of Mind to receiv^ it; they may
know that his Power will giv^ them Ability, and that whatsoever they do of
themselves will prove fruitless, because it is not done in Christ's Name and
Power, and so not acceptable to God.

The greatest thing that we are to be concerned about, if we will be Religious,
and concern our selves about divine Matters, about the Kingdom of God and the
World to come, is to see what frame of Mind we are in at present, whether the
high Places are taken away; whether we are not exalted in our own Conceits of
Knowledge and Wisdom, and reckon not to be beholden to him for his Grace. If we
be highly conceited, and think we can stand upon our own Legs, the high Places
are not taken away: Men are not prepared to seek the God of their Fathers;
therefore, let every one mind turning to God, and see how it is with you; see
whether there be a Mind brought low enough to be subject to Christ, and to the
gracious Teachings of his Spirit.

A Man may say, I can make a good Sermon, I can make a good Prayer and
Exhortation, and I can make a Book, and (...) it abroad, I can do all this by
mine own P^^ts and Abilities; so thou may, and may ma^e it all full of good
Words, but thou can never make it acceptable to God; for without me, says
Christ, you can do nothing. T^^^ must have the assistance of the Spirit of
Christ, else thou can not make a good Prayer, nor a good Book, nor any thing
good; God esteems the very Plowing of the Wicked to b^ an Abomination to him.
Where the Mind is not exercised by the Spirit of God, if he should pray from
Morning to Night, and spend all his Days in Penance, it will do him no good.
If I, says David, regard Iniquity, you may think I am a Man in favor with
God, a Man after Gods own Heart; yet if I regard Iniquity in my Heart, the Lord
will not hear my Prayer. What signifies Prayers and Sermons, made of good
Words, if they come not f^^m a Heart separate from Iniquity? If it be not so,
it will do no good at all, in point of Acceptance with God.

O let the fear of the Lord enter upon every Heart; wait all to feel the Divine
Power of the Lord, that brings down every high Thought, that so you may look to
the Preparation of your Heart; that is a right Preparation when People are so
low, so broken and so tender, that they are nothing in their own Eyes, but what
the Lord will make them to be: Then they are as Clay to the Hands of the
Potter, they are fashioned by his Hands, and (...) the Wor^^anship of God in
Chr^^^ Je^^^ (...) ^^e one Mediator between God and M^^ They must bear Christ
Jesus his likeness, (...) his h^^^enly Image, they must ^^ve hi^ ^ualities, and
have the same Min^ in them that was in him: I do always that which pleases my
Father, says the Lord Jesus Christ. Indeed he has the doing of things in the
Hearts of Men, and God is pleased with him, and where Men have the doing of
them themselves they are thrown back as Dung in their Faces, where any aim at
infallible Justification, where Men have a right preparation of Heart so to
seek the God of their Fathers, as to find him, and be accepted of him, it is
through Jesus Christ in whom he is well ple^^^^

In all your Assemblies, Prayers, Exercises and Meditations, you must be
separated and drawn o^ ^^^m your former Lovers, and you must be joined to him
that God has sent to be a ^eader and a Guide unto you, then you will find
daily his Assistance; and as you have Assistance from him, you will find
Acceptance wi^^ God, and he will show you the Father, and that and nothing else
will satisfy the Soul hungring and thirsting after God. Show us the Father, and
it suffices us. So when Christ the Mediator comes to have wrought so far as
the purifying of the Soul and the sanctification thereof, and thereby fitted it
for his Glory, such holy Souls (...) behold his Glory; For the Lord (...) Grace
and Glory, and no good thing will (...) hold from them that walk uprightly.

That you may be brought to this State, and ^ept and preserved in it; that the
Heavens may rain down Fatness upon you, and that you may feel the living
Virtues that flow from Christ to every Member; this is the Labor and Travel of
the Servants of God, for their own Souls, and the Souls of others that are in
Unity and Fellowship with the Holy Spirit.

SERMON VI. Captive Sinners set free by Jesus Christ. Preached at
Devonshire-House, April 29th 166^.
THere is nothing will make People live to God, but that which they received
from God: For as all Men by Nature are in a state of Death, so there must be
something beyond Nature to make them alive again; and that ^s it that every one
ought to wait upon God (...) that you may feel something that is supernatural:
And that you may be acquainte^ with God's Gift, The gift of God, says the
Scripture, is eternal life. Many find a Life in this World that is not the Gift
of (...): The Life that People have in Sin it is not the Gift of God, the
Delights and Pleasures of this World are become a Life unto them: The World is
that to which every one must die; they that are not dead to that, they live all
to themselves, they do not live to God, for none can live to God, but by the
Life that comes from him: That which People receive of Man gathers them unto
Man; that which they receive of God carries them to God.

So Men have made Gatherings, and have communicated of what they have to one
another, and by virtue thereof have made them a People: Many Men have gathered
many People, ^^ny Churches, and they live to them that gathered them; they do
not live to God, for want of receiving something from God, (...) all they that
come to receive the Gift of God; they die to the World, and they come to live
such a Life as the World does not love, does not care for, and has no Pleasure
in: If you were of the world, says Christ, the world would love you, but
because you are no^ of the world they hate you. How should this (...)
understood, were not they some of the Men o^ that Generation? How does he mean
the^^ were not of the World? Why, I have tak^^ you out (...) i^, ^^ith he; and
yet they (...) ^here still, and they were named by certain Names, the Sons of
such and such Men; yet for all that, they were not of the World; and th^^ which
differed them was, being made partakers of that Life which the World knew not.

And so there will be an Enmity in the World against the Life of Holiness; they
will hate any Body that lives in it; and as it was then so it is at this Day,
they that are of the World, they hear and receive those things that are of the
World from the Men of this World; but they that are of God, they hear them that
are of God, and they receive the things of God, and their greatest Comfort and
Joy that they have is their Communion with God in Christ Jesus, through whom,
as through a Conduit-Pipe, the Blessings of the Father are ministered to them,
and through whom, as from the Fountain of Life, their Life is renewed from Day
to Day.

But these things are hidden from the World, from the wise and prudent of it;
they cannon dig into the Depth nor ascend to this Height; they cannot
comprehend the length and the breadth of the things of God, which are in Christ
Jesus; they may reach unto something of the Love of God, that is in the
Creation: they can tell when the Sun shines upon them, and when the Rain falls
upon their Fields; and when it falls in due season they call it a Blessing; and
while the Covenant with Win^^^ and Summer remains they look upon it as
comfor^able, and perhaps some (...) stow a Saying, I thank God for it. All
(...) things are beneath us, and there is neith^^ (...) nor hatred know^ by
them all. I saw (...) ^^^ed, says one, I beheld his dwelling-^^^^^, and he
flourished like unto a green bay tree, and was wicked still, for all this.

But now, they that see where they live that live to God, they can say, That
their Leaf never withers, but they bring forth their fruit in due season; but
he did not so. But the wicked Man, that flourished like a green bay tree,
behold I looked and he was removed; and his place was no more to be found:
There came a Blasting upon all his Blessings, and his flourishing came to an
end; his Riches perish^^ and his good things passed away from him But the Man
whose delight is in the law of God and makes it his Pleasure both Night and
Day, he is like a tree planted by the rivers of water, whose leaf never fades,
and brings forth his fruit in due season.

But this is hid; there is no body in the World but would have something of
this Life too; they would be sure of Eternal Life, but they would not die to
the other Life, they would not be crucified to the world, they would not be
separated from their Lovers, if they could get into the state of a righteou^
Man an Hour or Two before they die, wh^^ they are sure they shall die, it would
plea^^ them; ^ut to live that Life that is to God to die to the World, and to
part with (...) they have their Comfort, their (...) their Peace and Honor,
and all their worl^^^ Enjoyments in, before they can come to receive t^^ ^ift
of God, they think (...) hard: But they that lo^^ after it, and have a mind to
find it out without parting with the World's Life, they befool themselves.

Do not you see how Men have befooled themselves in these days? They have
sought after the Kingdom of God till they are scattered in their own way; they
are quarrelling about their own way, as if they never had any Scripture to be
their Rule: They cry the Scripture is their Rule; this is the way to eternal
Life, says one; and this is the way, says another; and the one and the other
say ^ll these ways are false saving their own; and ^ll these Contenders about
the way to eternal Life, they all say the Scripture is the Rule.

And yet the Scripture speaks of the way too, and tells us the way plainly, the
way to Rest, Peace and Life Eternal. If the Scri- had been silent in it, and
had said nothing but of Genealogies and Histories of Armies and Wars, it had
been something; but the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament speak of a
certain way to Eternal Life, and say it is the way of Holiness, A way shall be
cast up for the redeemed and the ransomed of the Lord to walk in, which the
wayfaring man, though a fool, shall not mistake in it: Though he never took a
degree at the Univ^^sity he shall (...) ^rr in it; though he be a (...) the
^ccount of the World, and never understood Greek or Latin, yet he shall not
(...) this way.

The way that leads to the Kingdom of God is called the way of Holiness; but
while many have been reading in their Books they have been contending for a way
of Unholiness; no wonder then they have been quarrelling about it, and have all
missed it, and that in the main point of all: Let them make a way, which way
they will, and frame it never so wisely, according to the best Wit they have,
be it a way that has all the ma^e^ial Qualifications that should make it a way
of Holiness, these Men may walk in it, but they will never find the way to the
Kingdom ^f God, though they have sought it out: Go to one place and another
place, and ask them what is your way? Our way (say they) is the right way, the
most sure and certain way that can be found for People to walk in: But whither
will it lead me? It will lead thee to the Kingdom of God: That is it I would
have; but will it lead me to Holiness? No, never in this World, you must never
come to Holiness; do the best thou can do here, it is but Sin; the best days
work thou make is but Sin; the best Child of God on Earth cannot live a Day
without Sin: Do you hold out that in your way? Yes; then I have done with that,
and go to another People.

So, many have gone many (...) to the Kingdom of God, and when the ^^^^t is
come, they have found every way a polluted way, a sinful way; I know this way
will never lead me to God; sin first led me from God. I had been well enough as
I was created at first, if I had never sinned against God; a sinful way will
lead me from God. It is against common Sense, and against Rationality to say we
did first go from God by sin, and must go to God again by a sinful way. Who
will believe that such a way leads to God's Kingdom? that that way will lead
men to God that will not lead them to Holiness?

The Scripture says, If I regard Iniquity in my heart the Lord will not hear
me; though a Man keeps close to Meetings and Ordinances, and Duties, and
Performances, iniquity it seems must remain still; there is no rooting it out
in this World: This continuing and remaining with a Man makes all his
Performances, and Duties, and Prayers unacceptable to God; they are all turned
back again upon him and cast as Dung upon his Face, and true enough too; so
that here is no coming unto God in this way; the comers thereunto know well
enough they are not reconciled to God, if they are Men that are Conscientious.

There are a sort of People so stupid and sordid in their Judgments, that if a
Man tells them they are reconciled to God, they will believe him though
Conscience re^^oves them an hundred times a day. If the (...) the Parish say,
That he has made this C^^^^ an heir of the kin^^^^ of God and an inherit o^ of
eternal life; I know some have believed it forty Years after, and have born
themselves up upon this Man's Word all their Life: Do you think there is any
Danger of me, that in Baptism was made an Inheritor of Eternal Life and an Heir
of the Kingdom of God? God has not appointed Ordinances in his Church for
nothing.

I speak not of such sordid hard-hearted People, that never entered into
themselves to know how it was with them, whether they are ^onverted; but I
speak of sober conscientious People, that will not be cheated in a Point of
Salvation; though they have been deceived a great while they may be undeceived:
Then they must take this for certain Doctrine, that nothing can reconcile them
to their Maker but that which takes away Sin. God hears not sinners, he will
never be reconciled to a Man in this World, as a sinner; but there are many
thousands (blessed be God) in this Age^ as well as in other Ages, that were
Sinners and reconciled to God through Christ, and had Remission of Sin, but
never any Man in his Sin was reconciled to God, though he did believe the
Truth, if he did not come to the Sanctification of the Spirit he could never
(...) reconciled to God.

So that there has been in all Ages a way of the working of the Spirit of God
in the Hearts of them that believe, to prepare them for the sinless Kingdom,
for that glorious Kingdom; into which nothing that hurts, and defiles, and
corrupts, can enter. And because we cannot enter with Corruption and
Defilement, he has appointed the Ministration of his Spirit to work out that
which might hinder to cleanse us from Sin, that we might have an abundant
entrance into his glorious Kingdom; so that whilst they say there is an
impossibility of living without Sin, I had as leave they had said, there is an
Impossibility of entering into the Kingdom of God; for never any shall come into
the Kingdom of God but those that are without Si^^ for there is no Purgatory
after Death.

The Papists have a better conceit than the Protestants in that respect: The
Protestan^^ conceive Sin to be expelled at the point of Death; and, they say,
all the Sins of Believers, all the guilt of Sin, after we are Believers, is
pardoned, forgiven and done away by the Death of Christ upon the Cross; we will
have it if we can get it. If Men can imagine to find a way into the Kingdom of
God, they will have one: They believe that a Man may sin and contract no Guilt;
and that he may sin till his dying Day, and then all Sin shall pass away* and
he shall enter into God's Kingdom. The Papists say none can come to Heaven till
they be purged from Sin; and they say God has appointed a place for that
purpose, and Persons must go into Purgatory, and they must lie there till they
are putted, and purified, and fitted for Heaven. Now, say the Protestants,
truly; There is n^ such thing, we find no such thing mentioned in the
Scripture, therefore such a thing as this cannot be; for the A^^^tle said, We
have declared to you the whole Counsel of God, and he speaks not a Word of
Purgatory in all the New Testament. The Protestants they have got a way to help
themselves, and the Papists to help themselves, and both lie under Danger: As
for the Papists, if their Priests mistake, and there be no such Place as
Purga^^^^ then they m^^^ be brought back to the Doctrine of the S^^^^^^res;
which declares, That as death leaves us so judgment shall find us; and as we
sow so we must reap: if we sow to the ^^^sh, then of the flesh we shall reap
Corruption. Then the Protestants, likewise, if they mistake in saying, A Man
may act Sin and yet contract no Guilt, then they must be brought back to the
Doctrine of the Scriptures, that tell us; The soul that sins must die: If a
righteous man forsake his righteousness, and does that which is evil, his
righteousness shall be remembered no more, but in the sin that he has
committed, he shall die.

This is sound Doctrine: I had rather trust the Doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles than the Doctrine of them all, either Protestants or Papists; and had
rather depend upon their Doctrine for Salvation, that were inspired by the Holy
Ghost, than upon those Doctors that say* There is no Inspiration nowadays.
Some conceive this Scripture may be interpreted thus and thus; and others
conceive it means so and so, but we must (say they) submit to better Judgment:
I am a fallible Man, I submit it to better Judgments. Now when People are
concerned for Immortality and Eternity, to have such things dished out in such
a manner, what Souls are so dull but they would bestir themselves, and consider
and look about them before they go hence, how it shall go with them when they
are gone?

We are now to work out our own S^^vation, that is on our part: None eve^ have
earned out this Salvation, it is wrought out on God's part already, and it is
to be made ours; he that is our Savior, he has suffered for our sins and rose
again for our justification; He was made to us, of God, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption. Now Wisdom signifies the opening of the Counsel
of God; Righteousness signifies the Subjection of our Wills to the Will of God;
Sanctification signifies Obedience to the Spirit of Christ. Sanctification
signifies Obedience to something; to what? what shall we be obedient to? what
is our Rule? He that is led by the spirit of Christ, he is his; but he that is
not led by the spirit of Christ is none of his; so that it is plain
Sanctification signifies Obedience to the Spirit of Christ, and Redemption
signifies buying again or setting free from Bondage.

We know when our Friends are in Captivity, as in Turkey or elsewhere, we pay
down our Money for their Redemption; but we will not pay our Money if they be
kept in their Fetters still. Would not any one think himself cheated, to pay so
much Money for their Redemption, and the Bargain be made so that he shall be
said to be redeemed, and be ^^lled a redeemed Captive, but he must wear his
Fetters still? How long? as long as he has a day to live.

This is for Bodies; but now I am speaking of Souls, Christ must be made to me
Redemption and rescue me from Captivity. Am I a Prisoner any where? Yes:
Verily, verily, he that commits sin, says Christ, he is a servant of sin,
he is a Slave to Sin: If thou have sinned thou art a Slave. A Captive that must
be redeemed out of Captivity, who will pay a price for me? I am poor, I have
nothing, I cannot redeem my self, who will pay a Price for me? There is one
come that has paid a Price for me: That is well, that is good News, then I
hope I shall come out of my Captivity. What is his Name, is he called a
Redeemer? So then I do expect the Benefit of my Redemption, and that I shall go
out of my Captivity. No, say they, you must abide in Sin, as long as you live:
What benefit then have I by my Redemption? I could have been in Captivity no
longer, if I had not been redeemed I must wear my Shackles and Fetters still,
and be subject to my old Master and Patron, and when he will have me be drunk,
I must be drunk; and when he will have me be unclean, I must be unclean.

Thus many professed Christians there be, (you see it with your Eyes) that will
tell you they believe all the Articles of the Creed, and they have been
baptized into the Christian Faith, and can rehearse all the Principles of the
Christian Religion, and perform the Duty of Christians in going to Church,
saying their Prayers, and in giving Alms too it may be; they are such as would
be called Christians, they would be called so, yet they are not Redeemed from
their vain Conversations; for what makes their Shackles and Fetters about them?
When their old Master bids them be Drunk, they will be Drunk; and when he bids
them commit Whoredom, or Lie, or Cheat their Neighbor, they will do it: You do
believe the Devil leads you to this; you will not say the Spirit of God led you
to it. If one demand, How did you do it? You say, the Devil prevailed upon me:
What, has the Devil Power over Men after they are Redeemed? What sort of
Redemption is this? Then comes in the old Shift again, we are Redeemed from the
Punishment of our Sin, but not from the Act of it.

Now if those that are called Ranters had told me this Tale, it had been like
them; but when Doctors of Divinity tell us this Tale, it is so unlike Divinity,
that it is Carnal, Sensual and Devilish. To tell Believers they are redeemed
from the Punishment of Sin, but not from the Act of Sin; that this is the
benefit which we receive from Christ's Sufferings; that we may sin on free
Cost; that there is no Guilt contracted by it; will any Man or Woman, that
understands they have a Soul, venture their Immortal Souls on this Divinity? I
hope not. They will not venture their Soul on this Foundation-Doctrin: I hope
God will awaken the Consciences of People, that they will not hazard their
Souls upon such a carnal, devilish Foundation; that if the Devil should
preach, he could not preach a worse Doctrine than this, to persuade Christians
they may live in Sin, and Sin will not hurt them, nor impair or break their
Peace with God and Reconciliation with him.

I will tell you how it has been with me; in my Childhood, if I had spoken a
vain Word, or a false Word, I had contracted such a Guilt thereby, that I was
ashamed to draw near to God, to pray to him; I knew he would not hear Liars, I
knew there was no way to be accepted without Repentance and Amendment of Life.
I believe others have met with the same dealing from God, by the secret Strokes
of Conviction that have come upon their Hearts, when they have sinned against
God.

So that I am still of the Mind, that the Persons that depend upon this kind of
Doctrine do at some times, especially when Sickness comes, and Death looks them
in the Face, or in times of common Contagion or Pestilence, at such a time they
have a weight of Guilt upon their Consciences; for this Doctrine will not
support them at Death, but that then they believe they have contracted Guilt,
or committed Sin.

I have wished many times that the Lord would open the Eyes and Hearts of the
People of this City and of this Nation, to see how miserably they have ventured
their Souls. Will Merchants in this City ever venture their Goods at such a
Rate as Men commonly venture their Souls? What, will they venture their Goods
in a Ship without a bottom, before she goes to Sea? Now this Doctrine has not a
Foundation; shall I believe a Person that tells me I do not contract Guilt,
when I feel it upon my Heart; when I commit Whoredom and Drunkenness, and Cheat
my Neighbors, shall any one persuade me that I do not contract Guilt?

O Friends, we are speaking of great Matters; it is about Eternity, that we are
speaking, it is about the hazard of Eternal Happiness; therefore, I pray, let
every one be serious, and consider what I say, for I speak ^n Gods Name, and on
your behalf: Men are ^o come to a true search in themselves, what a Life it is
that they live. Many support themselves by the Doctrins and Precepts of Men,
and they buoy themselves into Conceits of Salvation; let them examine wheth^^ it
be a Life that has its supportation by t^^ Spirit of God; this is material for
every o^^ to consider. There are none can live t^^^d, bu^ by the Life they
receive from God; The grace of God which brings Salvation, has appeared to
all Men: Now here is an universal Doctrine.

There are a sort of Men in this City and Nation that tell us, That saving
Grace is given only to the Elect. Saving Grace is given to all Men; but you
must construe those Words, all the Elect, where they are somewhat injurious,
and would cast off the condition of the Text, if they make a distinction in the
latter part of the Sentence, for it will not be good Sense; The Grace of God
that brings Salvation, has appeared to all the Elect, teaching us to deny
all Ungodliness, etc. Here is Us taken out of the All. The same Grace, that is
our Teacher, appears to be the Teacher of others, though they turn it into
Lasciviousness. The Grace is the same, though they make many School-distinctions
between common and saving Grace. The Apostle explains it, by telling what Grace
he means; The grace of God which brings Salvation appears to all Men, and
that is by teaching us; What does it Teach? I pray consider it; i^ teaches us,
To deny all Ungodliness and (...) worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteo^^
and godly in this present World. Where is (...) Sin now, if a Man be taught by
this G^^^^ and the Dictates of it? Can a Man live Sin, and yet live
righteously, soberly and godly too? Can a Man live in Sin, and yet de^y all
Ungodliness at the same time? Where ^ave Men's Understandings been, that cannot
understand their Mother Tongue, and consider sense? Where are Men's
Understandings that will say, I may deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and
yet follow the Lusts (...) my own Heart? You would think I speak Nonsense if I
should speak thus; and yet we ^^ve been put off with such nonsensical Stuff as
this. We must pray to God to send his holy Spirit into our Hearts, to enable us
to live godly, righteous and sober Lives, and at the same time believe that we
shall never do it, but that it is a business of Impossibility.

Now when Men come to lay these things together, and when they consider between
God and their own Souls, how it is with them, many are amazed to think they
should ever be put off with such incongruous disagreeing and dissonant things,
that are not consistent with one another.

But do you think it is possible for any Man to live without sin?

Yes, or else I would say it is impossible for any to be reconciled to God; for
God will never be reconciled to Sinners as such; for his ^argain and Covenant
is made with such kind (...) Articles, Isa. 1.16, 17. Wash ye, make ye ^^ean,
put away the evil of your doings from before mine Eyes. Cease to do evil, learn
to do well, etc. Then come and let us reason together, says the Lord; though
your Sins be as Scarlet, th^^ shall be as white as Snow; though they be Red (...)
Crimson, they shall be as Wool; still these (...) the Terms, Put away the evil
of you^ doing^ then Patience, Mercy and Long Sufferi^^ shall be extended to
you, God will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withold what,
from those that say their Prayers, or g^ to the Church or a Meeting? No, but no
good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11. These
are the Men.

And when the Lord is distinguishing by his Prophet who he would have among
them, he speaks of a sort of People that called upon the Name of the Lord,
Those that feared the Lord, and spoke often one to another, that is, of the
goodness of God; they were a sort of People that Trembled at the Word of God; a
sort of People that did not do as others did, hunt after Pleasures, Riches and
the Honors of the World, but to be acquainted with the inward Word that
wrought upon their Hearts; In that Day that I make up my Jewels, they shall be
mine, says the Lord Whose shall the others be? Thou will own these for thine;
but whose shall the others be, that think not upon thy Name, and tremble not at
thy Word. There is a Place for them too. Tophet is ^^^pared of old, made both
wide and large (...) Fuel thereof is Fire and Brimstone, and (...) Wood, and
the breath of the Lord kindle^^ (...) This is for all that are Wicked (...)
work Iniquity.

This is in the Old Testament; then comes the New Testament in John's
Revelations, there is a separation again: There are a sort of Folk which are
called the true Worshippers, and the Angel was commanded to go and measure the
Temple, and those that worshipped therein: The outward Temple was not measured,
but left for the Gentiles to tread in, and left without the measure; For
without are Dogs and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters,
and whosoever loves and makes a Lie. And then the Lord speaks to his Prophets
in the Old Testament again; If thou put a difference between the Precious and
the Vile, then thou shall be as my Mouth unto them; but if thou huddle them
altogether, and sow Pillows under their Elbows, then thou shall be as my Mouth.

So that in all Ages God aimed at a separation of the state and condition of
his People; and one sort of People were purified, through the sanctification of
the Spirit and Belief of the Truth; and another sort were unsanctified and
unpurified, and remained in their Sin; and the end of Christ's coming into the
World it was to call People to Repentance; He came not to call the Righteous,
but Sinners to ^epentance, and to leave off their Sin. To as ^^ny as received
him, to them he gave Power (...) become the Sons of God, to as many as be^^^ed
on his Name. Whose Sons were the other? They made as high a rattle of
Profession as the other: He tells them who is their Father, You are of your
Father the Devil; o^ he did orderly prove it, and that was t^^^ That they did
the Devils Works, Ergo, T^^^ were the Devils Children. It was Christ himself,
the greatest Doctor of Divinity that ev^^ was in the World, that spoke these
Wo^^^ And this is the manner of Logic whereby (...) argues with the Pharisees,
to make them believe that they were the Devils Children they that do the Devils
Works are the Devil's Children; but you do his Works, therefore you are his
Children; so they sought to (...) him, they could not bear such Arguments.

If one should go and search out a People in th^^ City and Nation, and see one
Man of this Religion, another of that Religion, and pick them out, and use this
Argument with them. There is a Man professes high, he professes a Light
within; if you look upon his Deeds they are dead and dark, why then he is one
of the Devils Children: If you put me to prove this, I say, he does the Devil's
Works; he is an Extortioner, a Deceiver, and a Drunkard and unclean Person, and
does the Devil's Works, and so is none of God's Children. And so go to another
sort and use this Argument, it is safe enough, you can never fail in this kind
of Argument which Christ used; and if People would use it with ^^e^selves, and
think themselves no better, (...) we should have People confess themselves
(...) Devil's Children.

None come to be God's Childr^^ (...) come to acknowledge their lost estate
(...) deplorable condition; that they are fallen from God, and through Sin and
Iniquity are got into a nature that is at ^^mity with God, then they will cry
out, Who shall deliver me from this body of death and Childship of Sa^^^ this
Heirship of Wrath? I am an Heir o^ an Inheritance, I am an Heir of Wrath, and I
would fain lose my Inheritance and Heirship, and have an Inheritance with the
Saints in light; we shall never know this till we come to Divinity without
Sophistry, and without Tricks and Quirks, and come to Christ's R^^^^ning. He
that do^^ (...) Works is the Devil's Child; then ^^ey wi^^ ^^nfess this is of
the Devil, and ^he other (...) the Devil: This is an evil W^^k, an^ (...) that
I had need be brought into another condition.

When People come to an Acknowledgment of the Truth, and of their own
Condemnation, then they are one Step toward Redemption and Salvation: No one
ever took one step toward their Salvation, till they ^cknowledged their own
Condemnation. He that sanctifies and they that are sanctified are all of one,
and they that are joyne^ to the Lord are one spirit: An evil tree, says
Christ, cannot bring forth good fruit. When Christ spoke this he spoke it to
Men and Women, and he spoke it of Men and Women, and not of Trees: And when he
said, No man can gather grapes of thorns nor figs of thistles, he speaks of a
Generation of Men; as if he had said (...) this Thorn must be transl^^^ changed
into another nature before (...) bring forth Grapes; and this Thistle (...)
changed into another nature before (...) forth Figs.

There must be a Change in the na^^ Man before there can be a Change (...)
Fruit and Effect of his Doings; Wha^ he sows th^^ he shall also reap; whatso^^
man does in the body he must give an (...) thereof at the day of judgment; for
the (...) will be opened and men judged according to (...) thin^^ written in
those books. If there be (...) Boo^ ^or thee and me, i will warrant thee th^^ is a
great deal in it; there is a Recorder an^ a Clerk for the Book, which God has
opened in every Man's Conscience; and there (...) set down every Man^
Transgressions and hi^ Sins: Says one, Th^^ have written my Transgressions as
with the point of a diamond; thou have engraven it so deep that it seems
impossible that it should ever be blotted out again* Some have had their Sins
so deeply engraven in their Consciences, that they have thought they would
never be blotted out, they were written as with the Pen of a Diamond.

When People see and consider that they have ventured their Souls upon such
(...) Grounds, I hope they will be awaked to (...) after Righteousness, when
they see the (...) nothing good in them: Where there is (...) thing good it is
God that has given it (...) them. Some will say, If I be pervers^ (...) (...)
wicked, I cannot h^lp it, therefore (...) be beholdenn to my Maker to help
(...) ^lse I must never be helped. Now, be^^^^ God knows that we are helpless,
he (...) ^id help upon one that is mighty, that is, (...) Lord Jesus Christ;
and Christ has sent (...) his spirit into the world to convince the (...) of
sin, and to lead his people into all (...). And this Grace that comes by Jesus
^^^ist has been so universally showed, and (...) universally extended to all
Men, that I never met with a Man yet that had none of it: But let them be as
bad and as dark as they could, yet the Light of Christ shined ^o that Darkness,
into the darkest Heart that ever I met with in all my Life: He shows Men,
That his light shines in darkness, and the darkness cannot comprehend

Therefore the Wor^ that God has set us about, and the Service which he
requires at the Hands of many of us, is to turn Men from their own Darkness
unto the Light of Christ their Savior, and from the Devil's Power, that has
enslaved them, to the Power of God that can redeem them; and yet we are far
enough from that which they call Free Will, we are far enough from this. We say
a man can never be saved till he learn to deny his own Will; it is God's Will
that every one should be saved: But some will not be saved, they will keep
their Wills and not resign them up to God; they have a Free Will to go to
Destruction. As for Salvation, if they will obtain it; they must part with
(...) and they must take a Yo^^ (...) on them, before they can b^ (...) ^^^ple
can have their Wills, they will (...) Christ's Yoke upon them: He that (...)
Christ's Disciple must deny his own W^^^ take up his daily Cross: These are ^he
(...) of the Gospel.

But you will say, No Man, by (...) Power he has can redeem himself, (...) Man
can live without Sin.

We will say Amen to it: But if Men te^^ us, That when God's Power comes to
help u^ and to redeem us out of Sin, that it cannon (...) ^ffected, then this
Doctrine we cannot awa^ with; nor I hope you neither. Would yo^ like it well if
I should tell you, That God puts (...) his Power to do such a thing; bu^ the
Devil hinders him? That it is impossible for God to do it because the Devil
does not like it? That it is impossible that any one should be free from sin,
because the Devil has got such a Power in them that God cannot cast it out?

This is lamentable Doctrine; has not this been preached, this Doctrine of
Impossibility of living without Sin? It does in plain Terms say, Though God
does interpose hi^ Power it is impossible, because the Devil has so rooted Sin
in the Nature of Man. Is (...) Man God's Creature, and cannot he nev^^ make
him, and cast Sin out of him? If (...) is rooted deeply in Man, I say (...)
(...) deeply rooted but Christ Jesus is en^^^ (...) the Root of the Nature of
(...) that he has received Power to destroy (...) evil and his Works, and to
recover and (...) Man into his Primitive Nature of ^^^hteousness and Holiness;
or else that is (...). That he is able to save, to the utmost, ^^at come unto
God by him. We must throw (...) the Bible if we say that it is impossible (...)
God to deliver Man out of Sin: Is not ^^^ist entered into the root of our
Nature? And has he not taken upon him the Seed of Abraham, after the Flesh? Is
he not entered into the Root of all Men's Natures, and tasted death for every
man, that he might quicken every one that is dead in sins and trespasses? All
these things speak the Love of God to Mankind, in order to ^^^ir Salvation.

Much might be said to these things, these Clouds of Error and Darkness that
have overspread the Nation; yet, this I say, if one were to speak of it never
so long, it must be by the Eye that God gives you, that you must see it; it is
he that opens the Hearts of Men as he did Lydia's: If there had not been the
Power of God that reached her Heart, Paul could not have opened it.

When all is said that can be said, the Counsel of God which has sounded in
your Ears is recommended to you, that every one may retire in quietness and
stillness of Mind to (...) for the feeling of that quickening P^^^^r of the
Spirit of Christ that is sent in^^ (...) Hearts of Men; that that may open
(...) Eyes to see your present state; then you (...) see a better state, (...)
further state, and (...) you see with your inward Eye that your (...) is not so
good as you would have it ^o (...) then trust and rely upon the all-sufficient
(...) powerful Operation of God's Holy Spi^^^ mend your state and give you
Power (...) your Corruptions, and to go on from one (...) to another, toward
the Cleansing and Sancti^^cation of your Souls, so that you may receive
something from God to enable you to live to God; for all that you receive from
Men will only make you live to Men, but that which you receive from God will
help you to live to God; that will purify you and sanctify you, and make you
clean through the word: So through the Word you will come to Cleanness, Purity
and Holiness: And when you are come to the way of Holiness, you may believe you
are gotten into the way of God's Kingdom, and never till then.

It is not enough to make a Profession, but we must live up to the Profession
of that Religion that we make; it is not holding this Tenet and the other
Tenet, and saying, This Minister, I am sure, preaches the Truth thou may be
a Child of the Devil for (...) that. I now speak indifferently to all People,
without respect to any fort: They tha^ believe they are walking toward the
Kingdom of God, and yet their way is not a holy (...) ^hey have cheated
themselves and deceived their ^wn Souls, and they had need look about them and
take heed what they do; the Glass is ^^nning and Time is hasting away, and our
^ife may end we know not how soon. It is ^ood to prize and improve Time, while
you ^ave it, and bring your Deeds to the Light; ^ee what Reproofs,
Instructions, Counsels and Openings you have met with from the Lord, and see
how you have answered and been obedient to them, and so you will come to take a
sound and infallible account of your condition; and if it be not so good as it
should be, wait upon the Lord to mend it; he that made you can mend you, he
that made your Ears must unstop your Ears to hear the Word of God.

To that Power that carries on the Work of Sanctification and Redemption by his
word, to that word I must leave you, and to his Spirit I commit you. This word
will be with you, and if you part not with it, it will not part with you; it
will go with you to your Houses, and to your Shops, and to your Beds; it will
lie down with you at Night, and rise with you in the Morning: To that end,
Christ he is a Leader and Governor, and the Captain of our Salvation, to lead
the Van, and carry you on in the way of Salvation; and as many as follow Christ
and are led by the spirit of God, they are the Children of God.

SERMON VII The Sheep of Christ hea^ his Voice. Preached at Devonshire-House,
May 10th 1688. My Sheep (says the true Shepherd) hear my Voice.
THE Sheep of the true Fold hear the Voice of Christ, the good Shepherd, and
know the Voice of Strangers too: But, says he, the stranger they will not
follow. This Scripture has been a Mark of Distinction in all Ages, that has
been peculiarly bestow^^ upon the People of God, that they have h^^^ a
discerning Knowledge to make a certain distinction between them that were of
God, and those that were of the World: Now they that are of God hear us, says
the Apostle.

Now, that you may all find in your selve^ this peculiar Gift of God, to be
able to understand and discern between the precious and the vile, that you
might know the Ministration of Life from the Ministration of D^^th you must all
be gathered inwardly into that which you have received (...) God; for they ^^at
are only exercised (...) Gifts and Parts, and Acquirements that appertain to
this world, they have been always subject to Delusions, apt to be led away into
a by-Path and crooked way, that leads to destruction: but they that are under
the Government and Direction of the Gift of God, they have been able thereby to
make such a Distinction of Voices and of Sounds, that they have been preserved
from the Delusions of the Age.

This was the difference of old between the Prophets of God and the false
Prophets, between the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ and the false Apostles;
the difference was not so much in their Words, for they had in a great measure
the same Words; if the true Prophets used to say, Thus says the Lord, the
false Prophets would say so too; if the true Prophets declared against Sin, the
false Prophets likewise would do so; for the false Prophet stole his Word from
his Neighbor: But the great Matter by which the People of the Lord were
preserved was that hidden and divine Wisdom they received of God, by which they
understood the Voice of the Spirit from the Voice of Strangers, from the Voice
of them that were of the Flesh; and that was the Cause that Christians in the
Primitive Days, did not adhere to and follow those false Apostles that came to
them in their own Names, and held a form of Godliness, but denied the Power of
it.

But they amongst them into whom their witchcrafts did enter, they went away
from the spirit, and saught to be made perfect in the flesh; they went to the
outward observation and to the beggarly rudiments of things that perish with
their using, and from the Law of the spirit of Life in Christ Jesus.

And as it has been in those Ages of which we have read, so it comes to pass
in this our Age, in which a dispensation of the spirit of Truth is manifested
and revealed unto the Children of Men; there is a remnant, that have received
the Testimony of Eternal Life, and have believed the Testimony, and waited on
him of whom the Testimony is born, not to have Life by the Testimony, but to
have Life in him; so they receive their Life by the ministration of the spirit
of Christ, and they live to God and others who have received no Life from him,
but have a Life in the Words, and Sounds, and Noizes and Terms, and
distinguishing Phrases of things, their Life (...) there, they live not to God
but to themselves, their Glorying is not in the Cross of Christ, but in the
Words and outside of things; so that every one had need at such a time as this
to approve their Hearts unto the Lord; who knows the inside of Peoples
profe^sion, the inside o^ of their Religion, that knows how the Heart is
concernd toward God, and what they say and do upon the account of his service,
so that all that are met together might come to receive more and more of the
Life and virtue that sanctifies the Soul of him that receives it.

For Alas! my Friends, it is not the gathering together of the most excellent
Words about Religion, and about worship and service, which will approve any Man
in the sight of God; that is but the painting of a Sepulcher, and covering the
rottenness that is in many; but the Lord sees into the inside of every
professor, and whosoever names the name of Christ and departs not from
iniquity, they do but take his name in vain, and contract a guilt upon their
own Souls; so that every one that seems to be Religious ought to enquire,
whence their profession springs; If it springs from a real possession of a
measure of that which sanctifies the Life and shows it self forth, in its
working and operation many times abundantly more than it does in Word and
profession; It manifests it self in Holiness and Righteousness, to the Honor
of God; its the aim and design of all such to exalt the name of him whom they
profess by Holiness and Righteousness shining forth in their works, for it will
never shine through words alone; many good Words may be spoken yet God not
glorified, but his name may be dishonored by them; but whosoever comes to feel
that which is Life in themselves, they know what will Honor God, they feel the
Birth Immortal that is of God, of his own begetting by the Word of Truth.

This living birth is that which brings fort^ living praises; the other is but
flesh, that which is Born of the (...) is Flesh, and it glorifyes the Flesh,
and ^^en the Flesh is most of all glorified, most of all exalted, it is then
but as the ^^wer of the Field, it is then cut down and withered; the Sun of
Righteousness shines with the beams of the Everlasting glory of God, and
causes it to wither and come to naught.

So Friends let your Minds be gathered inward, that you may be able in your own
selves by virtue of the divine gift of God to distinguish between the Vo^^^ of
the true Shepherd, and the Voice of a Stranger, that so your minds may not
follow a strange Voice, that you may follow the Lord with your whole Heart,
with a fu^^ ^^^pose (...) Heart; for there is a real Word of prophecy
discovered in the inward parts, which does Distinguish between the precious and
the Vile in every ones particular; and that which is precious in one it
answers to that which is precious in another; and that which is vile in one,
it answers to that which is vile in anothcr,

For there is an inward and secret mystery of iniquity, as well as a mystery of
Godlyness. The mystery of Godliness is when God is manifested in the flesh, the
mystery of iniquity is when the wicked one is making himself manifest, and
appears and discovers himself in the Flesh, that he may rise up and glory in
the Flesh.

Now the eternal Truth which never changes, that is it which gives a
discerning; this has always put a difference between the true and the false
Prophets, the true and the false Apostles, between the true and the false
Ministers; the difference has not been so much in words as in Power, as the
Apostle speaks concerning some in his Days that had endeavored to deceive and
draw Men aside from the Simplicity of the Gospel, when I come (says he) I will
know; now their Words were not so much taken notice of what they said, whether
their Words be true or no: I will not know their Words but their Power. How
should he know their power if he was not in the power himself? Now this Divine
Power, as every one acquaints himself with it, it works unto the
Sanctification of them, when they have fellowship with the stirrings and
movings of all others that are partakers of it; this is that which will
establish and confirm your Minds in the true Faith and simplicity of the Truth,
that you turn not aside to the right Hand or to the left. If you have regard to
the principle of Divine Truth that you have received from God, then you can
receive confirmation from any one that has a Measure according to it. There is
a measuring Line, and the Reed of the Sanctuary that measures the Temple and
all that dwell therein, that measures them with one Reed and one Measure, and
every one answers to that Measure, according to the stature and degree of
growth of the grace of God they arrive to; and now they are come to a fixed
foundation.

Others there are in the World, that ha^^ laid their foundation upon this
creaturely help, and the other creaturely help, upon this Man, and the other
Man; but now true Christians, they come to have their foundation, their rooting
and Building upon Christ Jesus, upon that word of Life that first of all
gathered their Minds into a desire after Holiness, into a desire after
acquaintance ^^th God that made them.

You that are true Christians can remember, how you were begotten, and that
which did beget you; that Word of God that is incorruptible, that is immortal,
that was not of a dying quality, that need not be supported by this and that
and the other means, but it has its support in it self, it has its
nourishment in it self, and it grows up in (...) ^^lf, and every one that
receives it they grow up in it, until they come more and more to partake of
the Life and qualities of it; that as he is, so they may be in the present
World.

But, alas, this is never known, but where the Word of God has its free
passage: Many have tasted of this Word of God, and by tasteing of it, have been
acquainted with the powers of the World to come; they knew well enough the
Power that would bring forth another World, A new Heaven, and a new Earth, and
Righteousness in it; many have felt the Power that have never continued to see
the working of it, never continued to see and witness what this Power would
work; going ^^de from the Power of the World that was to come, they have never
seen the coming of it, but their foolish Hearts have been darkened again, and
their Imagination have grown vain, and they have conceived to themselves a
false liberty to the Flesh, and their Wills have been strong, and have
prevailed over them; that though they had tasted of the Powers that did belong to
the World to come, they never saw the working and operation of that Power to
bring to pass that which by sight and vision they did behold.

Therefore, it is needful for every one of you in every state and condition
that the Lord has brought you into, to keep your selves in a deep Humility; to
know the Afflictions, Temptations and Trials you are under, and to exercise
^^ur Minds not only on what you have got over (for when some come to look at
what Sufferings and Difficulties they have got over, they are apt to be exalted
above measure, and lifted up in their Minds) but let every one know the state
and condition in which at present they are laboring; let every one consider
what is their present state and work; their help lies in that condition: Some
have always a foundation of their Faith present with them, that they may feel
the object of their Faith where they hope for Help, where they hope for Comfort
and Strengthening to be present with them.

Now every one that believes in the word of God, their care is that they may
know this Word of God, that they may hear it, feel it, and behold the beauty of
it under the Exercises of it; how it conducts and leads, how it counsels and
advises, that so in all things they are to pass through, they may not be as
those that have run into it; as those that do this and that of their own Wills,
but may be properly Followers of something.

I go into this or that or the other thing, not to do mine own Will, not that I
run into it, but I am lead into it; my Leader goes before me, the Word of God,
that has conducted me and led me: I am a Follower of God in all his
Dispensations, in all his Leadings and Guidings; I am to follow him, for he
teaches me his way, he instructs me in the true way: The best of all his
Scholars and Disciples, they are to be led and guided into that Work and
Service they are to do, that they may run into no Irregularity or Absurdity,
for he will lead them into Holiness, Righteousness and Humility, where all
become the Servants of God in Christ Jesus, and Servants to one another: There
is a mutual Concord and Harmony in the Work of this Spirit, in the Service of
this Power, where every one finds what they are appointed and directed to, and
all the Members of the Body of Christ know they ought not to be disjointed and
rent, and separated one from another, but tied together in Joints and Bands, to
edify one another in the Love of God; so th^^ here is one Spirit that has been
the Guide of this one People in all Ages.

Many People have been guided by many Guides, and they have been scattered,
divided and separated one from another, and have been under this, that and the
other Name; but all Gods People have been guided by the Spirit of Christ, that
universal Spirit that is one with God. In the Old Testament times, and the New
Testament times, they were all led by the universal Spirit of Christ, and they
were of one Heart, and of one Mind, serving the Lord; there was a Concord and
Unity among them; and if at any time any Discord or Division happened, it was
because the roaring Lion that goes about continually seeking whom he may
devour, had found some or other that he might devour, and draw into his Snares
and Gins; for there are some that he may, and some that he may not. Who are
they that this roaring Lion may destroy? The Devil knows who those are that he
may prevail upon; he knows that those which are in the Hands of God are out of
his reach; My Father, says Christ, is greater than all, and none shall pluck
them out of my Fathers hands; yet doubtless those that are in the Fathers Hands
are tempted and tried, the roaring Lion goes about seeking to devour them if he
might; a Man that he devours, he swallows up with Prejudice, Enmity,
Coveteousness and Pride, and he will lead him into any evil thing; he has many
Gulphs to swallow Me^ up into, but if he meet with one that is kept in God's
Hands, he knows such a one is out of his reach, and he is not able to catch him.

If he meet with a Man that he can prevail over, as he did over our Father Adam
and Mother Eve, that are in their own Hands, that stand upon their Wit and
Parts, and Knowledge and Eloquence; those that stand upon these things as their
Foundation, they are in their own keeping; these are they whom he may devour
and catch, and ensnare in one or other of his Gins, and swallow them up in one
of his Gulphs and Temptations: But seeing God has opened and manifested these
things by his Spirit, and seeing the secret Wiles of Satan are discovered and
made kno^n by the shining of his Light, how ought every one that is a Believer
of the Truth, to depend upon God for his Protection, and be careful that he
goes not out of his Fathers Hands, that he never trust himself to his own
keeping for his Security and Preservation, lest he meet with a Temptation that
may swallow him and devour him.

I remember our Lord Jesus Christ when he was upon Earth, he put his Disciples
in mind of what happened long before, Remember Lot's Wife: You may take notice
of her, the Power of God took hold of her and brought her out of Sodom, and was
leading her to a place of safety, but she had something of Ada^'s Apostasy in
her Nature, she looked back, and was turned into a Pillar of Salt. Our Savior
was pleased to make use of this Passage that happened some hundreds of Years
before, to show how she failed of coming to the place of Safety, though she was
led out of Sodom by the Hands of one of the Angels of God: O remember her, she
was turned into a Pillar of Salt, and remains so to this day.

If we remember where our Safety is, and from whose Hands we must expect it, we
need not go and look at Lot's Wife. We have seen many in our Days that have
stood fair for Redemption, they have had a Power revealed to them, that is able
to redeem them, and save them to the uttermost; but afterward by exalting
themselves above this Power, and taking the Government of themselves into their
own Hands, they have robbed God of his Glory, and he has withdrawn himself
from them, and then it was with them as with Saul, when the Lord departed from
him, The evil Spirit entered into him.

We have before our Eyes from day to day, those that have known the beginning
of the Redemption of Gods Power, and have been in a great measure brought out
of Sodom, and out of the way of Egypt, and they have had opened to them the
Mystery of the Kingdom of God for their Encouragement, but at last they have
taken and arrogated these Gifts to themselves, and looked upon themselves as
far excelling others, magnifying their Parts as if they were their own, when
they were the gifts of God. Then the Lord has left them to let them see
whether they could stand of themselves, and they have fallen, and been taken in
the Ginns and Snares of the Devil, who like a roaring Lion goes about
continually seeking whom he may devour.

Now, my Friends, it greatly concerns us all to know what Refuge we have to fly
to in a time of Trial; we have a time of Trial now, though not a time of External
Suffering and Persecution, and enduring Hardship yet upon us, to try our Faith
and Trust in God; yet we have no reason to be secure, careless nor remiss in
our present Duty, nor to put the evil day far from us, but to be in the
exercis^ of Humility and Watchfulness as become^ Christians; for there is now
as much Danger and Peril in this time of Liberty and Tranquillity, as there was
before.

If any one in the time of Persecution and Suffering has said within himself,
I had better give over and part with the Truth, and forsake the ways of the
Lord, and give over my Testimony for his Name, for I shall be undone and ruined
in the World; this Man by his carnal Fears has lost his Testimony.

So likewise if a Man in this time of liberty and freedom of serving the Lord,
and bearing Testimony to his Name, if he shall not entirely trust in the Lord,
to carry him on in his Work and Service, and continue his dependence upon him,
and wait for the Assistance of the holy Spirit of God to work in him to will
and to do of his good Pleasure, this Man shall lose his Testimony as well as
the other: Therefore, let every one of you keep up a dependence upon Gods holy
Spirit for carrying on the Work which he has begun in your Souls; consider
what Work it is that Christ is now at in every one of you; I know what his Work
was when I was first Convinced, he was burning up and hewing down every thing
that hindered his carrying on the Work of Sanctification and Redemption, and
Settledness and Stability in the Covenant of Life and Peace.

So that our meeting together ought to be ^n the Name of Christ; I hope it is
so with most of you: I hope it is not to see and hear what this or that Man
says, but to know within your selves what part of the Work of Redemption the
Lord Jesus Christ is carrying on, that you may join with him, and be a willing
People in the Day of his Power, and say as Paul, Lord what will thou have me to
do? If thou will have me part with my all, Lord here it is, I offer it up; and
if thou will have any Service done, Lord here I am, Speak for thy Servant
hears; let there be in every one of you an attentiveness, and an humble
waiting upon the Lord, and say as the Psalmist, Behold, as the Eyes of Servants
look unto the hands of their Masters, and as the Eyes of a Maiden unto the
hands of her Mistress, so our Eyes wait upon the Lord our God until he have
mercy upon us.

When ever a Christian has his dependence upon God's Wisdom and Power, such a
one shall never want Wisdom, the Lord will give him Wisdom to preserve him
against all the Wiles of Satan; and he shall never want Power, for the Lord
will enable him to fulfill and perform what he requires of him; he shall be
replenished with Judgment and Understanding, Ability and Power, to direct him
into the good ways of God, and to enable him to walk in them.

It is the earnest desire of my Soul that every one of you may be exercised in
those things which are profitable for you, and which may be comfortable to your
Friends and Brethren; that you may all grow up into a stability and
stedfastness in the good ways of the Lord, that you may not be shaken and
tossed with every Storm and Tempest; that when there comes a time for the trial
of your Patience and Fortitude, and Courage, you may not be tossed to and fro
like Children, but be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the Work of
the Lord, that so living in all holy Obedience and patient continuing in
well-do^ng, you may have a constant Supply of Strength and Power from God
ministered unto you by his Holy Spirit.

SERMON VIII. No true Worship without the right Knowledge of God. Preached at
Grace Church Street, May, 24. 1688.
My Friends,
THere is no Man can truly worship God till he comes to a measure of certain
Knowledge of him; for all the Worship in the World where the Vail of Ignorance
still prevails upon the Mind, is all abominable; there is no acceptance with
God: There must be a knowledge of God before there can be a true Worshipping of
him; for they that worship before they know God, they worship they know not
what; they worship a God they have heard of, but do not know; so every one that
would be a true Worshipper must first come to that which gives a true
knowledge, that raises up a certainty in the Mind, This is the Lord, we will
trust in him; this is our God, and we will serve him.

And that all People might come to this certainty of Knowledge, therefore it is
that God has sent forth his Spirit, that the things of God might be
communicated by the Spirit of God, for without the Assistance of this Spirit
Men seek after the Knowledge of God in vain; If they seek after the Knowledge
of God, they cannot find it, and if they seek after the Worship of God, and
after Acceptance with God, they cannot find it; so that all Religion and
religious Performances that People are exercised in, where the Spirit of Truth
has not the beginning they will all prove fruitless in the end.

There be wise Men in the world, and they have employed their wisdom to find
out the true God; but God in wisdom has ordained, that the world by all their
wisdom shall not know him; so there is an end of all their Labor: How shall
they know him then? As none can know the things of a man save the spirit of a
man that is in him, so none can know the things of God but the spirit of God;
so that they that resist the Guidance, Direction and Counsel of the Spirit of
God, are like unto those that would enter into a House or Palace, and remember
not the Door that leads into it.

People would fain come into the Divine Knowledge and into the understanding of
Divine Mysteries, but they would come by it another way; they would study for
it, they would learn it by Arts and Sciences, they would attain it by their own
Industry; and herein they labor to excel one another. If there comes a Man
among them that tell^ them, Friends, you are all out of the way, then they are
angry, and instead of enquiring what is the way, they are angry that their way
must be rejected. Friends, you will never come to the Knowledge of God but by
the Spirit of God; then they mock, and then they scoff and scorn the Doctrine of
the Spirit, for the Teaching of the Spirit has been the common Scorn and
Derision of our Age.

It is so in our Day with many; if they cannot come to the Knowledge of God any
other way but by the Spirit, they would deny to make use of that, to be subject
to that, and these put their Trust in their own Power and Industry, to find out
the Mystery of the Knowledge of God; so they are ever learning, but are never
able to come to the knowledge of the Truth: How should they? How can a People
come to the Knowledge of the Truth, without the spirit of truth that reveals
it? Can any come to the Knowledge of Christ unless he that sent him reveals
him? Where are People's Books? where are their Bibles? where is their Rule
(they call it so) that all their Endeavors for many Ages have proved fruitless
in respect of the Knowledge of God?

This is but your say so (may some say;) How does it appear that we have not
attained to the true Knowledge of God and to the true Worship, and to the true
Religion?

I will tell you how it appears, for all in all Ages that have attained to the
Knowledge of God, they have been made partakers of his divine nature and his
Divine Qualities; they have brought forth a sort of Fruit in their Lives and
Conversations, that has been of the same Nature, it has been Holy and Divine:
They have known the Sanctifier, and they have been a sanctified People, so they
have become one with him, and have shown forth the Beauty of Holiness in their
Lives, that is a Demonstration that may show the Knowledge of God, for without
it they live another Life, an unholy one, a corrupt one, a Life of Self-love, a
Life of Pride, Vanity and Enmity, and that they never had from God, but from
another Root; a Life of Iniquity and Sin, it came from another Seed; so that
they are still without the Knowledge of God,

And again, all that have come to the Knowledge of God, they have trusted in
him; that People cannot do nowadays, except here and there a few that do know
him; the generality of the Age they cannot trust God; they must have something
else to rely upon, and trust to, for in him they cannot trust. Now the Lord
said by the Prophet of old. They that know my name will trust in me; tha^ is
enough if People know God, whom to know is life eternal, even to know thee the
only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent; This is Life Eternal; if
People were co^^ to this Divine Knowledge, they would never take care or study
for any Refuge, or set up this, or that, or the other thing to lean upon. A
rich Man he trusts in his Ric^es, one trusts to one thing and another to
another, but they would trust in the Living God, and he should be their God and
their Rock, and they would venture their Concerns upon him both in this World,
and that which is to come, if they did but know him. People may talk as much as
they will, but he can never properly be said to be my God and thy God, till we
cast our care upon him, and can venture our concerns upon him both in this
World and that which is to come, and can say, He is our God and our Relyance
and Dependence is upon him.

Now this is the Effect and Consequence of this Knowledge of God; such as come
to partake of it, they shall not need to be bid to worship him: You shall not
need to make a Law that this People shall worship the God that they know; there
needs no Law to command the People of God to worship him; his law is written in
their hearts, and they that know him will worship him. There was never any Man
on Earth that had the Knowledge of the true and living God, that needed be put
upon worshipping him, that needed a Law to oblige him to it; for the very
Knowledge that is given of God through Christ, this brings forth naturally an
Adoration of the invisible Power which Men put their Trust in; it produces an
Adoration that is true Worship; it causes an humble Reverence of that Power;
it brings the Soul upon its Knees, as it were; it brings the Soul to stoop and
bend, and bow upon all occasions to God, as his God: It raises his
expectations to receive Counsel, and Judgment, and Understanding from him, as
the Fountain of Wisdom; and hereby People are taught to worship in the right
Divine Knowledge.

But to tell Men of the Worship of God before they know him; though you make as
many Laws as you will to force them to worship that God they do not know, yet
you can never do them any good, nor make their Worship acceptable, nor make
them devout; you can never bring Devotion nor Divine Adoration into their
Hearts by all the Laws that you can make.

But there is a Spirit of Life that sets the Soul at liberty from its former
Bondage to Sin and Satan; and when this Law comes to be revealed in my Heart,
what says this Law? Worship God, give Honor and Glory to him. This Law says,
Submit thy self to him that redeemed thee, thou art his, thou art no more thine
own: This Law being written in the Heart obliges a Man to a true Worship, and
to worship God in spirit and truth, for this Man has done imagining among the
Heathen, that there are Gods many and Lords many: He has done imagining what
God is and where he is, for he is now come to Knowledge; he is come beyond the
best Scholar in Athens, let him be never so mean and despicable in the World;
if it be never so poor a Lad or Lass they are beyond the best Scholar in
Athens; for the best Scholar there came only so far as to contradict their
fellow Scholars: Some of them were for Mars and some for Jupiter, some for one
God and some for another: These Scholars, by some Beam of Divine Light shining
in them, had come to perceive that the Influences that were in Mars, Jupiter
and Venus, and the Sun and Moon, and other Planets, they received them from an
higher Power, that is, God. They denied not that these Planets had Power and
Influences given to them; sometimes they are called heavenly Bodies, the Sky or
Cano^ of the Earth; and Sun, Moon and Stars (...) called Heavenly Bodies, they
have Power and Influences; but this was given them, and that Power must be
greater than theirs from whom they receive their Power Virtue and Influence,
even that God who is the maker of all things. The Scholars at Athens were
gotten so far as to see there was a God greater than the Planets which the
Nations worshipped; they thought that God was to have an Altar as well as
Jupiter and Mars, and those other Gods, and therefore they built an Altar to
the unknown God whom they ignorantly worshipped.

If thou and I are come to the knowledge of the true God, then we must know more
than these Scholars of Athens, who erected an Altar to the unknown God: When
the Apostle comes to Preach Divinity among these Scholars of Athens, there were
Masters of Arts and sciences; he begins to Preach to them about an unknown God,
whom ye ignorantly Worship, says he, him declare I unto you; we do not need to
declare to you the Gods of the Nations, for you Worship them, but to declare to
you the unknown God whom ye ignorantly Worship; these were the ^reat Scholars
of Athens that the Apostle s^^ke to: What do thou declare of God? He is the
God that made the World and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of
Heaven and Earth, and dwells not in Temples made with hands, neither is
Worshipped with Men's H^^ds, as though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to
all Life and Breath, and all things, and has made of one Blood all Nations of
M^n for to dwell on the Face of the Earth, and has determined the times before
appointed and the bounds of their Habitations that they should seek the Lord,
if happily they might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far from
every one of us; for in him we live and move and have our being; for as certain
also of your own Poets have said, for we are also his offspring; for as much
then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is
like unto Gold, or Silver, or Stone Graven by Art and Man's device.

Here is a way of learning, you need not turn over Books any more; if I would
know the true God, I must know who gave me Life and motion, and who created me,
he is not far from me; and how should I find the knowledge of him? Feel after
him, if happily you may find him, for he is not far from any of us; in him we
live and move and have our being; we cannot live without him one Moment; he
gives life, essence and power to all Creatures in Heaven and Earth; we must
have him with us or we cannot live; I die as soon as my Life departs from me,
so do you; if my Breath and Life continue with me, (...) by the power of him
that gives it, in whom I live and move and have my being; still it is in him
that first gave it.

Here all the great Scholars and Philosophers were counseled to feel after him
(...) are all People now a days; this is our Business, when we go to Preach the
knowledge of God to them that want it; our Commission runs not that we must
read such a Book, such an Author, and turn over such a Leaf, and there you
shall have a discovery and a fair demonstration of the attributes of God, of
his Wisdom, Power, Goodness and Mercy, Omnipotence, Omniscience; our Commission
runs not that way, but our Commission runs thus, that we turn People from
darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan to God; to turn their Minds from
that which may hinder the knowledge of Christ, from darkness, blindness and
ignorance; God is not far from them; perhaps they might find him, if they did
feel after him,

There are a sort of Men now adays, (such as were in former times) that say
unto God, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, such a sort
of People are dark and blind and ignorant, and are like to continue so, that
say to God depart from us; God is come to them, but they bid him depart from
them; We are sent to these People that are dark and ignorant, and have not the
true knowledge of God, though they have abundance of notions, hearsay
knowledge, learning, and speculation; our business is to convince them of their
ignorance and to turn them from Darkness to Light.

There are a People that have mocked and scoffed at us many Years, what (say
they) is there a light within? must we go to the light within? Has every body
a light within?

Yes I believe so, and you must believe so too if you will believe the
Scriptures. Christ is the true Ligh^, and he has lighted every Man that comes
into the World. If he did light them, how did he do it? I will tell you, (say
they) he spoke a great many gracious words, and some body has writ them down.
What, will this prove the light within? because we have got a new Testament,
and Christ has spoken a great many gracious Words, and they are written down
and recorded, does this prove the light within? No, People might have been in
darkness still for all the Books of the New Testament, and the Old Testament
to; and for all the Books in the World; for they would never have conveyed
light into the Hearts and Consciences of Men if God had not placed it there.

Indeed these Books may be instrumental, and God does make use of them as a
means for the conveying of Light and Grace, and working of true conversion; but
the holy Scriptures cannot do it of themselves, unless there be a coacting and
cooperation of the Spirit of Christ with them; without this Spirit they cannot
convey saving Light to us: How prove you then a Light within? the Apostle tells
you if you will believe him, 2 Cor. 4.6. God who commands the Light to shine
out of darkness, has shined into our Hearts to give the Light of the knowledge
of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; so that every one that
retireth into himself will know quickly and understand his Error, and confess
that there is a Light within, and that by this rule because there is something
in the Heart, that makes manifest that which is reprovable; if they do or say a
thing reprovable, that which manifests a thing is Light; that which
manifests dark words or works is Light.

Now when they have found this Light within, the next question in controversy
is, whether this will give Men sufficient Light for the true knowledge of God,
whether this be sufficient to bring a Man to Life and to Salvation?

I am of that judgment that it is sufficient (...) and I believe it heartily and
preach it boldly in the name of the Lord, that the Light that shines in your
Hearts shines there to give you the true knowledge of God in the Face of the
Mediator the Lord Jesus Christ. You cannot believe this, you will say, for you
have had this ever since you was a Child, and you know not the least good it
has done you; all our learned Men and Ministers, go to what sort you will,
they speak very slightingly of it; this Light within it is nothing but natural
conscience, a poor Light, it is but an Ignis Fatuus, that will mislead us. But
let me tell thee the reason why it does thee no more good, is, because thou
have been loose and wanton, and vain and would not receive the reproofs of
it; reckon but up the time, and call to Mind, when thou did receive the
reproofs of it, then it did thee some good and brought thee to remorse, and
brought anguish and sorrow and trouble into thy Mind, and brought thee to a
right sense of what evil thou have done* but if thou did not regard it, no
wonder it did thee no good; its reproofs and counsels were like the seed sown
by the high way; the Fowls of the Air gathered it up, and it did no good, that
is, the Devil plucked it up, and then thy Soul lay as seed that brought forth
no Fruit to God, and the Devil might have what he would,

I will tell you the reason why so many learned Men, Men of g^^^^ abilities
speak slightly and meanly of it, because it has done them no good inward nor
outward that they know of: How should it do you good when it has done them
none? The reason why it does them no good is because they do not believe in it;
and did Christ ever do any Body good that did not believe in him? He gave Men
power indeed to become the Sons of God, the greatest good that they are capable
of; but it was to those that believed on his name: Were all they the Sons of
God that heard Christ preach? No, some were the Devils Sons; our Savior tells
them, that they were of their Father the Devil and his Works they did do; they
came to Meetings and heard Christ preach; he discoursed to them, but it did
them no good, for they did not believe on his Name.

And then it appears in the next place, that if this Light be taken heed to,
and if Men come to be taught by it and receive instructions, they would then
have it all for nothing, they would have it all for Gods sake; all the counsels
and understanding of Divine mysteries, all the openings of God, and all their
knowledge of God would come for nothing: What then would become of the trade of
preaching Christ, and the attributes of God; then their Silver shrine trade
will be spoiled, and then their Diana is gone; and this Light has done them no
good inwardly because of their unbelief; and it does them no good outwardly,
because (...) spoils their preaching trade, because it teaches (...) ^or
nothing and for God's sake the light (...) knowledge of God, that shines in the
face of Jesus Christ, wherein are the Openings of the Mysteries of the Kingdom
of God.

So that if any come to know the Virtue and the Power that turns Men from
Darkness to Light, they are come to another state, and turned from the power of
Satan to the power of God; and when the Power of God i^ revealed in them, then
they say, This is my God; now I know the true God; they speak as those that are
acquainted with him, This is life eternal to know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: It is not to know him at a Distance, but as
always present: The Soul comes to be acquainted with God as familiarly as a Man
is acquainted with his Friend, and better too: A Man that is acquainted with
his Friend, only knows some things pertaining to him; but those that are
acquainted with their Maker they know the whole counsel of God, so far as
belongs to their Peace; therefore it was not in vain said of old, Acquaint thou
thy self with him and be at peace: Be but acquainted with that inward Power
that knows thy Thoughts, and then no body needs to preach a Sermon to thee of
the Omnipresence of God; no Body needs make thee a Doctrine of it, and offer
Reasons and Motives to believe it; it is all foolish labor; I know that God is
with me and near me; I feel him in ^^e and with me, at my down-lying (...)
rising; when I am in my Shop and ab^^^ (...) business he is with me in all
Places; and such a Man is also well instructed about the Omniscience of God;
God's knowing cvery thing; I have learned that since I came to know him, all
the Doctors in Europe can tell me no more than I know in that Point; The Lord
observes all my goings and numbreth all my steps; Lord, thou make manifest
the thoughts of my heart, thou searchest my heart and tryest my reins. Here is
God's Omniscience and knowing all things. Here is Divinity growing out of the
Life.

Then the Wisdom of God is infinite; so are all God's Attributes Infinite,
Incomprehensible and Unspeakable, they are all so in him; but he makes manifest
a measure of his Wisdom; he brings a Man from being such a Fool as he was
before, to become a wise Man; He was such a Sot and Fool as to be drunk and
tumble in the Dirt; he could not stand upon his Legs, but now he is become wise
and sober: Another was so foolish as to defile himself and wallow in his
Uncleanness; now such a Man comes to true Wisdom, it begins in the fear of God,
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: What does his Wisdom do? It
keeps him out of the Dirt; It makes him live first as a Man, then as a
Christian, to live righteously, soberly and godly in this present world: It
leads him into the Knowledge of the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God; to know
and comprehend with all saints what is the ^^igh^h and length (...) breadth,
and depth, and (...) know the love (...) Christ which passes knowledge: This
is more than bare Sobriety and moderate Living; such are taught to live
soberly, righteously and godlily, to live by Faith, and to be led into the
kno^^^^^e of the mystery of the kingdom of God; to know the Lord Jesus Christ
to their Justification. This is the learned and the wise Man; he has not the
Substance as well as the Shadow; (...) ^^th the Marrow as well as the Bone; he
is ^^conciled to God, through Christ; he (...) ^emission of sins through Christ
Jesus, tha^ (...) for him and rose again.

When you come to be partakers of this, (...) will do you good; Notions will
not do it (...) when you come to know God for your selve^ and under (...) him
for your s^lves, to know him as your Savior and Redeemer, that has rescued
you from the Snares of the wicked (...), whoever, does this they will worship
God; when they have this Knowledge of him they will bow to him, they will be
like those of old that said, he is our judge, he is our lawgiver, he is our
king, and he will save us. There arose a Testimony in the Hearts of good People
of that Age, that God was their Judge that judged them, their Lawgiver that
directed them how they should make their way to him; that he was their King and
ought to rule them, for he must save them.

So when People come to know God for themselves, to be inwardly acquainted with
God for themselves; when a Company of these Souls meet together, when they have
been at this School and learned this Lesson ^f Divinity, they then sit down and
wait ^^on the Lord, that God that se^^ ^^th the heart and tries the reins, and
observes how they do Service for the Honor of his Name, and they receive
Spiritual Gifts from him to their Edification and ^^^fort, and they receive
Judgment from him when they do any thing contrary to his (...).

The Lord Jesus Christ he is the Minister of ^he Sanctuary which the Lord has
pitched: If Men have a Church, as they call it, they ^ust have John or Thomas
for their Minister: We know who is the Minister of such a Place; but here is a
Minister set upon ^o^'s Sanctuary, this Priests Lips shall preser^e knowledge.
All that come to God's Church are taught of this Priest, he is a high one, the
high pri^^^ of our profession, we have not such another; he is not set up by a
Carnal Commandment; his Induction came not from any Priest in this World, but
his Induction came from the God of Heaven and Earth; his Father set him up for
a Priest; he comes by a heavenly Induction and Commission, he is a priest for
ever, after the order of Melchisedek, not after the Order of Aaron: If you come
to God's Church you may hear this Minister.

Some have called a House of Stone (...) Wood a Church, but that will not do
no^^ therefore there are People that know better than they when they gather
Churches of living Stones; Men and Women are gathered to these Churches. Now
the Apostle says, the Church is in God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ:
if you will come to Church you must come to Jesus Christ, the Church is in God,
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the general Assembly, the Congregation of
his faithful People. What do you mean by a Church? Ask a learned Man, that
understands Greek and H^brew, what is the meaning of the Word? A Church, says
he, is the Congregation of the Faithful, it is an Assembly of the Faithful
People congregated together. Where must they meet? they must meet in the
general assembly of the firstborn, whose names are written in heaven. The
Hebrews were come to that Church, though they lived many hundred Miles asunder,
in Asia, Cappadocia and Bythinia: You are come to the general assembly of the
firstborn; there is a Priest, there is the high priest of our profession, the
Lord Jesus Christ, who is a priest after the order of Melchisedeck, not after
the order of Aaron. How long is this Priest like to stay in his Priesthood? For
ever, He is a priest for ever, not after a carnal commandment, but the power of
an endless life.

The Priests that were after Aaron's Order they could not continue: Death
snatched one away, then they must have another Priest; but here is one that
has a Priesthood higher than the Heavens, by the Power of an endless Life:
Here is the Priest of God's Church, and the Teacher of God's People; so that
when God's People come to Church, that is, to God the Father, there Christ
teaches them, according to the old Prophecy, I will teach my people my self.

We have labored to bring People to this Teaching, that they might come to the
Knowledge of the Living God. Now there needs none to teach them, for they are
taught of God; blessed be God, our labor has not been in vain, we see the
fruit of our labors and are satisfied: We have been laboring to bring Men to
know the Lord, new all shall know the Lord from the greatest to the least, and
bow before him and worship him; they hear that their high priests lips shall
preserve knowledge: If they do amiss, he chastises them for it; if they do
well, then he comfort them by his Spirit: Now our Labor is that all may be
brought to this, and that every one may know the Lord, and may fear him and
serve him, and worship him in his Temple: Our Bodies are a Temple for that use
to worship God in; know you not that you^ bodies are temples of the Holy Ghost?
you mus^ worship in your selves, you must go into you^ selves, you must know
the Exercise of the Graces of the Spirit in your selves, and the Workings of
the Spirit of Truth in you^ selves, and that your Souls that are in yo^^ Bodies
may be bowed to the Power of the Spirit, and that your Worship must be in the
Spirit; you must pray in the Spirit, and give Thanks in the Spirit.

Though those that set up Worship in the Church, talk (...) Divinity and
Religion in every part of it; yet the Substance of all the Shadows of the Law
are fulfilled in the Gospel; the Substance of all the Modes, and Rites, and
Forms of Religion are fulfilled in the Gospel-way: So then let every one
compare and examine their State, and consider how the case stands between them
and their Maker, what Knowledge they have of God; and what Trust they have put
in him, that so they may be persuaded and prepared to come within the Pale of
this Church. But you must first come out of the World, else you can never come
into that Church that is in God; if you be in the World, you must go to the
World's Church, and be the Members of the World's Church; and you shall have
this for your Pains, the World will love you; but if you come out of the
World's Church into God's Church, the World cannot love you.

Be as good as thou will thou can never b^ so good as Christ Jesus, and they
loved him not because he was not of the World; if you were of this world, says
Christ, the world would love its own; but since you are not of the world, but I
have taken you out of it, therefore the world hates you; if they do so to the
green tree. that will they do to the branches? Are you better than I, says our
Savior? the servant is not greater than his Lord: Those that are the Disciples
of Christ must be content to be persecuted, reviled and hated for his names
sake; for thus they treated him who (...) holy, and harmless, and undefiled,
who gave them a good Example, and who did them no hurt, but did them good; yet
the World hated him, and it is but reasonable that you should suffer from the
World in the same manner, and bear it at their Hands.

If you come to this Church that is in God the Father, and Jesus the mediator,
the church of the firstborn that are written in heaven, and come out of the
World's Church, then the World will be about your Ears, all the World will set
themselves against this Church, against the Woman that shall bring forth a
Birth, that shall rule over the Nations: There appeared a great wonder in
heaven, a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon
her head a crown of twelve stars, and she being with Child cried, traveling in
birth, and pained to be delivered. And there also appeared another wonder in
heaven (a terrible thing) and behold a great red dragon, having seven heads and
ten horns; and the dragon stood before the woman that was ready to be
delivered, for to devour her child as soon as it was born: and she brought
forth a man child, that was to rule all nations with a rod of iron, and her
child was caught up to G^^ and to his throne. When the Dragon (...) ready to
devour this Birth, God took it into his own Care, in spite of the Devil and all
his Instruments, and he will save the Child and preserve the Woman; he that
fits in hea^^^ ^ill laugh at his Enemies and defeat them. (...) is a pl^ce
appointed for the Woman in (...) Wilderness, where she is preserved by the
^^mighty Power, where she is nourished for a Time, and Times, and half a Time,
from the Face of the Serpent; but she must come out again after some Time, in
spite of the Devil and all his Instruments, of all his Dragons and Serpents:
The woman must come out of the Wilderness, and the Man-Child must come down
with great Power, to rule the Nations.

This has been accomplished, say some, above fourteen hundred Years ago; and,
if you will take their Word, the Church has been come so long out of the
Wilderness. But the Church that they speak of, has it not wanted Holiness and
Righteousness? Has it given glory to God on high, with peace on earth and good
will to men? No, their Church has lived in Tyranny and barbarous Cruelty, and
shedding of Blood. They say the Church was in the Wilderness in Dioclesian's
Time, and when Constantine came to the Empire the^ she came out of the
Wilderness.

If it had been a Holy Church, we should have seen the Man-Child come down from
God, and Holiness and Righteousness would have run down like a mighty stream,
and Truth would have filled the whole Earth. All these things have not yet been
fulfilled, for we have seen the Professors of Truth fallen in the Streets; they
have been persecuted and troubled, and thrown into Prisons and ^ons, but there
is a better Church some^ to be found.

I read of the Holy Church, the Lam^^ Wife, the Spouse of Christ that has been
hid somewhere, a great while, in some Corner or other in the Wilderness; but
she will come forth again out of the wilderness, leaning upon her well-beloved:
She does not come leaning on this Prince and the other Potentate: She comes not
out of the Wilderness leaning on Captains, Generals and Armies, but leaning on
Christ her well-beloved, the Immortal, Invisible Power of the Son of God; she
trusts in it.

All the other Churches, I have read of, they have leaned upon one Prince or
Potentate, or one Emperor or another, and they have relied on these great Men
as on their Bulwark; but this Church that comes out of the Wilderness will come
leaning only upon her well-beloved, the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Author
and Finisher of her Faith; she will put her Trust in him, for he will deliver
his Church from all her Enemies: And though the Serpent cast out of his Mouth
Water as a Flood, after the Woman, that he might cause her to be carried away
of the Flood, (...) the Lord will cause the Earth to help ^he ^oman, and the
Earth shall open her Mouth and swallow up the Flood which the Dragon cast out
of his Mouth. Let the Dragon do what he can to destroy the Woman and her Seed,
she knows what her beloved can do, he will command the Earth to open and
swallow up the Flood, and she shall go dry through it.

How happy are they that lean upon Christ their well-beloved? The Church of
Christ in all Ages has leaned upon him, and he has founded his Church upon a
Rock, so that the Devil and all his Instruments, and the very gates of hell
shall not prevail against her. The Members of this Church have their Teacher
Christ Jesus, and they receive Counsel and Direction from him: He is their
Priest and Teacher, and he teaches them by his Spirit and his Word, which he
has placed in their Hearts, and given them an Understanding to know him that
is true: Christ's Word you must keep to (...) if you will be true Sch^lars.
This (...) true Divinity; if you will have the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God
communicated and opened to you, give heed to (...) word, and that Truth that is
in your (...) parts: Attend to that Light and that (...) that is manifested in
your Hearts, and (...) Lord will show you more of the Power (...) Efficacy
thereof, and if you be faithful (...) little he will make you ruler over much
(...) answerable to the Understanding and Knowledge that God has given you,
and if you be faithful in a little he will communicate more and more of his
Mind and Will to you; and if you be led by the Spirit of Truth, you will trust
in it and hearken to it, and understand the Language of it in your own Hearts;
and if you be a willing people in the day of God's power, God will work all
things in you and for you, and work in you both to will and to do, of his good
pleasure.

SERMON IX. The wonderful love of God to Mankind. Preached at S.
Martin's-le-Grand, November 9th 16^0.
IT is our great concern, while we are in this World, to promote the Glory of
God, and (...) work out our own salvation, to endeavor that in us lies to be
sensible, and to help one another to be sensible of the Love of God to (...):
This is the only thing that can give us (...) comfort, to have a Sense of the
Love of God to us in Christ Jesus: There is (...) more certain ^ha^ that all of
us are Partak^^^ of the Love of (...) which is imparted to us daily, and we
live no^ a Day without it; but we may, if we have not a care, live ma^^ Days
without it, and without the comforta^^^ Sense of it; and that is the reason
that (...) great many of ^he S^^^ and Daughters of Men do (...) in their Li^^^
so little Love to God, beca^^e they have so ^^^tle Sense of his Love to them,
for the Apostle ^ohn, that had attained (...) great Knowledge and Experience in
Christianity, plainly declares, that ^he ^^^son of that Love ^^at we have to
(...) is ^^^ause he first loved us; and I do not believe that any Man can have
any true Love to G^d, that is not sensible of the Love of God to him.

And (...) those temporal Blessings that we enjoy (...) th^^ ^^fe, as Health
and Strength, and our very ^^eath (...) ^^ing, and well-being that every Day
and Hour are continued, they are from (...) Love of God to us, and the
lengthning (...) of our Lives and vouchsafing us Opp^^^^ (...) ^^es for the
good of our Souls are evident Tokens of God's Love and Goodwill to us. Where
these things are not considered and regarded, men live like the (...) that
perish, and regard not him that m^d^ them, but go on in Disobedience to him,
(...) Dishonouring of his great Name; and ho^^^ing up Wrath upon their own
Souls. A^^ (...) does every Man, while he rema^^^ in (...) natural state and
condition^ for there is in every Man by nature the S^^d and Root of all Sin and
Rebellion against (...) which makes him return evil to God f^^ the good he does
to us.

And I believe we are ^ll of us sensible in some measure of the depravedness
that is fallen upon all Man ^^d and of t^^t ^^mity to God, and that ave^^^^ss
that ^s (...) the doing the will of God and that impotency and inability that
is in every Man to the reforming of his ways and the changing of his Heart, and
leaving of his corrupt and vicious ^ncli^ations without the divine ^elp and
assistance (...) the Grace and Spirit of God.

Now they that are thus far sensible of their alienation by nature from the
Lord, and (...) also sensible that the time they have here, (...) the only time
they have for their ^^^^^ing and being fitted for that Everla^^^^^ Kingdom
which we all wo^^^ enjoy, H^w ought this to affect the mind of every ^ne that
while they have time they might ^^rize it and improve in, and come to an (...)
sense of the love of God, that for they (...) have a love raised in their
Hearts again to God for People will never be obedient unto God till they love
him, nor never love him till they are sensible of his love to them.

Therefore that which is the means and way of Gods making known himself to the
Sons and Daughters of Men; that mean^ and that way ought every one to embrace
every one ought to be (...) ^^ted with ^t and have (...) exercise of th^^ minds
in it, that so we might come to the knowledge of God, and might know by an
experimental and sensible feeling the kindness of God to us.

And truly Friends, they that are (...) to spend their time and exercise
themselves in the consideration of the mercy and kindness of God, th^^ have
wor^ enough for their whole lifetime ^^e consider and contemplate the manifold
Mercies of God bestowed upon them; for we have our Life and Breath from him
whom the whole World obeys, and serves God that made all living Creatures, has
created us, preserved us, he has had long suffering and patience toward us
until now (...) he is yet minded to do us good, which ^^e^^ d^^ltly manifest by
the invitations and promis^ he has m^^e us, and the workings of his H^ly
Spirit that he has made us acquainte^ withal.

For who is there in this Assembly that God has not made sensible of the
tenders of hi^ grace and inv^^^^ions to Repentance and Reformation, that they
that live loose (...) vainly in the World might turn to the Lord with all their
Hearts, and consider their wa^ and doings? God has waited to be gracio^^ the
Sons and Daughters of Men, and his ^^^cy and patience has been beyond all
hu^^^ patience, beyond the patience that (...) did bestow upon any, this the
Lord (...) showed upon you; therefore I entreat (...) hoo^ the love of God, let
this ^^^^deration sink deeply into your spirits, tha^ you may be affected with
the kindness of God and his patience toward you, and his long-suffering while
you have been sinning against him.

But some will say, How shall I know this? After what manner may I experience
this love of God to me? How may I be sure that the Lord has a love for me?

My Friends, it is not only temporal kindness that we enjoy from God, it is not
only the lengthening out of our Days, that is an evident token of the love of
God to us; but there is a demonstration and manifestation of i^ that is
universally extended to the Sons and Daughters of Men, in that he has sown his
Word in them, and has sown his Truth and his Grace in their Hearts, that every
Man, though never so wicked, never so ^oolish and vain, yet has many times
checks and reproofs in his own Heart: I know it, and I doubt not but you do.

Pray whence comes it that which does stop you in a course of sin, and ch^^k
and reprove you for sinning against the Lord? If you come to mind this and
consider of it you will find it comes from God; it comes from him, from him
comes our life and Breath; then People should be incited to receive the Grace
of God; ^^e favor and mercy of God which he has ^estowed upon them in order
to their salvati^^. The Scripture tells us, that Grace and ^^^th came by Jesus
Christ. I^ (...) have any good it came by Jesus Christ, and if thou have any
Truth it came by Jesus Christ, who is the Fountain of Truth and the Fountain of
the (...) of God; it is he by whom God has m^de known himself to the Sons and
Daughters of Men; it is Christ alone that God has ordained to be a Mediator
between God and Man, that so he might be the Minister of an everlasting
covenant, which we are brought into with God; so that now People should com^ to
the consideration of the way and means that God has ordained for their
redemption, namely, that he has given Jesus, that great and unspeakable gift
of his love and kindness to the Sons and Daughters of Men; here i^ Grace and
Truth that came by Jesus Christ: How is it con^^? It is come into my Heart.
Though Sins, and Lusts and Corruptions, perhaps have a plac^ in many, yet Christ
has a place too; He ha^^ made his grave with the wicked and was numbered with
the Transgressors; he was like that Seed that lies under the Clods an^ i^ the
least of all Seeds, yet when it comes out of the Ground it rises high and
spreads abroad its Branches and brings forth Fruit; this love of God, this
unchangeable Holy Truth, is in every one; why then should not every Man b^
ruled and governed by it?

But some Men will say, is Truth b^ than Falsehood, and Grace better than (...)
and Corruption?

You may see that by the Light that is d^ (...) in the inward parts: Let every
Man (...) inward to the Grace of God, turn to that Light that shows it self in
the Creature, and see what it will do for us: This is the Doctrine that the
Apostle was sent withal; he wa^ ^^nt with a Commission to turn Men from
Da^^^^ss to Light, and from the power of Satan to God: Why did he do it? It was
for this end, that Men might have remission of Sins, and that they might come
to an inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith in Christ Jesus our
Lord; so that this Gospel is the same that it ever was, though Men have diverse
ways of preaching, and several methods and ways of declaring the Truths of the
Gospel; blessed be God the Apostolical Doctrine is p^^ached again, and the
blessed Gospel has the same power attending it that was in former Days, and
(...) have the same effect; and that this may be the Portion of every one of
you, this i^ the end of our Labor. And we have i^ (...) Eye but two things:

I. First, to discharge a good Conscience in the sight of God, who has given
us his Word to Preach, and to turn Men from Darkness to Light, and from the
power of Satan to God; that we might keep our selves free from the Blood of all
Men.

II. Secondly, another end is, the desire that God ^^th placed in our Hearts
that all Men every ^here might be Saved; this is Gods Will; if a^ be Damned it
is their own will and the ^s will; this is Gods will that none should ^^sh, but
that all should come to repentance and be eternally saved. Now in this work of
your salvation, we would have regard to him that sent us to Preach the
Everlasting Gospel, and we would discharge our selves faithfully, and be made
manifest in your Consciences, that the benefits of the Gospel might come to be
yours* that you might answer the purpose of God in sending Christ to be the
Savior of Mankind; you must turn from Sin to God, and then you will find the
blessing that comes by Jesus, which it to turn every one from his evil way*

You may read this in a Book, and you may also plainly read it i^ your Hearts:
The Lord Jesus Christ has given you Light to distinguish between good and
evil; if you do good, you may make a comfortable reflection^ upon your selves,
and this will be your rejoicing, the testimony of your Conscience on tha^
account; bu^ if you do evil, though all Men do justify you and commend you,
yet you will be condemned in your selves; so that you have that in your selves
which distinguishes between things that differ in their nature and kind, and
you have a little enlightening by the knowledge and understanding you* have
received concerning the things that are pleasing and displeasing to God; if
after yo^ know this you will go on in a way displeasin^ to God, he will at
length be too hard for yo^ and plunge you down into the Abyss of (...) What ^to
all Eternity*

After Persons are satisfied and enlighten (...) with the Light of Christ, and
come to the E^perience of things in themselves; they will love the Light and
Walk in the Light; but there are many in this Age that have read the Scriptures
plentifully, and yet still go on in a way of Sin, they cannot love the Light
that reproves them; He that does evil he hates the Light, and the Dawning of
the Day is as the shadow of Death to him, and it brings nothing but
condemnation upon such Persons, so that they do not love the Light, though it
is evident they have it and enjoy it, and it shall be their condemnation
whether they will or no; if they do not love the Light and embrace it; it will
never be to their Salvation.

God has given Christ to be a Light to the Gentil^s and his Salvation to the
ends of the Earth. He is the Light that enlightens every Man that comes into
the World; the Apostle John tells you the genealogy of the Word of God, In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God; and
the same was in the beginning with God; all things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made that was made; in him was Life, and the Life
was the Light of Men; The Life of the Eternal Word was the Light of Men; What
Men do you mean? I answer, He is the true Light that lights every Man ^^at
comes into the World. He extends ^is Light to every Man, but it is
condemna^^on to every Man so long as he continues to be a sinner against God:
This is the condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men love
darkness rather than Light, because their deeds are evil.

Now all Men ^re by nature dead in Sins and Trespasses; (...) our first Parents
fell into Sin they were dead to God; in the Day that thou eatest thereof thou
shall die; when they had eaten the forbid^^n fruit, they did not die as to
outward appearance, but they died as to that Communion they had with their
Maker; in this dead state lie all the Sons and Daughters of Adam; but, as our
Savior speaks, though they be dead, they shall live again; Christ is Lord from
Heaven, a Quickening Spirit; this is the object of our Faith that has been
extended and offered to Mankind ever since the fall; there is no name under
Heaven, no other Power or Spirit by which a Man can be saved; this great
Mediator, the Eternal Son of God, is the Light that lights every Man that
co^^^h into the World: Faith in Christ is the same that ever it was,
notwithstanding the many forms of Worship among the Sons of Men; some of Gods
setting up, and some of Men's setting up; yet among all these, the object of
Faith is the same, and Faith the same.

In the 11th. Chapter of the Hebrews, That little Book of Martyrs, the Apostle
there give^ you a Catalogue of the mighty things (...) have been done by the
Faith of Gods Peop^^ he begins with Abel, By Faith Abel offere^ more excellent
Sacrifice than Cain, by which (...) obtained witness that he was Righteous,
(...) testifying of his Gifts; and by it, he being dead, yet Speaks; by Faith
Enoch was translated that he should not see Death* and was not found, because
God translated him, (...) before his translation he had this Testimony that he
pleased God; and so the Apostle there goes to Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Joseph and Moses: And what shall I say more, says he, for the time would fail
^e to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of Sampson, and Jeptha, of David,
Samuel, and of the Prophets, who through Faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought
Righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the Mouths of Lion^ quenched the
violence of Fire, escaped the Edge of the Sword, out of weakness were made
strong, turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens. All these great and noble
things were done by Faith; it was the aspect their Souls had upon Christ the
Mediator between God and Man; it was their trust and reliance upon God through
Christ the Mediator that did su^^ort and uphold them in all they did and
suffered. This Faith is still the same.

There are many Faiths in the World beside, but they will prove but the Faith
of Hypocrites. Some have a Faith, that if they do this and the other Work, they
say you may trust your Souls upon these good Works; but this (...) not the
Faith of Abraham, the Father of the ^^^^hful. But some called Christians are
gone (...) ^ar in the Doctrine of merits, that they ^^ok they can do enough for
their own Salva^^on, and for their Friends and R^^^tions too; that there may be
more Merit still over and above, that others may have Benefit by the Merit of
their Works of Sup^^^^gation: B^t this is not the Faith of Abra^^^ and other
Saints, by which they wrought such Wonders in the World. I would not have Men
trust at all in their own Works (...) Salvation, but trust in Christ alone, who
is able to save to the uttermost, all that come to God by him*

But some will object: We are taught the Doctrine of Faith in Christ, and
Justificati^^ by him.

Well, for my part, my Tongue shall as soon drop out of my Mouth (...) op^ose
the Doctrine of being justified by Faith in Christ: But, let me tell you, this
may be misapplied* If a M^n believe that he is justified by Faith in Christ,
and yet knows in his own Conscience that he is cond^mned, he believes a Lie,
he is seduced and deceived: A Man cannot be justified ^y Christ* when the
Spirit of Christ condemns him: Such (...) wh^^ ^e comes to lay down his Head
upon his Dying Pillow all his Faith will fly away* I (...) with some Instances,
lamentable I^ (...) those tha^ were called Christians, (...) made a Profession
of Religion, an^ (...) have laid down their Heads in So^ (...) this be your
Mistake consider, while y^ (...) Time, ^^at you may die in Peac^.

Now (...) Proposition and T^^der o^ (...) Lo^^ of God (...) Mankind has al^
^ried, that Limit^^^on with it, that is (...) in the World ought to observe; If
a Man hope to be saved by Christ he must be ruled by him: I^ is contrary to all
manner of Reason, th^^ ^he Devil should rule a Man, and Christ be his Savior:
The whole tenor of the New Testament is against it (pray read it) as often as
you p^^^se, for it is a good Exercise) you will find the true Christian's Faith
to be this, That he that has Faith in Christ has an Operation upon him for
the Cleansing his Heart and purifying and purging his conscience from dead
works, that he may serve the living God; though he has been a Servant of the
Devil, it will make h^^r leave his former Servitude, and bring him under the
Influence of another Law, the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, which
will make him free from (...) law of sin and death. The Apostle sets down ^he
several Conditions he had ^^ssed through, I was aliv^ without the law once; he
thought himself a Man* a brave Man, a Man of Understanding, th^^ had profited
among the Jews; I was alive, having respect to that Law which should have been
my Goverour, but when the comm^ndment came, sin revived and I died. He h^d ^ead
the Law, the Commandment many (...) and had been at the reading of it in the
(...) ^gue; but there was a coming of the Com^^ndment which he had not been
acquainted ^ith; there was a Writing of the Law of God in his Heart; when he
(...) to this inward World upon him, ^^^re was th^^ the (...) he lived? When
the (...) came, Sin revived, and I died: There was a professing Life he
formerly li^^d, but he was slain by the Power of the ^^^man^ment, it laid him
in the Dust as a ^^ain Man; when he was in a (...) condition he found out that
Law in him that was the Law of Sin and Death, and this caused a Combat and a
War in him; I find a law, says he, that wh^^ I would do good, evil is present
with with me; for I delight in the law of God in the inner m^; but I see
another law in my membe^ (...) against the law of my mind, and b^ (...) into
captivity to the law of (...) which (...) members: Now this br^^gh^ him (...) a
Poverty of Spirit, into a Sense of his mi^^^^ble Condition, and then he cries
out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death!

Now some People in this Day, they are like the Apostle, they have a law in
their m^mbers warning against the l^w of their minds, the good that they would
d^ ^^ey do not, and they can go no further: But the Apostle Paul did reach
further, though he did not in that state know Deliverance, yet (...) that he
should be delivered, and that he (...) be miserable all his Days. Thus ha^ing
(...) Romans into the several Sta^^s through wh^^^ he passed, he brings them to
a furthe^ S^ The law of the spirit of life in Christ (...) h^th made ^e, free
from the law of sin (...) de^^^: And now there is no condemn^ (...) ^^em that
are in Christ Jesus. How she (...) know this? They walk not after the flesh,
(...) after the spirit. N^ P^ul was come to that sanctified state, tha^ (...)
of Freedom and Liberty which Christ jesus will bring all those unto that
believe ^n him.

Holy Men, in former Days, did experience and find a great Strife and Warfare
in their own Hearts, they would do all well, and exercise a conscience void of
offense toward God and toward man; but there is a Law of Sin that wars in
their Members; if we yield to it it lead^ to Sin and Death: but if we yield our
selves to the law ^f the spirit of life, there is a Power tha^ (...) ^ved from
the Mediator, that will ^^anslate the Soul out of the kingdom of darkness and
Sin, which the Devil is the Prince of and bring it into the kingdom of God's
dear Son.

There must be a real Change wrought in us before we can come t^ God and to
Fellowship and Comm^^ion wi^h God* which ^lone can make the (...) happy. Let
this be the Exercise of e^ one of us to adore and magnify and (...) Mercy and
the kindness of God, that (...) not withdrawn his Spirit from yo^ (...) has
placed a M^n for in your (...) ^s upon you to cease to do evil (...)* and to
consider that the (...) sin is death: Here is a Sin, I may ^mit it; there is a
Temptation beofre me; (...) I know there is a Bait and a Hook (...) swallo^ it
if I will, but if I do, i^ will (...) ^y R^th: Would I come to etern^l Death,
and have my Portion with Liars and wicked Persons in the Kingdom of Darkness.
Where the worm dies not and the fire is not quenched? or would I have my
Portion with Saints and Angels? If I would have my Portion with the blessed in
the Kingdom of God when I die, I must walk in the way that leads to it; but the
Gate is strait and the way narrow, and few there be that find it; Labor then
to be one of those few.

But what signifies our Labor (some may say) if we can do nothing that is
good, not so much as think a good tho^ht? What signifies our Labor? all the
Labors and Endeavors in the whole World cannot ^^^ke a Man happy.

I now speak to a People to whom God does vouchsafe the Help and Assistance of
his Grace and Spirit, and the Visitations of his Love and Power; you mu^ (...)
^ndeavour to do someth^^g; if a Man en^^avour, with the help of (...) ^ie may
do^ great deal of good, and (...) a great deal of Evil: Though all our
Endeavors, in our own Power and Strength can signify nothing, yet they are
required by God, and ^y joining them with his Gr^ and layin^ ^old of
Opportunities, by (...) Assistance, we may do wh^ God will a^ But if a Man do
(...) thing in his own Po^ and Strength, whether Prayer, Hearing, R^^ing
Meditation or any other Duty, he ha^ (...) good let it ^^one.

I would consider you as those that God has followed with his Grace and the
Manifestation of his Spirit; this is given to every Man to profit withal, and
every Man has Opportunity to work with it; but he must work while it is day,
for the night comes when no man can work.

Let every one of us that are now met together, labor to be sensible of the
Love of God to us, and love him above all, and express our Love by a willing
and persevering Obedience, that we may have the love of God shed abroad upon
our hearts by the Holy Ghost, and offer up living Praises to him through Jesus
Christ, ^ho has loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and
has made to kings and priests unto God and his father: To him be Glory and
Dominion for ever and ^ver. Amen.

SERMON X. Salvation from Sin by Jesus Christ. Preached at Devonshire-House,
August the 9th 1691.
IT is a general Doctrine in the World, That no man by any means in the World
can ever be set free from Sin in this Life: This is universally received almost
among all Christians, in all Churches, one and another; though they differ never
so much in other things, yet they agree in this; so that this Doctrine has ^ot
a Sway in the World, and it is accounted a great Delusion and a Heresy, and a
grand Error for any to question the Truth of it.

Now while a Man is of that Belief, That there is an impossibility of living
without Sin, and of breaking down the Kingdom of Satan in any one Soul in the
World, How can Men hope or believe that Righteousness should prevail in the
Heart of one Man? Ther^ neither King nor Beggar, if he be a Bishop (...) a
Gospel Minister, the Devil must have a Rul^ and Gover^^ent in him, so long
(...) this World. As long as this is believe (...) not possible that the other
Belief should t^ place: It is madness to think that I must b^ under the Rule
and Government of Satan if I am under the Government of the Son of God. And it
is still greater madness to say, That Christ and the Devil are both my
Governors and Rulers: It is prodigious Folly and Madness to speak after this
manner.

This Belief prevails over all Men; over the Wise, and Mighty, and Noble, and
Learned, that they can never be freed from the Power of Sin in this World, but
that the Devil will lead them into Sin every Day; le^ Men be never so sober,
never so abstemious in their Lives; let them spend never so many Hours in
Prayer every Day; let them come to Meetings and hear Sermons, and write them
and repeat them, and do what they will, here is a Bar of Unbelief that lies in
the way, that makes Men depart from the living God and his Power, and lose the
Benefit they should receive from Christ: And therefore they go to fetch it
another way, that is, to have the Righteousness of Christ imputed to them, and
they shall be holy and pure in the sight of God, when they are polluted in
their own Eyes; and when they see their daily Failings, Infirmities and
Corruptions, yet God may not see them; but that he sees them Holy, Just and
Righteous in his Son.

What strange kind of Doctrine is this? I must pr^sume that God will see me in
his Son Jesus Christ, when I never was in Christ: How can this be? He that is
in Christ (...) new creature; old things are done away, and (...) things are
become new: But if there be O^ things remaining still, and I be not becom^ New,
shall I presume that I am in Christ, and that God will see me in his Son? When
People come to use the Understanding that God has given them, the will look
upon themselv^^ as barred out by their Unbelief, that the Nations have drunk
in; and it is as sweet to them as the Honey and the Honeycomb.

But, blessed be God, many have vomited it up already: If they would have
placed this Doctrine upon Man's Natural Ability, I would have said Amen to it.
I know there is none of us all have a natural Ability an^ Power to deliver his
own Soul from Sin and Satan; but when they come to place it upon God, that
though the Lord make bare his arm* and reveal his power; though they come to
have the Grace of God, that still they could not be delivered from Sin; this
has Blasphemy at the bottom of it. The other reflected upon man's Power, this
reflects upon the Power of God Almighty: That the Devil has got such a Power
over us, that God has no^ Power over us, nor cannot have Power a^ Dominion
over us, so that of a whole N^tion he cannot have one Man to serve him*

Much might be said in answer to this* When Men are once willing to serve Go^
they will be willing to leave the Se^vice (...) (...) Devil. There is no way to
answer that good Wish, but by waiting upon God for the revealing of his Power:
I pray God that when you come to a Meeting, you may say, Lord, let thy Power go
forth upon my Heart; Let thy Arm be made bare, and deliver me from the Power
and Dominion of Sin. Some will say they feel God's Power in a Meeting; I feel
the Power of God workin^ upon my Heart, in order to the taking away Sin and
Transgression, and giving me Victory over it, through the Lord Jesus Christ. If
they feel this Power of God upon them it is their Duty to believe it and depend
upon it: If I believe it I must wait for the Dictates of it and believe that I
shall be able to do all things through Christ that strengthens me; Then Faith
will come forth into Works, and appear to be a living Faith.

You may remember what the Apostle James says, As the body without the spirit
is dead, so faith without works is dead also. As soon as a Man comes to join
with the mighty Power of God, he will be able to withstand Temptation: If he
comes into evil Company he will deny them and not comply with them; (...) will
find then something of a Power (...) Ability to serve God; though he is ^ot
come to Perfection, yet he is walking (...) the way of Holiness, and pressing
forward toward the mark of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus: He will
say, I am got a little ^^arer than I was toward the place where I would be,
toward that Life which I w^ live and die; then let Death come when pleases
God, it shall be welcome.

This is the wickedness of many in the World, they will not live such a Life as
they would be willing to die in: They cannot come at it unless it be given them
to believ^ for it is the Gift of God; they must come to th^^ Governor and
Leader, which goes be^ to the Gift of God, which is eternal l^fe; then let
Death come when it will, if I have the Gift of eternal Life.

It is a miserable thing to think that there ar^ diverse that have not laid hold
of eternal Life: It is manifested that we may lay hold of it, there is a Hand
of Faith joining with it* When a Man comes to lay hold of eternal Life, this
Life will purify him and sanctifi^^ him, at least by degrees, till he be
wholly sanctified in Body, Soul and Spirit: This i^ that which the Apostle
writes in one of his Epistles, Your salvation is nearer than when you at first
believed. When they first believed, their Salvation was a pretty way off: He
describes Salvation to be the End of their Faith and Hope. When a Man comes to
be delivered from his Sins, he shall serve God without fear; but when a Man
comes to liv^ by Faith, he shall overcome; he is a (...) Soldier of Jesus
Christ, and he must fight v^liantly under his Banner till he gets a Vi^^^ry
over all his Enemies, and then his Sal^^tion is much nearer than when he at
first be^ieved.

I would I could say so of some of you, for I fear you Salvation is farther
off: Some go straggling here and there, as Sheep not having a Shepherd; this is
that which my Spirit is intent upon. You that are Travelers toward the
Kingdom of God, it is the wonderful Grace and Mercy of God that ev^^ it should
come into your Minds to seek the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof:
They that have obtained this Mercy from God, shall receive and enjoy other
Mercies, better Mercies; blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness: That is one Mercy; but there is another Mercy, They shall be
filled, they shall be satisfied: When a Man comes to this, he must take up a
daily Cross, and exercise Self-denial; but if he follows Christ he shall be
satisfied, he shall then have nothing but Peace and Joy; he shall then sing
Praises and Glory to God in the highest, and to the Lamb for ever.

There is none can understand the Glory that is laid up for those that take up
their Cross and follow Christ and love his Appearing. This is the great
Blessing that God does give unto his People, He has sent his son Jesus to
bless us, and turn us from our iniquities: This is a Blessing indeed. Take heed
that you do not admit of any new Terms: Do not think to bring God Almighty to
new Articles, the Terms are declared and concluded on already: If you will
obtain the Blessing you must be turned eve^^one of you from your Iniquities;
the Terms are already made, the Law of God must be written in the heart and
inward thoughts, and you must close with that Power that will write the Law in
your Hearts, and by traveling toward the Kingdom of God, you will see the
coming of that Kingdom into you.

It was the Joy of my Soul, that I saw the Kingdom of Christ would be set up in
my Heart, before it was set up there; then I saw the Lord's wonderful Work, and
a great Alteration in me, when the Lord was pleased to wean me from the World's
Breast, and take off my Heart, and wean it from worldly Lusts, from the World's
Joys, and Pleasures, and Fashions, and the World's Honor and Reputation: I saw
the Lord was pleased to wean me from these things, and brought me to an holy
Resignation, to give up my Heart to him: If I have Joy it must be from the Holy
Spirit; if I have Pleasure it must be in the presence of God, who in the
multitude of my thoughts within me made his Comforts to delight my soul; and if
he bring not Comfort to you, you will never have it; you cannot expect it till
you do believe; and when (...) have Faith you can feel the Kingdom of God
within you: There must be the New B^ the Work of Regeneration, for except a m^
be bo^^ again be cannot see the kingdom of God* there must be a translation
from Death to Life, there must be a turning out of the old Bottom and a fixing
upon a new Bottom, upon Christ Jesus the rock of ages; there must be a
Subjection to his Holy Power and Government, else you cannot see the Kingdom of
God.

Many have gone on in a Profession many Years, and never saw the Beauty of it;
every little Trifle in the World has diverted them, and drawn them away. This
and the other Pleasure has drawn away their Hearts, they have seen the Glory
of the World, which has captivated them: But those that make a profession of
the Truth, and have seen the Beauty and Glory of the Kingdom of Christ, they
should be shy of returning to the World again, for the Apostle says, It
happened to them according to the true proverb, The dog is turned to his own
vomit again, and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire; for it
had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than after
they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered to them: They
made a Profession and were Members of a visibl^ Church, and had a Name to live,
but they were inwardly dead; the Sight of the Kingdom of God is not given to
such, but unto Babes, that have a Divine Birth, and that desire the sincere
milk of the word, that they may grow thereby. God has hid these things from
the wise and prudent, and ^^vealed them unto babes.

You that are h^re this day, I speak to tho^^ that would receive some Kindness
from Go^ and that desire (...) ^nowledge of his ways and that the My^^^^s of
his Kingdom may be revealed to yo^ let your Minds be retir^^ and you shall find
^he great things b^long^ to your Peace made known to you. We have spoken much
of this but I would not have yo^ know it only by (...) Sayings, but (...) have
you g^ (...) ^ur selves, to^ke wh^ God has not bestowed this Grace and ^sing
upon you: If God has given you Grace* do not turn it into wantonness; do not
abuse the Grace of God* What is it that you d^ when the Grace of God ^^th
convinced yo^ that such and such a thing is Sin^ and if yo^ do it (...) ^ll
tend to your Ruin* Da^ (...) ventur^ ^o commit Sin after you are convin^ of
it* O take heed of doing despite (...) spirit o^ grace, and of g^^^ving the
holy s^^rit, whereby you are sealed (...) the day of ^^demption*

I wish that the weight of this Considera^^^^ might lie upon you* and that a
holy D^ead^ Aw of God mi^ht be wrought in yo^ (...) that you m^ (...) kept from
sinnin^ (...) God: You know there is a general O^ (...) against presumptuous
Sinning, Sinning (...) Light: Why should not we all cry ou^ (...) it? It is a
most dreadful thing for any (...) to sin against his Knowledge and Convi^ if
any of us have been guilty of (...) against Light, let such a one say, I have
Iniquity, I will do so no (...), but enter into Covenant with the Lord, and
say, O Lord, so far as thou have re^ (...) ^y W^ unto me, I will obey it; I w^
(...) light to (...) thy Will, O God, though I (...) mine own Will. Whatever I
cross I will no^ cross God's holy Spirit, by which I may b^^^^ed to the Day of
Redemption; I will never do this though I hazard my chief Interest (...) World:
This is the Temp^^ of a true (...) and I pray God make all of you of the (...)

And now my Friends* you that (...) to see this great Work wrought in your
selves, commit the whole Work to God* and trouble not your selves about it.
(...) sure God will carry on his own Work, and bring down the Devils Kingdom,
and rebuke that ^^clean Spirit that is gone forth over the (...) Nation, and
pour out abundantly of his h^ly Spirit to carry on a glorious Reformation* This
I believe God will certainly do, from what he has wrought (...) my own Soul
(...) I know not what Instruments are to be em^^oyed in the Work, I leave that
to the Lord* but the Kingdom of Christ shall be advanced, and it shall be
outwardly, and a (...) De^truction* ^^ll sweep away all his Enemies from the
Earth, and the Wrath of God shall burn against ^^em; only there is an
obduration has (...) upon the Nations of the World, and ^thing has stood in
the way in all-Genera^

But howe^ (...) I am sure wicked Men (...) En^ (...) may well say, That Christ
is the S^ (...) Men, but especially of the^ that believe. He has saved this
City and Nation from the Plagues and Veng^^^ce tha^ hang over us. Many Years
the Lord has spared us, and waited to be gracious for a long-time, to see if
we will at last turn to him (...) long the Mediator will intercede on (...)
beha^ (...) ^l; there is a time who^ the (...) ^iffering of God will come to an
end. God has brought a Scourge upon the Nations round about us, and the Flames
of his Wrath ^^ve kindled upon them, and Destruction has overtaken them; how
soon i^ may be our Lot, we know not; all our Money* our Silver and Gold, and
Valor and Courage, will not be able to stave it off, if the Lord but blow upon
us. It is even at the Door, there is but one way to save us, and that is
turning to the Lord, and crying to the Lord for the continuance of his Mercies
and Long-suffering, and Patience toward us. In this Cry, let us all cry to the
Lord, that are Lovers of the Nation, and let us join our earnest Supplications
in this Work, seeing the Lord has made us the Monuments of his Mercy and
preserving Goodness.

This Island has been continually surrounded with War and Blood, and Flames
and Destruction, and the Cry of the Orphans has been heard from other Nations:
And while they have been consumed with Flames, and deluged in Streams of (...)
we ha^^ sat under our own Vines and (...) but Judgments hang over the Nation*
and whether they will fall or not the Lord knows: But shall we do for the good
of our Nation, and Cities and Families, but labor every one in the Fear of God
to reform your Lives, and to take heed that we sin not against the Light, lest
we die and perish, in the midst of those terrible Judgments that hang-over us*

Let us turn from our evil Ways, and depart from all Iniquity, that the Kingdom
of Christ may be set up in our selves* It is the Righteous in the Nation that
the Lord looks at, and for their sakes he will spare a Nation. If there be a
People among us that walk in Humility, and lament and mourn for the
Abominations committed in the midst of us, God will have regard to them, and he
will hear the Cries and the Supplications of a praying People.

Friends, You that cannot make use of Sword and Spear for the saving of a
Nation, you may do good by your Prayers, and turning to the Lord with an
unfeigned Heart, and let your Sincerity appear before him. if I would take a
Common Prayer Book in my Hands, and pray never so devoutly and solemnly, if I
be not sincere, what will that do? Or, if I pray without Book, or if I pray
without a Form, or reject the Forms that others have made for me, what will
this avail? But the Cry of the Poor, and the Sighing of the Needy, and the
effectual fervent Prayer of the Righteous, has availed much for the saving o^
this Nation many Years.

Therefore, I exhort you all as you love the Nation, and as you love your selv^
(...) ^our Families and Relations, sin not a^^^nt the Lord; for he is now
setting up Righteousn^ Equity and Justice, and it shall preva^^ in the Nation.
God has been please ^o gather in many that have been Enemies in it, that are
now turned from sin to God, and led Captive by the Truth: and it is their
greatest Joy, that now they are no longer Servants of Sin, but are now become
the Servants of God.

Now Truth will prevail, and Righteousness go forth as the Morning Sun, and
(...) hope the Lord will show Mercy to us for the glory of his own Name, though
we are an unworthy People: It will be matter of joy and gladness to us, if the
Kingdom of God be come; then we may say our Prayer is answered. We have often
prayed, Thy Kingdom come, and thy Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. If
the Will of God be done, then I can do mine own Will no longer, then I can be
led away by Satan no longer; the Devil will have little Power, if I do Gods
Will on Earth, as it is done in Heaven; then Praises will arise in the Hearts
of every one that delight to do the Will of God, and God will carry on his Work
for the glory of his own Name, and for the Redemption of his People, that
Christ may be Preached for So^^tion to the Ends of the ^^rth.

SERMON XI. The Acceptable Sacrifice. Preached ^t Grace Church Street, July 3.
1692.
ALl People that would worship God and meet together for that purpose, they had
need have a great Reverence upon their Minds, and a holy Fear upon their
Spirits, that when they enter into the House of the Lord, and draw nigh to the
living God, they might not offer the Sacrifice of Fools, but may offer to God
that which may be acceptable to him: For all Worship, and all Religion, and all
Offerings and Oblations that ever were offered to God by any People, they have
had a return upon the Offerers and Worshippers, either of acceptance or
rejection. Many you know have been rejected though they have offered, and many
have been accepted of God, and their Offerings have been a sweet smelling
Savor in his Nostrils; and, I hope, we are all of that Mind that we would be
glad to have our Worship, and Service and Offerings to God accepted in his
sight, and that our present assembling together might be for the better, and
that every one might have an Answer of Peace, and of acceptance in their
Bosoms; but that can never be unless Men be qualified and prepared in their
drawing nigh to God, and that in all our Offerings and Worship that we perform,
our Hearts be prepared according to the Preparation of the Sanctuary, the
Preparation of Gods Dwelling and holy Place.

The Worshippers must be holy; there must be the Fear of God and a reverence of
the great God upon their Minds, before People can offer an acceptable Sacrifice
unto him, as the holy Apostle says, Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God must
believe that he is; which signifies, that a Preparation ought to be in the
Minds and Hearts of People that would draw nigh to God; or perform any Service
or Worship to God, they must have the knowledge of the God whom they worship,
they must first know that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. Here is a qualification for Worshippers, for religious
Persons; as they expect when they meet together to find the Lord in the midst
of them, they must be qualified accordingly, there must be an Awe upon their
Minds.

I am in the Presence of God, I have an expectation from God, that he will open
his abounding Treasury, and minister some good unto me, or else to what purpose
do People draw nigh to God? It is because they would have something of him; but
they must come in an humble petitioning frame; He gives Grace to the Humble.
It is the Lofty, the Proud, those that exalt themselves, the Fat and the Full
that want nothing. These, says the Prophet, the Lord beholds afar off. A
proud Man or Woman cannot draw nigh to God, the Lord looks upon them afar off;
nor do they partake of those divine and heavenly Comforts and Blessings, and
Counsels and Instructions that the humble Mind has the Promise of and will
certainly enjoy, The humble God will teach, he will instruct the Meek in his
Way; but what is this to the lofty Mind? What is this to one that is exalted,
and conceited and puffed up, and reckons himself full and wanting nothing,
while he is swimming in the Streams of the Pleasures of this World, and savours
only the things of the Earth, the Pleasures of a sensual Mind? These Persons
are not hungry, and so they are not fed; they are not thirsty, and so they
never obtain that which can satisfy the Soul. Our Lord Jesus Christ pronounced
a Blessing upon them that hunger and thirst; but that is nothing to them that
are full and lack nothing.

So my Friends, in this and all other religious Assemblies, a great care ought
to be upon every one, that their coming together to wait upon the Lord may be
in that reverence and fear, and that hope and expectation at the Hands of God,
that they might be bettered by it, or else they all lose their labor, as Cain
did; he would be an Offerer, he offered Sacrifice, but was not accepted*
because his Mi^^ and Heart wi^^^ot right before the Lord (...) Sacrifice was
rejected. It was before he had killed his Brother; ^he had great Guilt upon
him, before he had ^illed his Brother; he wanted a well-doing* If thou do
well, ^^^lt thou not be accepted? But if thou do no^ w^ll. Sin lies at thy
Door. H^ was got into evil doing, and an evil Mind hindered his acceptance with
God; so i^ does with all Men and Women in the World that meddle with religious
Worship and Sacrifice to God, if they meddle with evil doing. There must be a
taking off the Mind fr^ ^he evil of Sin and Corruption, and the Min^ (...) be
brought over to something that they have received from God before ever they can
be accepted.

You know the general Doctrine of all Protestants is, That we have no acceptance
with God but through Jesus Christ; we have no way to please God, nor can do any
thing that shall be liked of in his sight, but only through one only Mediator.
Now if so be I go to worship God, or perform any religious Duty without respect
and reference to the sense and participation of the virtue and power of that
only Mediator, how can I be accepted? And it has pleased God out of his
infinite Love to Mankind, to send this great Mediator into the World, that
every Man that comes into the World is made a Participant of something of the
Life and Virtue of that Mediator. So you read John 1.4. In him was Life, and
the Life was the Light of Men, the true Light that lights every Man that
comes into the World* and that with respe^^ to Men whether they are good or
no, both to good and bad, though Men are bad, as all Men are by Nature: So that
though they are Children of Wrath and Heirs of Eternal Damnation, and in their
natural State by reason of Sin, yet for all that this one Mediator, in whom
this Light has shined, he has sent forth that Light among the Sons and
Daughters of Men, that is, the Light of Men, that enlightens every one. So
there is an Offer made of something that presents it self to the view of every
Man that is good, if he apply his Mind to it, he may have that Good that comes
by Jesus Christ; he may draw nigh to God; as bad as he is, he has some good
that God has bestowed upon Men good and bad. There is no Man such a Liar but
he has some Truth in him; there is no Man so ungodly, but he knows that which
is pure and holy, that which has reproved him, checked, convinced him of his
Ungodliness. This presents it self to the view of every Man and Woman, and
calls them to Repentance.

Now for Men to make a show and pretense to Worship, and not have regard to the
glory of God, how can they draw nigh to God, or God draw nigh to them? Our Lord
Jesus Christ says, That where two or three are gathered together in my Name, I
will be in the midst of them; but if People meet together in their Sin and Wi^
me^ (...) ^hey h^ve a loo^ and a vain Mind, and intend to (...) Wic^edness and
Sin; if the^ meet, (...) ^et not in Christ's Name, but in the Devils Name, and
he is in the midst of them, and he works and Rules in the Hearts of the
C^^^dren of Disobedience. So that this has been the ground and reason why
abundance of Meetings upon this account have been fruitless as to any Benefit
to their Souls, and Peoples Expectations have been frustrated as to their
Salvation; they have not met with that in which the Blessing is, and to which
the Promise is made. The Promise is not made to People that the Devil rules;
there is no Promise to such but the Promise of Eternal Wrath to be executed
upon them with the Devil and his Angels to all Eternity; if you can make that a
^romise.

The Promise of Life and Salvation which is recorded b^^^^e Prophets and
Apostles, it has always relation to the Seed that are i^ Covenant with God. In
this the Coven^^^ stands, says God to Abraham, Genesis 17^^ I will establish my
Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee in their Generations, for
an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee. The
Covenant is made to Abraham and his Seed, that is, with Christ Jesus the
Mediator. It is he that brings to God those that trust in him and come to him,
He that comes to him, he will in no wise cast out; they that do not come to
Christ are cast off already. All Men, by Nature, are cast (...) if any of the^
will be (...), it is by coming to Christ, wh^ is able to ^ave to the uttermost,
and to mak^ Peace for them, and of Twins to make on^ new Man, and to make Peace
between God and their Soul^

There is a necessity for all People that have sense of their natural state and
condition, that according to Nature have no Title to the Kingdom of God, to be
reconciled to God By Nature they cannot make a claim to Righteousness and Life;
they cannot reconcile themselves to God by all their Works, says the Prophet
Micah, Will the Lord be pleased with a thousand of Rams, or with ten thousand
Rivers of Oil? shall I give my firstborn for m^ Transgression, the Fruit of my
Body for the Sin of my Soul? He has showed thee, O Man, what is good: And what
does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and love Mer^^ and walk humbly
with thy God? They that will be saved must lay hold of Salvation in that way
and method that the Lord God of Heaven and Earth has prescribed. He has
prescribed a way for every Body to be saved* he would have no Body to perish,
but that all should come to Repentance, and obtain everlasting Life. God has
made a way that will serve every Body alike, Thousands as well as Ten, and all
the World as well as one Man. Now the way that God has made, is turning out of
the State into which they are fallen, and a forsaking that Governor that rules
in the Hearts of the Chil^ (...) Disobedience, a^ closing with Christ (...) God
has appoin^ed to reign in every ^^dy's Heart* Peop^^ in Christendom will all
say, they have closed with Christ. Do not you hope to be saved by Christ on the
Terms of the Covenant? It is not crying Lord, Lord, but doing the Will of God;
the Terms are, All Men must believe in Christ the Eternal Son of God, and
through ^he Power of that Faith they have in him, he comes to rule over them,
and they become subject to him. And if a Believer be not subject to Christ, he
is all one as if he was an Unbeliever; Circumcision or Uncircumcision avails
not any thing, but a new Creature, and Faith which works by Love.

The Covenant does not stand in mere Words* (...) I conform to such Articles
then I am a Christian; if I believe all the Articl^s of the Creed, then I am a
Christian and a Child of God. If a M^n will say, I believe, his Say so is not
sufficient. The condition of the Covenant that God has made is, That Christ
shall rule and have the government of those Souls that he presents to God: How
should it be otherwise, seeing he is not to present any to God that are
unclean? Christ has no Commission to present any to God in their Uncleanness
and Wickedness. He that believes, he must be cleansed and purifyed by him: If
so, then that cannot be done by ruling over them. If they had the Rule of
themselves, they would be polluted and be like Water, whose Current is stopped
with Di^ (...) ^d, not running in its own natural S^ (...) People will commit
Sin when they have the Rule of themselves; but when Christ presents People to
God, and when they come to be led by him, they are cleansed and purified.

When the Apostle describes true Faith, he does it by this quality and property
of it, It purifies the Heart. All other Faith is but the Hope of the Hypocrite,
but real Faith is the operation of God, says the Apostle; and that Faith
works in an unclean Heart to the cleansing of it, and in an impure Heart to
the purifying of it: If the Heart comes to be purified, then it must needs
follow that the Conversation must be pure also. No body does an ill Work, nor
speaks an ill Word, but it is from an evil Heart. Now if the Axe come to be
laid to the Root of the Tree, and the Word of the Lord operate in the Heart
powerfully, if never so much evil be in it, the Axe when laid to the Root of
the Tree will cut it down; the Power of God will execute Judgment upon every
thing that is contrary to him* Christ is holy, harmless and undefiled, and
separate from Sin, and Sinners; and though he extend his Life and Virtue to the
Life and Soul of the most wicked Man in the World, it never joins with their
Uncleanness, but keeps immaculate and undefiled in the Heart of the worst of
Men.

Now this immaculate Power that comes from Christ it will purify the Hearts of
Men, and preserve them from evil Thoughts, W^ and Actions: This is the
manifestation of (...) one Mediator that they must be governed b^ else they
cannot be presented spotless to God the Father: There is a necessity of coming
to a Savior otherwise than by Words and Profession; we must come to him and
heartily join with him; we have all joined with the Devil, he has suggested,
moved, and instigated, and People have followed his instigations and motions;
there is no Man but is sensible of a devilish motion* why not then of a Divine
motion? Though now it is become a Bugbear to say, we are moved by the Spirit of
Christ; why not by that Spirit as well as by the Spirit of the wicked one? No
Man doubts but that there are motions of the Devil which they are sensible of,
that sometimes they have joined with him, and sometimes they with^^^nd him.
What is the reason that Men should join with evil motions? There is no just
reason for it. The reason why you and I withstand the motions of the Devil, is
because we find another motion conveyed into our Hearts by the Spirit of God;
if a Man has one motion to commit uncleanness, he has another motion to keep
himself pure; if he has a motion to speak a Lie, he has another motion to
speak Truth; there are two movers at the same time, in the same Heart, which
shall we join with? Shall I join with the Devils motion? If I find any thing of
the love of God in my Heart, it will constrain me to ^^nd the good motion, and
make me with^d the evil motion; so that the movings (...) the Spirit of God is
not such a wonder,

There are none but they have bad motions in them, and they have also motions
of the Spirit of Truth; they have met with evil motions, and they have admired
them too much, then it is time to repent; if there be a distinction between a
motion of the Spirit of Truth, and a motion of the Spirit of error, then I may
boldly say, it (...) our duty to join with the Spirit of Truth, and not with
the Spirit of error; if there be a desire in us to be saved from the wrath to
come, then the way to be saved from Gods wrath is to be saved from the cause of
it; take away the cause and the effect cease: The cause of Gods wrath being
kindled against Man is Sin, for God had no wrath against Man when he first made
him; for he made him after his own ^^^ge, and gave him Power to con^inue in
(...) Holiness and Righteousness, wherein he created him; but he fell, and was
cast out of Paradise, and an Angel was sent with a Flaming Sword (...) turned
every way, to keep the Way of the Tree of Life. Thus Man fell under the wrath
of God by his sin; but how shall I have the wrath of God allayed? By breaking
off from sin and returning to God again.

This looks like a covenant of Works, say some; do you say I must break of from
Sin and so escape the wrath of God?

Yes, I do; but no mortal Man (...) off from Sin but by joining with the (...)
He is the Author of Eternal Salvation, h^ (...) in us to will and to do, and
enableth us to (...) out our own Salvation; it was Sin that dr^ (...) Man our
of Paradise, and brought upon him the wrath of God. Sin is the Devils work; now
that Christ might be a Savior to us (...) will destroy the Devils work, for
this pur^^^^, says the Apostle, the Son of God was manifested, that he might
Destroy the works of the Devil. Now the Devil was not the destruction of Man
simply in himself, but by tempting him to Sin, which is the Devils work; now
Christ was manifested to destroy the Devils work; that Propensity to Sin that
is in the Nature of Man, which makes him rebel against the Mind and Will of
God. Christ the Eternal Son of God he became Man, he took the Nature of Man,
that he might bring Man again to his primitive state, wherein he was Created
after the Image of God,

Now how does the Devil work his works? does he do his works coercively? No, he
uses no irresistible force. But does Christ the Mediator work coercively, with
an irresistible power and force to bring a Man again to God? No, no more than
the Devil did to bring a Man from God. Man might have stood and continued in
his state of Innocence if he would; he might join with evil, and yield to the
Temptation of the Devil if he had a Mind; he knew if he gave over his Mind t^
(...) ^e should be ruined; and it proved so. (...) ^as resolved to try what it
was to yield (...) Devil, and obey him. He told them that (...) they did eat of
the forbidden Fruit they should be as Gods, but they became more like the
Devil; this they got by being obedient unto him, not that the Devil laid an
irresistible force upon them, you shall eat of the Fruit of this Tree; but
there was only a presentation of it to them, and with that he prevailed, and so
came the destruction of Mankind.

So Christ the Mediator, that he may present us to God, he comes and presents
himself to us in his commands, and his command is that we must break off from
that servitude and subjection that the Devil had brought Man into, and there
must be a yielding of subjection unto Christ; we must believe in Christ, and
harken to the word of God, and break off from Sin; But where is the Power? If
God would have me Holy let him make me Holy; if he would have me Pure let him
make me so, and give me ability to do that which of my self I cannot do; when
it pleases God to give me Grace and captivate my Will, I shall become a good
Christian. Now here is a great mistake that People should think they must wait
for an irresistible power to bring them back to God; there is a presentation of
love and mercy, and earnest invitations, and the long-suffering and patience
and goodness of God's long waiting upon Sinners, 2 Cor. 4.6. God who Commanded
the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined into our Hearts, to give the
Light (...) knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face o^ ^^sus Christ. What
shall I do with the Li^ that shines into my Heart? I will shut mi^ Eyes against
it, I love Darkness rather tha^ Light, and evil more than good; this Light will
lead me to Holiness and Righteousness, I will quarrel with it, it comes to
bereave me of my Comforts in this World, of my merry Companions and of all my
Bravery, I will not harken to it. Who can help it? This is the Condemnation,
that Light is come into the World, and Men love Darkness rather then Light,
because their deeds are evil, says our Savior. If I had not come and spoken
to them, they had not had Sin, but now they have no Cloak for their Sin.

Here is the Gospel Preached by Christ himself, here is the presentation of an
opportunity for every Man and Woman to return again; but I must be in the way
of returning, that is, by joining with that which presents it self with
Holiness, with Righteousness, with Chastity and Humility, that presents and
offers to the Soul all the Virtues and Graces that are in Christ, and shows it
the Light and Grace that comes from Christ. Now this Light and Grace showing it
self to my Soul, I have a view of it. Have thou a view of it? Have thou seen
Purity, Humility, Sobriety, Meekness, and Self-denial, and an Heavenly frame of
Spirit in thy self or some body else? How do thou like it? I like it* (...)
(...); I love to have Honor and Dignity, ^ower and Dominion, and my Elbow-Room
in the World; I love not this Meekness, Humility and strictness of Life, that a
man must have a Care what he speaks, and set a Watch upon his Lips, and upon
his Heart and Tongue, and Hands, I do not like this kind of Life.

If thou do not like a good Life, some body will like it and live in it; and
for all your Vapouring, and Hating, and Despising it, when People come to live
this kind of Life they will outlive thee; thy topping Life, thy reigning Life,
and thy having Elbow-Room in the world will at last come to be limited; the
Hand of God is against it, and it will bring down the Pride of Man: When thou
come to life upon thy Dying Pillow, expecting every moment to expire, and
breath thy last; then thou will wish, O that I had been more serious and lived
more like a Christian, lived a godly Life and given up my Heart to God, and
been more watchful over my Thoughts, and Words, and Actions. There is such a
Friend of mine that has lived better than I; if I had lived such a Life as he
has lived, I should have had more Comfort; And they that are despisers of the
godly, they do not like such a Life now, but they will like it then.

Friends, you that are Lovers of your Souls, and meet together upon that
account, of being better, and having Expectation, and Hope that you shall
receive Comfort and Benefit^ your meeting together; I tell you as a S^^vant of
God and a Lover of your Souls, it is but a little while and you will wish that
you had chosen the most holy, harmless, innocent Life that ever you saw your
selves, or heard of from any body else, and you will wish that you had been
more watchful over your Thoughts, Words and Actions: There is a day a Day a
coming when we must give an Account for every thing that we have done, whether
good or evil; you must give an account for your cursed Debauchery, for your
Swearing, and Lying, and inordinate Passions; you must give an account for
every vain Thought and every idle Word.

If this will certainly come to pass, how shall I prevent these Idle Words and
evil Actions? Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way (says the Psalmist?)
by taking heed thereto, according to thy word. I am not as those that say Lo
here and lo there: I do not say, You must come and learn Truth of me, but if
you find it you must find it in your selves: What if I live in the Truth? that
will not serve thee; and if I be a holy Man, that will not sanctify thee; thou
must hearken to Truth's speaking in thy self; thou may hear it speaking in
thine own Heart before thou be an Hour older; you may hear it call you to
Righteousness and Holiness; and if you he^^ it, you may do it too, if you
please; for there is a Power that goes along with it.

I know enough, thou will say, but I cannot do what I know; I have not Power.
What ails thee that thou have not Power? If I had Power then I would abstain
from all Sin, and break off from my evil Ways; but the Devil throws this Object
and the other Object in my Way, and by his Temptations he does ensnare me, I
have not Power to resist: Would you have me do more than I can do? and as long
as I have not Power I am to be excused.

Now here is a Device of the Devil to keep People in his Net still. If Men
would be true to themselves they would not be long without Power: If thou art
convinced of the Evil of thy Ways, and that it is thy Duty to break off from
Sin, there is a Power offered to thee, that if thou join with it thou may
overcome all Temptations and forsake thy Sin: I would have you all prove, and
search, and see whether I speak Truth or no; I am persuaded there is not a Man
or Woman here but they have sometime abstained from an evil Work which they
were tempted to. How were you restrained? because you knew it was an evil Work,
you durst not do it; the Devil had not a coercive Power to force you to do it;
I knew it was an evil thing, and I joined with that in my Mind which dissuaded
me from it; and I prayed to God to give me Power to abstain from it. The Devil
tempted thee on still, who helped thee against the Temptation? God restrained
thee by his Grace. Will not he be a present help unto thee? H^ (...) the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever; depend upon him still and he will be always
ready to help thee, and support thee, and strengthen thee* and thou shall be
kept from Sin in an Hour of Temptation: Consider that all Power in Heaven and
Earth is given to Christ, and if he be able to keep thee thou shall not fall
into it (...) those that come unto me, says Christ, no^^ shall pluck them out
of my hands, and my father is greater than all: If thou come unto Christ he
will in no wise cast thee out, and if thou depend upon him he will preserve
thee, and none shall be able to pluck thee out of his hand. If thou join with
the Truth and with that which is holy, thou shall have Strength and Ability to
withstand Temptation and overcome it; and (I may speak with Reverence) Christ
has bound himself to those that trust in him, Those that keep the word of
(...) patience, I will keep them in the hour of temptation: If I keep waiting
upon his Power, that is ready to help me, and have a mind to be ^urified and
sanctified, and to have Righteousness brought in to my Soul, and have mine Eyes
unto God, and my Expectation from him, he will work in me to will and to do of
his good pleasure.

Now here People have a fixed Foundation for their Faith; there is no working
at this rate without bearing a daily Cross. The^^ are a great many can receive
the Truth in Words, and receive Doctrines, and Tene^^ and that with Delight;
but there is no practicing Holiness and Righteousness without a daily Cross and
Self-denial. There are a great many have come to Truth, as far as it stands in
Words, but when it comes to something that they must do, to speak the Truth,
and live in the Truth, they meet with so much of the Temptation of the Devil so
much Lust and Corruption, and Ung^^liness in themselves, they meet with such
evil things that their Souls join with and yield to that they cannot go on in
the ways of Holiness, unless they look up to Jesus, and have an Eye to their
Savior, and take up his Cross and follow him. Whatsoever Reproaches, and
Sufferings, and Persecutions they endure, they must have a godly Resolution to
follow the Lord Christ, and say, I will obey his Commands, he shall have the
Rule and Government of my Life, and be the Guide of my way; whatsoever stands
in ^y way I will take up my Cross and deny my self: Without this there is no
good Christianity in the World.

There are a great many that seem to be religious and are Professors of the
Truth: We all know there are many Professors of the Truth in Notion, and with
some Zeal will talk of it; but they do not know how to live and walk in the
Truth, they do not live uprightly and honestly in it; they do not keep their
Words; they do not live justly and honestly with all Men, nor do unto others as
they would have others do to them: They can tell how to speak and act, then why
do they not do it? They have got a Notion tha^ they are above the Cross of
Christ, and Self-denial is far below them: People will not live in the Truth.

This is wanting in the whole World: If we look into this City, we shall find a
great many are illuminated; there is abundance of Knowledge and Understanding
among Professors, ^bundance of Learning, and great N^^^^rs of learned Men: What
is the Reason that Oaths, and Curses, and all manner of Wickedness runs down
the Streets like a River; there is Pride, and Wrath, and Envy, and Revenge, and
Violence to be found among us, as if it would pull down Vengeance upon this
City. They have heard preached in Pulpits much of Holiness and Humility,
Patience and Meekness, That a meek and quiet Spirit is an ornament of great
price: Men have heard much Preaching against Pride, Profaneness, and
Drunkenness, and Uncleanness, but they have heard it like a tale that is told,
not much concerned about it, and have given little Credit or Regard to what
they have heard of these things. Why are People so wicked? The Reason at last
results into this, Men are lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God, they
are not the servants of Christ, but serve diverse lusts, and pleasures, and are
led captive by the devil, at his will* and so they go on in Iniquity. All the
La^ of Kings and Queens cannot ^^^train and curb them, when the Law of Christ
is not written in their Hearts; but when Men come to see a Necessity of
Self-denial, (...) taking up the Cross; this will produce a Reformation.

This is that I labor for, and all good Men and Wom^n will do it: It is time
to cry for Reformation. Vain F^^hio^s, and Garbs, and Pride have been cried up,
why should not we cry for Reformation before the Wrath of a provoked God is
kindled against us* and his Vengeance poured down upon the Nation? We must
reform our Lives. How shall Men reform, you will say? By getting the law of God
within their hearts, that is pure, and holy, and heavenly, that will be as a
light to men's feet, and a lanthorn to their paths: Now till People come to this
they will go on in Sin and Iniquity till they be swept away with some
overflowing and dreadful Judgment.

So that, my Friends, in the Fear of God, and out of Love to you, I seek that
you may be brought to God, through Christ; that you may live in the Love and
Fear of the Lord, and, when you come to die, you may have Rest and Peace for
your Souls. There is no Rest for those that are evildoers; There is no peace,
says my God, to the wicked. The Ungodly cry, Peace, peace, and talk of Peace,
but there is no Peace for them, but they shall have for their Portion
tribulation, and wrath, and anguish; this shall certainly come upon every one
that does Evil. It is no matter what Religion you are of, if you do not obey
the Truth, but live in Unrighteousness.

Now, Friends, my Exhortation to you ^ll is, That you will return to the Truth
in your own Hearts, and do it while you have time. I am not pulling and
persuading People to love my Truth, but to love God's Truth in their o^n
H^arts, to love it and obey it, and you cannot do this unless you resolve to
take up a daily Cross, and be Followers of Christ, who is gone before to
prepare a Place for them that are his true Disciples; and then he will present
them to God, as holy, harmless, and undefiled, for these are Heirs of that
ev^^lasting Kingdom, which God has prepared (...) them that love him.

SERMON XII. Christians should be often thinking on the Name of the Lord. Being
his last Sermon? ^^eached at Devonshire-House, July 17th 1692. a while before
his Death.
THE People of God in former Ages, did think upon the name of the Lord: I would
it might be the daily Practice of all that make Profession to be the People of
God in our Days, to think upon the Name of the Lord. This you know is an inward
Exercise, invisible and known to none but God; he only knows when you are met
together, whether you are thinking upon his Name, whether the Exercise of your
Minds is upon his Power or upon whatsoever else your Minds are engaged. They
whose Exercise and Desire is to feel God's Power, and to be acquainted with his
Name, the Lord is nigh to them, to reveal his mighty Power and his Name to
them, and they are a People that partake of his Goodness and of his Virtue, and
(...) an experimental Knowledge of the diverse Administrations of both his
Judgments and Mercies to their own Souls, and so they can proceed from Thinking
to Speaking of the Goodness of God from the Experience that they have in
themselves, that the Lord is goo^ to them,

For all that some do in their manner of speaking of God and his Goodness, and
crying up the Name of the Lord, it is al^^ worth nothing, it is but Noise: But
every one that partakes in his own Soul (...) somethi^^ of the Divine Virtue
and Goodness that flows from God invisibly to him through Jesus Christ, he has
Assurance in himself tha^ he speaks the Truth: It is not mere Words made ready
to his hand, but it is his ow^ Knowledge and Experience of that wh^ God has
wrought in him by his own Spirit there are none that think upon the Name o^ the
Lord, and his Power, and the worki^^ of it, but they are able to speak of it
e^^^ctually and truly.

I know it has been and is the practi^^ among many, that they are able to
speak (...) God's Goodness from what they find in (...) Writings and Sayings of
some that lived before them, that did bear an honorable Te^^^mony of God's
Goodness in their Relig^^^ and they learn to say it over-again i^ particular
Age: But what has this Tale that they have told, wrought? This Report they
have made, How God was with the Christians of old, the Primitive Christians and
Martyrs; they have told a Tale of these things, and what has it effected? It
has either brought forth Christians or it has not.

Therefore the way for People to be grounded and settled in Divine Knowledge,
is for every one to speak what they know: And if they know nothing of these
things, to say nothing of them. And the way for them to come to receive Divine
Knowledge is by thinking, by meditating, by considering of that Converse that
God has with their own Souls; for there is a way provided for all Men to
converse with God that made them: Every Man and Woman may ask Questions of him,
and may have Answers from him, if they have Patience enough to wait for them;
every Soul here present, that shall come to be serious, and with seriousness of
Mind shall ask of God what their State and Condition is, if they were to die
presently, God will ^ell them, He will answer them; he will shine unto them by
the Light of his Son Jesus Christ, and let them know whether they are in the
gall of bitterness and in the bonds of their ini^uity still, or whether they
are redeemed out of it, and brought into Covenant with himself: But will you
believe his Answer? I would have no Man go about to ask such a Question of God
unless he has a mind to believe the Answer that God gives him. To what
purpose should Men ask, if they ask and ask amiss? If they ask without Faith,
they do not believe except the Answer please them.

Many, in our Days, have put up their Petitions and Prayers to God, that he
would discover to them the State and Condition of their Souls: The Lord has
answered them, that notwithstanding all the Profession that they have made of
his Name, and of their Faith in his Son Jesus Christ, and of the Work of
Redemption; yet he has told a Man* Thou art still unredeemed, thou art still
in thy Sin, and Lusts and Concupiscence prevail over thee, thou art still in
Bondage. This is God's Answer to many; but there is something arises in their
Minds, that they are not willing to believe this; I would think better of my
self than this: What if thou do think better of thy self? Thou art never the
better, for ^he word of the Lord stands sure. There is no removing of it; there
is no ^^nial of the Truth. If this Truth condemn thee all the World cannot
justify thee; and this Trut^ by which God condemns the Sinner is in the
Sinner's own Heart: What will he do with it? It is in the Sinner's Conscience;
it does not only condemn him by Book, out of this Chapter and that Verse, out
of this Author and the other Author, but he is condemned by God's true and
faithful Witness, in his own Conscience. Thou will not believe i^ but if thou
believe not this, then thou remainest in thy Unbelief of the Truth; and
nothing else but believing it can save thee; No counsel else can deliver or
redeem thee.

So that the best Advice and Counsel that I can give a People, in this case, is
this; That when they come to such a religious Meeting as this is, they would
come with a Mind prepared and fitted to think upon the Lord; to think upon his
Name, and the way by which he brings People to himself, for no Man can be
called a Child of God that does not partake of his Nature: If a Man be never so
wise, and rich, and great in the World, if he be a Prince or an Emperor,
without this he is a Child of Wrath: Now if these Children of Wrath meet with
something that convinces them; if they are touched and become a sensible
People, then Crowns and Diadems are nothing to them: Such a one will say, If I
be a child of wrath^ a Captive to Sin and my own Lust and Concupiscence, yet
for all that I will go to a religious Meeting, where I hope the Word of God
will be preached; I hope to meet with something there that will do me good; and
I have a Desire that I may be translated out of a natural State, from being a
child of wrath, and to be brought into the kingdom of God: If I have this
Desire in me, God that made me wrought it in me, for by Nature we cannot so
much as think a good thought: When Men think of being better, and of amending
their ways, and doing their Souls good; these are very good Thoughts in
themselves: When such Thoughts are begotten in any Men's Hearts, I would have
them to ascribe them to the Grace of God, and nothing else; Preachers may do
much where these Desires are begotten* but it is not in their Power to beget
these Desires.

Many have come to a Meeting with loose, profane and wandering Minds, and
though many good things have been spoken to them, it has not reached so far as
to beget good Desires, their Hearts have been so alienated from the Grace of
God in themselves, which is the great superior Worker, to which we are but
Servants and Ministers; there is none can beget any thing but he in whom all
Power is. They that are under the Power of Darkness the Devil begets in them
Wantonness, and Vani^^, Profaneness and hardness of Heart* Some go away from a
Meeting without being touched and persuaded, and they have no good Hope of
being better: But where People are really touched in their Spirits, with a
desire after something that will do them good; they must come to the Fountain
of Good, the God that made them, and think upon him; if they cannot see his
glory and hear his voice, yet they can think upon him. This is the least Duty
of a Christian, to think upon the Name of the Lord; and where their Minds are
exercised about divine Matters, about the State and Condition (...) their poor
Souls: If I die this ^ight, what will become of me? This and that Sin I have
committed, how shall I be able to answer to God for one of a thousand of all my
loose Thoughts, Words and Actions? They that come to a Consideration of this,
and a due Sense of their State and Condition, though it is such a State that
they do not like of, that it is not such as it ought to be; yet notwithstanding
it may be better, they may be brought out of it into a better condition.

Now this is the duty of all, to be waiting upon God, the Fountain of all Good,
that they may receive something from God, for every good and perfect gift comes
from above, from the Father of Lights, the Father of thy Light and my Light,
that Light comes to us from the Father of Lights: If we have any perfect Gift
bestowed upon us, it is bestowed by God; therefore you will grant that we are
all obliged, from the great^ (...) least, to wait upon him, if we have the
(...) Expectation from God, by a Meeting, otherwise we had better keep away.

But I am apt to judge that the most here are come with some Desire, that if it
please God they may receive Benefit by their Meeting: Where shall they have it?
They say, if such a Man preaches, then I can edify much by him: This is a
great Mistake, for let who will preach there is no Body can receive any
Benefit, but it must be from the Lord, as the Fountain of Good; for the best
Preach^rs in the World are but Inst^^ments in the Hands of God^ if God does not
bless his Labors, (...) ^^eacher can do nothing to the Souls of P^^ple; b^^^an
sound the Truth (...) their Ears outwardly* but he can reach no further, God
only speaks to the Heart. If thou mind the Preacher and not God that made thee,
all his Preaching will do thee no good; It may indeed help thee to a Notion or
Speculation, but that comes not to the Inside, that will be no better, the
Insid^ wants mending.

There are great Deformities, Scars, Spots, Stains, Wounds and Lamenes^ upon
the Soul^ of Men, by reason of their Sins, Lusts and Corruptions; and there
wants a Remedy* and th^^^ is no Physician of value but God that (...) us after
his own Image. The Devil has brought in Deformity, he has made one proud,
another cruel, another wanton, another an Oppressor, another malicious; this is
all the Devil's Work: And for this end (...) Jesus came into the world, that he
might destroy the works of the Devil. He came to destroy Pride, Malice and
Lust; these are the De^ Works, that Christ came to destroy (...) does he not do
it? He will destroy (...) Devil has wrought in every Man that will be subject
to him: Can a Surgeon set a Bone if the Patient be not subject to his Hand?

But this is far beyond all comparison; Christ has received all power in
heaven and earth, yet he ^^^^ays looks for a willing People; he sends (...) Day
of his Power upon a People, an^ he works upon th^^r He^rts by an invincible
Power; he makes them willing to be helped, and mended, and healed, and cured,
and then he cures them. I dare say, there is not one here that is willing to be
reformed, and to submit to Christ to be saved and redeemed by him, but he will
do it; He that is willing and obedient shall eat of the good of the land, and
shall know the Good of Redemption. See whether it be come to a State of
Redemption; here is universal Grace offered; for the light of Christ Jesus
lightneth every one of you; It shows you your lost State and Condition: When
you see yo^^ Condition bad, that it is not as it ought to be, who would not
have it better?

What means Prayer, that Christian Duty? (...) us; What shall we pray for? Must
not People be sensible in themselves what they should pray for, before they
come to pray? And what is it that will make them sensible but the Light and
Grace of God? They see their own Wants when God works Faith in their Hearts,
and they believe that God can supply those Wants. Why should I go to a Beggar,
to pray him to give me an hundred Pounds? I believe he cannot do it, therefore
I will not pray to him for it: Now necessity brings People to go to Prayer, but
there must be Faith in him to whom (...) he is able to supply their Wants (...)
relieve their Necessities. Upon this acco^ the Apostle says, H^ comes to God
(...) believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder (...) them that diligently
seek him. He must (...) know that there is a God to come unto, an^ then that he
is a Rewarder.

Here is the Foundation of all true Religi^^ and true Worship; they that go to
God (...) say their Prayers, and join with others in ^^^ing their Prayers, if
they have no (...) God, they had as good hold their (...) for their Praying is
to no purpose: They (...) pretend to believe in God without an exp^^^mental
Power of God working upon (...) Hearts, their Belief is not worth a Straw^
without their Respect to the Power of God all their Belief is nothing; but if
they know that God has such an Operation upon them, that no Man of Woman in
the World can discover that to them that God discovers, then they know that
God is the searcher of hearts and the tryer of the reins, Jerem. 17.10.

Suppose I know that there is a God, and at the same time I believe that he
will never hear me; that I am a reprobate Creature, and that he has cast me
off for ever, and that he has sealed Condemnation upon me, to all Eternity.
What reason has such a one to pray? This is a desperate condition. But while
we believe there is a God, and that (...) (...) rewarder of them taht
diligently seek him it is not in vain to pray; yet there is some^^ing
antecedent to to Prayer; there is Know^edge, and Faith upon that Knowledge,
that God is a Rewarder: He that has this, let him pray in God's Name. But what
must he pray for? He must not offer the sacrifice of fools; he must have regard
to his Lips; if it ^e mental Prayer, he must pray for that he ^^ands in need
of; it is for something he prays, ^^at God has revealed by his Holy Spirit, ^e
stands in need of; it is for something that he needs, it is Power to overcome
Corrupti^n, and Power to overcome Temptation, that ^e stands in need of; he
stands in need of a Mediator to procure for him the Pardon of his Sins: These
things he stands in need of, then let him pray; He that is afflicted let him
pray.

So that if a Man or Woman go to Prayer, they must pray to God, in the Belief
of his Goodness ^d Mercy, that he will bestow some Blessing upon them, that may
be for the better, that may be for their good. When they come to a Meeting, to
worship God, and hear the Word spoken outwardly, they must pray for something
that may be for their good; Lord give me something that may support my Soul,
and something that may withstand Temptation. People should have their Minds
thus exercised, and they should think upon the Name of the Lord, according to
their particular Necessity; they should pour out their Supplication to the Lo^
This is such Worship as God looks for, (...) such as he likes and is pleased
with; he w^ deliver those that thus pray to him out (...) Temptations, so that
they shall not prevail^ over them: One Man's Temptation is of one sort,
another's of another sort; but they are all delivered by ^e Grace of God, and
helped over them upon their Prayer to God, for they find by Experience that God
is a God, hearing prayers.

Now, when we have ^^^yed, what is the next Work? It is to ^^it for an Answer
of our Prayer. I prayed (...) other Day to God for Power to withstand such a
Temptation* when that Temptation comes ag^^n I do expect that God will answer
my Prayer. Do thou so? Then I pray thee have an Eye to the sam^ Grace ^f G^d
that convinced thee, and showed thee the T^mpt^tion, and have thy Faith
exercised upon that G^^ce of God, and thou will find it sufficient for thee, I
will warrant th^e: Let the Devil come with a Temptation never so sui^^ble and
subtle, keep thine Eye upon the Grace of God and it will deliver thee. This was
the Case of Paul, when a messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him, he besought
the Lord thrice: The Temptation did attend him, and God gave him an answer of
his Prayer; My grace is sufficient for thee. As if he had said, Let the Devil
come with never so much Power he shall never overcome ^hee*

I speak to those that are well skilled in (...) of Work, and have met with
sharp Temptations, and sometimes perhaps they ^ave been overcome by them; and
at other times they have withstood them: What is the difference, why one while
they are loose and careless, and did not pray for the Assistance of Divine
Grace; an^^her while they kept close to it, and were delivered?

Therefore when you come to Meeting, with a desire to receive Benefit from God,
with you Expectations Godward, to receive Comfort from the Hands of the Lord,
let your Eye be upon ^im, and the Working of his Grace in your own Hearts, and
hearken to that Voi^^ that is within you, and it will be more effectual than
mine. If you find the Work of Grace in you to be the same thing that I speak
of, then believe me (...) the Truth's-sake; believe me be^^^^e you find the
same Wor^ and T^st^^^^ within your selves. And I m per^^ad^ there is never a
one here but ^^metime (...) other they have withstood that Tempta^^o^ which
they have met withal. Pr^ tell ^e how they did it? Why, the Tempta^^^^ came
unto me, and it pleased God to show me the evil of it, that it was a bad thing
if I yielded to it. How did thou resist it, had not the Devil a coercive
Power over thee, to force thee to it, whether thou would or not? That God
that showed me the Evil of it, delivered me from the evil of it; I was not
judged and condemned (...) because I (...) delivered from it; there are no^
(...) you would not be lazy and id^ (...) might be delivered every Day, and h^
(...) ^^perience in your own Souls, that w^ (...) Devil comes and tempts, the
Lord is a^ (...) to deliver you (...) his Grace and Power.

So that t^ (...) way for People to be ^^served from Sin and Iniquity, is to
ha^^ a reverent respect to that Grace of God which they have alrea^^ ^^ceived.
I would ha^^ that taken out of your Head, that vain Conceit that has long
reigned in (...) World; When you see a wi^ked Husband, Wife, or Child, you say,
If they had Grace they would be better; I say they have from degree of Grace
already; God has s^nt forth his Grace and Truth, to teach men to deny
ungodliness, (...) ^at I would not pray that God would give my H^^band* Wife,
or Child, or Friend Grace, but tha^ (...) would break his hard Heart, that he
may submit to the Grace of God that is already ^estowed upon him. I believe
there is no^ a graceless Person here that is utterly void of all Grace; but
they walk not according to it, they trample upon it: For ever^ one being endued
with a measure of Grace, through Christ, our Duty therefore is to have a
reverend regard to the Grace of God, that (...) have received.

What G^^ce have I received from God may some one say?

(...) received so much Grace (...) truly say) that I can tell when the (...)
^gs a Temptation to me; that when (...) ^empts me to Uncleanness, Theft, Wrath,
(...) ^ee, or to deceive my Neighbor, I have (...) much Grace that I can tell
I am tempted ^n such a respect; the Gr^^e of God shows (...) this is a
Temptation of (...) Devil: But the Question is, Whether I am subject to the
Grace of God, and do love his Grace better than the Profit or ^leasure of a
Temptation? It comes as a Bait, but the Devil cannot make me do that which he
tempts me to; it is not in the Power of all the Devils in Hell, or of his
Servants on Earth to make me do this evil thing: The Light of my own Conscience
shows it to be a Temptation. Now I am free and at my Choice whether I will love
the Profit and Pleasure th^^ com^s with the Temptation more than the Grace of
God: I believe there is no ^^^ly that has been tried by a Temptation but they
can say so: I leave it to him that searches, and tries all your hearts, and
knows your thoughts, to judge whether you joined with the Temptation, that you
might have the Profit and Pleasure of it, or joined with his Grace, that might
have resisted the Temptation: You th^^ have done the one and the other, tell me
which is the best Bargain? When you ^ave joined with the Temptation that you
might have the Profit and Pleasure of it that came alon^ with it, or when you
joined with the Grace of (...) that s^^wed you the (...) ^^ger of (...)
Temptation a^ (...) speaks to you that spoke to Cain, (...) well shall thou not
b^ accepted? A^ (...) do not well sin lie^ at the door. (...) yielded to a
Temptation sin lies (...) there is a Breach made between Go^ (...) Soul.

The same Man, at another time, having ^^ted so deeply for it, being judged by
his (...) Conscience, when he meets the Temptati^^ again, he says, Let the
Profit or Pleasure go where it will, if I yield to this Temptation I cannot go
to God but as Thief to a Judge* Let the Profit or Pleasure be what it will I
will not touch with this Temptation. Ca^ the Devil force thee to comply with
his Temptation? No, if thou be true to the Grace of God in thy own Heart, it
will make thee able to resist the strongest Devil in Hell. Christ has
purchased for the Sons and Daughters of Men a Power to withstand the Devils
Power, and all his Devices and Temptations, and you shall obtain Victory, and
have Dominion over them. If you have a mind to grow in this Dominion, when the
Devil comes to tem^^ you resist him, and you shall, through the ^^wer of
Christ, be enabled to ove^come.

If Satan tell thee of the Profits and Pleasures of this World; tell him, That
the w^ passes away, and the lust of it, b^ (...) with God endures for ever: By
the (...) (...) will be able to overcome (...) Devil (...) Angels. This Power
is given to (...) ^^ve and obey the Gospel: If you (...) ^ve Benefit by it, you
must be exer^ (...) resisting of Temptation, and have (...) to the Grace of
God, and the Work^ (...) it in your own Hearts; and then you will be able to
say, when a Temptation comes, p^omising Profit and Pleasure, How can I do this
great wickedness and sin against God? Turn your Eye to God's favor, which is
better than life, and you will be more than conquerors; you will say the Fear
of God seized upon my Soul, and the Grace of God came in to my Assistance, and
made me stand like a Bulwark against Temptation. Here Praises will go up to
God; here will be occsion for thee to speak good of his Name. Remember what
David said, My soul praise the Lord that has delivered me from the horrible
Pit: Thus David and the Saints of old praised God in their Day; and why should
not we? They breathed forth living Praises and Thanksgivings for the
Deliverances wrought for them; and shall not we do it?

Now this cannot be done without thinking upon his Name, the Name of that God
that made us: Here I live in the World, I live and breath still, I have Health,
and Strength, and an Estate, how came I by all this? Did I make my self? No,
there is a God that gave me Life, and Breath, and Being; he holds forth the
Hand of Mercy to gather me to himself, and to redeem m^ (...) iniquity, that I
might serve him wit^ (...) in holiness and righteousness all the (...) life: If
I believe all this, I shall re^ (...) him, and love and p^^ise him, and dai^
(...) upon him for the Accomplishment o^ (...) Work. He desires not the death
of s^ (...) If (...) will believe the Almighty, it is (...) possible for him to
lie, all things are possible to him except that; he says, He would not the
death of him that dies: What would he have then? He would have you turn and
live: What means does he use? What I would have done I would use means for it.
You will say, What means does God use? I am ready to say, What means has he
not used (...) What is it that God does more wish for th^n that Men would
repent, return and live and be happy for ever? He has created them, and given
them Life and Breath, and continued them twenty, thirty, forty or fifty Years,
that they might have Time to prepare for Eternity; and he has given his good
Spirit to instruct them, but they have rebelled against him. He has sent forth
his Word, the Gospel of Salvation, which has been preached to them* and he
has waited to be gracious* and ^xercis^d much patience and long-suff^^^ (...)
toward them; so that I may say, what me^ has he omitted? He has planted them
as a vineyard, in a very fruitful hill; and he ha^ fenced it, and gathered out
the stones th^^^ and planted it with the choicest vine, and (...) in the midst
of it, and made a win^ (...) therein, and he looked that it should (...) fo^th
grapes, and it brought wild grapes. (...), I pray you, says ^he Lord, between
me (...) my vineyard: Wh^^ could have been done (...) to my vineyard, that I
have not done in it?

But notwithstanding all your unfruitfulness, the Day of your Visitation is
continued, the Lord is willing to show Mercy to your Souls. This is all the
Lord your God requires of you, That you would think upon his Name, believe in
him and trust in him, and wait upon him for the Operations of his Grace in the
Use of his Ordinances and your Attendance upon them, and harkening to his
Voice, and obeying it, and so to hear, that your souls may live.

I will affirm that there is never a one of you here present, whether you be
Quakers or no, but you may meet with the Divine operations of the Power of God
in your own Hearts, if you will regard it, and when you meet with these
operations and regard them not, I cannot help it; if you will resist the good
things of the Spirit of God, I cannot help it; if you will be of that Mind*
always to resist the Holy Ghost; If as your ^athers did so do ye, then you must
all perish, both you and your Fathers; there is no escaping but by being
subject to Christ Jesus, and his ^^ickening Spirit; if there be any Divine
^^^^rations that you meet with in your own Hearts, let me persuade you to s^
(...) have regard to them; for I know the (...) is near at Hand; and when
People (...) with Divine oper^^ions in their Soul^ (...) humble them and bring
down their P^ and convince them of the danger of their ^^^dition, the lies in
the way and suggests (...) poisonous thing that takes off the edge o^ these
oper^^i^^s, that they may dislike them; It is true^ (...) meet with convictions
of Sin; but they reckon they have that Faith and belief in christ, that does in
the sight of Go^ ob^ all their Sins that can be laid to the charge, both past
and to come. If I would look, say they, to the Divine operations* or any thing
wrought in me, it were enough to make me mad. I look wholly for the meri^ of
Christ; my Mind is wholly fixed upon him who i^ the Auther of Eternal Salv^ his
mer^^^^ious sufferings and obedience (...) obliter^^ and blot out all my Sins.

My M^^ds, I tell you many a Poor Soul has sp^ upon this Ro^ by undervaluing
the Divine oper^tions of the Spirit upon (...) Hearts; they m^ke a false and
wrong application of the merits of C^^^st which indee^ are so gr^^^ that no
body can ov^^value them* but we must not make a false application (...) them,
For this purpose was the Son of (...) manifested, that he might destroy the
Wor^^ the Devil; He takes away the guilt o^ (...) no^ that you might live in it
still: Who^ b^lieveth i^ Christ, shall h^ve Po^ (...) (...) and not be (...)
the dominion and (...) of Sin; Sin shall not have dominion over (...) for you
are not under the Law, but under (...). But God be thanked you were the
servants (...) Sin; but you have obeyed from the Heart, the form of Doctrine
which was delivered you: being then made free from Sin ye became the Servants
of Righteousness. Romans 6.14, 18.

But you will say, I am guilty of agree at deal of Sin already, what shall
become of me for the guilt that I have contracted?

If we confess and forsake our Sins he (...) ^kfull and just to forgive us our
Sins and to ^^^anst us from all unrighteousness; and the Blood of Jesus Christ
his Son cleanses us from all Sin; 1 John 9.9. Here is a true application of
Christ his Merits and Righteousness; when there is a confessing of Sin to Go^
and a forsaking of it, here is an offering and a Sacrifice made to God by our
Lord J^^us Christ for the expiation of Sin; he (...) by his precious Blood
p^^^hased the pardon of all my Sins, that he might present me to God without
Spot and Blemish; here is a true application the Righteous^^^^ of Christ; but
how can I apply it to my self while I live in Si^?

Here Gods Witness in the Conscience of a Sinner pleads against the Sinner;
when he has got a trick to believe that his guilt is taken away, and all his S
ns, past, present and to come are pardoned while, he continue to live in (...),
and Sin has yet dominion over him.

Take heed you split n^ (...) if you be humble, well grown Ch^ (...) will think
upon the Name of the (...) when ye find the operation of Gods (...) begetting
good desires in you to hate Sin (...) love Righteousness, you will then believ^
you will then Pray to the God of all Grace* for the Prayer of the Faithful is
acceptable to him: The effectual fervent Prayer of a Righteous Man avails much.
Jam. 5.16.

Let your supplications therefore be poured forth unto God, to endue you with
Power and Wisdom to subdue all your Spiritu^^ Enemies, and to conquer your
concupiscence, and the inordinate desires and affections of your own Hearts,
that you may take up the Cros^ of Christ and follow him as your great Patr^n,
and in his Name, and by the h^ and A^^ista^ce of his Holy Spirit you m^ know
how to ^^ercome all Temptations.

His Prayer after Sermon.
MOst Glorious Lord God, wonderful is thy great Power over all, which thou have
revealed and made manifest in this thy blessed Day. Thy Arm O thou Almighty God
is stretched forth; thou have touched a Remnant with a sense of thy Divine
love, whom thou have gathered unto thy Name; thou have revealed thy great
Salvation, and therewith thou ha^ made glad the Souls of thy Children; thou
have endeared thy self ^^to us by the discovery and manifestation of thy
abounding love, who did love us, when we were Strangers, and preserve us when
we were Enemies, and brought a glorious Day of visitation upon us, and opened
our eyes (...) behold the Light thereof, so that we are an engaged People to
speak good of thy ^^me: Thou have declared and manifested to the Sons and
Daughters of Men thy good Will and thy universal Grace that thou art daily
extending to them, that all may be made partakers of the Riches of thy House,
and of thy great Salvation, which by the Lord Jesus Christ thou have ordained:
And O thou Powerful God of Life, since the Day that thou first gathered us,
thou have been with us, thou have been our Guide, and our Eyes have been toward
thee for instruction; thou have taught us and ^ed us in the way in which thou
would have (...) to walk; thou have led us O Lord in the way Everlasting ^ith
the po^ (...) and the meek of the Earth; (...) placed our Feet, O Lord, near
the Eve^ (...) Mountain, which thou have exalted* (...) the high Hills of the
Earth, and thou ha^^ ^^vealed the Glory and the splendour of (...) House, thy
Holy Dwelling Place, and (...) raised Breathings in the Hearts of thy Peo^ that
they may dwell in thy Courts for ev^ And now, Holy Father, thou have gathered
(...) Remnant, and brought a peculiar People (...) trust in thy Name; but still
we do all the we do by thee; thou must be our Keeper, thou must be our
preserver, therefore we wait upon thee, we expect all from thy Hand, therefore
our applications are unto thee, that f^ Day to Day, and from time to time, we
(...) find thy living Presence in the midst (...) And O living God of life,
thou have give^ (...) Children large experience that thou art a (...) nigh at
hand to us in all our Trials, in all (...) Exercises; as our Eyes have been
turned (...) thee, thou have preserved us and revealed the Heavenly Power, O
Lord, in preserving and delivering thy Church and People, that they may bear a
testimony in their generation t^ thy great love, and the great Salvation (...)
tho^ have wrought for them and made (...) pertakers of. Now Blessed God of Li^
desires and supplications of thy People^ unto thee, for the glorifying of thy
P^ the exalting of thy glorious Name* (...) le^ the mighty operation of thy
(...) (...) and stubborn ones, that (...) against thee, and that have withstood
(...) tenders of thy Grace and the Motions ^d striving of thy Holy Spirit: Thou
art ^ole to bow them, and to break their stony Hearts; thou art. able to speak
effectually to their Souls, and to make them submit themselves to thee: Holy
and living Father, let the progress of thy Word and Gospel be great in our Day;
let it have a free course and spread it self mightily to those that believe
not, to beget a Seed of Faith in their Souls, that they may believe in thy
Name, and Trust in thy Power, ad wait to see the great Work of Redemption
wrought for the Salvation of Immortal Souls, before the Da^ of Visitation goes
over. Powerful God (...) Life, thy little Remnant which thou have ^edeemed keep
them by thy Power, and preserve them in Uprightness and Cleanness of Mind;
preserve them in the places and stations, wherein thou have appointed them to
dwell, and in all their Trials, and Tribulations, and Distresses, that may come
upon them, that they may be quiet and still, and in patience possess their
Souls; and let them ^ave strong consolation in that Everlasting ^^venant which
in thy Son thou have made ^th them and r^vealed to them; and let (...) not be
moved and tossed with the hur^ of this World, with the tumults and dis^ that
evil Men make in it, and the Storms (...) that are raised; but let th^^^ Hearts
and Minds be ^^^yed upon (...) they may know how to behave then (...) wards
thee and one another, and tow^ (...) t^ (...) ^e without, and thereby glorify
(...) m^ (...) thy great Name by the Beau^ (...) Holiness shining in their
Conversations, w^ may reach the Consciences of Men, that (...) that see them
may say, these (...) the Plan^ that the Right Hand of God has Plant^^ and see
the Fruits that are brought forth f^ (...) that Root of Life revealed in Christ
Jesus Powerful God of Life, carry on thine ow^ Work in this City and the whole
Nation* and in other places among that People whi^ t^^u have chosen and
gathered to thy (...) of the World: Powerful God of Life rem^^ber those that
groan in secret, making (...) moan to thee, that they cannot lay hold o^
Salvation for their Souls: Prepare them (...) that consolation that their Souls
are brea^ after: They are Night and Day wrestling (...) thee by earnest Prayer:
But what will all the^ wrestling signify, except thy Word and the Power of thy
Grace assist them, and (...) them to lay hold of thy strength, that (...) may
Fight the good Fight of Faith, tha^ (...) may get the Victory and rejoice in
the ^^^vation and see the Glory of it? Thou se^ (...) the Children of Men are
working an^ ^^^triving diverse ways for their own Salv^ make the^ to know that
all their o^ (...) and inventions ar^ ^n vain. Bless^ (...) the de^ (...) ^y,
wa^^^^y Heritage; and (...) thou have gathered by thy Word, do (...) preserve
them, that they may serve thee ^^th sincere and upright Minds all the Days
(...) their Lives; and offer up daily Tha^ (...) ^ings and living Praises to
thee, the (...) and living God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou ^ast sent, and ^hy
Eternal Spirit, who alone art worthy, who art God over all, blessed (...) ever
and ever,

Amen.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for Nath C^ouch, at the Bell in the Poultry, near
Cheapside.
1. The History of the Principality of (...) in three parts, containing, 1. A
brief ^^^unt of the ancient Kings and Princes of Brit^^^ and Wales till the
final extinguishing of the ^oyal British Line. 2. Remarks upon the (...) of
all the Princes of Wales, of the Royal ^^milies of England from King Edward the
first to this time, particularly of Edward the Black Pr^^ce of Wales, who with
30000 English defeated an Army of 100000 French at Cressy; and at Poicti^^s
with 10000 beat 80000 and took John the French King Prisoner; also of Henry of
Munmouth, (after^^^d King Henry the fifth) who with 13000 (...) 90000 French;
whose Son Henry sixth was (...) King of France at Paris. 3. Remarkable ^vations
on the most memorable Persons and (...) in Wales, and of diverse considerable
passages (...) any Hundred Years past, with the Birth and (...) Actions of
Merlin the famous Welsh Pro^ (...) with natural (...) artificial ^^^ities (...)
Princi^ (...) (...) ^wered in above 300 (...) ^ontaining, 1. Dreadful Judgments
upon (...) Blasphemers, and Perjured Villains. 2. The (...) ends of many
Magicians, etc. 3. Remarkable ^^^dictions and presages of approaching Death, a^
how (...) event has been answerable. 4. Fearful Ju^^ments upon bloody Tyrants,
Murderers, etc. 5. ^^mirable Deliverances from imminent dangers and deplorable
distresses at Sea and Land. Lastly, Divine goodness to penitents, with the
dying thoughts of several famous Men, concerning a future state. P. 1^* 3. The
General History of Earthquakes: or A^ account of the most Remarkable and
Tremendous Earthquakes that have happened in diverse parts of the w^^ld from the
Creation to this time, and particularly those lately in Naples, Smyrna, Jamaic^
England and Sicily; with a Description of the ^^mous Burning Mount Aetna, and
the several dreadful Conflagrations thereof for many Ages. To which is added an
Appendix, containing fever^ other late strange Accidents and Occurrences. As I.
A Surprising Account of Angels Singing Psalms in the Air over the Ruins of the
Protestant Church at ^^^ez, a City in the Province of Bearne, and oth^^ ^^aces
in France in the year 1686. With the W^ they Sang in the hearing of many hundr^
A^^^^ors at once, Papists as well as Protesta^^ II. The Life of a Great Person
of near a hund^^^ years ol^ who is now an Hermi^ a Fore^^ (...) France, with
the Devotions, Clothing, Di^ (...) Subsistence of him and his Companions (...)
III. The wonderful Army of Loc^sts or Gr^^^^pers that were seen near Breslaw in
Silesia, S^ 7. 1693. and in other parts of Germany; w^ their March took up 16.
Miles, devourin^ Green thing. Iv. Thr^ Miraculous Cures (...) by ^^ith in
Christ, in 1693. As 1. Of (...) (...). 2. (...) Hand. 3. A Shepherd near Hitch^
(...) ^fordshire instantly healed of the Kings Evil, under which he had
languished Twenty Years. Price one shilling.

4. Extraordinary Adventures of several ^^mous Men: with the strange Events,
and signal mutations and changes in the Fortunes of diverse Illustrious places
and persons in all Ages; being an account of a multitude of stupendous
Revolutions, accidents, and observable matters in diverse States and Provinces
throughout the World; with Pictures. Pr. 1 s.

5. Surprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts; containing, 1 The
Miracle^ of Nature, or the wonderful Signs and prodigious (...) Appearances in
the Heavens, Earth and Sea, with an account of the most famous Comets and other
Prodigies, from the Birth of Christ to this time. 2 The Miracles of Art,
describing the most magnificent Buildings, and other curious Inventions in all
Ages, as, the seven Wonders of the World, and many other excellent Structures
and Rarities throughout the Earth, Beautified with Pictures, price 1 s.

6. Memorable Accidents and Unheard of Transactions, containing an account of
several stra^^^ Events: as the Deposing of Tyrants, lamenta^^^ Shipwracks,
dismal Misfortunes, Stratagems of War, perilous Adventures, happy Deliverances,
with other remarkable Occurrences, and select Histo^^^al Passages, which have
happened in several Countries in this last Age. Printed at Brussels in 1691.
and ^^dicated to his present Majesty, William King of England, etc. publis^^d
in English by R.B. price 1 s.

7. Martyrs in Flames, or Popery in its true Colors, being a brief Relation of
the horrid Cru^ (...) Persecutions of the Pope and Church of (...) hundreds of
years past, to this (...) and England (...) Persecutions lately exercised upon
(...) ^^^^^stants in France and Savoy, in 1686, 16^7 ^^gether with a short
^^^unt of God's Judgm^^^ upon Popish Persecutors. Price 1 s.

8. The History of O. Cromwell, being an Impa^tial Account of all the B^^^^ls,
Sieges, and other Military Achievements, wherein he was engaged in England,
Scotland and Ireland; and likewise of his Civil Administrations, while he had
the Supr^^^ Government, till his Death. Relating only matte^ Fact, without
Reflection or Observation. By R.B. p^

9 The (...) Empire in America, or a pro^ of H^ Majesty's Dominions in the
West Indies namely, New Foundland, New England, Ne^-York, New Jersey,
Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina, Bermudas, Barbuda, Anguila,
Monferrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antego, Mevi^ or Nevis, St. Christophers,
Barbados and Jamaica: With an account of their Discovery, Situation and
Product: The Religion and Manners of the Indians* and other excellencies of
these Countries: T^ which is prefixed a relation of the discovery of the New
world, and of the remarkable Voyages a^ Adventu^^^ of Sebasti^ Cabot. Sir
Mar^in Forbish^^ Capt. Davi^, Capt. Weymouth, Capt. (...), Cap^ Hudson, Sir
Tho. Cavendish, the E. of (...) Sir Walter Rawleigh and other English Wo^ (...)
diverse places therein. Illustrated with Map (...) Pictures of the strange
Fruits, Birds, Beasts, (...) Insects, Serpents and Monsters found in the (...)
of the World. Price one shilling.

10. A View of the English Acquisitions (...) and the East Indies: With an
Account (...) ^gion, Government, Wars, strange Cus^ (...) Se^^ents, Monsters,
and other Obse^ (...) (...) Religion as (...) in the Alcoran. Two Letter^, one
w^^ten by the Great Mogul, and the other by the King of Sumatra in the
East-Indie^ to our K. James I. of an extravagant style. The (...) Executions in
these parts, with the manner of the Women ^^rning themselves with their dead
Husbands. Together with a description of the Isle of ^t. Helena, and the Bay of
Sou^dania; intermixed with pleas^nt Relations. Pr. 1 s.

11. England's Monarchs: Being a Compendious account of the most remarkabl^
Transactions from William the Conqueror to the sixth year of the Reign of their
present Majesty's* King William and Queen Mary: With Poem (...) of every
Monarch; and a List of the p^^sent Nobility of this Kingdom. Price one shilling.

12. The History of the House of Orange: Or, a brief Relation of the Glorious
and Magnanimous Atchievments of His Majesty's Renowned Predecessors, and
likewise of his own Heroic Actions, till the late wonderful Revolution,
together with the History of K. William and Q. Mary: Being an impartial Account
of the most Remarkable Passages from Their Majesty's happy accession to the
Throne, to this time. By R. B. Price, 1. s.

13. The History of the two late Kings Charles II. and James II. being an
impartial Account of the most Remarkable Transactions and observable Passages
during their Reigns, and the secret French and (...) Intrigues and Designs,
managed in those (...); together with a Relation of the happy ^ition, and the
accession of their present Ma^^^^ies to the Thrones, Feb. 13. 1689. Price, 1 s.

^ The Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland, (...) a particular and impartial
Account of all (...) Sieges, and other remarkable Tr^ (...) ^gal Trial at large
of K. C. (...) ^his Suffering; and the most conside^ (...) till 1660. With
Pictures of several (...).

15. Historical Rem^^k and Observations of th^^ and Present St^^^e of London
and Westminster, ^ing the Foundations, Walls, Gates, Towers, Bri^^^^ Churches,
Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Go^^^^ment, Courts, Hospitals, Schools, Inns
of Courts, ^ters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof* w^ most remarkable
Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Pl^ and other occurrences for above 902 years pa^

16. Admirable Curiosities, Rarities and w^ in England Scotland, and Ireland;
or an^ many remarkable persons and places and (...) of the Battles, Sieges,
prodigious Fact^ Tempests, Inundations, Thunders, Lightni^^^ Murders and other
Occurences and Accidents any hundred years past: Together with the and
Artificial Rarities in every County in (...) With several curious Sculptures.
pr. 1 s.

17. The History of the Kingdom o^ ^ing an Account of the Ancient inhabitan^^
all the Battles, Sieges, and other consid^ (...) actions both Civil and
Military in (...) from the first Conquest thereof, un^ (...) ^till its entire
Reduction, by His Maj^ ^^gether with the most remarkable P^ (...) since
happened there to this time. (...)

18. The English Hero: Or, Sir (...) Revived. Being a full Account of t^ (...)
Voyages, admirable Adventures, n^ (...) ^ries, and Magnanimous Atchievemen^^
^liant and Renowned Commander. As, (...) in 1572. to Nombre de Dios in the We^
^^ey saw a Pile of Bars of Silver ne^ (...) (...) ^s Voyag^ into A^^^ic^ in
(...) the Towns of St. J^go, St. Domingo, Ca^ (...) Augustine. IV. His last
Voyage into th^^^ ^tries (...) 1595. with the manner of his Death ^urial.
Revised, Corrected, and very much en^^ged, reduced into Chapters with Contents,
and ^tified with Pictures. By R. B. Price 1 s.

19. Two Journeys to Jerusalem, Containing first, ^count of the Travels of two
English Pilgrims (...) years since, and what Admirable Accidents be^ (...) ^em
in their Journey to Jerusalem, Grand Caro^ (...) ^andria, etc. 2. The Travels
of 14 English Mer^ (...) in 1660. from Scanderoon to Tripoly, Joppa, (...),
Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Jericho, the River of Jor^ (...) the Lake of Sodom and
Gomorrah, and back a^ to Aleppo. To which is added, a Relation of the (...)
Council of the Jews, assembled in the plains of (...) in Hungary, 1650 to
examine the Scriptures ^cerning Christ. By S. B. an Englishman there ^resent:
With the notorious delusion of the Jews, (...) ^erfeit Messiah, or false Christ
at Smyrna, (...) ^666. and the event thereof. Lastly, The Extir^^tion of the
Jews throughout Persia in 1666. Epistle (...) to our Savior, with our Saviors
Answer: B^^^tified with Pictures. Pr. 1 s.

20. The History of the Nine Worthies of the (...) Three whereof were Gentiles;
1. Hector (...) Pri^miss King of Troy. 2. Alexander the (...) King of Macedon,
and Conqueror of the (...) Julius Caesar first Emperor of Rome. (...) Jews. 4.
Joshua Captain General and Leader (...) to Canaan. 5. David King of Israel. 6.
(...) ^heus a valiant Jewish commander, against (...) any of Antiochus. Three
Christians. 7. Ar^ (...) Britain, who courageously defended his Cou^^ (...)
^^lives, ^^ruly actions, (...) Death. Illustrated with Poems and the (...) each
Worthy. By R. B. Pr. 1 s.

21. Female Excellency, or the Ladies Glo^ ^strated in the Worthy Lives and
Memorable (...) of nine Famous Women, who have been ren^ either for Virtue or
Valor, in several Ag^ World: As 1. Deborah the Prophetess. 2. (...) valiant
Judith. 3. Queen Esther. 4. The (...) Susannah. 5. The Chaste Lucretia. 6. V^
Britain, in the Reign of Nero Emperor (...) containing an account of the
Original Inh^ Britain. The History of Danus and of his 5. ^ters, who murdered
their Husbands in on^ Of the valor of Voadicia, under whose co^ Britains slew
70 thousand Romans, with man remarkable particulars. 7 Mariamne Wife (...)
Herod* 8. Clotilda Queen of France. 9. A^ Princess of Spain. The whole adorned
with (...) and pictures to each History. By R. B. Pr. (...)

22. Unparalleled Varieties or the Ma^ons and Passions of Mankind; displayed
in (...) notable Instancss and Examples, disc^ transcendent Effects; 1 Of Love,
Frie^ Gratitude. 2 Of Magnanimity, Courag^ ^ty. 3 Of Chastity, Temperance and
H^ on the contrary, the tremendous Cons^ Hatred, Revenge and Ingratitude. 5. O^
Barbarity and Treachery. 6 Of Uncha^ ^perance and Ambition. Imbellish'd with
(...) Figures. Price 1 s.

23. The Kingdom of Darkness; or t^ (...) of Demons, Specters, Witches,
Apparitio^ ^ons, Disturbances and other wonderful a^ ^tural Delusions,
mischievous Feat^ (...) (...) ^ther with a (...) ^tions and Alle^ (...) of the
Age, who (...) with Pictures (...) ^s, Price 1 s.

(...) ^lations Divine and Moral, (...) ^s A. L. Capel, Baron of (...) ^ith
some account of his Life, (...) Letter^ to his Lady the day be^ (...) ^k
Behavior and last (...) also the Speeches and (...) the Earl of Holland, who
(...) his pious Advice to his (...)

(...) ^ngs Entertainment, in two (...) Ten pleasant Relations of (...) ^e
Accidents and Occurrences: (...) ^es, with their Explanati^ (...) ^tions and
Morals upon each. (...) Pictures, for illustrating (...). Excellently accommo^
(...) or Young, and useful (...) ^versation. Price 1 s.

^INIS.

