A SERMON Preached to the GENTLEMEN OF YORKSHIRE, At Bow-Church in LONDON, The
24th of June, 1684.

Being the Day of their Yearly FEAST.

By Tho. Cartwright D. D. Dean of Ripon, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
MAJESTY.

London, Printed for Tho. Fl^sher, at the Angel and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1684.

To all my very much Honored Friends, the respective Natives of the County of
YORK; more especially to those of the Late Solemn Meeting, and particularly to
the Worthy Stewards of the FEAST, Sir Robert Legard, Sir Thomas Yarburgh,
Abstrupas Danby, Richard Thornton, Lionel Richardson, Christopher Todd, George
Sayer, John Hatfield, Henry Rapier, David Prole, George Talbott, William Wyler.

SIRS,
IN an Age wherein Religion and Loyalty have been of late so much out of
fashion, I could not but be very well pleased to find such a Discourse as this,
so acceptable to a considerable part of the greatest County in the Kingdom, as
that You not only gave it the hearing, (though I tried your patience, more than
would have become me upon any other Subject than The Whole Duty of Man) but
were also pleased una imously to command the Publication of it for the benefit
of others who might need the counsel of my Text, more than your selves. How
unfit I was to perform the Task which you laid upon me, my own Reason (though
exceeding weak) does sufficiently resolve me; but the Subject is such as will
recommend it self, and the weaker my Discourse upon it is, the more pregnant
Testimony will it be of my Obsequiousness to your Commands, when I shall have
given up it and my Understanding to your Pleasure If it help to make any better
Christians or Subjects, I shall think my Pains very well bestowed, and be very
thankful for the Honor you have done me in laying your Commands upon me to
undertake this Employment, and giving me this fair opportunity of testifying to
the World, how ready I am to approve my self,

Your most faithful and obedient Servant in all Offices of true Piety and
Loyalty, THO. CARTWRIGHT.

PROVE. 24. 21, 22. My Son, Fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with
them that are given to change: For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who
knows the ruin of them both?
THE Author of this Advice to a Son, was Solomon, the wisest of Men by the
Testimony of Wisdom 1 King. 3. 12.
it self; and of all his Divine Proverbs or Aphorisms, this of my Text is the
choicest, being a short and select sentence, which he requires his Son to get
by heart, and recommends to his practice as the greatest piece of Piety and
Policy he could teach him. It Is indeed the Whole Duty of Man, which Solomon
here preaches and publishes (not in his own Name, and as some would have it in
favor of himself as a King, but) in the Name of the God of Wisdom, whose Image
and Superscription it bears; it is the Language of the Holy Scriptures, and has
the Breathings of the Spirit of God upon it, by whom he was inspired to give
this Divine Counsel, not only to Rehoboam the Prince, as his Natural Son; nor
to his own Subjects only of Judah and Jerusalem, as his Politic Sons; but as a
Divine Prophet, to us also, upon whom the ends of the World are come, as his
Spiritual Sons; to all sorts and degrees of Men, but especially to them, who
would be thought not to live without God in the World, nor to be Aliens to the
Commonwealth of Israel, or Strangers to the Covenant of Grace, but to be the
Legitimate Sons of God and Solomon; it is to them that he directs his Paternal
Counsel, whom he calls his Sons, to show his love to them, as well as his power
over them: And to satisfy them that their Fathers Precept will be for his Sons
Profit, he bids them look upon Obedience to God and the King, not as any
servile Yoke put upon their Natural Liberty, which they might watch a fair
opportunity to shake off when they could, but to pay the duty of Fear to them
both, upon Filial Principles, which is the Glorious Liberty of Romans 8. 21.
the Sons of God, wherewith Christ has made us free, and in which St. Paul
commands us to stand fast, as Gal. 5. 1.
well as Solomon.

Which is a more seasonable Subject for this Place, and these Times, than any
Honest Man could wish it, and that on which the meanest Preacher may speak more
with case, than some of his Auditors can hear with patience.

In the words of my Text we have,

I. A Paternal Precept, My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King; in which I
must observe,

1. The Affection which he commands his Son to cherish in his Breast, and that
is fear.

2. The Proper Objects of it, and those in Solomon's Judgment are God and the
King, in which give me leave to observe two things;

1. The Methodical Order and disposition of the words, First God, and then the
King.

2. The close and intimate connection between God and the King, it is the nearest
that may be, for there is no disjunctive, but a mere copulative between them,
they are joined together by that Wisdom which is from above; even by the Spirit
of Wisdom, and none but a Man of Belial will ever attempt to put them asunder.

II. A Peremptory Prohibition, Meddle not with them that are given to change;
not with Tale-bearers, who do falsely accuse others to the King, nor with them
who speak evil of him and his Government to the People.

III. The Proper Suggestion upon which that Prohibition is grounded, or the
reason of that restraint, which he lays upon his Son, drawn from the Changers,
and the Medlers doom, which is aggravated from Four Particulars.

1. Its certainty, doubt it not, their calamity shall rise.

2. Its suddenness, it shall surprise them suddenly and unexpectedly.

3. Its strangeness, it is a Nemo scit, who knows it?

4. Its extent, it will reach to the ruin both of the Changers and Medlers,
for they shall be both ruined, and receive to themselves Damnation both
Temporal and Eternal.

I know you want a Remembrancer more than an Instructor in this Lesson of Piety
and Loyalty; give me leave therefore to stir up that knowledge which is already
in you, that so you may go away the more considerate, if not the more
intelligent from this Exercise; and to say with St. Peter in the like case, I
will not be negligent to put you in remembrance of these things, 2 Pet. 1. 12,
13.
though ye know them and be established in the present truth, yea I think it
meet to stir you up by putting you in remembrance, of

1. The Paternal Precept, My Son, Fear thou the Lord and the King. Now

1. The affection, which he commands his Son to cherish in his heart is fear;
and there is no passion more necessary for all sorts of Men than this of fear,
the early want whereof was so visible in our first Parents; for had they
feared, they had not fell, but this their Guardian Angel being departed from
them, they quickly lost their Innocence and Paradise. The only care must be,
that it be placed upon its right objects, and these in Solomon's Judgment are
only two, God and the King.

1. He counsels us to fear God with a Filial Fear of Reverence and
Circumspection, a Conscientious Fear in Worshipping him, and a Careful Fear of
offending him, such as becomes all ingenuous and dutiful Children, who out of
love to their Parents are afraid of displeasing them, and of falling short of
their duty to them; which Filial Fear, he who is born of God, cannot put off,
but he will be fearful of any stone of stumbling in the whole course of his
life, which may make him fall into Sin, and will make it his principal care and
design to approve the sincerity of his heart to the piercing eye of a jealous
God, which Fear discovers it self, not in a trembling amazement, but in a
cheerful and uniform Obedience to all his Commandments; which is such a divine
fear as never damps his Spirits, or robs him of those succors which Reason
would afford him, but makes him as bold as a Lion, and may Prove. 28. 1.
therefore be justly termed the beginning or principal Prove. 9. 10.
part of Wisdom. And indeed what greater folly and madness can the most
desperate Malefactor be guilty of, than to commit Capital Crimes in the sight
of his Judge? And yet how easily are we tempted to offend the dreadful Majesty
of the Omnipresent and Almighty Judge, who observes our closest Actions, and
will infallibly call us to account for them, and reward us according to what we
have done in the flesh, whether it have been good or evil? When you walk in the
ways of Math. 16. 27. Eccl. 11. 9.
your own hearts, and in the sight of your eyes, remember that for all these
things God will bring you to Judgment. And knowing this terror of the Lord,
let me persuade 2 Cor. 5. 11.
you, not to let your Lives give your Lips the lie, when you say that you fear
him; but consider that you naturally fix your eyes upon that which you fear,
and cannot easily get that out of your minds which does affright you. If
therefore you pretend to be afraid of Gods displeasure, where is your
tenderness of his Honor? Your care to please him, your zeal for his Cause and
Service, your delight in his Commands, and your rejoicing to do his Will? You
cannot fear his Name, and blaspheme it: If against the clear evidence of his
Word, and your own Consciences, you entertain any rebellious thoughts against
the Lord whom you should fear, you can neither escape his sight in this life,
nor his vengeance in the next. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, by wearing
his Livery, and doing the Devil Service; by talking as if you were inspired,
and had Cloven Tongues, and yet acting as if you were possessed, as some Cloven
Footed Protestants have of late done. There is no way to please God, 2 Cor. 10.
5. Jam. 1. 22.
but by bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ: Be ye
therefore doers of his Word, and not hearers only: Indent not with him to spare
you, no not in your darling sins, but resist them to the blood, because the
keeping of some of his Commandments, will not expiate for the breach of the
rest: Make no League with any Gibeonite; spare no Agag, no ruling sin, but
crucify the Old Man with his affections and lusts; Dash all those Babylonish
Brats against the stones, which are Traitors to the Crown and Dignity of the
King of Heaven; throw them from you with the same indignation that you would do
those loathsome things which you cannot behold without great distemper: Let
Christ be your King on Earth, and he will be your Savior in Heaven: Be as
ready to be overruled by him here, as to be rewarded by him hereafter; so
shall you prove your selves to be Solomon's Sons indeed, nay Sons of God, and
Heirs of Eternal Glory: always provided, that to this fear of God, you add that
of the King.

2. My Son, Fear the King. God commands us to subdue our wills* to that will of
Man on Earth, that he may the better subdue us to his own will in Heaven; and
accordingly our Savior came into the World to take away the Sins, not the Laws
of it. Nor was the Religion he established designed to loose the Reins of Civil
Government, but to keep Subjects under the same and greater Obligations than he
found them; to make sacred the Persons as well as Offices of Princes, and to
establish their just Prerogatives, as being those Visible and Mortal Gods, whom
the Almighty had honored with his Name, and to whom he had deligated his
Vicegerent power over us, and bound us, not only for wrath, but also for
Conscience sake, to obey and fear them, as ordained of him, and to reverence
that Divine Character of Sovereignty, which that his Ordination had impressed
upon them: Fear Good Kings as God, Bad Ones for him, though they should strain
the necessary and essential Powers of Government beyond its due pitch, and
become as very Tyrants, as Nero was, whose Power was from God in St. Paul's
Romans 13. 1. 2.
judgment, though the abuse of it were from himself, and his way of attaining
it not justifiable: For the Roman Emperors were not by right, but by force then
Lords of the World, and yet he commands Every Soul, Omnis anima quoniam ex
animo, to be sincerely subject to them; and though they were unworthy of that
Authority which they usurped and abused, yet were they not in any case to be
resisted under peril of Damnation.

'Twas God made Solomon King over Israel, not the Priest or the People; and he
is said to have set him on 2 Chronicles. 9. 8.
his own Throne, to let the People know that he did immediately represent his
Person, and was in his stead among them, as his Vicegerent and Lieutenant under
him. Inde est Imperator unde and homo antequam Imperator, Tertul.
inde potestas illi, unde and Spiritus: He made him a King, who made him a Man;
and from him had he his Scepter, from whom he had his Soul. And this was no
Court-Complement of Tertullian's, ( None of those Love-Tricks which were played
between the King and his People in the Honey-Moon of His Majesty's
Restoration, as the Plato Redivivus, who is not yet out of love with his
Commonwealth Principles styles them) nor did he speak it in his own Person, but
as the Judgment of the whole Catholic Church, whose Cause he was then
defending: So that the King does not Reign it seems in the Judgment of the
Primitive Church, either by the Commission of the Pope, or the Courtesy of the
People, who can no more choose their Princes, than their Parents; and have as
much Reason and Religion on their side to renounce the Authority of the one, as
of the other; and if there were any case, in which it might be lawful for us to
cast off the Yoke of their Authority, who should be judge of the Fact? Neither
the King nor his Subjects, for both are Parties: but Polybius his (...), the
Law of Hands, the longest Sword must be the Arbiter of that Controversy; and
how bloody a sentence that will give, on which side soever it light, our Civil
Wars, and the fatal period of them, may easily convince us; by which all that
we gained at last, was an endless liberty of ruining one another without hope
of redress. Though the King should oppose Gods express and immediate Will, and
overturn the very Foundations of Religion, yet the Almighty is able to defend
his own Cause; nor will He allow the People, whose Passions, Humors and
Insolences make them always unfit to become Reformers, without and against his
express warrant to usurp so great a Power, as to pretend to any right to
restrain the Royal Power which they never gave.

Let us therefore as becomes Solomon's Sons, pay the Duty of Subjection to
whatsoever Prince God in his overruling Providence shall think fit to set over
us: for though he were as bad as Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon, we must
either serve him, or perish eternally, and they prophecy a lie to you in Gods
Name who preach any other Doctrine, if the Prophet Jeremiah say true, Jer. 27.
10, 15, 16.

With what Alacrity then should we subject our selves to such a Pious and
Gracious King as our is, who if he be not in as much reverence with us, as he
is in esteem with God, all our pretended Piety to the Deputer, will never
expiate our Disloyalty to his Deputy; which will the better appear, because the
Obedience which God commands us to yield the King, is but the payment of an Old
Debt, which is due by the Fifth Commandment to the Supreme Father of our
Country, to him as next Heir to Adam, the first Monarch of the World, in whom
the Supremacy was as large and unlimited as any act of his Will; for God gave
him Dominion over the World, and made him Sole Proprietor of it, Genesis 1. 28.
And if he had not been so expressly made the Sovereign Lord of the Universe by
that Special Commission from the High Court of Heaven, yet all Mankind being
sprung from his Loins, were born in Subjection to him by the Law of God and
Nature, which invested him with a Patriarchal and Uncontrollable Power, not
only over his Children, but also over those who were descended from them,
during his life; which being transmitted after his death to his Eldest Son and
Successor Seth, (Cain having forfeited his Birthright by the Murder of Abel)
and so downwards in the right line, there could never be a time till the Flood
when the World was not under such a Monarchical Government.

Now when the Universal Deluge had swept away all Mankind but Noah and his
Sons; Noah was not Genesis 9. 2.
Tenant in common with his Sons, as one Lawyers Opinion is, (who was no better
a Friend to the Crown than the Church) for God would never have disinherited so
just and pious a Prince as Noah, whom he made the Restorer of all Mankind: And
therefore Cedrenus and Eusebius tells us, (as that Antiquary knew well enough)
that he by the Right which God and Nature had invested him with, did Twenty
Years before his death make a Partition of the World among his Sons, allotting
to every one his share, which he confirmed by his last Will, and gave it into
the Hands of Sem; and to him over and above his share, after his death, a kind
of Supremacy, as Lord in chief over the whole, admonishing them to live
peaceably, and not to invade each others Territories.

Nor did the Kings lose their Ground, till after Joshuah's time; for then the
tame People thought this Prerogative Doctrine, which we now Preach, to be
wholesome Divinity, and yet they were neither Evil Counselors, nor Flattering
Courtiers, nor Time-serving Priests who put him upon it; nor was he himself
thought a Tyrant for accepting such an Arbitrary Power over them, as this would
seem to be through a Pair of Modern Spectacles, Josh. 1. 10, 11. And they
answered Joshua, saying, All that thou command us we will do, and
whithersoever thou sendest us we will go, according as we hearkened to Moses in
all things, so will he hearken unto thee; and whosoever he be that does rebel
against thy Commandment in all that thou command him, he shall be put to
death.

And that the Kings of England hold their Imperial Crowns (for so Nine several
Statutes at least do call them) by the Law of God and Nature, subject to none
but the Almighty and only Ruler of Princes, and not by Human Institution, has
been the agreement of all Parliaments, though of different Interest, Religion
and Tempers, whom they therefore styled their Supreme Natural Liege Lord, Omnes
sub eo and ipse sub nullo nisi tantum sub Deo, says Bracton, who was Lord
Chief Justice in Henry the Third's time, next under God, and inferior to none
but him; so that his is Potestas Dei Vicaria, a Ray of Gods Majesty, who has
armed him with the Power of Life and Death by his Commission, who alone could
put the Sword into his hands for that purpose, as being the sole Arbiter of
Life and Death, who only can take it away, because he gave it. For it is plain
to all who understand any thing but Rebellion, that the Peoples Consent could
not do it, for they have not Power over their own Lives, and so could not
transfer that to another which they had not themselves. His Title may well be
Dei Gratia, for of God does he hold his Crown in Capite; it is by his Grace that
Kings are what they are, and our Kings of England have their Crowns
unquestionably established by an Inherent and Independent Right Antecedent to
their Coronations, by Birthright, by Consent, by Prescription, and by Law,
which are all the ways whereby any Right can be legally established; and it is
the Power of God in their Hands to which we are required to subject our selves;
and the violation of every particular Law made by them, does necessarily draw
along with it the violation of the general Law of God, by which he commands
Matthew. 22. 21.
Obedience to them, not with eye-service as men-pleasers, but in singleness of
heart fearing God and the King. In which words we are diligently to observe two
things.

1. Their Methodical Order and Disposition, Fear them both in their proper
Order, but First God; and it is 1 Timothy 6. 15.
good reason, for He is King of Kings; and Lord of Lords. If the King bids,
what God forbids, and so the fear of both become incompatible, you must obey
God ^ather than Man, because the Subordinate must yield to the Supreme, Gods
Minister to the Master and Maker* of us all; and therefore though it may be
sometimes necessary not to obey the King actively, (as it happened to the Captive
Jews under Nebuchadnezzar, and to some of the Apostles under the Roman
Emperors,) for they could not obey God and the King too, and then the Case of
Conscience was easily resolved, in as much as his Commands were countermanded
by an higher and greater Power, and the Obligation of such irregular Precepts
rescinded by a more indisputable Authority, and a more indisputable Law than
his, even by the clear express word of God, which is the Standard of Obedience
both to him and the King; and yet even then a passive Obedience was and is
necessary in the Judgment of the first and best Christians, who when they could
not obey with Piety, did dye with Patience, and lay quietly down under the
burden which they durst not bear; they patiently expected a redress of such
unusual Emergencies from the good Providence of God, for whose sake they
suffered them.

But alas! In our Iron-Age a little Loyalty and less Religion serves most Men's
turns; there is nothing more pretended to, nor any thing less practiced than
either; and they who are most forward to dispute who is to be feared God or the
King, first or most, are usually the Men who (for all their tender Consciences,
which serve for nothing but to mischief others and themselves) seldom fear or
obey either; for if they did, they would observe, a little better than they do,

2ly, The close Connection between God and the King, it is so near that there is
no Disjunctive, but a mere Copulative between them; My Son, fear thou God and
the King, (...), and be disobedient Sept.
or contumacious to neither of them. If there were not a God in Heaven, there
would be no Gods on Earth; nor would Mankind subject themselves to Government,
but that there is something of the Image of God in it, to which they are bound
by an Inherent Principle which Religion improves to pay a Natural Homage. Our
Civil Peace would soon be turned into a Civil War, if it were not for this; and
therefore there never was any Nation so Impolitick and Bruitishly Barbarous,
but that they embraced and established some Religion or other among them, as
knowing how great Influence it had on the Body Politic. Religion when pure and
undefiled, has always proved a good Friend to Government; and that Religion
will at last be found to be best, which befriends and strengthens it most; and
the better Christians Men are, the better Subjects they will be: for the
Integrity of Christian Loyalty, as Arnobius proves against the Gentiles, is
greater than that of any other Religion which was ever received in the World.
Vos Conscios timetis, nos Conscientiam: You are subject for fear your
Disloyalty should rise up in Judgment against you before Men, but we for fear
our Consciences should accuse us before God. It Is the fear of him which begets
in us the fear of the King, who represents him, and exercises his Authority
over us. Our Religion allows not the least opposition to be made by any private
Man, or any Body of Men to their Superiors, but strictly and indisponsibly
requires our Subjection to the Authority of the Worst Princes, and forbids our
laying violent hands on them, though they were Tyrants, and Invaders of the
Peoples Liberties; the very Worst of Men as well as Kings, looks not upon their
failings to be any abatement of their Power, nor admits any Asylum for their
Assassinates or Murderers. And I may venture to say in all places without the
hazard of a Quarrel, That the Principles of the Church of England are as
innocent and peaceable, and at least as Auxiliary to the Civil Government, as
the Maxims and Articles of any Church under Heaven, and much more than those of
the Church of Rome or Geneva, in respect of their extravagant Papal or Popular
Power, of the Conclave or Synod, directly or indirectly exercised by either of
them in Ordine ad Spiritualia, and the Exemption of their Clergy from the
Coercive Power of Princes. Our Principles are, and have in all Ages been truly
serviceable to the Government of Civil as well as of Religious Societies; and
our Protestant Religion established by Law, has the promise of this life and
that which is to come, and may justly be termed the best Reason of State: Nor
can any thing be of greater importance to the Security or Ruin of the Kingdom,
than the well or ill Administration of it. Most certain it is, that no Society
can be upheld without Oaths, Promises and Engagements, which are the Highest
Security of which Mankind is capable; nor can any of them hold, unless Religion
bind us to it; and therefore in Machiavel's Judgment, (who was none of the best
Friends to it) it is of great Importance to a State to preserve a worthy esteem
of it. And wise Princes will both in point of Gratitude and Interest cherish
the National Religion, which is a part of the Government, and being bred up
with it, will be sure never to give it any disturbance, by prohibiting and
restraining all strange and new Religions, which will only serve to exercise
the Kings patience, and keep him in breath with the Disturbances they will
create among his Subjects, (of which the late times have been an unhappy
instance) for the prevention whereof, God has put the Sword into his hands,
and he must not bear it in vain, but use it whilst he has it, as a proper
Instrument for the preservation of Peace and Piety in his Dominions: This is
that which makes his Authority so Sovereign, and his Person so sacred, that the
Historian has placed him next to God himself, as well as Solomon, Proximus
Diis habetur, per quem Deorum Majestas Justin. 1.
vindicatur. There is but one fear in my Text, which is due both to God and the
King; the Almighty has joined them together as well as Solomon, and he would
have us do so too: therefore neither the Popes nor the Speakers Chair must be
set between Gods and the Kings Throne; no just Interposition of any third
Person and Power, for our Debt to God and the King commences from our Birth;
and the Duties of Obedience to God, and of Allegiance to the King, are of the
first and greatest Importance, the Obligation whereof must be first paid, or
else an Everlasting Judgment will be entered against us in this Life, and
infallibly executed in the next.

Now there are three sorts of People who do attempt to disjoyn God and the King
in this kind; The Papal Jesuit, the Protestant Jesuit, and he who pretends to
be a Royalist, and yet disgraces so good a Cause by his profane Life. The two
first are Fratres in Malo, Twins of Rebellion, the Elder is of the Ignatian
Fraternity, and Roman Conclave, who puts the Pope; the Younger of the
Puritanical Assembly or Classis, which puts the People between God and the
King; and therefore I call the one a Papal, and the other a Phanatical Jesuit;
for I believe them both to be Roman Pensioners, two Parties commanded by one
General, because in all times, when the Government has been charging one of
them in the front, the other has always treacherously attacked it in the rear,
(and as much of late as ever) and both proved themselves in the end, Abhorrers
of Monarchy, underhand Contrivers, and restless Opposers of it, as they always
pretend for Conscience sake, out of a joint design to make the King a Property,
and his Government Precarious: Their Names are different, but their Nature is
the same in point of Disobedience. And the third, viz. The Profane Liver, who
pretends to Loyalty by making no Conscience of his Duty toward God, is also a
false Traitor to the King, notwithstanding the many good words he gives him,
and the great Honor he vainly boasts in all Companies to bear toward Him.

1. Give me leave to set first to the Bar the Papal Jesuit, who is all for the
fear of God, the Propagation of the Catholic Religion, and of the Apostolical
See of Rome; but tell him of the fear of the King, and then he leaves you, as
if the Pope and He were the Real Defenders of the Faith, and the King only the
Nominal and Titular one; and accordingly he teaches his Profelytes to weigh out
their Obedience to him by Drams and Scruples in a Pair of Jesuitical Scales;
makes the Prince stand to the Popes Allowance for Authority, and taken his
leavings, who of course exempts all the Clergy from their Obedience to their
Natural Sovereign, and makes them pay their Suit and Service to him as their
Lord Paramount, as if his Tribunal and Gods were but one; and the Civil
Magistrate by becoming the Son of the Church, had lost his Secular Power. An
excellent Doctrine to convert Pagan Princes to the Christian Religion, or
Protestants to the Popish! The fatal and pernicious Consequences of which
Popish Principles, our Parliaments have in all Ages as well before the
Reformation as since expressed their just detestation of, as appears by the
Statute of Carlisle, made 35 Edw. 1. and by that of Proviso's, made 25 Edw. 3.
and by many more in King Henry the Eighth's Reign, who was both Parliamentarily
and Synodically invested with the Supremacy in all Causes as well Spiritual as
Temporal, which was legally and essentially inherent in the Crown before, the
King of England being Supreme Ordinary by the Ancient Common Law of this
Kingdom, of which those Statutes were not Introductory, but Declarative: And
it is a great wonder to me, that every Prince in Christendom is not as much
possessed with an Anti-Papal Spirit at this day as ever King Henry the Eighth
was, considering what an Implacable Enemy the Pope has been to the Dignity and
Security, to the Powers and Lives of all Princes, especially such as he calls
Heretical ones.

2. The Protestant or Fanatical Jesuits, if they would be content to be civil
Subjects, yet they will be Ecclesiastical Superiors; they would have a King
under them, not over them. The King must Command as they will have him, or he
is no King for them; nor will they fear him, but make him fear them, if they
can compass their ends. He must do things against his Conscience, Oath and
Honor, against the Fundamental Laws of the Land, and the very being of the
Government, or else though they speak him as fair as they did his Roayl Father
of blessed memory in the Covenant, and so hide the Cloven Foot for a while with
their broad Pharisaical Phylacteries, and entrench themselves in the sure
retreat of those popular and plausible Pretenses of preserving His Majesty's
Person, and the Protestant Religion, yet they watch but for a fair opportunity
to put off their Hypocritical Vizards, and to make him feel the smart effects
of their Implacable Enmity against him, and let him see by woeful experience how
little they do either love or fear him, as they did his Royal Father before him,

David was a Man after Gods own heart, and had a Conscience truly tender, (I
would to God all that are called so in our days were like it) which made him so
sensible of his fault in snipping off a small shred of the Skirt of Readiness
Coat: But our Dissenters Itching Fingers long to be tampering with the
Prerogative, and will cut off as much as they can get into their hands and
throw it to the People, as the Men of God did in the late ^^ Rebellion, (for so
the deluded Multitude called them) though they proved Men of War, fired with
Phanatical Zeal against the Most Christian Magistrate in the World, our
Martyred Sovereign. The Black Coats of their Schism in stead of being
Messengers of Peace, sounded the Treasonable Alarms from such places as these;
though the Red Coats fought the Battles, they taught their Congregations to
construe the Singulis Major and Vniversis Minor after Buchanan's Translation,
and made them believe, That the People (which begins to be as fashionable a
word now as it was Forty years since) were as much above the King, as the King
is above the meanest of his Subjects. The King (say they) and other Magistrates
are but our Servants to protect us from Violence and Mean Tekel, page 41.
Oppression; and if they break their Trust, the Law of God and Nature allows us
to call our Servants to account, and to punish them according to their
Demerits, and to turn them out of our Service, ( In good time) and out of the
World too, as they did the Hist. of In dep. Part 2. Sect. 80, 81, 82.
Royal Martyr, as a Traitor to the Sovereignty of the People, (as that Insolent
Judge Bradshaw then Impudently styled it) which corrupt and false Principle of
placing the Original of Government in our Sovereign Lords the People, is not
only derogatory to God, whose Written Word it gives the lie to, but is also
destructive to the very being of Humane Society: For if the Power be radically
in them, and only passed over by the Conveyance of a Common Consent, with a
Power of Revocation upon equitable Conditions expressed or implied, (of which
the People shall be Judges) it is but their recalling of that Power, (to which
the Unwary Mobile may be easily tempted, for it is Neutrum modo, mas modo
Vulgus) and the Government is dissolved, and so all our Happiness lies at the
Mercy and Will of the Crowd, which will make us a reproach to our Neighbors,
and Psalm. 79. 4.
a scorn and derision (as it has already done in a great measure) to all that
are round about us.

We live in an Age wherein Men seem to call themselves Protestants, not from
that solemn and Honorable Protestation which was made by several Princes
against the Errors and Superstitions of Rome, and an Edict made in prejudice
of the Reformed Religion at Spires in Germany, A. D. 1529. but rather from the
Protestations made by the Covenanting Rebels of Scotland, against Gods and the
Kings Authority, A. D. Hist. of I^dep. Part 2. Sect. 100. and 1 1.
1638. and 1639. First against the Function of Episcopacy as Antichristian, and
not long after, against the King, and Kingship it self, which they first voted
down, and then abjured. And still their Impenitent Offspring, who are Nursed
up too fondly amongst us, fear any thing but God and the King, being grown so
over-familiar with both as to contemn them. Nimia superbia nihil timent: The
Haughty Spirits of our Modern Seditious Dissenters, (the last, but worst
Edition of Protestants, and that which needs much Correction and Amendment)
scorn to stoop to Authority, and therefore they speak evil of Dignities, and
Libel the Government, and do as much as in them lies to scare all the Princes
in Christendom from turning Protestants, by reason of whom the Way of Truth,
and of the best Religion under Heaven, comes to be evil spoken of, from whence
our Calamities do arise; and Solomon says theirs shall suddenly arise.

3ly. He who calls himself a Royalist, and yet disgraces so Good a Cause by his
Bad Life, does also disjoyn God and the King: He pretends as much to Honor the
King, as the other two do to fear God: He will Talk, Drink, and Fight for him,
but whilst he makes no Conscience of his duty to God, but lives in all manner
of Lewdness and Profaneness, he is not so good a Servant to the King as he
would be thought to be; for he does him more hurt by his Sins, than he can do
him good by his Sword; and pulls down more Judgments by his Iniquities, than he
can ever prevent or remove by his utmost Endeavors: And therefore though you
are ready to open your Veins and Purses for him as becomes you upon all
Occasions, and as your Loyal Ancestors of Yorkshire did before you for his
Father of Blessed Memory; yet unless you, who have rebelled against him by your
evil Lives, do reconcile your selves to the King of Heaven, and make your peace
with him, you are but Traitors to his Crown and Dignity; nor can you ever be
truly devoted Servants to him, unless you are devout Servants to the Almighty,
from whom comes his help. No Man can serve his Prince without Courage and
Honesty, and it is the Fear of God which is the right Parent of both; and
therefore as no true Christian can ever be a Rebel, so neither is any vicious
Man a truly Loyal Subject, for how serviceable soever he may be to the King in
other Instances, the Iniquities which he cherishes are such, for which 1 Samuel
12. 25.
God will destroy both him and the King. So that all National Sins have High
Treason in them; and every Combination in such public Enormities is a
Conspiracy and Rebellion against our King and Country.

Now as great Sinners as the worst of you are, I hope you are all more Men than
to prove your selves such Beasts, as to become Paracides to please a
destructive Lust, and to imbrue your Hands in your Princes Blood, (to whom you
pretend so much Duty) rather than to wash them in Innocence for his good and
your own. If there be any true Love and Loyalty in you to our Gracious
Sovereign Lord and his Royal Family; Any Affection to your Native Country; Any
Compassion to your own Souls, amend your Lives speedily, and do not like blind
Sampson pull down the goodly Fabric of Church and State upon their Heads and
your own, by your continued Rebellion against Heaven, but live so in the fear
of God, as if you did in earnest desire and hope for better times. Be faithful
to the King in your Persons and Purses, but let not your evil Lives conspire
against him. If our Enmity against the King of Heaven do not shake his Throne,
the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against it.

If you agree that God and the King are to be feared, why do you not agree to
do it? If either you are Solomon's Sons, or Gods Servants; if your Wisdom be
from above, or of this World, it is more than time that you showed it by putting
his Paternal Precept in practice, and taking also the just notice which becomes
you of his; secondly Peremptory Prohibition, Meddle not with them that are
given to change, with Men of Levity and Humor; for it argues a great Disease
and Sickness as well in the Soul as in the Body, whether Natural, Politic or
Ecclesiastical, to be continually tossing from one side to the other; Sound
Religion, like the Author of it, being yesterday, to day, and the same for
ever; and that Form of Government best both in Church and State, into which the
Real Interest and Manners of the People have run longest, and with the
strongest Current. Let not Inconveniences prevail with you to break Oaths, or
to overturn Laws and Ancient Boundaries, for nothing has so great an
Inconvenience in it as that; those are but partial, but this would be a total
one. Now all Public Changes are full of difficulty, but those in State or
Religion are so full of danger too, that it has always been thought fit, by
Wise Men, to bear with some tolerable Defects and Evils in either, rather than
by endeavoring to reform them, to hazard the marring of all the rest. And
though Interest in such as desire a change do often make them apprehend more
Advantages than really there are, and cover those very Doubts and Dangers they
are privy to, for fear of disheartning those short-sighted Men who are
unadvisedly Embarked in their designed Innovations; yet the sharpest eyesight
is not able to reach the sad Consequences and fatal End of such Attempts: For
either their Counsels must be backed with Arms, or they will prove dangerous to
the Undertakers; and so they who have engaged themselves and others in such a
desperate design, are reduced before they are aware to the Vicious Necessity of
more desperate Remedies, and do often make choice of those, which are much more
mischievous than the Diseases which they pretend to cure. There are few Men
Engaged in any Faction, who are so wise as to see their own Mistakes, or so
ingenuous as to confess them when they see them. Besides, the fear and
jealousy of being called to a future account for the breach of the known Laws
of the Kingdom, does naturally beget more rebellious Attempts in those
Incroaching Subjects, who being conscious to themselves of their having
exceeded the limits of Duty and Obedience to their lawful Sovereign, will do
what in them lies, to debase the King below the condition of any freeborn
Subject, and by factious and seditious Reflections on the Government, will keep
the Wounds of the Kingdom open, that they may suck its Blood, and save their
own, which has been the unwarrantable practice of some Brokers of Sedition in
these days, for whom the Kings Bench is a much fitter place than the Royal
Exchange.

By all which it will appear, that the Changing of Religion under any
Comprehensive Notion whatsoever, is the most desperate Paroxysm that can happen
to a sickly State; and therefore Maecenas in Dio counsels young Octavian to
worship God according to his Country custom, and to compel others so to do; but
to hate and punish the Bringers in of strange Religions, because they who bring
in new Forms of Worship, will also persuade Men to receive other Laws, and
bring in as fast as they can new Forms of Government. And therefore when the
National Religion comes to be questioned, disputed, and decryed, it is high time
for the Supreme Magistrate to take heed that Popular Tumults and Disturbances
do not sit hard upon the Commonwealth; for Schismatics are the
Standard-Bearers of Sedition, and the common Barretors of Mankind; Traitors in
Masqu^rade; and if their Power were answerable to their Spirits, they would
command Fire from Heaven to burn us all up in an instant.

And yet to our shame be it spoken, we Englishmen never know when we are well,
and are justly reproached by a Proverb for being given to change; our Garbs and
our Forms of Religion must be of the new Model, Cut or Fashion: many quarrel at
the Principles of that established by Law, and more despise the practice of it.
God has made us the Envy, and we live as if we meant to make our selves the
Scorn of the World. Our Laws are good and many, and we live as if we had none:
Our Religion is firmly established by them, and we laugh it out of countenance;
and the Liberty of Conscience which we are so ready to contend for, is designed
for nothing but a Cloak of Maliciousness.

I would to God it were not told in Gath, nor published in the streets of
Ascalon. Are you grown sick of your Religion and Loyalty, and with an
Inconstancy natural to Islanders, do you affect a change for the worse? if not,
why do you meddle with them that are given to it, and why do you espouse their
Cause as if it were the darling of your own Hearts? or why will you run along
with them into real and present, to avoid possible, future and imaginary
mischeifs? Would you change a Catholic Church into a sarm of Schismatical
Conventicles, a Flourishing Kingdom into a Fading Commonwealth, Uniformity into
Confusion, the Ancient Fundamental Laws of the Land into those Bloody ones
which the Arbitrary Sword shall give you? a long and lasting peace into a more
lasting War? Fullness into Famine, Wives into Widows, Children to Orphans,
bring your selves into your Graves, and leave the English Nation behind you, a
hissing and reproach to all that are round about us?

Will no Charters please the Body Politic, but such as may enable them to Sin
with an high hand against the Father of our Country, from whose bounty they
derive all their Freedoms and Privileges? for all Corporations are the
Creatures of the Crown, and when their high Stomachs will not be satisfied,
unless they may devour their Makers Prerogative, they need a Charter of Pardon
in stead of that of Freedom. Alas, that Golden Liberty which you have been
vainly taught to hope for by some busy Incendiaries who are now under the lash
of the Law, you would have found (as the just reward of your easy credulity)
to have been nothing else but the Iron Fetters of the most Arbitrary Slaves in
the World under the worst of Algerines, your own fellow Subjects, the gilded
Antidote which these State-Mountebanks offered you, would have proved a deadly
poison; and it concerns you as much as your happiness comes to, to take great
heed, lest by bogling at the shadow of Popery, placed only in your own
deceitful imaginations, you open the door before you are aware to let in the
Substance. He that would see what will be, let him seriously consider what has
been; let him sum up the Total Account of the profit of all that Blood and
Treasure which was spent in our late unhappy Wars, for promoting the Good old
Cause (Religion and Property the ordinary Common Places upon which Rebels
declaim) and satisfy himself that there are the same Desires, Humors and
Interests drove on in this age that were in the former, and much more furiously
now than then, by hands and mouths as like to those in Forty Eight as one Egg
can be to another. The grand design of our late saucy Clamarous Petitioners,
was the putting of the Government all out of Order, and making so many gaps and
divisions in the Public Fences of the Kingdom, that any seditious Person might
leap over them, or break through them at pleasure. You had been filled ere this
with your own desires, if God and the King had not been merciful to you beyond
your deserts, and whatsoever you then vainly dreamed of, when you are once
perfectly awake, you will find ten Rebels in Masquerade for one Romanist in
Masquerade, or else there would never have been so many Mechanical and Female
Politicians, so many Blew and White Aprons (for the former are influenced by
the later) to inform and advise the King and his Privy Council when to call
Parliaments, and how to govern us: How can you betray greater ingratitude to
God and the King for the peace and plenty you now do, and have so long jnjoy'd,
than by anticipating future evils, and prejudging future providence, and for
preventing imaginary mischiefs running headlong into real ones? They fright the
common people out of their Wits and Duty together, by fly-blowing their Heads
with the buzzing of Plots and Designs in the Air against their Lives and
Liberties, by which it is to be feared they design to teach them at last to
pinion their own Happiness, and to bring our Gracious Sovereign (whom God long
preserve) to the same fatal Scaffold that they did King Charles the Martyr,
which no good Man can think of without the greatest abhorrence imaginable.
These Intestine Incendiaries are set on underhand by the Court of Rome, and
perhaps by another Court too, both whose Interests depend on our Divisions and
Distractions, to disperse and foment Jealousies between the King and the
Country, by bespattering him with a design of Introducing Popery and Arbitrary
Government, and branding Men of more Sobriety, Justice and Charity, of much
better Principles than themselves, with Nicknames not fit to be mentioned here,
and endeavoring to run down the best Men and Counselors with Noise and
Tumult, beyond all shame and reason, as they attempted to do some of our Noble
Countrymen, who are the Glory of the North, and their Reputation the more
Glorious after such a Resurrection as God and the King have given it. Things
were lately come to that pass, that he who was not factiously bent against his
Majesty's Prerogative and the Churches Patrimony, and would not be such a
thorow-pac'd Protestant as not only to forsake and oppose Rome, but also to
take his Freedom at Amsterdam, was stigmatized as a dangerous person who
designed the Slavery of Englishmen, and the Ruin and Extirpation of the True
Protestant Religion. Take heed to your selves whilst you may, before your
Happiness be fled too far out of distance to be retrieved; Meddle not with them
who do not fear God and the King, fear not their fear, be not afraid without a
cause, but let the Isai. 8. 12.
Lord be your fear, lest you involve your selves and others in the same
Mischiefs which Solomon foretells will infallibly light upon the Heads of them
who are given to change, and of the Medlers too, which never were nor will be
good for any thing till they are rotten; which brings me in the last place to
the

3. Proper Suggestion upon which his Prohibition is grounded, or the reason of
this restraint laid upon his Son, drawn from the Changers and Medlers doom, for
their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both? and
detrahentis and ei feventis eorum detractiones libenter audiendo, of him who
robs the King of the Honor due to him, and of him who lends an itching ear to
the disloyal Detractor; for the Receiver is as bad as the Thief, and he who
does not apprehend and discover him whom he finds robbing the King of his Good
Name and of his Subjects Hearts shall fare no better than he. When God and the
King exert their Power, their Enemies ruin will be certain, whether they be
Changers or Medlers, which is the first aggravation of their Judgment, drawn

1. A Certitudine; doubt it not, their Calamity shall rise, and they who would
not in time fear, shall then infallibly feel the just effects of their
displeasure. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a Man Gal. 6. 7.
sows, that shall he also reap; for he is no respecter of persons, but his
Judgments are true and righteous altogether, Psalm. 19. 1.
so that it must needs be a fearful and fatal thing for a Traitor to fall into
the hands of the living God, who hates Rebellion as the Sin of Witchcraft, and
will revenge it accordingly. No Policy, Plot, or Strength of any created thing
shall be able to rescue or reprieve them, when once his Vengeance has
appointed their execution, all their Slights and Tricks shall fail them at a
dead lift; an Ignoramus Jury cannot serve their turns, for the sentence of this
great Judge is irrevocable, they shall soon be cut off as the grass, and wither
Psalm. 37. 2.
as the green herb.

The Authority of God and the King must at any rate be redeemed from contempt
by the due execution of the Laws of both against obstinate Offenders, and
incorrigible Villains, which is the Reputation and Life of the Government; and
therefore Kings do not only participate of Gods Power and Patience, but must
also imitate him in his Justice, and his manner of proceeding against obstinate
Rebels. Whatsoever is necessary, is also just, and that must be done which
cannot be avoided. Without Government there would be no Communities of Men, and
without Coercive Power there would be no Government; and as it is (not
Persecution, but) an Act of Mercy to cut off a Gangreen'd Arm from the Body
Natural to preserve the Man from perishing; so is it no less to the Body
Politic to cut off those corrupt Members of the Commonwealth, which hinder the
Kingdom from flourishing, and to prevent those growing Mischiefs of which the
Ringleaders of Rebellion are ambitious to be the Authors, by smiting those with
the Sword of Justice, who smote the King and their fellow Subjects with the
Fist of Violence. It Is Power that begets Fear, and Fear that makes Gods, and
Rules the World; and accordingly the Pulse of the Government beats high or low
with that of the Supreme Magistrate, whose remisness and connivance does
prognostic the decay of an unsettled Government. Toleration, as harmless and
reasonable a thing as it now seems, was once thought intolerable by them who
now earnestly plead for it, and will be found, if ever tried, (as I hope it
never will) to be the cause of many more Evils than we can easily foresee, and
will render the Diseases and Distempers of the State as well as of the Church
more strong and powerful than any Remedies; and that King who will make his
Enemies believe that he is afraid of danger in the discharge of his Trust,
shall never live without it. It Is better to venture some trouble at hand, and
run the hazard of Legal Executions, than to fall under certain ruin, though
somewhat farther distant. The Crowd is rather to be awed than reasoned with by
Lawyers, it being Fear and not Love or Judgment which is their proper Passion:
for though none are so bold and insolent in their Juncto's and Cabals as they,
yet none so faint-hearted and fearful apart. 'Twere well if Love could, but
it is necessary that Fear should Rule the World; and therefore it is safer to
work upon them by a Power which may cure the one, than by any advantage that
may excite the other, which they will perversely impute to unavoidable good
Nature, Fear, Oversight, or Weakness; and if any of them seem converted by it,
and are wrought over into a better mind, or put by Preferment into an hot fit
of Loyalty, they will cool on a sudden, and prove like Witches able to do
hurt, but no good at all to the Government, to raise the Devil of Discontent
and Rebellion, but not to lay it; whereas if the Prince punish them by the
severity of the Law, he will oblige them or others to the observance of it ever
after; nor will they love him for his Clemency, till he have first taught them
to fear him for his Justice and Resolution.

It Is impossible ever to oblige them, for they will make one Concession only
the Foundation of another Request; and having used themselves to desire more
than in duty becomes them, they will never think themselves safe without the
Sword and Scepter, as well as the Crosier and Miter in their Hands. It will but
elevate them in their Hopes, and make them more insolent in their Demands.
Having offended the King, they will never think themselves safe till they are
above his reach, and have either so disarmed him, or armed themselves as not to
fear him: And for as much as it has been always found by experience that they
who least consider danger in the doing their Duty fare best still, therefore
does it concern the King, and all who are put in Authority under him, to crash
this Cockatrice in the Egg as soon as they discover it. Sero Medicina paratur
cum mala per long as conval^ere moras. Blessed are they that Psalm. 106. 3.
keep Judgment, and he that does Righteousness at all times. Fiat Justitia ruat
Coelum, is as good a Maxim in times of Peace as War; and they who do their Duty
without disputing the success, shall never answer for those accidental Effects
which are contingent to their Orderly Proceedings. You shall not be afraid of
the face Deuteronomy. 1. 17.
of Man, for the Judgment is Gods, (says Moses) and you are the Ministers of
God to the People for good, Romans 1^. 1. 14.
and Revengers to execute wrath upon them that do evil, says St. Paul, for they
who resist shall receive to themselves Damnation, as sure as there is a God in
Heaven; and their Calamity shall rise suddenly, if Solomon say true, which is
the second Aggravation of their Judgment, drawn

2. A Celeritate: Their fall shall be sudden and unexpected; Their Destruction
shall come as a Whirlwind, as a thing which they never looked for; They shall
be confounded and sore vexed, they shall be turned back and Psalm. 6. 10.
put to shame suddenly. They shall, like the Old World, be washed away in an
instant, and consumed like Sodom when they never dreamed on it: Before the Pots
can feel the Thorns, he shall take them away as with a Whirlwind, Psalm. 58. 9.
both living and in his anger, God will send forth his Warriers, and destroy
those Traitors, and they shall descend alive into Hell, whose Judgment does
also admit of a third Aggravation, drawn

3ly, From the strangeness of it. It Is a Nemo scit, says Solomon, Who knows
their ruin, or the manner of it? Is not Destruction to the Wicked, and a
strange Job 31. 3.
Punishment to the Workers of Iniquity? Traitors shall die an Untimely,
Unnatural, and Accursed Death. If they would have believed Moses, they would
also have believed Solomon, for he told them long before that Rebels should not
die the common death of all Men, but perish by a more dreadful and remarkable
Judgment. If Corah, Dathan and Abiram enter into a Covenant with Men as wicked
as themselves, to mutiny Numb. 16. 32, 33
against Moses and Aaron, the thirsty Earth shall open her mouth and swallow
them, and all the Men and Goods which appertain unto them shall perish. If
Absalom steal away the Hearts of the People from his and their lawful
Sovereign, the Officious Oak shall take him off 2 Samuel 18. 9, 14.
from his Mule by his rebellious Head, and hang him up between Heaven and
Earth, as unworthy of either: Rather than the Traitor shall escape, it shall
play the part of Gallows, Halter and Hang man, and Joab shall be sent for to
thrust three Darts through his false Heart, to let out that corrupt Blood at a
treble Orifice, which had been stained with Disobedience to his Parent, Treason
to his Prince, and Hypocrisy to his God. If Sheba, or such another Man of
Belial, blow the Trumpet of Rebellion against David, the People shall cut 2 Samuel 20. 22.
off his Head, and throw it out to Joab. Had Zimri Peace who slew his Master?
He Fired the Kings House, 1 King. 16. 18.
but himself was also burned in it. Their own Hands 2 King. 9. 31
shall become their Executioners, their own Blasphemous Tongues shall make them
to fall, their own Accomplices and Confederates shall rise up in Judgment against
them, and their ruin shall be very strange, both as to the manner, and also

4ly, As to the extent of it, for one Punishment shall tread upon the heels of
another, and where Old go off, New Scenes of Miseries shall take their turns.
They shall pass from one Torment to another, from Temporal to Eternal, and so
go down by steps to Hell. I counsel thee (says our Wise Man) to keep the Kings
Eccl. 8. 3, 4.
Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of God. Be not hasty to go out of
his sight, stand not in an evil thing, for he does whatsoever pleases him. You
may as well allow Children to rise up against their Parents, Servants against
their Masters, and Common Soldiers against their Commander's, as Subjects in
any case against their Sovereign, their Power being but Inferior Branches of
that Sovereignty which is rooted in him, as the common Parent, great Master,
and Supreme Commander of us all. Where the Word of a King is, there is Power,
and who may say unto him, What do thou? Who may not, when every Tradesman
thinks it a part of his Freedom to intermeddle with the Kings proper Business;
and yet they who contradict and control him, shall at long running smart
severely for it, their Names shall be loaded with Infamy and Reproach to
Posterity, their Blood stained and attainted, and their Families ruined. Nay,
if they speak evil of the King, Eccl. 10. 20.
though but in their Hearts, God, whose Person he represents, and whose place
he here supplies, has threatened both to disclose it, and to be avenged of him
for it. Let them cover their Crimes with all the subtilty they can from Men,
there is a God above all the Tricks both of Changers and Medlers, who will find
them and their rebellious Designs out at last, and discover their Villainies to
Men and Angels; and notwithstanding all the Snow-water with which they have
washed their Hands, to make them look like Loyal Subjects and good Protestants,
he will for the filthiness of their rebellious Hearts plunge them into the
bottomless Pit, out of which there is no redemption: His Anger shall smoke
against them in this Life, and they shall suffer the Vengeance of Eternal Fire
in that to come; after a Temporal Death, an Eternal Damnation.

Rebels do usually promise themselves and other credulous People, great Matters
in the Golden Age of Reformation, if they can overcome the King; but they shall
become Felo's de se, they shall Damn themselves by their Projects, for God will
never be Friends with them who are Enemies to the King; and except they obey
both, they shall be punished as if they had obeyed Romans 13. 2.
neither, and receive to themselves Damnation. And therefore, My Son, fear God
and the King, not only for fear of Temporal Punishment, which some Daring
Traitors have undergone and contemned, and other Prosperous Rebels have avoided
and escaped by an Act of Indemnity or Pardon, but in Obedience to the
Constitution of God, whose Officer he is, and in reference to your own Eternal
Salvation, which you will thereby infallibly forfeit, though you should be
comprehended in an Act of Oblivion, or a General Pardon.

I hope I have said more than enough to convince all that hear me this day of
the Obligation which lies upon them to take the Wise Man's Advice in my Text;
and that You, my very Honored Friends, for whose sake I have pressed it, will
declare by your Exemplary Piety and Loyalty, your approbation of it.

No County in all his Majesty's Dominions was ever yet Corrival with Yorkshire
for Greatness or Goodness; None have more Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of the
best Quality in it, of which they profer'd, as became dutiful Subjects, to
raise King CHARLES the Martyr a Lifeguard for his Royal Person, which in
confidence of their Loyalty he graciously accepted, and honored them, by
making the Prince of Wales, our present Gracious Sovereign, (whom God long
preserve) the Captain of it. The then Loyal City of York received his Sacred
Majesty, when he was driven out of This by Seditious Tumults, and thither did
he assemble his great Council. And if I had not trespassed already too much
upon your Patience, or did in the least suspect that you needed more Motives to
Loyalty than those which this Text, and my Discourse on it, has already
afforded you, I should descend to some Local and Personal Obligations which lie
more upon You, than other Men, to engage you to it. I could easily reckon up
many Towns and Fields in your County, besides your Metropolis, in which your
Loyal Ancestors did sacrifice their Lives for his Service; especially at the
fatal Battle of Marston-More: Nor can I forget those who died Martyrs for their
Loyalty on Tower Hill, whose Loyal Blood runs still in the Veins of their
Children. I dare not be so uncharitable as suspect that you Inherit the Estates
of your Loyal Ancestors without their Virtues; and I hope you will convince the
World that Yorkshire Men are born in too free an Air to have their Spirits
tainted with Schism or Sedition, which are the most pernicious Pests and
Plagues of any County where they reign, for which things sake the Wrath of God
comes upon the Children of Disobedience. There never was such a Superfoetation
of those Brats in any Age as in this, (to our shame be it spoken) wherein Men
lately acted, as if they designed to put Loyalty out of Countenance, and
ridicule it out of the Kindgdom. If any of You were unhappily seduced into such
Disloyal Conspiracies, I hope you have asked God and the King Pardon for it,
and that you will always do as much as in you lies to show your selves thankful
for their Mercies. I know how ill it becomes me to give my Betters that, which
I need too much my self; and therefore I shall refer you to the Counsel of a
Great Countryman of your own, who is now placed above censure, and being dead
does yet speak, Sir John Packering Lord Chancellor of England in Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, that which he then gave the Parliament in that Glorious Age
of Reformation, I hope I may without offense to all good Men repeat to you,
whose Advice was this:

Listen not to the wearisom Solicitations of the newfangled Refiners,
commonly called Puritans, who disturb the good Repose of Church and
Commonwealth, whom you will find more dangerous than the Jesuits in poisoning
the Hearts of good Subjects, under Pretense of Conscience to withdraw them from
their Obedience; with whom though in other Points they pretend to differ, yet
do they join and concur with them in separation of themselves from the Unity of
their fellow Subjects, and in abasing the sacred Authority and Majesty of their
Prince, which it is the Common Interest and Advantage of Mankind to uphold and
honor.

I am sure it is both our Duty and Interest to hazard our Lives in his Majesty's
Service against all Rebellious Opposers whatsoever, before they be tamely taken
from us, (as we know whose were) by Usurping Insolent Traitors. We shall have
lived too long, if we outlive the Loyalty of Englishmen, which is the
Privilege and Glory of freeborn Subjects, and should be the Security of our
Gracious Sovereign in his Just Prerogatives. Nature teaches all Men to guard
the Head, even with the hazard of the other Members; and can we so easily
forget how soundly we were fleeced by Usurping Tyrants, that we will twice in
an Age listen to those Countrymen of Public Spirits, (as they did then, and
do still call themselves) who shall tempt us to refuse what is just and
necessary for the support of the Government under a lawful Prince, who requires
less than every good Subject is cordially willing to contribute upon such
Honorable Emergencies? They who will not part with half so much for a Common
Good as they will prodigally spend upon a Boon Companion, or a Common Miss, do
neither fear God nor the King as they ought to do.

If there be any thing in Fame worthy of your Ambition, True Piety and Loyalty
(the Methods prescribed you in my Text) are the shortest and surest way to it:
for Posterity will reflect upon your Actions without Prejudice or Interest, and
Canonize the best Christians and Subjects for the Greatest Men of the Age; This
is the Beauty of that Image in which we were made, the fairest Vestment that
our Souls can be adorned with till they are Clothed with Immortality; and if
you wear this Livery, the King of Heaven will make you free of a better City
than this, One not made with Hands, free Denizons of the New Jerusalem.

As therefore you tender the Glory of God, the Credit and Increase of your
Religion by Law established, your own Temporal and Spiritual Happiness here,
and your Eternal hereafter, withdraw your selves from the Society of Men of
Rebellious Principles, whether they bring them from Rome or Geneva, from the
Conclave or a Conventicle, and be as active to maintain the King in his Just
Rights and Royalties, as the Roman or Republican Agitators have been to
undermine them; and unless you are Sick of your Religion, Laws and Liberties,
(and I pray God we prove not so, beyond all hopes of recovery) let us all show
as much Zeal in defending them against the Kings and Gods Enemies, as they do
Earnestness in assaulting them, and him through their sides. If not for Honor
and Loyalty sake, as we desire to hear in other Nations, and After-Ages; if not
for Wrath, and fear of ruin to our selves and Families; yet for our Oaths and
Gods sake, for the Churches, Conscience, Posterity and Peace sake, let us
sincerely practice Subjection to God and the King as becomes good Christians
and Subjects for our Blessed Saviors sake, that Great Patron and Pattern of
Obedience, and pray unto him that he would scatter all His and the Kings cruel
Enemies that delight in Blood; Infatuate the Counsels of their Achitophels, and
root out all those Babylonian, Antichristian, and Anti-Monarchical Rebels, who
have decreed in their Hearts and Cabals against our Gracious Sovereign as the
Aramites did against the King of Israel; Fight neither against small nor 1
King. 22. 31
great, but only against the King of Great Britain; and said of our Jerusalem
the Church of England, Pull down the Fences of it, raze it even to the Ground,
that the Confusions of Babel may be heard no more among us, but we become like
Jerusalem a City at Unity within it self.

Let this thine Almightly Work, O King of Kings, and only Ruler of Princes,
appear unto thy Servants, and the Glory of it to their Children; So we thy
People will give thee thanks for ever, and will be always showing forth thy
Praise from Generation to Generation, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
FINIS.

