The copy of a letter sent from the Kings Army to a Gentleman of worth and
quality in SUFFOLK: Showing the present condition of the Kings Army,
intercepted August 28. by the Scouts at Cambridge, and by them brought to the
Committee.

To the Right worshipful Sr HENRY CROFTS, at his house in little Saxon in
Suffolk.
SIR,
THis is the first opportunity (since I went out at the beginning of May, to
wait on my Master) that I could find to convey any Letters to your hands, by
which I can now acquaint you with nothing that is likely to afford you any
content or satisfaction, but only this; That my self, with some other of your
friends here amongst us, are in good health; and that indeed is a greater
blessing then we deserve; and God make us sensible of his mercy that affords
us it to sweeten all our other calamities, which it has lately pleased him to
pour upon us in a very plentiful measure: his will be done, and hallowed be
his name; and yet how great soever our sufferings and afflictions have lately
been, they are like to prove but the beginning of sorrows, and prologue to that
full Scene of misery, which in probability we shall shortly act: The King
being in no condition to keep the field, he dares not rest in any Garrison for
fear of being besieged; we have no strength at all of our own; and there is so
much profaneness and irreligion, so much violence and oppression amongst us,
that I know not how to expect any assistance from above, that God can bless
the proceedings of so wicked an Army, whose sins increase with our
punishments. We are here now at Wooburn within 26. miles of Oxford, and the
Enemy at Nopthampton, with a greater power to get between us and home. We
march long and tedious marches to prevent it; yesterday from Huntington, and
set not out till eleven a clock; The King is in such a condition that he knows
not which way to turn himself: God Almighty may please to manifest and magnify
his power and goodness in our weakness and sinfulness; for I have learned
from him that our extremity is his opportunity: and truly upon that prop I
rest my self, resolved to run the same fortune to the uttermost that it shall
please God to send my Master. My attendance on him at this instant calls upon
me to break off abruptly, and tell you that I am and ever shall continue

Your most obedient and dutiful Son JOHN CROFTS.


