The Last Testimony, and Declaration of the Reverend Samuel Crossman, D. D. and
Dean of Bristoll: Setting forth his Dutiful, and True Affection to the Church
of England as by Law Established.
Preface.
THis Following Paper was Delivered to my hand by the Reverend Author of it,
with a Charge to Communicate it to the Mayor, and Other Worthy Members of the
City of Bristol: But being Prevented by some Earnest Business in London, So
that I could not Acquit my self of my Trust so soon as I intended, I found the
Memory of This Reverend Good Man, so Coursly, and so Injuriously Treated by
Diverse Ill Tongues; that instead of Doing him Right by some Few Written Copies
to his Particular Acquaintances and Friends, I rather made Choice of Committing
the Original to the Press, as a more Public Way of Justice and Vindication.

It was This Gentleman's Lot, among some Others of his very Loyal, and Orthodox
Neighbors, to fall under the Lash and Scandal of Several Reproaches: Wherein He
was so Sollicitous to Clear Himself, that next to the Great Work of making his
Peace with God, The Thing in the World, that lay nearest his Heart, was the
Leaving of a Good Name behind him: Which he thought could not better be Secured
then by the Solemnity of This Following Declaration. It was his Own Proper Act;
Signed by his Own Hand; And in Delivering it over to the World in the very
Syllables that I reccived it, I reckon that I have done my Duty.

John Knight.

To the Right Worshipful Sir William Clutterbuck, Mayor, with the Worshipful,
and others my very Good Friends, and Neighbors, the Citizens of Bristol.
HAving had my Lot cast by Divine Providence for Sixteen years amongst you; and
having now through great indisposition of body received the Sentence of death,
I am desirous (though with brokenness of words, through extremity of pain) yet
to take my last leave of you and the World; with that sincere nakedness of
heart, and truth, wherewith I expect to appear before my Judge and Savior.

I rejoice and am humbly thankful to God, that I (though a wretched Sinful
man) may now die in the Communion of the Reformed Church of England as
established by Law. And as a peaceable Subject under my most gracious Prince,
to whom I and all his Leige-people do owe a most cheerful and ready obedience:
not only for Conscience Sake, he being Gods Vicegerent over us; But even as the
fruit of just gratitude for his most admired conduct of the Government for our
Common good, while we have been so formidably involved in Successive and almost
inextricable dangers.

I do rejoice with you in those signal expresses, you and your City have
shown, both of Loyalty toward your Prince, and of Love to the Church of God:
And do beseech Almighty God that you may yet increase therein more and more.
But for as much as the seeds of several great Evils, and very Pernicious both
to Church, and State, have grown up here (as the envious man's Tares, where
better Seed had been sown) I do pray you, that I may, by these few lines, leave
this as my last sense, to them who have been thus drawn aside into the snare of
the evil one: It is now no time either to flatter with Softness, or to chide
with Passion ( Moses himself might not speak unadvisedly with his lips, how
froward soever the People were at the waters of Strife) I do pity them with all
my heart, and do wish as well to their Persons and Souls as I do to my self and
my own everlasting concerns. But poor men, I fear they have scarce thoroughly
considered the sad rise, and History of their present dissents from this
Church. With what indecent virulencies these Feudes began at Frankfort; to the
open offense of the Magistracy there, as a sad Omen of what would, and did
afterward so fatally ensue. With what bitter contempt of their Sovereign, and
Christian authority they proceeded Secretly to undermine, and openly to
threaten the Government in Q. Elizabeth and K. James his Reign. With what male
contentedness (as the Leprosy that Cleaved of old to the walls of the house)
they had leavened the body of the People in the Reign of K. Charles the First
of blessed memory: till they had enforced their high pretenses of Religion to
bring forth that bloody Monster of Rebellion. I do pray them for the love of
God, and as ever they tender the true welfare of this Church and State: that
they would no longer continue fighters against God, but return to the Bishop
and Shepheerd of their Souls.

I Entreat them to consider, there is no key of knowledge unkindly taken from
them. No mutilated Sacraments obtruded upon them. No Divine Administrations in
an unknown tongue; but all pious methods for Gods Glory, and their edification,
laid (by the great care and Wisdom of their Successive Princes) before them. If
there be any Shadow of good things to come in the Old Testament: If any thing
of greater Glory revealed in the New, themselves cannot but acknowledge the
principal things of both to be illustriously set forth in a most religious
Order, commemorated and preserved in this Church, to the Joy of all good
Christians. If there be any thing of Primitive Devotion (which we all seem so
affectionately to pant and long after) it is here tenderly cherished, and truly
defecate from the innovations which corrupt and later times had unhappily
introduced: that we might drink of these holy waters as they run clear and
crystal at the Springhead. And if the fruit of righteousness be sown in
peace, of them that make peace; I hope they will then for ever abandon these
fierce and Joyless contentions. Welcome! Welcome! that serene Government in the
State, Welcome! those mild Administrations in the Church, which breed such
peaceable Subjects to the Throne of David; such peaceable Sons and Daughters to
the House of God. Oh Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that
love thee. There the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore.

Faintness denies me to proceed any further. God Almighty bless our most
Gracious King, his lawful Heirs, and Successors, and whatever bold insolences
have been lately animated by some, to the Affronting the true line of the
Succession, I hope shall henceforth quietly end in that Prophetical
Prediction, They shall afterward return, and serve God, and David their King
for ever: and no more meddle with them that are given to Change. And now
Brethren I commend you to God, and the word of his Grace, which is able to
build you up, and give you an inheritance among all the^ that are Sanctified.
God gr^nt the dearest-harmony between this Church and City, and allow this poor
Land (how unworthy soever we are of it through our manyfold murmurings) that we
and our Posterity may see good days, and peace upon Gods Israel. Farewell!
Farewell! till we either meet in Heaven; or else being refined in the furnace
of affliction; May become vessels more serviceabie to God and his Church then
hitherto we have been here on Earth.

Ian. 26. 1683. Samuel Crossman, Dean of Bristol*

The End.

