A DISCOURSE Concerning the TRADE OF IRELAND and SCOTLAND, As they stand in
Competition with Trade of England, Being taken out of An ESSAY on TRADE.

Written by Mr. John Carry, Merchant in Bristol,

And Printed at Bristol, Anno 1695.

Reprinted at London, 1696.

A Discourse concerning Ireland and Scotland, showing how the Trade of those
Kingdoms may be made more Profitable to England; being taken out of an Essay on
Trade.
IRELAND, Ireland.
of all the Plantations settled by the English has proved most injurious to the
Trade of this Kingdom, and so far from answering the ends of a Colony, that it
does wholly violate them; for if People be the Wealth of a Nation, then it is
certain, that a bare parting with any of them cannot be its Advantage, unless
accompanied with Circumstances whereby they may be rendered more useful both to
themselves, and also to those they left behind them, else so far as you deprive
it of such who should consume its Product and improve its Manufactures you
lessen its true Interest, especially when that Collony sets up a separate, and
not only provides sufficient of both for its self, but by the Overplus supplies
other Markets, and thereby lessens its Sales abroad; This to a Kingdom so much
made up of Manufactures as England is, must needs be attended with great
Disadvantages, and yet to maintain a good Correspondence with Ireland is very
convenient. I shall therefore consider what Topics may be laid down as general
Rules for the Advantage of the former, and best agreeable with the true
Interest of the latter.

It was a Question once put by Pilate, what is Truth? And when he had said
this, he went out again unto the Jews, etc. which Question seems to me rather
to arise from a Perturbation in his own Mind, occasioned by the (fluctuating of
several Interests, than from any Desire he had to receive an Answer, for we do
not find he staid to expect it; and the Consequence showed 'twas so, for his
being willing to do the Jews A Pleasure, and fearing lest he should not be
accounted a Friend to Caesar, made him pass Sentence against his Judgment on an
innocent Person of whom he confessed, he found no fault in him; Interest does
generally biass our Judgments in such a manner, that the very supposing a thing
to be so, makes us uneasy under any Discourse that persuades only to enquire
into it; but Truth is the same still, and the easiest way to discover it, is by
walking in the Paths of Plainness; Falsehood wants Sophistry to lacker and set
it off, therefore Men usually represent their private Interests under the Name
of a public Good, and thereby endeavor to guild the Pill they would have go
down.

The Heads I shall proceed on are these two. 1. To show that Ireland, as things
now stand, is very destructive to to the Interest of England. 2. That the
Methods which may be used to render it more serviceable to the Interest of this
Nation, will also render it more serviceable to its own.


These are plain Propositions, understood by every Man, and I hope to make them
out with the same plainness.

1. As to the first, that Ireland is now destructive to the Interest of
England, I think it will for as long as that People enjoy so free and open a
Trade to Foreign Parts, and thereby are encouraged to advance in their Woollen
Manufactures, they must consequently lessen ours, than which they cannot do us
a greater Mischief, being the Tools whereon we trade, when they sink, our
Navigation sinks with them.

Now the Advantage Ireland has above England in making the Woollen
Manufactures, will soon give them opportunities of outdoing us therein, first
as it produces as good, or rather better Wool, and next as it furnishes all
Provisions cheaper to the Workmen, which renders them able to live on easier
Terms than ours can here, and this will in short time give Invitation for many
more to remove thither.

2. But it is the second Proposition which will not be so easily allowed; how
the true Interest of Ireland will be advanced by such means as shall be used to
promote that of England.

Here we must consider, what is the true Interest of Ireland, and wherein it
does consist? Whither in Trade and Manufactures, or in Improvement of its Lands
by a good Settlement? And I doubt not but on a strict Scrutiny it will appear
to be the latter; for indeed till that is made, no Trade can be serviceable to
any People farther than it does help toward it; Nor is it the Advantage of an
ill-peopled Colony whose Riches are to be the Fruits of the Earth to divert any
number of the Inhabitants from its Cultivation, whilst they can find Vent for
their Product, and be supplied with Conveniences another way; had our American
Plantations done so, they had never been well settled, but much more of their
Lands at this time unimproved; and this I take to be one great Reason why the
English in Ireland have always lain open to the Insults of the Natives there,
the Country being slenderly Peopled in the more inland Parts; if so, then
certainly whatever hinders the Peopling, and consequently the cultivating and
improving the Lands of Ireland, does so far hinder the advancing its true
Interest.

Now nothing does this more than Trade abroad, and Manufactures at home. 1. As
they divert great Numbers of People which cannot be spared from Husbandry. 2.
As they so far lessen the Strength and Security of that Island.


The true Interest then of Ireland being Husbandry, Trade and Manufactures
stand diametrically opposite thereto; for Trade being of it self less
laborious, and the Poor maintained thereby living more easy than such as are
employed in the Field, does invite them rather to settle in that way than the
other; this is the reason why such Multitudes of People daily flock into Cities
from the Country, if they have either Encouragement themselves, or can foresee
any for their Children, whereas few withdraw from Trade to the Labor of a
Country Life; of this we have an eminent Example in New England, which though it
was the first peopled, and by its Trade has drawn thither great Numbers of
Inhabitants, yet that large Colony has not cultivated so much Ground, as far
less Numbers have in other Plantations much later settled; for whereas in them
the Product was thought to be their Wealth, and therefore the Setlers dispersed
themselves, and with all the Assistance they could get endeavored to clear and
fit the Ground for breaking up, these took another Course, and by keeping
together, chose rather to live on Buying and Selling, by which means their
Improvements are very small, and their Product of no value suitable to their
Numbers, so that it seems at present rather a Magazine of Trade, their chief
Employment being to supply the other American Plantations with Fish caught on
the Coasts, and some other things raised near the Sea side, and in Returns
bring thence the Commodities of their Growth, which they again barter with us,
or Ship to Markets themselves; and here it is to be noted, that the great
Balance of their Trade is Ships, (which having plenty of Timber) they build on
reasonable Rates, either for Sale, or to be employed for transporting their own
Commodities, which being generally bulky, such as Timber, Mackrill, Bread,
Horses, for the Plantations, and Codfish for Europe, great part of their value
arises from their Freights; This was indeed their oversight at first, and now
scarce to be retrieved; for had they then began with Planting, and followed
that closely for some time, they might in all probability long since have made
themselves Masters of a greater Product, which would have laid the Foundations
of a much larger Trade both to Europe and other places in America; they are
indeed a thrifty sort of People, but want Commodities of their own Product, and
the Profits of a Nations Trade being very much limited according to that, if
the Parliament should think fit by new Laws to hinder the Freedom they now
enjoy in our American Plantations (which I judge absolutely necessary, because
so much abused by their carrying those Commodities to Foreign Markets without
touching first in England, to the lessening our Customs, and discouraging our
Merchants here) their Trade must sink, and they see their errer too late.

2. And as Foreign Trade and Manufactures lessen the Number of Husbandmen in
Ireland, so secondly it lessens the Strength and Security of that Island, which
lies in a good Number of hardy People, enured to Labor, who with it defend
their own Interests, and cannot depart thence without leaving their All;
whereas Merchants and Traders being but Temporary Residents, may and often do
leave a place when it most requires their stay for its Defense; an Instance of
this we had lately, when the trading part of the Inhabitants thereof, who could
remove their effects left it soonest, whilst the Men of Land came more uneasily
away, because they left their Estates behind them, and had no Methods of
maintaining themselves in England, but by living on what they brought with
them, whereas the others soon fell into Trade here, and though they changed the
place, were still in their Employments; now the Security of the Freeholders of
Ireland, is to engage as many as they can in the same Interest with themselves,
which may be done by dividing the Lands into particular Farms, in bigness
suitable to the Stocks of such as undertake them; by this means they fix their
roots in the Ground, and bind them with a Band of Iron; nor would many of their
People (if Trade were discouraged) return to England again, but employ
themselves and their Stocks in improving such Farms as they should purchase
either for Lives or Years at easy Rents, or making themselves Freeholders.

And as the security of Ireland is lessened at Land by Trade, so likewise at
Sea, for which they depend on the Kingdom of England; now can it be thought
this Nation will be at continual charges only to raise a People which shall vye
with them in their Trade? Or that we can be able to do it when our Navigation
decays? which it must do as the others increases, who afford us few Saylors
toward Manning our Fleet, whilst our own are harrast by continual Presses; for
let them be sure if the French King could have marched an Army thither as easy
as he could to Flanders, the Lands of Ireland might long since have had other
Landlords, maugre all the defense they, could have made.

Nor does the profit of this Trade and Manufacture redound to the Freeholders,
but only to the Traders, who as I hinted before, are a separate Interest, and
remove at their Pleasures.

But if the People of Ireland think England is bound to defend them against a
Foreign Invasion, an Account of its own Interest and Security, they must be
allowed to be in the right; yet let them consider also that we have power to
limit their Trade, so as it may be least Prejudicial to our own, which in my
Judgment cannot better be done, than by reducing that Kingdom to the State of
our other Plantations, confineing the Exportation of their Product only hither,
and that also unmanufactured, and preventing their being supplied with
Necessaries from other Nations; this will make Ireland profitable to England,
and in some measure recompense the vast Charges we have been at for its
Reduction and Delivery out of the Hands of foreign Powers and Popish
Cutthroats, and that not less than twice in Forty Years, all paid by the
People of England, a Guess whereat may be made by this, that the last cost,
above Three Hundred and Forty Thousand Pounds only in Transport Ships, for
which we now pay Interest; and if the Charge of Transporting our Army thither,
with their Provisions and Ammunition cost so much, what did the pay of the
first, and purchase of the latter amount unto? Now it is very reasonable, the
Nation should some way or other receive Satisfaction for its Expenses, and none
seems more just and equal than this, which would only limit the Profits of a
few Merchants, who carry on a Trade to the Prejudice of England; As for the
Free Holders, they would be supplied with Necessaries on as cheap Terms as now,
and find Chapmen for their Product, which would be bought up by Factories
settled from England, or they might send them hither themselves if they thought
fit, and by this means all would be manufactured here, and Foreign Markets must
be supplied hence as they are now thence.

This is the way to prevent Transporting their Wool for other places to the
prejudice of our Manufactures, and importing Tobacco with other of our
Plantation Commodities directly thence, to the prejudice of our Customs and
Merchants; this also would employ our Navigation, and by its short Voyages make
Multitudes of Seamen; in short, we cannot imagine the Advantages it would bring
to this Kingdom till Experience has showed us.

But then the Act of Prohibition must be repealed, there must be free Liberty
to bring in Cattle both alive and dead, and all things else which that Land
produces; and here I must again renew the Question, What is Truth? 'Twill be as
difficult to persuade the Gentlemen of England that this is their true
Interest, as it is those of Ireland that theirs does not consist in Trade and
Manufactures, one being by assed by the breeding part of this Nation, as the
others are by their Merchants, who represent their private Profits as the
Nations; and it is not to be wondered they have Success therein, when it carries
so much the Face of a present Advantage; but that the Gentlemen of England
should be still fond of that Act after so many years smarting under it seems to
me very strange than which I know no Law in my time has been more perniceous
to the Traffic of this Kingdom; 'twas this first put those of Ireland on that
Trade which has since almost cat out ours; 'twas this set them on
Manufactures, which were so far advanced before the late Troubles, that the
Sales of one Market, as I have been informed, came to a Thousand Pounds per
Week; for so long as they had Liberty of importing their Product hither, and
found a constant Sale when imported, they were contented therewith, but being
put on a necessity of finding out Foreign Markets for their Previsions, this
made their Merchants (who were before generally Factors to those of England,
and are, to give them their due, an ingenious prying People) dive deeper, and
since we refused to take the Flesh, they chose to keep the Fleece, and either
to Ship it to Foreign Countries where 'twould yield a greater Price, or by a
Manufacture to render it fit for those Markets wherein they vended the other;
'Twas this that has produced such great Quantities of Wool in Ireland, as have
at least equaled if not exceeded England, for the greatest part of the Lands of
that Kingdom by reason of the thinness of its Inhabitants, being turned rather
to Pasture than Tillage, and this Prohibition discouraging the raising black
Cattle, put the People on stocking them with She^p; which Overplus would again
decrease, if Ireland becoming better peopled in its Inland Parts by laying
aside Trade fell more on Tillage, or by repealing this Act the Inhabitants
received Encouragement to betake themselves again to breeding black Cattle; now
if it be true that not the quantity of a Commodity at Market, but the Demand
when there, makes it bear a Price, it will appear that the Makers of that Law
were out in their Politiques, by not considering that the Product of Ireland
must be consumed somewhere and if sent to Foreign parts formerly supplied hence
'twould abate the Exportation of ours, the Consequence whereof would be the
lessening of their Expense abroad more than it was increased at home; nor did
they at the same time take care to put us on any Footing equal with the others,
by Abatement in the Customs on Exportation, and thereby enabling the Merchants
of England to sell suitably with those of Ireland, but still continued Three
Shillings per Barrel on Beef, and Four on Pork, whilst the others paid much
less there, the same on Butter, Bread, Flower and other Provisions, so that a
Stander by would have thought this Law had been contrived for the Advantage of
Ireland; all which proceeded from the mistaken Interest of one part of the
Kingdom, which (were it true) ought not to prevail to the Detriment of a
National Trade, and the true Interest of the Remainder.

Nor will it be reasonable unless this Liberty be given to bind up Ireland from
a Foreign Trade, and consequently to confide the Consumption of its Product to
a Home Expense, except what we shall occasionally fetch from them to carry
abroad: This, as it will discourage the Freeholders there, so will it Industry
here, and the Trade must be managed by great Funds, small Stocks not being able
to engage in transporting the Commodities they receive in barter to Foreign
Markets, which they might in bringing them to England, being a shorter Voyage;
and so consequently the Product of Ireland would have more Buyers, and the
Inhabitants be supplied with Necessaries on cheaper Terms by this free Trade,
than when their whole Dependence should be on those Monopolizers.

The next Question will be, what Effect the taking off this Prohibition will
have on our native Product? Whither it will lessen it is Consumption? I am of
Opinion it will not, because our Exports must be increased as theirs from
Ireland are lessened, unless we do imagine Foreign Markets will not consume the
same Quantities they did before, or will find out new ways to be supplied with
them from other Places; besides, by how much more Charges are added to the
Products of Ireland (as those of Freight and other petty Expenses on such bulky
Commodities will be, if brought hither) so much will ours be put on the same
Footing with them, and bear a better Price.

It Is well known that the exporting our Wool to Foreign Markets has, by the
ill Consequences thereof, abated its Price at Home; This has been observed by
Calculations made by considering Men, and the Reason was, because those
Countries were thereby enabled to work up much larger Quantities of their own
into various sorts of Manufactures, which both fitted their occasions at home,
and supplied Markets abroad where we generally vended ours; by this means our
Sales growing slack, and finding new Competitors in our Trade, we were forced
to sell our Manufactures cheap, and this was done by making of them slighter,
and by lessening the Prices both of Wool and Labor; whereas, had we kept our
Wool at home, these Mischiefs had been prevented, and the French and other
Nations could not have made such a Progress in Manufactures as they have done;
their Wool being unfit to be wrought up by its self (unless mixed with English
or Irish) must have sought a Market here, and been returned again to them in
Manufactures, which is the true way to enrich this Kingdom; this would have
drawn over great Numbers of People to be employed in the Clothing Trade, who
would likewise have consumed our Product; and as these had increased so also
had their Employment, which would have kept up the price of Wool, things being
of value in Markets according as they are supplied by Nations standing in
Competition for Trade, and it must be allowed that it was not the Interest of
England to fall its Manufactures abroad, had we been the only Sellers; for
according as they yielded there, so much is the Wealth of this Nation advanced:
This our Forefathers knew when they made Laws not only to prohibit the
Exportation of Wool hence, but also from Ireland, which Laws cannot be too
strong, on whose due Observation depends our Wealth or Ruin; now if the Tra of
Ireland was reduced to that of our other Colonies, and the same care taken
about the Commodities of its growth, our danger from that Kingdom in Relation
to this, would be at an end, when Methods may also be used to prevent its being
exported hence.

Nor is there any Reason to be offered why Ireland should have greater Liberty
than our other Plantations, the Inhabitants whereof have an equal Desire to a
free Trade, forgetting that the first design of their Settlement was to advance
the Interest of England, against whom no Arguments can be used, which will not
equally hold good against Ireland.

1. As it was settled by Colonies spared from England.

2. As it has been still supported and defended at the Charge of England.

3. As it has received equal Advantages with the other Plantations from the
Expense England has been at in carrying on Wars abroad and Revolutions at
home; and on this last there is greater Reason against Ireland than any of the
rest, we have lately paid more Money for the Purchase of that Trade than the
Profits thereof may bring to us and our Posterities for many Generations; so
that 'twould be a piece of great Ingratitude for the Freeholders of Ireland
unwillingly to submit to any thing whereby the Interest of England may be
advanced, to the Inhabitants whereof they are indebted for their Lands, who
have laid down their Lives, and spent their Treasures to reinstate them in
their Possessions.

As for Corn, Fish, and Horses, whether a Liberty may not be allowed to
transport them thence direct for other Markets on Ships, first entering here in
England is a point worth serious Consideration.

But the main objection as to England is yet behind, a great part of the
Gentlemen of this Kingdom thinking it will sink the Rents of their Lands if
Irish Cattle are admitted to be brought over alive, others, that the
Importation of Provisions thence will fall the price of our own; and though in
the former they do not so generally agree, differing according as their Lands
are situated, and proper for breeding or seeding; yet in the latter they more
unanimously consent, and cry out, This is the great Diana of the Ephesians, the
less Provisions are brought in, the more of our own will be expended; whereas,
if they did impartially consider, they would find it an empty Idol; nothing
will advance their Lands like Trade and Manufactures, therefore whatever turns
the Stream of these elsewhere lessens the Number of Inhabitants who should
consume their Provisions, and when those increases so do the others, which
(besides a home Consumption by People engaged in Employments distinct from
Husbandry) does always invite many Foreigners hither, who being temporary
Residents, spend our Product, it being a sure Maxim, that where the Carcass is,
there will the Eagles be gathered together.

Besides, when the Irish Provisions are brought hither' those Markets which
were supplied with them thence before, will then have them hence, though perhaps
at dearer Rates, and with them great Quantities of our own: No Man can imagine
what Expense there would be of English Cattle were we once fallen into the
Trade of making Provisions here, England as well in its Beef as Manufactures
exceeding all other Countries, with this farther Advantage, that the former for
Goodness and Price cannot be supplied from any other place save Ireland; nor do
I suppose it so much the Interest of this Kingdom when Provisions are advanced
only by a Home Expense, as when it is done by a Foreign Export, the first makes
particular Men grow Rich, by preying on their Neighbors, but the Nation grows
Rich by the latter, when we vend them abroad at good Prices; nor would our
Plantations, which now take off the greatest part of the Cattle slaughtered in
Ireland spend one Barrel less, if killed here.

All Trade had a beginning, occasioned by some lucky Accident which put People
on new Projects, and why England, which has so many Plantations depending on
it, should suspect a Consumption for its Cattle, I cannot imagine; we might
then set the Rates of Provisions there, and the Merchants afford to give better
Prices for them here, when they shall load them at home, and save the Charges
of going to Ireland, without fear of having their early Markets forestalled
thence; and the Planters being now grown Rich, are likewise better able to give
greater Rates for them than they could at their first Settlement; England had
never a fairer opportunity of making an Entry on this Trade, than now it has,
which would soon consume great Numbers of Cattle, and consequently give
Encouragement to our Breeding Countries, as well as the Feeding.

But if a Manufactory is thought fit for Ireland, and its Circumstances will
admit thereof, let that of Linen be encouraged; this may draw over multitudes
of French Refuges, and put them upon an Employment wherewith they were formerly
acquainted, which we must assist by the Benefit of Importation Custom free, and
the Advantage of Fashion; and then these two Kingdoms encouraging different
Manufactures, will be serviceable to each other, for which Stocks would not be
wanting, even from the People of England, who would delight to see Ireland
thrive, when their Manufactures crossed not ours; This would in time alter the
Balance of our Trade with France, when we shall send thither more Woollen, and
receive thence less Linen.

If the wisdom of the Parliament shall think fit by these, or any other
Methods, to make Ireland more serviceable to the Trade of England, it will
advance both the Lands and Traffic of this Kingdom, and so make us all better
able to pay the Charge of this long and expensive War.

I shall next say something to the Trade of Scotland, Scotland.
which has formerly consumed more of our Woollen Manufactures than now it
does, since that Nation is fallen on making them there, which they do out of
their own Wool, with the help of what they get from us, also of Spanish, both
from hence and from Holland.

But their chief Manufactures are Linen, Butter, and Herrings; 'twere to be
wished the former was more encouraged by this Government, with Liberty to bring
it hither Custom free, provided they would send us also their Wool, and then
our Manufactures would not justle with each other; King James the II. limited
their Trade to his Pleasure, by Act of Parliament; which I take to be a great
reason why that People were so much at his Devotion: but the Liberty of a free
Trade, was made one of the Terms whereon His present Majesty received the
Crown; who has since given them Encouragement to settle Plantations abroad,
such as they shall either Plant, or buy from Foreign Princes, which he has
promised to enfranchise with the same Rights and Privileges he does grant in
like Cases, to the Subjects of his other Dominions.

They have also fallen lately on the thoughts of Codd Fishing, whereof they
have great shoals about their Coasts, which formerly they use to pickle and
send away in Casks, but now intend to cure, after the manner it is done in
Newfoundland.

And doubtless these three things would much encourage Trade, had they Stocks
to manage them; but those they want. I have heard it discoursed, that the Cash
of that Kingdom amounted to One Million of Pounds Sterling; but I scarce
believe it does to One Half, perhaps not to One Third, which properly belongs
to its Inhabitants; therefore they propose to carry on the Woollen
Manufactures, Plantations, and Fishery by English Stocks, the two last by
Companies, which will consist chiefly of Londoners, who first promoted the
Designs, and will furnish Moneys for making them. Now I cannot think any Nation
can settle Plantations abroad to advantage, which wants Stock and Manufactures
of its own to supply them, the great Profit of Plantations being to encourage
Manufactures at Home; and the means to settle them, is by giving long credit co
the Planters abroad, and when this is done, by Money taken up at Interest from
another Nation, the whole Profit will redound to the Lenders; so that the
Scotch may make Settlements abroad, but if neither the Stock nor Manufactures
are their own, they will have only the name of being Proprietors, whilst others
carry away the Profits; like a Gentleman, who pays as much for Interest yearly
as the Rents of his Lands bring in, he may have the Possession, but the Usurer
has the Income of his Estate; so for their Fishing, which being managed on
English Stocks, will bring them only so much as shall pay for the labor of
those Employed about it; The same for their Woollen Manufactures.

On the other side, if the Trade to these Plantations is driven by an English
Corporation, the Scotch indeed will get Employments for their Saylors, but all
the Product will be other Men's, who will take care for their own Advantage to
keep the Planters poor abroad, and the Inhabitants from inspecting into it at
home.

Besides, that Kingdom being now supplied from England with West India
Commodities at cheaper Rates than they can expect to raise them, will want vent
for their new Product when brought Home, unless absolutely prohibited to be
imported thither from hence, which will be a new Tax on the Spender, paid only
to a Foreign Monopoly; neither can they Export them to sell on equal Terms with
the English: So that on the whole I cannot see what advantage the Scotch can
make at this time of day, by settling Plantations; which if they do attempt, we
must be sure to take care of Ireland, and by reducing it to the terms of a
Colony, prevent their selling the Product there, which I am apt to think is the
main thing they aim at.

FINIS.

