AN EXPOSITION OF THE SECOND VERSE OF The Fourth CHAPTER OF THE Epistle to the
ROMANS: WITH AN APPENDIX ON CHAP. III. VER. 27.

The former being the Sum of Fifteen Sermons, the latter of Five, for further
Explication of that Great Doctrine of JUSTIFICATION.

By WALTER CROSS, M. A.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. for the Author, and are to be Sold by Tho. Parkhurst
at the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower end of Cheap Side, near
Mercers-Chappel, 1694.

TO The RIGHT HONORABLE, Sir William Ashurst, Knight. AND LORD MAYOR OF THE CITY
of LONDON.
My LORD,
THis little Book is brought forth in due Season, to Congratulate your
Inauguration into an Office of that Trust and Honor, that admits no Citizen in
Europe to be your Equal: The Subject of it is such, as not only becomes the
greatest Prince, as well as meanest Peasant to Study, but it is absolutely
Necessary they should; for none of their Affairs are of so great a Concern, as
the Pardon of their Sin, and the Salvation of their Souls. Yet I am so
distrustful of my Management of so great a Subject, that neither this, nor the
Honor of your Acquaintance, nor the Knowledge of your Impartial Judgment, or
Condescending Temper, had prevailed with me to prefix your Name to it, though I
often did deliberate upon it; but its Edition so immediately following your
Election, and its Publication being within the Verge, and under the first
Dawnings of your Authority, it could not be Civil without Saluting you, and
Craving your Patronage; and it gives me the Opportunity to tell You, that I,
and I believe thousands more, who have no Vote of Election, do enjoy our
Wishes, and are put in great hopes of a Reformed City.

I bope you will be as far from Patronizing Error as Protecting Vice, but there
is nothing in this little Piece (to my Knowledge) contrary to the Confessions
of our common Protestant Faith. Indeed there is a Notion about Faith, that I
may call New, in it, viz. That as the Author of our Faith, is the Author of our
Justification, Christ Jesus, and the Object of our Faith the Merit of our
Justification, Christ's Righteousness; and the Exercise of our Faith upon this
Merit, as the great Mean through which Divine Love, Grace and Mercy is conveyed
to us, is the Condition of our Justification; so the Gift of Faith is the
Sentence of our Justification, or Sign of it; for if the Spirit be an Earnest
of Heaven, much more is it of Pardon: It Is true, by this the Gift is before the
Condition, which all grant; but the Sign or Signification of the Gift, which is
the Sentence, is at least in order of Nature after the Condition; for we not
only do not perceive, but we cannot perceive this Gift; and consequently it
cannot signify divine Favor to us, until mixed with our spirit; for our
Observation is from our Experience. This being new, I have proposed it to be
tried before trusted; a Conditionality of the Covenant is a principal Pillar of
Popery, Socinianism, and Arminianism, according to their several modes of
Explication; and therefore the very sound of the Word fills the Heart of
sincere Protestants with Jealousy: But if we allow Faith and Repentance, those
absolute Gifts, and Effects of special Grace, to be Signs of special Grace and
Favor, or Pardon, (for a Man cannot be in a state of Grace without Pardon)
there is room for Duty, and Conditional Duty, without any Jealousy of these
Errors.

I pray the Lord may Confirm your Election with such an Unction that may
signify his own Approbation of you, Mercy to us by You, and that may fit you
fully for the place. It is a Place that never wanted Difficulties, nor are they
like to decrease in your Day; the greater they grow, the more Need you have of
the Favor and Fruition of Him, who is of God made unto us Wisdom as well as
Righteousness, and a Counselor as well as a Savior; his providential Conduct
in immediate directing of the Judgment, and Inclining of the Will of his
Favorites, when plunged in difficult Affairs, or surrounded with dangerous
Circumstances, fully supplies the want of Urim and Thummim.

No doubt the Hopes of so many People being terminated on You, and so great
things being expected from You, renders you concerned; but both of them may as
truly encourage you: For what do we expect, but that you be of a Public
Spirit, that your Aims and Ends be as public as your Place and Office, for the
Common Wealth, or the common Good of the City? It Is but of late that People
have enjoyed this Security, that their most Supreme Magistrates are in no
private Plott against their common Good; but tho we are now secure as to the
Throne, we are not as to all Places of Trust under it.

What do we expect, but the Impartial Administration of Justice, to great or
small, high or low, rich or poor, friend or foe? However unjust Men's Actions
are, their Consciences will cry, It is just, it is just, when they suffer most
severe Punishment for their Crimes: Honesty is the best Policy, and needs least
the Volumes of Politic Axioms; an upright, single-hearted Man, with a general
Notion of the Laws and Customs of the Land, will do more Service with a few
obvious Rules, that almost every man knows, than a Cunning Man can with all his
Skill, when he makes use of it for upholding him out of the Road of Equity and
Righteousness.

What do we expect, but that the Prophanity of this City should now meet with
an Hearty Enemy in the Chair? and you have a Notable Opportunity for showing
your self so, Wickedness being grown to that height, that it is an Injury, yea,
a Ruin to many Families, who could wink at it while it remained only under the
Form of a Sin or an Offense. He that will become a Check and a Terror to it
now, will receive the Praise, and enjoy the Hearts of all Parties, who would
not have their Posterity rot in Bawdy-houses, or made public Examples of
Justice at Tyburn, or their Estates purchased by labor and industry, or
preserved by pains, parcimony and prudence, drank away in Taverns, or thrown
away at a Game. You will become the City's great Benefactor, in delivering it
from such a Ruin, You will receive an Honor far above the Honor of your
Office, if it may be recorded, that Profanity, which has so long increased, did
decay, and receive its Deaths-wound under the Maioralty of Sir William Ashurst.
A zealous acting against Vice and Profanity, will not only be for your Honor,
and the City's good, but it will be an acting for God, who is of purer Eyes
than to behold Iniquity; the nigher you are brought to him, the more you ought
to be like him; the more he Honors you, the more you ought to Honor him: He
has generally given to you the Hearts of the City, will you suffer that
Kindness to be in vain? He has promised both Strength and Reward for his Work;
trust him, he is surely faithful; but never trust his Enemies; you may gain
your own personal Foes by Favors, but never think to make God's Foes your
Friends, if you intend to act for God; you may sooner lose ten Friends than
gain one of them; all your Favors will only make them Ridicule you, if not put
them in a Capacity to Injure you.

Not only may the things expected, but the Expectation it self, encourage you
in the Administration of your Office; for they who truly hope for such things
at your hand, will be constant Supplicants at the Throne of Grace, for Piety,
Prudence, Patience, Candor and Courage, for you. That you may not only have a
Power Faithfully to discharge your Trust, but with Ease, Pleasure and Success,
you may perform every Duty of the Station, and at last descend from the Chair
with an Honor greater than the Hope and Joy of your Friends at your Ascension
to it, in this Catalogue he counts it his Honor to be, who is

Your Humble Servant, Walt. Cross.

THE HYPOTYPOSIS, OR Schematical INDEX.
ROMANS 4.1.
1. THe Supposition, all Sinners are Justified one way, whereof Abraham was a
famous Pattern. Page 1. 2. The Prerogatives of Abraham, Prince of the Fathers.
p. 2. 3. The Grammatical Syntax asserted and proved, viz. That according to the
Flesh belongs to finding, not to Abraham. p. 5. 4. The Comprehensiveness of the
word Flesh, and sense of finding as to the Flesh. 5. The Importance of the
Rhetorical way of expressing this sense, What shall we say then? p. 12.
ROMANS 4.2.
I. An Introduction from the Momentuousness of the Doctrine of Justification.
p. 15. II. The Proposition, that Abraham was not Justified by Works, which
contains four Material Parts: 1. The Subject, Abraham, before spoken to; the
other three are in the Predicate or Attribute: 1. Justification. 2. Works. 3.
By. As to the first: 1. The Forensical Sense of the word Justify is asserted
and proved. p. 20. 2. The Correlative Privileges are explained; (1.)
Redemption. p. 24. (2.) Reconciliation. p. 25. (3.) Adoption. p. 26.
3. The Sentence or Index of Justification, viz. (4.) Regeneration. p. 28.
4. The Time of Justification. p. 36.
As to the second part, Works: 1. The Nature and Properties of Evangelically
good Works are explained. p. 37. 2. The Erroneous Limitations of Works refuted.
p. 39.
As to the third part By; in every Causal or Meritorious sense, Works are
affirmed to be excluded. p. 42.
III. The Discourse on the first Argument, because no Matter of Glorying, has
three principal parts: 1. The Formation of it. p. 45. 2. The Minor or Truth of
it proved from (1.) Man's Being. p. 49. (2.) Man's Nature, Free Will. p. 55.
(3.) Man's Guilt. p. 77. (4.) Man's Impotence. p. 87.
3. The Major or Strength of the Argument, that all Works affords ground of
Glorying. p. 99.

ROMANS 3.27.
I. The Litteral Explication of the Text. p. 107. II. The Supposition or Axiom,
the Justification of a Sinner must be in such a way as excludes boasting. III.
The Negative Proposition, that Boasting is not excluded by the Law of Works,
contains 1. The Nature of the Evangelical Law. p. 110. 2. The Pharisaical sense
of the Law when Christians. p. 116. 3. That all Laws requiring Works of us, are
excluded from Justification, because they exclude not Boasting; therefore there
is excluded (1.) The Nature of a Law in general. p. 126. (2.) The Natural Law.
p. 129. (3.) The Moral Law. p. 132. (4.) The Mosaical. p. 134. (5.) The
Evangelical. p. 136.

IV. The Affirmative Proposition, that the Law of Faith excludes Boasting, and
therefore by it we are Justified, contains 1. The Nature of an equal
Interpretation or Exposition of a rigid Law. p. 142.. 2. That Christ was under
a Law. p. 149. 3. The Nature of that Law and its Righteousness, p. 152. 4. That
he Obeyed it in our room. p. 155. 5. That the Law of Faith is this Mediatorial
Law. p. 157.

Correct,
Page 1. line 21. for when justified, r. who was justified.

Page 165. line 23. in some Copies, for it is right, r. taught.

ADVERTISEMENT.
A Compend of the Covenant of Grace. By Walt. Cross, M A. Sold by H. Barnard at
the Bible in the Poultrey. Price 6 d.

(...) ROMANS IV. 2. For if Abraham were Justified by Works, he has whereof to
glory, but not before God.
THe Doctrine contained in this Verse is of great Moment, and requires our most
earnest Attention and most narrow search and enquiry into its Nature and all
its Circumstances; for it is, How shall we be Justified before God? how shall
we behave our selves before such an awful Tribunal? When he rises up, what
shall I do? and when he Visits, what shall I answer? says Holy Job; Wherewith
shall we come before the Lord, and bow our selves before the most High? will he
be pleased with thousands of Rams, or ten thousands of Rivers of Oil? shall I
give my Firstborn for my Transgression, the Fruit of my Body for the Sin of my
Soul? That God would plead with Is^ael, made her Mountains tremble, and the
Foundations of her Earth to shake, Mic. 6. It Is David's Deprecation, Enter not
into Judgment with thy Servant, for in thy sight shall no Man living be
justified, Psalm. 143. How can Man be just (or Justified) with God? for if he
will Contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand, Job 9.3. But it
is a most certain thing, That we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, 2 Cor. 5. Romans 14.12. Psalm. 139.
and that every one of us must give an Account of himself to God; We cannot
decline it; Darkness cannot hide from his sight, nor Distance remove from his
Presence: We cannot fly from his Spirit, though we had the Wings of the Morning:
He is higher than the Heaven, what can we do? lower than Hell, whether can we
go? from the Depth of the Sea, or the uttermost End of the Earth, his Hand can
bring us back. He has appointed a Day, Act. 17.
wherein he will judge the World in righteousness, Eccl. 12.
and he will bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret thing, whether
it be good or evil: 1 Cor. 4.
He will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest
the Counsels of the Heart. Heb.
All things are naked and open to the Eyes of him with whom we have to do. If
there be a God there is a Governor, and if there be a Governor there must be
a Judgment: Can we be his Creatures and his Subjects, and will he be so
Careless as not to take an Account of us? Humane Government is but an Image of
his: There can be no Shadow without a Substance. Does a Summons from Man
fright us? Does the very Name of an Arraignment, a Court, a Judge, an
Appearance at a Humane Bar, shake off our Security, and rouse our Phlegmatic
Constitution, and put us into a most serious thinking frame, and shall not the
certain Warning of this rouse us out of our sleepy Condition, and entirely
monopolize our Thoughts? Yet because of our Dullness to hear things concerning
our Eternal State, I shall propose these Helps to render us serious about it.

1. The Majesty and Holiness of the Judge, the Voice of the Archangel, the
Trump of God, the Train of Saints, and glorious Appearance at the Great Day,
will add nothing to it; he is as Holy, as Just, as Powerful now as then, as
nigh to us now as then: When his Seat is upon the Conscience, is he not as nigh
as when he makes a Cloud his Theater? the Matter to be tried the same now that
then, all the Business of that Day depends upon this: A sight of this God by
Faith, and the Belief of our being now in his Presence, would put us in the
same frame we shall be in then, as we may see from Job 40.4, 5. and 42.5.
Behold I am vile, what shall I answer? I will lay my hand upon my Mouth, once
have I spoken, but I will not answer: I have heard of thee by the hearing of
the Ear, but now mine Eye sees thee, wherefore I abhor my self in dust and
ashes. Job's Faith would make Job's Temper.

2. Exactness of the Law we are under as his Creatures; it is holy, just and
good, it allows not, nor indulges any Sin, in Thought, Word or Deed, and is
fenced with the most severe Sanction; In the Day thou eatest thou shall dye:
Cursed is he that continues not in all things written in the Book of the Law
to do them, Gal. 3.10. This may fill Sinners with Terror, Isa. 33.14. The
Sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surpised the Hypocrite; who among
us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings?

3. Our Condition; Sinners, Transgressors of this Law, Rebels against this
Sovereign God: There is none righteous, no not one; Jews and Gentiles, all are
under Sin; there is no Pagan, but he approaches God with his Sacrifices and
Prayers as an Offender; Propitiation, Pardon, Reconciliation, is that he looks
after. Every one that has an Exercise of Conscience, whose Heart is not
entirely hardened, has this for his principal Care, What shall I do to be
saved? Acts 2.

4. This is the Sum of the Gospel, the principal End of all Divine Revelation,
to teach how this (...), this guilty Person, this Enemy, this Ungodly Man may
be Justified, Romans 1.16, 17, 18. for these come all to one thing, How Saved?
how Pardoned? how Justified? how Reconciled? how Sanctified? how in Covenant of
Peace with God? how shall I escape Hell? how shall I enjoy Heaven? Christ is
the one true and living way, Christ is the one Mediator, Christ is the Surety
of the Covenant: We are Justified thorough the Redemption that is in Christ,
that Jesus Christ is the Object of the Gospel, Genesis 3.15. Romans 1.2, 3, 4. Heb.
7.25. This is the End of the Law, Gal. 3.24. Romans 10.4. And this is the End of
Ordinances, Salvation is by Faith, and Faith by Hearing.

A 5th. Help to render us studious about it, is Satan's Pains, and alas! his
Success too in either Corrupting it in our Thoughts, or keeping us from
Thoughts of it: Satanae solamen (sicut solamen miserorum) est habere socios: A
ringleader of Rebels drew all to his Party he could or can, and all Mankind he
has brought unto the same Condemnation with himself: But our God from his
special Compassion to us poor miserable Men who are deceived by Satan, has
invented this way of our Salvation thorough Christ, which is a Delivery from
Satan's Tyranny into the sweet Government of Christian Liberty; this he
endeavors to hinder by Blinding Men's Eyes, that they may mistake it, 2 Cor.
4.3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, whose Minds the god
of this World has blinded: His Device among both Pagans and Jews in the old
World, was to trust to their own Sacrifices, that God in Mercy would accept the
Blood of a Beast for the Life of a Man, or one Man for many. The Jews took the
Ceremonial Law for a Remedying Law, Gal. 1.6, 7. The Apostle calls it another
Gospel, that is none; and v. 4. tells what the Gospel is: But all Sacrifices
being laid down among the Christians, after Christ's sacrificing himself, Satan
attempts other Methods. 1. The grossest: That Christ died only for an Example,
and that his Self-denial to Natural Inclinations might move us to be denied to
our sinful; and that his Powerful Interest in his Father, and Prayer to him,
inclines him to Pardon on easy Terms, so that now half-work may be taken for
the whole. 2. Others, That Christ's Sacrifice did obtain a Pardon, but not for
all kind of sins; some for Original Sin only, some for sins in Ignorance also;
some for all sins before Conversion, for others their own good Works, Merits,
Penances, together with the Priestly Absolution, must pay or appease. A 3d.
Opinion is, That Christ Merited that we might Merit, immediately we are
accepted for our own Works, but remotely for Christ's, for on his Account our
own are acceptable. Christ has purchased a Covenant of Grace for all, which
Promises Remission of Sin, Helps of the Spirit, and a right to Heaven, under
the easy Conditions of Faith and Repentance: by these a Man is just in respect
of this Covenant that requires no more, and by this Justice and Righteousness
he is Justified, but it is on the Account of Christ's Merits that this is
reckoned Righteousness, and this Covenant or Law of Grace is given, that
accepts such imperfect Holiness for Righteousness. This Righteousness is
Meritorious, says Grotius, Luke 17. because it consists in the Willingness of
the Mind; the Obedience is due, but to do willingly Merits. As to the Order of
the Covenant, it Merits an Interest in Christ's Righteousness. By this Doctrine
all are equally Justifiable by Christ's Righteousness, but all do not equally
partake of Gifts to perform the Conditions: Nor is there any Promise of Ability
to perform these Conditions, for then some of the Promises would be absolute.
Our Justification is by our own Works, but our Justification on such Imperfect
Works is of Christ, or we are obliged to Christ for this easy Law; but the
Works of the Law are our own, and we must be tried by them: And yet some
Protestants say, this Evangelical Law requires greater Perfection than the Law
of Nature, Bull. Examen. p. 173.
and that no other Law threatens Eternal Death, or Promises Eternal Life but
it, and all since Adam are born under this Gospel-Law alone as to Eternal
Concern. I think this deserves the Title of Neonomianism, and justles both
Christ and his Gospel out of doors; for then there is no Pardon of Sin by
Christ, for none can transgress the Law they were or are not under, and
according to themselves Christ did not suffer for Sins against the Gospel, but
they admit any Absurdity for this Idol: It Is now in Vogue, and puts on many
various shapes; I could reckon several, but shall forbear the Schemes of them
till afterward: I mention them now only to show Satan's Diligence in Obscuring
and Perplexing this Case, that is of greatest Concern to our Souls of any in
this World or the World to come; and should not we be as diligent in Searching
out and Contending for this Faith once delivered to the Saints, since it is a
Title to so great an Estate, our Charter for Heaven? And yet for the weak
Christian's Comfort I must say, the Doctrine may be Fundamental that may have
many Problematic Questions about it, that the Ignorance, Doubts or Errors in,
will be but as the Stubble and Hay upon a good Foundation. Ill Management of
our Plea at a Tribunal of Grace will not make us lose the Cause, when uttermost
diligence is given. Once more under Correction, I believe that serious
Christian that holds Faith as the Instrument of Justification in his
Profession, and the other that earnestly Contends it bears the room of a
Condition, often have not the least difference in their Idea's or Thoughts,
when they plead their Cause in Prayer before God; yet when Ministers inculcate
in People's Ears, they may, yea ought to plead their good Works at the Day of
Judgment, as lately has been, it will soon breed this Difference in Ignorant
People's Minds, and they who are Teachers of others ought to be better
instructed themselves.

A 6th. Help: Because the Purity of this Doctrine of Justification from any
Mixture of Man's Works or Merits with it, is the greatest Blessing of the
Reformation from Popery: In England the Discipline was very little altered, the
Idolatry of Worshipping of Saints fell as a Consequent of this Doctrine, that
ascribes all Merit to Jesus Christ. This Doctrine was the Everlasting Gospel
Prophesied of Rev. 14.6, 7. and was fulfilled in the Preaching of Zuinglius and
Luther, and they who followed them; they were the first of the Witnesses or
Protestants God illuminated with this Doctrine, and encouraged them to bear
their Testimony for it thorough all manner of Persecutions: For the Gospel is
the Doctrine of Christ's Righteousness, his Righteousness is the Evangelical
Righteousness, Romans 1.17. c. 3.20, 21, 22. c. 9.31, 32. and c. 10.3. and the
Righteousness of Faith, or by it; it is the Test of a Protestant and Shibboleth
of an Heretic: It is, says Luther, Articulus stantis aut cadentis Ecclesiae;
and Augustine before him, Ecclesia discernit justos ab injustis non Lege
Operum, sed Lege Fidei: And there is great Reason for it, it has such an
Influence on all other Doctrinal and Practical Truths. The Deity of Christ, if
not God, no Value in the Satisfaction: the Trinity, if no distinct Persons, no
Mediator; Original Sin, for if all not liable to Death, guilty Sinners, no need
of his Righteousness, etc. There is no fear of relapsing into Popery by any
Person on whose Heart this Doctrine is impressed; but there is ground to fear
that Luther was a true Prophet, who said, Post mortem nostram hac Doctrina
rursus obscurabitur. As we would Value the faithfulness of our Ancestors, who
suffered Martyrdom for propagating this Doctrine to us, it is the most precious
Inheritance we enjoy; as we would Value our own Souls, for there is no escaping
Wrath if we neglect so great a Salvation, Heb. 3. as we Value the Sacred
Revelations of God, for this is the Marrow of it, we would seriously set about
this Study, How shall I be Justified before God? What does Christ's
Righteousness contribute to a Sinner's Salvation? What Kindness has our Lord
Jesus Christ for poor Sinners?

But I shall come to the Words, which contains these two things:

(1.) The Explicatory Repitition of the former Proposition, that Abraham found
nothing as to the Flesh; for if Abraham was justified by Works.

(2.) An Argument for the Proof of it, because he had nothing to Glory in
before God. To begin with the first of these, though the Proposition is
Explicatory, yet such is the Subtilty of Satan, and his Diligence in filling
the World with darkness of Error, and reflecting his black Clouds upon the
Light of Scripture, that the Explication it self needs a Comment, or rather a
Defense: The (1.) Thing to be explained, is the Signification of the Word it
self, Justify: Never was there Word of greater Moment or Concern; for
Justification is the Soul of Religion, and Marrow of the Gospel, without it
nothing in the whole Scripture could Comfort a Sinner; never was Word matter of
greater Strife and Contention, and yet never less Reason for it; but the
greatness of its influence for bringing Souls out of Satan's Kingdom, makes it
Satan's principal Butt and Aim; the most of all other Disputations of Religion
end in Criticism, but this begins with it: The 1st. Question is, between us and
Papists, with whom the Swinckfeldians take part, that is, Whether this Word
Justify in St. Paul's Epistles, especially in this, when it treats of our
Righteousness, the Ground of our Pardon before the Tribunal of God, is to be
taken in a Physical or a Forensick Sense? Whether for sanctifying a Sinner and
making an unjust Person just, or for a judicial Absolving of a guilty accused
Person from the charge brought against him? The latter is the common Sense and
Tessera of a Protestant, and the former the Shiboleth of a Papist, excepting
Grotius and his Followers; who in this, and worse, take part with Papists.
Therefore this shall be the first Assertion, That it is a Justidiction, not a
Justification, of a Moral or Politic, and Relative, not an absolute Nature.

(1.) Arg. Though the Word it self is barbarous in the Latin Tongue, and made by
Divines, for the most genuine near and faithful Translation of the Original
Text; yet the Latin will favor this Sense, for Justifica men's deorum. Catul:
Signifies their juridical Distributions of Rewards and Punishments, and an
Adopted Son is called justus filius, from Jus Right, and in English we use the
Word Magnify and Glorify, not for making but esteeming Great and Glorious.
The Hebrew with all its Oriental Daughters do far more Confirm this Sense, for
one of their Conjugations usually adds declaring to the Primitive
Signification, as Barar pure, in Arabic, the Conjugation Taphahalah makes it
signify, he cleared himself, or justified himself juridically; in the Heb.
Tame polluted, Levit. 13.12. signifies to pronounce Unclean, which in this Word
Zadak, to Justify, holds almost always in all the six Oriental Languages, in
Hiphi^; as to the Greek we find it about thirty six or thirty eight times in
the New Testament always in this Sense, declaring, esteeming, or judging Just;
the shortest Method of the Proof is by instances of these Texts, that the
Papists plead for, and some Protestants are willing to yield; (that it often
signifies Forensically the Papist themselves grant) the Principal place is
Revel. 22.11. A Forensick Justification is not capable of increase.

Resp. (1.) In the Sense and Manifestation of it, it is. (2.) Where Courts are
subordinate, it is; he that is justified in one, may go on to be justified in
another. (3.) This Text speaks only of the Continuation of it, and there is a
considerable difference between the first Sentence of Justification, and the
Continuation in that State. (4.) Some Original Copies of considerable
Authority, reads it (...) not (...), which removes all pretense. The next place
to this in their Opinion is, Dan. 12.3. And they that turn many to
Righteousness; the Original is, they that justify many. Resp. (1.) Preachers
do as much Justify, as they Sanctify, their Instruction and Authority has
equal Influence on both: A third place, 1 Cor. 6.11. The Objection may be thus
obviated, Though sanctifying and justifying be named together; yet they may be
distinct Blessings, and not Explicatory one of another. (2.) Our Lord Jesus is
the Author of the One, and the Spirit of God the Author of the Other. (3.) The
Blessed Spirit of God is also a Cause of Justification, in his working Faith
and Sealing a Pardon; but for Scriptures that prove its Forensick Sense, the
Reader may look Deuteronomy. 25.1. 2 Samuel 15.4. 1 King. 8.31. Job 13.18. Mat. 11.19.
and 12.37. Luke 7.29. and 10.29. and 16.15. and on this very Subject, Romans
2.13. and 8.33. which the Papists themselves grant. Thus much for the first
Argument, from the Etymology, and usual Acceptance of the Word from Sacred
Writ; to which may be added, the Testimony of Fathers and Profane Authors; as
Chrysostom. (...) is (...), Homil. 15. to justify is to declare Just, the Greek
Etymologist (...), justified, that is judged Just. Suidas, (...), to esteem
just; and most frequently in profane Authors, (...), to Punish. (2.) Argument
is from its contrary, the contrary of making just, is Sinning, or Tempting to
Sin; but the Scripture shows us, that the contrary of justify is to condemn,
Deuteronomy. 25.1. Prove. 17.15. Luke 18.14. Romans 3.4, 5. and 8.33. The usual
Signification, or Primitive Significations, to which all others are reducible,
is the final result of a tried Case, to acquit or condemn, treat as just or
unjust, upon an Antecedent judicial Trial: And Scripture uses the most
favorable Signification to acquit; the profane Authors the other, to Punish
or Condemn: from which we see no Word of the World so fit; for our
Justification is not properly so, but a Pardon; it is an Acquitment upon a
Suffering or Satisfaction given; Christ was properly justified, we properly
pardoned; but the nearness of Relation between Him and Believers, the
Reflection or Rebound his Justification has on our Pardon, gives it the Name.
Christ was in some sense, though different, both condemned and justified; and so
are we; this makes the Word which signifies both so proper; for our
Justification is on a foregoing Condemnation. (3.) The Explicatory and
Synonymous Expressions in Scripture, shows it to be taken in a Forensick Sense,
as Remission of Sin, Reconciliation with God, not coming into Condemnation:
Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, for in thy sight shall no Flesh be
justified. (4) The Description of it in Scripture, as the result of a judiciary
Process: we read of the Judgment, Psalm. 143.2. (1.) Job 9.3. How shall Man be
Just with God, if he will Contend with him (2.) A Judge, the Judge of all the
Earth will do righteously. (3.) Of a Law. (4.) Of a Guilty Person, Romans 3.19.
(5.) Of this Law drawn up into a Charge against a Man, Colos. 2.14. (6.) And
Satan as an Accuser. (7.) Conscience as a Witness. (8.) There is a Tribunal of
exact Justice, and a Throne of Grace as a Superior Chancery. (9.) There is
Faiths Pleading at the Bar of the one, and appealing from the other. (10.)
Christ as an Advocate, 1 John 2.2. (11.) His Righteousness the Plea, and the
Absolving Sentence passed upon that account, Romans 3.26. To declare his
Righteousness, that he may be just, and the justifier of him which believes in
Jesus. (5.) I shall only explain that one Romans 5.18. Even so by the
Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all men unto Justification of
Life: (...). The Righteousness of that one Christ, as the Matter or Merit of
our Justification, is put in Opposition to the offense of that one Adam, as the
Matter or Demerit of our Condemnation; so Justification as the absolving
Sentence is put in Opposition to Condemnation, for Holiness or Righteousness is
not a proper opposite to Condemnation. The laborious Gerard does not without
cause say Sanctification is rather used for Justification, than Justification
for it; for when the Priest did cleanse the Leper, it was as much and more by
Absolving and pronouncing clean, than by any Physical Cure those Ceremonies
could make on that Distemper, Lev. 13.14. to which the New Testament alludes,
Heb. 10.10. By the which Will we are sanctified, through the Offering of the
Body of Jesus Christ once for all. The immediate Fruit of the Sacrifice was
Atonement, Peace and Pardon, our Sanctification is the immediate Fruit of the
Spirit. Thus much for the Signification of the Word, and general Nature of the
thing.

I shall next propose several Heads and Helps, for the more distinct
Apprehension, and particular Knowledge of this great Mystery. (1.) The Relation
it stands in to the other Benefits and Fruits of Christ's Death. (2.) What is to
be reckoned for the Absolving Sentence. (3.) When it is, that the Sinner is
Absolved and Justified. I shall leave other Questions to the 5th ver.

1. There are four great Privileges and Fruits of Christ's Death, that are of a
Relative Nature and as many of an absolute and Physical kind; for the first
four, There is this Justification, Redemption, Reconciliation, and Adoption.
(1.) For Redemption, it is taken two ways in Scripture: Either for the paying
of the Price, or the Applicaion of the purchased Privilege to the Person.

In the first Sense it is the Foundation of all the other Privileges, for it
puts on the Nature of the Ransom, or whatever other Name it may put on, by
which these Privileges are conveyed in Justice to us: Romans 3.24. Being
Justified through the Redemption. Colos. 1.20. Having made Peace through the
Blood of his Cross. Gal. 4.5. To redeem, that we might receive the Adoption.
Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity.
Ephesians. 1.14. Until the Redemption of the purchased Possession. There Redemption
is put for the Foundation of all these Privileges, being the common Term the
Scripture uses to express the Sufferings and Death of Christ by, in its use and
ends; by that he satisfied Divine Justice, by that we were freed from Death and
Hell; and this Foundation being laid, he became the Avenger of Blood as to
Satan who had slain us, and recovered the Captives from that Tyrannical
Conqueror. (2.) Redemption, is put for the Application of the Privilege bought
by this Price to the Person: As when a Slave in Algiers has not only attained
Money to be paid to his Patron, but he himself is actually returned home; and
therefore in Scripture it is seldom or ever used, for the Application of any
one of the Privileges apart, but for the complete Consummation of all of them
in Glory, Luke 21.28. The day of Judgment is called the day of our Redemption,
and also, Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the Holy Spirit, whereby you are sealed to
the day of Redemption. Because all the Privilege purchased by that Price, does
not so much as commence till then; There is a beginning of Redemption from
Guilt before in Justification, and a Redemption from Enmity before in
Reconciliation, and from Sin before its Pollution and Dominion; but they are
not completed, nor a Glorification from Death and Mortality so much as begun.
So much for the Relation between Justification and Redemption.

The third Relative Privilege is Reconciliation, and that is of two kinds too;
either (1.) As it puts on the Nature and form of an Inward Affection: For we
cannot conceive of God positively, but under some humane resemblance; thus it
is rather a reconcileableness, and belongs to the Love of good Will, a
Willingness that mutal Communion and Fellowship should be again renewed, and
that distance, by which we are undone no more continue. Gods becoming our
Council from Eternity, some improperly calls this a Justification, but Council
praecedes the Trial, Justification follows; and his so early Intimations of his
kind Purposes, and his giving his Son to be a Peacemaker, though the pulling
down of the Partition Wall cost his Blood: Reconciliation taken thus, is the
Foundation of Redemption, and all built upon it. These two, viz. Love of God,
and Gift of his Son, differ, as a Natural and Artificial Foundation; the
natural Rock, and the first laid Stone, this Love and Reconcileableness is the
very Nature of God, or an immediate result from it on the Position of such an
Object; for God is Love, and Love made him communicate of the fullness of his
Being to nothing, and he is a faithful Creator to protect and provide for what
he brings forth, Love makes him so. (2.) Reconciliation is taken for the
Agreement of Minds, Amos 3.3. Can two walk together, and not be agreed? Two
Persons who once were of one Mind, and of one Heart, they had the same designs,
and ends mutually engaged in Amity; and now this Temper and Condition after a
miserable misunderstanding is again renewed; as David's bowels yearned after
Absalom, he was reconcilable, but Communion was not renewed, until he had
lived a considerable time in Jerusalem. So Pharaoh's Butler, when he is again
restored to his wonted Place: Thus Reconciliation is the very same with
Justification. The divorced Woman is again reconciled to her Husband, in the
same State of Fellowship through the Covenant of Grace that she was before
breach of the Covenant of Works; as Justification is a restoring a Man to his
former State before the Charge or Suspicion of guilt, so Reconciliation is a
restoring to that State we were in before Enmity; they have both the same
blessed Author, God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, they have both the same
moving Cause, Goodness and Love, breaking forth in Grace and Mercy from
Eternity: God became Man's Council in this Trial, wherein he is justified, and
that Council was a Council of Peace; they have the same meriting Foundation,
Christ's Redemption; they commence both at one and the same time, Guilt and
Enmity falls at once: The one Simile only helps to illustrate, wherein the
other may become defective; for all the Transactions between Men and Men, have
their Exceptions and Dissimilitudes, when they are brought to represent the
Case between God and us: The one represents the Case as friendly, made up
without going to Law, the other represents a fair Trial; the one represents it
as a private Case, the other represents it as a public Crime pardoned,
Authority being appeased by a Satisfaction: By the one Guilt is removed, by the
other Enmity; the one teaches that the other is not to be wire-drawn, for
finding of something in it answerable to all the parts of the Simile.

The fourth is Adoption, which is of the same Relative Nature with the former,
and has the same Causes and Means of Conveyance, and commences at one and the
same time; but yet seem to differ in these things.

(1.) Adoption comprehends a greater Blessing, Justification gives Life, but
Adoption gives an Inheritance; Justification makes us free Subjects, but
Adoption makes us Sons; Justification puts us in Adam's Condition, but Adoption
gives a right to Adam's Expectation; for Adam's Marriage from its very Original
seems to be a Type of our Communion and Fellowship with Christ, Genesis 2.24. They
shall be one Flesh. Ephesians. 5.32. it is said to be a great Mystery: Vid. Dr. T.
Goodwin.

(2.) Justification of a Sinner is a Sublapsarian Blessing, but Predestination
to Adoption is an Antilapsarian Blessing, designed for Man before he fell, Ephesians.
1.5.

(3.) Justification is a Mean, Adoption is an End, Tit. 3.7. That being
Justified by his Grace we should be made Heirs according to the Hope of Eternal
Life; and so in this Chapter it is treated of from the 13th. Verse, as
posteriour to Justification.

(4.) Justification is a more immediate Effect of Christ's Death, Adoption more
mediate; it is by Justification that the blessed Line of Divine designs that
was broken by Sin, is again tied. God designed a perpetual ascending Line of
Blessings to his Creatures, but from Sin to Justification is a Parenthesis in
this Line: John 12.24. Christ compares himself to a Corn of Wheat that dies,
that it may bring forth fruit, so Psalm. 45. Christ dyed and was Anointed to the
Office of a Mediator, that he might recover those who were designed his Fellows
and Companions, from their Forfeiture of it and Unfitness for it: Hence it is
called a Purchased Possession, Ephesians. 1.14. by reason that is Purchased, without
which we could not enjoy it. We can have no Privilege without Life.

(5.) The one seems to require a more Noble and Heavenly Temper of Spirit
correspondent to it: Regeneration answers the one, but the Spirit of Adoption,
which is a higher degree, answers the other. The Regenerate Man may be under a
Spirit of Bondage, but they who have received the Spirit of Adoption are more
free from that slavish Temper, Romans 8.14. Heb. 11.16. their Desires are fixed
upon and more proportioned to their Estate.

(6.) The one is ascribed more to the Death of Christ, the other to his Life:
We are Justified by his Blood, Saved by his Life, Romans 5.9. By Authority he
forgives sins, but by his Intercession he prays for the Privileges of
Adoption. But whatever dictinction there may be, there is no Separation, which
is frequent among Men who have their Life often spared without restoring their
Estates, and may forfeit the one sometimes without the other.

(7.) There is a Priority in Justification to Adoption, though not in Time, yet
in Order of Nature, this follows consequentially from all the rest, John 1.12.
The right to Sonship follows Justifying Faith, Tit. 3.7. being Heirs follows
being Justified: Romans 8.17. We are first Children, then Heirs, and a Spirit of
Prayer and Divine Conduct for a Holy Life answers Adoption. First Life, then
Estate, in Order of Nature.

The Arguments brought against it by the Learned Forbesius, are answerable.

First, To Adopt is the Act of a Father, and the Acts of the Father in the
Trinity are before the Acts of the Son and Spirit. Resp. That Order holds more
in their Concurrence to one Act than in distinct Acts, for Justification is the
Act of the whole Trinity, so is Adoption. (2.) That Order holds more in
Antelapsarian than Sublapsarian Actions; for in the latter, Redemption, which
is Christ's Act, is first, for there Actions flow not from God immediately as
God. The Second, What is first in Christ, is first in us, but Christ is a Son
first, before Justified as a Redeemer. Resp. This is true in the Order of
Intention, for we are first designed Sons to be the Companions and Fellows of
that only begotten, but it is not true in Order of Execution. (3.) We are
Christ's Brethren by Adoption. Resp. He is a Brother by Incarnation, and fitted
for being our Redeemer by it. It is not our Brotherhood by Adoption fitted
Christ for Redemption, but his becoming our Brother by Incarnation. The
relation of the absolute Blessings, Regeneration, Sanctification, etc. may be
understood by the following head.

A Second Help for more distinct Knowledge of this Blessing, is what supplies
the room or place of the Justificatory Sentence. By Virtue of what Act of God
upon the Arraigned Person does he become formally free from the Curse of the
Law? By what does he publicly manifest such a particular Person pardoned?
Resp. There are four apparent Competitors for this place: 1. The Voice of the
Gospel, declaring all that believe are justified, Act. 13.39. but the Voice of
the Law and the Voice of the Judge are of distinct Natures. The Gospel is in
room of the Law, it is the Constitution of Christ's Kingdom, and it is also in
room of the Records of a Court, it shows in general what is Constitutive of
Justification, Romans 5.19. By the Obedience of one shall many be made righteous;
and is Decisive of them that are Justified, or to be Justified, and them that
are not or shall not be, Joh. 3.36. He that believes on the Son has Life, and
he that believes not shall not see Life: But the Judg's part is to make an
Authoritative Application of this Law or Constitution to an individual Person,
this the Scripture does not: All that Christ died for are Justifiable by the
Gospel Constitution, but they often live a considerable time before they be
actually Justified, 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you, but you are sanctified,
but you are justified. Mr. Baxt. Confess. p. 40. There is a treble Pardon
constitutive by God as a Lawgiver, declarative by God as a Judge, determining
our Right, and Executive in not inflicting the Poenalty: The Gospel does the
first, the second is that in question. There are others, such as the Testimony
of the Spirit in a Person's own Conscience, and the solemn Sentence at the Day
of Judgment, which I referr to the several Courts our Cause is tried in.

That which I shall conclude on, as bearing nighest resemblance to it, is God's
Act of Regeneration, his first Gift of Saving Faith and Sanctifying Grace, that
beside its absolute Nature in Conforming the Soul to Christ, and raising his
Image in it, it has a relative signification of Divine Favor, that is better
than Life. God by that Deed or speaking Action says, All thy sins are blotted
out, thy Iniqui^ies forgiven, thou art a Freeman in the State. (1.) 2 Cor.
3.17. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty, Romans 6.7. He that is
dead is freed (Orig. justified) from sin. (2.) As soon as ever man sinned, Genesis
3. he became guilty, and as soon as guilty the Punishment of spiritual Death
followed; so if as soon as sinned condemned, as soon as Christ's Righteousness
applied he is justified; the receiving such a blessed Fruit of it as the
Spirit, is a sure Application of it; there is as present and effectual Virtue
in the Medicinal Potion for Life, as there was in the Poison to Death. (3.)
Ephesians. 1.14. The Spirit of the Lord is an Earnest of the Inheritance wherever he
is; and since he ensures Adoption, much more he ensures Justfication. (4.)
Regeneration makes us Sons, and the Privilege of a Son is more than that of a
Subject. (5.) Romans 5.10, 11. Whenever we are reconciled, we are justified, for
they are but different representations of the same Privilege, and
Sanctification takes away the Enmity. (6.) When the Spirit is given to us, we
receive a great Trust, many Talents, and called to a great Office in Christ's
Kingdom, to praise and glorify him, to propagate his Kingdom, created unto all
good Works. Sir Walter Raleigh, and with him all Lawyers, judged his being put
in a place of Office and Trust, did virtually contain a Pardon in it. It
implies much weakness in Government or Governors, to employ Traitors, Rebels
and Criminals in places of Trust, who must strive for their Lives to hinder the
just administration of the Government which would take away their own Life.
(7.) Mat. 9.2. When Christ the Judge of the World verbally pronounces
Forgiveness, he signifies all imports one thing; Arise and walk: Eyes be ye
open: Be thou healed: Or, Thy sins be forgiven thee: His gifts are in a
comprehensive Cluster; there is a strong Chain of connection among them, and he
may name what is most easy; hence are they so united and involved into one
another by Scripture, Titus 3.5.7. 1 Cor. 6.11. Romans 8.30. Act. 5.31. And (8.)
There is not only the Example of Christ's Justifying, but the Example of his
being justified, Who was justified in the Spirit, 1 Timothy 3.16. All the Works of
the Spirit on him and by him were God's justifying him: His Resurrection was
his declared Justification, Romans 4.25. It was the Pattern of ours, besides
other great Influences on ours: By it was he taken from the Prison of the
Grave, and acquitted from the Judgment, where tried, therefore our spiritual
Resurrection, Romans 6.7. is called Justification. (9.) Ancient Custom shows that
Authority did intimate their Sentence by symbolical Actions, and things as well
as words. Ovid. Albis atrisque Lapillis. The White Stone was sent as a Symbol
of Absolution to the Person whose Name they wrote upon it. Pierius in his
Egyptian Hierogliphicks gives this Account of the Rights of a Slaves
Manumission: That he was Clothed in White Raiment, and his Patron's Ring put
upon his Finger, and did eat at his Master's Table. The Scripture makes use of
all these as Symbols of our Freedom from the Bondage of Corruption and
Servitude of Sin, Luke 15. The Ring is made mention of Revel. 19.8. there is the
White Raiment, Rev. 2.17. there is the Manna, the Food of our Lord's Table, and
the White Stone with our Names upon it. This expressing of a Sentence by an
Action, is becoming of the Divine Majesty, with whom to do and to say are the
same; his great Work of Creation required no more to its production but God's
saying, Let there be a Light, a Firmament, etc. and it was so. This great Work
of Regeneration, it is a begetting by his Word: Hos. 2.14. A speaking
Comfortably to the Heart, and frequently a Calling, Whom he Called he
Justified; his Vocation put them in a Justified State. (10.) Sanctification or
Regeneration removes a Punishment as well as a Crime; the giving of a spiritual
Life takes away a spiritual Death, which is the worst of Punishments: The
Desertion by the Spirit is the greatest Curse, and that is removed by the Gift
of the Spirit, and what takes away the Punishment does necessarily remove the
Guilt, or suppose it removed; for the greater Mercy does comprehend the lesser.
Lastly, From the Nature of Faith, Isa. 53.11. By his Knowledge shall my
righteous Servant justify many; it may either be by the Gift of Knowledge, or
by the Act of Knowledge upon him; for Heb. 11.1. Faith is the Evidence of
things not seen; it is no sooner in being than it is in exercise. The Seed of
Grace is not like Material Seed, to need a Time of Corruption and intermixture
with the Earth before it grow, but like the Beams of the Sun that act as they
are received. The Gift of Faith is the Idea of Heavenly things suggested into
the Soul, and there manifesting themselves by their own Light; so that we are
Receivers of the Objects of Faith when we act Faith, Isa. 65.24. Before they
call I will answer, and while they are yet speaking I will hear: Hence
Regeneration's being the Sentence does not pecede the Exercise of Faith as a
Mean: This might afford more Arguments for this Truth, because then the Union
between us Debtors and Christ as Surety, is Completed, which is not 'till we
apprehend him by Faith. (2.) Then the Soul actually Pleads, and therefor it is
Term-time, the acceptable Day of our Salvation; the Court sits on our Case, and
all the Causes of our Salvation are Clothed with a forensical Form from this
Exercise of Faith, by which we look on God as our Judge, on Christ's
Righteousness as our Plea, on Satan as our Accuser, on Christ as our Advocate,
and his Spirit our Council; on the Law as an Indictment drawn up against us,
and on its Constitution and Divine Justice as a Tribunal, from which we Appeal
to the Chancery of the Gospel, founded on Goodness and Equity.

Object. There are some Objections against this Doctrine: (1.) Sanctification
is a gradual thing, Justification is one Act. (2.) That this would Confirm the
Popish Error, that Justification is not a forensical or relative Act, but a
Physical and Absolute one.

To both which I Answer: (1.) That the Sentence of Justification is not
Justification, but the Declaration of it, and the Gift of the Spirit for
Sanctification the Sign of that. Faith is an Absolute Act, by which we are
justified, but Justification is the relative Result of all the Causes and
Foundations. Fatherhood or Sonship are Relative things, but to be Born, or to
be Begotten, is an absolute thing. (2.) In all Similitudes there is somewhat of
Unlikeness, and so in this: For, 1. He who is Judge, is both Lawgiver and
supreme Governor too; in other Cases in this. 2. In others we have done with
the Judge when the Sentence is past, but not in this. (2.) In others we need
but one Act, because we can abstain from the like Crimes; but in this we need a
Continual Justification or Remission: Hence we daily Pray, Forgive us our Sins;
and we have daily Encouragement, that if any Man sin there is an Advocate with
the Father: The Court constantly sits, we are always on our Knees before the
Bar, our Faith perpetually Pleads, and Christ's always interceding, and he is
always heard; hence a constant continued Stream of Justification, Dan. 9.9.
called Forgivenesses; and Revel. 19.9. the Righteousnesses or Justifications,
for it is the same word; (...), Romans 5.19. is translated Justification, and
thus may be expounded, Revel. 22.16. He that is Justified, let him be Justified
still; and in this very Chapter, Romans 4. Abraham is said to be Justified by
Acts of Faith several Years after his first Conversion, Genesis 15.6. it was at
least Ten Years after his first Faith. Our Case is a continued State of
Justifying or Pardoning.

That which recommends this Opinion to me, is not only its Appearance of Truth,
but its Medicinalness for Reconciling the different Opinions of Persons so
lately on foot; for the Subscribers Apology grants, 1. That Faith and
Repentance are absolutely given to the Ungodly, for what is Man else before
that Gift? 2. That Faith and Repentance are only given to the Elect. Are they
not then, 1. The Gifts, Blessings, Tokens of special Favor, Symbols of divine
distinguishing Love, though they may be long unintelligible to the Person under
the Exercise of them, as the Inscription of Mean Tekel on the Wall was to the
Chaldeans; yet ex Natura rei and intention Authoris, it imports a Person's
being Reconciled to God, Fellowship with Heaven is begun, and two cannot walk
together and not be agreed. Effects always signify their Cause, Romans 5.15. 2.
Can a Person be under special Favor, and not Pardoned, or Reconciled and not
Pardoned? Called and not Justified? not under Wrath and yet under Guilt, or
else under Divine Love and Wrath at once? or that the Punishment, to wit, want
of the Spirit, spiritual Death, is removed, and not the Guilt or lyableness to
the Punishment, although so removed as eventually never to return again from
the Vigor of Divine Love fixed on that Person: Romans 5. and 6. the Apostle
describes a State of Grace and Justification as necessarily united: But I need
not infer this from them, since the Reverend Mr. Baxt. Conf. p. 40. says, To
Sanctify is to Pardon, that is, executively, because it takes away the
greatest Punishment, Spiritual Death; and the Sentence of Pardon must go before
the Execution. And (further) our Pardon is subservient to our Renovation, by
Sanctity as imperfectly now begun; for being imperfect the Defect of every Act
deserves Condemnation, and needs Pardon, and yet this Pardon is a particular
Pardon following the general Pardon of our Persons, by which we escape Wrath,
and are capable of Acceptable Obedience for the future. By this the Pardon of
our Persons should precede every Act of Faith and Repentance, for a following
particular Pardon accompanies every Act of them.

But the greatest difficulty is, how Faith and Repentance should bear both the
Place of a Sentence and a Condition, which is needful to reconcile these two
Opinions.

R. 1. By Condition they mean not a Condition properly in a Law or a foederal
Sense, as we use the Word in Bargains between Man and Man; for the Civilians
inform me these three Properties make a Condition: 1. Potestative, that it be
in the Parties Power to perform. 2. Casualty in it self, and to the other Party
uncertain. 3. Causal, in that it bear a Valuable Consideration. The Law will
not suffer a Man to injure himself so far, or another to deceive him, as to get
a Title to an Estate of two or three hundred Pounds per Ann. for an hundred
Guineas: But the Apol. informs us, that This Condion is neither in our Power,
2. Nor Uncertain, 3. Nor Meritorious, therefore not a Condition properly. Nay,
further, (though the Gospel be a Law, and this Law is the Condition of the
Covenant) yet it is not a Legal Condition: Therefore it must be in a Physical
or Logical Sense, if not in a Law Sense; and a Necessary Connection is enough
for the one, viz. Logical, as if a Man be Reasonable, he is capable of
Learning, and if capable of Learning, he is reasonable; and Priority enough for
the other, as that Wood must be laid to the Fire before it can be burnt. And
this Opinion is very agreeable with Condition in this Sense, for there is not
only a Necessary Connection between Faith, Repentance and Justification, but
there is a Priority, (the Covenant of Grace partakes more of Orderliness, it is
Ordered in all things, than of Conditionalness) for the Foundation is before
the Relation, the Sign before the Signification, the Gift of Faith and
Repentance is before its Connotation of our Pardon, or being received into
Favor. Nay, further, there is not only the Gift of Faith, but the exercise of
this Grace as mixed with our Faculties, and become a Duty in order of Nature
antecedent to this Connotation or Signification of our being now brought under
Divine Favor; because the way of Communicating this Gift is by Calling,
speaking immediately to the Soul, and representing spiritual Ideas, making us
behold as in a Glass the glorious Image of the Lord, discovering unseen and
hoped for things, as before and after both is further explained; and the Gift
cannot be without this exercise, by which God and the Soul unite and mutually
apprehend one another. In short thus: That this Gift may not only be long
unperceived by the Receiver, but that it cannot Signify until in Exercise,
though as a Gift it does signify.

There is but one thing more, that Justification and Glory are suspended upon
these Duties of Faith and Repentance.

R. Either by Suspension he means no more but Necessary Consequential; so we
Agree, and I do not find his Arguments will prove more: For a Testament is
fully as proper a Title, that gives Name to the whole Bible, as Covenant or
Bargain; and Civilians say, the If used in Testaments, which is so frequent in
Scriptures, is a demonstrative If, that does not Suspend but Design the thing
Promised, and some certain Time or Manner of Conveyance. If he understand it a
Legal Suspension, it is the same with a Legal Condition, which he has denied
before; for, Conditio est dispositionis suspensio ex eventu incerto ei
opposito, and has an Obliging Influence on the Promiser, and Conferrs a Title
of Right to the Benefit promised.

I might Conclude this with some Testimonies out of the Fathers; but though I
find Phrases to answer my Purpose, I find the Style sometimes Loose and
Oratorical, and sometimes they Design another thing (which I wish a late Author
had minded, who Attempts to prove the New Law out of the Fathers, when Daille
who was better acquainted with them, says, It Is in vain to make them Judges in
many of the Controversies between us and the Papists; and yet this Author
would bring them to Prove a more Nice Point, become a very late Question. In
what sense the Law is New thoro the Gospel, or the Gospel may be called a Law,
I shall only instance his first Citation out of Justin Martyr, p. 228. etc. and
I am willing to be judged by any of the Subscribers that will take the Pains to
read it, if Justin intends any thng more than the recommending the Christian
Constitution, and proving it preferable to the Mosaical: For he says, This New
Law is Posterior to Moses his Law, but the Apologist's New Law has been ever
since the Fall of Adam. He says this New Law is Christ and his Testament. Any
may see he took Law in no strict Sense, when he calls Christ and his Testament
a Law; he calls it a Testament Eight times in that Page, and nigh Seventy times
in that Dialogue, and seldom, I think not above Four times, a Law, (without the
Explicatory word Testament added;) yet I think this Opinion will help to wrest
the Fathers out of the Papists Hands. The Fathers use the Words Justify and
Sanctify often promiscuously, for making Just and Holy. The common Answer by
Protestants is, the Fathers use the Word according to its Grammatical
Signification, not Forensical Use: To which the Papists answer, Then they were
not acquainted with that sense. This affords another, for we may say, to
Sanctify is to Justify, in the same Sense that Christ says, This Bread is my
Body, that is, a Sign of it: And so we may understand the Fathers Est, or Is,
Metonymically, for est Signum; and we may find enough among their Writings to
show that all the Parts and Degrees of Sanctification are Signs of
Justification; which does sufficiently show, that though this Phrase is New, that
the Gift of the Holy Spirit in order to our Sanctification, stands in the room
and place of a Justificatory Sentence, yet the Sense is not; for it is the
Sign, yea the spiritual Initiating Sign of our being in Covenant with God: This
is the Covenant I will make with them, I will pour out my Spirit on them. Being
in Covenant is a Relative Blessing as well as Justification, and they are
inseparable: Now, says the Lord, my giving my Spirit imports this, I take thee
to be one of my People, I avouch thee this Day to be mine. The Prince's
Proclamation of Pardon to a Rebel, or the Judges Justificatory Sentence of a
Person suspected, accused, imprisoned, is the first Authoritative Signification
of the Governments Favor: So what is the first Sign of Divine Favor must
stand in the place of a Justifying or Pardoning Sentence; but these absolute
Blessings that are proper to the Elect, of Faith and Repentance, are the first
Intimations of Divine Governments receiving us into Favor, therefore the Gift
of them is the Absolving Sentence.

A third Proposed Head, was the Time of our Justification, which being meant of
the first Act, necessarily follows from the former Proposition, to be neither
later nor sooner than the first Moment of our Conversion. The Goodness of God
would not suffer our Justification to be sooner, for he would not keep us out
of Possession of what is our Right; if as a just Judge he Justified us, as a
Merciful Governor he would Treat us as such, and let us have the Common
Privilege of Free Subjects, which is his Spirit: Not the later, for his
Justice could not give to a condemned Criminal without the Imputation of
Mediatorial Satisfaction, the greatest of the Favors and best of the Blessings
of his Kingdom; but whatever Arguments proved the former Proposition, proves
this: As for the Antinomian Notion of Justification from Eternity, it seems
more absurd than the Eternity of the World.

There is a Threefold Use this Doctrine affords, of Trial to the Doubtful, of
Support to the Dejected, and of Conviction to the Carnal secure Person. As to
the First, Whatever does prove the Sincerity of a man's Faith, the Reality of
his Regeneration, may be to him a sure Index and Token of his Pardon, since
Regeneration it self is the Justificatory Sentence. As to the Second, Whether
the dejection or despair of Mind arise from the greatness of Sin, the Violence
of Temptations, the strength of Lust, the multitude of Backslidings, or long
continuance in that comfortless State, or from such speculative Doctrines as
the Fewness of the Chosen, and fixedness of the Number of them for whom Christ
died; yet this one thing may support the Soul, and fill it with the Joy of a
pardoned Criminal, that if there be the least dram of Grace, though small as a
Mustard Seed, Mat. 17.20. thy State is secured, whatever come of others, or
however uneasy our present Condition be. For the Third, It is a vain thing for
that man to live in Hopes, and trust in Gods Mercy and Christ's Satisfaction,
without any inward Change in the Temper of his Mind; for the Sentence of
Justification is never passed upon him until he be Regenerate: Thus the
Apostle argues, Romans 6. obviating that Objection, If Grace be glorified in the
Pardon of Sin, let us continue in sin that Grace may abound. He answers, How
shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? He that is dead, is
justified from sin: These two are inseparable, a Justification from the Guilt
of sin, and a Mortication from the Power and Pollution of sin.

I come now to the other Term of the Proposition, Works, which I shall first
Explain by several distinguishing Characters, and then secondly, come to the
Proposition, and show in what sense the one is denied: Of the other, how far
Works are excluded from Justification. For the first, 1. They are Good Works;
neither Jews nor Gentiles ever pretended that God would justify us for bad
Works, that the same should be matter of Condemnation and Justification, that
what needs a Pardon should deserve a pardon. 2. Not merely Good in Men's
Opinions; the Pharisees thought their Works better than they were, Luke 16.15.
they did highly esteem what God did abominate, and justified themselves for it:
for Paul might then, and should have brought Arguments to prove they would be
Condemned for their Works: And 2ly, would have Corrected their Error as Christ
did, Mat. 5. by showing their Works were not good, they came not up to the
Extent and Spirituality of the Law. 3. The Apostle argues against the Works of
the Law, Romans 3.20. and the Law it self, v. 27. and 4.13. not against a
misinterpretation of the Law. Christ calls that Mat. 5. said of old, and said
of them, the Opinion and Tradition of Rabbis, not the Law, and Works of the
Law. It Is a sandy Foundation which some lay for their Comments, Systems and
Sermons, that only the works here meant are Mosaical in the Pharisaical sense
of them, without one word of proof for it; for then the fault or defect would
be in the Law, not in the Works by the Law, for this Law say some of them had
only Temporal Rewards and Punishments. 3. All Humane Actions, works in general,
not as Grotius only External Works; Aristotle and his Followers distinguish
between (...) and (...), Works and Actions. But Divinity that has only the
Morality of Actions for its formal Object, cannot exclude Internal, where all
Morality lies. The External works of the Apostles are called (...), their Acts,
as their famous and Sacred History is entitled, and 1 These. 1.3. Faith and
Love are styled Works: Besides, we find Obedience, Righteousness and Works, of
the same import through the Scripture, and especially in this Epistle: Romans
6.16. of Obedience unto Righteousness, and without Works, and without a Man's
own Righteousness, are of the same import. (4.) Good Works are the Fruits of
the Spirit, Eph^s. 5.9. The fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness,
rigbteousness and truth, Galat. 5.22. (5.) Good Works are wrought by a
Righteous Man. Mat. 7.18. A good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit, neither,
etc. Ephesians. 2.10. The Apostle proves that we are saved not of Works, because
Good Works follow our being God's Workmanship. (6.) Good Works must be
according to Divine Command, for that is the Rule and Standard between Good and
Bad, as (...), 1 John 3.4. is the formal Nature of Sin, so (...) is the formal
Nature of Good Works: Deuteronomy. 4.2. Good Works are called Righteousness, because
according to the Law, that is the measure of the Creators right to his
Creatures, and of the fellow Creatures to one another. Hence we are always sent
to the Law, and to the Testimonies, if not according to these, there is neither
Truth nor Goodness in them. Johannes Agricola, the Ringleader of Antinomians,
is usually condemned amongst Divines, and its said, was Converted by Luther
from this Error: That Repentance was taught by the Gospel, and not by the Law;
for the Law is the Rule of all Obedience, the Gospel is a Doctrine of Joy: Luke
2.10. A word of Grace, Acts 20.29. because it brings the tidings of pardon to
guilty Persons. The Law teaches Man's Righteousness, but the Gospel teaches
God's Righteousness, Romans 1.17.3.21. And hence our State being mixed of Law and
Gospel, no Works are truly good and acceptable to God by the Law alone: Not
from a defect in the Law, but a defect in us that cannot fulfill it. Hence (7.)
No work is good without Faith, Heb. 11.6. Romans 14. last. There is some
deformity in every action by reason of some defect or want of its Conformity to
the Law. And (8*) Its action needs a Pardon as well as every Person; and
therefore are only acceptable in the Name of Christ, Coloss. 3.17. Whatsoever
ye do in word or deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus. The doing in
Faith, and the doing in his Name, are all One: so it is a Justifying Faith
that is needed to justify every action, and this Composition makes the Actions
truly good, and as acceptable to God as those that were no ways deficient
either in Matter or Manner.

The Use I shall make of this, is of Refutation; for since none can pretend to
be justified by any Works but such as are good and acceptable in the sight of
God, and none are such that want the forementioned Qualifications, all the
distinctions of Adversaries about the Kinds of Works, are to no purpose. That
this may be more evident, I shall rank them under these four Kinds.

(1.) The Socinians, who say that the Apostle means Works in their Perfection,
that are excluded from a divine condescendency to our Impotency; he will not
require what we cannot perform, but will justify us for what we can. Resp. 1.
If we did and always had perfectly fulfilled the Law, we should have been
justified by its Works: Romans 2.13. The doers of the Law shall be justified: 2
Tit. 3.7. Not by works of righteousness which we have done. 2. It would
heinously reflect on the Holiness of God as a Lawgiver or Judge, to make an
Imperfect Law, or to Judge a Man just for Imperfect Performance of a Perfect
Law, Gal. 3.10. Cursed is he that continues not in all things, etc.

The Second Opinion is of them who exclude the Mosaical Law; and these of two,
and may be more sorts.

1. Some exclude only Ceremonies, and indeed the Controversy began about them,
Act. 15. the Instances by Paul most mentioned are of that kind, Gal. 2.14, 16.
and by their resemblance of a Remedying Nature, the Jews mistook them for the
thing it self: Thus Lombard and the Schoolmen, Alphons. a Cast. Dom. a Soto.
But the Law the Apostle speaks of, as the Rule of the Works he excludes, cannot
be Confined so narrowly; for Romans 2.15. it is a Law that the Gentiles had; Romans
3.20, 28. a Law that bound all Flesh, a Law by which the Knowledge of sin, Romans
4.14. a Law that works Wrath.

2. By others the whole Works of the Mosaical Law are excluded in the
Pharisaical Sense of them, that is, as separated from the Essential Duties of
the Covenant as given to Adam, Noah and Abraham. Respon. (1.) I grant that the
Pharisees did mistake the Law in its Extent and Intent too; the former Christ
corrects, Mat. 5. but it is very reasonable to think that they who had now
embraced Christ, to whom the Apostle writes, had forsaken that Error; for the
Apostle's Dispute is of another kind; not what was their Duty or Work, but what
place this Work or Duty had with respect to its Reward: Whether or not it was
truly Meriting; and his Business is to prove, that let their Works be what they
would, they could never serve for this Use; and the Apostle tells them, Romans
10.4, 5. that they did not know Christ completely, viz. that he was the End of
the Law, who would put such a Value on their own Works. Sir Nor. Knat. Observes
on Romans 2.14. that the (...), the Work of the Law, signifies the Office of the
Law; this was to Convince a Man of Sin, that he might fly to Christ, as Galat.
3. it is called a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ: The Law is the Mean, He
is the End. The Moral Law was a Mean to make them sensible of their Need of
Christ, and the Ceremonial was a Mean to represent him as the End of the other,
as One who was a Sacrifice, and gave satisfaction for their Breach of the Law.
(2.) The Apostle gives no Countenance to this Opinion in his Phrase; for Galat.
3.21. If there had been a Law given, etc. There is an Impossibility in any Law,
or its Works prescribed to Adam, Noah or Abraham, since Man was a Sinner, to
Merit in any sense Justification at the Hand of God. (3.) Romans 3.20, 21, 22.
The Apostle calls the Works he excludes, Works of the Law; not in any
abstracted sense, but Works that the Law required; and the Mosaical Law
comprehended all the former Laws under it, as Joh. 7.32. Ye received
Circumcision of Moses, not that it was of him, but of the Fathers: And when the
M^saical and the Christian Constitution are opposed, Mos^ical comprehends the
whole Old Testament State. (4.) The Righteousnesses that are in this Epistle
opposed, are God's and M^n's; not Adam's essential Duties in the first Edition
of the Naked Covenant, and Moses his in the Political Administration of it,
Romans 3.22. The Syriac renders it thus, The Righteousness of God by the hand of
Faith on that Jesus Christ: Not a Righteousness that is God's Gift, and is
acceptable to God by Virtue of his prescribing it as the Condition he required;
a Righteousness that lay in the Fruits of Faith, or in the Nature of Faith,
from its Conformity to the Law of the Covenant, but a Righteousness that Faith
as a Hand takes hold of. (5.) This Law the Apostle speaks of, comprehends all
inward Obedience, all Righteousness: Vid. Chapter 3. and 7. of this Epistle; nay,
the Pharisee, Mat. 22. did conclude Love to God to be the great Duty of the Law.

3. The third Opinion is of Grotius, who if the Writings that go under his
Name, and have so much Corrupted the Age, be his own, he was both a Papist and
Apostate; or if Mr. Baxter's Grotian Errors, and that other Book called Grotius
Papizans, or Walleus in N. T. Preface, be to be Credited; indeed his Doctrine
on this very Point of Justification is a very great Proof it, as his Comments
on the Epistles does testify, especially this: for though they are as Corrupt as
he in their Disputes, yet rarely in their Expositions, are any Papists so
Corrupt: His Doctrine is thus, 1. Works that are only External, Civil,
deserving Praise of Men, and by Humane Strength performable, are excluded from
an Interest in Justification. 2. Faith of God, is an Esteem of his Attributes,
and Faith of Christ is the Knowledge of him and his Doctrine. 3. To Justify is
to Purify, to Cleanse from Vice; so the Works are hypocritical, the Faith
historical, and that which Devils has, the Justification papistical. Resp. 1.
It Is very improbable that the Apostle should Dispute so Nervously, that a Man
cannot be Internally Sanctified by External Works; and as improbable that any
should be so absurd to maintain it, that a Man may become Just by Hypocritical
Performances, that external Civility is internal Holiness. 2. That Law, Romans
7.7, 14. required more than external Works. 3. Abraham had better Works than
External, and Paul when he knew nothing by himself, yet not thereby Justified,
did not mean only External. 4. They were what Works the Law required, and the
God that searches Hearts nev^r made a mere External Law to Judge Men by.

4. The fourth Opinion is that which is common among Papists; 1. Works before
Faith are excluded, but not after Faith: Sorrow for Sin without the Aids of
Grace, does not Merit: Preparatory Works to Grace does not Merit; though some,
and that generally, allow a Congruity and Fitness to them; others, as Becanus,
deny it: This is no more true than the others, for v. 3. Abraham had Believed
for Ten Years, and yet his Works not Imputed to him; and so Paul, Gal. 2.16. 1
Cor. 4.4. 2. If Works after Faith be most Meritorious, then there is most
Matter of Boasting from them; but Abraham had none to boast of, therefore none
that could Merit. 3. The Works of Believers, 1. Are Due. 2. Not our own. 3.
Imperfect, therefore cannot Merit. But though there are different Opinions about
what Works are excluded, there is an Agreement about what Works are included:
Faith as a Work, as the Matrimonial Consent, pregnant of all the Duties of
Marriage. Repentance is included, Sincere Obedience is included, which I shall
endeavor to refute on the fourth Verse.

The Second thing proposed, was, In what Sense they are Excluded. I shall Treat
this, 1. Positively. 2. Comparatively. 3. Give Account of the different Notions
and Respects under which others think they may be Included.

For the First, the Text excludes them indefinitely, in all respects that may
be brought under the Particles with, of or by; for not by Works, without works,
are the Apostle's Terms: For though Works are the Effects, Evidences,
Concomitants, Properties of our Justification, yet Justification is not by
them; for by denotes some Causal Influence, either by Efficacy or Dignity, and
Works have no such Influence on our Justification.

2. Comparatively, they are more excluded from our Justification here on Earth
before God, than at the great Day of Judgment. Works have a less Influence on
our being Called and Entered a Member of the Church Militant here below, than
on our Entering the Triumphant State in Heaven; for the former is merely a
Matter of Right, and our Works have neither Being nor Dignity for that End; but
the latter is Matter of Possession, and many things are requisite to Possession
that are not to Purchase. Our Justification at the Great Day requires Proof of
our being Justified here; and many things are Necessary to the Proof of
Justification, that are not Necessary to the first being of it: Yet I much
doubt any formal Process, the bare appearance of the Persons in Sanctity and
Glory, is evidence enough. (1.) In Order to our going to Heaven, besides the
Necessity of Precept, Gratitude. For, Right good Works are real Means of Order,
Preparation of our selves, and helping of others thither. (2.) Good Works have
a real Efficacy in them, as all Actions have to beget and strengthen a Habit.
(3.) Good Works have a real Congruity in them, to make us meet and fit for that
Holy Fellowship and Communion above. (4.) Good Works are the Necessary Effects
of Justification and Sanctification; the Spirit of God cannot dwell in a Soul
without transforming it more and more into a Likeness to Christ. (5.) Good
Works have a real Utility in 'em, for heightning our Reward in Heaven: Not that
they can from their own dignity Merit Degrees of Happiness, more than the Being
of Happiness; but from the beautiful and harmonious Order of Divine Providence,
in advancing us from one step to another, and not Conferring Degrees per
saltum; there is no End of the Increase of Christ's Kingdom, as to its
Blessings; but its Increase is by way of a Life, in a perpetual and gradual
Growth. (6.) Heaven is truly a Reward to our Holiness here, by Virtue of Divine
Order and Connection from Divine Condescendency, as Basil says; Manet requies
sempiterna non tanquam debitum operibus redditum, sed secundum munificentissimi
Dei gratiam. Hysichius. The Kingdom of Heaven is not the Reward of Works, but
is the prepared Grace of God: And as another says, It Is proposed as a Reward
more to attract us to Duty, than a due Debt of our Duty; and it is rather the
Righteousness of Christ by which all our Actions are rendered acceptable, that
is Rewarded, than our Actions themselves. Lastly, Our good Works are Necessary
to Heaven, as the Beginning and Growth of a thing is Necessary to its
Perfection; as Sowing in the Spring is Necessary to Reaping in Harvest, and our
being Children in Order to our being Men. Perfect Holiness is as much the
Condition of Heaven as Faith is of Justification, and Ordinances of Conversion,
and rather more; for there are Exceptions in the last, but none in the first.

The Third thing proposed, was the several respects, that several Persons plead
Works to be necessary, in Order to our Justification; and herein there is a
greater Variety of Terms, viz. A Tenor or Hold, a Plea, the Form or Matter,
Preparations, Dispositions, Conditions, Moral Means, Merits of Dignity or
Congruity, than there is in Thought and Opinion; and so a greater variety of
Persons, Professions, Names and Ages of the World, than there is in the thing
it self: for all these very different Sentiments we may find amongst the
Papists themselves. (1.) The grossest of them, as Vasquez and Cajetan, fay, Our
Works Merit from their own Dignity, that God in strict Justice could not but
Reward such Pains, such Mortifications, such Fastings and Prayers, with Heaven,
or Eternal Happiness, this not true of Adams Covenant. But a second, and more
Moderate sort, as Marsilius, Leonardus, etc. admit of a Tripple Allay to render
them Meritorious: And the first is, That Christ has merited, that our Works
may Merit: Ours as subordinate Conditions to an Interest in his: The second is
from Divine Ordination, because though our Actions are not worth a Pardon, yet
he has Promised both a Pardon, and a Heaven for them: A third that lays
Foundation for the former, is a natural Congruity and Aptness, that the
diligent Worker should have a Reward, and the sincere Endeavourer should not be
slighted, when the Bounty does not Empoverish but Honor the Donor; and that a
Penitent Person should be pardoned: And ever since the Interim, at the first
Birth of the Reformation, there has been a party amongst Protestants, in little
or nothing differing from them, called sometimes Interimists, Cassandrians,
Majorists, Conditionalists, Calixtians; and others that have run as far to a no
less dangerous extreme, as Amsdorfius, who said, Good Works were so far from
being necessary to Justification, that they were pernicious and hurtful to it.

I do not comprehend under Conditionalists, all who have asserted the Covenant
to be Conditional, for they have explained themselves, that they mean no more
by it, than the immediate and nearest means of these Blessings, viz.
Justification and Glory: And add many Cautious and Negative Senses, that
destroy the proper Nature of a Condition; some five, some ten; but I see no
Reason for their Zeal against them who say it is not Conditional; since they say
it is three to one, five to one more not Conditional, than Conditional, viz.
it is not Conditional Antecedently, it is not Conditional Naturally, it is not
Conditinal Meritoriously, it is not Conditional Legally, it is not Conditional
Uncertainly; and yet cry Error, Error, if another say it is not Conditional, and
call it a Disposition of Grace thorough means to a certain end; if we take the
Word Condition in its vulgar use, for the whole stipulated part of the Bargain
or Bond to be performed wholly by the restipulating party, its more apt to
deceive vulgar People (who have that Idaea of Condition) to say its Conditional
without Limitation, than to say it is not Conditional; and do they think their
Brethren have neither Power nor Skill to add Limitations to their not
Conditional, as well as they to their Conditional? and fewer are Necessary,
viz. though Faith and Repentance are Gifts of Grace, yet they are Duties; and
though the Lord calls effectually where he will and when, yet our Consent is
courted, and wooed, not forced; we freely yield to the Spirits Conduct, though
our yielding is the Spirit's Effect, and Effects bear not the Name of
Conditions.

The Sense then of the Apostle is this, That no Works Ceremonial, Moral, with
Faith or without it; by the Spirit of Grace, or Strength of Nature, external or
internal, perfect or sincere; no Works of any Law performed by us, are either
Merits, Matter, Form, Legal Condition or Plea, etc. for our Justification
before God; they neither by Efficacy do Constitute it, nor by Dignity deserve
it: What the Apostle has excluded without Limits, we should. The Arguments for
the Truth of this follows next in the Text.

So I come now to the second Part of the Verse, which is the first Argument
that proves we are not Justified by Works; He has whereof to glory, but not
before God. The Argument is from the Topic of Impossibility or Absurdity; the
Matter is impossible, and the Action is absurd, that such a Worm as Man, or any
thing that is a Creature, should boast, or have ground of boasting before its
Maker: Much more absurd is it for this Creature, becoming a Rebel and a
Transgressor, to boast of its Meritting a Pardon, or rendering its Pardon a
Justification: If a Slave should break a Vessel of great worth, and boast he
could restore it, or fatisfie for the Damage, when he is not his own, it would
be unbecoming, but too mean a Type of this.

There are three things to be Treated in the Argument: 1. The Form of it. 2.
The Truth of it. 3. The Strength of it.

1. The Form of the Argument is thus: Maj. If Abraham were Justified by Works,
he has Matter of glorying. Min. But Abraham has no Matter of glorying, at least
before God. Concl. Ergo, Abraham is not Justified by Works.


This is the general Interpretation of Protestants, and some others; Erasmus,
Vatablus, Calvin, Zegerus, Beza, Piscator, Paraeus, Dickson, Hyperus,
Melancton, Sclater, Tuckney.

But there are Interpreters of great Number and Note, that form the Argument in
a contrary Method, thus: Maj. If Abraham were Justified by Works, he would have
no Matter of Glorying before God. Min. But Abraham had Matter of Glorying
before God, viz. His Faith. Concl. Therefore not Justified by Works.


Origin, the first Interpreter, says, if Faith had not been a real Glory before
God, he would not have Imputed it to him in place of Works; but there is no
Reason to Impute this Error to Origin but his Popish Translator (for we have no
other Origin on this Epistle that I know.) Rufinus, as we may read in his
Preface to that Epistle, p. 634. Basil. They say there is so much of this work
thy own, that thou should entitle it with thy own Name, not Origens: But though
I have had an Herculean Labor in adding, diminishing and altering, yet I will
not steal his Title that laid the Foundation, but let the Reader ascribe the
Merit of the Work to whom he will, to him or to me, I shall put both our Names
in the Title. They who form the Argument thus are of two kinds; either, 1.
Those who differ both in Form of the Argument, and in the Truth, as the Papist,
Aquin. Sasbout, Estius, etc. who say that Free Will affords a Man Matter of
Glorying; by it he has made himself differ from others, Converted himself,
Prepared himself, performed the Conditions of the Covenant: May not a Workman
glory in his Work? 2. Those who only differ in Grammar and Form, as First, The
Fathers: Chrysostom. Faith thinks highly of God, and so glorifies him: Therefore he
gloried not that he loved God, but that God loved him. Secondly, Some
Protestants, as Bucer, P. Mart. and also L. de Diu. His glorying before God,
was glorying in God. 1 Cor. 1.31. He that glories let him glory in the Lord.
Faith sends a Man out of himself, to glory in God, and in Christ.

I reject this Form of the Argument, and embrace the former for these Arguments.

1. The Propositions of the latter Argument are not in the Text, but the
contrary are; the Text says not, If Justified by Works, he has no Matter of
glorying, but quite contrary, He has Matter of glorying if justified by Works;
the Text says not, He has Matter of glorying before God, but, Not before God;
so nothing of their Syllogism in the Text, all the other is.

2. Both the Propositions of their Argument are false: The first is false, That
Works afford no Matter of glorying; for Romans 3.27. Glorying is not excluded by
the Law of Works: Ephesians. 2.9. If we were Saved by Works, we would boast. An
Innocent Man has more Matter of Glorying in his Works that deserve a
Justification, than a Pardoned one whose Works deserve Damnation. The Second is
false, That Abraham had any Matter of glorying, for 1 Cor. 4.7. Who makes thee
to differ? what have thou that thou did not receive? if thou did receive,
why do thou glory?

3. We find the same Apostle forming the Argument according to the first, Ephesians.
2.9. We are not Saved by Works, that we may not glory, v. 10. 1. Because we are
God's Work. 2. Thorough Christ, so a Relation there before. 3. Good Works the
End, Ergo not the Mean: Christ the Mean to our Good Works, not Good Works the
Mean of an Interest in him.

4. From the following Argument, v. 3. that Faith is imputed to Abraham for
Righteousness, proves no matter of glorying in Faith: For, 1. It is a Gift,
Ephesians. 2.8. Heb. 12.2. no glorying in a Gift, 1 Cor. 4.7. 2. Faith put for its
Object, or containing its Object, makes glorying in God, not before God. 3. For
the Exercise of Faith, which is receiving, trusting, depending, affords no more
Matter of boasting before God, than the Beggar's glorying of his Receiving,
before his Benefactor and his Bounty.

5. Those who do not Err as to the Matter, commit a double Fault in the Grammar
of the Words: 1. To translate, (...), before God, or with God: in God or from
God, as we may see from Parallel places, 2 Cor. 2.17. As of God, in the sight
of God speak we: Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith we have peace with God: 1
John. 3.21. If our Hearts Condemn us not, then have we Confidence toward God:
So that the Sense is, to have Matter of glorying, God being Judge and Witness,
and consequently Matter of Justification; for they differ but in this, that
Justification presupposes the Charge of a Crime, or Suspicion of one: Praising
or Glorying does not: So that Praising and Justifying differ only as Comfort
and Joy; and Grotius himself being Judge, on John 1.1. this is the Sense of the
Phrase. 2. Glorying in God is expressed (...), Romans 2.17. And make thy boast
of God: 1 Cor. 1.41. He that gloryeth, let him glory in the Lord: Psalm. 34.2.
My Soul shall make her boast in the Lord. These two are vastly different; to
have Matter of Glorying in our selves, in our Actions toward God, God himself
being our Judge and Witness, and to Glory in God, his Favor and Kindness, when
we have deserved nothing but Wrath. A second Grammatical Error is to think that
(...) and (...) differ in Scripture; for we find that (...), Glorying, is put
for (...), Matter of Glory, 2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is this, the Testimony
of our Conscience; Romans 15.17. I have therefore whereof I may Glory, in things
that pertain to God: And so (...) for the Act of Glorying, 1 Cor. 5.6. Your
glorying is not good: 9.15. Make my glorying void: 2 Cor. 5.12. Occasion to
glory on our behalf. But beside, if Man had Matter of Glorying, there might be
justly glorying, where there is (...) there may be (...). God does never deny
any man his due. The deepest Degrees of Humility God requires, are but suitable
Apprehensions and Conversations to what we are. And Lastly, a Man's Works
affords Matter of Glorying as well as his Faith, Heb. 11.17. James 2.20. God
praises Abraham's Works as well as his Faith.

6. The Critics generally are against this Translation; and so the Ancient
Versions, as the Ethiopick, which puts a Reward here in place of Glorying; and
the Arabic, which says, If he was Justified by Works, he should have Glory in
them.

Lastly, It is the making of a Neutral Verb active, without any Authentic
Examples to Countenance it.

But I come to the second thing, which is the Truth of the Argument, That
Abraham had no Matter of Glorying before God. I shall form it into this general
Doctrine.

That no mere Man has any Matter of Glorying before God. This I shall Confirm
and Illustrate from these four general Topics.

(1.) From Man's Existence and Being.

(2.) From his Constitution or Essence.

(3.) From his Undoing of himself, his ruining and destroying his Soul by Sin,
his guilt; which not only affords matter for Humility, but of mixing it with
Sorrow, Shame and Confusion of Face.

(4.) From our Impotence to restore our selves from this Fall, though there is
matter in it to remove our Sorrow, none to remove our Humility, or lay a
Foundation of our Glorying.

I shall begin with the first of these Topics.

First, Our Being or Existence; this has seven Properties that are inseparable
from it, or from any Creature; whether Angels above us or Beasts below us: They
are the seven Properties of a Creature as a Creature, and the just
Consideration of them, is that which makes Angels never Mind themselves, but be
unwearied, and without Intermission taken up with the Praises and
Contemplations of a God: These are the things which make Seraphims cover their
Face and their Feet with their Wings.

The first is Creatures Contingency; that is, tho it now is, it might not have
been, and may not be again; there is no repugnancy to not Being in its
Constitution; which I shall thus Illustrate. Before our Birth we were not Men:
Atheists that pretend our matter to have been from Eternity, and that when we
dye, we only dissolve into that Common Mass; yet they grant, that we begin to
be Men, and cease to be Men, and that every individual Man has a beginning.

(1.) If there is no Necessity of our being Men, there is no Necessity of our
being any thing, especially Inferior to Man, as Matter is owned to be; for
Necessity of Existence, is a high Perfection: Contingency that borders next to
nothing, is a great Imperfection; and therefore the greater Perfection is to be
placed in the more perfect Being. Therefore if no Necessity of his Being man,
there is no Necessity of being any thing Inferior to him. Necessary Existence
must be the Attribute of something, for since something now is, something
always has been, and that which has been always, does Exist by the Intrinsic
Perfection of its own Essence; for what suffers nothing to be before it, admits
of no External Cause. But, (2.) That which has the least Imperfection of any
kind, it wants this Perfection of necessary Existence; whatever has any
Imperfection, is but a Contingent thing. For if there be not a reality of
Perfection, to exclude a little Imperfection, there cannot be a sufficient
reality to exclude a greater Imperfection. If the fullness of the Beings
Perfections, do not include a lesser Perfection, they cannot include a greater;
for instance, if Matter cannot include among its Perfections these lesser ones
of Thinking, Reasoning, Speaking, Feeling, it cannot include a more Noble
Perfection of Necessary Existence; for not to be, is a greater Imperfection
than not to be Reasonable, or not to be Sensitive: Necessary Existence is at
the greatest distance from not Being that is possible; and therefore, since not
Being is the greatest Imperfection, necessary Being is the greatest Perfection;
and whatever has it must want no Perfection; and whatever wants it, is but a
Contingent thing. (3.) All that own a God, own that necessary Existence is his
incommunicable Attribute; and does contain an incomparable, an incomprehensible
Perfection; it is the highest Degree of removal from nothing, a grain of Dust
is better than nothing; all Creatures are in a middle State between Nothing and
a necessary Being; Nothing is not, Gods Name is Being, Exodus 3.14. I am what I
am, his Name alone is Jehovah. But Creatures are indifferent to be, and not to
be; there is no repugnancy in us against Being, nor no impossibility in our
Constitution to hinder us from not Being. Christ himself bears a Similitudinary
Image of Independency, because having once a Life given, he is said to have
Life in himself, in his own Power; but there is no Image of this Necessary
Existence: Atheism is very unreasonable to place this Perfection in Matter,
which as the Reverend Mr. How says, is next to Nothing, for it can do nothing;
and shall we place the Attribute that is most distant from Nothing, in the
Subject which is next to nothing. What great ground of Humility does this
afford, that I am more than a Fly! it is of God not of me, that I differ from
the Dust, or the Dirt I tread on, I owe it to God; I am not so much as one
Breath, yea the smallest particle of the most subtle Air of my self; that I am
more than mere nothing, is wholly of another. I am obliged and indebted for it.
But, (4.) All who own the Scriptures, own that Man is a made Creature; a
Workmanship of Divine Art, and a Fruit of his mere good Pleasure. That he might
have made us, or not made us, as he would, Romans 9.20. That the Thing formed,
say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Isa. 45.9. Our
Possibility is from his Power, our Futurity is from his Will, our Existence
from his Act, our Matter, our Dust was his by absolute Propriety, and our Form
is the Effect of his Wisdom.

2. We are Dependent, Experience proves this; we depend of our Parents, and yet
not solely, for they dye and we survive; we depend on Meat, Drink, Air, yet not
only, for our Life is more Noble than they; nothing can give or communicate
what it has not; there must be some more noble Independent Being, in whom we
live, move, and have our Being^; Act. 17. c. as the Poet Aratus that lived
about 290 Years before Christ, could say, We all use God, we all enjoy God, we
are all his Offspring -- (...).

2. Since we are Contingent, we must also be Dependent, for Contingency is no
more determined to Being, than not Being, Perseverance than Perishing: for such
as our Nature was in primo fieri, so it remains; a Contingent thing is a
Tottering Being, of it self inclinable any way, and External Force forces it is
Lot. 3. It Is a Prerogative of God to be Independent, a Spirit Independent is
the best Definition we can form of him, and it is his Glory to have all things
Depending on him; the whole Mass of Beings, to be nursed by the Breasts of his
Alsufficient Fullness; he is a Careful Parent of his Offspring, it is no Toil
to his Power, nor Difficulty to his Wisdom, nor Draining to his unsearchable
Riches, where all is Infinite; but a wonderful discovery of that Plenty that is
in him, which is his very End and Design: How should this stop the boasting
Mouth, silence the glorying Tongue, and stifle the proud Thoughts of Man! If
thy Dependence were a bare Permission, that thou cannot live an hour on Gods
Earth without his leave, or use his Creatures for Profit or Pleasure; he can
sweep thee off the Stage of Being with a Beesom of Destruction in a Minute: But
Dependency is a Divine Manutenency, it is a keeping us up by force from falling
into that Pit or Abyss of Nothing we were drawn out of, and still hang over,
Job 26.7. He hangs the Earth upon nothing: For since Creating was an Act of
Violence upon Nothing, and such an Act as needed Omnipotent Strength to force
it into the Condition of Being; Preservation is the Positive Influence of the
same powerful Hand to keep this Tottering Being upward, that is by Natural
Tendency declining into its Original Nothing; there is no need of Power to make
any thing Nothing, for then nothing would be the Effect of Divine Power. There
is no necessary Connection between the Creation of any thing, and its
Continuance; because we were Yesterday, it does not follow that we shall be to
Morrow; we daily change, we are not to Day what Yesterday, there is no such
Inference where the Being is Contingent; how gladly would we live, but it is
not in the Power of our Will, our Nature, or all our Friends and Physicians; no
Cordial, no Food, no Physician can do; and if they cannot preserve Life, far
less Being. The Glorious Arches of the Heaven would dwindle away, the Depth of
the Ocean dry up, the steady Earth tremble into a Nonentity; the most Immortal
Spirits faint, and Angels be annihilate by one Minutes Intermission of
Omnipotency: A Proud Man is a Mad Man, a deceived Soul; thou cannot move thy
Tongue, nor exercise thy Thought, but thou art under an Infinite Obligation to
Infinite help for supporting thee in it, and will thou use it against him? the
more perfect we are, the more we depend; the more imperfect we are, the more we
need his Power to support us.

3. Unprofitable: Job 35.7. If thou be righteous what give thou him? or what
receives he of thine hand? Job 22.2. Can a man be profitable to God, as he
that is wise may be profitable unto himself. (1.) It is a Property of Divine
Decrees to be disinterested, of pure Generosity and Bounty, the Issues of Love
and Goodness, that is still giving and communicating. (2.) His End to make his
likeness, and form his Praise without himself, from that Content and
Satisfaction he had in beholding it in himself; he would have others taste of
the sweetness of that Being he enjoved, therefore called Nothing into his
Banqueting House, and his Banner over it was Love, by which it was brought into
Being. (3.) His Fullness: it is Gods Original Glory to want nothing, his
Sufficiency and Fullness is such that admits of no Addition. (4.) Creatures
Emptiness: we must pay our debt before we Profit, and every day we are obliged
for an Infinite Flux of Goodness and Power, to keep our Souls in Life; and yet
we have craving Appetites, like the Barren Womb, that cries, Give, give, but
make no grateful return; this keeps all the Quires of Angels in the perpetual
Exercise of humbling themselves, and praising of God. Not unto us, O Lord! not
unto us, unto thee be all Glory and Honor.

4. Temporary Beings: Job 8.9. For we are but of Yesterday, and know nothing;
because our Days upon Earth are a Shadow. 1. There is a difference between the
time of Men in this World, and the Aeviternity of Angels, Rev. 14.6, 7. The one
is to end, viz. Time with the seventh Trumpet, that is, Time measured by Sun
and Moon; for there will be no Sun the true Standard of Time, Rev. 21.23. No
more Night and Day, the Foundation of Chronology. But Aeviternity, or Time, as
defined by Successive Motion still continues in Heaven; for the Mind of an
Angel is not Infinite, therefore comprehends not all Objects at once, nor does
not comprehend the incomprehensible God, for that is Inconsistent with
Adoration or Admiration, which still supposes something unknown; therefore of
Necessity their Minds change its Objects, sometimes thinking of one thing,
sometimes of another, and consequently one thing in Order before another, and
Time is a Motion thorough former and latter: This affords another Argument,
that this World is not from Eternity, because Successive; for where a former
and latter, a second, third and fourth, there is a first and last; this may be
rendered more easy by these Instances. (1.) No Man's Death is from Eternity, for
his Life, his Birth was before it, and if his Death not from Eternity, neither
his Birth, for that but a short time before his Death* no Man has lived a
thousand Years, it were a very absurd thought of Eternity, to say, it was but a
thousand years longer than Time. (2.) Eternity is an Infinite Duration, but the
Duration of Years not so; because exceeded by number of Days, Hours and
Minutes. The second Difference is between the Eternal Duration of God, and that
Duration of Creatures, Psalm. 102.27. They shall be changed, but thou art the
same, and thy Years shall have no End. The one is founded in an Immutability,
the other in Change; the Infinite God possesses his whole Essence Independently
and most perfectly at once; in Time there is Past, Present and Future; the
Eflux of a ^^ing from Past to Future by the present Minute, this agrees not to
Him whose Nature is I am, that is, In me, nothing ^ast in me, nothing Future.
This alone has great Matter of Humiliation in it: of what awe would the
Presence of a S^ge Angel, that has been since the Creation, to such a Mushroom
as Man, a new start-up in the World; we suffer not Children to speak in the
Presence of Men; how much more should man's Mouth be stopped before the Ancient
of days; who has ten thousand Times ten thousand ministering before him, and
charges the Angels with Folly.

5. Man is an Imaginary Being, rather the Picture of Being, than the Reality;
and this is not a Dignity, that every Creature attains to be called, the Image
of God; they are his Workmanship, Romans 1.20. And so are proofs of an Eternal
Powerful and Wise Being, and they bear some Prints of his Being upon them, 2 Timothy 2.13. He cannot deny himself, neither in Word, nor in Deed; he cannot do
any thing but what must represent him to be such as he is, though there are
vastly different Degrees of Representation. The Common Properties of Creatures
seems to be their Reality, Durability, Goodness and Beauty; but Man alone of
all Earthly Creatures bears the Name of an Image, because there is some
Representation of all the Divine Attributes in him, either Subjectively, as
Spirituality, Knowledge, Reason, Will; or Objectively, as he possesses an Idea
of the Divine Nature impressed upon him, 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open face,
behold as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, and are changed into the same
Image: Or Qualitively, as Righteousness and Holiness: Or Reflexively; and thus
the incommunicable Attributes of Sovereignty, Independency and Alsufficiency,
are represented by our Submission, Emptiness and Dependency; as the Wax does
represent the Seal: Or Deputatively, as he is Governor of the World; but as
this is Man's Dignity above other Creatures, to be Gods Image, so it is the most
excellent thing in it self; and this is our great Misery, the loss of this
Image; and our Happiness lies in its Restoration, so that Man at his best, who
is the best of the Creatures, is but an Image.

6. A mere Passiveness: Matter is a very Passive Object to work upon, yet
through the Disposition of its parts, hardness or softness, it is fitter for
one thing than another, and more easily wrought into that frame; but nothing is
equally Passive for all, equally fit to be an Angel, and an Atom of Dust; and
whatever Activity the Creatures may now have on one another, yet with respect
to God they are Passive Beings.

7. Creatures are more Nothing than Being, Isa. 40.17. We are Nothing, and less
than Nothing: Nothing Naturally, and less than Nothing, by Debt and Obligation
owing the Being we have received, but far more by our Guilt and Transgression,
for what is worse than Nothing is less than Nothing. A Marble Statue formed in
the likeness of a Man is more a Stone than Man, because the one by Art, the
other by Nature: So Man, by Nature he is nothing, by Divine Art he is God's
Image: We are from Nothing, that is our Original, for we are brought into being
by the Force and Violence of Omnipotent Power. If God's proper Name is Jehovah,
Psalm. 83.18. and of him only can it be said, Exodus 3.14. I am, or, He is, then
properly is it said of the Creatures, They are not. Philosophers usually grant
that Ens, or Being, is not a Genus Vnivocum, when applied to God and Creatures,
there is no Generical Oneness in it: When we say the Creature is Being, and God
is Being, it is not one thing that is meant by that word Being; for the one
really is, the other is the Image, as we call the Picture of a Man a Man. Since
any one of these affords matter of Humiliation, how much more all being put
together? and if they afford matter of Humiliation for Angels, how much more
matter of Humiliation for Man? If an Angel be but a Contingent, Dependent,
Unprofitable, Temporary, Passive, Imaginary Being, a Being more Nothing than
Being in Comparison of God, how little a thing must Man be in Comparison of
him, and how much less a sinful Man?

I come to the second Topic of Arguments for the Proof of this Doctrine, That
Man has nothing to Glory in before God; which is the Form he was made in, and
by which he Excells other Earthly Creatures, and is called an (...), Lord of
his own Actions, a Self-powered Creature, or as Cicero says, a Power of Living
as he will. The Common Title for it is Free Will, Liberum Arbitrium, which
Amyrald thinks to be better Translated a Free Judgment. The Apostle Paul calls
it the Prevailing Will, Romans 7.17. If I do that I would not, it is not I, but
Sin. I, as that which denominates the Man. I shall insist the more largely on
this, because it is that which the most part of the World are proud of. The
former Argument is more commonly granted, That Man cannot be Proud of his
Being, but therein still he would be Equal to the Angels; and the Pride of Man
can hardly aspire higher, but for this Argument, that Man has no Matter of
glorying from his Free Will, is not so easily Complied with, whether we View
Men's Professions or their Practices. (1.) The Pagans, they commonly ascribed
all Virtue, all their Heroic Actions, and the Praise of 'em, to themselves:
Upon this Account Cicero, De Natura Deorum, says, We may thank God for Riches,
or Fortune, but not for Virtue, that is our own; for that we are Praised, for
the want of that we are blamed: We may glory of our Virtue, which we could not
do if it were God's Gift. Seneca, Ep. 53. A wise Man in some things is
preferable to God, for the one is Wise by the Benefit of Nature, the other by
the Benefit of Virtue: Ep. 20. Be Content with thy self, and the Goods brought
forth by and of thy self, so thy Happiness shall be next to Gods. (2.) The
Jews, especially the Pharisees, on this account were as Proud as the others,
for they reckoned the External Administration of the Law, which g^ve Occasion
to their Merit by Free Will, to be the principal difference between them and
the Pagans. Maimonides says this is one of their Fundamentals, That they had
such a perfect Free Will, and sufficient Power for Virtue and Goodness, that
they only needed the Law to exercise their Power about: Rab. Gaon. Saadia says,
(...) "All things are in the Power of Heaven, except the Fear of Heaven, that
is Religion. There is a difficulty of reconciling their Opinions about this
Point, because they also owned a Fate; which they call (...), or (...).
Josephus, who was one of them, says, lib. 2. chap. 7. that they attributed all
things to God and Fate, but it is no wonder, for wherever Error is, there is
Contradiction; for every Man holds some Truth, and whatever Error he holds is
repugnant to the Truth he holds; but Camero thus explains their Sense from
Josephus his own words, That by Faith is meant God's Providential Help, but
most is to be placed in Man; and lib. 18. chap. 2. We are not to separate Man's
Will from enclining Fate: so that the Sense of it is, Providence gives Occasion
to Work, but the Work it self is wholly Man's own. (3.) The Pelagians are not
inferior in this Pride to any of the former, who confine all God's Grace to
Man, in giving of this Noble and Natural Endowment of Free Will, by which a Man
is able to do all good Commanded. They say none can give a Man spiritual Riches
but himself, for these he is justly Praised, and jure Preferred to others; for
these can have no Being but in himself and from himself; hence he taught this
Form of Prayer, Lord behold the Purity of my Lips, by which I Pray to thee, and
the Innocence of my Hands which I stretch forth before thee. (4.) The Papists,
especially Jesuits and Molinists, though others seem to diminish the Power of
Free Will when they write on that Head, yet when they come to the Point of
Merit, they again extol it, Bell de Just. lib. 5. chap. 3. because it is more
honorable to obtain a thing by Merit than by Grace alone; therefore that God
might Honor his Children, he has granted that they might prepare Eternal Life
to themselves by their Merits, and more proudly; Ruard. in Top. Art. Lov. God
forbid that the Righteous should expect Eternal Life as a Poor Man does an
Alms, since it is more glorious for them as Victors and Triumphants to possess
it, as the Crown and Palm due to their S^eats and Labors; and their Common
Doctrine is, that by the strength of Nature preparing our selves we Merit ex
Congruo, special Grace, and afterward being made just by it, we can so
perfectly fulfill the Law, that we Merit Heaven ex Condigno, and why may not a
Workman glory in his Work? (5.) Socinians and Arminians, who hold the Freedom
of the Will inconsistent with any Necessity, and that it is out of the Power of
God effectually to Call a Sinner when he will, or according to the Terms in
Dispute: Grace is always resistable, but the Will of Man unconquerable. (6.) We
find many others, and more ancient, too much extolling Man on this account, as
Prudentius in his Poems on that Subject: Insubjecte potens, rerum arbiter,
arbiter idem and judex Mentis propriae. Powerful, being subject to none, Lord
of all things, Lord also and Judge of thy own Mind: And elsewhere, "He that
made thee Lord of all things, would he not make thy self free? He that made
thee King of the World, would he not make thee King of thy self? would he so
Curtail thine Honor and Matter of glorying? Besides, the common Definition of
it signifies no less, that supposing all things in act that are fit, or have
Power to move or incline it, it may Act or not Act, or act the contrary as it
will: Neither God nor Angels, Men or Devils, have Power certainly to determine
it. (7.) They who have their Minds better instructed, yet have Practical
Sentiments secretly latent in their Minds of this kind, which we may learn from
our Observation of our selves: As, 1. When Men adventure on sin because they
think they can make amends by Repentance. 2. When Persons delay Repentance upon
this ground, that they can do it afterward. 3. When Persons stifle
Convictions, and quench the Spirit, because they think they can enjoy it again
when they will. 4. When Persons do not Pray, from this latent Error, that they
have a Power to Accomplish their Designs themselves. 5. When men Neglect the
outward Ordinances and Means of Salvation, which God has appointed not only as
Means between Us and the End, but as Means between our Can and our Cannot,
because we cannot do any thing of the Essentials of Salvation, Meriting Pardon,
Enlightening the Understanding, or Sanctifying our Wills, God has prescribed
these Means that we can do, and has Promised to Perform that which we cannot,
Phil. 3. Work in and about your own Salvation with fear and trembling, for he
works in you to will and to do: Now that which many Neglect the Means for, is
because they think they can go about the thing it self. The Security that
destroys the most of perishing Souls is founded on this corrupt Root, that we
have a Power in a very short time to do all the Business of our Salvation. Were
it not for this, Sinners Despairing wholly in themselves would be rolling
themselves in the Dust, and prostrating themselves before a Father of Mercies
and God of Grace, and constantly Watching for the Angels troubling of the
Waters; they would be daily waiting at Wisdoms Gates for the Spirit promised to
Attendants upon appointed Means.

In opposition to all this, I shall lay down these Eight Propositions, with
their several Confirmations, to prove that this Noble Principle that God has
endowed Man with, though it has exalted him above Brutes, it affords him no
ground of Pride, or glorying before God; four are Positive, and four Negative.

1. Free Will is a part of that Excellency by which Man is the Image of God:
All in Man by which he excells mere Animals, he therein is God's Image. This is
a great Dignity, to be in the Image of God, but this should humble Man before
God, because he is but an Image; though in respect of inferior Creatures, they
being only a Vestigium, or a Print of some one perfection; as the Print of a
Man's Foot represents but one part of him, an Image represents the whole or
most principal Parts. Free Will is founded in Wisdom and Power, and in these
Man is God's Image, but this Excellency affords no Matter of glorying. (1.)
From the Scriptures own Expression, Psalm. 39.6. there is a Reason given, why
Man in his best Estate, that is, in the Purity of his Nature, in the unfaded
and unstained flower of all his Senses and spiritual Faculties, is but Vanity;
because every Man walks in a Vain show, so we Translate it, but the Original is
Bezalim, the same Word which in Genesis 1. is used for the Image of God. Man is
Vanity, because at best but an Image. Our greatest Perfections by Nature did
not free us from Defectibility. (2.) Indifferency does not represent the Will
of God as terminate upon himself, but as terminate upon the Creatures; to him
it was indifferent whether they should be or not be: They are Lusus Dei, the
Fruit of his mere Pleasure, things of no moment; so when we experience in our
selves that the Foot, the Tongue, the Hands, the Eyes, move in Obedience to the
Will as Nimbly as we can think, it do^^ not represent God's Essence, but his
Relative Sovereignty over his Creatures, so it is but an inferior part of an
Image. (3.) The Will of God is a Power, and causes these real goods that are
its Objects; but the Liberty of Man is only admissive or rejective of these
Objects in the Understanding, and gives occasion to their Influence upon the
Faculties of the Soul, and so affords no Matter for Glory in the Work of our
Conversion. Suppose the Sunbeams should enter a Room before dark, by some
Casement or Cranny, and fill this room with Light, yea, render its Earth
flourishing and verdant, should we ascribe this great Change to the Sun or to
the Casement? Nay, suppose farther, that the Sun by its perpetual Heat and
repeated Influence has made the Boards give way, and made its own entrance,
should we ascribe the Glory of the Action to that which so long hindered it,
and is yet the Cause of the Works being so weak? And this is the very Case, as
far as Matter can represent Spirit; for the Lord opened the Heart of Lydia, and
he says Rev. 3. Behold I stand at the door and knock, and if any Man open I
will come in. (4.) The Will of God never acts without the highest Wisdom,
Ephesians. 1. According to the Counsel of his Will: Therefore the setting up of a
Liberty in Man, distinct from the Conduct of the Understanding, is a Chimera,
no Image of God, who cannot deny himself in any of his Works, he never did any
thing that might give us false Sentiments of his Nature. (5.) Our Liberty is
much inferior to God's, because of the Narrowness of its Sphere: The Beast has
only Sense, Man has also spiritual things for his Object to Converse about, but
the Divine Will converses about those things we never saw nor heard, nor has it
entered into our Heart to conceive. (6.) Our Liberty is a Gift, God's is
Self-originate; ours a Shadow, his the Substance; ours but an Emanation of his,
as the Image of a Face in a Glass, but we have no such Help distinct from him,
he is the Support and Spring of both. (7.) His is Infallible, always equal,
vigorous, active; Ours faints and wearies, as in Sleep and Infancy, and fails,
as in every Sin.

2 Prop. The Liberty of the Mind of Man consists (to be more particular about
it) in a Freedom from Physical Necessity or Coaction, in a Freedom from Sense
or Matter: It is a general Axiom, and therefore needs the less proof, That
Free Will is only the Property of thinking and reasoning Creatures, that
propose an End to their Actions, and deliberate about what is fittest for
gaining that End. The Fire burns whatever comes nigh it, but the Will does not
choose every thing proposed. The Imagination of a Beast is confined to Material
Ideas, but the Mind of Man is not determined nor limited to such Objects: A
Beast can only be allured by present things, but things of a hundred years
distance can move a Mind; this is a great Privilege, but affords no matter of
Glory. For (1) It lays us under the greater Obligation to our Maker, who made
us Men and not Beasts. (2) Our Abuse of it in making our selves worse than
Beasts, being carnally minded and lead by Sense, who have more Noble Faculties
to govern us. (3) The more Knowledge the more Liberty by this Rule, and
therefore our Blindness and Ignorance should make us bemoan our Confinement:
The Natural man knows not the things of God^ and therefor can have no
Liberty about them. But more of this under another Head.

3 Prop. Liberty consists in a Freedom from Restraint, an (...) as well as a
(...), goes to the making up of this Perfection, a Willingness as well as a
Judgment. Augustine de Spir. and Lib. Chap. 31. defines it to be, A Power of
doing what we will, and thus it does principally consist in the Imperate acts;
called free because they proceed from a free Principle: To will and to can are
two different things; a Man may will what he cannot, and then the Will has not
this Freedom. The Scripture seems to take it in this sense, 1 Cor. 7.37. Having
no Necessity, but has power over his own Will, and has so decreed in his
heart. By Freedom from Necessity there, is meant a Power to put his Purpose in
Execution: And so Romans 7. What I would, that do I not. The Spirit is willing,
but the Flesh is weak: Taking Liberty thus for a freedom from Constraint, or a
Power of doing what we will, it affords no matter of Glorying to Man, he is
under so many Restraints, by his Nature, by his Sin, by Punishment, all his
Faculties are restrained; about Objects Natural, Moral, and much more
Spiritual, he is restrained and limited. As we see among sensitive Creatures,
some are confined to the Water, as Fish, some to the Earth; but others have a
more ample Sphere of Activity, and a more vigorous Principle to carry them
through Water, Earth or Air. So we find Man more confined than Angels; we can
only under^tand Earthly things: John 3. Christ tells Nicodemus, that there was
a Necessity of representing Heavenly things under some Earthly Similitude, that
we might be capable of understanding them. (1) Peter and Paul were Saints of
the first magnitude, and yet when they were brought to converse with Heavenly
things, the one confessed he knew not what he heard; and the Spirit asserts of
the other, that he knew not what he said. It is an old Jewish saying, That God
descends in a humane Mantle, that we may have some suitable Apprehensions of
him; and it is most amazing Humility in God, to reckon our highest Thoughts of
him an Honor or a Glory to him. (2) By Sin the Scripture calls Man Darkness,
led captive at the will of Satan, a slave to Sin, and dea^ in Sin, therefore he
is wonderfully confined and restrained by it. A Habit in any one particular
Vice, how does it ensnare and confine one to its Courses. How can you believe
that receive honor one of another? The Pharisees who were covetous, derided
the Doctrine of Charity. They that are accustomed to do evil, can no more do
good than the Ethiopian can change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots. (3) All
Afflictions and Sufferings put Restraints on Man's Liberty. John 21.18. Thou
girdest thy self and walkedst whither thou would; here was Liberty: but
another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou would not; here is a
Restraint or Compulsion. A man may have a will to move a gouty Finger, or stop
a Convulsive or Paralitick Motion of his Nerves, but he has no Liberty to do
it, as Dr. Lock says well. (4) In our Intellect and elicit acts of the Will we
experience this Compulsion; we would love God as the Angels do, but we cannot:
How many would throw off Terrors, Convictions impressed on their Minds, but
they cannot? We cannot keep our Mind at ease when the Body is under pain. (5)
How little do we know in things Natural, notwithstanding all the Pains that has
been given by Students, and far less in things spiritual.

4 Prop. There is a Liberty of Indifferency in Man about many things that are
in his Power to do, whether Natural, Moral, and after received Grace, Spiritual
also. (1) Our common Experience witnesses this; in matters of Contrariety, as
telling the Truth or a Lie; matters of Disparity or Specification, as going to
the Church to Prayer, or about some other business of our Vocation or Calling,
or what is sinful; in matters of Contradiction, to do a thing or omit it. (2)
There are many Examples in Scripture that witness this: 2 Samuel 24. There are
three Judgments proposed to David's Choice, about which he had not only a Moral
but Physical power. 1 Kings 3.5. Solomon had four things put in his power to
ask of God, long Life, Riches, the Life of his Enemies, or Wisdom. It was
proposed to Adam's choice by what Name to call any Creature, and of what Tree
to eat. 1 Cor. 9.4.17. Paul had a power to eat and drink, and there was a
Necessity upon him by Moral Obligation to preach the Gospel, which he might
perform willingly or against his Will: Ezra 7.13, 15. Numbers 30. there are
more Examples of this kind. (3.) Without owning this Indifferency in Man, we
cannot defend the Holiness of God: There can be no greater Absurdity than to
think or say that God is the Author of Sin, or to assert any thing that does of
Necessity infer it, for it takes away all place for Repentance, and fills the
Soul with most dreadful Apprehensions of a Deity, viz. To make a Man sin, which
is worse than to tempt him, and then to Punish him, it darkens the Beauty and
Glory of the Divine Essence. Holiness is that which the Saints and Angels
trebble in his Praise, and they know him best. The whole System of the
Scripture declares God's Innocence as to this thing, for it declares that God
made Man upright, Eccles. 7.29. and the Angels also, Jude 6. He made them in
his own Image. (2.) He gave him a Holy Law to keep him from sin, Romans 7.12. and
he fenced Obedience to that Law by most terrible Threatenings, Thou shall dye;
and with great speed he did execute the Punishment, for spiritually he dyed
that very Moment he sinned, and the stroke reached the very Instruments of the
Sin, and by no influence could God incline or determine him to what he did
forbid, for with him is no Unfaithfulness or Unsincerity, nor want of Holiness.
(3.) James 1.13. God tempts no Man, he cannot deny himself; but to Necessitate
Man to sin, is to do the sin, and can God do what he hates? Hab. 1.13. Psalm.
11.7. Besides, if Sin were not voluntary and free, it would not be a sin; would
that be against God which was from God? could it be Guilt wherein Man was
wholly a Sufferer? (4.) The very Nature of Permission, which is of purpose and
designedly to let that be which he can hinder: Genesis 20.9. Abimelech did not
sin, because God did not suffer him; if he had suffered him he would have
sinned; as in the instance of Hezekiah, God left him to try him, that it might
be known what was in his Heart: So where God permits, man has a Physical
Liberty to do or not to do. God did permit Adam to sin, for if he had designed
to impede him, he could not have done it. We must not Clip divine Power, more
than Stain divine Purity: Omnipotency would be turned into Impotency, if Adam
sinned whether God would or no: He could have Chained up Satan from laying the
Bait, or Adam from swallowing of it; but on the other Hand, as he did not
hinder him from it, he did not predetermine him to it: Whether the first act of
sin be Pride, Unbelief, or Inconsideration; God could not incline the Will to
an Averseness to his own Amiableness, or Distrust of his own Faithfulness, or
Disobedience to his own Commands. (5.) Without allowing this Indifferency,
there were no room for the Office of a Magistrate: Could Joshua say to Achan,
Why have thou troubled us? the Lord shall trouble thee this day, Josh. 7.25.
There could be no room for Praise or Rebuke, and there would still be place for
some Excuse in Man. He that wanted the Wedding Garment would not have been
speechless altogether, if there had been an Impossibility of attaining it; he
was brought a Beggar from the High ways and from the Hedges, and so had no
Wedding-garments of himself, Mat. 22.9. but it was to be put on freely; and
though Man is now a Slave to sin, yet multitude of particular sins he might have
omitted.

This brings me to the second and principal thing, That this Liberty of
Indifferency is no Matter of Glorying, but a great Matter of Humiliation before
God: for, First, The Indifferency of the Will often flows from Fluctuation of
the Judgment: Ignorance in the Understanding occasions Uncertainty in our
Choice, Ephesians. 4.18. We are alienate from the Life of God, through the Ignorance of
its Excellency and Beauty. This Ignorance consists, (1.) In Uncertainty and
Doubtfulness: We doubt if there be a God, a Devil, a Heaven or a Hell; that
makes 'em have less Power in determining our Choice. (2.) In Short-sightedness,
like a Pur-blindness in the Mind, that the future Punishment or Reward appears
little, the present Pain or Pleasure great. If the Sickness and Trouble that is
consequential to Drunkenness, Prodigality, Vileness, were as nigh to our Sight
and View, as the Sin or the Act is, we would never embrace it; if the Pain of
the aching Head were in the Pallat, when the Drunkard drinks up the Glass, he
would never swallow it down: And if Temporal Punishments, because at a
distance, appear so little, how much less does Eternal. (3.) In
Narrow-sightedness: Our Understandings are like small-mouth'd Vessels, that can
only take in one thing at once. Hence we commonly reckon the present Pain the
worst, and the present Pleasure the sweetest, because it so fills the Narrow
Mind, that there is no room for other Idea's. (4.) In gross and carnal
Corruptness, that spiritual things are so subtle that they do not suit its
Disposition; hence we scarce feel an Appetite after Spiritual things, but the
Appetite of the Flesh is strong, its Urgency precipitates the Deliberation, and
does not allow a due time for ballancing the Account, and stating the Cost on
both sides: this affords great Matter of Humility, that our Spirits are so
weak, and Understandings so dark. Secondly, This Indifferency flows from the
Meanness of the Object, or different Disposition of the Subject, when the
things proposed are Trifles, of no great Moment or Concern, or indifferently
suiting our Disposition or Temper, then we are indifferent about them; the more
we are employed about such things, to so much the less purpose do we spend our
Lives, and therefore have the less Matter of Boasting in them; for there is a
great difference between our Indifference and Adam's, that was to good or bad;
ours to Bad, and has its Choice of Bads. Thirdly, This Indifferency flows from
Divine Permission, as is before proved; but a far greater Blessing it is to be
inclined and determined by God, than to be left to our own Conduct; for God
always inclines the Heart to good, and we never read of any left to themselves
and their own Determinations, that did good; therefore David Prays, Incline my
Heart to thy Testimonies. Adam was permitted to his own Will, and he fell; and
so it is said of the Israelites, Psalm. 81.12. I gave them up to their own
Hearts-lust, and they walked in their own Counsels: Acts 14.16. He suffered all
Nations to walk in their own ways; and these were Idolatry and Profanity: But
he did not permit Abimelech, Genesis 20.9. and he did not permit Laban, and
therefore they did not sin. Fourthly, From the Natural Mutability and
Defectibility of the Creature, we being, as is before proved, Contingent,
Dependent Creatures. The Indifferency of the Will is the tottering of the
Creature, it is like the reeling and staggering of a Drunken Man, or like a Post
set up before fixed, if the Upholders withdraw their Hands, and permit it to it
self, it declines one way or other. Fifthly, This Indifferency gave Birth to
the first sin of Angels and Man: He put them in a good State, Jude 6. but they
left it; He made man upright, Eccles. 7. but he found out many Inventions.
Sixthly, This is the great Impediment that hinders Men's Conversion, their
Repentance and turning to God, Psalm. 81.11. My People would not hearken to my
Voice, and Israel would none of me: It Is always laid at the Door of this Will,
Mat. 23.37. I would have gathered you as a Hen does her Chickens, but you would
not. Seventhly, All these great Crimes and actual Transgressions which would
the Conscience, flow from this Spring, as now wrongly biased by Corruption.
There is a considerable difference between the good things a Man can do, and
what he does, and all that Guilt is chargeable upon his Will as indifferent;
for if it be not within his Power, then he is not indifferent to it. This loads
the Soul of Man with Guilt, if we consider our Powers, which comprehends so
many Talents given of God to be Improved by us, and all the Mis-improvement
lies at this door of our Will. (1.) A Man's Tongue, together with all his
Senses, especially those that are the Instruments of Discipline, Seeing and
Hearing, these are entirely under the Dominion of our Will, ard therefore
either the Omission of them where they ought to have been employed, or the
Exercising of them where they ought to have been restrained, renders us so far
Guilty. (2.) Our Health, Strength, Estate, Honor, Acquaintance, how great a
Sphere of Power do they afford, especially to some Men, and yet how little
Good, or rather how much Mischief is done by it? (3.) Our Reason is a
considerable Talent for bridling our Senses, for searching into the certainty
of Religion, Natural or Revealed, for comparing of Spiritual with Carnal,
Eternal with Temporal things. (4.) Our Memories are a Treasury for Divine
Commands, Convictions, Comforts and Experiences. (5.) Our Consciences for
empowering Practical Light; its Power is of a large extent in keeping in aw
from sin, and in quickening to Duty. (6.) Providential Dispensations, that we
have them through all our Life, to observe God's Method of dealing with Man,
that we may see how Good and Patient he is, Romans 2.4. We may learn that verily
there is a God that Judges the Earth, and that verily there is a Reward for
the Righteous. (7.) The Revelation of the Gospel, with that Spirit that usually
attends it, to Convince of Sin, Righteousness and Judgment, is yet a far
greater Power, and when it grows up into a Conversion, and God's Gifts crowned
with Special Grace, how much more is the Power of Man heightened, Romans 6.18.
Being then made free from sin, ye became the servants of righteousness: 1 Cor.
15.10. By the Grace of God I am what I am. What great Progress in Religion may
a Man make, that is endowed with all these Powers, and how unexcusable are
their blameable Lives and Conversations! Few can with Paul say, The Grace that
was bestowed upon me was not in vain, but I labored more abundantly than they
all. Lastly, Should a Sinner Glory in that which has rendered him void of all
Cloak and Excuse to his Sin? but this Will of Indifferency, considering the
Powers God has given Man, and is still ready to give more or more upon asking
or admitting, it renders Men, especially that live under the Gospel, altogether
without Excuse; for what Excuse can a Man make for the Neglect of such a
Concern, if it or any thing tending to it lie within the Compass of
Possibility? Difficulties can be no Excuses, to say with the Sluggard, he could
not Plow nor Sow in the Winter, because it was Cold: If a Man has exercised his
Power as much other ways, he cannot excuse his Neglect of it in things tending
to Salvation. Mat. 16. Christ tells the Pharisees, that they might as easily
Collect by the Exercise of their Reason about Scripture Prophecies, that he was
the Messiah, as they did the fair and fowl Weather in the Morning from the
Evening-skye. If Persons once could be more frequent and serious in the Duties
of Religion, when Self-Interest went along with it, and the Profession of
Godliness brought External Gain, or when a severe Rod was on their Back, than
they do now; this Omission can have no Excuse, for neither the one nor the
other did or can contribute Strength to the Exercise of Religion. It is not in
vain that the Scripture lays our Destruction at the door of our Wills, for if
there be a Will, God accepts it for the Performance, 2 Cor. 8.12. If there be
first a willing mind, it is accepted according to what a Man has: 2 Samuel
17.20. A Humiliation under the sense of Impotency is accepted for the
Performance. Religion lies within the Sphere of the Spirit, and the Spirit's
comprehensive Faculties are Light and Love, Knowledge and Inclination, or
Understanding and Will. (2.) Persons are often glad they want Power or
Opportunity of doing good, when Magistracy and Ministry are Profane, they are
glad of it: Jer. 5.31. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear
rule by their means, and my People love to have it so: Hos. 5.11. Ephraim is
oppressed and broken in Judgment, because he willingly walked after the
Commandment: Isa. 66.3. Their Soul delighted in their abominations. (3.)
Because they Fancy they have a Power to do what is spiritually Good, and yet
Neglect Outward Means, either Positive in External Ordinances, or Negative in
Omitting cf Vices and Outward Wickednesses. (4.) Because they are not frequent
and serious in asking the Strength they want, or readily complyant with Power
offered, Isa. 65.24. How often are we prevented with Convictions and
Suggestions about good Resolutions that we don't kindly entertain, as if they
came Messengers from Heaven, but throw them off with that Violence that we
ought to do Temptations from Hell! Should we be proud of that which is a Defect
of our Nature, and supposes a Defect in the Understanding? that which we never
did Good by? that which all our Evil came by? that which removes all
Excusableness from our Evil?

I Insist more on this for the Use it may have, than the need of it for an
Argument; for the Will being limited to the Understanding, as shall be
afterward proved, Ignoti nulla Cupido, it is only indifferent about trifles,
or what the Understanding thinks so; the Concerns of Salvation and Happiness
are none of its Objects as such; when God puts Life and Death, that is the
Means of them, to our Choice, we count them foolishness, until God give an
Understanding; when we discern them of such a Concern, indifferency is gone.

I come now to those Prerogatives falsely attributed to the Will of Man, that
is the Sink of all the Spiritual Pride and shameful Boasting in sinful Man. I
may reduce them to these four:

1. A Freedom from all Necessity, essential to the Will of Man.

2. A Freedom from the Empire of God as to Fact, though not Duty.

3. A Freedom from the Conduct of the Understanding.

4. Freedom to all kind of things whatsoever, sensitive, rational, spiritual,
heavenly.

First, That a Freedom from all Necessity, or a Freedom of Indifferency, is not
essential to the Will of Man.

1. That Liberty is only Essential to the Will of Man, that renders him worthy
of Reward or Punishment, Praise or Blame, by reason of his Actions; but a Man
is thus free and thus deserving in his most necessary Actions, which admits of
no indifferency; for Man pursues his ultimate and Supreme Happiness
necessarily, nothing can desire to be miserable. Enjoyment of God in the most
intimate Fellowship we are capable of, is our greatest Happiness, and yet it is
worthy of greatest praise to pursue this end: when a Man's Self, either
Self-will, Self-pleasure, or Self-profit, seems to him the last End, he
necessarily pursues it, and yet is worthy of Reproof and Punishment for it.
Self-Denial is the highest Virtue, and Self-seeking the greatest Sin. Moreover,
when any thing appears either as an only or a necessary Means to obtain this
great End, being formally considered as such, is as necessarily pursued as the
End it self. If our Understandings were Illuminated, we would as necessarily
and as fervently seek an Interest in Christ the Mediator, as in God the End: We
are as much bent and determined to Food, as to preservation of our Life.

(2) When all Necessary Causes are presupposed in Act, the the Effect must
necessarily follow: Therefore if Divine influence, and the attractive Power of
the Object be set forth by the most clear Light in the Understanding, the Will
must be persuaded; or else it must not be a perswadable Appetite, if any reason
can be given why it was not moved by these Arguments, then all Necessary Causes
are not in Exercise; if none can be given, the Will is not a reasonable
Appetite, but our Experience speaks the contrary, that when we refuse a thing
one day, and embrace it another, it is by more seriously weighing the Matter,
and find it appears more suitable to us.

(3.) What is Essential to a thing, is inseparable from it, universally and
perpetually agreeing to the whole Species; but this Indifferency is not so to a
Will, for the Will of God is not indifferent to Good and Evil, nor the Will of
Christ, whose Righteousness was Meritorious, nor the Will of Angels, who do
most freely Praise their Maker.

(4.) What is Essential to the Will as in other things, is most visible when
the Will is in its greatest perfections, as hardness in a Marble, not Lead;
whiteness in Snow; therefore the Essential Perfections of the Will are most
visible in God and Christ, Angels and Saints, that are most determinate in
their Designs and Actions.

(5.) What is Essential to the Soul, is best known when it is most perfect, for
Defects make not up the Nature of any thing. Christ was a Man, tho not sinful,
therefore Sin is not a Necessary Property of Man. Man is a reasonable Creature,
though there are many Fools or Madmen; and it is as reasonable to draw the
Essentials of a Spirit from the Common Observations of a sinful Man
Unregenerate, as from the Common Observation of Fools or M^d-men. The Will is
in its greatest Perfection when in exercise, for Acts do perfect our Faculties,
and when the Soul acts most sweetly and fervently, there is the least
Indifferency; for the Efficacy of the Action removes its languidness, and the
sweetness all its fluctuation; and whenever the Will acts, it is determined;
for, Quicquid est, quando est, necessario est; and much more determinate it is,
when in a State of Giory, acting without Weariness and Intermission.

(6.) What is Essential to the Soul, is best known when in exercise about its
proper and most principal Object; the Eye about Light, the Ear about Sounds,
the Intellect about Truth, and the Will about Good. We search the Nature of
Sight, rather in the Eye of an Eagle than of an Owl, because it looks on the
Sun the principal Object; the other through its weakness sees with greatest
ease in a Twilight. So the Will is to be Considered rather as it Acts about its
Ultimate End, than about Means; rather about a Chief Good than a Doubtful
Good; rather about God in most Clear Vision, than in this World, where so much
Darkness.

(7.) That cannot be Essential to the Will that is Inconsistent with its other
Properties in their Perfection, but this Indifferency is inconsistent with a
previous Judgment, without all Fluctuation or Obscurity; for what Aversion and
Appetite is in the Will, that Affirmation and Negation is in the Intellect, the
one bears the same respect to Good that the other bears to Truth; Doubtfulness
in the one, and Indifferency in the other, are both Defects.

Lastly, That is not Essential to the Soul which it desires to be removed, Ephesians.
5.19. No man ever yet hated his own flesh: Indifferency is an Impediment and
Hinderance to Action, like the waving of the Scales, which is no Principle to,
but an Impediment of Action: We Love, quod facilitat facere, not what hinders
us. Time is consumed in Deliberation; Shall I? Shall I? does no Business: we
strive and struggle to come to a Determinateness, therefore that must be the
Perfection, the other a Defect, a Companion of Ignorance and Uncertainty.

2 Prop. The Will of Man is not free from the Empire and Government of God,
neither as to Law or Fact; as to the former there is no dispute, the latter
these Arguments may Confirm. (1.) Man would be then an ungovernable Creature,
which is a great Absurdity: for God intended the Care and Government of the
Creatures he made, he could not make him Happy or Miserable in Spirit, if not
free his Will, and would he make one that might disorder his Harmony, and
frustrate his Designs, whether God would or no? (2.) Such a Power in Man would
limit an Infinite Being; it would limit his Will, he works all things
according to the Counsel of his Will, Ephesians. 1.11. The distinction has Absurdity
enough in it, of those who say it is true in Natural things, but not in things
Moral. (3.) It limits God's Power as to all Civil Affairs in the World; for
still his designs must depend on the Inclination of Man. (4.) The Knowledge of
God: This Conclusion is so apparent, for what is uncertain in it self, cannot
certainly be known; that Poieret denies God's foreknowledge of Sin, and that
until it came to pass, there was not one Thought or Idea of it in God: And
Pomponatius denies his Knowledge of Future Contingencies. (5.) It would both
rob God of much Praise and Glory, and rob poor Sinners of much Hope and
Comfort: For

1. The Doctrine of Perseverance is undetermined by it: No Person could have
any Assurance from his highest Seize in Grace. Paul could not have had
any Confidence of God's perfecting the begun Work of Grace, Phil. 1.6. if that
had been true: Nor Peter have concluded God's establishing, strengthening and
settling the dispersed Jews, from their being called, 1 Pet. 5.10. Those Chains
of Grace between Predestination, Calling, Justification and Glory, would be
very easily solvible.

(2.) God's Providential Care, [ Mat. 6.31. If God so cloth the Grass of the
field, shall he not much more cloth you, Oh ye of little Faith?] is overthrown
by it.

(3.) The Work of Conversion, [ Luke 11.25. I thank thee, O Father, because
thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed unto
Babes:] is derogated from Go^ by i.

(4.) The Scripture positively asserts the contrary, both in Morals and
Spirituals: Exodus 34.24. Neither shall any Man desire thy Land, when thou shall
go up to appear before the Lord thy God, thrice in the year. There was then a
brave opportunity for the Enemies to invade Israel, when all the Males were at
Jerusalem, and not one Man in all the Land, not one Man in all the Country
left to defend any Fort, Passage, City, or Castle; the Lord promises not only
that he would protect it, which he could have done by many miraculous ways, but
he promises though they should fight against it all the Year over, yet at that
time they should not desire it. John 6.44. No man can come to me except the
Father draw him; every Man therefore that has heard and has learned of the
Father, comes unto me. Phil. 2. He works to will and to do. Psalm. 110. The
people shall be willing in the day of thy power. Jer. 20.9. Thou art stronger
than I, and have prevailed; the manner how is expressed before; O Lord, thou
have deceived me, and I was deceived: But the Original is, Thou have enticed or
overperswaded me. Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any
more in his Name; but his word was in my heart as a burning fire; I was weary
with forbearing, and I could not stay.

(5.) The Efficacy of Effectual Calling is ascribed to the Efficacy of Divine
Influence on the Heart of Man, and not to Man's Will, or the Rethorick of
Ministers: 1 Cor. 2.4. that Efficacy is called a Powerful, Spiritual
Demonstration, there is a tripple Demonstration; the one is to our Sense, when
we see with our Eye, and hear with our Ear; the other is to Reason, when the
Connection between Terms, or Properties of things are clear and evident; but
this third Kind seems to be the Lords immediate proposing clear Apprehensions
of the thing to the Soul of Man, which is called a speaking to the Heart, Hos.
2.14. I will allure her, and will sp^ak to her Heart: which is particularly
described 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open face beholding as in a Glass the Glory
of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by
the Spirit of the Lord. There is first the Image or Idea, which is a Glorious
and ravishing Apprehension of God. Secondly, There is the Glass wherein this
Idea is represented, which is either the Scripture, as the Mean of Conveyance,
or rather the Intellect of Man, because it is by an immediate Efficiency of the
Spirit: and the Apostle is discoursing of the Jews, who had that Glass of the
Scripture, but could not receive this Idea into their Minds from it, by reason
of a Vail on their Minds; they were blinded: but this Vail is done away in
Christ. So there is a double operation, the first is a disposing of the Mind,
so as these Objects may be suited to it; for there is no Love but where there
is a Likeness. Different Pallats reli^h different Dishes; the Eye cannot be
made to see by outward light, without a due Disposition for receiving and
reflecting this Light: the Pharisees could see no takingness in the Doctrine of
Humility, while they received Honor one of another; nor any goodness in
Charity, while they remained Covetous: The Gentiles thought the Gospel
foolishness, while they judged their own imperfect Rigeteousness acceptable to
God, or their Sins so small, that the loss of a Beast in a Sacrifice could make
a sufficient recompense. And so it is said of every Natural Man, that the
things of God are foolishness unto them, and that they cannot discern them,
because they are spiritually discerned: But when he is Spiritual, he discerns
all things. So this subjective Influence is the making of a Man Spiritual,
which is called a New Creation, a Regeneration, a Resurrection. The third thing
is the Author of this Persuasion, or of this Image raised in the Mind, the
Spirit of the Lord. The fourth thing is the infl^ence it has upon the Soul; we
are changed into the same Image: So that whether the Objective Operation, or
the Subjective, have the precedence, is a Question among Divines. But this Text
sets the amiable, and most persuading and charming Object of God, presented to
the Soul, as that which moulds the Soul in a likeness to its self; as we see in
Bodily things passionately seen, marks a Child in the Womb of the Mot^er: This
is called, A drawing with the Cords of a Man; that is, not by Violence, as with
Cart-ropes, but with bands of Love, Hos. 11.4. and the constraining Power of
Love, 2 Cor. 5.14. And when the Word is blessed to be an Instrument of it, it is
called an ingrafted Word, or a Divine Seed. Lastly, This Doctrine of Denying
God an Absolute Empire and Government over the Will of Man, to turn it which
way he will, and when he will, (though he does not so always, which is called
his Permission) it does discourage the Duty of Prayer, and emasculate our Faith
and H^pe; how faintly and hopelesly should we beg Counsel of God for success in
our Affairs, our choice of Means for attaining our End, if this be true? For
the answer that we expect, is God's inclining our Wills to choose methods that
he will prosper, or inclining the Hearts of others to favor us; as Abraham's
Servant prayed, Genesis 24.14. that the Damsells Words and Actions, and his own
Words too, and Thoughts toward her, might be determined of God. To how little
purpose should the Church pray, Draw me, and we will run after thee; turn us,
and we shall be turned; and David, Incline my Heart to thy Testimonies; if it
were not in the Power of God to answer their Desires? In what a Despairing
Condition should poor Souls be, who know the Deceitfulness of their own Hearts,
the Brittleness of their Resolutions, and their own Impotency for removing of
that Prejudice and Antipathy they have against that Necessary Work of a
thorough Repentance, and Universal Mortification or Self-denial? It is
therefore ill Divinity of the Molinists, who as they say, God did not foreknow
sin before it came to pass; so they also assert, "He could not have prevented
it, if he had foreknown it, because Establishing Grace must follow an Habit.

3 Prop. The Will of Man is not free from the Guidance and Conduct of the
Understanding. Limborgh the now great Corypheus of the Arminians, asserts the
Will of Man after all Deliberations of the Mind, and fixed Purposes of the
Judgment, remains free to follow those Dictates, or brutally and unreasonably
to forsake their Conduct by suspension, or acting the quite contrary; but the
contrary of this has been the Opinion of Ancient Philosophers, who say, (...):
All Men do all things because they seem good to them, pleasant or profitable:
And as Dr. Lock says, A Man cannot but choose what he likes best, and what
likes him best that he calls the best Good, and what displeases him most that
he calls the greatest Evil, and a thing only can appear pleasing or
displeasing, Good or Evil, by the light of the Understanding. It Is true, the
Disposition of our Mind or Bodies have great Influence upon the Intellect, as a
Glass of Spring Water to one in a Feavour appears the pleasantest thing in all
the World. But, (2.) A greater Authority than Humane asserts this Point, 1 John
2.9. He that says he is in the light, and hates his Brother, is in darkness
even 'till now: Chapter 4.8. He that loves not, knows not God: There the Spirit
of God asserts the Will, and consequent Practice necessarily to follow an
enlightened Understanding; and on the contrary, Ephesians. 4. Alienation of our Minds
from God necessarily does follow Darkness in the Understanding; and elsewhere,
If they had known the Lord of glory, they would not have Crucified him: If
Jerusalem had known what had belonged to her Peace, she would have pursued it;
if the God of this World did not blind Men's Minds, they would obey the Gospel.
(3.) Preaching, Exhortation, Counsel and Advice, would be improper Means for
Reforming of Men; the Ministry would be an useless Ordinance, if Men were not
guided by their Understandings; for suppose that Fort was gained, nothing at
all was gained, for the Will would remain in its freedom, whether to be guided
by it or no; a Man might be thus spiritually a wise understanding Man, and yet
a wicked unconverted Man, but the usual Phrase of a wicked Man in Scripture is
a Fool. (4.) This would allow of another Variety of Creatures the World has not
known, to wit, a Creature with a Free Will without an Understanding; for if
they can act separately, they may be separate. (5.) The Unity between the Will
and the Understanding, they being both the same indivisible Soul, does not
admit of the Inclinations of one part contradicting the Inclinations of the
other; they are but two different Denominations from different Objects. The
Soul conversing about Truth is called Understanding, about Good is called Will,
they are so linked and interwoven, that there is a Will in the Understanding,
and Understanding in the Will; for there is an Inclination to Truth, that is
Will; and there is a Sense of Good, an impression of it self upon the Mind,
this is Intellect; the Will is a rational Appetite, and the Understanding is an
Appetizing Reason: How can therefore one act independently from the other? We
may see it in this Instance of Hope and Joy; Hope is the Opinion of a future
Good in the Understanding, Rejoicing is the Disposition of the Will that this
Idea or Appearance works: Now is it possible for us not to fear on the
appearance of a future Evil, or to rejoice on the appearance of a future Good?
and what are all these Affections and Passions that do variously arise upon the
various appearance of Good and Bad, but the various Motions of the Will? the
Will is the Soul's Inclination, the Soul's Inclination is Love, the Passions
are Love's different Postures, like the variegated Light in the Rainbow,
embracing Beauty fainting under Despair of Fruition, taking Courage in its
wrestling with the Impediments that lie in the way to its End, when it finds
them Conquerable, and begins to surmount them: The strongest of Objections
against this, seems (1.) to be Experience, Video meliora proboque, deteriora
sequor: I see better things, and approve them, but I cannot but follow my old
ill Course. In such Instances the Inclinations of the Will seem to fight
against the Dictates of the Understanding. Resp. Solomon observed the Nature of
this Experience more narrowly than a Medea or a Virgil, and he expresses it
thus, Prove. 13.4. The Soul of the Sluggard desires and has nothing: Has is
added by the Translators; if we let the Text supply it self, it is thus, The
Soul of the Sluggard desires, and not; to wit, desires: The Opposition is in
the same faculties, a Desire and not a Desire, a Will and not a Will: There is
the Vacillation of the Judgment, as well as the Velleity of the Will. The
Contention is about the Object, not about the Faculty: So far as our Judgment
is for the thing, so far our Will is for it: If there be a (...), there will be
a (...), that is, a true Repentance; when the Judgment is so far altered to see
the Evil of the former Actions; whereas, there may be great Deceit in Grief and
Sorrow raised upon the consequent Circumstances of some evil Action. (2.)
Object. Then we should seem to need no Grace, but that of Light to our
Understanding. Resp. This Objection is founded on a false Supposition, that the
Will and Understanding of the Soul are like different parts of the Body, Head,
Hands and Feet; it is impossible for the Soul to receive any Grace but what has
an influence upon it all, and yet the Scripture tells us, this is the manner of
Grace's influence, viz. To renew the Will by enlightening the Mind, 2 Cor. 3.18.
(3.) Obj. Stat pro ratione voluntas; that we often have no other Reason of our
acting but our mere Will, or as some say, I will, because I will. Resp. That
saying either is the saying of a Politician, who means he will Conceal his
Reason, or of a Fool that knows not what he says. (4.) Obj. Ignorance much
excuses a Fault, but if our Wills did always follow our Intellects, then all
our Sins would be Sins of Ignorance, and so not so full of Aggravation as
otherwise. Resp. The Scripture calls all our Sins Errors, Heb. 9.7. Which he
offered for himself and the Errors of the People: And both the Hebrew word
(...), and the Greek (...), signify to Mistake or Err; and the very first sin
of Man is called, a being deceived. 2. There is an Ignorance that aggravates as
well as an Ignorance that excuses; for he that has given Diligence and Pains to
know the Will of God and State of his own Soul, he that has attended upon
Ordinances for increasing the Knowledge thereof, is less guilty than he who
remains Ignorant of what the other knows by his Negligence.

I shall conclude this with these two Inferences: 1. That there then was an
Error or Mistake in the first sin of Angels as well as Man; though they had no
Outward Tempter, yet their own glistering Beauty and glorious Excellencies
appearing in their own Mind, were too abstractly Considered, and too
precipitantly doted upon. 2. That the great Object of our Prayers and Diligence
should be to attain true Knowledge. Wisdom is the principal thing; we ought
daily to Watch at her Gates, that the Eyes of our Understanding may be
enlightened, that we may know what is the Hope of his Calling, and what is the
Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance; to know more of God's Love and Power
toward them that believe, to know more of the Beauty of Holiness, Vileness of
sin, and Vanity of the Creature.

The fourth Proposition is, That the Will of Man is not free to all things:
Every thing is Confined to its own Sphere, the Carnal Man to Carnal things, the
Spiritual Man discerns all things, yet that is Confined to spirituals here
below; for neither Peter nor Paul could Converse rationally about Heavenly
things. This necessarily follows from the former Proposition, viz. That the
Will of Man is confined to the Understanding: Indeed the Appetite is in this
sense larger, that it Craves a greater Good than the Eye of the Mind can point
out to it; but in particular Choice and Prosecution it can only seek after such
as the Mind demonstrates to it: Ignoti nulla cupido; and it will be further
proved under the last Topic, viz. Man's Impotency.

The third Topic, or General Argument for our Humility, is our Guilt. This is
the Argument the Apostle insists so largely upon, to prove by it, that we are
not justified by Works, or to render the Gospel which brings the Tidings of a
Justification by Faith more acceptable. First, We are Naturally guilty, Ephesians.
2.3. and we are by Nature the Children of wrath, even as others; a Child of
Wrath is one liable to Wrath, or guilty of Wrath, as Judas is called a Son of
Perdition, Joh. 17.12. And so we read of a Son of Hell, Mat. 23.15. and
Children of the Curse. 2 Pet. 2.14. Deuteronomy. 25.2. a Child of beating, is
translated worthy to be beaten. But the great Controversy is, What is meant by
being thus liable to Wrath by Nature? There be two ways that they who deny
Original Sin explain it: First, some say it signifies only truly Children of
wrath, as in Gal. 4.8. By Nature were no Gods. Resp. 1. We grant they are truly
so, but where does ever the word Nature signify no more? For these Gods wanted
a Divine Nature, Spirituality, Independency, etc. and the Rule of interpreting
Scripture, is to let every word signify as much as it can. 2. The obviated
contrary would be such as none ever pretended, viz. and were in Opinion the
Children of Wrath even as, etc. the Jews were not in their own Opinion thus,
Gal. 2.5. A second way is: By Custom Children of Wrath; they found their
Interpretations on these two things: The Context speaks of their Conversation.
2. The word Nature signifies sometimes Custom, 1 Cor. 11.14. Nature teaches
that if a Man have long hair, it is a shame unto him. Resp. 1. He mentions two
kinds of Sins beside Conversation, viz. Flesh and its Lusts, Wills or Desires,
by way of Genealogy succeeding one another. 1. Flesh. 2. Lusts. 3. Conversation
or Fulfillment of them. There are two things here to be proved, That we are
Flesh Antecedent to any Custom. 2. To be Flesh is to be sinful. For the former,
see John 3.3. every thing born of flesh is so, 1 Cor. 3.3. it is common to Man
as Man in this State: -- are ye not carnal, and walk as men? For the latter,
see Romans 8.6, 7, 8, 9. The Apostles design is to prove, that the Jews were not
only as guilty as the Gentiles in Conversation, but in Lusts and fleshly
Dispositions; and so naturally Acts are before Custom, but a natural Principle
before Acts. It Is Nature before Custom teaches that Lesson, which brings forth
longer and more Ornamental Hair in Women than Men; Rev. Its a Natural Character
of distinction of Sexes. 2 Custom is called second Nature; Like Nature, or
acquired Nature; not Nature simply, and teaches nothing of this Matter: for in
some Countries Men nourish and dress it, in others not; but Nature constantly
distinguishes; and these distinguishing Characters are called Nature, Romans
1.26, 27.

Two Ways Nature is most usually taken: (1.) For the Internal Causes, the
Principium, motus, the Disposition or Constituti- of a thing. Romans 2.14. The
Gentiles do by Nature the things of the Law. Or (2.) for Birth, as Romans 2.27.
The Gentiles are the uncircumcision by Nature, in opposition to the Jews, who
by Birth had the privilege of Circumcision belonging to them, Gal. 2.15. Both
these are here comprehended, the Arguments for it are these: (1.) Flesh and
Nature here seem to be one thing; for the reason of our being Children of
Wrath, is, because we had our Conversation in the lusts of the Flesh By Flesh
in Scripture is understood, that Natural bias and tendency to Carnal things
that is in every Man from his Birth: Hence it is called a fleshly Mind, a Carnal
Mind; and, in my flesh dwells no good thing; and this fleshly Disposition is
Nature to us, for whatsoever is born of the flesh is flesh. There is
substantial Flesh, of which we are born, and then there is this fleshly
disposition, that is, the property: As it is said, That what is born of the
Spirit is Spirit: The one is the Holy Ghost, the other a Holy Habit in the
Mind. So as the Seed of Grace in a Regenerate Man is called the Divine Nature:
So this Flesh or Carnal Disposition, it is our Corrupt Nature, and it is called
Flesh from its opposition to the Spirit: for as Substances, Flesh and Spirit
are opposite in the Scripture, so also Spiritual and Carnal Disposition; until
a Man has a higher principle, he only can converse about Carnal things: Carnal
and Earthly things are equivalent, they did partake of your Carnal things: So
Galat. 6.12. 2 Cor. 5.16. Phil. 3.3. The strength of the Argument lies thus:
That since by our Birth, and by our Natural Disposition, we are Carnal,
therefore by our Birth and Natural Disposition we are liable to Wrath. By our
Birth we are Flesh, John 3.3. That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and the
Text says this Flesh renders us liable to Wrath.

(2.) We are liable to Wrath from all the successful Temptations of the Prince
of the Air: for all the results, says the Context, are Disobedience. Now Satan
both can and does act us before any acquired Custom or Habit; and according to
the Common Notions of the Soul, there is no apparent repugnancy why his
suggestions may not be thrown into the Soul, and succeed too before we are born.

(3.) Nature and Grace here are opposed, as Comprehending the two entire States
of Man by Nature; you are the Children of Wrath, but by Grace you are saved. So
Nature comprehends the whole of a Man's Life before Grace, else he may be saved
without Grace; except Nature were taken in this sense, his Argument would be in
two considerable Points defectible: 1. In showing, as to Eternal Concerns, that
by Birth and Nature the Jews and Gentiles condition were alike, as well as by
Conversation. 2. In depressing the Jews false grounded Pride, who reckoned all
the Seed of Abraham in a sinless Condition until adult, Gal. 2.15. Is it
supposable, that when the former is so true, and the latter so dangerously
false, and both the Apostles design in the very place, that there should be
nothing in his Argument to signify them, or that when no word more proper than
this word Nature could be thought on, that that word should be used in a most
improper sense?

I might add four more to enforce this: 1. Authority. Austin and Prosper did
interpret this Text of Original Sin. 2. Etymology; the word Children is
changed, it is not the same that in the second is called Children of
Disobedience, but (...), which signifies our Birth. 3. The other Texts of
Scripture, Psalm. 5. and Job, I was conceived in Sin, and born in Iniquity: Who
can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? 4. Matter of Fact: Infants dye,
suffer Miseries, Pains, that are the Effects of Wrath in Scripture Language, if
they were not liable to them, how should they generally and frequently suffer
them?

2ly. We are personally guilty: To prove that all Men are guilty, is, because
the Scripture describing the Heraldry of our Sinfulness, does not derive it
from our Actions, but derives the Evil of our Actions from our Persons. We are
Corrupt trees, and therefore bring forth Corrupt fruit. That which comes out
of a man defiles a man; and Satan like, when he speaks a lie, speaks his Own,
John 8 44. If God from a Man's Birth do determine his Will, and so sanctify
him, it may stop this Course, but being left to himself, he cannot but sin, for
Nature will follow its own Course. For the Wicked drink in Iniquity as the fish
do the water; they go astray from the Womb, speaking lies; and being left to
himself, as soon brings shame, as Wise Solomon observes: Mat. 12.3, 4. being
evil, ye cannot speak good: -- An evil man out of the evil treasure brings
forth evil things. Tit. 1.15. Unto them that are defiled every thing is impure:
Prove. 21.4.27. the plowing and praying of the Wicked are Sins; Hag. 2.12. they
defile whatever they touch; the dead Carcass, and other defiling things under
the Law did typifie them. The Nature of God is the Rule of ours, antecedently
to his Will, being the Rule of our Actions, and the want of Conformity to the
Rule is a Sin, and where the want of his Image is, there is the want of a
Likeness or Conformity to him; this may be called a Personal Guilt, antecedent
to our Guilt by Actions, and is a Confirmation of the former, and much of the
same Nature with it.

3dly. We are universally Guilty: This is the Apostles great and demonstrative
Argument, to prove that we are not justified by Works. (1.) He supposes
Salvation possible, attainable. (2.) That a Righteousness was necessary to it;
for the Judge could not be just in justifying the Unjust. (3.) This
Righteousness must be inherent or imputed; a Righteousness to be believed, or a
Righteousness to be done by us; a Righteousness by Works or Faith; by our own
Righteousness, or another; by a proper Righteousness, or Vicarious, what
Sovereign Authority in Justice might accept in its room; the former is by the
Law, the latter is by the Gospel: the former is that the Apostle rejects with
most industrious pains, and strenuous proof. For it is a disjunction that admits
of no Medium; if guilty by the Law, only saved by the Gospel. (4.) He proves,
that we are universally guilty as to the Law.

(1.) The Gentiles are, from Chap. 1.18. to Chap. 2.17. Because they knew God,
but did not glorify him; they detained the truth in unrighteousness; they
condemned in others what they did themselves, their Conscience accused them for
transgressing the Law wrote on their minds.

(2.) He proves the Jews guilty, and that in measure above the Gentiles, from
Chapter 2.17. to Chapter 3. From their having more Knowledge and worse Lives, by which
they made the Gentiles blaspheme their Religion, and the Author of it. 2. By
doing the same things, or things of like Nature, they taught from the Law of
God was not to be done. After the obviating of an Objection against that
Argument, from Chapter 3. to v. 9. he there begins a New Argument, to prove all
guilty to v. 20. by the Authority of the Old Testament, the Jews and
Christians, only owns the strength of the Argument; but it is Conclusive
Universality, does not only prove the Jews are guilty, but all, v. 9. both Jews
and Gentiles, v. 10. None righteous, no not one; v. 19. All the World guilty
before God: The Citations are so interwoven as to guard against all Exceptions:
Negatively, None righteous; Positively, All gone out of the way; Subjectively,
understanding, none understands: Will; none seeks after God; Words, v.
13.14. Their throat is an open Sepulcher, etc. Works, v. 15. Their feet are
swift to shed blood: Objectively, against Men, v. 16. Destruction and misery
are in their ways: Against God, viz. There is no fear of God before their eyes.
Which may sufficiently discover the unreasonableness of their Opinions, who to
limit this Guilt, and make some room for Works in Justification, say, The Guilt
and Works here spoken of are only against the Ceremonial Law, others against
the Judicial and Civil Constitution of the Jews; others the Moral only, as
abstractly considered from Evangelical, in Strength or Duty: But more of this
on Verse 4.

4thly, Not only Universally guilty, but Numerously guilty: Every Man is not
only guilty of Sin, but the account of his Sins are Innumerable: For first, the
Actions of our Life are innumerable, together with the words of our Tongues,
and Thoughts of our Mind; and there is a sinfulness accompanying each of these.
We must give an account of every idle word, Mat. 12.36. and all our Actions are
to be set before us, and how will then the Sinner be humbled, when his
aggravated Talents, or Sins, amount to ten thousands, and no coming out till
all be paid? Mat. 18.24, 34. how much more numerous must Farthing-Debts be? And
yet Mat. 5.26. there is no coming out till the uttermost farthing be paid. (2.)
God as a Punisher, or as a Pardoner, he reckons the multitude of every
Transgressors Sins great, Genesis 6.5. The Deluge was sent on the Old World
because every thought of the imagination of their Heart was only evil
continually. The Captivity was sent on the Jews, Ezekiel. 16.25.51. because their
Whoredoms were increased, and she had multiplied her Abominations more than
Samaria: Nay Samaria had not committed half the Sins. When God forgives Sins,
he forgives many Sins: All manner of Sin and Iniquity shall be forgiven: Luke
7.47. I say unto thee, her Sins which are many, shall be forgiven, Romans 5.16.
The free gift is of many offenses unto Justification: James 5. and last, He
that Converts a Sinner, hides a multitude of Sins.

3. The Saints own account of their Sins, or rather Vain Attempts to account of
them, Job 9.2, 3. We cannot answer for one of ten thousand; ten thousand was
one of the least parcells he could put by their selves. David, Psalm. 19.12. Who
can understand his errors? Cleanse thou me from secret faults. Psalm. 40.12.
Innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine Iniquities have taken hold upon
me, so that I am not able to look up: Solomon, Eccles. 7.27. One would expect
the best account of him of any body, if he should lay out his Talent of Wisdom
that Way, which after he became a Penitent, or one gathered into the Church, as
the Hebrew Phrase is, he did; for Verse 25. he says, I applied my Heart to know
the wickedness of folly, even of Wickedness and Madness; Ver. 27. he says, This
he had found, counting one by one, to find out the account, which yet my Soul,
says he, seeks, but I find not. That is, he found the account of Sin was not
to be found out; but this he found, Verse 29. that they were many, they had
sought out many inventions, and that God was Author to none of them.

4. The Similitudes they are compared with, the Hains of our head, Psalm. 40.12.
the drops of a living Spring, the Sand on the Seashore, as the words of
Manassehs Prayer has it. The very Tongue it self, says St. James, is a World
of Iniquity; the Dimensions of Sin are high as Heaven, Ezra 9.6. Deep as Hell,
Hos. 9.9. Psalm. 130.1. Its Breadth and length are such as nothing but the
Incomprehensible height, depth, length and breadth of the Love of Christ can
cover.

5. We may know the Number of our Sins by the Books of Accounts, that the great
Auditor of Accounts Christ Jesus will make use of at the great day: There is
the Book of Scripture, that contains the Law, and so teaches us Skill in this
Holy Arithmetiek; the second is the Book of Conscience, which is like our
Diary, Romans 2.14. and has all Matter of Fact wrote in it: By comparing these
together, every Man may get sight of a huge and terrible Number of Sins. First
for the Law, it is exceeding broad; but yet there is an opposite Law in our
Members, that is as broad as it; for there is no Law but we have some way or
other broken, and that by a nigher Transgression than by that Rule the Apostle
gives; he that transgresses one is guilty of all: This Law has a famous
Division in Ten Commandments; but the Jews subdivide them into 613 Ceremonial
and Judicial Precepts, and so may we in as many particular Moral ones: As for
Instance, Thou shall have no other Gods before me, Comprehends our Faith in God
and all his Promises; and who can reckon the number of Promises, Blessings?
Secondly, Knowledge and Study of God; and who can reckon the various parts of
Divinity? Thirdly, Love of God, and this should be as much repeated as his
Mercies are to us, that admit of no Intermission. Fourthly, Adoration, and this
admits as many parts as there are things unknown of the Incomprehensible God,
or as there are New Discoveries made of them. Fifthly, Obedience, and this is
as large as all particular Precepts: Sixthly, Farther, if we shall take one of
these particular Commands, they admit of Variety of Kinds of Transgressions
against them; for Instance, Adoration, Atheism, Idolatry, Magic, Superstition,
Blasphemy, Hypocrisy, are all Transgressions of that Duty; and yet there is
none of these Species of Sins, but may be subdivided into multitude of Inferior
Branches. For Instance; Idolatry; Men have been as many ways guilty of it as
there are Creatures, the very Mouse has been Worshipped, and Art has been put
on the Rack for Invention of Kinds of Molten, Carved, Painted Idols, or Images:
There has been variety of Idols, for all the Ends or Uses Man wanted any good:
There has been Gods of Sneezing, there has been as many Idols as there are
things that Men set their Hearts too much upon Profits, Pleasures, Honors. If
we will next take the other Book of Conscience, and search how often we commit
Idolatry with what is our Idol, which by our practice we perpetually pursue; We
talk on it, we think on it, we dream on it; who can then reckon the multitude
of his Transgressions? If our Consciences be secure, and we reckon our selves
pretty Innocent from gross abominable Sins, yet this Number might startle us;
there are multitudes, Multitudes in the Valley of Decision. We cannot but say,
Beelzebubs Sin was the greatest Sin in the World, yet we dare not say 'twas
greater than the Sins of all the rest that Complied with him; for they lost
God, a vast number of Creatures, and threw Dirt on multitudes of his Glorious
Images: So thy many Sins have robbed God of many Duties. Beside, in the number
of our Sins there is not only a bare increase of Quantity, but there is
increase of Intention with their Extension: As Poison, or Physic, five Grains
at one time will work more than four Grains at two times: So we find, Mat.
18.22. Peter thought eight times was unpardonable; and the Lord says, Numbers
14.22. Because they had ten times rebelled, they should none of them enter into
the Land.

Lastly, Constant Multiplication of Sin has a Continuedness of Sin in it, and
this is highly provoking to God: As Continuedness in Prayer prevails with him
for Blessings, Continuedness in sinning provokes him to Anger.

5. We are hainously guilty. This accompanies every Sin, its a property of its
Nature, tho few see it. When the Apostle had his eyes open to see it, the sight
struck him dead: Romans 7.9. When Sin revived, I died: The Effects of it
discovers this, it debases the Soul to slave on Earth, and live on Husks; it
defiles the Soul so, that no Nitre can wash it clean; it made the Angels who
sparkled like Morning-stars, fall to the ground like a shot, spent Meteor: It
disordered Divine Government, eclipsed his Glory, destroyed his Imnge; it
ruined this World, and laid the Foundation of Hell. It Is the Root and Abstract
of all other Evils; they live and move by it, they all serve to give it Names,
it is Poison, Vomit, Mire, Darkness, Blindness, Folly, Madness, Death, Poverty,
Shame and Nakedness. God glories to be the Author of all things, but abhorrs
this as a Bastard, Jam. 1.13. never had any hand in its production. Our Lord
Jesus Christ glories that he has born all Evil, that he was able and willing to
drink the Cursed dregs out of the Cup of our Afflictions, but he would never
taste of this. The Saints who but see it is Evil as with one Eye, through a
Cranny, prefer the bitterest of Sufferings to the pleasures of Sin, Heb. 11.24.
1 Timothy 5.6. She that lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives. The Devil is
not worse than Sin has made him; there is no Evil in him but Sin and it is
Fruits. The Divine Attributes have Variety of Objects, but Wrath, Hatred is all
engrossed on this one Object Sin, and there it acts with such Vigor, as that
where it is only imputed, and the Person his only begotten Son, he will not
spare him, Romans 8.32. And its Evil is seen more in its being as contrary to
God, as God is to it, Romans 8.7. It Is against his Existence, Romans 1.30. it hates
him, wishes he were not; it is against all his Attributes, all his Laws, all his
Favorites. We cannot say it is as bad as God is good, because he can forgive
it, ruin it, sanctify from it; but as he is only good, it is only evil; he is
to be Loved for himself, it is to be Hated for it self; and by being against
him directly and only: Psalm. 5.1. Against thee, thee only have I sinned; it
puts on an Infiniteness of Evil, Acts being denominate from their Objects: So
we have a twofold Infiniteness in Sin: The Number of Sin, and the Nature of
Sin. No wonder there needed an Infiniteness in the Ransom.

6. There are great Aggravations accompany the guilt of every Sinner, beside
the Essential Hainousness of every Sin, and besides the particular aggravations
that distinguishes one Sinner from another; there are three Circumstances that
much swell the guilt of sin, as a tripple addition of Venom to a Toad, that no
adult Persons want in some degree. (1.) Sin against Knowledge, Luke 12.47. of
this Pagans were guilty: Romans 1.18, 21. (2.) Against Mercies; of this the
Pagans were guilty too, Romans 1.21. and 2.4, 5. Acts 14.17. Formation in the
Womb, Integrity of Mind, Senses and Members, safe Deliverance, a furnished
World to come into, a time of Reprieve, and space of Repentance to stay in it.
(3.) Voluntariness, bent of Mind: Some would have an Indifferency necessary to
the Voluntariness that makes Man guilty, and what wants this, is no guilt: A
Drunken Man's Murder is no sin in their sense, nor an Infants Inclinations,
Passions no sins, nor an Adults thoughts, except the prevalency and consent of
the Will be to it; but this is very contrary to Scripture: For (1.) It makes
Lust a Sin, which is an Inclination before an Act. (2.) The Apostle owns sin
where the I or prevalent Will is not: Romans 7.7, 17, 18. Not I, but Sin in me.
(3.) It makes willingly an Aggravation: Heb. 10.26. Romans 1.28, 32. (4.) If
there are Sins of Ignorance, there are Sins without Free Will, for no Freewill
without Knowledge. (5.) We are Originally Guilty, but the Apostle leaving this
industriously out of his Argument, in the first, second, and third Chapter, and
treating of it in the Fifth Chapter, by it self, I shall omit, and pass to the
last Topic.

I come to the fourth and last Argument, to prove that Man has no Matter of
Glorying before God, and that is from his Impotency of doing any good; as he is
guilty by sinning for the time past, so it is not in his Power to abstain from
sinning still: And this Impotency is twofold, Natural and Moral. Moral
Impotency is an Aversion and Antipathy in the Will from a thing, but a Natural
Impotency is a Defect in some other Faculty that hinders the Action; Mat. 8.2.
the Leper says, Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean: He doubts not the
Natural but the Moral Power. Joseph's Brethren they hated Joseph, and could not
speak peaceably unto him, the Defect of Power was in the Will, not in the
Tongue. That there is this Moral Impotency in Man to any Spiritual Good, is
generally granted amongst Protestants, and is founded upon these reasonable
grounds: (1.) Because the Scripture lays our Disobedience at the Door of our
Wills, Joh. 5.40. You will not come unto me that you might have Life: How often
would I have gathered you, but you would not. (2.) Because the Scripture calls
this Impotency an Enmity, Romans 8.7. The Carnal Mind is enmity against God,
therefore it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be: So Luke
11.7. The Parable says of the Friend, that the Children were in Bed, and he
could not rise: And another Parable, Luke 14. says of the several Rejecters of
Christ, That they could not receive him; I have Married a Wife, and therefore
cannot come. (3.) Christ tells the Pharisees, that they had a Natural Power to
know that he was the Messiah, because they employed it about other things that
Needed more Skill to know them: Mat. 16.3. Ye can discern the Face of the Sky,
can ye not discern the Signs of the Times? (4) This Impotency toward Holiness
is like the Impotency in God toward sinning, but that is only a Moral
Impotency; for Omnipotency is Incapable of a Natural Weakness, Habak. 1.13.
Thou art of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, and can not look on Iniquity:
Titus 1.2. God that cannot lie: This Impotency is a high Perfection, and when
the Saints are Regenerate in a likeness to God, they partake of this Aversion
to Sin also: Whosoever is born of God does not Commit Sin, for his Seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin. A Potency to sin is an Imperfection, but
an Impotency by which one cannot forbear sinning is the greatest Perfection
that can be, Romans 8.7. Ephesians. 4.24. (5.) Our Natural Indisposition or Natural
impotency is a farther Proof of this, for things are grateful or ungrateful
to our Taste, according to the Disposition of our Palate. Our Will is our
Spiritual Appetite, and according to its Natural Disposition its Sympathy or
Antipathy arises. We are a Generation of Vipers, there is Poison in our
Constitution, and being evil we cannot speak good; Mat. 7.18. A good tree
cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good
fruit. This Indisposition is granted both by Arminians and their Antagonists,
but the Dispute between them, is, Whether it is a Sin or no. The Divine Nature
in Holiness, Righteousness and Knowledge, is as much the Measure and the Rule
of the Disposition of the Mind of Man, as the Divine Law, which is the Copy of
that Holy Nature, is the Rule and Measure of Man's Actions; and therefore since
Sin is an (...), a Want of Conformity to the Law, there is a sinfulness in our
very Natures, though undoubtedly it wants much of the Sinfulness and Guilt that
our actual Transgressions have; the one is our Misery and our Grief, the other
is Matter of our Repentance and Amendment: It seems to receive a Diminution in
that 5th. of Romans, that they have not sinned after the similitude of Adam.
The Scripture elsewhere aggravating the Sins of Adult Persons, says, They have
Transgressed like Men, but the Original has it, like Adam. This Moral
Impotency is as unconquerable as Natural Antipathies, Mark 10.25. It is easier
for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle, than for a rich Man to enter
into the Kingdom of God: The Text represents a Penetration of Dimensions, which
is beyond a Miracle, to be easier than for an Unregenerate Man to mortify his
Earthly Inclinations. Transubstantiation is easier to be Believed, than that a
Man can Convert himself when he will, though receiving all External Helps; for in
this young Man here was a good Natural Disposition, Jesus loved him; here was a
good Education, All these have I observed from my Youth; here was an excellent
Preacher, Jesus Christ himself; here was a Careful Attention, for he went away
grieved at the Proposal of the Choice; Christ offered him Treasure in Heaven
for parting with Treasure on Earth, but that he could not do. Lastly, Because
the Scripture asserts, that we are made Willing by Divine Power, John 6.44. No
Man can come to me except the Father draw him: Psalm. 110. Thy People shall be
willing in the Day of thy Power: 1 These. 1.5. Our Gospel came not to you in
Word only, but also in power.

Secondly, There is a Natural Impotency as well as a Moral. (1.) Because this
Impotency is in our Natural Constitutions, Psalm. 51.5. I was shapen in
Iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. Neither the Grammar, nor Sense
gathered from the Context, will allow David to be bemoaning here his Parents
Transgression, for that could not make up a part of his Repentance; and here
David does oppose it unto that Truth that God desired in the hidden and inward
Parts of Man: Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? If the
First fruit be Holy, so is the Lump, if the Root be Holy, so are the Branches.
We are by Nature the Children of Wrath; read Mat. 7.18. and 12.34. Since this
Averseness is born with us, Universal to all, I think it may be called Natural,
though in the Will, so the Moral Impotency is Natural. (2.) The more Moral
Impotency that a Man is under, the more Guilty he is: But there is an Impotency
in Man to good, that in some part, though not wholly, does excuse Guilt, as the
Infants in Nineve. It is said, All dye, because all have sinned, but none can
be so Uncharitable toward Poor Infants, whose Impotency is greater than the
Adult's, to think that therefore they are more guilty, Romans 5. (3.) The
Invincibleness and Unconquerableness of this Impotency being represented under
such an utter Impossibility, does manifest a Defect in all the other Powers as
well as the Will, as impossible as for a great Camel to go thorough the Eye of
a Needle; it requires as great a Power as Creation and the Resurrection of one
from the Dead does, Ephesians. 1.19. it requires the exceeding greatness of his
Power, the Energy of his mighty Power. If all the other Faculties were fitted
for their Office, especially the Understanding, it might and would sway the
Will, since the Will follows its Conduct, as is proved before; for the Gospel
proposes such Objects with such a Certainty that would surely Captivate and
Conquer the Will, if there were no Defect in discerning it; and Paul the
Apostle complains of the Defect of other Powers; To will is present with me,
but how to perform that which is good I find not. Christ blames the Disciples
for the Weakness of the Flesh, when the Spirit was willing: Suppose our Wills
entire, our Animal Spirits would not serve us to Obey the Law of Innocence, and
this Incapacity is from our sin; so a Man is as Guilty by this Impotence, as in
Omissions of Duty thorough Drunkenness, and I cannot think but a Man is Guilty
of Blood that Kills his Neighbor in Drink, or does not deliver him sinking in
the Water, because his Drunkenness has made him incapable, the Impotence is
voluntarily Contracted: Gal. 5.17. The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, so
that ye cannot do the things that ye would: Was there no Sin in the Impotence,
since they were willing? (4.) The Understanding is a distinct Power from the
Will, and antecedent in Manner of working, and there is an Impotency ascribed
to it; 1 Cor. 2.14. The Natural Man cannot know spiritual things. The
Contrivance of our Salvation, which is the Effect and Glory of Divine Wisdom,
appeared to the Grecian Philosophers seriously Studying the Case, a ridiculous
Dream of a weak Brain. Act. 17.19. The Epicureans and Stoic Philosophers, though
they heard him again and again, and though his Speech was Divine, yet the
Conclusion was Laughter and Mockery: Resurrection of the Dead was a strange and
incredible Doctrine to Pagans; Heaven and Hell, a Day of Judgment, and
Destruction of this World, were Chimera's and Fancies: Caecil the Philosopher
thus: O wonderful Foolishness and incredible Boldness! they Contemn present
Torments, and yet fear future Pains; they fear not Death, but fear to dye after
Death; their Fear is foolish, and their Hope fallacious of Comfort at the
revival from Death, for they are not Contented with the furious Opinion of the
Dissolution of the World, threatening the very Stars with Fire, but they tell
old Fables of a Birth after Death from the Cinders and Ashes. Epictetus said,
the Galileans were Melancholy Persons, who willingly chose Death from Hopes of
good things afterward. Christianity appears as foolish to Politicians, the
spiritual Kingdom of Christ is to them a Castle in the Air: When Pilat, John
18. heard that Christ's Kingdom was not in this World, he thought it was not
worth his Attention, some imaginary Business: Nor had the Vulgar any better
thoughts of it, Joh. 6. they would follow him for Earthly Bread, and Crown him
for it, but they could not relish his Discourse of Heavenly Bread. The Pagans
used to call them Atheists, because they had no Temples, Altars, Sacrifices,
nor Holy Days; an inward Religion in Thoughts was no Religion to them, their
gross Minds could not feel it; and they used to throw their Ashes in the
Rivers, thinking thereby to prevent their Resurrection. An Universal Monarch
from among the Jews was no credible Doctrine to a Roman, whose Subjects or
Slaves they were, far less to believe him a God and a Savior, one rejected by
the Jews, Mocked, Scourged and Crucified.

The Jews, who enjoyed Divine Oracles, especially the Prophetical ones of such
a Prince and Savior, yet how contemptible was the Obscurity of his Life! And
what offense was the Cross of his Death to them? and how foolish did his
Doctrine appear, John 7. 49! His holy Laws about Loving our Enemies seemed
impossible to practice, and contrary to Heroic Virtues, in the Opinion of both
Jew and Gentile: Regeneration was a Miracle to a serious Nicodemus. On these
Examples, especially that Act. 17. the Apostle seems to reflect in that
Assertion, 1 Cor. 2.14. But secondly, the Scripture is most frequent and
emphatical in this Assertion, that the Understanding, Ephesians. 4.17. is,

1. Dark: We are in darkness; but more is said, Ephesians. 5.8. We are darkness. Some
Creatures can see in the dark, that carry a light about with them; but we are
dark, yea darkness, Acts 13.41. therefore cannot believe this Work, tho a man
should declare it unto us: And there is not only Darkness, or some Vail over
the Eye, or defect in it, but it is expressed by the want of Eyes, Ears, and
Understanding too as to this, Deuteronomy. 29.4. An heart to perceive, eyes to see: 1 John 5.20. And has given us an understanding.

2. Flesh, Mat. 16.18. Flesh and Blood has not revealed it; Fleshly Wisdom,
carnally minded, because it can only discern Earthly things.

3. Sick, 1 Timothy 6.4. Corrupt minds; the word signifies sickly, but how? by
being destitute of the Truth.

4. Weak, Impotent; We are not sufficient of our selves to think a right
thought. The evil of our Thoughts proceed from the weakness of the Mind; there
was weakness before Sin: Eve was deceived, beguiled, much more since Sin. I
might form an Argument thus: The Understanding is a distinct Power or Faculty
from the Will, but there is an Impotence in the Understanding; therefore there
is a Natural Impotency, for a Natural Impotence is an Impotence in another
Faculty than the Will: Prove. 24.5. The Wisdom of a Man is his strength. If a
General had the strength of an Ox, and Courage of a Lion, what serves it for
without Wisdom? therefore Ignorance is weakness; to be Carnally minded is to be
weak: The weapons of our Warfare are not carnal, but mighty. There is great
Reason we should believe the Scripture in this Point, because the Eye cannot
see it self, and the most Ignorant Man thinks he is knowing. The blind
Pharisees said, Are we blind also? And Romans 2.19. they were confident they were
sufficient Guides to the Blind. A Fool, a Madman thinks himself Wise; God has
given us this Glass to see our Minds in, and undeceive our selves. Further,

5. The Scripture asserts, That the Common Profession of Christianity on an
Historical Faith, is a Gift of the Spirit: No Man can call Jesus Lord, but by
the Holy Ghost. All those Philosophers and Politicians before mentioned, could
not see grounds of embracing him until this Gift was given: The spreading of
Deism at this time is a great and sad sign of the withdrawing of these gifts.
The Protestant Profession sprung out of Popery by such a Light: Nay,

6. Natural Religion is a Divine Gift, Romans 1.21. and 2.25. God manifests
himself, he writes his Laws on our hearts. Since we see some born Fools and
Idiots, all might be; Neither for this man's sin nor his Parents sin was he born
blind; therefore if for any, it was for Sin common to the whole of Mankind. Now
the Scripture shows what makes the difference, John 1. He is the Light that
enlightens every one that comes into the World; he has Gifts for the
Rebellious, Psalm. 68.18. No Man is so bad as he deserves.

7. The skill of Plowing, Sowing, Trading, are from God: Isai. 28.24. it is
both fully and clearly asserted. If then Man by Nature is weak as to these, how
much more as to Saving Knowledge, the least Grain whereof, if like a
Mustard Seed, initiates in the Kingdom of God, Mat. 13.31. the very Smoke of it
is preferable to the Light of most sparkling Gifts, for it will never be
quenched. It is specifically distinct from other Knowledge of Scripture by Gift
or Acquirement; the one is, to use the Schoolmen's Language, Specie Propria,
the other is, Specie Aliena; by the one we only know the signs of Divine
things, by the other, the things themselves, (or rather in my weak Thought) a
more like or nigher Idea of them framed by God himself; the one is like the
sight of a Picture, the other is like the Person; the one like an Anatomy by
Book, the other by immediate Dissection; one like Learning by an Herbal Book,
the other by Simpling, tasting of Meat, and telling another of it: The two
Persons Thoughts much differ. Job says, I have heard, now I see, Chapter 42. v. 5.
and 1 Cor. 2.9. Mat. 11.25. Joh. 14.17, 21. 1 John 5.20.

I can imagine nothing that can be Objected against this but one of these
three. 1 Obj. If a Man's Will were right, he could do good enough, and be happy
enough without this Knowledge. Resp. One may as well think a Watch can go
without the Spring, for the Understanding is the Guide; 2 Cor. 1.12. Not by
fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God. According to the kind of Knowledge,
Gracious or Fleshly, so the Conversation, Jer. 4.22. Ephesians. 2.3. Lusts of the
mind might be Englished Wills of reasoning: The Will follows that, but that
being Corrupt, the Will is a Lust. 2 Obj. If we had a true Will for this
Knowledge, we should have it. Resp. Not by pains, for it is the Work of the
Spirit, nor by Promise, for we have generally a desire for Knowledge, we would
be as wise as Angels; we have an earnest desire for more skill in our Employs
and Callings, and as to saving Knowledge God gives to whom, and when he will. 3
Obj. If we have a Will for it, God accepts the Will for the Deed. Resp. This
Axiom admits of Limitation, for it could not be admitted by the Law of
Innocence, it is only under the Gospel Constitution, it is on Christ's Account
the Will is accepted for the Deed; that is, through him the Defect and
Imperfection is pardoned: The want of the Deed is then a Sin, it needs a
Pardon: So there is a Sin, the Will being supposed right; To will is present
with me, but how to perform, etc. Romans 7. Ye cannot do the things that ye
would, Gal. 5.17. A second Limitation is, that the Will is accepted according
to what a Man has; he must do what he can, else the Will will not be accepted
for the rest. From these Texts the fault is not laid on the weak degree of the
Will, but on other Powers.

A Fifth Argument for Natural Impotence, is from the Oneness and Unitedness of
Soul. The Soul is a Natural principle in the Man, and there is Impotence in
every part therefore if in one: If Impotence in the Will is called Moral from
the Subject, the Will being so, why not Natural by being in the Understanding,
or whole Soul? If that be Natural which is born with us, this Impotence is so:
If the Texture and Frame of Essential Properties be Nature, as we say Nature
will do the Cure, Nature is strong or weak, this is Natural; if that be Natural
which is Universal, this is so, Universal in every Man, and part of Man; if all
be polluted, all is weak, Sin is a Rust and Dust in the Wheels, Gal. 3.22. All
under Sin, (...), 1 These. 5.23. Soul, Body and Spirit need Sanctification:
Spirit is Judgment, Conscience: and Soul, Affections or Passions, Heb. 4.12.
Soul and Spirit are compared to Joints and Marrow, the Animal Spirits are
seated in the Marrow; but gross Joints and Bones of the Body are without: from
this Oneness of the Soul, the Argument for Moral Impotence alone appears
strong; if a Man's Will were right all were right: This is true, because it
cannot be sanctified or cured alone: It is as true, if a Man's Understanding
were Cured, all were Cured, therefore its Cure is reckoned the greatest Mercy:
Col. 1.12, 13. 2 Timothy 2.25. It Is the sum of Conversion, Ephesians. 5.8, 14. Jam.
1.18. to open their Eyes, and turn them from Darkness to Light, is the sum of
the Gospel. It Is the sum of the Covenant, Jer. 31.34. They shall all know me.

A sixth Argument for Natural Impotency, is from the Devils Potency over our
Souls; he uses a Natural or Physical Efficiency to hinder our Conversion, Ephesians.
2.2. he works effectually, with an Energy, and there is need of such an Energy
to remove him and his influence: Moral Swasion will not Chain Satan; he would
become very good, if persuasion would make him leave off tempting: Gal. 2.8. He
that wrought effectually in Peter -- the same was mighty in me. Before Man's
Fall Satan stood without, and used only Moral Swasion, which Man could have
resisted and dissented from; but now his Operation is of a superior Kind than
by Humane Converse: Ephesians. 6.12. its called Heavenly, We wrestle against wicked
Spirits in heavenly's; so the Marginal reading is: the Text shows its the
manner of Operation that is called heavenly, as well as the subject, about
which he sits on the Imagination, as a Spider on his Web, he can bridle our
ruling Faculties as a Man a Horse, and spur him in the most tender and
unguarded part, as a Man's way of Conduct is superior to that of a Horse,
another Horse cannot do so; so Satan is in a superior Order and Rank of
Creatures to us, he knows where our Helm stands, and can lay his hand upon it,
and turn us at pleasure; we may see it in Lunaticks, whom the Scripture calls
possess d, and yet Possession is a more External way, affecting more the Body:
for I believe possessed Persons may be in a State of Grace; it is more an
Affliction and Punishment than a Sin, Heb. 2.14. Satan has the Power of death,
Heb. 2.14. for any thing I know that Scripture intimates, that he has an active
Influence on the Death of every Man: We call it a Natural Death, but it is the
Devil, with as active Causality, as if the Executioner cut our Throat: And if
Man could resist him either in punishing Soul or Body, he were not a fit
Executioner of Divine Wrath: Though his influence is inferior to the Operation of
the Holy Spirit; for Ephesians. 6.12, 13. in the power of his might we can resist
him, though in that only; and though Temptation is by way of presenting Objects,
yet since he is a powerful Spirit, abides and works within us, we cannot limit
it to Objective Influence, nor deny all Physical Influence to Objects, since
Satan can even paint them upon the Imagination, and from thence throw his Bombs
into the very Soul, and prevent our attending any thing that may divert our
Thoughts. If one more strong than I set an Object before my Eye or Ear, and
keep my Eyelids open, or not suffer me to stop my Ear, I cannot prevent the
Influence of the Object, it is got within the guards; but when Satan is in our
imagination, he is much nigher and intimate.

7. The Naturalness of this Impotency may be drawn from the Object, or
necessary Way of Divine Operation in Curing this Distemper; which is by
presenting the true Image of God and Divine things to the Understanding, before
ever the Will can be affected with them: If the Free Will of Man were advanced
as high as the Pelagians would have it, that is, without receiving the least
crack or flaw from Man's Fall, it is Power is only to admit or reject, choose or
refuse what is brought within it is ken, or what Objects are proposed in the
Understanding: Now no Man can have any Knowledge of heavenly things, except a
Heavenly Being proposes the Idea of them to the Mind: No Man can learn any
thing by mere words, and those Metaphorical too, and such are the Scriptural
Expressions of heavenly things. Our Mind must be some way acquainted with the
thing it self before it can know it: A Book cannot make a Man an Astronomer
without his Globe, nor the Globe either without an immediate contemplating the
Stars: If a Traveller had learnt his Geographical Map with the greatest
Accuracy and Exactness, he finds his Idea of the Country a mere mistake, as
soon as he views it with his Eye: God has made our Souls a Mirror, wherein his
own Image may be represented as a Looking-glass; Water, or polished Brass
represents the Image of Bodies, but they can never do it except the Person
immediately approach before them: So God must draw nigh to the Soul before it
can discern him: He by his presence produces his own likeness on the Soul;
Psalm 17.15. When I shall awake, I shall be satisfied with thy likeness: David
knew this by some earnest of it; this made his Soul pant and thirst so for it
under the want of it, Psalm 42.2. My Soul thirsts for God, for the living
God, when shall I come and appear before him This Likeness, or Spiritual Image
is what the Apostle Paul so much traveled for, Galat. 4.19. Of whom I travel
in birth again, until Christ be formed in you: For it seems to be the Knowledge
of Christ, from Verse 9. After that ye have known God, or rather are known of
God. Our Knowledge says that Text is more passive than active, to wit, an
Impression of the Idea, and this Idea is Christ formed objectively within, or
his Glorious Image, 2 Cor. 3.18. not excluding, but having consequentially to
it, a likeness of the Soul to Christ in Holy Qualities: As that Text has it,
Beholding his glory we are transformed into the same Image. Without this the
Soul is as a Carcass forsaken of the Soul as to Spirituals: To be carnally
minded is death; as the dark and dolesome Air forsaken of the Sun, or as the
stinking Lanthorn, when the flame is extinct; both these last Arguments are
mentioned, John 8.43. Why do ye not understand my Speech? because ye cannot
hear my Word, ye are of your Father the Devil. 1. A Denial of the Act, Ye do
not understand my Sermons or Discourses: 2. A denial of the Power; Ye cannot.
3. The Power of Learning is denied, that is the power of Understanding: For
Hearers are Learners: Rev. 2. and 3. He that has an Ear, let him hear: they
wanted the Faculty represented by the Organ; Therefore speak I to them in
Parables, because seeing, they see not, and hearing they hear not, nor
understand. 4. A Reason of this Impotency is from the Object; My Word, Verse
38. That which I have seen with my Father, and have received Commission to
preach, v. 45. the Truth; John 3.3. things concerning his Kingdom. Romans 14.17.
Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. 5. A further Reason why the
Truths of the Gospel are an unintelligible Object to an otherwise intelligent
Creature, is, Ye are of your Father the Devil; the powers of Darkness have
begotten this Darkness and Enmity, that makes up the Constitution of thy Soul:
2 Cor. 4.4. The God of this World has blinded the minds of them that believe
not, least the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them.
Psalm. 89.15. Blessed are the people who know the joyful sound, they walk in the
light of thy Countenance, O Lord. For there is this freedom from Satan, who
like a Father propagates an hereditary Distemper of Darkness and Hatred about
heavenly things in the Soul of his Children; and this Distemper is our Natural
Temper, through it we are by Nature Children of Wrath.

3dly, As the Averseness of our Will is a Moral Impotency, and the darkness of
our understandings a Natural Impotency, so I may add an Habitual Impotency,
that in Adult Persons hardens and strengthens both; and this habit has a
threefold Spring that feeds it, or a threefold Cord that Chains and Fetters the
Soul; Education, Custom, and Company.

1. Education; the Soul of Man is a Chamber of Imagery, and as soon as it comes
into being, God, or the Devil, or our Senses by their Objects constantly fill
it: and he that takes the start, has the greatest advantage, and easiest work,
Prove. 22.6. Train up a Child in the way that he should go, and when he is old
he will not depart from it. The sooner Parents begin, the more acceptable to
God, and the Impressions stick the deeper: There is the more room for them, it
becomes a Vessel of Honor or Dishonor, according as Instructers fill it: If
we are so impotent to good, that we cannot Conquer any one of those acquired
Impediments of Custom, Company, and Education, which might properly be called
Moral Impotence, and both the other Natural; how much less when we are Chained
to Evil by all of 'em, and when they have the Power of Hell to back them, and
when they are but as Twigs, or small Grafts from that bulky Stock of our
Natural Corruption? and if so impotent to good, how little reason of Glorying
over what good we find in us, or ascribing any part of it to our selves. If you
will seem to set a value on a Rattle, a Child will prefer it to Gold: If you
will act fear at the sight of a Friend, the Child will cry. Cartesius complains
of the great Impediments in our Progress in Philosophy by Childish prejudices
from Education; they do much more injury to Religion; few Parents can instruct
their Children, and far fewer do it. How few can give any reason for their
being Dissenters, or Conformists, Protestants or Papists, Christians,
Mahometans or Pagans, but their Education, their Parents or their Masters first
taught them so: This is a very ill Foundation for Religion.

2. Custom: Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his
spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil: There is a
kind of Moral Impossibility in changing of Custom; the Doctrines of Popery in
this Nation and others were more easily reformed than Customs; it is Carnivals,
May-poles, Holy Days, Altars, Rails, Crossings and Kneelings with Sacred
Vestures, and other Rights, are all kept by the power of Custom; the Learning
of Synods, nor the Wisdom or Powers of Parliaments have not been sufficient to
conquer Custom in such trivial and indifferent things: A Custom in doing good,
impowers a Man mightily in Religion, John 7.17. If any Man will do his Will, he
shall know of the Doctrine: If he will but attempt to practice, and make
experiment, he shall soon become a thriving Christian, Psalm 119.100. I
understand more than the Ancients, because I keep thy Precepts. By the start of
practice he soon outstript his Teachers in Knowledge: Heb. 5.12, 14. they were
dull in hearing, because they did not use their Spiritual Senses; but Custom of
doing Evil grows faster than the other, because it is engrafted upon our
Inclination, and our Inclination is the Stump from the Root of our Nature. Our
Conversation is from our Lusts, and our Lusts from our Flesh. Men proud and
ambitious, can never learn the Doctrine of Humility, Self-denial, or the Cross:
Charity and Liberality are Paradoxes to the Covetous, and all revealed Religion
a Mystery to the Profane. Heaven is a Dream to the Earthly Worm, and he will
as soon forsake the one for the other, as his Life. The

3. And last, is Company; Evil Company corrupts good manners. A Man can never
maintain Converse, but with Persons suitable to his Inclination, or to whose
Humors he forms and suits his own. The Penal Laws of Cities or Nations, the
Discipline of Masters or Parents, are not of so great Influence as what is
valuable and fashionable in the Society we live in. In a School or College
where Learning is valued among the Students, it is of greater force for
Learning, than the severe stripes of the most rigid Master. So mean a thing as
a Top-knot by the alone strength of this, has stood out against the powerful
Arguments of Reason, and serious Prayers of tender Consciences, the Admonitions
of Relations and Friends, the Satyrs of Wits, the Ridicule of the Bullies, the
pointing of the Boys, all these joined together, have not been able to pull
down this Ensign from the Tower it stood on. The strength of the hold lay in
the Custom and Fashion of the place we live in: How awful might this be, if we
consider how many things of far greater Moment, and worse Influence, this is a
foundation to in each of us, since in Ephesians. 2.2. to follow the fashion of the
World, is a certain sign of a Child of Disobedience.

I come now to the Last thing in the Verse, the strength of the Argument, or
necessary Connection between Justification by Works and Glorying, what is just
ground for the one, is just ground for the other also, they have a reciprocal
Relation, Chapter 3.27, 28. if no matter of Glorying, not justifieed by Works in
this Verse; not justified by Works, because no Matter of Glorying. The Reasons
of the Connection are, 1. The Sameness and Identity of the Matter; the
difference between Praising and Justifying lies only in Circumstances; the one
is before a Populacy, the other is in a Court of Authority; the one is a
Panegyric, the other a Juridical Transaction; the one supposes an Accusation
or Suspicion, the other not; they differ as Comfort and Joy, Repentance and
Obedience, they are of the same Intrinsical Nature: Comfort and Joy are the
same motion of Blood and Spirits, the same Temper of Mind; the Acts of
Obedience and Repentance are Works of the same Law, only the one supposes the
Course of Obedience interrupted; it is a repeated or renewed Obedience after
Transgression, as Comfort renewed Joy after Sorrow. Justification is a
Vindication of Honor and Credit by Authority; after some Cloud on it, it is
renewed Praise or Glory. Among Men there is usually another difference in
degree, Men are praised for Heroic Acts, Acts of great advantage to Learning,
Religion or Country, but justified for obeying Orders, doing no Evil or Injury
to them: But this has no place with God, for we are unprofitable Servants at
best.

2. Humility is the Test of all true Doctrine, and therefore a proper Test for
this Doctrine of Justification: Whatever Doctrine tends to the debasing of a
Sinner, and humbling of a Creature, is sound Doctrine. To walk humbly with our
God, is the sum of our Religion; and Romans 10.3. their going about to establish
their own Righteousness, is called the want of Submission to God. The humble
Publican went home justified, while the proud Pharisee, standing upon his
Personal Differences, was rejected of God, Luke 18.14. The Papists, tho in
Dispute with Protestants, do seem to deny a Glorying to their Works, yet
Necessary Connection makes the contrary Conclusion appear in their own Writings
against their Will. Bell. lib. 5. Chapter 3. De Just. says, Because it is more
honorable to have somewhat of Merit than of Grace alone, therefore God, that
he might the more Honor his Children, has done this for them, that they might
prepare Eternal Life to themselves by their own Merits: and yet more proudly,
Ruard. Tap. in Art. Lev. God forbid that the Righteous should expect Life
Eternal as a poor Man does Alms, for its much more Glorious for them to possess
Heaven as Victors and Triumphers do a Palm of Glory due to their own Sweats.
But the Scripture teaches us, Psalm 115.1. to say, Not unto us, O Lord, not
unto us, but unto thy Name give Glory, for thy Mercy and for thy Truths sake:
Romans 3.19. Every mouth must be stopped before God; for we have not one word to
say in our own defense.

3. God does never deny Man his due. Humility is the true Sentiment or Value of
a Man's own self in his own Mind, (...), we are only required not to think of
our selves above what is meet, or not to think of our selves more highly than we
ought, Romans 12.3. yea, it is added positively, that we may think of our selves
soberly, according to the measure of Faith God has given us: And because
Scripture is a true Rule to our Judgment, we are bid to think not above what is
written. If therefore we had any Works to be justified by, or any Ground to
plead from as of our selves, our Glorying so far would not be a Sin. God
ascribed to Abraham Glorying before Men, because his due.

4. Glorying is a Species of Pride, but Self-justifying is a Glorying. We can
never be justified through the Exercise of what is most abominable to God, Luke
16.15. and 18.12. God resists the proud; they are Sins of the same kind, and
suppose a Diabolical Temper of Mind, 1 Timothy 3.6. and a Mind very ignorant of
it is own Condition; Job 42. he owns he had uttered what he understood not,
since more acquainted with God his Judgment is altered. Paul says, tho he were
so sinless as to know nothing by himself, he durst not adventure a Trial upon
that score, yet I am not thereby justified.

5. To be Justified by Sincerity, would afford us as much Glorying, as Adam by
Perfection; because his strength proportioned: It Is as much Glory for a Child
to do a little thing, as a Man a greater; that we have received the Grace through
a Mediator, does not abate any Glorying. Adam's was Free Gift, this our
Sureties and Brothers Purchase; nor that ours subordinate to Christ's, for it is
reckoned the sole Condition of the Covenant of Grace, that gives right to
Christ's Merits. Christ's Merits are no Conditions of that Covenant: Works,
Faith and Repentance are not Lex Negotio addita, but Negotium it self in it.

This is the sense of them who would bring in Evangelical Works, as giving a
right to Remission of Sin, or Glory. It Is true, the Angels are justified by
their Works, yet Rev. 5. they ascribe all Glory to God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ: But that is the Glory of those Works they could not perform, the Work
of Redemption and saving of sinful Man; but we do not find them denying
themselves to the Glory of not Confederating with the false fallen Ones, though
they derived the Grace by which they stood from God. If our Sincerity were the
proper Condition or Matter of our Justification, Man might Glory of God's
yielding to him, and coming to lower Terms. All own the Works of the Innocent
deserves praise; but if a Nocent and Guilty Person should bring forth Works
worthy of a Justificacion, he should deserve more praise than the Innocent,
because Works of an higher value necessary to it, nay more praise than the
Works of our Lord Jesus Christ; far easier to be Mediator for another than
themselves; easier for an Innocent to Merit than a guilty Person to Merit.
Sinlesness was a necessary Qualification in the Mediator; but if one sinful
could Merit, the more Worth must be in the Work: Therefore suppose it be
granted a Working, Meriting, Glorying under Christ, it may be equal to Adam's,
for if he had stood as Angels, it must have been by freely given Grace; but
this cannot be allowed, because a more low Humility is required of us than
Adam, by Repentance, Sorrow, Grief, etc. Therefore I add

6. There is no Kind of Works but affords some Matter of Glory in them: Romans
3.27. Where is boasting then? it is excuded. By what Law? of Works? Nay, but by
the Law of Faith: So wherever there is place for Works, as the Condition of
our Justification, there is place for some boasting; but the Scripture every
where stops Man's mouth, Romans 3.19. That every mouth may be stopped, and all
the World may become guilty before God: And it ascribes all the Glory to him,
Psalm. 115.1. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give Glory,
for thy Mercy and for thy Truths sake; Ephesians. 1.6. To the praise of the Glory of
his Grace.

7. All kind of Works affords some Plea, and pleading is a Glorying, for it is
a standing upon our own defense; and this is another way of addressing God than
either the Example of the Saints, or the Rules of Holy Writ teach us; Petition
and Confession, Deprecation and Lamentation, with Praise and Thanksgiving on
the Receipt of Mercies, are the only ways we are taught to approach God. The
lowest kind of pleading is one of these four: First, By way of Comparison, as
when a Man can say, I must have either done that or worse; either to have
neglected a Parent or a Wife, either to have fled, or suffered the Army to be
cut off, there was no room for this Excuse in Adam's Sin. Secondly, Relation,
when we throw the fault upon them that accuse us; this did but aggravate Adam's
Crime, and add to the Sin, when he said, The Woman whom thou gave me.
Thirdly, When we remove the Evil of the Fact upon some other Person, as Eve did
the eating of the Apple upon the Serpent, and Adam upon Eve. Lastly, A
Purgation, when we acknowledge the Fact, but diminish it through some necessary
Circumstances, or Ignorance. We do not find any of these ways usual, or
acceptable at the Throne of Grace, but rather an aggravating of our own Guilt,
like Poreus when he was Converted from the Pelagian Error, to the Catholic
Truth. What I shall first condemn in my self I know not, wherein to excuse my
self I know not. Petition or Deprecation, says the Learned Vossius out of
Cicero, is no pleading, except for a Person whose former Actions have highly
merited -- and therefore it becomes not a Court of Justice, as Cicero for
Ligarius before Caesar, O Caesar, I have brought many Pleas, and that before
thee when in Court, where thy Honor and Authority was concerned, but never as
now when privately and before a Parent, then I pleaded, the Crime is a Fiction,
the Witnesses are false, he never did it, he never thought it: But now, O
Father, he has erred, he has fallen, he will never do the like: But a
Justifying Defense must be made before Authority Juridical.

I shall conclude this with Answering some Objections briefly, that are brought
as Arguments to prove, that since no Works are excluded, but what affords
occasion of Glorying, then some Works may have room for an Interest in our
Justification. For instance, 1. God may freely first give Grace to work, give
Faith and Repentance, and then justify us for the Exercise of them, whereof we
cannot Glory, because the Grace is received, and they are the Fruits of Grace.
2. God gives a Gracious Law, a New Law, the Law of Faith, Romans 3.27. that
excludes Glorying, and therefore we may be justified by the Works thereof. 3.
These Works come not in as the Meriting Cause of Justification, but as the
Condition of it. Resp. In general this Contrivance of the Method of
Justification is such a Fruit of Divine Wisdom, that it is the special Glory
thereof, and therefore there is no wonder that the feeble Beam of our Light,
cannot show us the depth of it, or pierce into all the Harmonies and Connexions
of it is parts, or their mutual Relations and Influence, and consequently no
wonder Divines do not agree about such things, and the Disagreement ought to be
born with Meekness, Patience, and mutual Endeavor to instruct one another. I
profess my self a Seeker and a Learner in many of these mysterious Points, and
I am never satisfied with a Sermon, except I receive some Edification to my
Understanding by it: And if Divisions and bitter Language, unbecoming
Christians, Scholars or Men, were not the sad Fruits of these Disputants, not
the Disputes, they ought to be encouraged; I bless God for the Sparks I have
already received from them, and I hope to receive more; and that my Heart is as
much united in Love to both Parties as ever, and I am as much at a Loss as the
poor Children when asked whether they Love Father or Mother best: But in
particular I shall begin with the first Objection.

Resp. 1. It is inconsistent with what I have before proved, viz. that the Gift
of absolute and distinguishing Grace, the Spirit, a New Heart, etc. that beside
its absolute and sanctifying Virtue, it is of a Relative Nature, both to
signify and entitle, as the Ring in Marriage, or other Earnests and entitling
Symbols. Phil. Melanct. in his Annotat. on this Epistle, [in Comparison of
which, ( Luther says) that Jerome and Origens Commentaries are but Merae nugae
and Ineptiae] says, Deus solus Justificat transfundens in nos Spiritum suum, p.
17. We must either reckon him a Papist, who was the first Protestant, (this
Book I have is Printed 1522.) or else say that Gift was the Sentence, or its
declarative Sign. Mr. Baxter says, When a Person is Converted, the Angels
rejoice, and therefore have some Notification of it; and they who know our
Conversion, cannot be ignorant of our Justification, which they cannot know
without some Divine Manifestation: A second part of the expressed or declared
Sentence of our Justification (he says) is the illustration of our Minds with
the Holy Spirit, although often obscure. I think there is great Reason to unite
these two in one, thus: The Angels who are so well acquainted with our Minds,
and the Language of Divine Operations, know our Justification from the ruling
of the Spirit in us, after such a special manner: Ephesians. 1.17. Who is the earnest
of our Inheritance, and so the Earnest of total and Complete Pardon. Now if
Absolute Grace bear the Nature of a Title or Sentence, the Exercise cannot be
the Cause, though it may be the Condition, that is orderly Connection: for though it
procure it is own Confent, it is not received, except complied with, and yielded
to. Our Confession of Faith says, We are not justifyjd, until the Holy Spirit
apply Christ to us, and confirms it from Tit. 3.6, 7. which Text seems to show
a greater Connection between them than that of Time; By the renewing of the Holy
Ghost, that being justified, etc.

Resp. 2. All Glorying of boasting is not excluded: by this half-workers should
receive half-wages, and half Credit. Now when Grace is exercised, the Work is
ours, Believing, Repenting, etc. Though this is not Pelagian, it is Popish.
Suppose a Man have a broken Arm or Leg, and do some great or Heroic Act, after
it is Cured, he will not ascribe the Glory of the Action to the Physician, or
the Medicine, though he own them Author and Cause of the Cure. Mr. Sclater is
large on this Subject against Bellarm.

Resp. 3. Such a Special Gift as the Spirit is, the Grace of Faith and
Repentance is, supposes the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness; though such
Gifts as Men in Common receive, viz. A Reprieve from Hell, and outward
Benefits, may not, yet such as Spiritual Life cannot be given without it. A
Prisoner for Treason may have Conveniences allowed him, and some Favors, but
Places of Trust cannot be bestowed on him; there is a necessary Connection among
all Spiritual Blessings, in due order to be possessed, whereof Faith is the
first, and therefore the Argument is good from the first to the last, if Faith,
Justification, Adoption, Eternal Life; It is of Faith, that it might be of
Grace. Thus Poieret argues, It is not Consistent with our Sovereign Lord and
Governor to forgive Impenitent Persons, for that were to let them have all the
Glory; for by yielding, he should lose his own Authority; and it is as
inconsistent to give the best of his Blessings to them, to deal equally with
Friends and Foes, Rebels and Obedient Subjects; but to give his Spirit, is to
give the richest Fruit of his Love: How shall then Man be saved? He Answers, By
providing a Mediator, and granting to them an Interest in his Satisfaction,
therefore this Interest is first in order to be enjoyed: Faith and Repentance
are Fruits of his Death, and inseparably united with the others: The first
Fountain is Mercy and Favor on the Mediators Account, Pardon of our Sin
follows Imputation of his Righteousness; immediately therefore as soon as such
Gifts are, Pardon is.

Resp. 4. That Exercise of Faith needs a Pardon, being imperfect, and must
first be accepted, before it can render us acceptable; It is common Doctrine,
That the Person must be justified before the Actions, The Tree must be good,
then the Fruits: A Cause must be before the Effect; so these two things
prevents this Order, the Posteriority and Pollutedness of our Actions: Though
Grace is pure as from the Spirit, sinful Infirmity accompanies every Action of
ours; and so there must be an Interest in Christ antecedently for the Pardon of
these Actions.

Resp. 5. This would make the Covenant of Grace a Covenant of Works; for our
Ability to obey was from God then, as is mentioned Argument 5. before.

Obj. 2. That we may be justilled by Obedience to the Law of Faith without
boasting, Romans 3.27.

Resp. (1.) It is the Common sense of Interpreters, that the word Law here, is
put in figuratively, for Faith, or the Doctrine of Faith, because it comes in
the room of the Law, as Christ's Satisfaction is called a Righteousness,
because it comes in place of ours: for suffering is a bearing of the Threatening
of the Law, and not properly Righteousness. (2.) Beside, the Name of a Law
being honorable in the Jews esteem, and frequently in their Mouths, as the
Foundation of all their distinguishing Privileges, the Apostle in imitation of
them calls Faith a Law. (3.) From the Likeness of Faith to a Law, it being a
powerful productive principle of Good Works: On the same account we read of the
Law of the Mind, the Law of the Spirit of Life, may be Faith is meant by both;
so we read of the Law of our Members, which is Flesh, or our fleshly
Disposition: Th^s Chrysostom. and Theophil. Ambros. and Austin among the Fathers,
Expound it. Among Modern Divines, Philip. Melanct. Calvin, Pet. Mart. Gr. Gom.
Pisc. Beza, Willet, Zaegerus, Pareus, who say Glorying is excluded by the Law
of Faith, because that is to be justified by another Righteousness, to wit,
Christ's, which Faith apprehends. Wilson adds, Faith is the hand by which we
receive Christ's Righteousness; it is the Gift received enriches, not the
stretching out of the hand; the poor Leper may remain poor all his days, though
he stretch out his hand as long as he is able, he may starve for want if
nothing be given him: The Gift and the Giver is to be Gloried in, and not the
extended Palm. Sclater thus: The Law of Faith is the Gospel Law, and Christ's
Righteousness is the Gospel Righteousness, his fulfilling of the Law for us is
our Gospel Righteousness: So much for Authority. But to come more particularly
to the Text, it being the Foundation of one of our Late Controversies, I am
willing to show my self not unconcerned in Sions Afflictions, and throw all the
Water upon that Fire I can, to extinguish the Heat, not the Light, that may be
received from it. The Text is thus:

The APPENDIX.
ROMANS III. 27. Where is Boasting then? it is excluded? by what Law? of Works?
nay, but by the Law of Faith.
ALL the valuable Translations agree with ours, and all to the Original, except
the Vulgar Latin, which adds Thy, Where is Thy boasting then? And the
Ethiopick, who read it thus: Wherein shall ye Glory? in what law shall ye work?
there is not another law, but by Faith? But these are of no value to oppose
others. The Syriack for excluded, has Aethbatela, useless, in vain, to no
purpose; the word is but once in the Old Testament, (...) Eccl. 12.3. The
grinders cease; but often in the New, Ver. 31. Is the Law made void? It Is the
same word there, it is an Emphatical Explication, because Works afford a Ground
for Glorying; therefore if a Man be justified by the Law, he would have Matter
of boasting in it. The Papists add thy, because they think Glorying is only
excluded from Works entirely our own, the Fruit of our Free Will. The sense of
the Aethiopick seems to be, that the Works of no Law will bring us to Glory,
but through Faith, without Faith the Work of no Law is acceptable. The Substance
of the Text lies in this Syllogism. Major. Sinful Man must be Justified in such
a way as must exclude all Matter of Glorying. The Minor is expressed by way of
a Rhetorical Dialogism, by which, as Calvin says, the Apostle insults over his
Adversaries; having demonstrated the Truth, he thunders against Pride, the
Foundation of their Error: Where is boasting then? The Law of Faith, not of
Works does exclude boasting. The Conclusion is in the 28th. Verse, That
therefore a Man is justified by Faith, without the Deeds of the Law; the very
same Argument that is in the Text I have been treating of: And because of the
Affinity, or rather Identity with the former, I shall the more amply discourse
of it: and to begin with the Major Proposition. I may call it the Fifth
Principle of the Apostles accurately connexed Discourse; the first is, That
Salvation, Forgiveness of Sin, Justification, is a possible thing, it is vain
to preach what is not attainable: Despair plucks up the very Roots of
Diligence, Hope is the very Spring to Virtue. The second is, that there is no
Justification without a Righteousness; God cannot be just, and justify the
unjust too, that is an Abomination, next to the Condemning of Innocent.
Thirdly, No Man has any inherent Righteousness of his own, whether Jew or
Gentile. Fourthly, That all Righteousness is by a Law; on this Subject he shows
there is a Tripple Law: The Natural Law, and it is Righteousness, from Chap.
1.17. to Chap. 2.17. he excludes both the Law and it is Righteousness from any
Ability of this kind. (2.) The Mosaical and Moral Law, from that Verse 17. to
the 21st. of the third Chapter; he also excludes that Law and it is
Righteousness from being able to justify Sinners: From Verse 21. he begins
positively to assert and explain a third Righteousness, which he calls the
Righteousness of God, or Righteousness of Faith; and a third Law, a Law of
Faith: All which is Evangelical, for in the beginning of the Epistle he had
described the Gospel and his own separation to the Office of preaching it, and
laid down this Doctrine, Chap. 1.16, 17. That it was the Power of God unto
Salvation to every Believer; and the Reason it is so, is, because therein is
the Righteousness of God revealed: This Righteousness, after having excluded
the Law, with it is Works, he most accurately explains, from Verse 21. to the
Text, where he begins a Discourse which is a Conclusion from the former, and a
Proposition to the latter part of the Context, built upon this fifth Axiom,
That there is a Necessity of the Justification of Sinners being in such a
Method that may utterly stop their Mouth from either Glorying or Boasting: God
has his Glory for his ultimate End in all his Actions, but there is a
particular Reason, that the Glory be entirely his in this great Action; for a
Sinner is Gods Enemy, there is a Controversy between them; if the Peace or
Reconciliation should be so made up, as Man should have any thing to brag of,
God were so far the Yielder, and conquered party, Man were the Victor and
Triumpher in this Affair; whatever Glory we ascribe to Man, we derogate so much
from God. This may be clearly illustrated, by the Transactions of Peace between
Armies, Nations, Besiegers and Besieged; they contend as much for having the
Glory of the Peace on their side, as for having the Victory of the War on their
side: And we find the Scripture punctual in ascribing the Glory to God in all
the particular parts and points of this great Contrivance. (1.) Election, Ephesians.
1.4. (2.) Permission, the very letting of Man fall in Sin. Strangius says, Sin
is none of Gods Mediums, but the Permission of Sin is, Romans 11.22. Gal. 3.22.
(3.) The Calling of Man, Tit. 3.5. (4.) The sending of the Son into the World.
(5.) The ordaining of such weak Ordinances for means of Conversion and
Edification. (6.) The Calling of Men, when they stand at greatest disadvantage
for Conversion; and so all the other parts of this whole Project; and likewise
we find the Scripture in nothing more punctual than in describing Man's Guilt
and Impotency, his Wickedness and his weakness, and every thing that may
contribute to humble and vilify him in the sight of God. And Satan is in
nothing more diligent than to propagate this Lust of Pride: it was his own
first Sin, and the Foundation of his Kingdom, and he maintains it as the
principal Pillar thereof. Carnal Pride is a very strong Hold in his Kingdom; it
is a very difficult thing to be denied to Credit, Honor, and Reputation among
Men: But Spiritual Pride is a more subtle Sin, and not easily discernable, far
less conquerable: And if Satan can maintain this one hold, we are never like to
be sound about this Doctrine of Justification; whatever may be our Speculative
Opinions in Profession, if we retain a Practical Sentiment of a
Self-distinguishing Work, we run a very great Danger as to our Souls: Therefore
as ever we would obtain this incomparable Privilege, we would endeavor to
walk humbly with God, and to get Self-abasing Sentiments of our Selves.

I come now to the Minor Proposition, or second Doctrine, which the Text
expresses by way of Dialogism: What is not, and what is the way of
Justification that excludes Glorying. I shall begin with the Negative part.
viz. That Glorying is not excluded by the Law of Works: The Sense of it is,
That if a Person can be justified by Works, he does not want Matter of
Glorying; for God does not require Humility of a Man beyond his due; if his own
Works can answer for him before the Tribunal of God, he has in Justice, viz.
Distributive, merited his Life, and where there is Matter of Merit, there is
Matter of Glory. There are a great many attempts to diminish this Proposition,
viz. If a Man be justified by Works, he has Matter to Glory by the Law of
Works: (1.) Some say it is only the Ceremonial Law, and it is Works. (2.) Others
say it is only the Judicial Law, and External part of the Moral, which made up
the Jews Civil Law. (3.) Others say, only the Moral Law is excluded so far as
obeyed without Grace. (4.) Others say, it is the Mosaical Law in the Pharisaical
sense thereof. (5.) Others say, It Is the Law as requiring Perfection. (6.)
Others as Meriting. But (7.) It has been the most Universal Sentiment among
Protestants, that all Law is excluded, and all Inherent Works in sinful Men as
Righteousness, or being conformed to that Law. It is more easy to fix upon
this Question, Whether or not the Evangelical Law and it is Works be excluded,
yea, or not? For though all these six Ways differ in what Law is excluded, yet
they generally agree, that the Evangelical Law, with it is Evangelical
Obedience, are not here excluded, but put in opposition to the former, and
comprehended under this Notion of the Law of Faith.

The first thing Needful, is, to enquire into the Nature of this Evangelical
Law, which is the Influence of the Gospel upon the Law: The Moral Law and the
Gospel are the two Ingredients whereof our Christian Religion is Constituted,
and being thus Compounded, have an Influence one upon another; and the Law by
reason of the New Modes and Relations it receives from this blessed Yoak-fellow
in the Covenant of Grace, is called a New Law and a New Commandment, and an
easy Yoke and light Burden. The New Constitution of the Law that we are under,
is one of the blessed Fruits of Christ's Death, and this makes the Preaching of
the Law Gospel to us; for the Gospel strictly taken, Romans 1. to the 17. v. and
Romans 3. from the 21. to the 26. v. is a Narrative of Christ, his Nature,
Person, Offices, States, with the blessed Fruits thereof to us, and the Manner
of Application to us by the Power of the Holy Sprit. But in particular, the
Moral Law is by the Gospel a New Law, that is, a Renewed Law after Man's Fall;
Jure, the Law was quite Obliterated, but he who is the Light that enlightens
every one that comes into the World, has re-wrote some Fundamental Parts of
this Law in their Consciences, John 1.1. Romans 2.14. But it has received a newer
and later Edition under Moses, and yet a Newer under the Gospel by Christ and
his Apostles; and a Newer still, when the Spirit writes a Clear and Regular
Copy thereof from the Law, upon the Hearts of Men, which is called The
engrafted Word, 1 John 2.7, 8. You may find the same Law called New and Old,
and it is usual in Scripture to call that that is renewed, New.

2. The Gospel brings the Law under a New Authority: The Reverend Mr. Baxter
says well, That ever since the Fall, the very Law of Nature has been in the
hand of Christ: Psalm. 75.3. The Earth and all the Inhabitants thereof are
dissolved, I bear up the Pillars of it, Selah. All things had turned into a
mere Chaos, if he had not stepped in to preserve an Order upon a New Bottom, and
there is no Order without a Law or Rule: Ver. 31. of the Context it is said,
Faith, that is the Gospel, does Establish the Law. Christ could not be King or
Governor of the World without a Law, and his Law must reach as far as his
Government is extended: He could not Judge the World but by a Law, Psalm. 93.
and 97. The Earth's Commanded to Rejoice, and the multitude of Isles to be
Glad, because such a Lord Reigns; and from the 7th. of the Acts 31, to 39. we
may see 'twas Christ that Delivered the Law upon Mount Sinai, for he is said to
be the God of Abraham, and yet to be an Angel; and more fully and particularly,
Mat. 5.17. he Delivers the same Law; Mat. 28. Gospel Ordinances are solely
founded upon his Authority; 1 Cor. 5. Church Censures to be administered in his
Name.

3. The Gospel gives to the Law a New-Spring, or Principles of Obedience. Adam
received Ability from God to obey, but the Ability was due, and it is now
forfeited and lost: We are created in Christ Jesus unto good Works. The End of
the Commandment is Charity, out of a Pure Heart, and of a good Conscience, and
Faith unfeigned. Romans 8.3. The Law of the Spirit of Life. It is this Living
Sprit that enables us to fulfill the Law: I might add to this the Newness of
Security, it being by Promise, Jer. 32.40. I will put my Fear into their
Hearts, that they shall not depart from me: And the Newness of the Order, the
Promises stand here first, and then the Precepts; God puts his Law in our
Hearts, before we Obey.

4. The Gospel gives to the Law New Ends: This is a Common End with the former,
that it directs our Duty, and acquaints us with the Nature of God; but it does
not now stand as that which we are to be justified or Condemned by: There is a
Righteousness of Faith that now comes in Room of that Righteousness of the Law,
so as it has lost that Old End, it has gained some New Ones. (1.) To teach us
the knowledge of Sin. (2.) What Christ has done for us: And (3.) What Need we
have of him: (4.) What we have Received from him: And (5.) Fits and Prepares us
to be Fellow-Companions of his; and though it is Obedience does not give Right
to Heaven, it serves for a certain Mark of the Right to Heaven, Rev. 22.14.
Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have Right to the Tree
of Life. The Text says not that doing gives a Right, but that all have a Right
who do.

5. The Law receives from the Gospel New Motives; Ends and Motives differ as
Future and Past: Creation, Provision and Providence, were the Motives of our
First Duty; but now Christ's Redeeming us, and the Spirits Callng us, are Great
Motives to obey the Law. We see Dilivery from the Bondage of Egypt was a Motive
to the Isralites.

6. There is a New Manner of Acceptance. Acceptance was formerly Bottomed upon
the Exact Conformity of our Rightousness to the Law, but Now Faith is the
Reason of Acceptance: Without Faith it is impossible to please God: What soever
is not of Faith is Sin: All is to be done and accepted in the Name of Christ:
Works before were Accepted for their being a Fulfilling of a Law; now they are
for Christ's Fulfilling the Law for us; the Imperfection or Sinfulness of the
Action is Pardoned on his Account.

7. The Gospel Renders a New Measure of Law Obedience Acceptable: not that the
Law is Altered in its Perfection; for Perfection in Faith is still required,
and Perfection in Patience. Let Patience have its Perfect Work: but the Work is
made up between the Spirit and the Son: the Defects in Measure, Manner, or
Circumstances, are Forgiven, if it be the Sprits Work. I may add here,
Repentance, because Perpetuity was one of the Measures of former Obedience, and
Repentance Comprehends the whole Duty of the Law; but it only Implies an
Interruption, that our Obedience has been for a considerable Time stopped; it is
to be wise after Folly, and to be Obedient after Rebellion. The Chief
Circumstance it differs in from former Obedience, is a leavihg off to do Ill;
so Repentance must be Obendience to the same Law was Broken.

8. The Gospel adds many New Objects to the Duties of the Law: By the Law we
were to have no Gods for our God but one; Now we are also to have No Mediator
but one. There is but one God, and one Mediator between God and Men; so that
Commandment, Thou shall have no other Gods before me, says also, Thou shall
have no other Mediator: The Apostle Paul says, There are many called Gods, and
called Lords; but to us there is but One God, and One Lord. We are to love our
Brethren by the Law of Nature, but Now we are to sympathize with them, from
that Change that is made in Nature by Sin; Bear ye one another burdens, and so
fulfill the Law of Christ. The Angels have now new Objects of their Duty since
the Fall, for they serve the Mediator, they protect and defend his Church: We
were to trust in a Righteousness of our Own for Life by the first Law, but the
Righteousness of another is a New Object the Gospel brings in.

9. There are many positive Precepts added to the Law by the Gospel: The Law of
Nature is so large, as to comprehend all Duty under this Axiom, That we are to
do whatsoever God enjoins, or reveals; but beside, it has subdivided Axioms in
particular, to which all Kind of Duties are specifically reducible: The Fourth
Command does now as well require the Observation of the First day of the Week,
as it did formerly of the Seventh; for the Injunction and the Blessing are both
annexed to the Sabbath, not the seventh; and the Jews themselves reduce all the
Sacred Time to it. The Second Command does Now comprehend all positive
Ordinances under the Gospel, Baptism, Lords Supper, Ministry, Church Order, and
all other external Worship; they are as justly reducible to that Command as
Circumcision, Sacrifices and Legal Washings were. Mr. Baxter says acutely, That
the Law of Nature is what a reasonable Nature observes to be due from that
Relation that is between Men and God, or Men and Men; Mutata Natura, mutatur
Lex Naturae. To Love our Enemies, to be Charitable to the Poor, to Repent of
our Offenses, had been Paradoxical Duties to a sinless Man; but now they are
plain Duties of the Law of Nature.

10. From these very Circumstances, the Gospel brings a greater clearness and
particularness to the Duties of the Law, than the Law it self since the Fall.
The Blessed Trinity, that great Mystery, which is the adequate Object of our
Worship, is more manifested by the Gospel, than ever the Law could have done;
the Example of Christ fulfilling all the Law before the Eyes of Men, has not
only cast an Honor, but a luster upon it, as it never had before; the formal
Reasons of Duties were never so discovered as they are by the Gospel, besides
those Comments that in the Gospel he and his Apostles have made of it.

11. The Gospel has yet a greater Influence upon the Law, in removing of it is
rigorous way of exacting Obedience of Fallen Man, it has a Coercive Irritating
and Condemning Power upon them. First, A Coercive, because by the Terror of its
Threatenings it Commands what Man abhorrs, and when the poor Sinner obeys, he
does it as a Brute, for fear of blows, 1 Timothy 1.9. The Law is not made for a
righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, etc. The Quietists say,
that properly the Name of a Law arises from the Contention and War between
Man's Inclinations and Duties; but when the Law is Writ in our Minds, and
becomes our Delight, it is a Gospel, not a Law: however, when the Gospel brings
in Light and Strength, it becomes a very easy Yoke. The Law of the Spirit
increases it is strength, and the Law of the Members decay and dye: We obey by a
kind of persuasion, God's Efficacy is so gentle upon the Soul, Galat. 5.8. This
persuasion comes not of him that calls you. Secondly, It has an irritative,
or Pollutive Power: It Is an Old Proverb, Nitimur in vetitum: Our desire
increases by being forbid; Sins taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in
me all manner of Concupiscence; for without the Law sin was dead. Some think
that Swearing, Profaning the Name of God, and Adultery, arises chiefly from
this Natural Contradiction in us to the Nature of God; if Persons thought them
no Sins, they would never so much delight in them. Thirdly, It has a Condemning
Power, 2 Cor. 3.9. it is called a killing Letter. The Gospel is a City of
Refuge; There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who has
satisfied the Law for all interested in him: This is a Newness, altering the
Law from what it was to Man sinful, not sinless.

12. The Law, which of it self is the Spring of Terrors, for the strength of
Sin is the Law, becomes a Handmaid to Consolation in and through the Gospel;
partly by its discovering to us, that Christ has fulfilled the Law for us; this
is the Marrow of the Gospel, and by it the Law of Works is turned into a Law of
Faith: Partly as it is an instrument to interest us into the Gospel; partly as
the Law fulfilled or satisfied by Christ, is seen by Faith. By the Law we have
the Knowledge of Sin, James 1.24. That Is a Glass to see our selves in, 2 Cor.
3.18. The Gospel is a Glass to see Christ in; the more vile and horrible the
Looks of the one appears, the more aimiable appears the other. The Law is a
Judge, Romans 7.9. to kill the Man by Sentence, and to revive Sin. Man by Nature
and Satan's deceitfulness is very secure, and a great Self-flatterer; but if
the Spirit of the Gospel enliven the Law, it makes a Man conclude all the
Threatenings on himself, and bring him under a Spirit of Bondage: He cries, I am
accursed, I possess the Sins of my Youth; my Sin is ever before me, I am
undone. So the Gospel Spirit takes the killing Letter of the Law, and rouses
him out of his Lethargy, it makes a Man weary and heavy laden; it makes People
a People prepared for the Lord, for then he begins to see what he thought
Righteousness, Guilt, and what he thought Gain, Loss.

13. The Gospel Spirit makes a Bridle of the Law to restrain Sin. The Wicked
cry, Let us cast off these Cords from our Neck; but when the Spirit comes, a
little Child may lead them. By this Law restraining Grace Works; Men are
persuaded to forbear Evil by the Lords Terrors; what would become of either the
Gospel or the Church, if it were not for this Use of the Law? Farther, the Law
is a Rule for directing Evangelized persons how to live, and it is a Pattern
from which the Spirit transcribes a Copy into the Heart of Man: It is a Mean of
Conversion; The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul. The Gospel is
much honored when the Saints walk orderly, according to this Rule.

The Second Enquiry is, about their Opinion whom the Apostle here opposes, viz.
What a Christianiz'd Pharisee is? For Act. 15.5. such they were. I do not say
they were the only, but the principal party he opposes; how far their Faith and
Profession reached, and wherein that Error did consist, is next to be
considered. We find they were of two Kinds: Some that did oppose the Mosaical
Law to the Gospel, as the Unbelieving Pharisees: Or the Natural Law, as the
Pagan Philosophers. The one did overvalue Ceremony, the other Morality. We find
the Apostle often disputing against both; against the former, Romans 9.3. Philip.
3.1. Gal. 3.5. against the latter, 1 Cor. 1.23. Coloss. 2. Acts 17.19. The
former Party did compose the Law with the Gospel: Acts 15.5. Certain of the
Pharisees who believed said, it was needful to Circumcise 'em: Gal. 2.21. If
righteousness be by the Law, Christ dyed in vain; this Argument would have been
of little strength against the Pharisees who crucified him, and thought he died
a Malefactor, but of great Influence against them who mixed Moses and Christ,
Law and Gospel, and expected Salvation from their mutual Concurse. The latter
denied the reality of Jesus his Satisfaction and Righteousness, but these did
deny the Fullness of it; they would eak, or add to it; and except it were the
Church of Thessalonica, we find by Paul's Epistles, that there was not any
Church, but what was molested and partly corrupted by this Error: In the
Epistles to Corinth, the Apostle calls them false Apostles, deceitful Workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.13. In the
Epistle to the Galat. he calls it another Gospel, by which they were Bewitched.
We find the Church of Ephesus is Forewarned of such, Acts 20.30. And in the
Book of the Revelation they are Charged of Falling from their First Love; yet
it is Doubtful whether that came by this Error, or not; For Christ Appoves of
her Orthodoxy, saying, She had tried them which said they were Apostles, and
found them liars; she was molested with them, not corrupted. From the Third of
Philippians, we find that Church was corrupted by 'em; for he calls such
Teachers Dogs, evil Workers, the Concision; and from his own Experience tells
'em he was once such an one that trusted in the Flesh, but now solely in Christ
and his Righteousness. It is against both these Parties that the Apostle here
disputes, but principally against these latter sort, as we may see by the state
of the Question, Ver. 28. Justified by Faith without the deeds of the Law. His
Disputes with the former were of another Kind, viz. To convince the Gentiles
that Christ was the and the only Mediator, against the Jews; that Jesus was the
Promised Messiah: But here the Question is, If we be justified by Faith mixed
with the Deeds of the Law, or without it? And therefore we may conclude, That
whatever Truth the unconverted Pharisees held, these Converts much more held;
and that they did not plead these Works of the Law intentionally to exclude
Christ or his Righteousness, whom they had embraced.

Partly from the Scripture, and partly from their own Writings, I find this
Account of their Doctrine of the Law. (1.) They were very zealous and laborious
in all External Worship; they kept the Sabbath to a height of Superstition; and
their Prayers were very long, Matt. 23.14. (2.) In Justice between Man and Man,
they were so exact, as to tithe Mint, Annise and Cummin. (3.) And tho Christ in
every thing blames them for Hypocrisy, yet he owns their Charity, and Alms;
but their Hypocrisy was more in Practice than Profession: For (4.) In Mat.
22.37. they owned Love to God and their Neighbor, with all their Heart, Soul
and Mind, to be the first and great Commandment: Which includes a (5th) That
Sincerity was in great value with them, as Sephar Ikkarim, (...), God has
greatest respect to the Intention of the Heart; as David says, Create in me a
clean Heart: So the Lawyer, Luke 10.28. Sir, thou have answered right; and St.
Paul, Act. 23.1. -- lived in all good Conscience. (6.) Their own Writings speak
much of the Excellency and Virtue of Faith; the Author of Nitzakon says, He
that believes not as he ought, his Circumcision makes him not a Jew; but he
that believes as he ought, he is a Jew. And in Michlaz Jophi, Abram said to be
the Father of all Men that followed him in his Faith: The Talmud says, When
Abram was Father of the Syrians only, he was called Abram, but when he shall be
the Father of all the World, he is called Abraham. The former Nitzakon says,
Faith consists not in Circumcision, but in the Heart. And the Author of Sepher
Ikkarim says, Faith is the Cause of Blessedness, and therefore of Life Eternal:
And again in the same, 1 Lib. and 21 Chap. Abraham is praised for his Faith, as
the Scripture says, Abraham believed God, and 'twas imputed to him for
Righteousness. And Mat. 23. they were accused by Christ for neglecting
Judgment, Mercy and Faith: It was their practical Omission was reprehended, not
their Ignorance; for these are called the weightier Matters of the Law. Since
they who did not own Christ, speak so much of the Commendation of Faith in Gods
Mercy, for that was the Object of their Faith, as we may see from Sepher
Ikkarim, on those words in Daniel 9.18. Not for our Righteousness, but thy
great Mercy: The Mercies of the Blessed God are upon all his Creatures from
pure Grace, not Merit; for which the Author further cites Job thus: Wh^ has
given to me, that it may be repayed? Much more must we conceive them to say of
Faith, and Faith in Christ, who own Christ for their only propitiatory
Sacrifice and Savior; and such were they against whom Paul disputes: And tho
the others believed not Jesus to be the Messiah, yet they believed the Messiah
to be the Redeemer from Death and Hell by the Merit of his Sufferings, as may
be seen at large in Raymundus Pugio Fidei, Jos. Voisin. Theologia Judaica,
Porchet, Galatinus, Pseiferus, and their own Midrashes, on the Prophetical
Texts of the Messiah. (7.) They highly praise the Conf^ssion of Sin; their
Writers on Isaiah 45.22. Unto Me every Knee shall bow, and every Tongue
confess, say, That a four-^old Confession is to be made to God: A Confession
with the Mouth, a Con^ession in Works, a Confession with the Heart, and with
all together; and they call the 100 Psalm, Mizmor Letodah, a Psalm of
Confession. Bereshet Ketannah says, They who overcome their Lusts, and confess
their Deeds, are worthy of the Future Age; but he that confesses not, is Cursed
as Cain, who denied and hid his Sin; but Achan, Josh. 7.29. tho he was troubled
in this World, he was not in the other, because he confessed his Sin: From
which they gathered a Necessity of particular Confession. And in the Conclusion
of Reschet Chocme, All that dye let them Confess; if they cannot, let them say,
Let my Death be an Expiation of my Crimes. They own, we may see, not only a
Confession, but joined with Forsaking, a Mortification of (...), Original Lust,
that begins as they say in our first Formation. (8.) Repentance is a Duty of
great Esteem: Midrash Shirh^shirim: 5. 2. Open to me, my Sister, my Love, says
thus: Open to me one Crevice of Repentance, and I will open the wide Gates of
Glory to thee: Psalm. 46.10. Be still and know that I am God; that is, Cease to
do evil, and let thy Repentance be but as the Twinkling of an Eye, and thou
shall know me; if Israel could but repent one day, they would be immediately
redeemed, and the Son of David would come. On Zach. 9.1. The Burden of the Word
of the Lord in the Land of Hadrach. It Is asked what is Hadrach? And answered, It
is the Messiah, who is to bring all the World to the Face of God by Repentance;
for (...) signifies who, and (...) the Way, or to lead; he leads by the Way of
Repentance. Others thus: (...) signifies sharp, and (...) tender; for the Lord
is bitter to the Impenitent, but tender and Merciful to the Penitent. The
Talmud on Psalm. 25.8. Therefore will he teach sinners in the way; that is, the
way of Repentance; for poena peccatoris est poenitentia; about which there is a
hard Expression of theirs on the 14th of Hosea: That they say, In two things
the Mercy of God exceeds man: One is, He will be pleased with Words, so not
Man: Another is, when All have offended, he is reconciled with the Repentance
of One. So that all Christ's Sufferings by them are called Repentance: Lam.
3.43. v. The Midrash Tillim says, The Gates of Prayer are sometimes shut, but
the Gates of Repentance never: Repentance is like the Sea, that any at any time
may go in to wash; Prayers are only heard in an acceptable time, but Repentance
at all times. And on Psalm. 37.3. Trust in the Lord and do good, it is said,
There is no good in this World but Repentance. Resset Cochme contains twenty
two penitential Canons, and concludes, Let every one search himself every day,
that if he has offended he may speedily repent, and implore Gods Mercy with a
contrite Heart: (...). And Maimonides has wrote a Book of Repentance.

There are two Objections lie against the Doctrine of the Pharisees being of so
comprehensive and Spiritual a Nature. (1.) Christ's Sermons about them, Mat. 5.
and 23. (2.) Their own Writings, as Maimonides of the Mishnah: He that observes
any one Precept, it shall be well with him, and his Days shall be Prolonged,
and he shall Possess the Earth: That is, says Maimon. by the Addition of this
Work to his other Works, his good Works over-weigh his evil, and his Merits
Proponderate his Demerits. M. Smith in his Select Discourses observes these
Defects in their Righteousness, and their Notion of it. (1.) That the Law was
merely a Dead Letter without 'em. (2.) Their Free Will was a Self-sufficiency
within 'em to be a Foundation of Merit. (3.) They might pick out particular
Precepts for their Observation, with Neglect of the others. For though they have
an Axiom, that it is not Lawful to Skip over Precepts, yet they expounded it
thus: A Man is not to leave the Observation of one Precept, to go and observe
another; yet they have another Canon, Mizbatorah Mirba Hajim, He that
Multiplies the Law, multiplies Life: These things seem to Derogate from the
Jewish Notion of their Works, rendering it Partial, External, Constrained, and
Artificial; but these following Considerations may help to reconcile the former
Position with the Objections. (1.) Christ asserts of 'em, Mat. 23. That their
Opinion was better than their Practice, Ver. 4. They bind heavy Burdens on Men's
shoulders, but they will not move 'em with one of their Fingers: And on the 3d
Ver. he seems to allow of their Doctrine; What they bid you Observe, that
Observe and do, but do not ye after their Works. (2.) They reckoned Sincerity
the Measure of the Law, or acceptable without Perfection; therefore Christ
tells the Young Man, If thou will be Perfect, one Perfectly Righteous: They
made a great Difference between Perfection and Sincerity; these they called
Beninim, Middle-way Men, that had Sincerity, and should go to Eternal Life,
either by the Preponderation of their good Works, or Repentance of their Evil:
hence Obadias de Bartanora says, Whosoever shall Perform any one of the 613
Precepts of the Law, without any worldly respect, for Love of the Precept,
behold this man shall Merit thereby Everlasting Life. And R. Minach Kekannat,
"Know that the Life of Man in the Precepts is according to his Intention; He
who obeys the Commands otherwise than for themselves, shall have no Reward but
in this Life. So they did not lay the weight of Imperfect Obedience on
particular partial Obedience, but on Sincerity: More Proof of it may be seen
before on the 5th Particular, and in Maimonides his Explication of the
Objection: For, 1. He says only Blessed in the Earth. 2. Others must be added.
3. Observed from Sincerity. (3.) The Jews make a great distinction between what
the Law was in their time, and what it should be in the days of the Messiah.
Rabbi Johannim, who lived about Titus his time, cited by the Midrash Shir
Hashirim says, The Week in which the Son of David shall come, the Law shall
return to his Newness, and it shall be renewed to Israel; as it is said in
Jeremiah 31.31. A Law, that they should not break, because written in their
Hearts. Midrash Kohlet 11.8. "Every Law which Man learns in this Life, is
Vanity, except the Messiah his Law: And 2.1. The Reason is rendered, Because men
in this Age Learn and Forget; in the other it shall be wrote in their Hearts:
And so their Gloss on Cant. 1.1. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his Mouth;
that is, "Write it in my Heart, that I may never forget; Teach me Ore proprio,
with his own Mouth. Moses had a Stammering Tongue, and Isaiah, polluted Lips,
but the Messiah is the Unspotted Mouth of God, his Kissing is the immediate
Touching of our Heart, as the Loadstone the Needle, and our Kissing him is our
Turning to him, complying with his Voice: Psalm. 2. Kiss ye the Son. Aben Ezra
well observes, That Kissing there is opposed to Rebellion and Disobedience; in
the ver. 1, 2. he illustrates it with this Simile: A King sent to destroy a
City that rebelled, his Son intercedes, and reconciles them, the Citizens come
with Submission and Gratitude to the King: Go says the King, Thank my Son,
(that is, says the Author) Kiss him: And on Cant. 8.1. O that thou were as my
Brother, viz. Incarnate, Clothed with Humanity; that sucked the Breasts of my
Mother; that is, Bring forth the Law unto a nourishing Life and Vigor; when I
should find thee without, see thee thus manifested in External Humanity and
Internal Power, I would kiss thee; that is, obey gratefully. See more of this,
on ver. 1. I conclude from it, if they did expect such a spiritualized Law in
the days of the Messiah; they, who had by the Power of his Spirit been made
willing to embrace his Law, would they disown such a Truth? The Apostle says
not, Gal. 3.2. Received ye the Spirit by the Works of the Law, or by the
hearing of Faith? 2 Cor. 11.4. If ye receive another Spirit, or hear another
Gospel: So whatever constraint the Unbelieving Jews obeyed from, the Believing
obeyed from the Spirit; nay even the Unbelievers owned Divine Assistance, Luke
18.11, 12. I thank thee, etc. Aug. He proudly said He was Righteous, though he
owned God the giver of it: Hear this O ye that are worse than Pharisees, who
say God made you Men, but you your selves Righteous. Greg. He rightly thanked
God for the good he had from him. Stella, there is a Triple Pride, The first
denies Gods Gift, The second owns him, but thorough Merit; The third, as this
Pharisee, glories in it. He disputes against the abuse of the Law, performed
and obeyed by that Spirit they had received: The Law is good, if a Man use it
lawfully. So there is a great difference both between the Persons and the State
of the Question, from that in Math. 5. they were mere Pharisees, here
Christians too. 2. The Question was about the Perfection and Extent of the Law;
here it is about its use and the Merit or Worth of its Obedience, supposing the
other Error rectified, which was more Practical than Speculative: for according
to Mat. 5.23. that Sacrifice will not be acceptable, when we are at Enmity with
our Brothers: on Lev. 5.5. They say, Sacrifice will not expiate without
Confession and Repentance; and according to ver. 28. the Talm. says, He that
looks on a Woman with Intention, is, (...) as he that had gone in unto her; and
according to 29. One had better have their Belly cleav'd than go to Hell whole:
And according to 34. Maim. It is a great good, that a Man swear not at all: And
according to 39. If one call thee Ass, suffer him to put a Saddle on thee too;
and according to 44. Maim. says, David was excellently instructed with Virtue,
when he said, Psalm. 7. I have delivered him that without Cause is mine Enemy:
For the Law says, Thou shall not Avenge, Lev. 29.18. and Mat. 6.1. R. Jann.
said, When he saw a Man giving Alms publicly, You had better give none than
so; and ver. 34. He that has Bread in his Basket, and says, What shall I eat
for to Morrow, is a Man of little Faith. Jos. de Voisin. has more of this kind;
but it is certain, the Law was corrupted by their Traditions; but this Error
here was about its use. 4. As to Free Will, I do not find that they say so much
as the Armin. for Maim. says, that God can do with the Will of Man what he
pleases; but he rather chooses the long and tedious way of Means, than work
such a Miracle; as he rather led the People thorough the Wilderness to Canaan,
than the shortest way by the Philistines. There are three things more, that are
considerable to help us to the Jewish Sentiments in this concern. (1.) Their
owning Universal and Original Guilt. (2.) Their denying their own works to be
of sufficient Merit, without respect to Divine Mercy, and the Office of the
Messiah, when he comes: And (3.) Their great Encomiums of it. As to the first,
Thus the Talmud from Beracot: When Adam sinned, the whole World sinned, for he
was its Perfection; therefore the World lost its Perfection: This can be said
of none of his Posterity; as to the first and last, Raym. 175. Rab. Josc. Gabl.
says, Adam transgressed one Negative Precept, and behold how many Deaths on all
Generations, certainly the Merits of the King Messiah does overbalance; much
more shall he justify all Generations, since the Iniquity of all met upon him.
As to the second, the Author of Nove Schalam, says, on Exodus 33.19. I will have
Mercy on whom I will, Worthy or Unworthy; and Ikkarim, on Dan. 9.18. Not for
our Righteousness, but for thy great Mercies: The Mercies of the Blessed God
are poured out on all Creatures, not for their Merits, but of Pure Grace; for
who has given to him, that it may be repaid? But a subordinate Merit they
owned generally for Temporal Things. The Talmud has a saying, That the Camp of
Israel was extended the space of three Leagues; which the Author of Caphtor
Vphera explains thus: He saw the Power of this Nation, (viz. Baalim) (Numb.
23.9.) Consisting in these three things, their Strength, their Multitude, and
their Merit, with the Merit of their Fathers, from the Top of the Rocks, that
is, the Merit of the Patriarchs. Who can count the Dust of Jacobs? That is,
their Multitude, and their Power in it; Let me dye the Death of the Righteous;
there is their own Merit, which he would have shared of: Another of its
sayings, He plucked up the Mountain, which contained three Leagues; it is thus
explained: As the Thought of Og, who said, Since this Nation has not Power with
its Multitude to possess three Leagues, but by the Merit of their Fathers; and
now I have got the Merit of Abraham from them, therefore I may drive 'em from
this Mount, and use it against 'em. By Mountain is meant the Patriarchs, Isa.
55.1. Look unto the Rock whence ye are hewn, look unto Abraham your Father. A
third saying, But God brought the Ants who pierced through the Mountain, that
is, the Israelites, whose Strength is in their Tongue, Locusts-like, for by
their Prayers, the Merit of Abraham stood by 'em, and did not help Og. And
elsewhere, Moses in his Prayer needed the Merit of all the Patriarchs, and the
Merit of the Tribes, and his own Merit. But a subordinate Merit they allow in
Eternals: In Raym. 469. Bereshit Rabba is cited thus: Jacob was very afraid,
because no Man can be secure till Death; and tho David knew there was a Reward
for the Just, and that he was Holy, yet his Sin might prevent his Merit; and
that all the Promises are Conditional, though the Condition be not expressed;
there was a perpetual Priesthood promised to Phinehas, but that was meant if
they did not backslide. So on Zach. 1.12. There is an absolute Promise of the
Messia, but at the close of the Chapter, its added, This shall come to pass, if
ye will Diligently obey the Voice of your God: And thus they explain, Jer.
33.17. A Promise of a Perpetual Throne to David's Seed, and an Altar to Aarons;
the Condition was not fulfilled, and that Repentance is the greatest Condition:
God will get the Angels to absolve him from his Oath, if People repent, and yet
they cannot repent of themselves; For on Isa. 64.7. they Paraphrase thus: There
is none of the Callers on thee, that is able to raise himself up against the
Figment of his own Heart: (that is, Original Sin,) That he may take hold of
thee, that thou should not send him to Hell; (here Merit diminished): They
believe all goes to Hell, Abraham and all the Prophets, though they think some of
them like a Salamander in the Fire; no Merit can deliver from thence but the
Messiah. Says R. Jamai, If I should suffer to be crushed between a Door and its
Threshold, it would not prevail to free me from Death. R. Juda R. If my Tongue
should be bruised by the Hinge of a Door, I could not escape Hell. They ascribe
that only to the Messiah; they say the Lord told Adam when he made him, he must
be very careful of Sinning, for the World, the Creation would be ruined by it;
and none could repair it; the Just one, Messiah, must suffer by it; they fain
two strange Conferences, one between God and Satan, that Satan seeing a
Glorious Light under the Throne of God, asked whose it was? R. The Messiah and
his Generation. Satan. Permit me, and I will destroy it? R. God. Against him
thou cannot prevail. Sat. Let me, I can. R. That Attempt will destroy thee out
of the World, when none of them shall be destroyed. The second Conference did
on the back of this, presently begin between God and the Messiah. God thus: O
Messiah, my Just One, these who are now in Secret and hid with thee by their
Sins, shall bring thee into a grievous Age, for thy Eyes shall see no Light,
thy Ears shall hear great Reproach, thy Tongue shall cleave to the Roof of thy
Mouth, and thy Skin to thy Bones, and thou shall be consumed and wasted through
Grief and Sorrow: Will thou undertake these things? if thou do it, it is
well; if not, I will drive them from my Presence. The Messiah answered him,
Lord of the World, for this I am Glad, and I undertake all these Tribulations,
on this Condition, that in my day thou shall raise the Dead, even all who have
died from the first Adam until now; and all those that shall be Created, and
shall save them, etc. The Conclusion I draw from this large Narrative is, That
no part of Evangelical Obedience is here wanting, Faith and Repentance, the
influence of the Spirit, Jesus a Lawgiver, and Principal Meriter, Sincerity an
acceptable Measure, etc. And suppose them not all of a Mind, yet Charity will
ever make us conclude, the Believers to be of the best Mind among them. And the
Error here opposed in this Church at Rome, by the Apostle, is the same that now
in the Church of Rome is opposed by the Protestants, 2 These. 2.7. This was that
wherein the Mystery of Iniquity did already Work; the Doctrine of Merit was
already begun, and no other Error can be found to have such a fair appearance;
when the Apostle wrote to the Thessalonians, the Church at Thessalonica was
free of the Error, and she of all the Churches only was; and may be therefore
the Mystery of it was revealed to them. Mr. Squire of Shore-ditch says on this
Epistle to the Thessalonians, That the placing of Faith between Mercy and
Merits, is like the Infant between the two Mothers; if divided it must be
destroyed: Its like the Pale Horse, Death sits on it, and Hell follows; it is a
damnable Assertion without peradventure, and a Bellarmine after his long
Dispute for Merits, concludes, that it is most safe to trust in Mercy alone.
And what way Rome had her first beginning by, that way she is most likely to
attempt her Restoration; and by opposing Merit, our first Reformation began,
which has this for its Glory, its a Restoration of Christianity to its
Primitive Purity; and while we preserve this Doctrine, she will never corrupt
or stain our Souls, however she may prevail to oppress our Bodies. But it is to
be lamented, that so many bearing the Name of Protestants, are so deeply
tinctured with this Doctrine of Opera Tincta, Works Meriting because tinctured
with Christ's Merits.

The Third Enquiry, shall be a more close Examination of the Extensiveness and
Comprehensiveness of this Law of W^rks, that is excluded from being the Rule or
Law of our Justification: Because boasting would not be excluded from us by it,
if justified by it; and on the most sincere Scrutiny I can make, I find all
Laws, and all Works, as performed by us, are excluded; the Arguments for Proof
of it I shall reduce to these five Heads. 1. The Nature of a Law in general is
excluded. 2. The Natural Law is. 3. The Moral Law is. 4. The Mosaical Law is:
And 5. The Evangelical, and our Evangelical Obedience to it, is excluded.

(1.) The Nature of a Law in General is; for every Law is a Law of Works, and a
Law of Works is excluded: (...) a Law, signifies either in general Doctrine, as
Isa. 2.3. Out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. Joh. 10.34. Is it not written in your Law, I said ye are Gods? That
is no Precept: See Joh. 15.25. Gal. 4.21. Or it is taken properly, and then it
signifies a Doctrine of Works; hence Works and Law are reciprocal: without Law,
Romans 3.21. is the same with 4.6. without Works. We are justified, not only
without the Law of Works, but by a Righteousness without the Law: Gal. 3.21. If
there had been a Law given, which could have given Life, verily Righteousness
should have been by the Law: Works is no Distinctive Addition, as Dr. Tuck of
Cambtidge says, but Explicative, Romans 2.13. The doers of the Law shall be
justified; to do the Law and Works, are the same in the Apostles style, they
are of so nigh kindred; he adds it, to tell us what he means by Righteousness
of the Law, viz. Works Commanded by, and Conform to the Law; the whole
Constituent parts of the Description of a Law manifests this, first its
generical Nature; its a just Act of a Superiors Will. We call Statutes or Laws
Acts of Parliament, its their Will what the Subject should do: Psalm. 33.8. He
commanded and it stood fast. Psalm. 143. Teach me to do thy Will; and in the
Lords Prayer, Thy Will be done.

(2.) The Author of a Law is the most Supreme Power, Dominative Power, as the
Master over the Servant, the Father, Husband, Tutor, etc. Juridical Power is
not: Judges are but Administrators, Applyers of the Law to particular Cases and
Persons; they are Jussa Populi rogante Magistratu, the Peoples Commands
ratified by the Supreme Magistrate. It Is very diminutive English of Jussa, when
it is called Votes, that is only Wishes; the old Saxon word is Low, Consent,
because a Covenant between Prince and People is the Spring of Laws. But why all
this Authority? The Command needs it, it is to Work; hard Work is required, and
we need Awe to put us on; hence Exodus 19. and 20. God sets an Emblem of his
Power and Authority before his Law.

(3.) The Effects are, (1.) Obligation. (2.) Command and Prohibition. (3.)
Punishment, or Impunity by permission; but all terminate in Works: And though the
Mediatorial Law, which was the most severe Penal Law that ever was, Sufferings
being the great Duty, yet the Fruit of it is called Work, and Doing: I come to
do thy Will, and to work the Work of his Father.

(4.) The Subjects of the Law, are by way of Eminency called Subjects, Romans
3.19. They that are under the Law, are called so from its Energy and working
Efficacy in them: And therefore, though only a rational Creature is a doer of a
Law, moved reasonably by Fear or Hope, yet the Efficacy occasions Metaphors in
mute Creatures, Job 38. Have thou commanded the Morning since thy Day? and our
Inclinations to Wickedness are called the Law of the Members; and Rules of Art
are called Laws; Custom, which is a Habit of working, is called a Law.

(5.) The Matter or Object is Work, something to be done: Th. A. A Law is a
Rule directing our Acts, what is to be done, and what not: And again, It Is
Divine Wisdom as directive of all our Acts and Motions. Biel. It Is a sign of
Right Reason, dictating what we are obliged to do, and what not.

(6.) The Properties are, Romans 7.12. Holy, Just and Good: (1.) Holy, from the
Matter; it distinguishes between Holy Actions and the Vile ones. (2.) Just,
from the Manner, not to give Laws where not Subjects, or where they neither
Protect nor can Punish: The Lawgiver must be able to Save or Destroy what he
gives Laws to, Jam. 4. therefore it is ridiculous for Man to give Laws to a
Spirit, or Conscience in Matters religious; and where he has Power he must
distribute Burdens and Works by Proportion, according to Ability; to bring one
part of a Nation under Penal Laws, and another under Privileges, is not an
equal distribution, except when Offenders or highly meriting; Mat. 23. It was a
great sin in the Pharisees to bind Burdens on others they touched not
themselves. (3.) Good: Salus Populi suprema Lex: Plato says a Law is a Manner
of Governing by fit Means, to the best End. No Privileges, that is, Privae
Leges, ought to be granted without this Prospect: Knowledge of Sin, and Wrath,
are the Consequents of Divine Law; but neither End nor Fruit of them, but of
the Transgressors. (4.) Publicly Proclaimed. (5.) Firmly ratified by Sanction;
Laws are made that the Innocent may be safe among the Wicked, that the Wicked's
Boldness may be bridled; the Law is not for a righteous Man.

(7.) There is no kind of Law but what requires Works as its Object; the
Negative forbids Works; the irritating make void Works; according to the kind
of Works they are distinguished: Natural, of Nations; Civil, Canonical,
Privileges, Poenal, Customs, Counsels, Moral, Judicial, Ceremonial,
Evangelical, and consequently the Law of Faith is not meant the Law requiring
Faith, for then it would be a Law of Works; for Joh. 6.29. To believe is to
work the work of God: Gal. 5.6. Faith works by Love; and the Pharisees even
before Conversion, as is before proved, owned Faith as a most acceptable Work
to God; so there would neither be fit distinguishing Terms of the opposite
Propositions, nor any Refutation ot the Apostle's Adversaries by this Sense of
it: it must therefore either be taken largely, for the Doctrine of Faith, that
is, the Gospel, the Object of our Faith, according to the Cloud of Protestant
Commentators; or which is Materially the same, the Law, that is the Object of
our Faith, and as such he had been before describing the Righteousness we are
Saved by, and Justified by, to be a Righteousness, Romans 1.17. and 3.22.
Revealed to Faith, to be believed in; now this Righteousness must have a Law,
which is the Mediatorial Law, as the other is the Mediator's Righteousness; He
was made under the Law, to redeem us from under it: Gal. 4.5. and Mat. 5. He
came to fulfill the Law; we are Justified by his Obedience to the Law for us.
So by the Law of Faith, is not by the Law as Directing and Commanding our
Works, but by the Law as believed to be fulfilled by Christ in our room: There
can be no Pretense or show of Reason for the other Opinion, but on this bottom,
that by Works and Faith are meant different kind of Works: But then why should
the general term Comprehending all kind of Works be used for one Species? Would
that be a good Division, to say God governs the Earth not by an Animal, but by
a Man? or not by a Spirit but by an Angel? and there is no ground in the
Context to take the word thus by Synecdoche, as shall next be proved: For there
is no Divine Law under which we are, but what we may find excluded by the
Apostles Arguments.

(1.) The Natural Law and its Works are excluded, Romans 3.9. We have before
proved both Jew and Gentile, that they are all under sin, V. 19. All the World
is guilty before God; not from insufficiency of the Law; for Romans 2.26. If the
Uncircumcision keep the Righteousness of the Law, shall not his Uncircumcision
be counted for Circumcision? for the Law of Nature now is the same with that in
Innocence, only there is a Change in the Matter. Positive Laws do not bind ad
semper, and the Negative Laws are all the same still; the Law says one thing to
a married Person, and another to an unmarried: So though the Law command other
things to fallen Man than to innocent Man, it is not another Natural Law: All
the Natural Law, Tertullian says, was broken in Eating the Forbidden Fruit;
there was Theft, yea Sacrilege, in stealing God's Proprium; there was Murder
of himself and his Posterity; there was Coveting, there was want of Love to
God, and Obedience too; yea Idolatry, to an Incarniz'd Devil, having more
esteeming and adoring Thoughts of the Devil than God: So the Matter of the Law
is the same, and the Measure of it too, viz. what Reason observes, or may
observe to be its Duty from Divine Providence; Romans 2.5. The goodness and
forbearance of God leads to Repentance: The Author, God; the Principle, Love to
God; the End, God's glory and our good, is still the same, its Sanction is
Perishing and Salvation, Romans 2.12. They that sin without Law, perish without
Law; and if they observe it, it shall be Circumcision to them; but all are
Sinners, all have broken it, their Conscience accuse them, they detain the
Truth in Unrighteousness, they did what they knew deserved Death, Romans 1.32.

(2.) The Natural Law being excluded, all Law is excluded; for they are all
reduceable to it, and consequently it is comprehensive of them. Mr. Baxt.
Method. p. 392. In illo tamen omnes eaedem fuere virtualiter aut eminenter: It
is the Mother and Root of them all, but the further the Branches are removed
from the Root, the lesser they are, and the more invisible, and stand at a
greater distance from it. 1. These are its Primitive Axioms: That good is to be
chosen, and evil to be refused, and the greater the good is for Weight or
Duration, with the greater Desire and Endeavor to be pursued: That we are to
do that which is becoming us, and to do as we would be done by in the like
Circumstances. The second Order is more determined, to wit, God is to be
worshipped by true, loving, trusting, adoring and Obediential Thoughts; that
the Innocent is not to be Hurt, the Honest Man is to be Befriended, the
Superior to be Reverenced, the Inferior to be Condescended to, and the Indigent
to be Supplied, and many other Laws about Patience, Fortitude, Sobriety and
Temperance. The third Order is more particular, Vices and Virtues are
specified, by which Theft, Adultery, Murder, and the like, are forbid. The
fourth Order is less apparent and evident, to wit, about Revenge, Fornication,
Usury and Self-Murderers, in some Cases, which gives occasion to Civil and in
some sense Canonical Laws also. These are two ways reduced to the Natural Law:
First, because both Civil and Religious Society, and consequently Government,
is constituted by this Natural Law, Romans 13.1. There is no Power but of God,
the Powers that be are ordained of God: Their Authority is both established and
limited by his, and therefore their Laws ought to be subordinate to his, which
is the second Connection: For Rulers are not a Terror to good Works, but to the
Evil. Hence a Penal Law obliging to Sin, or to suffer, is a most unjust thing;
for it is a Terror to good, yet a Conformity to the Laws of God is pretended to
by all Lawgivers, even under Paganism: The Moral Law is more properly this Law
it self, than reductively belonging to it; for where Moral and Natural is
opposed, it is in Sciences not in Laws; for what is Moral as to the Object, to
wit, Praiseworthy, or Blameworthy, Vice or Virtue, in a Man's Conversation
toward God or Man, is natural as to the Principle; for what are Principles of
Action in a Man, by common Gift of Knowledge, or Honest Inclinations, are
natural Principles: Before the Law given to Moses, we may find footsteps of all
the Ten Commandments, for Abel believed in God, which is the Duty of the first;
and Sacrificed, which is the Duty of the second; and in the third Generation,
when but very few Families on the Earth; and not above three, to wit, Adam,
Seth and Enos's, that were Worshippers, except we Charitably Hope some were
Proselites of the Cainitish Race, public worship was established, for then Men
began to call upon the Name of the Lord: This was Obedience both to the second
and third Commandment, which did suppose Obedience to the fourth, to wit, a
sanctifying some publicly known Time for Worship, whose Determination God by
Positive Command had fixed, though from a natural Reason, to wit, the
Seventh-day, in which God had rested from the greatest and best of Works he had
yet done in the World: The fifth and the seventh Command is manifest in the
Practice of Marriage, for therein was the Period of Subjection to Parents
terminated, in leaving Father and Mother, and an Era of faithfulness to the
Wife begun, expressed in cleaving to her; and it is probable that last and
crowning Duty of Childrens Subjection to their Parents, is taxed as broken by
these Sons of God, who took unto themselves Wives, according to their own
Choice, Genesis 6.7. The sixth and ninth Command were both broke by Cain, who
murdered his Brother, and then not only denied it, but denied the Knowledge of
such a Fact, Genesis 4.8, 9. The eighth and tenth Command are thought by some,
especially the Quietists, to have been neither Commands, nor broken, because
there could be no Coveting of enlarging Property, but rather of Men, to share
of the common good; and Sin gave occasion to particular Commands, though of
such a General Nature: But we find Adam guilty of both* in coveting of a Diety,
and robbing God of his Property; when but one Tree was reserved in all the
World, for an acknowledgment of Gods having the Primitive Right: And we find
Genesis 6. that the abounding Lusts of the Heart was the cause of the Deluge; and
all Lust is coveting. The Ordinance of Circumcision was appointed, to be a
Monument and Conviction of the Lusts of the Heart, and the Necessity of
Mortification; the Sweat of the Brow, and toil of labor, were appointed as the
means of our Maintenance; and the Nimrodical Hunting was a robbing men of what
God had blessed their labor in. So we find the Moral Law in this Law of Nature.

The next Enquiry, is about the Evangelical Law, whether any Prints of that is
to be found under it, yea or not; and taking the natural Law most properly, and
as here the Apostle explains it in his Discourse, for a Sign of Divine Will
about our Duty as revealed in Nature, or by Creation and Providence, we may
find footsteps of it here. (1.) For the Duties of it, here are both Faith and
Repentance rendered concludable from Divine Forbearance and Goodness, Romans 2.4.
Not knowing that the Goodness of God leads thee to Repentance; but after thy
hardness and impenitent Heart, etc. (2.) As there are Evangelical Duties, so
Evangelical Influence; Chap. 1.18. Who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness; here
was a Truth preserved alive against their Wills, and as Genesis 6.3. the Spirit of
the Lord was said to strive with men; and 1 Pet. 3.20. Those Souls that are now
in Prison had once the Spirit of Christ dealing with them, and also Evangelical
Acceptance: If the Uncircumcision keep the Righteousness of the Law, shall not
his Uncircumcision be counted for Circumcision; for Circumcision is not that
which is outward, in the Flesh, but in the Man whose Praise is of God:
Therefore the Law of Nature being excluded, there is an Evangelical Law
excluded, which Suarez calls the Con-natural Law, and Gratian says, Jus
natural est quod in lege and Evangelio continetur; and Mr. Baxter says, It is
the first Edition of the Covenant of Grace, which two ways was published to all
the World. (1.) By Natural Light, discovering God Merciful in his Nature. (2.)
By External Proclamation. (1.) Once to Adam, that there should come a Seed of
the Woman, who should tread down the Head of the Serpent. (2.) In Noah; and
(3.) In Christ: For although none comes to the Father, but by the Son, and there
is no other Name given under Heaven by which men might be saved, yet it does
not follow, that particular and distinct Knowledge of the Messiah was
absolutely Necessary; for that many Infants who were saved have not, and the
Disciples who lived with Christ were doubtful about it, yea Peter forbid him to
yield to Death, when he was very nigh to suffer for it.

The Third Law excluded, is the Moral Law, whereof the Decalogue, qui (...),
receives all things, is the Sum: To take the Moral Law according to common
Sentiments, there is by it these three things added to the Natural Law. (1.) A
Positive Institution with great Solemnity from Mount Sinai, with several
Positive Determinations, that are not immediately concludable by the Light of
Nature. (2.) The Spiritual Extension of the Moral Law is manifested; through
Corruption much of the Law of Nature was obscured; as whether Fornication or
Usury were Sins, or Thoughts of the Mind, before Formal Consent? or latent
Inclinations to Unlawful Things? A third Edition is of Life and Authority to
the Sanction, men very much Question whether a Man was liable to Eternal Death
for evil Inclinations, Yea or No? but this Law is added, because of
Transgression, that is, both to discover it, as the Apostle says, Romans 7. I had
not known Sin, if the Law had not informed me; so the Conviction of Sin was
weak, until the renewed Sanction of the Law has made it more terrible: Sin gets
many fair Colors; Covetousness gets the Name of Frugality, until the Spirit
discover both the Sin, and the Curse; doubtful Duties are established, weak and
faint Notions revived; corrupt Thoughts are corrected, the need of a Savior
more Manifested, and the Jewish State settled in a more perfect Condition than
any State in the World. Now we find this Law is excluded, for Romans 3.20. For by
the Law is the Knowledge of Sin; there is no Law discovers Sin so as the Moral:
The Natural Law discovers Sin, but neither so powerfully, nor so plainly; the
express Word of God discovers the Malignity of Sin, the Root and Original of
Sin, and the dreadful Issue and Event of Sin, more plainly and clearly, and
removes all those Fogs and Mists that created many doubts, by which we were apt
to think great Sins small, small Sins none, and no Sins so hateful in the sight
of God as they are. The Ceremonial Law discovers Sin but by Accident, its
Primitive Intention is to represent a Cure: We only see the Malignity of the
Distemper, by the Strength and Power of the Medicine; the first Edition of the
Natural Law was to direct to Duty, and to prevent sinning, but the principal
end of this Edition is to make Trangressors sensible of the Number, and
Aggravations of their Sin, and so to be a Schoolmaster to bring to Christ. (2.)
That Law is excluded that works Wrath, Romans 4.15. For the same Law cannot
bring a Man both under the Curse, and under a Blessing; both to be a
Ministration of Death and Life; the same cannot be both matter of Justification
and Condemnation; and there is no Law renders a Man liable to Wrath as this
does; for being Guilty, Wrath is unavoidable by it. (3.) The particular Vices
nominate from the 9th. verse to the 19th. which hinders Men from being
justified by this Law, discovers this Law to be Moral, whereof they are
Transgressors: The Fear of God, that comprehends inward spiritual Worship; not
following the Way of Peace, that shows want of Love to their Neighbor; and
what can be more Spiritual than Understanding of God, and Seeking of God? and
in the second Chapter, Theft, Murder, and Sacrilege, and want of Heart
Circumcision, are mentioned as Reasons why they could not be justified by the
Law. (4.) That Law and its Works are excluded, which is of universal Extension,
Chap. 3. 19. That all the World may become Guilty before God, but that is only
the Moral, which is but circumstantially distinct from the Natural. (5.) All
Works that we have done are excluded, Titus 3. Not by Works of Righteousness
which we have done; but all own Moral Obedience to be our Works.

(4.) The Mosaical Law is excluded: for farther Explication of this, we may
find it meet with a double Acceptance, as it is a Politic or Spiritual,
concerning the Soul or Civil, a Type or Antitype, for their whole State was
significant: for the former, as it was their Commonwealth Law, it did
comprehend Ceremonies, the Judicial Law, and the External part of the Moral,
this made up their Civil Constitution, and its faults were punishable by the
Magistrate: It had only Temporal Promises and Penalties, and it was twofold,
either most severe, as the Common Law threatening Death, for Nonperformance to
a Tittle; and this did (1.) Represent the Moral Law, or (2.) It was remedial,
for smaller faults; for Types must not be enlarged to have overthrown the
Commonwealth, and therefore there were no Sacrifices for Murder and Adultery,
and the like, Lev. 20. But (2.) There was a Chancery, or a Remedying Law, to
prevent these Penalties in many Cases, Acts 13.39. If there had been in all
Cases, the Order of the Commonwealth had been turned into Confusion: This we
may see in Heb. 7.8, 9, 10, Chap. This was the Ceremonial Law, Levit. 15. A Man
for burying the Dead, was liable to perpetu^l Exile, which was a necessary
Moral Duty, had it not been for this Relief? Now all grant this Law literally
taken, is excluded from our Justification, and some lay the stress merely here,
viz. in the Insufficiency of the Law, as that which God never intended to
justify any Man as to Aeternal concerns by; but we see on the contrary, it was
the insufficiency of the Obedience that did prevent it, not the Law it self.
(2.) The Mosaical Law is to be taken Spiritually, and this in Correspondence to
the Type, must be twofold also: Either as a most severe Law, requiring Perfect,
Personal, and Perpetual Obedience, in Thought, Word and Deed; and Threatening
Death for every offense. I have proved already this Law is excluded, or 2. As a
Remedy for all Transgressions and Failures, against that exact Law: (for the
Parallel of a Remedy as to some offenses, Acts 13.39. is excepted;) and this
was the Law as fulfilled by Christ Jesus for us, for he it was, and his
Obedience who was obedient to the Death, that was represented by all these
Ceremonies that were Tipifying Remedies under the Law; he was the City of
Refuge, he was the Propitiating Sacrifice, his Blood sprinkles both Book and
People, and only Purifies as to Conscience; and this is the Gospel, or Law of
Faith, by which we are justified, and by which our Mouth is stopped as to all
boasting, we being no ways fulfillers of it. For he alone did tread the
Wine Press of the Fathers Wrath, of all the People there was none with him; he
built the House, and he ought to bear the Glory; by one Sacrifice he has for
ever perfected them that are Sanctified: They who plead for a Remedying Law to
be obeyed by us, ought to find Scriptures interpreting the Typical Remedying
Law to represent it; but they all Terminate and End in Christ, and therefore
the Law is remedial as satisfied or obeyed by him; the Mediatorial Law is the
Remedying Law. Indeed the Quietists Interpret a Broken Heart and Contrite
Spirit to be typifi'd by the Sacrifices, because called Sacrifices that God
will not despise; but then they deny Christ's Sacrifice, for the Type must Point
at one thing, else it would be of an uncertain sound; other things are by
Allusion, but nothing is more plain in all the Scripture, than that he is the
Antitype of all that Remedying Law. The Armin. System by Limbourgh says, The
Dedication of our selves to God, as living Sacrifices, Romans 12.1. Or Alms and
Charity, were represented by the Thanksgiving Offerings, not the expiatory
Sacrifices; we must be Priests, in a justified State, a fellow of the
Highpriests, before we can offer acceptably: This was the Gospel, and Law of
Faith, and differed from ours only as symbols from express Words; a gradual
difference in Clearness and Obscurity, and rendered the promised Seed of the
Woman bruised, after the manner of an Expiatory Sacrifice, the Object of the
Old Testament Faith.

(5.) The Evangelical Law and its Works, are here comprehended under the Law of
Works; for the Distinction lies more in the Manner of Obedience, and Acceptance
of the Works, than in the Preceptive or Sanctive Nature of the Law. (1.) The
Works of all Men are excluded: by the deeds of the Law there shall no Flesh be
justified, Romans 3.20. The Expression seems to be borrowed from the 143d. Psalm,
v. 2. Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, for in thy sight shall no Man
living be justified. They to whom Paul writes, were Saints, Romans 1.7. Beloved
of God, called to be Saints. Galat. 1.2, 4. They were the Churches of Galatia
in whose State Paul enrolls himself, Ver. 4. Who gave himself for our Sins:
Abram is brought in here as an Example, having his Works excluded from giving
any Right to Justification, and David who was a Man according to Gods own
Heart, is brought in as another Instance, expecting Gods imputing Righteousness
without Works. And indeed the Apostles Arguments for Justification without
Works, would be of small Strength against any Man, except Believers in Christ:
Galat. 2.21. If Righteousness come by the Law, then is Christ dead in Vain:
They who did not believe in Christ, would grant all his Arguments, viz. that
Christ died in Vain with respect to that End of Redemption of Sinners under the
Law, Galat. 4.5. And not only Professors of Faith, but real Saints, being
sanctified in Heart and Life, as may be seen by the Apostles answer to that
Objection, Romans 6.1. The Objection lies thus: If Grace be glorified in
pardoning of Sin, and our own Works have no Interest in obtaining the Right of
Pardon, then our Works are useless, but our Sin useful; Let Us continue in Sin,
that Grace may abound, and the like, Romans 3.5. If our Unrighteousness commend
the Righteousness of God, how can God be Righteous in punishing man? Had it
been the Works of any one kind of Law, that the Apostle had been here
excluding, the most proper Answer had been by Distinction of Laws and
Righteousness, viz. tho Ceremonial Works be excluded, yet Moral Obedience is
requisite; or tho the Moral Law be excluded, and its Works, yet Evangelical
Obedience is not ex^luded: But the Apostles answer is of another kind, viz. How
shall we that are dead to Sin, live any longer therein? and he that is dead, is
justified from Sin: The Strength of his Answer is founded on the necess^ry
Connection between Justification and Sanctification, the Bl^ssing of the one, is
the Badge of the other: Bellarmine's Answer to this Argument, savours neither
of Honesty nor Subtlety, viz. Saints do many things that are not Evangelical
Obedience, many of their Works have neither Faith as a Principle, nor Gods
Glory as their End; but who did ever expect to be justified before God, on the
account of their Sins and Transgressions? The very Pagans supplicate for the
Pardon of such Crimes, and here the Apostle is disputing against a Company of
seduced Christians.

2. Arg. As the Works of all Men are excluded, so all kind of Works are
excluded: There is no Man can do any Works that can be ground of Right to
Pardon or Glory. We have Apostolical Testimony for this, Ephesians. 2.9. Not of
Works, lest any Man should boast: There are in that Text four Arguments
excluding Works from our Salvation. (1.) An Opposite Principle, Grace; By Grace
are we saved; therefore not by Works: By Gods Gift, not your Merit: (2.) The
ill consequent that would follow our Works being exalted to such a Dignity,
vsz. Boasting, lest any Man should Boast. A third is from the distorting of
Divine Order in the Method of our Salvation, by putting Works before the
Promise: We are his Workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which
God had before ordained. The Divine Order lies thus: (1.) A Pre-ordination unto
Holiness. (2.) An Union with Christ, as the great mean through whom its consistent
wi^h a just God to bestow Blessings on Man. (3.) There is the Blessing it self,
our being new molded by a New Creation, for New Ends: Lastly, comes in the
result of all, good Works, unto good Works: Holiness is a Possession, it is a
begun Heaven, and the Right of Title must be before the Possession: Fourthly,
The Reason is added, why they might be occasion of Boasting, because we are the
Subjects of that Grace; Should Boast; for we are his workmanship, that we
should walk in them: What is in us, is ours, as shall be proved; which is
directly contrary to what is asserted by the Adversaries, that Works from Grace
will not give occasion to Glory. The like is asserted of the Text; A Man is
justified by Faith without the Deeds of the Law; and Galat. 2.16. Knowing that
a Man is not justified by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus
Christ. I cannot here pass Bellarmine's Exception to this last Text, from the
Vulgar Translation, which renders it thus; Nisi, Except by the Faith of Jesus
Christ, so he would make the Sense run thus: A Man is not justified by the
Works of the Law, except these Works flow from Faith; so that Evangelical Works
here have room in the Matter of Justification. For the Refutation of which, I
shall rejoin these Considerations. Nisi signifies sometimes But: Cic. De re
nihil judicare possum, nisi mihi certe persuadeo te talem virum nihil temere
facere. Ter. Nescio nisi mihi Deos satis scio iratos fuisse. The Greek is
(...), which often in the New Testament must be translated but, and signifies
adversatively, Matthew. 26.42. If this Cup may not pass away from me, except I
drink it: The Opposition is there Adversative. And Matthew 12.4. -- And did eat
the Shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat, but only for the Priest.
John 5.19. The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do.
(3.) (...) is the Synonymon of it, and that is most frequently in the
Septuagint, and also in the New Testament put adversatively. (4.) The Syriack
in this Text is, (...) from the Hebrew (...), and from it is the Greek (...),
all which signifies but; so tho the Apostle wrote (...), he spoke (...), or
rather took 'em both in one Sense. (5.) These proves that it may be as properly
translated but as except; but Scripture Interpreting it self, shows that it
must be translated but, and therefore our Translation is preferable to the
Vulgar: For (1.) Other Texts in express Terms put Faith and Works
Adversatively, and not Conditionally; and therefore if it contradict not it
self, must be so understood here, Romans 3.28. A Man is justified by Faith,
without the Deeds of the Law: Without cannot signify a Condition. (2.) The
Text shows, that the form of the Argument is Disjunctive, thus: A Man is either
to be justified by the Works of the Law, or by the Faith in Jesus Christ; but a
Man is not justified by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ,
as we may see. Thirdly, In the Applicatory Conclusion: Even we have believed in
Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the
Works of the Law. Any new Law must suppose an Abrogation of the old, but that
was impossible; and therefor there was a necessity of Christ's fulfilling it
for us; but he having fulfilled it for us, by a kind of Equity our imperfect
Obedience is accepted for Duty, but not for a Condition of Life, which I shall
enlarge on the second part of the Text.

3 Arg. As all Men's Works, and all Works of all Men, are excluded, so all Law
is, requiring Works of us, Galat. 3.21. If there had been a Law given which
could have given Life, verily Righteousness should have been by the Law: But
this has been spoken to under the third Head.

(4) All Evangelical Obedience being imperfect, it can never be the Matter of
our Justification; for what needs a Pardon for it self, cannot Merit a Pardon
for another: If it cannot stand the Test of the Law, it can never be Justified
by the Law: If it be accepted though imperfect upon the account of Christ, the
Person who performs it must first have an Interest in Christ; for in him we are
Created to good works: It is on the account of this imperfection of Works in
themselves, and as to such an Office and End, that the Prophet says in the Name
of the Church, Isaiah 64.6. We are all as an unclean thing, and all our
righteousnesses are as filthy rags: And so the Apostle, Philip. 3.8. I count
all things but dung that I may win Christ. Bellarmine exclaims against Chamier
and other Protestant Writers, for calling Gospel Holiness Dung and Rags, and
therefore denies it to be comprehended in this Text of the Apostle, but thinks
it to be understood in the 9th Verse, by that Expression The Righteousness
which is of God by Faith: But these Arguments move me to think otherwise. (1.)
In the 6th. Verse he particularized Pharisaical Righteousness, Touching the
Righteousness which is in the Law blameless; but here in the 8th Verse he
comprehends more than what he had before said, I count all things but loss. Now
there can be nothing greater than Legal Righteousness but an Evangelical
Righteousness, as to that Concern; and therefore the Evangelical must be
comprehended under all, if any thing more be: which (2.) Does appear from the
Constellation of particles, (...), which the English cannot emphatically enough
express, yea doubtless, without all peradventure or exception, I count all
these things named, and all things else, but loss, etc. (3.) The change of the
Tense of the Verb, I counted, V. 7. when I was first Converted, and my Eyes
were once opened, I presently counted all my former Gains in Opinion Loss, V.
8. I do count all things still Loss; a known Christ is above all I have yet
gained. I can only persevere in my Opinion, but among all my New Privileges
and Gifts since I was a Christian, I count that the best. (4.) There is reason
enough for calling our Sanctity dung: 1. In comparison of Christ, do count them
but dung that I may win Christ. How intolerable and unchristian-like is that
Pride that thinks it too mean an Abasement put upon his own Sincerity! too vile
a Comparison to compare an Int^rest in our own Righteousness as an Interest in
Dung, in comparison of an Interest in Christ's, and this Comparative Sense is
the Apostle's, Dung that I may win Christ; and that Sense makes me conclude he
particularly eyed his Evangelical Righteousness: For Professors to whom he
spoke and wrote, could be under no Temptation of placing any Righteousness else
in the room of his. Thorough what a Magnifying Glass must a Man see his good
Purposes, when not One of Ten executed; his well intended Vows most basely
broken thorough small Temptations; his Prayers or Preachings, Alms or
Ordinances, to think Dung too diminishing a Metaphor, and therefore conclude
the Apostle could not mean Gospel-Holiness? Adam's Holiness was Dung in
comparison of it; Angels Holiness is Dung in comparison of it; its Value was
from the Divinity, it was the Blood of God, the Sufferings of Immanuel, the
Righteousness of God; and who can measure the distance between the Creator and
Creature? the Angels for all the good Service they have done in and to the
Church, or their own spotless Holiness, ascribe all Blessing, Honor, Glory and
Power to him, Rev. 5.12, 13. all their Works could not merit Pardon for the
least sin of the most sinless Saint. There are two more resp^cts in which our
Gospel Holiness is Dung: 1. For their Infirmity and Imperfection: Christians
are called Saints from begun Holiness in them, which makes them differ from the
World, where none at all: And the difference is great, to be acted by the Holy
Ghost in any measure, and to have the Devil wholly ruling Lord and Master of
his own House; but it is more than seven times a day the Saint falls in the
Dung, he is but a Babe, 1 Cor. 3. Carnalness and Babes in Christ are
consistent. A 2d. Respect is as to this Use or place of being the Matter or
Merit of our Justification: Disorder is Dung, Order is Beauty and Comeliness;
and the want of it, or what is contrary to it, is ugly, vile; Silver and Gold
is Dung as to feeding our Bodies, it is not suitable: The Fruits of the Spirit
are precious, but in us Dung; as to this End of Justification, they are Dii
stercorei, though m^de o^ Gold.

(5.) V. 9. And be found in hi^, is more applicable to a Political or Relative
Interest than a Spiritual; there is an equality from the very Phrase to be in
him, as a Political as well as Spiritual root; to be in him as a Debtor in the
Surety, as well as a Branch in the Vine; but there is a Superiority from the
general Scope of the Words, which all own to be spoken in relation to
Justification; and the parallel Language of Scripture does manifest it, Romans
3.20. Therefore by the Deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified: How like
is it to this Phrase, Not having my own righteousness which is of the Law: So
Romans 3 22. Even the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus Christ?
How like is that to the latter part of the Verse, But that which is through the
Faith of Christ, the righteousness of God through Faith? Justification being a
relative thing, this being found in him is most probably of that Nature and
Kind.

(6) His own Legal Righteousness which is here renounced, comprehends his
Evangelical Righteousness: For, (1.) Evangelical Righteousness is a Man's own:
Scripture allows the Expression. Faith is God's Gift, yet it is ours, Romans 1.8.
Your Faith is spoken of: Mat. 9.2. Jesus seeing their Faith: V. 22. Thy Faith
has made thee whole: Hosea 14.8. From me is thy fruit found: Though God is the
Efficient or Author, yet the denomination is from the Subject: Prayers are
ours, but the Spirit of God is the Author, 2 Cor. 8.8. To prove the sincecerity
of your Love; that Grace is God's Gift also: Good Works are ours, but God
begins and perfects them, Phil. 1.6. Ephesians. 1.15. After I heard of your Faith in
the Lord Jesus, and love unto all the Saints: vid. Rev. 3.10. (2.) As
Evangelical Righteousness is ours, as well as Adam's innocent Righteousness, or
Sinners common Gifts, for God is the Author of both, so it is a Legal
Righteousness; for a Principle and a Rule are not opposite; Faith's being the
Principle, renders it more legal, or more conformed to the Law. (3.) The very
Order of the words, Being found in Christ, is put before, not having mine own
righteousness, which in order of Nature follows a renunciation of Pharisaical
Legal Righteousness. The first Husband, to wit, the Law, must be dead, before
we be married to a second, to wit Christ, as it is expressed Romans 7.1, 2, 3.
(4.) The Apostle's expressing of his own Experience, and his daily exercise of
Faith on Christ, his Solicitude and Care least he should be found with a wrong
Plea at the Day of Judgment; that I may be found: He had once been deceived by
trusting to a Righteousness. It can hardly be thought he was jealous of his
Relapse into Pharisaism: But there is a greater Danger of relying on
Evangelical Righteousness, that needed more Watchfulness and Care, least he
should overvalue what he ought to Value. (5.) This Experience and Care he
expresses to be a Pattern and Example to the Philippians, V. 17. Be ye
followers of me: Every Man is apt to value himself on the Righteousness he has;
Romans 10.3. the Pharisees in theirs, and the Christians to whom he wrote in
theirs; it allures the Eyes of every Creature; and Act. 10.35. is accepted of
God according to the measure of its Conformity; In every Nation he that fears
God and works righteousness is accepted. (6.) The Apostle would hardly dignifie
Pharisaical Righteousness, now since Conversion, with that Name: for the
Pinnacle of it, Persecuting the Church, was a sin; and he diminishes it, when
speaking of it, he calls it a blamelesness, that is, before Men; so Bishop
Downam.

(7.) Ver. 9. All the Properties and Epithets of Christ's Righteousness, imputed
by God and applied by Faith to us, for our Justification, are here expressed.
(1.) A Righteousness by Faith, and thorough Faith, not of Faith as Fruit of the
Tree. (2.) By the Faith of Christ, a Righteousness that comes from Christ
thorough Faith, the Righteousness is Christ's, and the true Office of Faith, in
Justification, is described. (3.) (...), of God, this Word added, as distinct
from Christ, by Divines is Interpreted of God the Father; this Righteousness is
by his Gift, his Contrivance, his Imputation, he is the Spring and Fountain of
it; Christ is made of God unto us Wisdom, etc. He set him forth to be a
Propitiation: God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself.

(8.) The Native Analysis and Coherence of the Apostles Discourse in this
Chapter, further proves it, which is always to me an Argument of great Moment,
and the Members of Division are here as evident, as in any Writings of this
Apostle, and suitable to his Custom and Way of Writing: After an Introduction
in the 1st. ver. in the 2d. ver. there is a Caution given about some bitter
Enemies of the Gospel, and a Triple Character of them, Dogs, Evil-workers,
Concision, by which it seems they were the old Enemies, the Pharisees. (2.) In
Opposition to them, ver. 3. there is a Character of a true Christian in three
contrary Epithets. 1. They Worship God in the Spirit. 2. Rejoice in the Lord.
And 3. Have no Confidence in the Flesh. This triple Character, to the 15. ver.
he enlarges and illustrates by the Example of his own Person, in a retrograde
Order: 1. That he had no Confidence in the Flesh, ver. 4, 5, 6. 2. That he
rejoiced in the Knowledge of the Lord Jesus; and tho he put this in its proper
Place, it was the Principal thing in his aim, ver. 1. his last Use, and
Application from the Character of Christ in his Humiliation and Exaltation;
finally my Brethren rejoice in the Lord; and might as the Principal Subject,
given Method to the Chapter, as Branches to flow from it: But then one harmony
would have been lost, the Character of Christ in the second Chapter, and
Character of a Christian in the third; yet when he comes to it, it becomes on
this account a new Spring to all that follows; for he divides the Reasons of
our Rejoicing in the Knowledge of Christ, and highly valuing it, under these
two Heads. (1.) Justification, ver. 7, 8, 9. And (2.) Sanctification, ver. 10,
11, 12, 13, 14. For ver. 10. he repeats the Knowledge of Christ as Root to
another Blessing; the former was from the value of his Death, this from the
Power of his Resurrection. So in this 10th. ver. the Third Member of the
Christians Character begins, Their Worshipping God in the Spirit, their inward
Holiness, but treated with a likeness to its Relation to the second Member or
Character, to which it was immediately United: from the 15th. ver. follows the
Application, pressing and exhorting the Philippians to true Christianity, as
exemplifi'd by and in him: And I think they who would jostle Christ's
Righteousness out of this Discourse, may with as great Confidence attempt to
jostle it out of the Bible, and out of the Christian Doctrine. The hard Names
and rough Language given to the Adversaries, is no sufficient ground of
concluding they professed not Christianity, but rather the contrary: for 2 Cor.
11.13. he calls the false Apostles who preached Christ, Deceitful Workers, and
compares them not only to Dogs, but Devils, who had changed themselves into
Angels of Light; their shining Luster lay in this, They preached Free Grace,
Christ's Meritorious Death, but the Satanicalness was in a Merit of their own
praerequisite to an Interest in it: Their Light lay in denying Pharisaical
Righteousness alone; but the Devil lay in placing a legal Right in their Gospel
Obedience: Hence v. 14. it is said, they transformed themselves into Ministers
of Righteousness; they did exalt Holiness and Righteousness more highly than
Paul did, and afford it a more honorable Office, viz. the giving a right to
Justification, Adoption, and Glory: 2 Cor. 11.4. This was a departing from the
Simplicity that is of Christ; they preached not a simple, but double
Righteousness; one of Christ's, another of their own; and hence room for this
Currish and Doggish Temper, barking against the Apostle, as an Enemy to
Holiness; They were Ministers of Righteousness, not He; and They preached the
Spirit, the Gospel, and Christ, as well as He; but a greater value They put on
inhaerent Righteousness than He. And thus as the Serpent, that incarnate Devil,
deceived Eve, so These did the Corinthian and Philippian Churches; they were a
Concision, the Word signifies Renters, they made Schisms in the Church, by this
New Doctrine about Inhaerent Righteousness.

5 Arg. Is from the Order of receiving Divine Blessings, and the Equality in
the freeness of the Gift. For the first, There is a common saying of Austin's:
Bona opera sequuntur Justificatum, non praecedunt Justificandum: Good Works
follow a justified Person, they do not go before in him to be justified;
according to Romans 4.5. But to him that works not, but believes on him that
justifies the Ungodly. Mat. 7.18. A good Tree brings forth good Fruit. John
15.5. The Branch must be in the Vine before it can bring forth Fruit. As to the
second, There is no Reason why Justification and Glorification should not be as
freely given, and Grace as much glorified in the Gift, as Sanctification, which
is owned to be an absolute Gift; necessary Connection or Posteriousness in
Order, does not derogate from Freedom: But when the Posteriousness is by a
depending Suspension on our Performance, there is a Derogation: Election is
Free without Condition, Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined us unto the Adoption of
Children, to the Praise of the Glory of his Grace; if the Intention was Free,
why not the Execution? Romans 9.11. That the purpose of God according to Election
might stand, not of Works, but of him that calls. Romans 11.6. There is a
Remnant according to the Election of Grace, and if by Grace, then is it no more
of Works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace; but if it be of Works, then is it
no more Grace, otherwise Works are no more Works. This Opposition is not
between Grace and External Works, but between the very Nature of Grace and
Works; they are repugnant, they can no more be the Moral Causes or Motives of
any one Action, than one individual thing can be White and Black in the same
part. So our Calling is Free, 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us with
an Holy Calling; not according to our Works, but according to his own Purpose
and Grace; as Purpose gives Measure to Calling, so Calling gives Measure to
Justification, Romans 8.13. Whom he did predestinate, them he also Called; but it
is equally free, Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his Grace: What is
wrought in the Soul by Calling, has no more Influence in our Justification,
than our Justification has on our being Glorified; Whom he Justified, them he
Glorified: But Justification can never merit Glory, being Gods Act, but is only
a Prior Blessing in Order: this Equality of Freedom solves an Objection, which
is to many in appearance a great Argument for Admission of our Evangelical
Obedience unto a Subordinate Merit, or ground of Right to our Justification:
The Objection is founded on these Scriptures, Romans 4.14. If they which are of
the Law be Heirs, Faith is made void, and the Promise is of none Effect. Gal.
2.21. If Righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in Vain. Chap. 5.4.
Christ is become of none effect to you; whosoever of you are justified by the
Law, ye are fallen from Grace. The Objection is thus formed: Our Works are no
farther excluded from Justification, than they exclude Faith, Christ, and the
Promise from Justification; but Evangelical Obedience, Gospel or gracious
Works, do not exclude Grace, for they are the Fruits of Grace; nor Faith, for
they flow from it; nor the Death of Christ, for that has purchased it; nor the
Promise, for they are conveyed through it; therefore Gospel Obedience is not
excluded from Justification. Resp. (1.) This Evangelical Obedience does not
exclude Grace, Faith, Christ and the Promise, from our Sanctification, thus
explained: Because it owns good Works to flow orderly from them all, but it
does not suffer them to have an equal Freedom in our Justification; because
these Works, though the Fruits of Grace, they are as much ours, as Adams Works
were: For God was the Author of the Ability, by which they were wrought,
therefore when what is ours truly and properly, is a Legal or Federal
Condition, in order to enjoying the one and not the other, makes a great
difference between the Freedom of the one and the other. All Christians
Experience witnesses the Labor, Pains and Sweat, that is necessary to
Mortification of Lusts, and Exercise of Grace; and by this Opinion, we must
look on Justification as the Reward of our own Labor, tho we must look on
Sanctification as a Free Gift. (1.) In particular, there is a Derogation from
the Fullness of Christ; his Satisfaction to the Law was not Complete, if our
Obedience to the Law be one Penny of the Price. (2.) From Grace, that will be
all or nothing in this Affair, according to Romans 11.6. it will admit of no
Composition; if Works come any way in as a Plea, they must either be perfect,
or we must be condemned; for there is no Law in Scripture requires less than
Perfection; the Law that requires Faith, requires perfect Faith; and the Law
that requires Patience, requires perfect Patience: Therefore we must fall from
Grace, that is, be certainly Condemned, if justified by the Law: So Works will not
admit of Grace, more than Grace will admit of Works; Grace will have nothing,
the Law will have Perfection; the Composition is a Contradiction. (3.) It
derogates from Faith, that is from its Office, which is alone in this Work, and
that as receiving, not as doing; we are justified by Faith, as we are nourished
by our Appetite: Hence is it called Eating, Drinking, Hungring, Thirsting; it
is the Food, not the Appetite that nourishes us. (4.) It derogates from the
Promise, because it Promises Remission of Sin, Inheritance of Life freely; but
this puts in an exceptive Clause of something on our part first to be done.
Faith will be only Applicative alone in the Office, though not in the Subject, or
not at all; Christ will be alone the Meriting Cause, or not at all; Grace alone
the End and Motive, or not at all; and therefore these Arguments are as strong
against Compounders of Grace and Works, as against Opposers; because the
Compounding, is an Opposing Divine Wisdom and Order: A Man that Digs, though the
Spade be borrowed of his Master, will not think his Wages Charity at Night, but
on as exact Justice due, as he that dug with his own: A Man that walks
twenty Miles a day, after his Lame Leg restored, will never impute the Journey
to the Physician. And thus Christ, and Free Grace, though inabling us to Work,
would lose their Honor and Glory in Justification.

I am now come to the last part of the Text, viz. The Law we may be justified
by, without ground and danger of boasting, which is the Law of Faith: All
Christians are generally agreed that this Law is the Evangelical Law, the Law
of Chancery or Equity; but all are not agreed about the Nature and Kind of
that. All agree that there can be no Salvation, or Justification by the Moral
Law, in its full Rigor, requiring Perfect, Personal and Perpetual Obedience,
requiring the Righteousness of our Persons as well as our Works since Sin:
There must be some Room for Equity, or none for Hopes; there is a Triple
Application of this Equity, some applies it to the Sanction of the Law, some to
the Duty of the Law, and some to the Persons subject to the Law. The first is
Originisme, saying, the Equity lies in the Mitigation of the Punishment; an
Eternal Death by Desert, is turned into a Temporary by Justice of Equity, and a
Perpetual Hell into a Transitory Purgatory. The second Opinion applies it to
the Duty and Works of the Law; before there was required Perfect Obedience, now
imperfect will serve, if it be Sincere: Divine Government is content to take a
Penny in a Pound, and of this Way there are several Explications. The
Socinians, who deny Christ's Deity and Satisfaction, do hold that it is of mere
Sovereign Mercy; but Arminians and Papists hold the Merits of Christ as the
Fruit of that Sovereign Mercy, to be the immediate Foundation of this Justice
of Equity: They say he has Conditionally died for all, and sincere Obedience to
this new Law of Faith is the Condition, which they say is called Faith, from
the Facility and Easiness of obeying it; because it requires no more Obedience,
but with a Proportion to our Faith, and the Measure of our Faith is the
Perspicuity and Assurance of Divine Revelation. The Socinian and Arminian deny
Merit, but that is from the Odium of the Word only; for Crellius the Socinian
says, No Master of Justice and Equity would rob his Servant of a due Reward,
for a fault or two; God would not lay such a snare in the way of Wicked Men, to
deprive them of Hopes, and discourage them from Duty: And Poppius the Arminian,
describes the Christian Religion by those Works that consist in Obedience to
the Commands of God and Christ, and on respect to which depends the Reward of
Eternal Life; yea, which he is not to have without the Work be Plene
Consummatum, entirely and fully Perfect: And the Papists mean no more by Merit;
they do not think their Works merit Heaven by a strict Commutative Justice,
that is used in Bargains; nor Distributive, in the rigor of the first
Covenant; but in Justice attemper'd with Equity, and tinctured with the
meriting Blood of Christ; a Justice arising between a Foederal Promise, and the
most mean Condition: And the Sincere, as well as Learned Mr. Baxter says, in
his Catholic Theology, he only differs from them in the Word, because
offensive, and that we ought rather to rejoice the Papists have so much Truth
among them, than reject the Truth because they hold it: But whether he died in
this Opinion, that our Works gave such a Right to the Reward, I doubt; for in
his little Book against Dr. Crisps Errors, he says, I formerly believed the
formal Nature of Faith to lie in Consent (as he elsewhere explains it, the
Marriage Consent, that binds to all the Duties of the Married State, and so
gives Right to all the Privileges,) but now says he, ^ Recant it, (which he
could not do so often as he used, without great Measures of Humility;) I
believe, says he, it lies in Trust; this makes the Right to lie in the Object,
for it is I depend on Christ, as the Matter or Merit of my Pardon, my Life, my
Crown, my Glory. But thirdly, the Gospel, which is the equal Interpretation of
the Law in its exactness, plainly teaches us, that the (...), the Equity, is to
be applied to the Subject of the Law; and the Law by immutable Justice required
Death; but there was place for Equity, in change of Persons; a Sponsor or
Surety might be admitted to dye; and some way there must be Infiniteness in the
Death, because an Infinite Majesty offended; but the Law left it doubtful,
whether the Infiniteness must be in the Duration of Suffering, or Dignity of
the Sufferer; and Equity has interpreted it of the latter: As if a Father was
permitted to suffer for a Son, or a Sum should be paid in Gold, which the
Words of the Law required to be paid in Silver, or Copper: For Equity is (says
Aristotle) a Correction of the Law, wherein it is deficient in Words, by reason
of its Universality: Or I think better, an Explication of the Words of the Law,
according to the Will of the Lawgiver, in an extraordinary emergent Case: Or
as Crellius says, it is a Justice mixed with Mercy; or a Virtue mitigating the
Acrimony of the Law from Consideration of Circumstances; as St. James says, The
Wisdom that is from above, is Pure, Peaceable, Gentle, and Easy to be
entreated; full of Mercy and good Fruits; the Fruit of Righteousness is sown in
Peace. And thus generally Protestants expound the Equity of the Law, to be Gods
admitting, yea giving Christ as a Surety for us; he was made under the Law, as
a subsequent Surety. The first Covenant did not say, Thou Adam (either first or
second Adam) shall die; for then the first Covenant had been the Covenant of
Grace still, there was no need of another Covenant, as the Reverend Mr. Baxter
does strenuously prove; but when we were under the Curse of the Law, he came in
and took our Room, and became a Curse to redeem us from it, and the Law as
fulfilled by him for us, is to us truly a Law of Faith, according to the Text:
For farther Explication and Confirmation of which, I shall propose these four
Heads. First, That all the Functions and Offices of our Lord Jesus Christ, all
he said, and did, or suffered, was in Obedience to a Law. Secondly, I shall a
little explain the Nature of this Law and its Righteousness. Thirdly, That Law
he did fulfill for us, in our Room and Stead. Fourthly, That Law and its
Righteousness, is to us a Law of Faith, and consequently the Law here mentioned
in the Text, it is not proposed to us as a Rule of our Obedience, but as a
matter of our Faith; yea our Faith Interests us in it, and makes its
Righteousness effectively ours.

For the Proof of the first, We find by Eternal Compact between the Father and
the Son, in the Mediatorial Covenant, the Son came under a Mediatorial Law:
Psalm. 40.6, 7, 8, 9. In that Emphatical Account of it, we may make these
Observations. (1.) There was a Compact by which he calls God his God: O my God.
(2.) By Virtue of that Covenant which was recorded in the Volume of the Book,
his place was to become a Servant, Lo I come; I am ready to obey. (3.) His
Service was to fulfill the Divine Will. I delight to do thy Will. (4.) This
Will was a Legal Will: Thy Law is within my Heart; for Law is a just act of a
Superiors Will. (5.) The Law required him to be a Sacrifice, Heb. 10.10. By the
which Will we are sanctified, through the Offering of the Body of Jesus Christ
once for all. (6.) That no other Sacrifice either pleased God without this, or
but this; Sacrifice and Offerings thou did not desire. 2. By Virtue of this
undertaking, the Son became under an Obligation to ob^y this Law, Heb. 2.17.
Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his Brethren. And
Luke 24.46. And thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the Dead:
Yea this Obligation did extend to the most Minute Particles of his Life: John
4.4. He must needs go through Samaria. 3. In an answerableness to this
Obligation, he did all he undertook: Hence is it said of him, He did all things
well; and John 8.28, 29. I do nothing of my self, but as my Father has taught
me, I do always those things that please him: And Chap. 4.34. My Meat is to do
the Will of him that sent me, and to finish his Work. Psalm. 69.4, 5. Then I
restored that which I took not away: O God, thou know my foolishness, and my
Sins are not hid from thee. John 15. It is applied to Christ; and Theod. in
Lat. Graec. expounds it thus: It is true, I am under a Guilt, and made a Curse,
but I call thee to Witness, from whose sight nothing is hid, that the least of
'em is not mine, not the smallest Sins of Folly and Infirmity; I restored that
which I took not away; I never contracted the debt I paid; others robbed thee
of thy Glory, and the World of its Harmony and Beauty, but I have restored it
all again; tho they were mine by Imputation, they were never mine by Inherency.
4. He has Divine Approbation bearing Testimony, that he did so; though he was
condemned in the Flesh, yet he was Justified in the Spirit, 1 Timothy 3.16. The
Deity justified what Man condemned, Isa. 50.8. He is near that justifies me,
who will contend with me? All the Miracles wrought by him were Divine
Testimonies, but especially his Resurrection: Romans 1.4. And declared to be the
Son of God with Power, according to the Spirit of Holiness, by the Resurrection
from the Dead; Then he was visibly discharged out of the Prison of the Grave,
having satisfied Divine Justice, and paid the Price of Redemption to the utmost
demand: Never was there such a Miracle, as a Man having the Iniquity of us all
laid upon him, and yet completely give Satisfaction, and receive an
Acquittance: He was raised again for our Justification; all the Elect virtually
rose in him: Hence Ephesians. 1.19. it is reckoned one of the greatest Effects of
Divine Power that ever was. 5. By this Work he receives the Title of a Servant
and Surety. (1.) He was a Servant, Isa. 49.6. It is a light thing that thou
should be my Servant, to raise up the Tribes of Jacob; his Service is
described, to Enlighten the Gentiles, to be a Salvation to the ends of the
Earth, etc. It was hard Service, Soul Travel, Isa. 53. It was great Service, to
bring them that sat in Darkness to the Glorious Light of Heaven, and the
Chained Prisoners to the Liberty of the Sons of God. (2.) He was a Surety; and
this is evident from the other Title, Heb. 7.22. By so much was Jesus made a
Surety of a better Testament. 6. His Service bears all the Denominations due,
and Properties, that a Law uses to what is regulated by it: It Is called Work: I
must work the works of him that sent me; it was to him a Law of Works, though to
us a Law of Faith; Obedience, Romans 5.29. By the Obedience of one shall many be
made Righteous; and Righteousness often; his temper of Mind under it is called
fear, Heb. 5.7. And was heard in that he feared; and Phil. 2. The Form of a
Servant. 7. The Rule of his Life, and Offices, is called a Law, Gal. 4.4. He
was made under the Law; and Command, Joh. 10.18. This Commandment have I
received of my Father: He was under the Mosaical Law, He was Circumcised; He
was under the Evangelical, for He was Baptized; He was under the Moral, for He
was Holy, Harmless, and Vndefil'd; He was under the Sanction of that Law as
well as its Precept, Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the
Law, being made a Curse for us. And all this was but a part of his Subjection
to the Mediatorial Law. There is a Noble Criticism, on 2 Samuel 7.19. The English
has it thus: And is this the Manner of Man, O Lord God? But it may be
translated thus: This is the Law of the Man the Lord God; as Dorscheus says on
the 2d Psalm. O Wonderful, O all together wonderful Law, by which God and Man
should be united, and according to which an unexpected Divine Dispensation
should make that this should be the Prerogative of some individual of the
Posterity of David, that he should be the Lord God! Oseander inferrs a Reason
out of the Context, the sense of which he renders thus: I understand thee to
have spoken of that Messiah, whose Law requires that he should be God and Man.
And it does not want Reason, for what is said in the 12, 13, 14. verse. agrees
best to this Messiah, for it is spoken of a Seed that should rise up after his
Death, which should proceed out of his Bowels; but Solomon was both Born and
set upon the Throne, before David died; yea it is particularly noted in the 19.
ver. That this Prophecy was of his House a great way off. Secondly, It is said
verse. 13, 16. That this Kingdom should endure for ever, which is expounded,
Psalm. 89.7. by the Duration of the Sun, Moon, and Heaven. Thirdly, He shall be
to me a Son, verse. 14. he notes his peculiar Subject, as Psalm. 2.7, 12. Heb.
1.5. Gods first born, Psalm. 89.28. This is the Interpretation of Calovius,
Gerard, Thilo, and Piscator.

Secondly, As to the Nature of this Law and its Righteousness. (1.) For the
Law, it differs much from any other Law. 1. In Subject, Meer-man, and God-man,
differ very far. 2. In the Precept, the principal thing it requires is
Suffering, Joh. 10. I have Power to lay down my Life; this Commandment have I
received of my Father: Suffering is but in Case of failure in other Laws, to
make them obey, annexed by Sanction to the Law. 3. In the Work, it is the
greatest Work that ever was commanded by Law, Isa. 61.1. To bind up the
brokenhearted, to proclaim Liberty to the Captive, and open the Prison-doors
to them that are bound. Act. 3.21. To restore all things, to reconcile such
Enemies as a Holy God and his Creature, become his Enemies; to Justify the
Guilty, Adopt Aliens, to turn an Hell into a Heaven; an extensive Work, Earth,
Heaven and Hell, he is to be employed about; he is to Rehead, or Recapitulate
all things which are in Heaven and Earth; a Work of the greatest Trust ever any
was in, Isa. 22.14. They shall hang upon him all the Glory of his Fathers
House, the Offspring and Issue: All Vessels hang on that Nail, that is a
Glorious Throne to his Fathers House. 4. In that it has no Legal Sanction, no
Threatenings, there was no need of any; since he was so sufficient and faithful,
nor no possibility, for the greatest Penalty was the Duty of the Precept. 5.
The Promises, a Name above every Name; at his Name every knee must bow, Angels
Adore and Worship him, he is at the Right Hand of the Throne of God.

(2.) There is a Distinction of Christ's Righteousness by Divines used. 1. Into
Divine Righteousness as he is God, his has no Law but the Divine Nature to act
becoming (...). Official, proper to the Office of the Mediator. 3. Is ^carious,
common to Men, and (...) Men, and therefore shall (...) treated under the Head
of ^^putation, but I think both ^ay be Comprehended under (...) Law of Faith.
As to the Works or Righteousness of this Law, Romans 3.21, 22. It is described
to be, (1.) Righteousness of God. (2.) Without the Law. (3.) Witnessed to by
the Law and Prophets. (4.) It is by Faith. As to the first Character of it, it
is on a fourfold account the Righteousness of God. (1.) It is a Righteousness
from God as the Author of it, (...), so it is expressed in the third of the
Philippians, it is the Gift of his Grace, the Contrivance of his Wisdom, and
the Effect of his Power: It is the Gift of his Grace, Romans 5.17. Much more they
which receive abundance of Grace, and of the Gift of Righteousness. 2 Timothy 1.9.
It is a Grace given us in Christ before the World began, but is now made
manifest: By this Righteousness of God, Death is abolished, and Life and
Immortality brought to light: God that so loved the World as to give his Son
for them, gave all things with him; and this none of the least of the Gifts,
which is as freely given as any other; for we are Justified freely by his
Grace: It is also a Fruit of the depth of the Riches of the Knowledge of God,
the Angels stand amazed at the Contrivance; the most Sagacious of them would
have been non-plus'd, if asked by what Righteousness a Sinner could be
justified: It Is one of those things God has prepared, that neither Eye has
seen, nor Ear heard, nor ever Heart considered; it is also an Effect of
Infinite Power; what Power less could have united Divine and Humane Nature in
one Person? What Power less could have made a Virgin Conceive? What Power less
could have brought a Clean thing out of an Unclean? and Caused one to be born
of a Woman, and partake of Humane Flesh and Blood, and yet be Sinless? It is a
kind of Generation none can declare; What Power less could have done that great
Work and Service, he was appointed by this Law? The Angels that excel in
Strength, being all put together, could never have performed a thousand part of
it; the restoring of all things to their Primitive Beauty and Order; What Power
less could bear the Burden of Guilt; the weight of one Sin is an intolerable
burden to a Soul: No Man were able to stand, if God should mark Iniquity; but
this sure Foundation Stone bore the guilt of the whole World, but never did
yield, nor give way; did neither shrink, split or flinch; he is a tried Stone,
and found to be a sure Foundation; he could rise again from the Grave
notwithstanding the weight of this Gravestone of Guilt. (2.) It Is the
Righteousness of God Subjectively, because the Righteousness of that Person who
is God; as the Blood of the Humane Nature is called the Blood of God; to feed
the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own Blood. All the Works of
his Person, by Reason of their Conformity to the Mediatorial Law, are called
Righteousness, Romans 10.3. Have not submitted themselves unto the Righteousness
of God; for Christ is the end of the Law: So we see the Righteousness of God is
the Righteousness of Christ, ^ Person in whom the Law gained all its ends, for
he obeyed all its Precepts, he suffered all its Threatenings, and he purchased
all its Promises too. (3.) It Is the Righteousness of God in Opposition to all
Humane Righteousness; it is his in Opposition to our own; he is Jehovah our
Righteousness, not Adam's or Man's Righteousness. (4.) It is the Righteousness
which alone God can accept a Sinner for; he cannot be Just, and yet justify a
Guilty Person, for any other Righteousness but this; he is the Lamb that takes
away the Sins of the World: This was the Sacrifice God was well pleased with;
God is pleased with the Sacrifices of a broken Spirit, for part of Duty being
Sincere; but for no part of the price. This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased. Isa. 42.21. The Lord is well pleased for his Righteousness sake:
Act. 13. For all that Believe, by him are justified from all things. By the
Obedience of one, many are made Righteous, Romans 5.19.

Secondly, It is without Law. (1.) As to its Existence obliging us; it was not
directed or regulated by Ceremonial, Judicial, or Moral Law; for though it may be
called the Natural Law of a Mediator, because one cannot be a Mediator without
performing such Duties, yet it is distinct from any other Law, Moral or Natural,
taken in its whole Latitude, these are distinguished, as a part from the whole.
(2.) It was manifested without the Law; now, for though the Ceremonial did
represent it, that Dispensation was at an end; it was now more perspicuously
Taught, the Moral never taught it. (3.) We are interested in it without Law; we
cannot be interested in any other Righteousness without obeying the Law
Directing and Commanding it; but we are interested in this by Believing.

Thirdly, It is witnessed to by the Law and Prophets, Isa. 2.2. Out of Zion
shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem: Prucknerus
thus: This is the Law of Faith, Romans 3.27. The Hearing of Faith, Gal. 3.2. The
Word of Faith, Romans 10.8. This is the Gospel, the Gospel is the Narration of
all Christ has done for us, with the offer of it to us; and all he did was
ordered by the Mediatorial Law, and therefore is called a Law. Hackspanus thus,
" Jalkut on this place, says, All the Consolations which God is to give to Man,
shall arise out of Sion; for it is said, Out of Sion shall go forth a Law.
Hence the Jews did expect their Salvation as well as we; and they bear
Testimony that it is no new Law but a new Doctrine; and the Text it self calls
it; the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem, to wit, that Word which was the
Subject of the Apostolical Sermons, which Romans 1. was the Gospel: Another
Testimony we have from the 19th. Psalm, where it is said, The Law of the Lord
is Perfect, Converting the Soul; that by this is meant the Apostolical
Doctrine, may be seen from Romans 10.18. where it is cited, that it was Prophesied
their sound should go to the Ends of the Earth, that the Gospel Light should be
as Universal as that of Sun and Moon. The Papists pretend to prove the
Corruption of the Original Text, because what the Hebrews calls Lines, both the
Version of the Seventy, and the New Testament, translated Sound; their sound
went unto all the Earth; but in Sense they are agreeable: For the Sun and Moon
have their Course by Lines; which Lines do Tipifie the Travels of the Apostles
and their Followers, or the spreading of a Voice by Lines in the Air: Bellarm.
Capell. and Grot. think the Word was formerly read Kolam, and by Corruption
turned into Kavam; but the Masora Marks it to be an once read Word; whereas
Kolam by their marks is read fifteen times. As the Prophets bare Testimony to
this Law, so they do to its Righteousness, Jer. 23.6.33.16. This is the Name
whereby he shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness. Abravanel reads thus,
This is the Name whereby the Lord shall call him, to wit, the Messiah, our
Righteousness; wherein he grants the Office of the Messiah, but denies his
Divinity; but the Accent joining Lord and our Righteousness together by
Apposition, asserts both his Divinity and Office to bring in a Righteousness.
Other Jews also, as the Talmud and Midrash Tillim. So Dan. 9.24. To bring in
Everlasting Righteousness; it was brought in in the Time of the Humiliation of
Christ, but was Eternal as to its Efficacy, as his Redemption is called, Heb.
9.10. Having obtained Eternal Redemption; and so is the Gospel called
Everlasting; and likewise in Isa. 53.11. He shall justify many, for he shall
bear their Iniquity: And Psalm. 32. Blessed is he to whom the Lord will not
impute Iniquity. And as all the Prophets testify this, so the Law, both
Ceremonial and Judicial, were Types of it.

I come to the third thing, That Christ obeyed this Law for us. I shall leave
the Examination of both Extremes to a more proper place, and only Confirm the
Truth of it in a Scripture style, from these four Arguments. (1.) The
Metaphors. (2.) The Types representing it. (3.) The Particles signifying Legal
Change of Places. And (4.) From the Assertions and Reasonings of Scripture. For
the First, He is called a Mediator, One God, and one Mediator. Satan was a
Makebate, but Christ was Peacemaker; a Mediator acts in the Room of both
Persons at distance; as a King and Prophet he Acts on Gods part; as a Priest he
Acts on our Part. Secondly, He is an Advocate and Intercessor only for us; it is
a Part of his Priestly Office. (3.) I shall omit what the Reverend Mr. Brinsley
says, That Christ was our Attorney, and only a little explain the Title of a
Surety, Heb. 7. The great Questions are, (1.) What Covenant Christ was Surety
in? And (2.) On which side he is? The Socinians say, He is Surety for God to
us: but both against the Text, which makes Suretiship belong to his Priestly
Office. And 2ly. Reason, Would any believe a Man more than God? But in which
Covenant shall we believe him placed a Surety? in the Mediatorial he is Party,
so not Surety; but the being Party in that makes him Surety in ours: The end of
Security is to give ground of Trust, when the one Party is not responsible, or
the other distrustful: And I think in both, but with a difference, according to
their Nature: In the first, by way of Satisfaction; in the second, by way of
Caution: The first is a Law, the second a Testament; he became a Sacrifice by
the first, and as a Testator made the second; as to the first Mr. Rutherford
says, The Legal Bond wherein he put his Name, made a five-fold Union between
him and us. 1. One Legal Object, the Law equally obliges both. 2. One Debt, he
restored what he took not away: it became his Debt, though of our Contracting. 3.
One Payment, our Suffering is no Satisfaction; the Law can pursue none united
to Christ. 4. One Acceptance by the Governor or Creditor. 5. One Legal Effect,
what the one does, stands for both; we rose in him, and died in him; he takes
our Legal Condition, he was made under the Law, and under that part we were
under, to wit, the Curse; and our Names are put in his discharge; we share of
his Reward: He was made Sin for us, that we might be made the Righteousness of
God in him; it is an Accessory Obligation, when the Surety is subsequent, and
so does not free us, we are bound to obey still. The manner of Payment was by
Satisfaction. The Socinians find fault with the Word, but it is Scriptural:
Numb. 30.31. (...), which is there translated Satisfaction, is the same that is
translated Ransom, Atonement, Lev. 16. and Numb. 5.8. and the Greek answering
it, is applied to Christ, Romans 3.25. A Propitiation, and Chap. 5.11. an
Atonement, for these are but different Respects, expiating the Crime, ransoming
of the Offender, and attoning or propitiating the Governor offended. (2.) In
the Covenant of Grace, he is Surety by way of Caution and Bail, for performing
of Conditions, renewing our Obedience: He became Hostage, that we should lay
down Arms, and submit our selves, if he would forgive us: All that the Father
gives me, shall come to me, Joh. 6.37. We are by the Covenant of Grace bound
to keep all the Moral Law, and he is engaged before we go to Heaven, we shall
be perfect in it; he does not believe and repent for us, but has engaged we
shall; the Condition is not to be performed before we be in Covenant; but by
the Covenant which Christ by his Spirit has brought us into, we are bound to
perform it.

But the Book overgrowing the designed Bulk, I shall come to the Fourth and
last Head, that this is a Law of Faith; which I shall confirm from these six
Arguments. First, From the Denomination, Law of Faith, that is, a Law of Faith,
that is the Object of our Faith: the Phrase is usual; Romans 10.8. The Word of
Faith which we Preach. Gal. 3.2. The hearing of Faith. And Romans 4.13. The
Righteousness of Faith; and 1.17. Therein is the Righteousness of God revealed
from Faith to Faith: That is, says Sir M. Knat. in his Critical Observations,
the Righteousness that we are interested in by Faith, is revealed to our Faith,
that we may believe it, and be interested in it; and there is great Reason for
this Title; for the Mediatorial Law is not known by the Light of Nature or
Reason, but only by the Light of Faith, Gal. 3.12. The Law is not of Faith;
it is founded in Natural Light, but this Law is not, it is of Faith. (2.) If the
Righteousness we are justified by, be the Righteousness of Faith, then the Law
of that Righteousness is the Righteousness of Faith; but the Mediatorial
Righteousness is granted to be so. (3.) If the Gospel be the Narration of all
Christ did for us, in himself, by his Spirit, or Apostles, all with the offer
of it to us, and all this is called Faith, being the Object of it, Gal. 3.23.
Before Faith came we were under the Law; then justly the Law by which he was
regulated in all that Affair, was the Law of Faith. (4.) Since that Law is ^o
otherwise to us a Law, but to our Faith, not to our Works, what we should do,
the Mediatorial Office is too great Work for us, but it is a Measure to our
Faith, we may and ought to believe that Christ did as much for us as that Law
required; and there are as great things provided and prepared for us, as the
Promises annexed to that Law did contain. (5.) It is a most Pathetical
distinguishing Character, for all others required Works of Man.

Secondly, It is very agreeable in Matter, though not in Words, to the
Interpretation of the Text by Protestant Commentators; who say, that Law is
taken largely for Doctrine, and not without Reason; for the Jews call all
Divine Doctrine Law: Hence are these Titles of their Theology; Legal Science,
Doctrine of the Law, the Divine Law, and Medrilta; that is, according to
Hottinger, a Comment on Exodus, about two hundred and ten Years after Christ,
oh the 12th. Chap. 3. he cites Deuteronomy 29.1. These are the Words of the
Covenant, and thus expounds it: (...) the Covenant is nothing else but a Law:
and the Midrash on Leviticus, distinguishes thus between Statutes, Judgments,
and Laws, in Chap. 26.46. (...) The Law is (...) Doctrine, Learning, and (...)
Statutes are Midrashoth, Glosses, Expositions; and (...) Judgments are
Hadaenin, Decisions of Cases in Law: and Aben Ezra on psalm. 19.8. gives this
Etymon of it; the Law is called (...) Law, because it shows the Right way, and
Converts Souls, by taking away their Doubts and Fears. But since they mean by
Doctrine of Faith the Gospel, and the Gospel being regulated by this
Mediatorial Law; Law of Faith and Doctrine of Faith are the same things; and it
is usual in Scripture to use a Law and its Works of Righteousness
promiscuously: Hence without the Law and without Works are the same; and so the
Law of Faith and the Doctrine of Faith are the same; for it is a Doctrine of
what was done in Conformity to this Law.

Thirdly, The Opposition between the two Members in this Text does Confirm it;
for Law of Faith cannot be here understood a Law requiring Evangelical Faith,
as a specifical distinct Duty from the Works the other Law did require: For
first, Faith it self is a Work; 2 These. 1.11. The Work of Faith with Power. 1
These. 1.3. Remembering your Work of Faith; and in John, To Work the Work of God,
is to Believe: For thus there would be no Distinction betwixt the Law of Works
and Law of Faith; for the Moral Law required Faith in God, and the Ceremonial
Law required Faith in him that was Typified by their Sacrifices. But to come
nigher to this Opposition, as it is explained by the Socinians and Arminians,
it must either lie in the Object, or in the Precept, or Duty, but in none of
them. As to the Object, God and Christ, there is no Essential difference there;
for either it must be between the Persons, and then there must be three Faiths
specifically distinct: Or it must be between the Office and Nature, and we
cannot say there is any greater Distinction there between God and Mediator than
between God and Creator, God and Preserver, or Governor, or Sanctifier; all
which are Incitements and Motives of our Faith or Love, or as Mr. Durham calls
it, Objectum Considerationis; or as Cloppenburgh, Objectum Formale sub qua, but
not Ratio formalis quae vel propter quam; and such distinct Formalities make no
distinct Worship or Faith. We see the Lords bringing the People out of Egypt,
is set down as an Incitement to their Observation of the Moral Law: I am the
Lord thy God which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt; it is far from making
a new Law distinct from the Moral; so Gods becoming our Redeemer, and
delivering us out of the Regions of Darkness, and Prisons of Bondage, is the
strongest Motive that ever was; and this Sinning against such a Motive, which
is a Sin against the Gospel, is the greatest Sin; and as there is no
specifically distinct Object in the first Table, so there is none in the
second, to render our Evangelical Obedience to it, distinct from our Moral: For
the Sympathizing with our Neighbor under Adversity, as its said, Bear you one
another Burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ; it is no farther remote
from Loving our Brother, (being only Charity denominated from his Condition,)
than not stealing of his goods from him, killing of him, bearing false Witness
against him, or those other Precepts are; but it is called the Law of Christ,
because that kind of Love was the Spring of all his Obedience to the
Mediatorial Law; the principal part of his Work was to bear our Burden; but the
Socinians are in a greater difficulty here than others, who deny the Deity of
Christ, and yet do Religiously Worship him: Their Work should be how to find
out a new Table, not how to find out a new Law, to place a kind of Obedience in
that, is neither proper to God nor Man; nor are they altogether free of this
Task, who tho they own the Mediator to be God, yet as such talk of a specifical
distinct Law of Duties to him, from what we owe to God; as to Repentance, the
Ability to perform it, and the Acceptance of it, being interrupted and
imperfect Duty, flows from the Gospel; yet there is a Necessity that the Law it
is regulated by, be the same Law that was broken. It was Man's Duty to Love God,
to fear him, to have Faith in him, and to obey him; he has now by Sin omitted
these Duties, what is else the Essence of his Repentance, but the repeating and
renewing of it again; that he that broke the Law now keep it? If he observe not
the Law he did violate, it is no Repentance: Repentance and Primitive Obedience
differ no more than the Image of God that Man was created in, and Regeneration,
which is a renewing of him to the same likeness of Knowledge, Righteousness and
Holiness, as the Divine Nature is the rule of this Image both in one and the
other, else it were no Image; so that Holy and perfect Law of God, founded on
what is his due, from what he has been and is to the Creature, called the Moral
Law, is the same Rule to our Actions; distinct Formalities in Objects make
distinct Sciences and Arts, and may occasion distinct Precepts or Acts; for it
is an imperfect Law, if it reach not to every Condition of the Subject: Hence
Suarez says, The Law of Nature before and after the fall, differ only as the
Acts of the same Law in Time of Peace and War. The Law says one thing to a
Married Man, and another to an Unmarried; it has distinct Statutes to every
Condition, but the Law is one: A Law meets with many changes, and yet remains
the same; as a Man does, and is yet the same Man in Essence. (1.) In Use, it
may serve for directing the Obedient, convincing and condemning the Guilty, and
be the same Law still: So the Moral Law was that we were to be justified or
condemned by in the Primitive State; that use of it ceases: when the Sovereign
Prince Pardons, then the Dignity of the Intercessor, or his own Bowels of
Mercy, is his Measure. So God now proceeds with us according to what our
Mediator has done for us, that is the Law of Faith, not according to what we
have done: It is strange to say Faith in a Mediator will justify, and not
Faith in God; or that Faith in God belongs not to the Moral Law; or that its
now having a Pardon for its Object, and before a Reward, brings it under
another Law, the Angels have many a new Duty, and new Object of Faith, but
their Law remains the same.

(2.) The Law may meet with external Changes in its Administration, either by
Dispensation, when positive only, as the Ceremonial, or an (...), Abatement of
the Rigor in Words, but the Law the same that suffers the change.

(3.) The Law may suffer some Change in particular Precepts, which are its
Integral Parts. A Man is the same Man still, tho he lose his Thumb: Collective
Bodies are capable of Increase or Decrease, so Jus Collectum of Derogation,
Surrogation or Erogation, but Abrogation, or Obrogation, alters the Essence;
and until the Moral Law is Abrogate, we cannot expect one specifically distinct
from it.

But the Opposition is perspicuous thus: A Law that requires your Works, a Law
to be obeyed by you, and a Law that requires your Faith, a Law fulfilled by
another for you, which you ought to believe, and it thus Answers the Argument;
we are justified by most perfect Obedience, but we performed it not, it was
Christ.

Fourthly, It is manifest from the Context and Harmony of the Apostles
Discourse; he had all along joined the Laws and the Works together, which he
excluded from Justification: First, The pure Natural Law among the Gentiles.
Secondly, The manifold Mosaical; now he tells us of a Righteousness and a Law
that we may and must be justified by, if at all; is it reasonable or possible
to separate these two? Ver. 21, 22. But now the Righteousness of God is
manifested, -- Even the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus
Christ. If the one be the Righteousness of Christ the Mediator, surely the
other is the Law of it; shall we separate the Righteousness of Faith, and the
Law of Faith? The Text would not be a good Conclusion from what precedes,
without this; that which he had proved, was, there is no Justification by the
Deeds of the Law, but only by the Righteousness of God: Well, says he, if the
Case be so, Where is your Boasting? it is excluded. He draws his Conclusion,
Triumphing over them; How? By the Law of Faith. You are justified by the
Righteousness of God, you are justified in a way that excludes Boasting; the
Law of Faith excludes Boasting, and the Righteousness of God justifies you; do
not then these two Coincide, the one as the Work, the other as the Command; if
it were another Law, requiring a new kind of Obedience and Righteousness
distinct from what he had spoken of, he had drawn a Conclusion without any
Premises: There are two things should have been enlarged on. First, To prove
that this Righteousness is the Righteousness of Christ, as Mediator. The
Second, Whether or not this Law of Faith, referrs to the Righteousness as the
Rule of it, or the Faith by which it is applied. Both which I must deferr to
some proper Verses in the fourth Chapter; only at present, as to the first,
that 2 Pet. 1.1. may persuade any unprejudiced Person; Thorough the
Rsghteousness of God, and our Savior Jesus Christ: As to the second, our
Confession of Faith says, We are not justified by Faith, or that is not imputed
to us it self as an Act, nor any other Evangelical Obedience: But this is to be
treated in ver. 3.

Fifthly, This Law is a Law we can be justified by, and it is before proved,
that we cannot be by any Law requiring Obedience of us.

Sixthly, The difficulties that attend the Explication of it, by Socinians,
Arminians, and aliis melioris notae, who say, this Law is the Law of Christ the
Mediator, not as made under it, but as a Lawgiver, requiring Faith and
Repentance of us, as the Condition of an Interest in his Merits and
Justification by them. I say the difficulties that attend it, render it the
less credible. (1.) This Gospel-law or Law of Faith, must be a perfect Law,
requiring Faith in Perfection, Repentance in Perfection, and so other
Evangelical Obedience. Mr. Bull in his Examination, who is Zealous for this New
Law, and who as Mr. Pitcarn, one of his many Adversaries, says, is of the
greatest Acumen of the kind, he not only owns it, but proves it from Christ's
own Words, Mat. 5.48. when he was Promulgating his Law, Be ye perfect as my
Father in Heaven is perfect. 2 Pet. 3.18. Grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. On which he thus Acutely Comments: The
Commands of growth have no Bounds nor Limits, until we come to the Unity of the
Faith, and the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the
Measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ, and it is a certain Truth,
that there is no Duty in the Gospel wherein Gods Law only requires sincere and
not perfect Obedience; Patience should have its perfect Work, and that is a
special part of Evangelical Obedience: Either the Gospel Law or Law of Faith
must require Perfection of Obedience in these Duties, or some other Divine Law;
else God would become an Indulger of Sin by Law; if it be by another Law, viz.
the Moral, that he requires perfect Obedience, and by this sincere only, then
these two Laws differ but in Degree, not in Specie, or Kind; because both
require the same Duties or Works, and so this Gospel Law would be no Distinct
Law, but only the Measure of sincere Obedience would receive a new use, which
we own it has, to wit, to be an Index and Mark of our Justification, though we
cannot own that use of its giving Right; but to proceed, a distinct Law they
must hold, or quit their Cause, or this Foundation of it; for the Text sets the
Law of Faith down as an opposite Law to that of Works, and that they hold. (1.)
Then if it be a perfect Law, requiring perfect Obedience, there is no
possibility of Justification in this Life, Poppius the Arminian grants the
Conclusion, that our Obedience must be consummate before our Assurance; and
others distinguish between a Complete and Partial Justification; the former is
not, they say, until the day of Judgment. But this is not all the difficulty;
for it is the adding a Load to a Burden: Is this Gospel, to a Man that is unable
to perform the least part of the Moral Law, to tell him, that God or the
Mediator requires perfect Obedience to it for the Future, and another too? Or
is this Gospel, to say, you shall perish Aeternally, and have the Fire of Hell
seven times heated, if you obey not this Gospel? Its indeed a Conditional Hell,
but it is more dreadful than the Law-Hell, and the Condition is more impossible;
because we have less Power to shun this difficulty of two perfect Laws. Mr.
Bull owns no other perfect Law but this Gospel-Law, since Man fell; but by
shunning one difficulty he falls into two as great. (1.) Then the Moral Law is
abrogated; beside the falsness of the Doctrine it self, for it is impossible
that should cease to be our Duty, to love God with all our Heart, and Soul;
what Advantage brings Christ's Death? To abrogate one perfct Law, and establish
another; here is little Gospel. A second difficulty is, we must either say,
Christ has purchased to us Pardon for Sins against the Gospel-Law, or for none
at all, but that one Sin of Adam's, if the Moral Law be abrogat'd; after the
Fall we never sinned against any Law but the Gospel's, for we were under no
other Law, according to him; but how contrary is this to the Nature of the
Gospel, whose greatest Cordial is Remission of all Sins against the Law: He
brings a twofold Remedy or Solution to these Difficulties: 1. The Gospel
renders all the Duties possible it Commands; hence is it called the Power of
God, and Law of the Spirit: And the Reason, why the Law was imperfect before
the Gospel, was, because there was not Power to obey a perfect Law; God cannot
Command what is impossible: This is no less oppressed with Difficulty, than the
Distemper it is brought to Cure. For (1.) Does God lose his Right, because we
lose our Power; the Devils have no Power to obey, do they therefore not Sin? he
was a Liar and Murderer from the beginning, he continues it, does he not Sin in
it? If Sin be worse than Suffering, and there be no Sin in Hell, Hell is better
than this Earth. Some would help him at this strait, with the Distinction of
Moral and Physical Impotence; God cannot justly command what is Physically
impossible, but he may what is Morally so; but he Scoffs at it as an Impotent
Brat of Amyraldus, nursed by Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Truman; and I think it affords
little relief: For when the Impotence is insuperable, yea more unconquerable
than Physical Impotence, wherein is there a greater Foundation to Justice,
because Sinners like to have it so? are we not Mad and Distracted, and may we
impose on Fools what we will because they may like it? it looks like Tickling a
Man to Death. But 2dly. Granting that which is certainly false, that the Gospel
renders all it requires both Morally and Physically possible, it makes not the
Gospel better than the Law; for in Innocence all commanded was more than barely
possible. But the second and grand Remedy is, that tho the Law require perfect
Obedience, yet not under the Penalty of Death; there is no Law that threatens
Death to every Sin, but to particular kind of gross Sins, 1 Cor. 6.19. Gal.
5.19. Yea only to Impenitence: This is the Gospel Law, this is the (...); but
still difficulties attend it, and divide the Parties. (1.) Some say, this is an
aequi-just Interpretation of the Moral Law, others of the Gospel Law. (2.) Some
say, this is a Law and Constitution Evangelical by it self, others that it is
an Administration of the Law by Sovereign Power, set in a Throne of Grace, but
not Law. (3.) Some say, this is proper to the Gospel Law, others that the Moral
Law did admit of it also; and that if ^ve had had only an Inclination to eat of
the Forbidden Fruit (which in the Rigor of the Law was a Sin) and refrained
from completing the Act, which was the Violation of the Covenant formally, she
should not have died: It were too operose to follow all these Tracts, the
Multitude of them would render one Jealous, that they are not the Kings
Highway, but some private Paths, that do derogate from the True and Living
Way. In General, this does Enervate the Law of God, the Law of Faith
establishes the Law, but this does Emasculate it, and turn it into a mere
Counsel and Advice: What else is a Law without Sanction? Yea no Law; so there
is no Sin but Impenitence, and indeed they call the rest Venial peccadillo's.
Secondly, It is repugnant to the Moral Law to admit of Aequity, because it is
most aequal in it self; those Laws admit of Chancery and Aequity, that would in
some Circumstances become rigorous and cruel; but there is no such thing in the
Divine Law: It would be contrary to Aequity, and so unjust, to establish a Law
requiring partial Love to God, and partial Obedience. Thirdly, This Doctrine
opens a door to Antinomianisme; and History tells us it sprung from such a
Mistake, that Faith and Repentance were taught and commanded by the Gospel, and
they contained all necessary to Salvation; so the Law was needless: And
Lemborgh says much the same. The Gospel needs no Law to be a Schoolmaster to
lead to Christ; it has more terrible Threatenings of its own, than the Law has,
to drive men to Christ with, that Scripture Phrase belongs to the Ceremonial
Law. Fourthly, This would put an Honor on the Mediator above God, that
Imperfect Obedience to his Law might merit Heaven, or what is of as much worth,
an Interest in Christ a right to his Merits; but no less than Perfect Obedience
to Gods Law can merit it. Fifthly, It would much derogate from Gods Honor, who
is now content to give his Favor and his Rewards on easier rates than before;
he would have had perfect Service, now partial will serve: And consequently,
Sixthly, Boasting would not be excluded by the Law of Faith; for Man might
boast God was come to Easier Terms; he should lose Glory by the change of the
Covenants, not gain. But

(...)
