Imprimatur Doctissimus hic De Paradiso Terrestri Tractatus.

Jo. Hall, Rev. in Christo Patri, Humphredo, D. Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.
Apr. 3. 1666.
A DISCOURSE OF THE Terrestrial Paradise, AIMING At a more probable DISCOVERY
OF The true SITUATION of that happy place of our First Parents Habitation.

By MARMADUKE CARVER, Rector of Harthill in the County of York.

Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos
Ducit, and immemores non sinit esse sui.
Ovid. (...) --
Orac. Magic. LONDON, Printed by James Flesher, and are to be sold by Samuel
Thomson, at the Bishop's head in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1666.

TO The most Reverend Father in God, GILBERT, Lord Archbishop of CANTERBURY,
his Grace, Primate of all England and Metropolitan; and one of His MAJESTY'S
most Honorable Privy Council.
MAY it please Your Grace to vouchsafe the Patrociny of Your great and worthy
Name to this mean and unpolished Discourse, framed many years ago upon a
private occasion, and for private satisfaction only; but passing into the
hands of diverse eminently famous for their Piety, Learning, and Station in this
Church, was by them adjudged not unuseful to communicate to the Public, as
relating (though more remotely) to a Concern of the whole Catholic Church, (I
add, the Jewish Synagogue also) in vindicating the truth of Moses's
Description of the Terrestrial Paradise from the Blasphemies of Heathenish
Infidels, (Celsus, Porphyry, Julian the Apostate, etc.) and the more Heathenish
Christians of these later times, the Antiscripturists, who springing (as the
Spartae from the teeth of the Serpent, so these) from a prodigious mixture of
Pharisaism and Sadducism, epidemically raging in these last years, (under
various disguises) have arrived at length to that height of superlative
Insolence, as (among other their Blasphemies) to propound the History of
Paradise to scorn and derision, as a mere Utopia, or Fiction of a place that
never was, to the manifest and designed undermining of the Authority and
Veracity of the Holy Text: the conservation of which (next under his Sacred
Majesty, the great Defender of the Faith) being by the Divine Providence
entrusted to Your Grace, (whom he has extraordinarily furnished with all
excellent Gifts for the Government of so eminent a portion of his Catholic
Church as this is of which he has made Your Grace Overseer) I was encouraged,
and soon after emboldned, (by the experience of Your generally-known and
unparalled Clemency, Candor, and Condescension, not to have been expected by
one so inconsiderable and a stranger) to advance to this presumption, to crave
Your Grace's Patronage for what may herein be observed conducing to the
Vindication thereof: Not altogether doubting (considering the Cause wherein I
am engaged) but that he who out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings perfecteth
strength to still the enemy and avenger, may so level this pebble taken out of
the bag of a poor Shepherd, as, if not to pierce the brow, yet to stop the
mouth of that Goliath that blasphemeth the Host of the living God. For the many
mistakes, errors and imperfections which everywhere will betray the weakness
of the Author, as I humbly crave Your Grace's and the Church's pardon and
pity, as being not only easy for me to fall into, but (considering the great
disadvantages I labor under) morally impossible for me to avoid; so for the
blame of them I am content (after much reluctance to the publishing of them) to
charge my self with it, being not unwilling to sacrifice my own credit to save
(though but in this one particular) the Credit of the Holy Scriptures. Our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Great Shepherd of the Sheep, and Archbishop of our Souls,
long preserve Your Grace, to the great good of his Church; and, having served
Your Generation by the will of God, vouchsafe You that Crown of Glory that
fades not away, reserved at his appearing for all that faithfully serve him:
Which is the daily Prayer of

Your Grace's humbly and affectionately devoted Servant, M. C.

To the Judicious and Ingenuous Reader, especially the professed Divine.
HOW many Pens have been employed in this Enquiry concerning the Place of the
Terrestial Paradise, and how much rubbish has been dug up, and dust raised,
to the great hindrance of discovering that which was so eagerly sought for by a
multitude of contradictory Opinions, and some of them hardly reconcilable to
Sense or Reason, is sufficiently known to all, and is too manifest by the
Consequents. For while some have evacuated the Letter, to plant a Cabalistical
or Allegorical Paradise of their won, others sought for Paradise under the Orb
of the Moon, or far above the tops of the highest Mountains, without the vierge
of this habitable world; and others taking it for the whole compass of the
Earth, and others for this part, others for that, some under the Equinoctial
line, and some under the Arctick Pole, or Antarctick Circle, some in the
East Indies, some in the West, some in Syria, some in Judaea, and some of late
in France; (and indeed where not, where a wanton fancy or an ignorant impudence
is pleased to place it?) and with no less absurdities vexing the four Rivers
with incredible down-falls and uprisings, in so occult passages and strange
distances, that to undertake in good earnest to confute them were to be mad for
company: It is come to pass that the faith of very many has been stumbled, and
in some turned to so professed a despair of finding that place, that they count
it not only an impossibility, but an impiety, to attempt a discovery of it;
(Impie, locum quaeris quem Deus occultum velit, says Pererius.) Though it
cannot be denied that Moses did on purpose enlarge himself in so full and exact
a Topography, (the like not to be found in the Scriptures, or scarce any
Secular Author) to acquaint the men of his Age, (whereto his Description is
fitted) and all succeeding Generations, with the true Situation of that Place.
But (which is worst of all) beside the mischief hereby occasioned to Believers,
it has opened the mouths of Atheists and Infidels, to impeach the Holy
Scriptures of falsehood, who (both in former and latter days) have hereby taken
advantage to propound the History of Moses to be considered at no higher a rate
then a mere Romance.

The first that I meet withal (after the Dotages of the Schoolmen upon this
Question were found so far unable to occur, as rather to foment this Scandal,)
was Augustinus Steuchus Bishop of Eugubium, who, by the advantage of the
Vatican Library, (whereof he was Keeper) did first (as himself says in his
learned Cosmopoeia upon Genesis) undertake to assert the Description of
Paradise to a Consonance of Historical and Geographicall verity: And herein he
was followed by diverse Learned men: and in Anno 1581. the Divines of Lovain set
out a Topographicall Description and Map of Paradise, (accordingly as he had
hinted) about the Confluence of Tigris and Euphrates in Babylonia. But the
Learned Franciscus Junius pursuing the overture of that Discovery, but pitching
the place a little more to the North in the same Region, did with so much
accurateness clear this Question, that the whole Church of God is much beholden
to him for this, and not a little for other his Annotations relating to Sacred
Geography, wherein I know none before him, and very few since him, that are to
be admitted to a Competition of the honor of that service. And if that Worthy
man had been as happy in pitching upon the right place, as he was elaborate in
his Description of Paradise, there would have needed no more to have been said
upon this Argument, for satisfying that imbred desire we all are affected with,
to know the Place of our First Parents Habitation, or to stop the mouth of the
Enemy and Blasphemer.

In my younger years and first Tyrociny in Divinity, while I was yet more
patient of study, (my body not being then broken with so many and great
infirmities as now it is, and for many years has been) I was desirous
(according to the means that I had) to satisfy my self in this Question. For
though it be not of so high a nature but that many a good Christian, holding
the mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience, may be ignorant of it without
hazard of his Salvation; yet I always conceived that when we speak of
Theology as a Science, (which is the Profession of the Divine) whatsoever the
Holy Ghost has revealed in the Sacred Code, though of remoter concernment,
belongs ex officio to our cognizance and study. The Opinion of Junius having at
that time so universally obtained, and (which is rare, and an argument of the
great verisimilitude that it carried with it) being both approved and improved
by Learned men of both Persuasions, (both Protestants and Papists) I saw great
reason to acquiesce in it, as believing it might be made good against all
oppositions; until, upon a stricter examination, some Doubts did arise, and
afterward multiply, to suggest a fear whether he might not have mistaken his
ground, and consequently whether it might be safe to hazard the trial of this
Question upon those Evidences which the place he pitched upon might seem to
afford. And hereupon being brought again under an unquiet of mind, I was
enforced to cast about, and enquire whether some other place might not happily be
discovered, that with greater probabilities might answer the Description of
Moses: and having arrived to some satisfaction therein, it happened that,
undertaking to preach through the History of the Creation before an Honorable
Auditory, when that Paragraph of Paradise came in its course to be spoken to;
giving an Interpretation according to the apprehensions I had entertained,
which could not be without some reflection upon Junius, (but briefly, and
remembering my self to be in the Pulpit) a very Worthy Gentleman of happy
memory, (Sir Richard Diet, one of the Council in the North) well known and much
honored in those parts for his Prudence, Integrity and excellent
accomplishment in all kind of Learning, having thoroughly digested the Opinion
of Junius, as it is also farther managed by Sir Walter Raleigh, was pleased to
entertain a debate with me about it, and for diverse days to discuss the
Question; till at length there was raised in him also a jealousy, that the
Description of Junius was not so exactly adapted to that of Moses as he had
apprehended; and thereupon desired me to draw up in writing what I had
meditated upon the whole matter: which accordingly I did, having the benefit of
the Library of the Cathedral-Church of St. Peter's in York, and the great
happiness and exceeding great advantage (never to be forgotten by me) of daily
commerce with a Reverend, Pious, and Learned Divine, who both encouraged me to
the undertaking, and prevailed with me to communicate the perusal of it to some
others; by which means the notice and censure of it has come into the hands of
as worthy, judicious, grave, and every-way-eminent Divines, both for Learning
and Piety, as this Church has any, (and I think it has many not to be
equalled in the Christian world.)

It is now six and twenty years ago and upward since the first (and only)
Copy was drawn up, with no intention at all as then, and long time after, (till
of very late) to publish it: in which space of time I have had occasion to
observe diverse collateral Testimonies, which might have been inserted into the
Text for confirmation and illustration of many passages in the Discourse; but
that I abhor the very thought of a new task, to the certain ruin of my
health, already broken even to a disability of writing, otherwise then by the
hand of an Amanuensis. And for this cause I have waved the advice of some, whom
I have great cause to respect, persuading me to put it into the Latin Tongue,
and to divide the continued Discourse into several Sections with their
Summaries, for the more accommodate use and ease of the Reader, (for the supply
of that defect I acknowledge to be wholly due to the favor and pains of a
Friend,) being content to exhibit and submit it as it was in the first Copy,
without any alteration at all, to the Judgment of this Church in which I was
born, and in which, by the Grace of God, I serve, hoping for her Indulgence in
faults upon the by, so I approve mine intention in the main, which is briefly
this; That there was in Armenia Major a Region called Eden, in the Eastern part
whereof there was and is a River, which with one entire Chanel having watered
the place where the Earthly Paradise was planted, does afterward branch it self
into four Streams, each respectively running in the same Course, and through
the same Countries as Moses has set them, and the Countries themselves even in
after-Ages retaining the same Names and Characters by which he has described
them. Each particular whereof if I have made good by the testimony of two or
three credible Witnesses, (for the Law requires no more, and I have brought no
less;) I shall acknowledge I have attained what I aimed at, and shall
contentedly bear the imputation of many other failings upon the by, which were
impossible for me to avoid. For under that imperfect discovery which we have of
those places where the scene of this Discourse lies, none of the Ancients
having furnished us with Tables but only Ptolemy, and his but imperfect ones,
and few describing those Regions to any purpose, so that it was necessary to
make up that defect by scattered Testimonies to be gathered here and there
where I could find them, and to be managed many times by Conjectures; it will
be no wonder if I become obnoxious to mistakes; and he shall forget his
Interest in the common Humanity that shall be too rigorous in imputing them.
Grant me, upon the Testimonies here produced, that Four such Streams as Moses
speaks of were acknowledged for real in after-Ages, and if I err in the
precise point of place where any of them breaks from the main Stream, or in the
Decourse of it with all it its gyres and windings, with the reception of other
Rivers into it, and many such like, I shall willingly acknowledge such
unavoidable mistakes, so the main chance be saved. And as I speak this with
reference to the Map, which must serve as a Commentary to the Discourse, and
was drawn by me as near as I could to the Tables of Ptolemy; so in the
Discourse it self, in those larger Digressions which I make upon the Countries
themselves through which those Rivers pass, I will not affirm that every
Conjecture I make is infallible, or that I may not have erred in diverse
particulars incidental to the Illustrations which were necessary for me to
prosecute: yet am I not only willing, but desirous, to see those mistakes
amended. and have some hope that, by the help of those Learned men who have
begun to open the treasuries of the Orient unto us, particularly the
Translation of the Arabic Geographers, much light may be fetched, as for
rectifying what is amiss, so for confirming much of what I have observed; which
howsoever it may appear New to the men of this Generation, I perceive by such
Writings as have been translated since this Treatise was finished, has
obtained the credit of ancient and received Truth in those Eastern parts. And
upon this occasion I could wish, that having so great helps from the knowledge
of Tongues, plenty of Commentaries, and the like, a little more diligence might
be added, as for perfecting Sacred Chronology, so for improving Sacred
Geography; for want of which not only many excellent Treatises have suffered
some blemishes, but a good portion of the Holy Text has lain upon our hands
unimproved; yea (which is saddest of all, and therefore most to be heeded) some
places of Scripture have been carped at, and made use of by the Adversary, to
elevate and disparage the credit of it self: as this very place which I have to
discourse upon may serve for an Instance too notorious, which through the
negligence of former times, in not making out the truth of it by the help of
Geography, but blanching it over with Allegorical, or impertinent and
ridiculous Interpretations, has suffered even to the imputation of a Fable,
(for that is the usual style that Julian in his Blasphemous Rhetorications is
accustomed to bespatter the Writings of Moses withal.) And this gives me
often occasion to wonder, whence it should come to pass (except to palliate
sloth, and ignorance thence arising) that matters of this nature should be so
slighted, and accounted of by very many but as mere Parerga, or things of so
minute and invaluable consideration as not to deserve our study: whereas it is
certain that, without the help of Sacred Geography, the immediate Literal sense
of the Text (which is the Basis of all true Interpretation) cannot in many
places be made out, nor the History cleared, nor the Questions obviously
presenting themselves discussed; so that if any one stick morosely upon the
spirit of any man unsatisfied, it is hardly credible what mischief this may
amount to. For the wily Serpent, that early found a hole to creep into
Paradise, if he can but get advantage upon such dissatisfaction to suggest a
Temptation to discredit, or but doubt of, the truth of any Particle of
Scripture, will by degrees improve it to a questioning, and at length a denying
the truth of the whole. To quicken our industry to this study, we have not
only the example of the Ancients, who held it to be of singular use, (as
appears by Eusebius's Book (...), which St. Hierom for that cause translated
into Latin, with diverse additions of his own;) but the great encouragement
which these Times afford, by the favor of our most Gracious SOVEREIGN, not
only countenancing, but effectually promoving, the advancement of all kind of
Learning: By means whereof as the Book of Nature may seem to have received a
new Edition by the farther Discoveries of the Secrets of Philosophy; so no
doubt the Book of the Scriptures also may receive much light, for the farther
discovery of many useful Truths, both in the History and Mystery, that have not
yet been so heedfully attended to. An evident Specimen whereof we have in the
Writings of the Learned Bochartus, and the hopeful Overtures already begun, and
successfully prosecuted, by our alike-learned Dr. Lightfoot.

But I fear (courteous Reader) lest by this time I may have tired thy patience
with this long Preface, which yet was requisite for me to write, and thee to
read; that I might acquaint thee with the motives and manner of my proceeding
in this Discourse, and thou might be prepared to entertain it with the more
Candor: which notwithstanding I desire not to improve beyond its due bounds, or
to prejudice the freedom and liberty of thy Judgment: for as I have dealt with
Junius, I am content, yea desire, to de dealt withal my self. But then I must
a^sure thee not to mistake my dealing with him: for if thou should imagine
that I quarrel with him upon the main matter, thou shall wrong both him and me
and thy self. I look upon Junius as the ablest Assertor of the Cause I contend
for, and from whom I received the Light by which I was enabled to search into
this Question: It is not the truth of the History of Paradise that I have to
debate with him, but the Situation of it only in respect of the place, and the
accommodation of Moses's Description to it; in which if I have found some
reasons (and here thou have them) to believe that he might be mistaken, and
thereupon have been bold to transferr the materials to be set up in a more
convenient place, I have but followed the example of Junius himself, (who in
like manner dealt with those that went before him) and reserve a free liberty
to every man to vindicate his Opinion from the Objections th^^ the Adversary
may be able to make against it, (which shall be most grateful to me) or himself
to prompt us to a more probable place then this I have pitched upon; which
though I will not assert upon so high terms as to pass my word that I have not
erred, yet I have not had as yet any prevailing argument to move me to distrust
but that I may have pitched upon the right. And all this may be done without
giving any advantage to the common Adversary, who (how impudent so ever) can
with no more pretense of reason draw this into consequence, that there was no
such place as Paradise, or so situated as Moses had set it, because we are not
yet fully agreed upon that very spot of ground where it was; then that there
was no such City in Persia as Persepolis, destroyed by Alexander, because such
as have undertaken to give us an account of the Situation of it conformable to
such Characters as ancient Historians have described it by, are not yet agreed
upon their Verdict, whether it was Shivaz, or Estacher; or that there were no
such Colonies of the Romans here in England as Lindum, Cambodunum, and many
more, because our Antiquaries are at variance in describing the places where
they stood, some placing them in one place, some in another As for thy part,
(Christian Reader, for such I here suppose thee to be, believing the infallible
Veracity of the Holy Scriptures) it will be no point of wisdom in thee to
smite thy Friends, to gratify thy Adversaries: Our Contentions are no more but
a farther advance in clearing and vindicating the Holy Text, in which thou and
the whole Christian (yea and Jewish) Church are equally engaged as well as we:
nor had this Discourse of mine ever (with my consent) seen the light, had I not
lately been provoked thereunto upon this very Question by the unsufferable
Insolence and Insultation of some Antiscripturists, a Generation of men lately
sprung up amongst us, and growing very numerous and exceeding bold, owing their
extraction to the most virulent poison of the leven of the Pharisees and
Sadducees, (the perpetual Pests of true Religion) now complying together in a
mystical mixture, and much improved by the effectual working of the spirit of
Antichrist in a multitude of confused Sects (both Fanatics and Pro-fanaticks,)
freely dominearing in these late years, and (however disagreeing among
themselves) yet agreeing all together in this, to subvert the Foundation of
Faith and the Power of Godliness; such as are our Familists, Antinomians,
Libertines, Hobbians, Ranters, Quakers and Seekers, beside a great number of
many others, who (though not so directly and immediately) have by their
pernicious and seditious Doctrines contributed not a little to promote this
Mystery of Iniquity, and to make way for the birth of this Monster that now
begins to appear upon the stage, (a Monster more prodigious then Africa ever
bred) to wit, a Christian Atheist, acting all the parts of an avowed Infidel
under an Hypocritical (and therefore more odious) outside of a baptized
Believer, professing Religion for no other end but to jear it, and reading the
Bible for no other end but to blaspheme it; whom to discover and oppose. I
doubt not but every good Christian, whose heart is touched with any zeal for
the Honor of God and his Holy Truth, will take himself equally concerned to
engage with me to the utmost of his power. As for those whose custom it is (as
Sir Thomas More has observed long ago) to make themselves merry upon their
Ale-bench with the Writings of others, and think themselves extremely witty if
they can break a scurrilous jest (the Evaporation of Drink and a profane
spirit) either upon the Argument or the Author; as we are willing to take
notice of them among the former company, so for their Censure we referr them to
the Judgment of him who will take an account of every idle word that men shall
speak; in the mean time wishing them more sobriety.

And now (good Reader) I shall keep thee no longer from the perusal of this
Discourse, (lately mine, but now made thine) only desiring that we may all
double our Prayers to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he
would inspire continually the Universal Church with the spirit of Truth, Unity,
and Concord; and grant that all they that do confess his Holy Name may agree in
the truth of his Holy Word, and live in Unity and godly Love: And especially
those whom he has appointed to watch over the Souls of his people, that they
may attend faithfully to the Ministry which they have received of the Lord to
fulfill it, by contending earnestly for the Faith that was once delivered to
the Saints, and opposing vigorously, with united hearts and hands, those
overflowings of Atheism and Ungodliness that are breaking in upon us, like a
mighty Torrent, and by asserting the Truth of God and his Holy Word in the
evidence and demonstration of the Spirit and power, confirming such as stand,
and supporting those that are ready to fall, by removing stumbling blocks out
of the way of the weak, stopping the mouth of the Adversary, and plucking up
the Tares which the Enemy has sown; endeavoring (as much as in us lies) to
present every man blameless at the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose
Fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor; and gather his Wheat
into his garner, but the Chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire.

AMEN.
Errata.
Page Lin. 14. 25. Hededis, r. Hedenis 16. 3. (...), r. (...)

A DISCOURSE OF The Terrestrial Paradise.
CHAP. I.
The Opinion of Junius concerning the place of Paradise proposed.
THE Opinion of Junius concerning the place of Paradise (which is almost
generally followed by all Interpreters since his time, not Protestants only,
(both Lutherans and Calvinists) but even the most ingenuous and learned
Papists) is, that it was situated in Chaldaea, in the Region which Ptolemy
calls Auranitis, which he supposes by the change of a letter to have been
corrupted from Audanitis or Edenitis. The River watering it he takes to be the
main stream of Euphrates, which toward the end of his course divides it self
into four branches. The first toward the West, which divides betwixt Chaldaea
and Arabia the desert (which Mose's calls the land of Cush, or, as we (with
others) Aethiopia) is that which Ptolemy calls Baar-sares, Strabo Maar-sares,
Ammianus more corruptly Marsias, Abydenus (...), because it emptieth it self
into certain Fens abounding with Frogs, which the Chaldaeans call Akrukan: and
this he supposes to be that which Moses calls Gihon, the signification of
their names so well agreeing, which in both is as much as Alveus, fosse atumve
deductum atque distractum. The second branch is that which runs through
Babylon and Otris, and is by Ammianus (...) called Euphrates, and therefore
without straining supposed to be Moses's (...) The third is that which Pliny
says the Assyrians commonly called Armalchar, Ammianus (more truly)
Nahar-malca, Abydenus by a Metathesis (...), and is the very same put into
Greek which Ptolemy calls (...). This he conceives to be Pishon, which
breaking from the main stream at a Town (taking name therefrom) called by
Ammianus Macepracta (or, as he would have it read, Maja-prakta) by Pliny
Massice, and running into the River Tigris at Apamea, not only mingleth his
water, but his name with it, which from thenceforth is called Pasitigris, or
Pisotigris, and entering the Persian Gulf at Teredon, waters by the way the
whole Region of Havila, where there is Gold, Bdellium, and the Onyx-stone; that
is (as he expounds it) the Country of Susiana, where all those precious
things are to be found. The fourth and last branch, called by Moses Hiddekel,
he supposes to be that Rivolet mentioned (but without name) by Ammianus, which
being drawn out of Nahar-malca, emptieth it self into Tigris at Seleucia and
Ctesiphon,, and so runs Eastward toward Assyria, as he renders Moses words,
Genesis 2. 14. These four Heads, all drawn from the same River, suiting so
handsomely with the description of Moses, besides the incredible fruitfulness
of the Eastern part of this Region, (where he conceives the very Garden-spot
to have been) so highly extolled by diverse Authors of good credit, work over
the exact judgment of this learned man to so firm a belief that this was the
very place created by God for the habitation of our first Parents, that he
doubts not to conclude his exact and elaborate Discourse with this confident
close, Atque hic quidem Hedenis situs, qui mea sententia tam manifestus est,
and documentis certis confirmatus, ut a nemine in dubium vocari possit.
Comment. in Genesis c. 2.

CHAP. II.
Junius his Opinion examined, and the weakness of the Conjecture from the name
Auranitis manifested.
BUT (by the leave of so worthy a man) though a great verisimilitude present it
self in this Description at the first sight, yet being more narrowly examined,
so many Scruples arise to counter-sway our belief as may justly retard our
assent, and suggest very great causes of doubting. For, 1. what he brings
from the name of the Region Aur anitis for Audenitis or Edenitis, by mistaking
r for d, this is but gratis dictum, and a Conjecture (for I think he esteemed
it no more) of no great probability: for though errors in transcriptions be
very common, (in which regard Conjectures sometimes become very useful) Scimus,
and hanc veniam petimusque damusque vicissim;

yet this does not appear to have any solid ground, because r and d are literae
contrarii ductus, the one drawn downward, the other upward; which kind of
mistakes as they are not so easy, so neither are they so usual. Besides, the
name of this Region is diversely delivered out of Ptolemy, none of which much
favors this Conjecture. Ortelius in his Nomenclator Ptolemaicus calls it
Auramitis, Maginus's Edition of Ptolemy has it Auchanitis; and I should
suppose (for we are but upon conjectures) that this should come nearest the
true reading, the depressed draught of the upper part of ^ (frequent in
Manuscripts) being mistaken for a ligature with the following i, i. e. ^ for
VI, and so the true name might happily be Auchaditis, or Achaditis, from the City
Accad, one of the first four which Nimrod built in this Province, the Land of
Shinar, Genesis 10. which ancient name might still continue to the Region, though
the City it self changed its name (yet a name (as I suppose) either of the same
or equivalent signification in the Chaldee tongue.) Hieronym. Trad. Heb. in
Genesis Achad, quae nunc dicitur Nisibis. Idem de loc. Heb. Achad urbs regni
Nimrod in Babylone. Porro Hebraei hanc esse dicunt Mesopotamiae civitatem, quae
hodie quoque vocatur Nisibi, a Lucullo quondam Romano Consule obsessam
captamque, and ante paucos annos a Joviniano Imperatore Persis traditam. But I
cannot assent to S. Hierom's Rabbis, that Achad built by Nimrod was Nisibis
under Mount Masius in Mesopotamia, for that is out of the Vierge of the Land of
Shinar; but another in Chaldaea upon the River Euphrates, diverse times
mentioned by Josephus, especially Antiq. lib. 18. c. ult. circa initium.
Neardea dicitur urbs Babyloniae, frequens populo, and agro fertili, qui tantam
multitudinem possit alere: ad haec non patet hostium assultibus, cincta
fluentis Euphratis and firmissimis moenibus. Eidem flumini est and Nisibis
apposita: and again, circa finem ejusdem cap. Plerique (Judaeorum) in Neardam
and Nisibin se receperunt, securitatem suam reponentes in earum munitionibus,
quae alioquin etiam habitantur a viris bellicocissimis; for it was a
Frontier-town and a Garrison, as the name imports. Jun. in Genesis c. 10. v. 10.
But this we are content shall pass for a surmize only, not an assertion, as
intending here no more but to oppose one Conjecture against another.

CHAP. III.
A second Inconvenience of Junius his Account, as not suiting with Moses's
description of the Rise of the River of Paradise.
2. A More considerable Doubt arises from the River, which Moses affirms to
take its spring out of Eden, and having watered the Garden with one entire
channel, (...) ab inde, after that it divides it self into four Heads. Thus
much Lambert. Danaeus in Antiq. diligently weighing the Text of Moses has
judiciously observed; to whom Alstedius (though a precise follower of Junius's
Topography) does assent. His words are these, Encyclop. l. 20. Historic. c. 11.
Recte igitur Lambertus Danaeus in Antiquitatibus ait, quatuor illa flumina
fuisse unius and ejusdem aquae sive fluvii ex Edene regione nascentis divortia
seu brachia; Et addit, Fontem istum and fluvium ex eo emanantem in Edene
regione, antequam se in divortia illa quatuor diduceret, Hortum illum
terrestrem irrigasse, and quidem totum adhuc and non divisum: postquam autem
totum Hortum irrigaverat, tunc se infra Hortum in quatuor ista flumina
divisisse. How this can agree with the Description of Junius, I see not; for,
in his opinion, the Garden of Eden was placed in the utmost corner of Chaldaea,
in an Island made by Nahar-malca and Tigris. These are his words. Fuit igitur
Hedenis hortus, non in ea part Hedenis quae cis Babylonem est, sed in
orientali part trans Babylonem situs secundum Basilium and Tigrim fluvium, ubi
fertilissimus est totius Orientis ager. But Euphrates ere it attain thus far
has spent all its divisions, being it self ready to be swallowed up of Tigris,
who here intercepts a great part of his waters, and carries them with him into
the Persian Gulf, leaving him no further place for after-divisions: which that
he (or at least his follower Alstedius) wh ohath transcribed and approved the
observation of Danaeus, should not take notice of, might well be wondered at, if
a second error (or slumber rather) no less strange did not at the same time
equally possess them both, about the Head of this River, which Moses plainly
affirms to have its rise in Eden, and having watered the Garden, afterward to
divide it self. Now Geographers commonly place the Head of Euphrates in the
Northern part of Armenia major, where at its first rise it is called Pyxirates
say Strabo and Pliny, or rather (as Junius himself corrects them) Puc-perath,
i. e. profusio Euphratis, from which place to the nearest part of Auranitis in
Babylonia is above 7 degrees distance, which make up 400 miles and above: all
which space of ground having coursed through with a large circle, he is so far
from meeting any Paradise, when entering Babylonia he is about to divide his
Channels, (as according to Moses's description he ought) that contrariwise he
hasteneth through as unfruitful a piece of ground as any on the face of the
Earth, having Arabia Deserta on the right hand, and the no less barren Deserts
of Mesopotamia on the left, as by experience they have found who have led
Armies that way; witness Xenophon in the Expedition of Cyrus, Ammianus and
Zosimus in the Expedition of Julian, etc. Junius may seem to have had some
foresight of this Objection as ready to encounter him, and therefore in favor
of his opinion he translates (...) in Genesis 2. 10. not exit (though he
ingenuously confess that is the proper importance of the Hebrew word) but
procedit, as willing to persuade us that Moses did not mean, that the River had
its spring in Eden, (for that he knew and confesses to be altogether
irreconcilable with his description) but only that it did proceed or pass
through it: Therefore he gives us this Note; Non oritur quidem (nam Euphratis
ortus in Caranitide Armeniae major is Praefectura est, ubi Puc-perath, id est,
profusio Euphratis appellatur, non autem Pyxirates, ut legitur apud Strabonem,
and Plinium libro quinto Nature. histor. cap. vigesimo quarto,) sub radicibus
montis quem Capoten incolae nominant, sed delapsus per varios anfractus Hedenem
usque procedit quatuor alveis sive capitibus, ut deinceps ostenditur. Quamobrem
procedit potius quam exit maluimus interpretari causa evidentiae. But doubtless
the Text would have been more clear if he had translated it faithfully as he
found it, and not played the Paraphrast in stead of the Interpreter, especially
in the very body of the Text. No man knew better then Junius, that the proper
signification of (...) is to issue forth, as children in the birth do out of
the wombs of their mothers, whereunto (in regard of that proluvies, quam simul
cum foetu profundere solet puerpera) God himself compares the first issuing
forth of the Sea at its creation, Job 38. 8. And if the native propriety of the
word in this place be not sufficient to evince it, the preposition (...)
following in (...) puts it out of doubt; for the proper use of that particle is
to denote motum a loco, not per locum, or ad locum; nor does the holy Ghost,
when he would signify the decourse of a River by, through, or to a place,
express it by (...), but by (...), as Ezra 8. 15. True, our learned Countryman
Mr. Fuller has Miscel. l. 1. c. 4.
observed 2 (and but only 2) places in the old Testament, where (...) may seem
to denote terminum ad quem, viz. Genesis 13. 11. and 2 Samuel 6. 2. But seeing the
circumstances of the place seem to require it in the one, and an express
character in the Hebrew text in a parallel place 1 Chronicles. 13. 6. does warrant
it in the other, lest any should wrest this improper use to the prejudice of
the undoubted signification of this particle in other places, he subjoyns this
Caution: Rarus est hic usus particulae istius in Hebraea quidem lingua, in
Arabica vero frequens, etc. And strange it is, that Junius having in the Text
changed exit into procedit, should not also have changed ex into usque; for
what unprejudicate Reader taking his Text without his gloss, Fluvius autem
procedit ex Hedene, but would from the obvious importance of the words collect,
that the original of this River was in Eden? certainly, exit ex can import
nothing else.

CHAP. IV.
An examination of the four Channels mentioned by Junius, and first of the
upper Stream of Nahar-malca.
3. AS the main Stream is not able to wash it self from all Doubts, so neither
the Channels; which are like to meet with such obstructions, as may endanger to
turn them quite out of Paradise. For not to question the number of the Rivers,
(though undoubtedly Euphrates had more drainings; Those flumina) Babyloniae,
Psalm. 137. 1. where the Captive Israelites sat, were (perhaps) none of these,
especially if the testimony of Alexander Polyhistor be true, apud Eusebius. Praep.
Evang. l. 9. c. ult. Temporibus, inquit, Joachin, Hieremias prophetavit, qui
missus a Deo, cum Judaeos aureo simulachro, cui nomen er at Baal, sacrificantes
reperisset, futuram eis propter hoc calam it atem praedixit; unde Joachin vivum
jussit cremari. Illum autem dixisse, Foveas ipsos a Rege Assyriorum captos
juxta Tigridem atque Euphratem eisdem lignis facturos. The River Sud, Baruch 1.
4. the River Chebar, so often mentioned in Ezechiel's Visions, whether they
were any of these four, and which of them, or rather none of them, I know not.
Ammianus himself, quoted by Junius, tells us that one of these Rivers (viz.
that which runs through Babylon) was subdivided into other three, all
navigable. Perfluunt has easdem terras, potiores ante alios omnes ij quos
praediximus, and Marsias, and Flumen regium, and Euphrates cunctis excellens:
qui tripartitus per omnes rivos navigabilis est, insulasque circumfluens, and
arva cultorum industria diligentius rigans, vomeri and arbustis gignendis
habilia facit. But because many Authors of good credit have agreed upon this
number of four, especially Xenophon (though he mis-call Euphrates by the name
of Tigris) and Geograph. Nub. who gives an exact account of them all; therefore
(with thanks to Junius for his accurate pains in opening to us the Chorography
of this Region) we subscribe to this partition, as containing (though not all,
yet) the most remarkable branches of Euphrates: but to accept them as the four
Heads of the River of Paradise, we cannot; for a main prejudice lies against
most of them, that they are of a later date then to reach the antiquity of that
place, yea some of them fall short of the age of Moses. Thus much the Authors
themselves alleged by Junius clearly testify, acknowledging them to have
been manufactitious, and drawn out of the main Stream by the industry of men.
To insist a little upon the particulars ordine retrogrado. The upper Stream of
Nahar-malca, which falls at Seleucia into Tigris, and from it (as Junius
supposes) borrows the name of Hiddekel, is so inconsiderable a Rivolet, that
ancient Geographers (taking it only for an Aquaeduct, as indeed it was no
more) have made no mention of it among the branches of Euphrates, and therefore
assigned that Eastern Island (where he imagines the Garden to have been) to
Mesopotamia, not to Babylonia. His own words are these. Chiddekel, Hededis a
Septentrione terminus, proprie quidem significat Tigrin; hic autem synecdochice
denotat superiorem Nahar-malcae vel Basilii alveum, qui supra Seleuciam influit
in Tigrin, and nomen ejus mutuatur: quem alveum prisci Geographi manufactum
fuisse rati non retulerunt inter Euphratis alveos; sed potius insulam quam
Euphrates cum Tigri efficit a Seleucia Apameam usque Mesopotamiae, ac non
Babyloniae, tribuerunt. That all this is true, Ptolemy is a sufficient witness,
who therefore makes but three branches of Euphrates, as acknowledging this for
a Pseudo-river, and not worth the mentioning. Nor is there any great likelihood
(in my opinion) of that Conjecture, that the name Hidclito which Pliny gives
Tigris (not when it passes by Seleucia, but at its first rise in Armenia,
remote many hundred miles Northward from this place) should diffuse it self
into this River, which is not of his progeny, but the degenerate offspring of
another. However (I am persuaded) it is beyond all example that one River
should adopt the name of another, before it mingle its waters with it; for if
so, then might Nahar-malca also put in for a title to this name, seeing that in
like manner emptieth it self into Tigris at Apamea. But if Hiddekel in Moses be
the same (as in all probability it was) with that mentioned by Daniel, and
where he saw some of his most famous Visions, Dan. 10. 4. then is the pretense
of this Rivolet to that name rendered yet more suspicious: for Daniel tells us
that Hiddekel was (...), a great River, the amplitude of which Epithet all the
waters in this Channel are not able to fill; for it was not full 5 miles long,
and for the most part dry, as being drawn at the first, and afterward opened,
only upon occasion. The first Author of it (as Ammianus testifies) was the
Roman Emperor Trajan, who caused it to be cut, to waft his Navy out of
Euphrates into Tigris; for which cause it was opened again by Severus, and
after him by Julian, when the Persians had stopped it up. This date falls far
short of the age of Moses, as (I think) that translation does of his meaning,
where (...) is rendered ad Orientem Assyriam versus, for there is neither
preposition nor (...) local, to make room for versus in this place, nor does
that general and ambiguous note, fluere ad Orientem Assyriam versus, (which may
be said as well of other Rivers as of this) suit any thing well with the
exactness of Moses's description. Therefore they that keep close to the Hebrew,
render it either ante Assyriam, or ad Orientem Assyriae, as does our English
Translation: which if it be true, (as for my part I think it is) then is this
Rivolet clearly cashiered out of Moses's Chorography, as whose course is wholly
terminated to the West of Assyria, if yet it do indeed reach any part of
Assyria at all; that Assyria (I mean) which the Scripture properly calls so.
For though Ptolemy draw down the bounds of Assyria as far South as Arae
Herculis; yet the Scripture (when it speaks of the Country, not of the
Kingdom) seems to give this name properly to that Region alone that lies
about Ninive; so do secular Authors. Strabo l. 16. circa initium: (...), Trans
Lycum Aturiae campi Ninum circumjacent. Dion in Trajano: Romani flumen
transeunt, Adiabenem que omnem, quae pars Assyriae ad Ninum pertinuit, in suam
potestatem redigunt: Ad haec Arbela atque Gaugamela, ubi Alexander olim Darium
superaverat, capiunt: ea Attyria nominatur, litera Sin Ta Barbaris commutata.
Pliny makes it altogether the same with Adiabene, l. 5. c. 12. Ultra Armeniam
Adiabena, Assyria ante dicta. Now there is no part of Adiabene so far South as
Seleucia (where this River falls into Tigris) by of a Degree, that is, 40.
miles, in which space the Campi Cauchae (as I take it) are placed by Pliny, and
the Region of the Garamaei by Ptolemy; which puts off the Current of that River
at so considerable a distance from the ancient Assyria, that I question how
even his own Translation can be verified of it, Fluit ad Orientem Assyriam
versus. But if this Translation could be justified to be unquestionable, Junius
(in my opinion) might with much more probability have made choice of another
River rather then this, upon which to bestow the name of Hiddekel, viz. that
which Herodotus speaks of l. 1. n. 193. Babylonica Regio omnis (quemadmodum
Aegyptiaca) dissecta est in fossas, quarum maxima navibus transiri potest, ad
Solstitium hybernum vergens. (...), Exit autem ex Euphrate in Tigrin alterum
flumen, ad quod urbs Ninus sita erat. If his meaning indeed be, that there was
such a River, as running out of Euphrates, emptieth it self into Tigris over
against Ninive, this would suit better with his description, being (as might
seem) a River of some note, and falling more exactly upon that point of the
Compass that his Translation has set it. But the truth is, this River also is
very questionable, as having no other authority but the single Testimony of
Herodotus to assert it.

CHAP. V.
That Nahar-malca it self was none of the Four Rivers of Paradise, but an
Artificial Channel.
2. AS the Daughter-stream is found to be far under age to claim an inheritance
among the Rivers of Paradise, so the Mother Nahar-malca (for out of it was it
drawn) will hardly come off with her title upon the same trial. The verdict of
Pliny is full against it, giving us a hint of the time when it was cut, and
expressly naming the party by whom, Not. Hist. l. 6. c. 26. Sunt qui tradunt
Euphratem Gobaris Praefecti opere diductum, ubi eum diximus findi, ne
praecipiti cursu Babyloniam infestaret; ab Assyriis vero universis appellatum
Armalchar, quod significat Regium stumen. Who this Gobares was Pliny acquaints
us not: but seeing the name is Persian, and the man himself was but a Prefect,
not a King, he intimates clearly enough, that this Current was cut during the
time of the Persian Monarchy, at the charges indeed of some of their Kings,
(and therefore had the name of Nahar-malca) but under the care and oversight of
Gobares his Lieutenant in those parts: for had it been cut in the time of any
of the Kings of Babylon, not his cost only, but his name also (in all
likelihood) would have been remembered in this work. Now it is well known that
the same year in which the Babylonians came under the dominion of the Persians,
the Israelites were released from their Captivity by the Edict of Cyrus, to
which time from the death of Moses there had passed (by certain calculation) no
less then 916 years; all which time (and long before) this River (it seems) had
not existence in rerum natura, and therefore could not be taken notice of in
the book of Genesis. Junius could not be ignorant how apt this scruple was to
arise in the mind of the Readers, upon his producing the testimony of Pliny,
and therefore seeks to elude the force of it, by suggesting a suspicion, that
it was but a popular and uncertain Tradition; for, giving the reason of the
name Nahar-malca, he tells us it was so called, quod alveum hunc studio
operaque Regam fuisse ductum putaret vulgus. But sure they were not the Vulgus
that Pliny meant by Sunt qui tradunt, but such Authors as, having written the
Description and History of those parts, he makes use of, and now and then names
some of them, in his Works. For that Pliny had this report from the Natives of
Babylonia, is without all warrant: and if he had, yet seeing they lived upon
the place, and had reason to be acquainted with such passages happening in
their own Country, their deposition for the affirmative ought in justice to be
received before the negative of any man whatsoever, living in an age and place
so far remote. The Learned Scaliger was so fully satisfied of the truth of
Pliny's relation concerning the cutting of this River by Gobares, that he
supposes (by an easy change of G into C) it took from him also (as the
Author) the name of Cobar, and was (in his opinion) the very same with Cebar in
Ezechiel, where the captive Israelites were placed. But though I cannot (for
some reasons) subscribe to this Opinion of Scaliger; yet is it far more
probable then the Opinion of Junius, who affirms it to be Pison; for betwixt
Nahar-malca and Pison there is no affinity, neither in sound nor signification.
Nor is that surmise (for it is no more) of any validity at all to prove that
ever this River inherited the name of Pison, because after its joining with
Tigris it gives it the name of Piso-tigris; for though diverse Authors have
spoken of Pasi-tigris, yet that it should receive that name from its commixture
with this River, not one. The testimony of Pliny quite overthrows it, for he
draws the original of this compound name, not from Tigris commixing with any
Stream of Euphrates, but from the reuniting of his own divided waters; for
about 125 miles to the North of Seleucia he parts himself into two, and having
run all that space in several Channels, ubi remeavere aquae, (says he)
Pasitigris appellatur. And if we desire to know whereabout that was, that which
he subjoyns intimates that it was at or about Seleucia and Ctesiphon, for
presently he adds, Atque (ut diximus) inter Seleuciam and Ctesiphontem vectus,
in lacus Chaldaicos se fundit: now this was near upon 60 miles above that place
where Nahar-malca falls into his Chanel. And indeed if Havil^ be Susiuna, (as
Junius expounds it) the name of Pison must be drawn up thus high at least, or
else it will not answer that which Moses testifies of it, that it compasses
the whole Land of Havila: For though Ptolemy (as we have said) point the
North-bound of Susiana at Arae Herculis; yet if that be true which was
observed, that the ancient Assyria was equal only with the bounds of Adiabene,
all that Region which lies South thereof must be assigned to the ancient
Susiana: but then Nahar-malca is so far from compassing it, that it washes not
much more then half part of the Western Coast thereof, and that not in an
entire Chanel of its own, but as a small addition of a far greater River
receiving it, which therefore may in reason challenge the honor of this
mention before it. But the truth is, Junius is mistaken, in taking Susiana for
Havila; for there is no authority produced, nor probable conjecture alleged to
approve it, save only that there is in this Region Gold, Bdellium, and the
Onyx-stone; all which because, we hope hereafter to find, with better proof, in
the true Havila that Moses meant, we remit the farther prosecution of that
question to its proper place. Only here let us add, that seeing these two
Rivers have appeared so exceeding doubtful, Junius had no cause to accuse so
many good Authors of negligence, for neglecting them, as approving but only
two natural Streams of Euphrates; Nam Mela quidem, Plinius, Solinus, alii,
negligentius videntur perscripsisse duos solum Euphratis alvees, propterea quod
alios Aquaeductus magis quam naturales alveos esse putaverunt. And they had
good reason to think so, as appears by that which has been said.

CHAP. VI.
Of the two remaining Channels, and the Fertility of the Eastern part of this
Region.
AND are the two remaining Streams then unquestionably natural, and not
artificial? Doubtless they have much more to say for themselves, then the
former; yet if they be called to the trial, they will not escape without some
suspicion. For, to proceed to the third River, which running through Babylon
still retains the name of the main Stream Euphrates: Some good Authors affirm
this River also to have been cut, and name us the party by whom, viz.
Semiramis, when she built the City: for whereas the Plains of Babylonia were
all covered with water, as Herodotus testifies l. 1. n. 184. (and then sure
there were none of these Rivers) Belus going about to lay the foundations of
Babylon drained them, as Abydenus apud Eusebius. Praep. Evang. l. 9. c. ult.
testifies: Omnia (inquit) illa loca aquis contecta fuisse dicuntur. Belus autem
regionem siccasse perhibetur, and Babyloniam condidisse. By which draining of
the waters at too great a distance (as it seems) the City soon found the want
of it; and therefore Semir amiss rebuilding and enlarging it, (which Orosius
says she did in the 64. year from the first of Ninus) among other her famous
works, she cut a Chanel for this River through the City. Thus much Pomp. Mela
affirms, l. 1. c. 11. Ex operibus certe ejus insignia multa sunt, duo maxim
excellunt; constituta Urbs mirae magnitudinis Babylon, ac siccis olim
regionibus Euphrates and Tigris immissi. Where Olivarius has this note;
Euphrates and Tigris olim non Chaldaeam irrigabant, er at enim regio sicca,
nisi cura Semiramidis adjectis fossis ambo fluvii immissi fuissent. And
Propertius seconds the same report with his testimony, l. 3. Eleg. 10.

Persarum statuit Babylona Semiramis urbe^, Ut solidum cocto tolleret aggere
opus, etc. Duxit and Euphraten medium, qua condidit arces. Now though Semiramis
were indeed ancienter then Moses, (albeit Herodotus makes her younger, as
living but five Ages before Nitocris, l. 1. n. 184. and Porphyrie apud Eusebius.
Praep. Evang. l. 10. c. 3. seems to make her his contemporary) yet if this
River were cut by her hand, it could be no River of Paradise, which was
ancienter then Adam himself. And I cannot persuade my self that by (...) ipse
Perath, Moses meant any Branch, but the main Body of the great River, the River
Euphrates, (as the Scripture every where calls it;) which Moses therefore
forbear to describe by the Countries through which it runs, because it was well
enough known to the Israelites, as being one of the Bounds of their Land. So
that now there remains but one native Stream to this River, (and one we must
needs leave it for its ancient Channel) which may seem by best title to belong
to Naharsares, though the Etymology of the Name render even that suspicious
also: for Sares (as Junius has observed) signifies diductum sive divulsum;
but then we must suppose the reason to have been, not because it self is drawn
out of any other Stream, (for so the Antiquity of it should become as
questionable as the rest) but because it self is the main Stream out of which
the rest were drawn; for anciently it emptied itself into the Persian Gulf in
a proper Chanel of its own. Sed longo tempore Euphratem praeclusere Orcheni and
accolae agros rigantes: nec nisi per Tigrin defertur in mare, says Pliny l. 6.
c. 27. And yet it seems not always to have kept constant to the same Chanel;
for if it be (...) in Abydenus, (as Junius says) or Pallacopa in Arrianus, (as
its distance from Babylon renders it very probable) it was several times
obstructed or diverted in its course. Abydenus apud Eusebius. Praep. Evang. l. 9.
c. ult. Cum Principatum (ait) Nabuchodonosorus accepisset, continuo Babylonem
triplici muro quindecim diebus munivit, and flavios Armachalem atque Acracanum
ab Euphrate ortos obstruxit. And Arrianus de Expedit. Alex. l. 7. tells at
large how Alexander stopped the mouth of Pallacopa, (as that Babylonian Satrapa
with great labor had done before) and cut a new one. The same does Strabo
confirm out of Aristobulus, l. 16. Cum fossam quandam ad paludes and lacus qui
sunt Arabiam versus tendere animadverteret, habentem os intractabile, and
obstructu difficillimum, propter cedentem and mollem terram; aliud novum os
aperuisse 30. stadiis a priore, capto loco petroso, atque traducto alveo. So
full of uncertainties are all things concerning the Rivers in this Region, that
(I think) Junius could not have chosen any other, wherein with less hope of
success to have traveled in search of the Garden of Eden. As for that which is
alleged from so many credible Authors concerning the incredible Fruitfulness
of the Eastern part of this Region, it may well enough be granted with small
advantage to this cause: for that, being but a common adjunct, is predicable of
other places as well as this: and though happily there may be some strength in
this negative Argument, Such a place is not fruitful, Ergo it was not Paradise;
yet the affirmative is but weak, Such a place is fruitful, Ergo Paradise was
there. And therefore I marvel much to find so great a Logician as Alstedius
was, reasoning thus: Paradisus terrestris fuit situs loco fertilissimo and
amoenissimo: Talis autem est Auranitis, Encyclop. l. 20. Historic. c. 11. Can
he assure us that the place where Paradise stood does (even after the Fall, yea
after the Custody of the Cherubims is removed, and the Deluge has marred the
face of the Earth) still retain the preeminence of fruitfulness and beauty
above other places? Many good Authors of able judgments are of another mind.
And if the decision of this Question lay upon this point, many places of the
East would disdain to yield this honor to any part of Babylonia, if the lavish
commendations of Geographers may pass for unquestionable proofs; of which (if
it were worth the while) plenty might be produced. Therefore perhaps we shall
do no wrong to Pliny, if we take his superlative expression (as the custom is)
for a little hyperbolical. Herodotus (an eyewitness, and from whom (if I be
not deceived) Pliny received this testimony) speaks more modestly and warily,
confessing indeed that this was the fruitful'st place of the East that he had
seen; but how? for wonderful store of Corn, not of Wood. The place is in Clio,
n. 193. Exit ex Euphrate in Tigrin alterum flumen, ad quod urbs Ninus sita
erat. Haec Regio omnium quas nos vidimus long optima est, duntaxat ferendo
Frumento. (...), Nam in arboribus ferendis, Ficu, Vite, Olea, nequaquam de
principatu contendit. Only afterward he mentions some store of Palm Trees,
to which Strabo adds some Gardens of Cypresses, of which Alexander was
necessitated to make up his Navy, for want of other wood in those parts: (...),
says Strabo, l. 16. Now surely to the constitution of an Orchard (as Paradise
was) variety of Trees (especially Fruit Trees, such as the Vine, the Olive and
the Figg) are as necessary, as the fatness of the Soil to bearing Corn. And
that it was so in Adam's Paradise Moses assures us, Genesis 2. 9. And out of the
ground made the Lord God to grow every Tree that is pleasant to the sight, and
good for food: the Tree of Life also in the midst of the Garden, and the Tree
of Knowledge of good and evil: neither of which (I persuade my self) was either
Palm Tree or Cypress. But to cut off this controversy: Suppose this part of
Babylonia were as well stored with all manner of Trees for use and ornament, as
it was fertile in bearing Corn; yet if the other parts of Moses's description
suit not to it as well as this, the Argument from this alone will infer no
necessary Conclusion: for so Alstedius himself has taught us, that a Fallacy
of the Adjunct is then committed; Cum uno atque altero Adjuncto sumptis, quorum
vis est imbecilla, necessariun concluditur. Syst. Log. l. 9. c. 3.

CHAP. VII.
The Author's attempt of finding a more probable place for the Seat of
Paradise. Tigris and Euphrates proved to rise from the same Fountain.
FInding therefore no satisfaction in this Description of Junius, lest we
should seem more willing to find a fault, then to offer our best service
(though we well know how worthless that is) for the discovery of the truth; let
us lift up our eyes again, and see if happily any other place may be discerned
where this happy portion of ground, so much sought after, may with greater
probability be found out. And here we must make use of the River as our
faithfullest Guide; which springing out of Eden, (as Moses says) afterward
divides it self into four Heads, of which Tigris and Euphrates (by the consent
of all) were two; not any petty Streams in Babylonia, but those two famous and
well-known Rivers, which encircling Mesopotamia give it its name. But can it
ever be proved that Tigris and Euphrates spring out of the same Fountain? This
indeed is the great difficulty: in discussing whereof, if the same spirit that
guided the pen of Moses shall favorably assist our weak endeavors, the rest
of our task will become far more easy. It cannot be denied, that the
seeming-concurring testimony of Geographers to the contrary has so far
stumbled some otherwise godly and learned Divines, that they have broke forth
into speeches not very seemly. Luther, Tom. 6. Comment. in Genesis 2. calls this
unum de maximis Scandalis in Mose; and having debated this Question of the
distance of the Fountains in the vulgar way, concludes, Ergo Moses
evidentissime contra sensum pugnat. I will not dissemble, that the reading of
this passage struck my spirit with some horror, and often recalled my thoughts
to this meditation, (which otherwise I was willing to have bestowed in more
profitable matters) to try if by any means this Scandal might be removed. And
why should we despair of effecting this, when even Secular Authors themselves
are not at agreement in assigning the Fountains of these great Rivers; some
finding them in one place, some in another; some at a larger, some at a nearer
distance? A hopeful augure, that at length they may be found so near as to
verify the testimony of Moses. Strabo (that grave and learned Geographer) sets
them very far asunder, viz. near upon 312 miles. (...), Fontes Tigridis and
Euphratis distant invicem circiter M. M. D stadia: Ptolemy cuts off more then a
third part of this distance, for he sets the Latitude of the Fountains of
Tigris in 39d. 40m, of Euphrates in 42d. 40m, between which there are no more
then 3 Degrees difference, which make but 180 miles. But Procopius may seem to
draw them nearer together, for thus he writes, De Bello Pers. l. 1. Mons non
valde praruptus in Armeniis est, a Theodosia Civitate 42 stad. distans, ad
Boream pertinens, unde duo exeunt Fontes totidem Flumind constituentes,
Euphratem dextrorsus, Tigrim vero sinistrorsus. What this Mountain was, and
where this City Theodosia was situate, (5 miles to the North of which these two
Rivers had their Springs) it is not easy for us (by help of that broken and
imperfect discovery which we have of those Eastern parts) to determine. In the
same Book he mentions a City of that name not far from Nisibis: Anastasia
Civitas condita est ab Anastasio, ubi erat Dara in Mesopotamia, a Nisibi 98
stad. distans, in Romanorum Persarumque confinibus, cui vicina Theodosia. But
this, being well within Mesopotamia, could not be the same with the former,
seeing it is certain that the Fountains of Tigris and Euphrates were in
Armenia. More likely it was that Theodosiopolis mentioned by Eustathius in his
Comment upon Dionysius's (...), where, speaking of Armenia, he bids us note,
that the Emperor Justin divided it into 4 parts; the first and most renowned
whereof was that which was called (...), whose Metropolis was Bazanis, formerly
called Leontopolis, (...). But neither is that so precisely bounded, that we
have any thing of certainty to affirm concerning the situation of it; nor, if
we had, would it be much material to the end we aim at: for though the
Testimony of Procopius have served us to bring the Fountains of these Rivers
nearer together; yet seeing he confesses them to be distinct, this will not
serve our turn. But are there any then that do affirm them to spring out of the
same Fountain? Surely, if Isidorus Hispalensis do not deceive us, either he
himself or S. Hierome had read some such thing in an authentic Author, viz.
Salust the Historian; for these are his words, Orig. l. 13. c. 21. De Fluminib.
Euphrates fluvius Mesopotamiae de Paradiso exsurgens. Salustius autem author
certissimus asserit, Tigrim and Euphratem uno font manare in Armenia, qui per
diversa euntes longius dividuntur, spatio medio derelicto multorum millium;
quae tamen terra, quae ab ipsis ambitur, Mesopotamia dicitur. Ex quo Hieronymus
animadvertit aliter de Paradisi fluminibus intelligendum. Whether Isidore
himself had seen this passage in the Works of Salust, (which now are lost) or
S. Hierom's Works have suffered some mangling since his time, I cannot tell;
but the truth is, in the Editions of Hierome which we now have this Testimony
is not quoted so fully, for in the place to which he relates the most material
passage is left out. His own words, De loc. Heb. voce Euphrates, are these:
Euphrates fluvius Mesopotamiae in Paradiso oriens: Porro Salustius author
certissimus asserit tam Tigris quam Euphratis in Armenia fontes demonstrari. Ex
quo animadvertimus aliter de Paradiso and fluminibus ejus intelligendum. That
there is a considerable difference betwixt these two in relating the testimony
of Salust, is obvious at first sight, without a Prompter: for besides a larger
addition in Isidore, that main clause, Tigrim and Euphratem uno font manare in
Armenia, is no more in S. Hierome then, Tam Tigris quam Euphratis fontes in
Armenia demonstrari; which they might well enough be, though removed at as
great a distance as some have set them. Yet can we not honestly suspect, that
Isidore would falsify either Salust or Hierome for so small a matter. And the
observation which Hierome makes upon Salust's words argues, that he conceived
something in them remarkable above what was ordinarily to be found, for
rectifying a common Error about the Rivers of Paradise. Now that the Fountains
of Tigris and Euphrates were to be seen in Armenia was no news, nor worthy so
solemn a preface to gain credit to the Author, it never being questioned by
any, but obvious in every Historian as well as Salust. But if he observed and
reported them to flow out of the same Fountain, (which was a Secret unto most)
well might he commend the Testimony of such a credible Writer to the
consideration of the men of his time, as a fair way to reconcile the relation
of Moses with the truth of History, the ignorance whereof had put them upon
such prodigious fancies; and so his aim may seem to have been the same with
ours, viz. by hinting this Testimony, to prepare and procure belief, that
nothing was reported by Moses concerning the Original of these Rivers, which
(if inquired after) might not also be made appear by the testimony of Secular
Authors. But because this report of Salust comes to us only at the second
hand, and that also somewhat obscurely, we are content no more weight should be
laid upon it then what in prudence it may be supposed able to bear: nor is
there need we should, having a second at hand ready to be deposed upon the same
thing, and that as clearly and fully as we can desire. This is Lucan, Pharsal.
l. 3.

Quaque caput rapido tollit cum Tigride magnus
Euphrates, quos non diversis fontibus edit
Persis; and incertum, tellus si misceat amnes,
Quod potius sit nomen aquis. --
That he sets the common Fountain of Tigris and Euphrates in Persis, whereas,
by the undoubted consent of all that speak exactly, they were in Armenia, this
ought not to stumble any one that is but meanly conversant in Histories, who
cannot be ignorant, that it is common with Writers (especially of those times)
to call by the name of Persis all those Countries that at that time lay under
the Dominion of the Persian or Parthian Monarchy: But it cannot but be grateful
to all such as wish well to Moses, and would rejoice to see his Authority
vindicated, to hear a Heathen stand up thus stoutly in his defense against the
general vote of Geographers, not obscurely rejecting their contrary Opinion as
an Error. And he might be the bolder to do this, if it be true which is
observed by an able Commentator, (though himself incline the other way) that he
had the vulgar Creed to justify him in it. Farnab. in locum. Vterque fluvius
oritur ex Armeniae montibus, verum non parum distantibus; vulgo tamen creditum
unum habuisse Fontem. And certain it is that learned Boethius (among the rest)
was of this belief; for discoursing excellently (as his manner is) how casual
events are guided by Providence, (which he makes the common fountain out of
which they flow, and into which at length they finally resolve themselves) he
illustrates it by this Simile of Tigris and Euphrates, which issuing out of the
same Fountain, (says he) and having enclosed a large compass of ground, at
length meet together again, bringing their wreck along with them. His words are
in his Treatise De Consolat. Philosoph. l. 5. carm. 1.

Rupis Achaemeniae scopulis, ubi versa soquentum
Pectoribus figit spicula pugna fugax,
Tigris and Euphrates uno se font resolvunt,
Et mox abjunctis dissociantur aquis.
Si coeant, cursumque iterum revocentur in unum,
Confluat alterni quod trahit unda vadi,
Conveniant puppes, and vulsi flumine trunci,
Mistaque fortuitos implicet unda modos.
Quos tamen ipsa vagos terrae declivia casus,
Gurgitis and lapsi defluus ordo regunt.
Sic quae permissis fluitare videtur habenis,
Fors patitur fraenos, ipsaque lege meat.
CHAP. VIII.
A farther Enquiry where this Fountain is. Objections answered.
THE concurring Testimonies of these Authors will (I hope) be deemed
sufficient to support the credit of this Assertion, if we can (by good
authority) discover what, and where this Fountain was. And hereunto that clause
in the forecited Testimony of Lucan may perhaps afford us some help; Incertum,
tellus si misceat amnes, Quod potius sit nomen aquis. For though these words be
capable of several constructions, (and Commentators have left us here to sink
or swim to our selves, though oft-times they spend many lines in less needful
Criticisms;) yet to my apprehension the Poet's meaning is this, That these two
Rivers after their efflux out of their common Fountain run still so near
together, that when they overflow their Channels, and their waters touch each
other, (as, by the supposition he makes, it seems sometimes they do) if then
they should intermingle their Streams, it would be a hard matter to determine
which of the two Rivers should bear the name of their conjoined waters. This
passage suits so well (save only the difference of a name) with that
Observation which Cl. Caesar brought home with him to Rome out of these parts,
when he warred in the East, (which was not long before the Poet wrote) that I
doubt not but he had relation to it; and the account that Pliny makes us of
that report of Cl. Caesar is the best Commentary that we may expect upon that
clause; Plin. l. 6. c. 27. Tam vicinum Arsaniae fluere eum (sc. Tigrim) in
regione Arrhene Claudius Caesar author est, ut cum intumuere, confluant, nec
tamen misceantur, leviorque Arsanias innatat IIII M. fere spatio: mox divisus
in Euphratem mergitur. If we had as full assurance that this Arsanias of Caesar
did flow out of the same Fountain with Tigris, as his unmixed overflow does
accord with that which Lucan testifies of Euphrates, it would be no presumption
to affirm that they were one and the same River. And though this be no easy
task to perform, (no Geographer (that I have met with) having undertaken to
give us any account of the first Spring of Arsanias;) yet so much they have
acquainted us withal as may serve to satisfy any ingenuous mind in this
matter. Plutarch, lib. De Fluviis, tells us a strange story, (as some have
construed it) though (in our opinion) not so strange as true. He says that the
River Tigris runs into Araxes, and so into the Lake Arsacis. His words are
these: (...) Tigris fluvius est Armeniae, defluens in Araxem simul and
Arsacidem paludem. This relation seems so incredible to his Commentator
Mausacus, that he fears not to charge it back upon him for a Falsehood. Falsum
est quod docet hoc loco Author noster, Tigrim in Araxem defluere. Falsi arguere
potes ex Strabone and innumer is aliis authoribus. The reason that moved him to
be so bold with his Author was this then, (as I suppose) because Strabo and
other Geographers had told him, that though Tigris and Araxes flow out of the
same Mountain, (as some say) yet their course is so directly contrary, Araxes
running into the Caspian Sea on the North, and Tigris into the Persian Gulf on
the South, that it is not imaginable how they should ever run the one into the
other. But had Strabo or any other Geographer told him, that there were no more
Rivers of this name but one? or that it was not possible for any Writer to
miscall another River by that name? Himself observes a mistake in the name of
the Lake; and why might not the same befall the River also? That Lake which
Plutarch here calls Arsacis, Strabo and Dionysius After (as he notes) called
Arsene and Thonitis, and Pliny Thespitis, which he supposes ought to be read
Thonitis: but there is no good warrant for that Correction, for The spitis is
as probable a name as Thonitis, and Ptolemy calls it so, placing upon it a City
called Thospia, from which in probability it borrowed this name. And though
Strabo make this and Arsena the same Lake, yet Pliny does not, but sets them at
a good distance; for the first Lake that Tigris runs into he calls Arethusa,
Ptolemy Arsissa, (in all probability Plutarch's Arsacis) but placed by him a
Degree and more to the North of Thespitis. But whether they were one or several
Lakes, it is not much material to our purpose: Most likely it is that the Lake
either gave or took its name from the River Arsanias flowing into it; and so
did the Country about it, which Ptolemy calls Arsea, others Arsena, but
Procopius always either Arzane or Arxane; which has so near affinity to
Araxis, that it leaves us no just cause to doubt that Plutarch's Araxis is the
same River that others call Arsanias. Which being so, we have found these
Rivers meeting very early together, after which their first Conjunction they
seem not to part asunder for a long time; for (so far as we can discern them)
they run in the same, or a near-adjoyning, Chanel, they fall both into the same
Lakes, dive into the ground alike, spring again alike: in a word, they sever
not, (at least at no considerable distance) till in the Region of Arrhene (as
Cl. Caesar has told us) Arsanias floating over his fellow, for the space of 4
miles, at length leaves him, and falls into Euphrates. That this is true, we
have a credible Author to give testimony of it, who gives us good assurance
withal, that Arsanias is indeed no other then Euphrates, as Lucan called it.
Cl. Marius Victor, Genes. l. 1.

Tertius hinc rapido percurrens gurgite Tigris
It comes Euphrati, juncta quos mole ruentes
Tellus victa cavo sorbet patefacta bar athro;
Donec in Armeniae saltus ac Medica Tempe,
Quos non sustinuit, nec jam capit, evomit Amnes.
In that he makes Tigris and Euphrates juncta mole ruentes, he plainly enough
intimates the Conjunction of their Streams, after which he finds them falling
together into a subterranean Gulf: this was after they had passed the Lake
Arethusa, as Pliny writing of Tigris tells us, l. 6. c. 27. Influit lacum
Arethusam omnia illata pondera sustinentem, etc. Fertur autem and cursu and
color dissimilis: transvectusque occurrente Tauro Monte in specu mergitur,
subterque lapsus, a latere altero ejus erumpit. Locus vocatur Zoroanda. Eundem
esse manifestum est, quod demersa perfert. Their first Efflux after this their
new birth out of their common Fountain was (as the Poet tells us) into the
Forests of Armenia, and the pleasant Woods and Groves of Media, (taking Media
largely, and so reaching those parts, though properly assigned to Armenia, as
others have done.) But forthwith they fall into another Lake, viz. Thonitis,
(as Strabo and Dionysius) Thospites, or Thespites, (as Ptolemy and Pliny call
it;) for so it follows, Alterum deinde transit Lacum, qui Thospites appellatur,
(which Strabo tells us was (...), nitruous, and not potable.) Therefore Tigris
hastening through it, immediately after it has acquit itself, rursus in
cuniculos mergitur, and post XXV. mill. pass. circa Nymphaeum redditur: which
as Strabo, Dionysius and others testify, so the former Poet has expressed not
unelegantly.

Sed Tigris, nigro tanquam indignatus averno,
Prosilit athereas motu majore sub auras;
Et rursus spelaea subit, mersusque cavernis
Intus agit fremitus; and fortior obice factus
Multiplicatur aquis, atroque citatior antro
Exit, and Assyrios celeri secat agmine campos.
But because in the forementioned place of Lucan, that remarkable unmixed
mixture of Tigris and Euphrates (or, as Pliny calls it, Arsanias) is by the
Series of the Poet's discourse intimated to have happened betwixt their common
Spring and the last Fall of Tigris, for so it immediately follows,

At Tigrim subito tellus absorbet hiatu,
Occultosque tegit cursus, rursusque renatum
Font novo flume^ pelagi non abnegat undis:
we must understand that of Pliny, concerning the running of Tigris under
ground for the space of 25 miles, beginning as soon as he comes forth of the
Thospian Lake, (as Strabo also testifies) not of a total disappearing of the
River, but an interruption of its Stream, so that it kept not a constant
course, but was up and down, and manifested it self by Effusions (as it were by
stealth) rather then a perpetually-visible Current. And so much (I think)
Aethicus means. Fluvius Tigris etiam ipse de Monte Caucaso quasi visitur natus,
cum aestivis temporibus sub humo cum desuper Aethiopiam currere ex viriditate
superni cespitis prodatur, fluvius subditus latenter erumpit, and ob hoc ortus
ejus non comprehenditur, quoniam de obscuritate promitur. And this may probably
pass for a reason in Nature, why, after their Confluence, the waters of
Arsanias float over those of Tigris, because they are not so well cleansed from
the nitrous and oily matter they had contracted in the Thospian Lake, as those
of Tigris (by coursing under ground) were. However this be, it hinders us
nothing from the thing we aimed at, viz. a sight of that Fountain we have been
in search of; for now it appears to be in Armenia major, in the Region of
Sophene, on the Southside of the Mountain of Taurus, in a most pleasant and
delicious place; in a word, in the very place where Ptolemy places the
Fountains of Tigris, (and consequently of Euphrates) in the Latitude of 39d.
40m. Haec domus, hac seeds, haec sunt penetralia magni
Amnis --


Nor can I foresee what scruple of moment can be opposed against this whole
discourse, except happily some be not yet satisfied, that Pliny's Arsanias is the
same with Moses's Euphrates: who notwithstanding (I hope) will suffer
themselves to be persuaded, if they consider, 1. That it is so common for
Rivers to change their names, especially for ancient Rivers to receive new
names, that to contend about the name, when the thing it self is evident, is
but an humorous vanity. 2. Though Pliny call it Arsanias, yet Lucan, Marius
Victor, etc. call it Euphrates, as Moses does. 3. Pliny denies the right of
this name to the great River it self, till, having broken through the Mount
Taurus, it enters Syria; whereby a liberty is granted to this River to plead
its birthright to this name, as well as to any other that, running through
Armenia or Mesopotamia, flow together to make up its Chanel. Plin. l. 5. c. 24.
Supra Simyram XII. M. pass. initio Pyxirates nominatus. Fluit Derxenem primum,
etc. Deinde Elegiam Armeniae december M. pass. acceptis fluminibus Lyco, Arsania,
Arsano. Apud Elegiam occurrit ei Taurus Mons, nec resistit, quanquam XII. M.
pass. praevalens. Omiram vocant irrumpentem; mox, ubi perfregit, Euphratem. The
like is observed by Aethicus. Fluvius Auxius nascitur de Monte Armeno;
transiens per Mesopotamiam pergit: in ea vero Provincia alius ei adjungitur
fluvius Pactolus, qui dicitur ex ipso Monte Caucaso nasci; and unum effecti,
per Parthos transeuntes eorum cursus congregant aquas: ibi flumen Euphrates
nomen accipit, and exinde se diffundens currit millia 872, and mergitur in
Sinum Persicum. Here is plainly affirmed that Euphrates takes not that name
till the Conjunction of these Rivers; whereof if Pactolus were Pyxirates, and
Auxius Araxes or Arsanias, (as with good probability we may conjecture) then
have we another argument to prove that this River was anciently taken for
Euphrates; for so S. Ambrose tells us, that the Learned men of those parts used
to call it Auxes. Amb. De Paradiso, c. 3. Plerique Euphratem (...) dictum
putant, hoc est, a laetando. Causa autem cur caeteri qua commeant fluvii,
describuntur regiones locorum, qua Euphrates commeat, non describatur, illam
accipimus, quia aqua ejus vitalis asseritur, and quae foveat atque augeat. Unde
Auxen eum Hebraeorum and Assyriorum prudentes dixerunt. Yea, Pliny himself (if
we be not deceived) gives his verdict for this name: for how otherwise to
reconcile him with Ptolemy, and the truth of Geography, we see not. Lib. 6.
cap. 9. numbering the most remarkable Cities of Armenia, he writes thus: Oppida
celebrantur in minore, Caesarea, Aza, Nicopolis: in majore, Arsamote Euphrati
proximum, Tigri Carcathiocerta. Now if Arsamote (which without doubt was the
same that Ptolemy calls Arsamosata) were as near Euphrates as Carcathiocerta
was to Tigris, it was seated upon the very banks of it: But in Ptolemy it is
set well-nigh two Degrees distant; which make up so large a sum of miles,
that for my part I believe this is an error in Ptolemy, and credit rather that
exacter Writer Geog. Nub. who sets them about 24 miles distant. For he, (Part.
5. clim. 5.) describing the way betwixt Meledin (in Armenia minor) to
Majafarecqin (in Armenia major,) tells us, that when we come to Alhama, which
is opposite to the Town of Malattia on the South, (the same Town that Ptolemy
calls Melitene, situate at or near upon that long Stream which Geographers
usually call Euphrates) from thence there are 12 miles to Tal-Batric, and other
12 to Tal-Aresias. Now Tal-Aresias is the very same that Pliny calls Arsamote,
Ptolemy Arsamosata, for the signification in them both (...) and (...) is
neither more nor less then Collis or Mons Solis: and if we would know where
that was situate, he tells us; Jacet autem Aresias ad magnum quoddam flumen,
quod e montibus excurrens, tandem Euphrati se miscet infra Samosata. Which
agrees so well with the description that Pliny makes of Arsanias, that we need
not doubt but that was the same River which ran by this City. Whereunto if we
add the report that Dion and Tacitus make, of Paetus his making a Bridge over
this River, (when he made that cowardly Composition with the Parthian) there
will remain no farther cause of questioning: for Dion expressly calls it
Arsanias. (...), Parthus dimisit Paetum, prius cum eo pactus, ut ponte sibi
jungeret fluvium Arsaniam. But Tacitus calls it Arsametes, Annal. l. 15. Fluvio
Arsameti (is castra praefluebat) pontem imposuit: which has so near affinity
with the Citie's name, Arsamote, that (though Lipsius think it corrupted in
Tacitus, and to be amended by Dion) we may well conjecture, that the City and
River gave or took their name one from the other, or else from some other cause
common to them both. However, if Arsamote were placed near upon Euphrates, (as
Pliny has told us) and yet that River be evidenced by clear proof to be the
same that himself elsewhere calls Arsanias, it will follow by his own
confession that Arsanias was Euphrates; which is most true, for it was its
primitive and original Stream, as Moses assures us.

CHAP. IX.
Of the first Division of the River Tigris after its Separation from Euphrates,
and the various Names given to one Branch of it by several Authors.
AND now having (by God's assistance) waded through the chiefest difficulty,
and discovered the Fountain of the River of Paradise, and two of its main
Heads; we may (I hope) with more encouragement proceed to the inquiry of the
rest; if only we shall admonish this, That from henceforward Euphrates (which
the Jews, subtracting the Article, call Perath, or (as Josephus has it)
Phorath, the Inhabitants of those parts sometimes Furro, but for the most part
Frat) constantly holds this name all its Course throughout: But whether Tigris
(as yet) may challenge the name of Hiddekel, will better appear in this ensuing
Discourse. Nevertheless we make choice of his Stream to follow as our Guide in
this Search, as having formerly found, upon examination, the Streams of
Euphrates altogether unable to abide the trial. And it is not long that Tigris
has run after its Separation from Euphrates, and last rise from its new
Fountain, before it come to a second Division: for having past the Gordiaean
Mountains, and being now about to enter Assyria, it parts its Stream asunder,
and opens its arms (as I may so say) to embrace it. Thus much I gather from
Epiphanius in Anchoret. n. 58. (...), Tertius, inquit, fluvius est Tigris, qui
e regione Assyriorum fluit: Quippe Orientis tractus dividens, sub terram
demergitur. Qui cum ex Armenia inter Cardiaeos and Armenios oriatur, depressus
iterum emergit, and Assyriorum agros divisus irrigat. Ptolemy indeed takes no
notice of this Division in the Historical part of his Geography, (which will be
no wonder to those that know how many such like omissions may be observed in
him;) yet (if I be not deceived) there is something in his Tables that referrs
this way: I mean his ancient Tables; for those set out by Gerard Mercator,
promising correction, are herein faulty. In the ancient Editions of Jacob.
Eszlar, and Georg. Vbelin, and Maginus Asiae Tab. 3. (which contains the Map of
Armenia major, with some other of those Regions that lay to the North of it)
two Streams of Tigris are fairly drawn, (not far from its Fountain) the one
running Westward toward Armenia minor, the other Eastward on the back of the
Mountain Niphates, which bounds Assyria to the North. Indeed, if Ptolemy had
intimated any such thing, these might have been taken for Rivers running into
it: but seeing he does not, we take leave (upon the grounds already, and
farther to be discovered) to assign the Western Branch to Arsanias running into
Euphrates, and the Eastern to this new Division of Tigris intimated by
Epiphanius. If any wonder why their Course is not drawn out to the length, the
streightning bounds of the Map (which was to end with the South-bounds of
Armenia) may be rendered as a good reason of this Eclipsis; and being thus cut
off, (as it seems) they became neglected in the following Maps. However, that
there was such a Branch of Tigris running to the North of Assyria or Adiabene,
we have Pliny for a sufficient witness: for thus he states the Bounds of
Adiabene, l. 6. c. 9. Adiabenen Tigris and Montium sinus cingunt: (or, as some
read it, Montium sinus invii cingunt) which that it is to be understood in
relation to Armenia, the circumstances of the place evidently prove: and if any
doubt should be moved of it, that other passage of his in the same Book, cap.
15. makes it clear. Adiabenis connectuntur Carduchi quondam dicti, nunc
Cordueni, praefluente Tigri. Which is also attested by D. Marius Niger, Geog.
Asiae, Com. 5. Juxta Cadusiorum regionem Corduci sunt, qui quondam sic
appellabantur, nunc vero Cordueni, qui Adiabenis connectuntur, medio elabente
Tigri. But never did any Author mention the Carduchi to the West or South of
Tigris, but generally all to the North, in the Mountains of Anti-Taurus
assigned to Armenia and Media, betwixt which and the Mountain Niphates the
Valley lay in which this River ran. And this same River still holding on its
Course, I take to be it which Josephus mentions, (but names not) as parting
betwixt Adiabene and Media, Antiq. Jud. l. 20. c. 2. Cumque Parthus numerosas
equitum atque peditum secum propere trahens copias opinione citius venisset,
posuissetque castra ad fluvium qui Adiabenem a Media dirimit, Izates quoque non
long inde castra metatus est, etc. And may we not well conjecture this to be
one of those three Rivers which Herodotus mentions under the name of Tigris?
For though he deny the first and third to spring out of the same Fountain, yet
he says nothing to the contrary but the first and second might. Terpsic. l. 5.
n. 52. But certain it is, that without the help of this River we shall never
understand aright the history of young Tobit's journey into Media, who parting
from his Father at Ninive, (which by the greatest part of Geographers is placed
upon the banks of that other well-known Stream of Tigris) yet Chap. 6. 1. it is
said, that as they went on their journey, they came in the Evening to the River
Tigris, and they lodged there. This cannot be understood of any gyre or circle
of the same Stream, (as some imagine) for no such lay in their way to Ecbatane;
but it was a distinct Stream by it self, and separated from that other at a
considerable distance. Nor will any ingenuous man think it sufficient to elude
this Testimony, because this Author is Apocryphal; for though the Book be not
Canonical, yet this Testimony may be true: and none (I think) will deny it to
be so, that has attentively read the Relation that Xenophon makes of the
Grecian Armie's march in these parts. For having told us (De exped. Cyri l. 3.)
how they passed over Tigris into Assyria at a Town called Caenae; he farther
relates how they still passed on Eastward over the Rivers Zabatus and Zathes;
(which Mr. Fuller sufficiently proves to be the same that Ptolemy calls Lycus
and Caprus) then having passed another Torrent, (which he names not, and
therefore gives us leave to conjecture that it was that small Rivolet which
Ptolemy calls Gorgas) Quod reliquum dici erat secure pergendo cum confecissent,
(says he) ad Tigrim amnem perveniunt: (lo here another Tigris) which having
passed at a Town called Larissa, after another days march of six parasangs,
they came to an ancient Town of the Medes called Mesphila; where turning their
faces toward the North, they made toward the Mountains of the Carduchi,
having this Stream all along on their left hand, even to its very spring; as
appears by the end of the third and beginning of the fourth Book. Which
Relation brings this Stream of Tigris about the ancient Assyria with so large a
circle, that it might serve to present it to us in the form of an Island. And
indeed it was so; for it was so shut in with Rivers on all sides, that there
was no passage into it but by Boat. Whence it was that the Greeks fetched the
reason of the name Adiabene, as if it were so called (...), eo quod esset
impertransibilis; which though Ammianus justly reject, (for it is absurd to
frame a Greek Etymology of an Assyrian word;) yet the reason rendered for it
he denies not, but confirms, Hist. l. 23. Juxta hunc circuitum Adiabena est,
Assyria priscis temporibus vocitata, longaque assuetudine ad hoc translata
vocabulum ea re, quod inter Oenam and Tigridem sita, navigeros fluvios, adiri
vado nunquam potuit. And this without all question was the reason why that
ancient Historian Quadratus called Assyria or Adiabene by the name of Messene,
(as he is quoted by Stephanus (...). voce (...).) utpote (...), quia mediam
inter duo quae ibidem sunt flumina regionem occuparet. These Rivers he after
names Tigris and Euphrates, for which he incurreth the reprehension of diverse,
who cannot see what Euphrates has to do with Assyria: But if they would
consider how customary it is with the Writers of these parts, mutually to
commute the names of these great Rivers, and many times to apply them to other
Rivers which have proper names of their own, they would not reject this ancient
Author's Testimony, but accept it as a piece of true Geography. We have
formerly noted how Xenophon calls Euphrates by the name of Tigris, and other
Authors (to requite that wrong) call Tigris by the name of Euphrates. Hesych.
in voce (...). He makes Tigris to be the same which the Jews call Phorath,
which we all know to be Euphrates. And the like does Diodorus Siculus, Antiq.
l. 3. c. 1. where speaking of the foundation of Ninive by Ninus, he says, Ipse
coactis undique viribus, and his quae adtantum opus spectarent paratis, (...),
supra Euphratem fluvium Vrbem condidit: which almost all besides him place upon
Tigris. Now if Quadratus (and after him Stephanus) may be conceived, and might
be allowed to speak according to the language of these men; supposing the
Western Stream to be that which he calls Euphrates, the other which
encircleth Assyria he might call (as diverse others do as well as he) by the
name of Tigris; and so his expression shall become as excusable, as the thing
it self which he affirms is true. But Ammianus (a man much conversant in these
parts) has acquainted us more exactly with the true and proper names of these
Rivers, (learned (as may seem) from the Natives themselves) and therewithal,
of the true Etymology of the name Adiabene, Hist. l. 23. Nos autem didicimus,
quod in his terris amnes sunt duo perpetui, quos and transivimus, Diavas and
Adiavas, juncti navalibus pontibus. Ideoque intelligi Adiabenem cognominatam,
ut a fluminibus maximis Aegyptus, Homero authore, etc. The names of these two
Rivers are one and the same in their Radix, and differ no more then the same
word with and without an Article. Mr. Fuller takes them to be those which we
have heard Xenophon call (...) and (...), the Letters D and Z being so near of
sound, that easily they may be (and usually are) transmuted. Besides (...) in
the Chaldee and (...) in the Arabic signify the same thing, even that by
which Ptolemy has expressed the Rivers name in Greek, and that is (...). This
is both learned and probable; but whether it will satisfy Ammianus, I cannot
tell: for I observe that wheresoever he has occasion to mention the River
Lycus, he never calls it Diavas or Adiavas, but always Anzaba: and
accordingly Geog. Nub. part. 6. clim. 5. calls it Zeb major, (as he does the
other Zeb minor.) Which if it may be accounted sufficient to argue these to be
different Rivers in the opinion of Ammianus, I should crave leave to
conjecture, that these Rivers Diavas and Adiavas (as the Natives called them in
Ammianus's time) were the same with the forementioned encircling Rivers, which
(as himself a little before has told us) were anciently called Tigris and
Oena. What that Oena was we forbear to enquire at present, as pursuing some
farther notice of Diavas and Adiavas; whose Radix if we search, we cannot (I
think) more probably fetch it elsewhere then from the Chaldee word (...), or
(...), which is the same with (...), and accordingly rendered, viz. Aurum; as
Dan. 2. 32, 38. So that applied to the River it will make it as much as Flumen
aureum, or, as the Greeks would express it, (...). Of which name I find a River
in these parts, mentioned by Aethicus, so nearly resembling this we speak of,
that for my part I doubt not but they were the same. His words are these:
Fluvius Chrysorrhoas nascitur in campis Assyriis de Monte Caucaso, vicinatur
and ei Tigris fluvius. Fluvius Tigris etiam ipse de Monte Caucaso quasi visitur
natus, cum aestivis temporibus sub humo eum desuper Aethiopiam currere ex
viriditate superni cespitis prodatur. fluvius subditus latenter erumpit, and ob
hoc ortus ejus non comprehenditur, quoniam de obscuritate promitur: nam ambo
includunt Cordubennam oppidum, and ad unum redacti, magnam faciunt coronam, and
etiam alia Oppida includunt, and Thesiphon and Seleuciam currentes millia 882.
immerguntur ad Auge oppidum, quod est in Sinu Persico. Not to engage my self,
to justify every particular in this piece of Geography, thus much (atleast)
may be clearly gathered from it, That this River falling into the River Tigris,
and with it including the Metropolis of the Gordiaeans, (which it seems stood
in a little Island) after their running some while together in a conjoined
Chanel, this united Stream separateth it self again into two, so as with its
encirclings it encompasseth a large space of ground: Which is so consonant to
the former relations, that we need not doubt they all refer to the same
truth, though under different names: for the name of Tigris was more famous,
and better known to Strangers; but this of Diavas or Adiavas became so grateful
to the Natives, that with it they baptized both these Streams; for I find the
Western Branch called Zaba, which is indeed but the contract of Zahaba, (of
(...) aurum, not (...) lupus) and so in the Chaldee Tongue was pronounced
Dihaba, or Diavas. Paulus Diaconus relating the Expedition of Heraclius the
Emperor against the Persian, writes thus: Kalendis December. venit ad fluvium
magnum Zabam: and cum hunc transisset, castrametatus est juxta Niniven. Now,
wheresoever the ancient Ninive were seated, certain it is that that Town which
went under that name in the time of Heraclius was situate either upon or very
near the banks of Tigris: for opposite to the Ruins of it was Mosal built in
Mesopotamia, the River only parting betwixt them, and that also joined by a
Bridge. Benjamin in Itinerario, page 62. Edit. Elzivir. Ista Civitas, (sc.
Al-mozal) jam inde^ a diebus priscis maxima, Persidis initium est, ad Tigrin
flumen sita: inter quam and Niniven Pons tantum intercedit. Haec devastata est:
attamen multos pagos and arces habet. A Ninive Arbeelem usque una est
parasanga. Ninive autem Tigridis ripae imminet. The like has Geog. Nub. Part.
6. clim. 4. Mausel est Urbs ad occidentalem Tigris partem exstruct a, habetque
territoria ampla, and provincias magnas, ac prae caeteris territorium Lino (i.
e. Nini) Urbis vetustissimae, sitae ab orientali latere Tigris, e regione
Mausel. And for the upper Stream of this River, that that also was called by
the Natives Diavas or Adiavas, we have the Testimony of Moses Bar-cephas, a
Learned man, born and living about these parts, who in his Treatise of Paradise
diverse times makes mention of this River, (for so I fear not to affirm)
sometimes calling it Dijobis, and otherwhile Dijabis, as cap. 21, and 28.
Whereupon though the Learned Masius forbears to pass his Conjecture, yet others
have not feared to call it Danubius. Which they might easily do by the
Epenthesis of a letter, and yet not vary from the true signification of the
word. For the Arabian City Dizahab, mentioned Deuteronomy. 1. 1. (which comes of the
same Root with this, and is accordingly rendered by the Septuagint (...), from
the Gold-mines that were found about it) is by some rendered Denaba. Which name
Dizaba (which is near of sound to Dijabis) being applied to this River, and the
Article (...) prefixed unto it, (which is usual with the Eastern Nations to do
to the names of Rivers, as (...) Dan. 10. 4.) it will become Hudizaba, or
Hudizabis, which might so easily be changed into Hydaspis in a Western man's
mouth, that if any be found to call it so, their error is as pardonable (while
their grounds are so good) as we take that of Caesarius the brother of
Nazianzen to be, who in his Dialogues makes Danubius one of the Rivers of
Paradise, upon the former mistake. A considerable Truth in our opinion,
howsoever others (who had never heard of another River pretending any affinity
to this name, but that famous one in Germany) have proposed it to be derided as
an idle Conceit. Now for Authority to prove that this River has sometimes
passed under the name of Hydaspis, we may produce that of Virgil, Georg. l. 4.

Praeterea Regem non sic Aegyptus, and ingens
Lydia, nec populi Parthorum, aut Medus Hydaspes
Observant --
It is strange to see how Commentators are troubled to find what this Medus
Hydaspes should be; for they tell us they never read of any River of that name
in Media, but only in India: and therefore some are bold with the Verse, and,
pretending to correct it, make it much worse; for they would have it read,
Medus, Hydaspesve; and so it should become Versus hypermeter. Others are of
opinion that it took this Epithete, because the Medes under Alexander overcame
the Indians. Junius Philargyrus in loc. Apud omnes satis constat Hydaspem
flumen Indiae esse, non Mediae; sed potest videri Poeta Hydaspem Medum dixisse
jure belli, quod Medi duce Alexandro vicerint Porum Indorum Regem, and in suam
redegerint potestatem. A vain and frivolous reason, without all warrant or
probability; for so the Poet should rather have called it Graecus Hydaspes. But
if the ground of Virgil's calling this River so (which indeed ran by Media) did
not come to their observation, they might have been awakened to the enquiry of
another Hydaspes, This same River Hydaspes is that which is mentioned also in
the Book of Judith, Chap. 1. v. 6. as appears by the Context.
by that which Plutarch writes of this River; though it be usual with that
Author (whosoever he was) to conjoyn, or rather confound, diverse Rivers far
distant, but going under the same Name, into the same Description. Lib. De Flu.
c. 1. writing of Hydaspes, he tells us, (...), Indiae autem fluvius est,
vehementius influens in Syrtem Saroniticam. Here again Maussacus falls foul
upon his Author, and tells us in plain terms, Fabula haec est, and gratum
mendacium, sed non ferendum: and all because he had never read of a Syrtis
Saronitica, or Sinus Saronicus, but in the Bay of Corinth. But happily we may
find a more probable place for it, when we have resumed the consideration of
that which Aethicus formerly related of the Outlet of the River Chrysorrhoas,
(which was the same;) for he says, it emptied it self into the Persian Gulf ad
Auge oppidum, which himself had called before Anisauge: which Town we may in
vain seek for in Ptolemy, or any other Geographer, for it is indeed a mere
(...) In our modern Maps it is called Angua, though a little misplaced.
(...), (no great wonder in Aethicus) and ought to be read Augeanis, or rather
(which was the true name of it) Aginis; for so Arrianus, libro Rerum Indic.
calls that Town where this River emptieth it self into the Persian Lake. A Lacu
ad ipsum flumen navigatio est stadiorum DC. Ibi and pagus quidam Susiorum est,
quem Aginim vocant. Is a Susis distat stadiis quingentis. About which distance
Ptolemy places a City in these parts called Saura, which to have been a City
of some note appears by this, that the name of it is transmitted to these
times; for in our Modern Maps mention is made of it, as also in Geog. Nub. who
calls it sometime (after the old name) Saura, sometimes (by a new one, as it
seems) Daurac, and sets it near the Persian Gulf, or at least a Bay shooting it
self up into the Land, which first received this River, and might well receive
from it the name of Sinus Saronicus, or Syrtis Saronitica; it being usual with
Bays to receive their names from some near-adjoyning remarkable City.

CHAP. X.
A farther Prosecution of the same Argument, and this Stream found at last
(sutably to Moses's Description) to be Gihon.
AND now the knot is untied, and both the Head and Outlet of this River is
discovered, between which so large a space of ground is interposed, that we may
well imagine that in so long a Course it receives other waters into it besides
those of its own Chanel. And so indeed it does; for it takes in the River
Choaspes out of Media, also Eulaeus, and out of Susiana another Branch of
Tigris, of which we shall speak afterward. And thus much Strabo has observed
out of Polycletus, who affirmed, Choaspem, and Eulaeum, and Tigrim in Lacum
quendam confluere, atque ex eo inde in Mare exire; yet so, as both they, and
all other Rivers which they take into them, first meet together in one
conjoined Chanel, which carries the name of Tigris; for so he immediately
notes that other had affirmed: Sunt qui affirment flumina omnia quae Susiam
pervadunt, (...) (...), in unum Tigridis alveum illabi. And hence proceeded
that difference among Authors, some ascribing that to one of these Rivers which
others ascribe unto another: as, (Ex. gr.) that high esteem which the Persian
Kings made of the waters of Choaspes is by some ascribed to Eulaeus, Aelian.
Hist. var. l. 12. c. 40. Plin. l. 6. c. 27. p. 263.
by others to Danubius; for so Giraldus, and out of him Ortelius, Tab. Daciae
and Moesiae, has observed, Babylonios Reges ex Danubio (sive Istro) aquas
inter gazas reposuisse; De Diis Syntag. 17. Which is a remarkable passage, and
gives us full assurance of the Course of this River as we have described it.
For this Danubius was not Ister, (as they falsely imagine) but the same formerly
spoken of, which others have called Diavas, Dijabis, Adiavas, and (Virgil and
Plutarch) Hydaspis. But if any happily doubt whether Plutarch's Hydaspis were the
same with this, because he says it was fluvius Indiae; they are to note, that
the name of India is given by good Authors to diverse other Countries besides
that famous one vulgarly known by this name in the East: for (to omit examples
not so nearly relating to our purpose) the Regions of Assyria and Susiana are
(if I mistake not) by the Writers of the Emperor Trajan's Life called India.
Eutrop. Breviar. l. 8. relating his Conquest of those parts, sets it down thus:
Seleuciam and Ctesiphontem, Babylonem and Edessios vicit ac tenuit usque ad
Indiae fines, and Mare Rubrum accessit: atque ibi tres Provincias fecit,
Armeniam, Assyriam, Mesopotamiam, cum his gentibus quae Macedenam attingunt.
But none ever affirmed that Trajan conquered the East Indies. For though, in
emulation of Alexander, he rigged a Navy in the Persian Gulf, (which Eutrop.
(with others) calls Mare rubrum) with a purpose to assault those parts; yet it
does not appear that ever he landed his Army there, having received
intelligence, while he was yet in his Voyage, that these Countries had
revolted; which made him speedily return to settle those parts, as accordingly
he did, and after reduced them into the form of Provinces, as Dion,
Cassiodorus, etc. testify with Eutropius. Or if this Testimony be not
sufficient, we have another beyond all exception, and that is the Testimony of
Nicephorus, who confidently calls Adiabene an Indian Region. Hist. Ecclesiast.
l. 9. c. 18. Adiabene vero Regio est Indica ampla and celebris. And hence
Theophilus (a famous man born in this Country, and while he was but yet a
youth sent Hostage by the Adiabenians to the Emperor Constantine, and by him
sent back again as his Ambassador into those Eastern Countries, where he
converted many to the Christian Faith) was by the men of that age usually
surnamed Theophilus Indus. Id. ibid. And for the same reason (I think) it was
that this same River also got the surname of Indus: for so Plutarch also
(though he give another fabulous reason of this Name, yet) plainly testifies
that it was called Indus; loc. citat. Which is another great stumbling block in
his Commentator's way, and is not indeed easily to be removed but by the help
of this observation. Assuredly they that fetched the Spring of the River Indus
out of the Mountains of Armenia, could mean no other River but this: and that
some have done this appears by the Testimony of Sabellicus, Ennead. l. 1. who
accordingly affirms it; Indus in Armeniae montibus oritur. And we have farther
assurance that this was the River, by the Testimony of Dionysius Periegetes,
who mentions a River under this name running into Choaspes, (or rather taking
in the Stream of Choaspes into its Chanel) and with it watering the whole
Region of Susiana. These are his words in Periegesi, -- (...) Simul ad ortum
Solis cunctae gentes, concussae bello, quae inter Indum and Euphratem amnes
inclytos sunt; atque imperati Obsides Persarum Regi nomine Cosdroe. Sex. Aur.
Victor, in vita Trajani.

(...). And may we not well suppose that this was the remaining Stream of that
famous River Gyndes, which Cyrus in his march from Persia toward Babylon cut
into so many pieces, because it had drowned one of his beloved white Horses
that drew in his Chariot, as it is related by Herodotus l. 1. n. 189, 190. and
after him by Seneca De Ira, l. 3. 6. 21? Truly the circumstances of the Story
agree so well to this River, (besides the affinity of the Names) that if it
were not this, we cannot well imagine where to find it. Indeed it might move
some scruple, that Herodotus finds the Spring of this River in Matiana, if we
had not observed how confused and large the notion of Matiana is in his
Geography; so as it may well be extended even to that place where we also
believe the Fountain of this River to be. Besides, it is no unusual thing with
Herodotus to be overtaken with that vulgar Error, which we have observed to be
common to him with others, to mistake adventitious In-lets for the native and
original Streams of Rivers. But Stephanus speaks full as much to our purpose as
we desire: for he (whence-soever he had it) going about to relate the famed
story of Gyndes, (in voce Gyndes) prefaceth it with such a Description of the
River as sets it right with our Observation; for thus he writes: Gyndes,
Assyriorum fluvius maximus secundum Euphratem. Is cum Cyri impetum, etc.
Whether or no this River were as great as he makes it, (as like enough it might
be) yet undoubtedly, if it were a River of Assyria, it could be no other then
this that we have described. Others again have called this River Cydnus, and it
appears to be the same by the Course that it runs, and Fall in like manner into
the River Choaspes, (or Reception of it rather) with whose conjoined waters it
crosses the Eastern borders of Assyria; yet so, as in the way it may seem to
shed out of it a little Stream, which falls into that branch of Tigris, that
after we shall speak of, not far from the Rivers Lycus and Caprus: the like
whereto being related by Pliny and others of the Fall of Choaspes in like
manner into Tigris, it might well enough be the same, these two Rivers having
before conjoined their waters. And the observation of this is useful, to
reconcile some differences to be found in Historians in relating the Battle at
Arbela. For Q. Curtius l. 4. says, that when Darius, being put to flight, was
glad to shift for himself, Paucis fugae comitibus, ad Lycum amnem contenderet,
quo trajecto, dubitavit an solveret pontem, etc. Arrianus De Expedit. Alex. l.
4. seems to call it Bumadus, which is observed to be the same River which
Ptolemy calls Caprus. But Justin plainly calls it Cydnus, Histor. l. 11.
Suadentibus deinde quibusdam, ut pons Cydni fluminis ad iter hostium
impediendum intercluderetur, non ita saluti suae velle consultum ait, ut tot
millia sociorum hostibus objiciat: debere and aliis fugae viam patere, quae
patuerit sibi. And from thence (no doubt) Orosius took an occasion of that
gross Error, when, dreaming of no other Cydnus then that which runs through
Cilicia into the Syrian Sea, he took boldness to write, that the last Battle
betwixt Alexander and Darius was at Tarsus; Histor. l. 3. c. 17. And the like
mistake, arising from a like misprision, occasioned other Learned men to
discredit another Story concerning this River, reported by an eyewitness out
of his own knowledge. This was Diotimus, Ambassador from the State of Athens
to the Persian, who delivered it with his own mouth to Eratosthenes, from whom
Strabo thus relates it, Geog. l. 1. (...), Diotimum Strombichi filium, ducem
Legationis Atheniensium, e Cilicia adverso flumine Cydno in Choaspin fluvium
navigasse, qui Susa alluit, ac XL dierum spatio Susa pervenisse; idque ipsum
sibi narrasse Diotimum. Though Eratosthenes had no just cause to except against
the Credit of the Relator; yet he confesses the Relation it self seemed very
incredible unto him, because he could not conceive how Cydnus could possibly
flow under Euphrates and Tigris, to fall into Choaspes. But if there were not
only a double Cydnus (as by this may sufficiently appear) but also a double
Cilicia, (and one of them at the very place where Diotimus took Barge) then (I
hope) this wonder will cease. And that there was so, the Author of the Book of
Judith may serve for a sufficient witness: for relating the march of
Nabuchodonosor's Army under the conduct of Holophernes toward the West, he
tells us, Chap. 2. 21. that they went forth of Ninive three days journey
toward the Plain of Bectileth, and pitched from Bectileth near the Mountain
which is at the left hand of the upper Cilicia. It is more evident then can be
denied, by the sequel of the history, that the Mountain which is here said to
lie on the left hand (i. e. to the North) of the Region called Cilicia, was
that part of Mount Taurus that bounded Mesopotamia and Assyria on that side;
and the Plains of Bectileth are supposed by Junius to be the Plains that lay
about the City Bithias not far from Samosata. But whether that were so or no,
(for it may well be doubted, because Bithias lay more then three days journey
from Ninive) yet certain it is, that hereabouts (and nearer Ninive) Ptolemy
sets the Region Calacine, which Strabo calls Chalachena, and both of them might
as well every whit have called it Cilicia, (for so Pliny calls some of the
Inhabitants of those parts Silices, or rather Cilices) which is indeed no other
then that Region whither the captive Israelites were translated when they were
led away into Assyria, which 2 Kings 17. 6. is called Chalach, and had its
denomination from the City Chalach built by Nimrod, Genesis 10. 11. near (as may
seem) to the utmost North-west border of Assyria, where we have formerly found
this River to make its Division. And the reason why this Apocryphal Author
calls this Region the upper Cilicia was, (in all probability) with relation to
that other better known in the West, that lay upon the Recess of the Syrian
Sea; which had (no doubt) both its name, and the reason of it, from the same
Hebrew Root with this. And so it appears plainly, that howsoever this report of
Diotimus has hitherto passed for little better then a prodigious Lie, yet it
is indeed a remarkable Truth, and gives us full assurance of the Course of this
River in the same manner that we have set it. I might here farther add
something concerning another name of this River, taken up (as seems) in
aftertimes; and it is Zirma, Corma, Somra, and Samura. For Agathias finds it
on the North of Assyria under the name of Zirma, Hist. l. 4. When it crosses
the East of that Region, Tacitus calls it Corma, Annal. l. 12. When it runs
through Susiana, Benjamin in Itiner. calls it Somra and Samura. Which to be the
same River with this we speak of, appears by the answerable Course that it
held. But having already tired my pen in this tedious search, and come at
length within view of that which was sought after, I willingly supersede from
that needless labor. For who is there now that in those corrupted names of
Cydnus, Indus, and Gyndes, may not easily discern the misshapen lineaments of
the name Gihon, which Moses makes one of the four Rivers of Paradise? And if
upon this ground we take leave to suppose the name Oena (which Ammianus gives
it) to have been anciently either written or pronounced Geona, none (I think)
can justly challenge it for an over-bold conjecture. However, certain it is
that diverse of the names given to this River have been by others applied to
Gihon. Geog. Nub. expressly calls that River which others call Cydnus by the
name of Gihon; as Scaliger also notes, who farther observes, that Gihon (a
River running to the South of Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 32. 30.) is also by an
equipollent Synonymon called (...) Siloach, Nehem. 3. 15. which by a little
corruption in aftertimes became (...), Jo. 9. 7. and being put into the form
Pyhal becomes (...) Shullach, Obad. v. 1. So near to which both in sound and
signification is the ancient name which Plutarch gives this River, that as they
agreed in the one, it may well be supposed they agreed in the other also. For
the most ancient name of Tigris (as he tells us) was (...), or, as Eustathius
in his Comment upon Dionys. Perieg. has it, (...) which to have continued to
this upper Stream we speak of, called by Plutarch Hydaspis and Indus, appears
by the same Author, (cap. de Indo,) where he affirms it also to be called
(...) which is either no more then the former radical word with a (...)
Heemantick prefixed before; or else it is farther compounded of (...) which in
composition as well as construction becomes (...) and is by the Egyptians (as
Josephus) and the Syrians also (as Scaliger says) pronounced (...) or (...),
and signifies Aqua, or Synecdochi (...) Fluvius; so that (...) is but aqua, or
fluvius Solos or Solax, or rather Sulach: for that the true Radix of this word
is (...) or (...), which among other acceptions signifies Dimittere and
Dejicere, Plutarch himself has put us out of doubt, who, undertaking to
interpret this word, says that it signifies (...). And I doubt not but this
was that River Silus, which, meeting with the Streams of Eulaeus, ran together
with it into the Sea. Inde flumen Silum a Montibus Persarum venientem recipit,
post in Mare emittit. D. Mar. Niger, Geograph. Asia Com. 5. Yea (that all
occasion of doubt may be taken away) the famous name of Nilus (which was
generally believed by the Ancients to be Gihon) is found also to be given to
this River: For Joach. Vadianus has observed, that from the time of Moses,
even to the time of Alexander, Indus was generally believed to be Nilus. Upon
presumption whereof it was, that Alexander prepared a Navy in Indus with a
purpose to pass into Egypt, as hoping by its Stream to sail into Nilus; as
Strabo testifies Geog. l. 15. But herein was his mistake, that he sought that
before him which was behind him, not knowing (as it seems) that that name was
intended to this River, which by good authority we have already proved to be
called Indus. The place of Vadianus is in his Appendix, containing an
explication of some places in his Commentaries upon Mela, which, because it is
pertinent to this purpose, we shall here describe in his own words. Sed de
Indo, inquis, Moses non meminit. Geon enim, ut Augustine. lib. super Genesis 8.
interpretatur, Nilus est per omnem Aethiopiae terram fluens. Agnosco equidem
Augustini interpretationem. Constat tamen a vetustissimis, usque Alexandri and
Artaxerxis tempora, dubitatum fuisse, diversusne esset a Nilo Indus, an idem
Amnis: id quod Aristoteles scriptum reliquit, and, libro 15, memoriae prodidit
gravis imprimis Author Strabo: ut rerum and humanarum and divinarum
peritissimum Mosen ea causa Indum praeteriisse existimare debeamus, quod
populari suorum temporum historia in Nili nomine Indum comprehendi videret. And
(I think) Eucherius was of this mind, as he is quoted by August. Steuchus
Eugub. Cosmopoeia in Genesis c. 2. Eucherius noster, vide quam recte, Phison ait
est Ganges, qui nunc est Nilus. For Ganges with him is no other then Gyndes,
(cut by Cyrus) even as it is noted in S. Austin also, relating that story De
Mirabilib. S. Script. l. 2. in the Text it is called Gyndes, in the Margent
Ganges; and was the same River with Indus; the names only being differently
pronounced by different Nations, as Epiphanius has observed, lib. De 12
Gemmis. (...), Phison autem apud Graecos Indus, apud Barbaros Ganges vocatur.
And that the name of Nilus should be given it, is nothing strange, not only in
regard of the amplitude of its signification, (for (...) is no more then
Torrens or Rivus, and so may be indifferently applied to any River;) but also
in regard of the great similitude that was betwixt that in Egypt and this. For
as that Nilus, not far from Memphis, parting it self into two main Branches,
(out of which others were drawn) watered all that Country which from the form
of the Greek letter is called (...): so this River also, dividing itself into
two Streams, waters the whole Land of Assyria. Sextus Rufus in Trajano;
Provincias fecit Armeniam, Mesopotamiam, and Assyriam, quae inter Tigridem
atque Euphratem sita irriguis amnibus instar Aegypti foecundatur. But above all
other, the Testimony of Pausanias is most remarkable, who has delivered us an
ancient Tradition of the Original of Nilus so fully consonant to what we have
delivered, that it self alone may not unjustly be deemed sufficient to justify
all or most that hitherto we have observed. The place is in Corinthiacis, sive
lib. 2. Quin and Nilum fama est Euphratem esse, qui ubi Paludi immersus diu
latuerit, supra Aethiopas Nilus evadit. This is so exact a Commentary upon
Moses, that no Divine (which I have read) has afforded us a better. For here
Nilus, (that is, in the language of the Ancients, Gihon, and was indeed a
Stream of that River which vulgarly passed under the name of Tigris) is
expressly affirmed to be the same with Euphrates; not only because the name
Perath was applied to it, (as has been observed out of Hesychius) but because,
as Moses affirms, they sprung together out of the same Fountain, and for some
space ran so near together, that oft-times their waters touched each other;
after which, separating themselves, this River dives under fenny Lakes and
Marshes, (just as the forecited Authors write of Tigris) and then springing
up again, it takes the name of Nilus, (says Pausanias) and waters the Land
of the Aethiopians. Could any thing have been delivered more consonant to the
Sacred Story then this? For is not this the very Characteristical note by which
Moses describes this River to us? Genesis 2. 13. And the name of the second River
is Gihon: the same is it that compasses the whole Land of Aethiopia, says our
English Translation, with the Septuagint and others. And they might well enough
translate (...) Aethiopia, it being well known and granted that Cushites and
Aethiopians are the same. Joseph. Antiq. Jud. l. 1. c. 7. Ex quatuor Chamae
liberis, Chuso nihil detrimenti tempus attulit. Aethiopes enim, quibus
praefuit, nunc quoque tam a seipsis quam ab Asianis omnibus Chusaei nominantur.

CHAP. XI.
A Confirmation of the former Assertion, by proving that the Regions through
which this River passes were anciently called Aethiopia.
BUT if any now begin to wonder to hear of Aethiopians in these parts, (as no
doubt but this with other Observations in this Discovery will seem strange at
first to prejudicate minds) I hope they will rest satisfied when they shall
have heard the Testimony of so many credible Authors as have affirmed it. For
howsoever the name of Aethiopia be now in a manner appropriated to that Region
of Africa which commonly goes under the name of the Kingdom of the Abassines,
or Prester John; yet the ancient Aethiopians were at first Inhabitants about
this River, from whence they passed into Africa, and no doubt carried their
name along with them. So much is observed by S. Augustine, (or whoever else was
the Author of that Book) De Mirabilib. S. Script. l. 1. where having taken
notice first of that Country that vulgarly goes under the name of Aethiopia,
he adds, Aethiopiam alteram esse in multis locis Historiarum Scripturae
describunt. De qua in Ecclesiastica Historia scribitur, quod ex part Indiae
adhaeret. Et in Chronicis Canonicis Eusebii refertur, (viz. An. Mundi 3580)
quod Aethiopes ab Indo flumine consurgentes, juxta Aethiopiam (juxta Aegyptum
Eusebius.) consederunt. Ex quo intelligitur, quod terra illa in qua primitus
Aethiopes habitaverunt, Aethiopia dicta esse potuerit. What that Country was,
we may in part gather from Nicephorus Hist. Ecclesiast. l. 9. c. 18. where,
among other of these Removers, he names the Assyrians, whose Country he had
formerly in the same Chapter called India, (even as the African Aethiopians
also were called Indians) and a great part of it (as has been said) was
compassed with this River Indus: for having spoken of the Auxumita, (the most
eminent Tribe amongst them) he adds, Ante hos vero ad extimum pertingentes
Oceanum, Orientem versus, Assyrii: apud quos etian hanc appellationem habent,
quos Alexander Macedo, ex Syria pulsos, Colonos eo deduxit. Ii ad hoc usque
tempus patria utuntur lingua. And seeing the identity of Language is the surest
proof of the identity of Nations, we may well suppose that the rest of these
Removers also were anciently their near neighbors, seeing the vulgar Language
of these Aethiopians at this day (as themselves confess, and Scaliger delivers
for certain) is no other then the ancient Chaldee; which to have been the
Language of the Assyrians also, and other adjacent Regions, (with little or no
variation) is more evident then can be denied. Yea, of so large extent was this
title of Aethiopia, that the Chaldaeans themselves may seem to have come under
the compass of it. For Tacitus, Hist. l. 5. speaking of the Antiquity of the
Jews, tells us, that most Writers held them to be Aethiopum prolem, whose
ancestors notwithstanding we all know came from Ur of the Chaldees. And in like
manner Strabo notes Phoenicia by some to have been called Aethiopia, Geog. l.
1. (...). Which as it is evident in the story of Perseus fetching Andromeda
from Aethiopia, (say the Poets) which was indeed from Joppa, where Cepheus her
Father was King, and where the bones of that Monster (slain by Perseus) were to
be seen many Ages after: so might Strabo, by the help of that Observation, have
better understood that much debated Verse in Homer, which, after long sifting,
he leaves at length with a far less probable interpretation. Homer. Odyss.
(...). 81. (...),
Aethiopes adii, tum Sidonios and Erembos.
All which Menelaus might well do, and yet never pass out of the Mediterranean
Sea; for the truth is, all these were neighbour-Nations, dwelling along the
Seacoast betwixt Egypt and Cilicia: the Aethiopians about Joppa, the
Sidonians in their own then-famous City; and the Erembi were either the
Arabians, or rather the Syrians, whom the Scripture calls Aramites, and were
anciently known to the Heathen under the same name Aramaei, as Strabo in the
same place testifies. But my purpose is not to pursue the utmost extent of this
word, which alone might serve to fill a Volume, seeing, (as the same Strabo
testifies l. 1.) anciently the better part of the Habitable World went under
the name of Aethiopia: but confining my search within its due limits, it shall
suffice me to mention those Aethiopians only whom (as Moses and Pausanias tell
us) the River Gihon compasses, or courseth by. For, as Ainsworth on Genesis 2.
11. notes, the Original word is sometime used for turning and passing along
by, though not round about; as in Jos. 15. 3. and 16. 6. where the Greek
translates it (...), pass by: and so he supposes it to be taken by Moses. Now
if we take a review of this River, even from its Fountain to its Outlet, we
may discover some scattered mention of Aethiopia and Aethiopians. For as
touching its Springhead, we have heard Aethicus (before cited) placing it in
or about Aethiopia: Fluvius Tigris etiam ipse de Monte Caucaso quasi visitur
natus, cum aestivis temporibus sub humo eum desuper Aethiopiam currere ex
viriditate superni cespitis prodatur. The Inhabitants of Sagrus or Zagrus (a
Mountain that lay to the back of this River in a good part of its Course) are
observed to be a Nation of Aethiopians; for so Hesychius, (...) (lege (...))
(...). The Province of Elymais with the adjoining Territories ((...) (...)) are
by Epiphanius in Anchoret. n. 58. expressly placed in Aethiopia. And for the
Inhabitants of Susiana, that they went anciently under the name of Aethiopians,
we have a Testimony of as great antiquity as the evidence of any Heathen
History will reach: for Memnon, who came from Susa to the aid of Priamus in the
Trojan War, is by the ancientest Writers called Aethiopum Rex. So Hesiod in
Theogonia,

(...),
(...) --
Ast Aurora parit Tithono Memnona fortem,
Aethiopum Regem --
So accordingly Pindarus, Olymp. Od. 2. calls him (...), Aurorae filium
Aethiopem. And Pausanias, Phoc. sive l. 10. mentioning a Table in which
Memnon's Picture was drawn, adds; Prope Memnonem nudus est puer ex Aethiopia;
quo^d nempe Aethiopum Rex fuit Memnon. Venit enim ad Bellum Trojanum non ex
Aethiopia, sed a Susis Persarum urbe, debellatis iis omnibus Nationibus quae
mediae sunt usque ad Choascum (Choaspem) flumen. And the like has Diod. Sic.
Bibliothec. l. 3. c. 6. Cum Priamus bello oppressus, ab Rege Theutamo
praesidium, utpote Assyriis subditus, per Legatos postulasset; ille december
millia Aethiopum, totidemque Susianos, cum ducentis curribus, duce Memnone, ad
Trojam misit. That he reckons the Susians apart from the Aethiopians, it is
not because they also were not Aethiopians, but because he had conquered some
other Nations lying about Susiana, whom therefore he notes under this more
general name of Aethiopians; and immediately after calls them by the like
general name of Persians, for so it follows; Erattunc Tithonus, (Memnonis
pater) Praefectus Persarum, acceptus maxim Regi. And so those Persians which
the Athenians, under the conduct of Miltiades, overthrew in the Plains of
Marathon, were pictured under the habit of Aethiopians, in a Vial which the
Statue of Nemesis held in her right hand, formed by Phidias out of that Marble
stone which the enemies had brought with them, and presumptuously designed for
a Monument of their own Victory, Pausan. Attic. sive l. 1. Which is a thing so
clear, that it is strange so great an Antiquary as Pausanias was should stick
at it; who dreaming only of Aethiopians in Africa, professes he knew not what
to make of it. So great a let is Prejudice to the discerning of the truth. Nor
is that to be neglected which Strabo notes, Geog. l. 15. that Aeschylus called
the Mother of this forementioned Memnon (...) which we must not take for her
proper name, (for that was Aurora, say the Poets) but nomen gentilitium, taken
from the Country where she lived, viz. Susiana. (...), (says Strabo in the
same place) Susii enim etiam Cissii dicti sunt: or rather Cossaei, as himself
and other Geographers call them for the most part; of whom frequent mention is
made in Histories, especially in the Life of Alexander, before whose time (as
it may seem) they had enlarged themselves farther then the bounds of Susiana,
and possessed not only the Mountains that lay betwixt it and Persia, but spread
themselves up Northward all along the back of this River into diverse scattered
portions of Mount Taurus, not only Eastward as far as Media, but Westward also
even to the Fountains of Tigris. Plin. l. 6. c. 27. Susianis ad Orientem versus
junguntur Cossaei latrones. In which place Strabo also finds them, and
enlarging their Bounds yet farther toward the North-east, Geograph. l. 11.
(...) (...), Media major definitur versus Ortum Parthia and Montibus
Cossaeorum. Sunt hi Latrociniis dediti, and aliquando sagittariorum XIII millia
eduxerunt, Elymaeis suppetias ferentes contra Susios ac Babylonios. Nearchus
ait, Cum quatuor sunt populi praedando viventes, de quibus Mardi Persis
contigui erant, Uxii and Elymaei iisdem atque Susiis, Cossaei Medis; omnes eos
tributa a Regibus exegisse. Cossaeos autem munera etiam accipere, cum Rex
aestate Ecbatanis transacta in Babyloniam descendit: nimiam tamen eorum
audaciam ab Alexandro fuisse compressam, cum cos hyeme adortus esset. His ergo
Media versus Ortum definitur; ac Paraetacenis praeterea, qui contigui Persis,
ipsi quoque Montana incolunt, and Latrocinia exercent. Which Testimony I have
therefore recited at large, that in it we may see the warlike spirits and
ancient power of this Nation, such as to impose Tribute upon the greatest
Kings, until they were subdued by Alexander. Dionysius Afer remembers them
under the name of Cissii, (as Herodotus also does oftener then once) and sets
them toward the North of Babylonia, comprehending under that name Assyria, (as
others also do:)

(...),
(...).
At supra Babylona vides Aquilonis ad oras
Cissos, Messabatasque, Chalonitasque feroces.
That the Cissii or Cossaei are placed adjoining to the Messabatae, is
agreeable to that of Pliny, l. 6. c. 27. Susianis ab Orient proximi sunt
Cossaei; supra Cossaeos ad Septentrionem Mesobatene. Indeed Ptolemy places the
Messabatae in Persia; but Strabo says it was a Region of Elymaes; and happily it
was adjoining to the borders of them both: about which place that the Cossaei
were their neighbors, is farther attested by Dom. Marius Niger, Geog. Asiae,
Com. 5. Susianae partem Septentrionalem Cossaei tenent, regiuncula haud
fertilis, tota enim montuosa est, per quam Cosaeus amnis transit. Homines
sagittarii, qui Latrocinia exercent. That Cosaeus amnis I take to be the same
that in Aethicus is called fluvius Susa, which (as he describes it) in Media
Provincia nascitur, bicornis; efficitur unus: currit millia 504, descendit in
Sinum Persicum. Whereupon Jos. Simlerus passes this not improbable Conjecture:
Intelligo fluvium juxta quem est Susa Urbs, hoc est, Eulaeum: quem bicornem
dicit, quoniam duos habet Fontes, unum in Susiana, alterum in Media, Zagro
Monte, qui infra Susa in unum confluunt. And it may be Josephus meant no other
River but this, when he fetched the Original of the Samaritans Ancestors a
flumine Cutho. True, he sets that River in Persia, and makes the people a
Persian Nation. Antiq. Jud. l. 9. c. ult. Deinde migrare jussa Persica quadam
gente ex eo tractu qui ab amne Cutho denominatur, seeds ei designavit in agro
Samariae, caeteraque Israelitarum regione. Et paulo post; Caeterum novi
Samariae coloni Chuthaei: sic enim tum appellabantur, quod a Persidis regione
Chutha and flumine Chutho essent traducti, etc. But if we remember that Ptolemy
also places Messabatene in Persis, (where farther within land he finds a
Nation likewise of the Susaei) and consider also how largely the name of Persia
was taken in the time of Josephus, this will breed no great difference. Yet I
do not assent unto Josephus, that this people took their name from the River,
but rather the River from them; which if it were one of the Horns of Eulaeus,
or rather a Stream that fell into it, or received it, it may well seem to have
been no other River then this we have discoursed upon. And that it should take
the name of fluvius Chuthaeus is nothing improbable, because (as Moses says)
it watered the whole land of Chus. And indeed the Cossaei did border upon it,
not only here in Mesobatene, where they inhabited upon Mount Zagrus, but all
along its Course to its Spring, upon those Mountains that lay to the back of
Assyria even to Armenia; where having formerly seated themselves, they
straggled afterward farther Eastward into Media and Persia, and possessed
diverse Mountainous places in those Countries, even to the borders of India,
(though not without some change of their Name.) So much I learn from Strabo,
who, speaking of the Northern parts of Media, writes thus: (...) Quod autem ad
Septentrionem vergit, montosum, asperum, and frigidum est: ubi degunt Cadusii
montani, Amardi, Tapyri, Cyrtii, aliique id genus; qui and aliunde in ista
migraverunt loca, and sunt Latrones. Zagrus enim and Niphates istas gentes
sparsas habent: and qui in Persia sunt Cartii and Amardi (sic enim vocant
Mardos) and qui in Armenia sunt eodem hodieque nomine censentur, eundemque
habitum tenent. By which Testimony it is evident, that the Cartii and Mardi or
Amardi in Media and Persia were originally descended from the Cartii and Mardi
in Armenia and the Mountains adjoining to it; where we need not doubt to find
them, seeing Ptolemy, reckoning up the Countries that lay East to the Fountains
of Tigris, names Gordene, and quae magis Orientalis Cortaea, and qui sub ipsa
sunt Mardi; who yet were of the same progeny with their neighbors, though
attaining this different name: which as it is well observed by learned Mr.
Fuller, so it may be farther confirmed by comparing the Writers of Alexander's
Conquest of these Nations; for those whom Arrianus calls Mardos, Curtius
calls Cardos. And it is very probable (which he conjectures) that this name
was given them in stomach by their neighbors the Assyrians, because they could
not conquer them: for (...) is as much as (...) deficere, and in the Chaldee
(...) is Apostata or Rebellis; and such they were always to the Assyrian
Monarchs, who undertaking to invade them, were put to the worst, and their
Armies wholly routed by them, as a Native of those parts told Xenophon. Which
doubtless was the reason why Adramelech and Sharezer, having slain their Father
Sennacherib, fled into the land of Ararat (where this Nation dwelt) for
protection. As for the Cartii, which Strabo more usually calls Curtii, as
also the Cordi, Cordiaei, (and Gordiaei) Cardueni, Carduchi, etc. that they
were originally Cossaei, their name it self (notwithstanding all this
alteration) may evince. For, by the light alteration of an S into an R, Cossaei
at the first became Cortii, and Curtii, and Cartii; afterward Cardi, and Cordi,
and Gordii, and Gordiaei, etc. And hereof we may gather a good argument from
the different writing of their Countrie's name in Ptolemy. For whereas Maginus
and Marius Niger have it Cortaea; Ortelius, in his Nomenclator Ptolemaicus,
(with others) has it Cotaea; which anciently to have been Cosaea or Cossaea
none will deny that knows how customary it is in the Syriack Tongue to change S
into T, (as has already been observed.) And seeing this Country lay so near
the River that watered the land of Chus, and the Name answers so exactly to
it, (for how small is the difference betwixt (...) and Cotaea?) I should rather
incline to believe that this might be the more likely place from whence that
Colony was transplanted into Samaria; not only because it lay nearer to those
places remembered in the Catalogue of the Assyrian Conquests, as Gozan, and
Haran, and Reseph, and the Children of Eden which were in Thelasar; but also
because the captive Israelites (who seem to have changed Countries with them)
were bestowed here-abouts. 2 Kings, 17. 6. In the ninth year of Hoshea, the
King of Assyria took Samaria, and carried Israel away into Assyria; and placed
them in Halah, and in Habor, by the River of Gozan, and in the Cities of the
Medes. As we have formerly noted Halach or Chalach to be Chalachena; so Habor
or Chabor was either Al-Chabur, which Geog. Nub. sets in the North of Assyria,
or else some Region in Mount Coathras, which in the Greek Copies of Ptolemy is
called (...). Gozan gave name to a double Region, (but both adjoining to these
parts) the one in Mesopotamia, the other in Media. And for the Cities of the
Medes, I suppose not only Amedon is meant, (which Geog. Nub. calls Hamadan,
Benjamin Tudelensis Hemdan, and says (in Itinerario) that he found therein
near upon 50000 Israelites) but all other Cities in that Country, out of which
those Nations were drawn that were sent with the Chuthites to make up that
Samaritan Colony, and are thus reckoned Ezra 4. 9. The Dinaei, Aparsathcaei,
Tapelaei, Aparsaei, Arcavaei, Babylonii, Susanchaei, Dehavaei, and Helamaei:
which (omitting the Babylonians and Susanchites, which are well enough known
without a Commentary) are expounded by Junius to be the Dennani, (or Dani, or
most commonly Daii, joined with the Mardi by Herodot. l. 1.) the Paraetaceni,
the Tapyri, the Persae, the Araceni, (or Inhabitants of Oracana, a City of
Media in Ptol.) the Daritae, called also Zapovorteni, (or rather the Debae, so
called by contraction for Dehabae) and the Inhabitants of Elymais, the ancient
neighbors of the Cossaei. Nor am I any thing deterred from this opinion by
that of Abrabaniel, who makes Cuth or Cutha a City of the Chaldaeans: (...),
Cuth est Civitas alia in Chaldaeorum regione. For as the name of Chaldaea is
found given to other Regions beside that which lies upon Babylonia; so this in
which the Curdi dwelt is commonly known to the Arabians by that name.
Leunclavius, Pandect. Turc. nu. 232. A vicinis Persis and Turcis ea Regio
Curdistan appellatur, quam nunc quoque Keldan vocant Arabes, id est, Chaldaeam.
And so much Stephanus (...). had observed: Chaldia, Regio Armeniae. Incolae
Chaldi. But other Chaldi in Armenia there are none but the Cardi, formerly
called Cartii and Curtii, and at the first Cossaei. As for the name of Scythae,
which Heathen Authors give this Nation, as it was suitable enough to them in
regard of their often flitting and wandering, (for Historians represent them to
us like right Nomades, and therefore they are not unjustly called by Strabo
(...)) so no doubt but it was taken from their well-known name (...), as the
City Bethsan, which was re-edified and re-peopled by them, is famously known by
the name of Scythopolis. Plin. l. 5. c. 18. Scythopolin, antea Nisam, Libero
Patre, sepulta Nutrice ibi, Scythis deductis; id est, Chuthaeis. And so the
Country from whence they came is from ultimate Antiquity remembered by the
Heathen under the name of Scythia, being indeed Cotaea or Chutha; which lying
so near (as it does) to the Mount Gordiaeus, where the Ark is said to rest
after the Deluge, I doubt not but it might be made appear by good proof, that
this was that Scythia Saga, in qua renatum ferunt mortale genus: Cato in Frag.
But the clearing of this would lead us into too large a Digression; and
therefore I forbear it, and proceed to the prosecution of the subject in hand.
Seeing the Radical Letters in the Original were the same (save the different
pronunciation of a Vowel) in all those several names of Cissii, Cossaei,
Cuthaei, and Susii; we need not doubt to affirm, that these were indeed the
true and primitive Aethiopians, whom the Inhabitants of Asia (as Josephus has
told us) called Chusaei. And hence it appears that their Etymology is false
that have derived the name of Susiana from (...), which in the Persian Tongue
(they say) as well as the Hebrew signifies a Lilly. I will not deny but Sushan
the Palace, and happily Susa the City (whence those Susanchites Ezra 4. 9.) might
take their denomination from that Root; but certainly that Region whose ancient
name was Cissia, (still continuing to a part of this Province in Ptolemy's
time) and the name of the Inhabitants not only Cissii but Cossaei, could have
no other original of their denomination then (...). And hereof the Inhabitants
themselves give us good assurance, who (even to this day) call their Country,
not Susiana, but Cusistan, which is neither more nor less then the Country of
Chus. Benjamin in Itin. calls it (...) Cuzestan; others call it Curestan, even
as Chus the son of Cham is by Berosus called Cur. Dom. Mar. Niger, Geog. Asiae
Com. 5. Susiana Provincia sequitur, quam quidam in partem Persidis ponunt,
nomen a Susa Urbe clariss. deducens; nunc a Barbaris patria lingua Chus
dicitur. And no marvel it should take its name from him, who with his posterity
seated himself here very early after the Flood, even before the building of
Babel. For if Nimrod the son of Chus, when he went with his rebellious
Associates into the land of Shinar to build that Tower, journeyed from the
East, as Moses says they did, Genesis 11. 2. then in all probability the place
from whence they set out was Susiana, which lies next East to Babylonia. Indeed
Chus had a numerous posterity, whence it was that his name spread so far. Some
of them passed into Arabia over the River Tigris, which I should choose for a
more probable Bounder of the Eastern and Western Aethiopians mentioned in
Homer, then the Arabian Sea, or Mare Rubrum; though I know also that many
Secular Writers have comprehended the Persian Gulf under that name. Of the
Western or Arabian Aethiopians many Commentators have written learnedly: and if
they had turned their pens to enquire after these in the East also, I doubt not
but they might have found out a better interpretation of many places of
Scripture then ordinarily has been given. As (Ex. gr.) where Chus and Elam are
joined together, Esaias 11. 11. Paras, Chus, and Phut, Ezekiel. 38. 5. as formerly
Paras, Phut, and Lud, Ezekiel. 27. 10. For as Paras and Elam are well known to be
Eastern Nations, (to whom the Cossaei were near neighbors;) so we should not
always need to go into Africa and Asia minor for Phut and Lud, but find them
nearer at hand, if we did well consider that place in Judith, 2. 23. And
whether any help may hence be had for the better understanding of that obscure
Prophecy, Esaias 18. 1. I leave to better judgments to enquire. But surely it was
not without cause that in that parallel Prophecy, Zeph. 3. 10. the Chaldee
Paraphrast renders Trans flumina (...) Aethiopiae, by E Regionibus ultra
flumina (...) Indiae: whether thereby he meant the less noted India that we
have by the way touched upon, or that other more famous and better known Region
removed farther toward the East: for even there also were Cushites or
Aethiopians. The Israelites in Nisebor by the River Gozan are said in bellum
proficisci ad Regionem Cusch per viam deserti, Benj. in Itin. And Herodotus
clearly distinguishing the Eastern Aethiopians from the Western, joins them
with the Indians, Polymn. sive l. 7. (...), Aethiopibus quidem qui sunt ultra
Aegyptum and Arabibus praeerat Arsames: qui vero ab ortu Solis erant Aethiopes
(bifariam enim militabant) ordinati erant cum Indis. And not only long after
did Philostratus find Aethiopians about the River Indus, but Homer long before
had set them as far East as the rising of the Sun. And whether the River Gihon
might not anciently compass even these also, I cannot certainly affirm: but the
confounding of this River not only with Indus but with Ganges also (by so many
good Writers) might seem to intimate, as if they were believed anciently to
have communicated in their Streams. And their opinion falls not far short of
this, who have found the Fountain of Ganges in the Mountains of Media; as
Artemidorus, that ancient and famous Geographer, is said to have done: and that
of the forecited Benjamin, if we were certain it were true, might render it
probable, who finds a Stream of Tigris emptying it self into the Sea over
against the Island Nikrokis, which Constantine L' Empereur supposes to be
Zeilan, formerly called Nanigeris; an Island once famed with an opinion of
Paradise, a River whereof Ganges is still held to be, by the native Indians,
who yearly testify that credulity by many superstitious Ceremonies. But the
most remarkable Testimony is, the Draught of this River in that famous Tabula
Itineraria antiqua lately set out by Peutinger, wherein the Head of it being
set much about the place where we have found it, it is drawn quite through the
East, and falls into the Oriental Ocean, having taken in by the way the River
Ganges. If any ask how it should come to pass then, that the Course of it now
should be intercepted, (if indeed it be wholly intercepted;) I answer, they
will cease to wonder, if they consider not only what Strabo has related of a
great Earthquake, whereby a great change happened among the Rivers in those
parts, Geog. l. 1. (...), Et Duris refert Rhagades, quae in Media sunt, nomen
inde habere, quod Terrae-motibus rupta fuerit terra apud Caspias portas,
compluresque eversae Urbes and Pagi, ac Fluviorum variae inciderint mutationes:
but remember also what formerly has been noted of Cyrus cutting the Stream of
Gyndes into so many Channels as might well suffice to exhaust the greatest
River. But I do not take upon me to maintain this, nor is there any need that I
should, it being not much material to our purpose; seeing that Course of this
River which we have formerly asserted from so good authority, is abundantly
sufficient both to clear and justify the Geography of Moses.

CHAP. XII.
Another Division of Tigris; and the River Hiddekel with good Evidence found
out.
AND now there remains but one Division more, fully to complete the number of
the four Heads; and this we have occasionally touched upon before in producing
the testimony of Pliny, who gives us a clear account of it, Hist. l. 6. c. 27.
Tigris ex Armenia acceptis fluminibus claris, Parthenia ac Nicephorione,
Arabas, Aroeos Adiabenosque disterminans, and quam diximus Mesopotamiam
faciens, lustratis Montibus Gordyaeorum circa Apamiam Mesenes oppidum, citra
Seleuciam Babyloniam CXXV. M. P. divisus in alveos duos, altero Meridiem ac
Seleuciam petit, Mesenen perfundens; altero ad Septentrionem flexus, ejusdem
Gentis tergo Campos Cauchas secat. The same Division is also remembered by
Stephanus (...). who finds the point of it in the same place that Pliny does,
viz. about Apamia: the Northern Stream he calls by the name of Tigris minor;
and the Southern Delas, which is but a contraction of Dehelath, or (as
otherwhile it is written) Degelath and Diglath, and Tegelath and Tiglath, and
is the same no doubt with the Hebrew word (...), ((...) being pronounced like
G, as in Gomorrha) and in Greek is as much as (...), in Latin Aquaeductus, and
accordingly is translated in 1 Kings 18. 32. Geog. Nub. calls it Dogiail, part.
6. clim. 4. where in like manner he makes mention of this Division agreeable to
the former. Tacrit est ex Urbibus Mausel, jacetque ab Occidente Tigris, and
opponitur illi in mediterraneo Urbs Hatdher. Prope Tacrit separat se a Tigri
flumen Dogiail, quod ejus terminos secans excurrit ad dominium Sora-man-rai,
illudque alluit usque ad parts vicinas Baghdad. If any happily think this an
inconsiderable Division, because not long after their parting these Streams
meet again, viz. at or before they attain Seleucia and Ctesiphon, as Pliny
intimates loc. cit. where he immediately subjoyns, Ubi re-meavere aquae,
Pasitigris appellatur: Postea recipit ex Media Choaspem; atque (ut diximus)
inter Seleuciam and Ctesiphontem vectus, in Lacus Chaldaicos se fundit: To this
we answer, That it is more then probable that Pliny was deceived by the
homonymy of the word Tigris, which River shedding several Streams from it, and
all still carrying the name of the original Stream, he might easily mistake one
for another. Truly I think he will hardly persuade any that has attentively
considered the Chorography of these parts, that the River Choaspes fell into
that Stream of Tigris that runs by Seleucia and Ctesiphon; and yet it fell into
Tigris too: for even this Stream we are in search of was (even now) by
Stephanus called Tigris minor; and with this it fell, not into the Chaldaean
Lakes, (as Pliny says, for no part of Tigris fell into them, but they were
wholly made by the effusion of Euphrates) but into the Lakes of Susiana, (whose
Coast toward the Persian Gulf was very fenny, as Strabo notes) and in
particular that very Lake whereinto we observed the former River to fall, as
will immediately appear. But be it so, that some of the waters of this Northern
Stream fell into the Southern at the same place where Pliny says they did; yet
certain it is that it was not the whole body of the Stream, but some small
Chanel drawn out of it, which served notwithstanding to make the enclosed
portion of ground a perfect Island, and is therefore by Pliny himself, as well
as Stephanus, called Mesene. But that the main Stream held his Course still
farther on toward the North-east, we have the warant of Pliny himself to
assure us, who finds a Town situate upon the Banks of it at so large a distance
from Seleucia, as will forbid us to think it could in any probability run back
again unto it: for thus he writes in the forementioned Book and Chapter: In
Septentrionali Tigris alveo Oppidum est Babytace. Abest a Susis CXXXV. M. pass.
Ibi mortalium soli aurum in odio contrahunt; id defodiunt, ne quo cui sit in
usu. If Babytace were removed but 135 miles from Susa, it was removed at a far
greater distance from Seleucia; for betwixt that and Susa himself a little
before had set no less then 450 miles, out of which if we deduct 135, there
remains still 315 miles; all which this River having run before it attained
Babytace, it is altogether incredible that the main Stream should ever turn
back again so suddenly, as to fall into Tigris about Seleucia: and indeed it
did not, but held its Course still on forward even to Susa it self, having
first met with the former River Gihon, and Choaspes with it, and afterward the
River Eulaeus; by which access of Waters it became a mighty Stream, and flowing
on still toward the Persian Gulf it carried all these Rivers along with it
under its own name of Tigris, as we have learned before out of Strabo. And
hence it is that Benjamin in his Itinerary calls the River that passed through
Susa Tigris, upon a Bridge whereof, that joined the two parts of the City, he
tells of a memorable Monument of Glass hung up in iron chains, made at the cost
of a Mohammedan Prince in honor of the Prophet Daniel, if we may believe him.
Nor is the name which this River holds at this day much dissonant from its
ancient appellation: for in our modern Maps the River which runs by Susa is
called Tiritri, which Constantine L'Empereur in his Notes upon the place of
Benjamin supposes to have been corrupted from Tigris. And no doubt but this
Tigris was it whose Chanel Eumenes filled with the slaughtered bodies of
Antigonus's Soldiers attempting to force a passage over it: for so it is
expressly called by Diodorus Siculus, who notwithstanding had already told us of
their quiet and uninterrupted passage over another Tigris long before they
attained the place of this Defeat: for that was within a days journey of Susa,
where Eumenes had his Headquarters, having fortified the passages of this
Tigris that flowed by it, while Antigonus was yet in Babylonia recruiting his
Army, and framing a Bridge of Boats over that other Stream of Tigris that ran
by Seleucia; which accordingly he did, and passed his Army over by it into
Susiana without any let or hindrance, finding no opposition, till, attempting
the passage of this Tigris, he received that remarkable Overthrow. An evidence
so clear of this Stream of Tigris which we now speak of, that it is a wonder
some good Chronologers should not hereby rather have been led on to the
observation of it, then so unjustly (as they do) to charge Diodorus with a
contradiction of which he is no way guilty, save only through the default of
their own mistake. Now if Tigris were the same that Moses calls Hiddekel, as
Vatablus says is agreed upon by all, we need not doubt to affirm this to be
the third River of Paradise, as finding it not only passing under that name,
but holding a Course so answerable to the Description of Moses as might serve
alone to exclude all doubting. Genesis 2. 14. And the name of the third River is
Hiddekel; that is it which goes toward the East of Assyria. And such and so
agreeable to the same point of the Compass is the Current of this Stream as
Pliny has set it, that we cannot desire a better Commentary. For if (as we
have heard him say) this Stream, after its breaking from the other at Apamia,
ran upward toward the North, (ad Septentrionem flexus) then it must of
necessity bend its Course toward the East of the ancient Assyria: so that
howsoever it waters also the South side of that Region; yet this intimation
of its inclination toward the North brings it up also to the East, with so
large a bend as may well satisfy as much as the word (...) does require. And
indeed that Testimony of Pliny does represent to our minds the Current of this
River at a higher draught toward the North, then we know well how to express
in a Map, keeping any tolerable correspondence with the Tables of Ptolemy.
Besides, the Prophet Daniel has abundantly secured us that this River was
Hiddekel, by the circumstances of that famous Vision which he saw upon the
Banks of it, Dan. 10. where v. 4. he calls it the great River, which is
Hiddekel. For if at the time when he saw that Vision he was President of
Susiana, and ordinarily resident upon his charge in the Metropolis of that
Province, or the place where the Royal Court used to be kept, viz. Sushan the
Palace, (as may be gathered from Dan. 8. 2. and is sufficiently proved by
Scaliger, both in his Proleg. in lib. De Emend. Temp. and in his Notae ad
Frag.) then there is no more doubt to be made that Hiddekel in him is the same
Stream of Tigris which Secular Writers have found flowing through Susiana, then
that Ulai is the same River with that which by them is usually called Eulaeus:
ibid. And here also it is much to consider what misshapen resemblances of the
true name of this River have been continued to posterity even amongst Heathen
Authors. For while it runs through Susiana in its own proper Chanel, and has
not yet mingled its waters with the River Eulaeus, it is by Pliny called
Hedypnus, l. 6. c. 27. Recipit amnem Hedypnum praeter Asylum Persarum
venientem, and unum ex Susianis. Some have written it Hedypus, but Jo.
Boccatius calls it (in like manner as Pliny does) Hedypnus, lib. de Fluminib.
Hedypnus fluvius est Susianorum Persarum in Eulaeum flumen decurrens. Strabo is
observed to call this same River Hedyphon, or, as others write it, Helyphon,
Geog. l. 16. (...), Capta est etiam prope flumen Hedyphontem Seleucia magna
Civitas, quae prius Soloce vocabatur. Now how easily these corrupted names of
Hedypus or Hedypnus, Hedyphon or Helyphon, might be formed out of the true and
proper name of this River Hiddekel, I think none will unwillingly grant, that
has been but lightly acquainted with the many far more unlikely changes of
foreign (or, as they used to call them, barbarous) words, made usually both by
Greek and Latin Writers.

CHAP. XIII.
Proving the other Branch of this Division to be Pishon.
AND as we doubt not but this Stream was Hiddekel; so there is no more doubt to
be made that the remaining Stream was Pishon. And this we are the more
emboldened to affirm, because here we fall in with company: for not only
Junius, but diverse other Learned men both before and after him, have been
awakened to the observation of this, by the name Pasitigris, or Pisotigris,
given it by Pliny and others; being indeed no other then its own proper name
compounded with the common and vulgar name of this River. Whereunto we may add
the Testimony of Xenophon, who calls this River Physcum amnem, (by an easy
mistake for Phison) De Expedit. Cyri lib. 2. A Tigride vero quartis castris M.
pass. LXXX. confectis, ad Physcum amnem pervenere. Hujus latitudo pass. erat
XX. Ponte is jungebatur. Nec long aberat ampla Civitas, Opis nomine. If any
prejudge this Testimony as impertinent, because Xenophon says that they had
passed Tigris already, and left it 80 miles behind their back, before they came
to the River Physcus: let them but consult the History, and they shall be
forced to acknowledge, that Xenophon had often before this called the Branches
of Euphrates by the name of Tigris; and that this Branch which they now had
passed from was Nahar-malca, the uppermost of its Streams, from which directing
their march toward Assyria, (which afterward they entered into not far from
the River Lycus, having first passed the former Stream of this Division of
Tigris at a Town called Caenae, after they had marched with it on their left
hand some while in the Campi Cauchae, or, as he calls them, Solitudines Mediae)
this Physcus amnis, which they met withal in the mid way, could be no other
then the remaining Stream of the same Division, which Moses calls Phison. And
that it was a part of Tigris, we have farther assurance from the City Opis
situate so near unto it, and lying a little above the Bridge where they passed
over it. For in the same manner has Strabo also described the Decourse of the
River Tigris by this City, Geog. l. 11. In intimo Paludis recessu Tigris in
voraginem incidens, longoque spatio infra terram labens, apud Chalonitidem
emergit: inde ad Opin and Semiramidis murum procurrit. Quintus Curtius is
observed several times to call the River Tigris by the name of Phasis, (being
so taught by the Natives of those parts) which D. Marius Niger imputes as an
Error to him, Geog. Asia Com. 3. Curtius Tigrim Fluvium Phasim incolas vocare
ait; nescio an errore inductus, quemadmodum de Tanai fecit. But if he erred no
more about Tanais then he did about Tigris, our charity will easily absolve him
from much guilt, and judge him not only worthy of a pardon, but of thanks, for
acquanting us so honestly (though not without some little imperfection) with
the testimony of the Natives touching the name of this River in their own
language: for better witnesses then these we cannot desire; and we have great
presumptions to believe, that howsoever it seemed to sound Phasis in his ears,
yet it was Phison in their mouths, the true and ancient name of this River. The
same pardonable mistake is noted in Pasitigris for Phisotigris: and some have
observed the like in the Praenomen of the City Charax, built not far from the
mouth of this River, where it emptieth it self into the Persian Gulf. For
whereas Dion in the Life of Trajan calls it (...), and so does Stephanus (...).
in Pliny l. 6. c. 27. it is Pasines; Junius thinks it ought to be read Phisonis
Charax, as taking denomination from this River. But because those Authors agree
that it took that name from Spasinus or Pasines, (a petty King in those parts)
who re-edified it, we will not press that Conjecture too far; but rather,
turning our eyes from the Outlet of this River to its Fountain, take notice of
that Field that lay near about it, which has retained the name of this River
so entirely, that, notwithstanding the succession of so many Ages, no
corruption has eaten into it. Procop. De Aedif. Justin. l. 1. Martyropoli ad
Solemn occidentem locus adjacet Phison appellatus. If this place (whatsoever it
was) lay to the West of Martyropolis, it lay not far from the Fountains of
Tigris; so that in all likelihood its Stream ran either through or by it, and
(as may be supposed) gave it this name. Whereupon will farther follow, that
though this name of Phison be properly due to this fourth and last Division of
the Streams of Tigris, yet that it shed it self also through the whole Current
of this River, even to its Fountain: and this (perhaps) was the reason why the
uppermost and greatest of these Streams (which we have found to be Gihon) was
by the Ancients commonly called Phison. Yea Moses himself may be supposed
therefore to have named Phison the first amongst those Rivers, because it was
the main Stream out of which the rest did flow.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Land of Havilah, where there is Gold, Bdellium, and the Onyx-stone.
AS for the Land of Havilah, Chavilah, Evilah, and Evilath, (as it is
differently written by several Writers) which this River compassed, Genesis 2. 11.
we shall better determine what and where it was, when we have taken notice that
Moses, Genesis 10. makes mention of two men under this name, both Heads of
Families, and giving denomination to their several Countries. The one was
Havilah the son of Joctan, whose posterity are said to inhabit from Mesha as
thou go to Sephar, a Mount of the East, v. 30. Both which bounds Junius
finds in Mesopotamia; taking Mesha for Mount Masius, and Sephar for Sipphara, a
City that stood upon the uppermost Stream of Euphrates. But this Interpretation
may well be suspected as doubtful, because to justify it he is constrained to
add a preposition more into the Text then Moses will own. For whereas in the
Original it is (...) (id est, ad verbum) Ingrediendo te Sepharam montem
Orientis; Junius renders it, Qua venis Sepharam, ad montes Orientis usque.
Which liberty, how tolerable or necessary soever it may be elsewhere, is not
easily to be allowed here, there being no other just cause of this swerving,
but a prejudicate opinion that Sephar, was the name of a City, which Moses
expressly makes the name of a Mountain. Much more probable I take to be the
interpretation of Josephus, (followed by so many of the Ancients, Eusebius.
Hieronym. etc.) who gives us this Commentary upon Moses's words, Antiq. Jud. l.
1. c. 7. Hi a Cophene flumine Indiae ad Assyriam usque habitant: so it is in
Gelenius's Edition, but certainly corrupted; for S. Hierom, quoting that
Testimony two several times, (lib. De loc. Heb.) has it, Jeriam regionem: But
the Greek Copy of Eusebius lately set out by Bonfrerius has (no doubt) still
retained the true reading, and gives us the best account of Moses's meaning:
(...), Sophira mons Orientis juxta Indiam, apud quem habitarunt filii Jectan,
filii Heber, quos ait Josephus a Cophene fluvio and Regione Indiae usque ad
ipsam Seriam occupasse. Whereby it is evident that the corrupted name of Jeria
and Assyria in Josephus was indeed Seria, or the Country of the Seres, who had
their name from (...) that signifies Oriens, because they were Inhabitants of
the utmost part of the known world Eastward: between whose Country and India
lay Mount Sephar, (the East bound of the sons of Joctan) which by Arrianus (in
his Periplus Erythraei maris) is called Pyrrhus Mons, in Ptolemy Bepyrrus, but
in Mercator's Tables Sepyrrus, or rather Sephyrrus; and was no other then that
long ledge of Mountains that, taking rise from near the Indian Ocean, stretch
themselves far up to the North, and separate betwixt Indostan and the Kingdom
of China to this day. And for the Western Bound, the River Cophen, that being
well known to be the first of those Rivers Westward that make up the full
Stream of Indus; Mesha in Moses is either the famous Mount Nysa, (where India
begins) called also (perhaps) Mysa, even as Paropanisus (the same Mount, but
compounded with another word) is by diverse called Paropamisus and Paropamissus;
or else it was the Region of the Assaceni lying under it, whose true name
indeed was Massaceni, as appears by their Metropolis Massaca, (or rather
Massacara, i. e. Massa civitas) situate near the River Cophen, as Arrianus
testifies lib. Rerum Indic. in initio. And that Havilah should have a dwelling
betwixt these Bounds, is very credible from Moses's joining him with his
brother Ophir, Genesis 10. 29. whose Seat was so near this Mountain, that Eusebius
(and after him S. Hierom) confound their names, or rather derive the Mountain's
name from the Man's, affirming that the Gold which Solomon's Navy brought from
Ophir, was from this Mount Sophera, loc. citat. and supra in voce Ophir: and so
Hesychius; (...). But Tzetzes has retained its right name Ophyr, finding it
about the same place; and gives us particular notice, that it was the same
Country with that which in Ptolemy and others is called Chersonesus Aurea, a
Peninsula lying betwixt Sinus Gangeticus and Sinus Magnus, (or rather Mangus)
called at this day Malacca.

Insula est Indica quam (Poetae) Auream vocant;
Alii vero Peninsulam dicunt, sed non Insulam.
Hebraei autem Ophyr lingua sua vocant.
Habet enim metalla auri and lapides omnifarios.
Excellenter magis vero Prasinum lapidem.
And if this were the Region of Ophir, no question but the Evilaei, remembered
by good Authors as dwelling near about the same parts, were the true posterity
of his brother Havilah. Vetus Orbis Descriptio, (lately set out by Gothofredus)
reckoning up the Nations which lay next to the West of the Seres, names first
the Brachmani: (...), Post hos ab alio latere est regio Evilaeorum; qui and
ipsi Regum expertes sunt, and pene Deorum vitam viventes. Horum terra est
mansionum triginta duarum. In that he describes them pene Deorum vitam
viventes, he may seem to intimate their Sacred Function, inasmuch as out of
this Tribe were their Hierophantae chosen among the Indians; as may appear also
by Epiphanius, who in like manner joyneth them with the Brachmans, Exposit.
Fidei Cathol. number. 12. (...), Indorum vero, Evilaei appellati and Brachmanes;
Graecorum Hierophantae, and Aedituorum Cynicorum turba. And we may well presume
that from them that double Region took name, which he calls (...), In Anchoret.
n. 58. Through both which seeing he finds the River Phison flowing, his
Testimony might well enough save us farther labor in this search, if Phison
were the same to him that it is to us. But seeing it is manifest that he (as
diverse of the Ancients besides) calls that Stream of this River by the name of
Phison which we have found to be Gihon, (and is extended by them as far as
Ganges;) we having bestowed this title upon Pasitigris, are bound to find
another Land of Havilah besides this in the East Indies, much farther removed
toward the West. And we doubt not but the second Havilah will help us herein,
who being the son of Cush, Genesis 10. 7. his dwelling may be presumed not to be
far removed from Susiana. For though we have denied that Country to be
Havilah, as finding no good warrant to assert it, and willing to reserve it to
his Father Chus, to whom of right it did belong: yet seeing diverse of his
Brethren passed over into Arabia, which was the next-adjoyning Country to the
West, and separated from it at no greater distance then the Stream of this
River, which compassed a good part of it, in such manner as Moses intimates; we
need not despair to find him there amongst his kindred, and his dwelling seated
in such wise as Moses has described it. And hereof we have the Testimony of
Moses himself to assure us, who describing the dwelling of the Ishmaelites,
(the known Inhabitants of Arabia the Desert) sets their Western Bound at Sur,
which lies in the way to Egypt, and the Eastern at Havilah, lying in the way
to Assyria. Genesis 25. 18. And they dwelt from Havilah to Shur, that is before
Egypt, as thou go toward Assyria. And in the same position did Saul many
Ages after find them, when he was sent to make war against the Amalekites. 1.
Sam. 15. 7. And Saul smote the Amalekites from Havilah until thou come to
Shur, that is over against Egypt. And though no question but in aftertimes
they underwent the same Changes that the rest of their neighbors the Arabians
did; yet they still continued a Nation of such note, that Heathen Authors also
have made mention of them. For Strabo speaking of the way betwixt Petra in
Nabathaea and Babylon, (which he makes (...) stadia) sets out the passage of
that journey in this wise: (...), Tota autem via versus Ortum aestivum [tendit]
per adjacentes Arabum gentes, Nabataeos scilicet, Chaulotaeos, and Agraeos.
Where, that by the Chaulotaeans are to be understood the posterity of Chavilah,
there is no more question to be made, then that by the Agraei he meant the
Hagarens or Hagarites, who in Psalm. 83. 6. are joined with the Edomites,
Ishmaelites, and Moabites: and in 1 Chronicles. 5. 19, 20. it is plainly intimated,
that their Country lay to the East of the Reubenites, Gadites, and the half
Tribe of Manasses: farther East of which those Chaulotaeans dwelt, even as far
as the Stream of Phison. So that whereas Strabo, in that Journal betwixt Petra
and Babylon, sets the Chaulotaeans next to the Nabathaeans, and before the
Agreans; it is not because the Agreans dwelt more East then the Chaulotaeans,
but because the Chaulotaeans dwelt farther to the South then the Agreans,
possessing some part of the Country that lay betwixt them and the Nabathaeans
in the way to Babylon. And so is Dionysius Afer to be understood, who in like
manner remembers both these Nations, save that the Chaulotaei in Strabo are by
him called Cablasii, in Perieg.

(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
Verum enimvero primi ultra declivitatem Libani
Divites habitant cognomento Nabataei.
Prope autem Chablasii que and Agrei; quos juxta tellus
Chatramitica incolitur; e regione Persicae terrae.
And this gives some probability to the Conjecture of August. Steuchus Eugub.
Cosmop. in Genesis c. 2. that the Chauchabeni, which Ptolemy sets along the
Current of Euphrates and to the South of Babylonia, were indeed Chaulatheni (L
being changed into ch and th into (...), which was easy.) However, no man can
well deny that those Evaleni mentioned by Glaucus, an ancient Historian, (l. 2.
Arabicorum, as he is cited by Stephanus (...).) were the true posterity of this
Havilah. And so were those Bliulaei placed by Ptolemy in Arabia, (Tab. Asiae
6.) for that they were indeed Evilaei Pliny persuades us, who calls the Hills
that lay about them Montes Eblitei. And if any object that these were without
the compass of the River Phison, because they are in Arabia Felix, whereas this
River emptied it self into the Persian Gulf at Teredon, (now called Balsara:) I
answer; It is true, Ptolemy indeed finds the end of its Course about that City,
but we have cause to believe that Ptolemy is herein defective: for not only
Philostorgius apud Niceph. Hist. Ecclesiast. l. 9. c. 19. makes the Island
Messene, which lies betwixt the two jaws of this River emptying it self into
the Sea, much larger then Ptolemy's description will bear; but also Geog. Nub.
finds a Stream (at least) of this River flowing still on to the South, and upon
the bank of it two great Cities, Manbeg and Madar. And Petrus Texeira (a
learned man, and an expert Traveller in those parts) assures us that it reached
as far South as Catifa near unto Baharen: for thus he writes in his Itinerary,
relating his passage up Tigris after they had sailed the Persian Gulf; Ubi octo
aut novem leucas adverso flumine ascenderis, dividit se Fluvius in duo brachia;
quorum unus labens versus meridiem Sinum Persicum ingreditur in Katifa juxta
Barhen, ita ut a Continente veluti dividat regionem quae in longitudinem patet
supra octoginta leucas. Which large measure as it might alone assure us that
the Island made by this Stream took up a great part of the Western coast of the
Persian Gulf; so it is farther confirmed by the situation of Baharen, (near
which was the mouth of this River) for it is placed by Ulughbekius in the
Latitude of 23 Degrees: whis is almost as far. South as the Western bottom of the
Persian Gulf in Ptolemy: All which long Course of this River being anciently
inhabited by Havilah, (the Author of a populous Nation, aad spreading far) it
will now be no hard matter to find within the compass of this Country all
those precious things mentioned by Moses, Genesis 2. 11, 12. viz. Gold, Bdellium,
and the Onyx-stone. For who has not heard of the Gold of Arabia? And whereas
Moses seems to denote some excellency in it above ordinary, by adding, And the
Gold of that Land is good: so also does Diodorus Siculus, whose words are a
sufficient Commentary, Biblioth. l. 3. c. 12. Effoditur in Arabia Aurum, quod
non igni decoquitur, ut apud alios consurvit; sed evestigio effossum, nucibus
id castaneis simile reperitur: color est ita lucido, ut pretiosos lapides ab
artificibus auro inclusos splendidiores reddat. Not to mention the Gold of
Parvaim, 2 Chronicles. 3. 6. which Junius supposes to have been fetched from
Barbatia, which was a City in this part of Arabia, as appears by Pliny l. 6. c.
28. And as for (...), though there be difference amongst Expositors what they
were; some taking the former (Bedolach) for a precious Stone, others for a
Tree, and the most for a precious Gum issuing out of that Tree, in color
white like unto Manna, Number. 11. 7. Exodus 16. 31. and the latter (Shoham) some
translating the Onyx, (as our English and others) some the Beryll, as the
Chaldee Burla, and the Arabic al Belor, and the Septuagint (...), in Exodus 28.
20. whatsoever they were, (if they were any of these) they were undoubtedly to
be found in this Coast. For if Bdellium were a sweet Gum, (as is most likely)
the Tree that yielded it grew in this soil, as Dioscorides witnesses lib. 1.
cap. 69. Bdellium alii Bolchon appellant, alii Madelcon: lacryma est
Saracenicae arboris, (and the Country of the Saracens we well know was taken
in his time to be here.) Or if it were a kind of Pearl, Benjamin assures us it
was to be found about Catifa, (near which we have found the Outlet of this
River.) And for the Beryll and Onyx and other precious Stones, this Country is
so well known to yield them even to this day, that it is altogether needless to
produce the testimony of the Ancients: only (because it serves so well to
clear the words of Moses) let us take notice of the report that Nearchus
(Admiral of Alexander's Fleet) made of the Western Coast of the Persian Gulf,
which lay upon the land of Havilah. Strabo Geog. l. 16. (...), etc. Dicit autem
in Persicae orae initio Insulam esse, in qua multi and pretiosi Uniones
gignantur: in aliis vero clari and pellucidi lapilli. In Insula quoque ante
Euphratem arbores Thus redolentes nasci, quarum radices fracta succum
effundunt. As in this latter clause, among those odoriferous Trees that yielded
such excellent juice we may well believe Bdellium was not wanting: so in the
former, amongst those Unions and precious Stones, we may be as sure that there
was both the Beryll and the Onyx. And that it was thus in the Inland, as well
as about the Seacoast, Diod. Siculus is a competent witness, from whom those
that desire it may receive farther satisfaction, loc. citat. And hence it was
that this Country growing famous for those rich Commodities, (as it appears to
have been of old by Moses taking notice of it) this part of the Land of Havilah
was by Secular Geographers assigned to that part of Arabia that vulgarly (and
not undeservedly) goes under the glorious title of Arabia Felix.

CHAP. XV.
An Enquiry where the Region of Eden lies.
HAving thus finished the Description of the River with its four Heads, it
remains now that we turn our eyes back again, to see if we can discover any
thing more perfectly concerning the Region of Eden, and the Situation of
Paradise in it. And though we well know how obnoxious to exceptions such
particularizing is; yet having engaged our selves thus far, and already
discovered some marks in Moses to guide us in this search, we shall not refuse
to do our best endeavor to finish that also. As for the Limits of Eden, I
think it lies not in the wit of any man at this day to set us out punctually
and exactly how large or narrow the compass of that Country was in Moses's
Chorography: yet seeing himself has told us that the Spring of this River was
in Eden, he has left us assured that it was either the same, or at least a
part of that Country which Secular Geographers call Sophane, lying betwixt the
Mountains Masius and Anti-Taurus, which did so overshadow it on both sides,
(though it self also were full of lesser Hills) that from thence it seems to
have taken its denomination: for (...) or (...) (for Eustath. Comment. in
Dionys. Perieg. calls it (...) for (...)) is as much as obtegere vel obumbrare;
and so this name was therefore given it, eo quod verticibus Taurinis umbratur,
as Ammianus speaks in the description of Amida a famous City of this Province,
lib. 18. And it is not unlikely but we shall find the place we seek for in
these parts, if we call to mind in what manner and with what words Cl. Marius
Victor has formerly described unto us the nature and quality of that part of
this Region where we have already discovered the Fountain of this River,
calling it Armeniae Saltus ac Medica Tempe: which is so exact a Paraphrase of
Eden, and so fully consonant to the words of Moses, that no Poet could have
given us a better. Besides, the name Anthemusia given to this Region, if we
pursue it to its first Original, has much pregnancy in it to evince this. For
if we translate (...) out of Greek into Hebrew, (which was very near the vulgar
language of the Natives of those parts) what other word could we choose to
render it by but (...)? Truly their significations differ no more then a
flowery and fragrant place does from a place of pleasure. And that this name
was anciently appropriated to the Region of Sophene, as it is easy to gather
out of Strabo, so it is observed to our hand by D. Marius Niger, who limits it
out with the very same Bounds, Geog. Asiae Com. 3. Sub Basilisena, inter
Anti-Taurum and Masium Montes, jacet Sophena in convalle quadam, Regio felix.
And the very same was the situation of Anthemusia: Idem, Com. 4. Praeterea
Regiones in Provincia sunt Anthemusia, inter Casium (al. Masium) and Taurum
Montes ad Armeniam, etc. Yet in Ptolemy's time and after (as we may gather from
Ammianus) it may seem to have stretched its name so far South into Mesopotamia,
as to reach the places about Edessa; for Batne municipium (so highly extolled
for the admirable delightfulness of the place by the pen of Julian the
Apostate) is by Ammianus seated in Anthemusia. And that the Grecians (after
they had conquered the East) did in this manner change the old name of this
Country into another of their own language, (yet the same in signification) we
may be assured from Cornelius Tacitus, who, mentioning some of the Cities
within this Province, (and amongst the rest Anthemusias, remembered also by
Pliny under the name of Anthemusia, lib. 5. c. 25. and Anthemus, lib. 2. c. 26.
which we may well suppose was the same City with that which Ezekiel. 27. 23. is
called Eden) observes by the way, that they had formerly other names, till the
Greeks changed them. Annal. lib. 6. At Tiridates volentibus Parthis Nicephorium
and Anthemusiada, caeterasque Urbes, quae, Macedonibus sitae, Graeca vocabula
usurpant, Halum que and Artemitam Parthica Oppida recepit. However, there can
be no doubt but that the children of Eden which dwelt in Thelasar, 2 Kings 19.
12. were true and native Inhabitants of this Region: for not only other
circumstances of the Text do persuade it, but the names of the places remembered
with it do assure it, viz. Gozan, Haran, and Reseph; all which Cities are
placed by Ptolemy in the North parts of Mesopotamia, and some of them (if I be
not deceived) within the compass of Anthemusia largely taken. And though it be
not easy to design the very place where Telasar was seated, nor indeed what it
was, whether a Castle, a City, or a Country, (or perhaps all;) for Eusebius,
and after him Hierom, give us no more notice of it then that it was (...),
Regio Syriae, by which no doubt they meant Assyria, and understood it in no
other sense, then that it was conquered and after possessed by the Assyrians:
yet even that is sufficient to satisfy us that it stood not near Aden in
Arabia Felix, where Benjamin dreamed that he had found it. Nor is there any
great probability in the opinion of Junius, that it was Thilutha, a Castle
seated in an Island of Euphrates not far from the borders of Babylonia: for
beside the difference of the names, the removing of it at so far a distance
from the forementioned Cities as the South Bounds of Mesopotamia are from the
North, renders it very improbable. Nor can I subscribe to the Hierosolymitan
Paraphrast, who affirms Resen (built by Nimrod in Assyria, Genesis 10. 12.) to be
Telasar; adding this farther for the better designation of the place, that it
was situate betwixt Ninive and Harjath, (...), Telasar inter Niniven and
Harjath. For this affords small help to us that know not what that Harjath was,
whether Charchathiocerta, (the Metropolis of Sophane) as Junius supposes, or
rather that Harra or Arra, whose Territory is remembered by Geog. Nub. to lie
within Assyria; betwixt which and Ninive if Telasar stood, in all likelihood it
was no other in the Paraphrast's meaning then some place of strength in the
Island of Eden, (famous among the Eastern Christians to this day) lying but
twelve miles above Mosal: whereto the Opinion of Epiphanius may be
accommodated, who calls Resen (...), by which (I suppose) he meant Labbana,
which Ptolemy places upon the banks of Tigris, at or near about this Island.
But though I will not deny that Telasar in aftertimes might be called Resen,
yet surely Resen in Assyria was none of the places which Sennacherib boasts of
in his Conquests; for they were belonging to other Nations that had other Gods,
whereas this was in his own native Country, and near his Royal City: and if it
should be supposed that he might re-conquer it after some Revolt, yet if
Telasar had been Resen in Assyria, it should in reason have challenged the
first mention in the Catalogue of his Victories in that order wherein they are
set down, and not after Gozan, Haran, and Reseph. More likely therefore it is
that Resen, which was Thelasar, was that mentioned by Geog. Nubiensis amongst
the Cities of Diar-Rabiaa, and placed betwixt Amed and Majafarecquin; Part. 6.
Clim. 4. De Provinciis Diar-Rabiaa sunt Nisibin, Azun, Amed, Rasaain,
Majafarecquin, etc. Nor yet does he mean thereby the Rhisina mentioned in
Ptolemy, as appears not only by the situation of it, but also because he
afterward remembers that Rhisina by the name of Ras-alain, ibid. though it is
true, the signification in them both is the same, viz. Caput, seu Fons aquae.
And as that Rhisina or Ras-alain took that name because it stood near the
Fountain of the River Cobar; so might this happily take the same appellation
because it stood near the last Spring of Tigris; for so it must needs do if it
stood South of Majafarecquin, and North of Amida, which, as Ammianus notes lib.
18. e latere quidem Australi geniculato Tigridis meatu subluitur propius
emergentis. And if this Resen were Telasar, we may well conjecture that the
children of Rasses, Judith 2. 23. conquered by Nabuchodonosor, were the same
with the children of Eden that were in Telasar, formerly subdued by some of the
Assyrian Kings: for that that Rasses was either this Ras-aain, (or some place
near it) the circumstances of the history plainly prove. Or if we imagine it to
have been some strong Hold or Castle, it might in likelihood be seated upon
that Hill out of which Tigris last rises, and where the strong Hold of Amida
after stood, remembered by Ammianus, and in Geog. Nub. called Tur-aamdin, and
Propugnacula Amed, which stood a considerable distance to the North of the
City, as appears by the cited Authors, and more plainly in Not. Prove. Or if we
rather suppose it to have been a City, it is as likely to have been Thalimasus
as any other, which Procop. De Bell. Persico lib. 1. sets 40. stad. distant from
Amida: for the Letter (M) with its foregoing Vowel being rejected, (which in
foreign words often proves Epentheticall) it will become Thalasus, which might
easily be corrupted from Thalasar. Howsoever, it is certain that the Children
of Eden possessed the Confines of Armenia and Mesopotamia, and their Country
took up part of both. So much we learn from Aethicus, who twice makes mention
of it under the name of Adonis, (by the like change of the word as the Garden
of Eden was by the Poets fictitiously represented under the Gardens of Adonis.)
Once he names it among the Provinces of the East, (where his Commentator
Simlerus knows not how to expound it otherwise then by Eden in Moses;) and
afterward among the Rivers: For speaking of a River which he calls Armodius, he
describes it thus Fluvius Armodius nascitur in Aethiopia, inlustrans Regione^
Adonis and Mesopotamiam; currit mill. 724, and accipitur Sinu Persico. Here it
is evident that Adonis and Mesopotamia are neighbor Regions, and that Adonis
lay more to the North, through which this River flowing, that it should find
its Head in Aethiopia will not seem strange, if we remember what has been
noted before, and that Aethicus a little after finds Tigris also rising in the
same Aethiopia: and in that it is said after so long a Course to empty it self
into the Persian Gulf, it is apparent that it falls in by the way either with
Tigris or Euphrates, but rather Euphrates, which we have before observed to
pass under a name so near to this, that we may well suppose them to be the
same: For as by most it is called Arsanias, so by Tacitus it is called
Arsametes, which so corrupt an Author as Aethicus is might easily change into
Armodius. Or if this Conjecture please not, then supposing Ar to be the
contract of Nahar, i. e. Fluvius, (as in Pliny Armalchar is Nahar-malca) then
the remaining part Modius is very little different from the old name of
Euphrates, which (as Plutarch tells us) was Medus: for so he, Lib. De Flu.
(...), Euphrates Parthiae Fluvius est juxta Babylonem urbem, qui antea dictus
est Medus. So that Armodius is no other then the primitive and original Stream
of Euphrates, or else some Rivolet running into it. And as this Testimony of
Aethicus gives us a true and exact intelligence of the Region of Eden, both in
its name and situation: so no less clear is the Testimony of Sextus Rufus, who
remembers it under the same name, and in the same place, among the Conquests
of Lucullus. His words are these: Tigranocertam, maximam Armeniae Civitatem,
expugnavit; Adenam, optimam Armeniorum Regionem, obtinuit; per Melitenam ad
Mesopotamiam descendit; Nisibin cum Fraate Rege capit, etc. This Adena, that
lay in the way of Lucullus returning from Tigranocerta to Melitene, and from
thence passing into Mesopotamia to Nisibis, could be no other then this Region
of Eden. Indeed in some Copies it is Madenam; but in the Impression of
Jansonius (which is the latest and best corrected) it is, as we have written
it, Adenam: and we may suppose that in the original Manuscript it was Hadenam
(with an aspirate,) which by changing H into M was made Madenam; though even
that reading will not offend those that remember how Marius Victor has called
the places hereabout Medica Tempe; and Q. Curtius, nothing the Decourse of
Tigris betwixt the Cordiaci (i. e. the Carduchi) and this Region, calls it
Mediam, l. 5. As for the title of optimam Armeniorum regionem, it is the same
Encomium that this Author afterward in the Life of Trajan gives to Anthemusia,
calling it in like manner optimam Persidis regionem: which as it may argue
(what we have noted) that Adena and Anthemusia were the same Region; so it
gives us farther to note how fully it did make good the signification of both
these names, being a place of that delightfulness, that no Region of the East
was able to hold compare with it. And we may well believe it was so, not only
from the temperature of the Climate in which it was seated, (viz. betwixt the
Latitude of 37 and 40 Degrees.) but also by the many rare and precious things that
Geographers and Historians report to be found here. For not only was it a most
fruitful Soil, yielding increase at almost an incredible proportion; but it
yielded precious Stones also and Gold mines, (as after will appear.) It was
stored with all sorts of Trees both for use and ornament, emulating a perpetual
Spring, yielding many rare and delicious Fruits; besides many medicinable
Herbs, Plants and Druggs, not elsewhere to be found of like virtue or worth.
(...), Nam Regio pascuis laeta est ac germinibus; adeoque etiam fert quae
semper virent, and de aromatibus Amomum. Est etiam leontopodifera, and gignit
Naphtham, and Gagatem lapidem, qui serpents fugat; Strabo Geog. l. 16. From
which plenty of choice Commodities we may learn the reason why, amongst those
that trafficked at Tire, three Cities of this Region are remembered by Ezekiel,
chapter 27. 23. Charan, Channe, and Heden. Of Heden there can be no doubt, and
something may be intimated of the situation of it afterward. Channe, or Can,
was either Caini, which in Notit. Provinc. is placed a little below Amida; or
rather that City which gave name to the Country where Tigris had its last
rise, which in some Copies of Strabo is read Chalonitis, but by Casaubon
Chaonitis, and Strabo himself acknowledges a Region of that name adjoining to
Assyria. And for Charan or Haran, it was not that which lay so far to the South
in Mesopotamia, where Abraham dwelt; but the City Corra in Ptolemy, whence the
Region Corrinaea, which Pliny (rejecting the aspiration) calls Arrhene, and
lay about the place where the River of Eden first divides its Streams: and the
same (I think) was that Haran, before mentioned, which adjoined upon the
Children of Eden which were in Telasar. And hereof the Amomum mentioned by
Strabo may give us assurance, which grew within the territories of this City:
So much I learn from Josephus, Antiq. Jud. l. 20. c. 2. Accersitum igitur
silium maximo affectu excepit, eique donavit Regionem quae dicitur Caeron,
Amomi feracissimam. In ea servantur Arcae reliquiae, qua Noe fertur evasisse
Diluvium; ostenditurque ibi hodie quoque videre volentibus. But that is
generally believed to have been about Gordiaea; adjoining to which was this
Region of Chaeron or Charan, which being for the most part under the dominion
of the Kings of Assyria or Adiabene, (as Josephus there testifies) hence it was
that Virgil called it Assyrium amomum, though growing indeed in Armenia, (as
Dioscorides testifies) Eclog. 4. Assyrium vulgo nascetur amomum. And seeing it
cannot be doubted, but such Aromaticall plants and herbs must needs perfume
this Country with such an odoriferous and fragrant smell, as might well enough
reach those parts of Mesopotamia and Assyria through which Alexander's Army
marched; I am inclinable to believe that this Country was it which Q. Curtius
calls by the name of Arabia, lying on their left hand in their journey to
Babylon. Euntibus aperit se laeva Arabia, odorum fertilitate nobilis Regio.
Campestre iter est, inter Tigrim and Euphratem, tam uber and pinguis soli, ut a
pastu repelli pecora dicantur, ne satietas perimat. And here by the way we may
correct an error in the former Book of the same Historian, who having told us
of Alexander's passing his Army over Euphrates, and thereupon refreshing them
for a few days, adds, Igitur quarto die praeter Arbella penetrat ad Tigrim. It
is not easy to conceive what this Arbella should be, that Alexander marched by
in his passage through Mesopotamia unto Tigris; for it is certain that Arbella
where he gave Darius his last defeat was not only beyond Tigris, but the River
Lycus also. Therefore I fear not to affirm that, in stead of praeter Arbella,
it ought to be read praeterita Arabia: and so Pliny frequently calls the
Inhabitants of Mesopotamia (especially that part which lay about the Mountains,
and adjoined upon Armenia) by the name of Arabes; and at this day it is called
Azemia, or Ayaman, the same name which they give to Arabia Felix. I might here
add something farther out of Strabo, concerning the strange plenty of Honey
dropping down from the leaves of the trees, (like that 1 Samuel 14. 26.) the huge
clusters of Grapes, and excellency of the Wines in the adjoining parts of
Mesopotamia and Armenia: but (not to insist upon particulars) if we desire the
exact (...) of such a place as in every respect fully deserves the name of
Eden, let us take that description which Dionysius Afer has made of this
Country about the Lake Thonitis, and the distance betwixt the Streams of
Tigris and Euphrates.

(...),
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
Which Rhamnius Fannius the Grammarian has translated in Latin thus:

Hoc tamen omne solum fluvius quod cingit uterque
Indigenae populi pro re dixere Medamnem,
Quod medias amnes has terras flumine cingunt;
Agricolis pariter, pastoribus atque feracem:
Ubere tam laeto florenti semina cuncta
Herbarumque thoris and gramina laeta virescunt,
Et variis rami complentur fructibus alti.
Gens quoque praefulget claris in laudibus illa:
Nam peperit multos celsa virtute potentes,
Atque adeo similes Diis immortalibus illos.
Which Description suits so well to Adam's Paradise, both in regard of the
excellent Pasturage, the plenty of all manner of Fruit Trees, the admirable
Fertility of the Soil, and the flowery Meadows, that by that (...), Hominum
stirpem pulcherrimam and immortalibus similem, we might suppose the Poet had a
mind to represent before our eyes our First Parents inhabiting this happy
place, while yet in their Innocence, created after the image and similitude of
God. So that all this being laid together, we may well believe Ab. Ortelius had
good reason for what he did, when he set the Country of Eden just in this
place, Tab. 1. Geograph. Sac.

CHAP. XVI.
A more particular Consideration of the very place of the Situation of the
Garden of Eden.
AS for the particular place of this Country where the Garden of Eden or
Paradise it self was seated, though it might be deemed to trench too near upon
Curiosity to be too inquisitive after it; yet seeing Moses has not neglected
to give us some notes whereby to find out the Bounds of it, we need not fear to
follow such a Guide, so long as we keep close to his footsteps. Genesis 2. he
plainly intimates that the Garden-place was betwixt the Fountain of the River
and the division of its Streams: for these are his words, v. 10. And a River
went out of Eden to water the Garden, and from thence it was parted, and became
into four Heads. If that (...) ab inde be to be taken with its nearest
reference, viz. the Garden, and not the more remote, viz. Eden, (as in all
reason it ought to be taken) then the observation of Danaeus (formerly cited)
is most sound and true, that the River immediately after its efflux out of its
Fountain watered the Garden with one entire Chanel; and then, having past it,
broke it self into these Streams. Whence it follows, that, seeing the first
Division of its Stream was (as Pliny has told us) in the Region of Arrhene,
(the same which Ptolemy calls Corrinaea) the place of the Garden was betwixt
Corra (or Charan) and the Fountains of Tigris, in the midst whereof, and upon
the bank of the River, stood the Tree of Life, as may be gathered from Genesis 2.
9. Rev. 2. 7. and 22. 2. Just about which place when we see in Ptolemy the
nitrous Lake Thospites overflowing, it might not a little stumble us, if we did
not remember, that as the Land of Sodom, which before its overthrow was like
the Garden of God for deliciousness, Genesis 13. 10. was for the sin of the
Inhabitants turned into a Sulphurous Lake; so might God in like manner change
the most remarkable place of the Earthly Paradise for the sin of our first
Parents. And this Conjecture (for I esteem it no more) may (I hope) pass with
as good probability as theirs, who have imagined those fiery Flashings issuing
out of some Lakes about Assyria or Babylonia, still to remain as testimonies of
the Cherubims flaing sword turning every way, to keep the way of the Tree of
Life, Genesis 3. ult. But as this Conjecture helps us little, so neither does it
hinder us from searching (and happily finding) some remaining memory of the
Garden about this place. And though I confess this attempt never entered into my
thoughts at my first onset upon this Question, as taking it then to be a
Secret beyond discovery, and being ready to rest satisfied if I could but find
out the true Description of the River with its Heads, and the Region of Eden:
yet having upon farther search more seriously weighed the names which Secular
Authors give this part of the Region of Eden, and finding them very significant
and argumentative to this purpose, I did not only receive farther satisfaction
about this particular doubt, but was filled with admiration also, that such
pregnant Testimonies should so long time have escaped the observation of so
many learned pens as have traveled in this Question. Three names are given by
several Authors to that portion of ground which fell within the bounds of the
Garden, as Moses has set them. The first is that of Ptolemy, who calls that
Region which lay next to the East of the Fountains of Tigris by the name of
Bagrandavene, for so it is in the Edition of Maginus, Lib. 5. Tab. 3. Ab
Orient vero fontium Tigridis Bagrandavene est: and yet in the Map of the same
Edition it is called Bajavandena. Ortelius in his Nomenclator Ptolemaicus calls
it Bagravandena. D. Mar. Niger, Geogr. Asiae Com. 3. calls it Bagrandana, and
Bagradavena. And others have called it Bagradena and Bagadena. Secondly,
Procopius usually calls the Country that lies about the Thospian Lake, and
stretches it self Eastward to the River Nymphaeus, by the name of Arzane or
Arxane: others call it Arsea, and Arsene, (even as the Thospian Lake is by
Strabo called Arsena palus.) Thirdly, Strabo himself calls the Country
adjoining to it Syspereitis, or more frequently (rejecting the superfluous S
praefixed to the beginning of the word, and serving for no other use but to
obscure the true Etymology of it) Hyspereitis, and Hysperatis; and constantly
places it betwixt Armenia and Calachena, which lay North-west of Assyria. For
lib. 11. recording the fable of Armenius born at Armenium near the Boebeian
Lake in Thessaly, and peopling this place under the conduct of Jason, he adds,
(...). The like also he has afterward in another place of the same Book, in
which he farther tells us of a Town called Cambala, from whence Alexander sent
Memnon to fetch great store of Gold. (...) (...), Sunt and auri metalla in
Hyspiratide apud Cambala, ad quae Memnonem misit Alexander: allata sunt autem
ab incolis. Now if we had the true names of this Region set clear from all
ambiguity, I doubt not but we might spell out of them some broken remembrance
of the Garden of Eden, and of Paradise. For to examine the first, Bagrandavena,
or rather (as most write it) Bagravadena or Bagradena; who easily discerns not
that it is a compound word, and that the latter part of its composition was
Adena? so that happily in its own proper language it was written (...), and what
is this in effect but (...) as Moses calls it? For (...) amongst the Rabbis is
pubescere, and (...) applied to the description of a place is as much as ager
pube variorum seminum laetus, as Ammianus describes a Garden-spot near
Seleucia; which very place (if I mistake not) Xenophon calls (...). And
hereto accords the Hebrew word (...) (from whence no doubt the Rabbis had
their (...)) which, as applied to mankind it signifies Juvenis, Ezekiel. 9. 6. so
applied to a place it is lectus, electus, selectus: and so that Valley in Mount
Libanus, where the House of Eden, mentioned Amos 1. 5. and the City Paradisus,
mentioned by Ptolemy, stood, is by Guilel. Tyrius called Vallis Baccar and
Vaccar. And of the same importance is the name Macedena, which Eutropius
(formerly alleged) applies to this place, as appears by the places mentioned
with it, and the reducing it into the form of a Province by Trajan, with the
Nations that lay about it, viz. Anthemusium, the Arabians, the Quinque Regiones
Transtigritanae, (so often mentioned in following Histories) etc. Now what is
Macedena, but (...)? and is all one in signification with Bagradena or
Bacaradena, and in them both as much as pretiosissima vel selectissima portio
Hedenis: and what else was that but the Garden? Or if we may suppose Eutropius
called it Macedena in stead of Bacedena or Bagedena, extricating the R, (and so
it is written by some) even this also comes up to our purpose, and fully speaks
out the thing we seek for, viz. Hortus Edenis. For the Eastern Nations even to
this day call a Garden Baga, as Petrus Texeira in his Itinerary tells us: For
dicoursing of the Original of the name of that famous City Bagdat, he affirms
that it took this denomination from hence, because it was formerly a
Garden-spot. Nomen autem invenisse putatur a Baga, Persis Horto, quia primo
tantum Bagadaden, id est, Horti, ibidem fuerunt. And in all likelihood they
derived this word from the Hebrew (...) which signifies esca, praeda, cibus:
and by changing Gimel into Tzajin it is made (...) Ezekiel. 7. 21. from which
(...) or (...) I suppose the corrupted word Bajavandena receives most properly
the former part of its composition. So that which way soever we turn it, the
memory of the Garden of Eden may be retrived from this name. And no less
clearly may it be gathered from the second name given by others to this Region,
viz. Arzane, Arsane, Arsea, etc. For what more apt Radix can we find for it
then (...), which among the Rabbis signifies Hortus, even as (...) signifies
Hortulanus, as Buxtorfius teaches us in his Lexicon Rabbino-Philosophicum? and
so accordingly Hesychius interprets (...) and what (...) is himself after tells
us, that it is (...), locus floridus: and yet in the next word (...) he tells
us also that it signifies (...). Both which significations how well they may be
applied to the place we now discourse of, will appear, if we consider that this
Region was a part of Sophane, which among other significations is also
translated (...), Septentrio, Ezekiel. 47. 17. And for those (...) he speaks of,
that they are to be found (...), in the flowery Meadows of this Region, we need
not doubt, seeing that name also is to be found here-about. For not only have
we the River Nymphaeus, (so often remembered in Procopius, and called by Pliny
by a correspondent name Parthenias;) but the same Pliny tells us also, that the
place where Tigris rises again (after it has run some space under ground) is
called Nymphaeum, which renders it very probable that the same name was
attributed to the Region that lay about it. Now if we would take the notion of
Paradise under a Heathen word, we cannot have a better then (...). For the
description that is given of it is so suitable to that which they make of a
Persian Paradise, that we may safely affirm they are but Synonyma's of the same
thing: for as that, so this was no other then a delicious Valley abounding with
all the choice rarities and delights of Nature, where Emperors and Kings had
their retiring Palaces and Houses of pleasure. We might justify this by that
Nymphaeum in the coasts of Apollonia, remembered by Strabo lib. 7. Plutarch, in
Vita Syllae, etc. as also that about Stagira mentioned by the same Plutarch, in
Vit. Alexand. Ludum eis and studii locum Nymphaeum prope Miezam assignavit; ubi
and hac aetate seeds Aristotelis lapideas, and ambulationes umbrosas monstrant.
But I shall content my self, only to transcribe the observation that
Leunclavius has made upon this word, which is abundantly sufficient to give us
the true importance of it. Pand. Hist. Turc. n. 153. Praetor Graeciae noster
cujusdam regii vel imperatorii palatii meminit, cui nomen dat Nymphaeum. Ab eo
non procul dissitum describit locum, tali Teggiurum vel Imperatorum Prato rebus
omnibus simillimum. Alicubi de. Nymphaeo: Michael, ait, Palaeologus Imperator
Nymphaeum pervenerat, quo loco recreare se solebant Imperatores, postquam
Constantinopoli (a Flandris) in exilium ejecti fuerant. Alibi vero Planitiem
vel Pratum ipsum describit his verbis: Quum dies aliquot (Imperator, Joannes
sc. Ducas Vatatzes) Phlebiis exegisset, Clyzomenen profectus, (hoc loco nomen
est) ibidem tentoria figi jussit. Nam isthic Imperatores e Nymphaeo digressi
commorari solent, majoremque Veris partem transigere. Quippe totus ille locus
mera planities est, quae graminis copiam, compluribus equis sufficientem,
producit. Aquis etiam irrigatur, ac in propinquo multos pagos and Civitates
habet, a quibus ad victum necessariae res copiose subministrantur. But what
shall we say to the third name which Strabo gives this Region, viz.
Syspereitis, and otherwhile Hysperatis? is there any thing in that also
sounding this way? Yes very much, if we purge it from those superfluities which
the fault of some men's tongues and pens have stuffed it with; I mean the double
S, which seems to have thrust it self into this word in the same manner that it
has done into the name of our Neighbor-kingdom of Spain. For as that at the
first was Pania, (as Pliny testifies l. 3. c. 1.) after by the addition of an S
it became Spania, (and so S. Paul calls it Romans 15. 24.) and at length by
prefixing an article it was made Hispania: so it might (and we are persuaded it
did) befall this word, from which if we reject the superfluous letter, it will
become Hypereitis or Hyperatis, or rather, as it was written in its own native
language, (...); and what (I pray) is this but Ipse Paradisus? And I am the
more confirmed in this, because Strabo in like manner calls that place in Libya
where those Gardens (so much famed by the Poets) were supposed to be situate,
Syspereitis, which by others are commonly called Hesperides Horti: and that
they took their name from (...) is as credible, as it is certain that they took
their conceit from some broken notions of Moses's Paradise. And I hope I may be
excused if upon this ground I take liberty to conjecture, that the City
Pherendis, which Ptolemy places near about the Fountains of Tigris, was
anciently written Pheredis; it being so common for the letter N to thrust it
self into words whereof it is not Radical: and so this also in its own proper
character should be (...), which perhaps was the Metropolis of this Region, and
communicated in the same name with it. And I am the rather emboldened to write
this, because near about the same place was the City Heden seated, if Petrus
Bizarus misinform us not; for he places it nigh Mount Cordan, (or, as he calls
it, Cortestan) which is the right situation of this City in Ptolemy. Hist.
Pers. lib. 12. Sunt etiam haec loca infrascripta, videlicet Combalechum,
Bastemum, Mulasia, Vanla, Dresherinum, and Saltamatum; quae loca sita sunt in
regione vulgo Chimeldata, and ut plurimum posita inter Euphratem and Tigrim, ad
latus Montis quem incolae Cortestanum, nos Taurum appellamus. His quoque
adjiciunt Adenam, Urbem praeclaram and divitem, in qua sunt plurimae textrinae
lini gossipii, and jacet ad latus ejusdem Montis, etc. Indeed Stephanus (...)
mentioning a City about these parts which he calls (...), (from Eddanus a
Captain, as he imagined) finds it seated upon Euphrates, and inhabited by
Phoenicians: but the name Euphrates is ambiguous, (as has been noted) and it
might well be there were more Heden's then one in this Region, even as Pliny
also remembers both Anthemus and Anthemusia. As for the store of Gold that
Alexander is said to find at Cambala a City of Hysperatis, that will seem
nothing incredible, if we remember what was formerly said of the River
Chrysorrhoas, which taking its spring about this Region, had that name given it
from its golden streams. Nor is it to be neglected, that the Region called
Mithracina (where the famous breed of Nisaean horses, yearly sent by the
Satrapa of those Territories to the Persian Emperor, were kept) seems by
Strabo, and is by D. Marius Niger expressly affirmed to be about this place:
which as it is an argument of the Fertility of this Soil, in regard of the
pleasant Meadows and excellent Pasturage here to be found; so it testifies in
what high esteem they held this portion of ground, in that they entitled it to
their great God Mithra, (to whom also Horses were sacred, 2 Kings, 23. 11.) for
(...) is as much as Ager vel possessio Mithrae. And this also corresponds very
well to another title usually given to Paradise in the Scriptures, wherein it
is diverse times called (...) Hortus Domini. But I am very sensible how
obnoxious these Grammatical Criticisms will be to the censure of such as are
willing to show themselves pertinacious, whom we must not presume to persuade
to accept such arguments for Apodictical Demonstrations: yet if they will
consider, that these are as good Arguments as the nature of the Subject we
handle will well afford or bear, and that Notation is one of our Logical
Topics, from which sound Arguments may sometime be drawn, (forasmuch as Nomen
may prove Notamen, the natures of things otherwhile agreeing with their names,
according to that of the Poet,

Convenient rebus nomina saepe suis)
they will give us leave (I hope) to make use of it to as much service as here
we intend to apply it to. For it is not the Etymology of a few names only that
has induced us to this belief, but we have farther for the confirmation of it
a constant Tradition successively continued in these parts, that here-about was
the place of Adam's Paradise. The firm belief whereof gave (no doubt) great
advantage of credulity to that joculatory Paradise, (seated in some Valley
amongst these Mountains,) by the allurements whereof that notable Impostour
Aladeules engaged so many seduced persons to his service, and thereby rendered
himself formidable to the mightiest Monarchs of his time. A story well known in
the Turkish Annals, and touched upon by those who have written the Life of
Selymus, and is related at large by our Countryman Mr. Cartwright in his
Travels through those parts. Nor was this Opinion brought in by the Turks, but
entertained long before by the Christians, yea (if my authority fail me not)
even in the times before the Flood, at what time S. Chrysostom was persuaded
the place of Paradise was well known. The Author that affirms this is
Methodius: a fabulous Author, (I confess) and full of dross, among which
notwithstanding some grains of Gold may be found; so that if his Traditions be
well sifted, they may sometimes become helpful to us to spell out diverse useful
Antiquities, which we may in vain seek for in many a better Writer. Now this
ancient Author (in lib. Revel.) speaking of the death of Seth, and the
secession of his posterity from the posterity of Cain, has among other things
this remarkable passage: Mortuo Seth separavit se Cognatio ejus a sobole Caini,
redieruntque ad natale solum. Nam and Pater eorum vivens prohibuerat ne
miscerentur. Et habitavit Cognatio Seth in Cordan monte, Paradiso terrestri
proximo. If the terrestrial Paradise were near the Mount Cordan, and that Mount
Cordan or Gordiaeus stood in the same place where Ptolemy has set it; then we
may rest secured, that the happy seat of our First Parents Habitation was at or
about the very place that we have described. And now to conclude: Though all
these evidences laid together (which surely are as great as well may be
expected in a Subject of this nature) have not raised our confidence to such a
height as some have attained to, (and, as we suppose, upon far weaker grounds;)
yet we verily believe that if they whom God has blessed with abler parts, more
skill in the Tongues, History, Geography, etc. a larger freedom from other
employments and distractions, with a more plentiful supply of Books, and other
accommodations for such a study, (all which we want) would resume this
Argument, and apply their pens to the farther search of this not-unnecessary
Question, they might here (sooner then in any other place yet discovered) find
out the true place of the Situation of the Terrestrial Paradise.

FINIS.

