A DISCOURSE Concerning the East India Trade Showing it to be Unprofitable to
the KINGDOM OF ENGLAND, Being taken out of An ESSAY on TRADE.

Written by Mr. John Carry, Merchant in Bristol,

And Printed at Bristol, Anno 1695.

Reprinted at London, 1696.

A Discourse concerning the East India Trade, showing it to be Unprofitable to
the Kingdom of England, being taken out of an Essay on Trade.
THE East India Trade, East Indies.
for many Reasons I take to be mischievous to the Kingdom. To clear this we are
to consider how a Trade may be advantageous or detrimental to a Nation, and
then to draw Inferences thence applicable to the above Proposition; I shall
therefore lay down such general Notions as may without dispute be allowed by
all unbyassed Persons, which are these: 1. That that Trade is advantageous to
the Kingdom of England which Exports our Product and Manufactures. 2. Which
Imports to us such Commodities as may be manufactured here, or be used in
making our Manufactures. 3. Which supplies us with such things, without which
we cannot carry on our Foreign Trade. 4. Which encourages our Navigation, and
increases our Seamen.


And consequently that Trade which exports little or none of our Product or
Manufactures, nor supplies us with things necessary to promote Manufactures at
home, or carry on our Trade abroad, nor encourages Navigation, cannot be
supposed to be advantageous to this Kingdom; especially when its Imports hinder
the consumption of our own Manufactures, and more especially when those Imports
are chiefly the purchase of our Bullion or Treasure.

And because I would be rightly understood in my third Proposition, I mean
those Commodities without which we are not able to fit out our Ships for a
Foreign Trade, such as are Pitch, Tar, Hemp, Sail-Cloth, Masts, Timber, and
such like; These are so absolutely necessary, that we must have them, though
purchased for Bullion, as being the chief Hinges whereon Trade turns, and the
Tools by which we Mechannically navigate our Ships, those Bulky Mediums of
Foreign Trade; but for those things which are Imported, only in order to be
Exported again as Commodities to trade on, these cannot be so advantageous to
this Kingdom as they may be to the Dutch, who having little Land, are
maintained rather by Buying and Selling than Manufacturing; whereas England
being a large spot of Ground, and having a great Product of its own, (besides
what comes from our Plantations) capable to be wrought up or manufactured here,
gets by the Employment of its People, therefore it would be the great Wisdom of
our Government to regulate all Foreign Trades by such Methods as may best make
them useful in the promoting our Manufactures.

How England may be said to be enricht by Trade.
Here it will not be amiss to confider again how and in what manner a Nation may
be said to be enriched by Trade; for there must be a difference made between a
Nations growing Rich, and particular Men's doing so by it. And I humbly propose
that it may be possible for private Men to be vastly improved in their Estates,
and yet at the Years end the Wealth of the Nation not to be a whit greater than
at the beginning, and this both in an Inland and Outland Trade; for whilst the
thrifty Shopkeeper buys at one Price, and fells at another to the prodigal
Beaux, and the industrious Artificer vents his Labor to the idle Drone, and
the politic Contriver outwits the unthinking Bully, one raises his Fortunes on
the others decay; the same for our Outland Trade, if we Export the true Riches
of the Nation, for that which we consume on our Luxury, though private Men may
get by each other, yet the Wealth of the Nation is not any way increased: For
suppose by one Hundred Butts of Wines the Importer gets Five Hundred Pounds,
yet when drank among our selves, the Nation is not thereby Richer but Poorer,
and so much poorer as those Wines cost at first; for if Imported by English Men
in English Ships we loose but the first Purchase, the rest being Freights,
Customs, and Profits, are divided amongst our selves, but if they are brought
in by Foreigners, the Nation loses all but the Customs; I take the true Profits
of this Kingdom to consist in that which is produced from Earth, Sea, and
Labor, and such are all our Growth and Manufactures.

To apply this now to the East India Trade, we will first consider what are its
Exports and Imports, and then inquire Cui Bono? Whither the Contest for this
Trade does proceed from a design to serve the Nation, or from Principles of
Self Interest? Or whither the Members of that Company who strive so much about
it, would if in other Circumstances still be of the same Mind? For Principles
that are in themselves true are always so, we may change our Opinions, but they
do not change their Certainty; I confess as the state of the Nation alters, so
must our Measures in Trade, but then it must appear that the State of the
Nation and not our private Interests makes us to alter them: Now when I find
that it is not the true Interest of this Nation to advance the Product and
Manufactures thereof, I shall change my Opinion.

First then to begin with their Exports; and here I need not say much, it is
generally allowed by the Traders themselves that our Product and Manufactures
are the least part thereof, consisting chiefly in Gold and Silver.

But it is alleged that in Returns they Import such Goods which being again
Exported, do bring from Foreign parts much more Treasure in specie; which leads
me secondly to consider what those Imports are, and what becomes of them; They
chiefly are, Saltpeter, Pepper, Callicoes, Druggs, Indigo, and Silks both
wrought and raw, many of which Commodities are very necessary as well for our
Home Expense as to export again, others vastly prejudicial to us, as they
hinder the consumption of our own Manufactures both Abroad and at Home, and
this latter outweighs the former; Callicoes and wrought Silks are the things I
chiefly aim at, and hope to make it plainly appear that those two Commodities
do us more prejudice in our Manufactures, than all the Advantage they bring
either to private Purses, or to the Nation in general, and it were to be wished
the Wisdom of our Parliament would prohibit their being worn in England; else
like the ill-favored lean Kine they will destroy the use of our Manufactures,
which might be fitted to answer all the ends they serve for; Nor is the
lessening the wearing our own Manufactures at home all the Mischief Calicoes
have done us, their Importation having thrown out the wearing of Silesia, and
other German Linnens has been attended with as bad a Consequence from thence,
where those Looms which were formerly employed on weaving them, were thereon
turned to the Woolen Manufactures, wherewith they not only furnish themselves
but Poland, which has made those Countries very careful to increase and
improve their breed of Sheep, whose Wool was generally brought hither before,
and used in making Hatts, but is now much of it wrought up there; for when we
slighted their Manufactures they fell on ours; whereas if we had encouraged the
Wearing their Linen, they would have still depended on us for Woollen; This
has been a means to abate the Exportation of many thousand Pieces of Cloth,
which would have brought more Advantage to the Nation than all the Trade we
have driven to the East Indies, and will never be retrieved till we return
again to the use of their Linnens.

He that considers how wonderfully Fashions prevail on this Nation may soon
satisfy himself how things of little value come to be prized, and to justle
out those of greater worth; Fashion is Fancy, which as it has of late Years
brought in a disuse of our native Commodities by Imitation, so if our Nobility
and Gentry would turn their Fancies to them again, I doubt not it would have
the same Effect, and if our Workmen could receive Encouragement, no question
the Genius of this Kingdom would soon reach to such a pitch, as to answer all
the Uses of both those Commodities, even with a Thread spun out of Sheeps Wool;
It was scarce thought about twenty Years since that we should ever see
Calicoes, the Ornaments of our greatest Gallants (for such they are, whether we
call them Muslins, Shades, or any thing else) when they were then rarely used,
save in Shrouds for the Dead, and that chiefly among the Poor, who could not go
to the Price of finer Linen, and yet were willing to imitate the Rich; but now
few think themselves well dressed till they are made up in Calicoes, both Men and
Women, Calicoe Shirts, Neckcloths, Cuffs, Pocket-Hankerchiefs, for the former,
Head-Dresses, Night-royls, Hoods, Sleeves, Aprons, Gowns, Petticoats, and what
not; for the latter, besides India-Stockings for both Sexes; and indeed it will
be a hard matter to put them out of this Fancy, nothing but an Act of
Parliament, or humor of the Court can do it, the latter is the most natural
means, and would easier make way to introduce the former, for besides that
'twould bring with it the Prayers of the Poor for those who have cut them out
new Employments, it would likewise wonderfully tend to advance the Gentlemen's
Estates, first by expending their Wool, and next by keeping the Poor at Work,
who would consume more Wheat and Barley, Beef and Mutton in their Houses, and
yet they need not fear having Laborers enough in their Harvests, though
perhaps at a little higher Rates, which would be abundantly made up by an
Advance on the Product of their Lands, besides what would be saved in the
Poor's Rates, and it has been a constant Observation grounded on Reason, that
this Nation never thrives more than when the Labor of the Poor is at such
Prises as they may live comfortably by it.

We will next consider: 1. How far the Manufactures of this Kingdom have been
already made to answer the uses of Indian Silks and Calicoes, and what did
encourage it. 2. What farther Improvement may be made thereon, and the means to
bring it about. 3. Why the People of England are so much against their Native
Manufactures as to be more in love with Calicoes and Indian Silks.


1. As to the first, I will go no farther than the Act for burying in Woolen;
how averse were the People of England to it at first? as if the Dead could not
rest easy in their Graves, if wrapped in our Native Commodities, or that it
would trouble them inter Hades that they had occasionally given Employment to
their poor surviving Countrymen; no, the Fault was not there, Experience has
taught us that it is all one to them, and Time has more reconciled us to that
Statute, when we saw the good Effects it produced by putting our People on
making so many pretty sorts of Woollen Vestments, as ornamental to the Dead, as
the others formerly were thought to be, and of such different Finenesses and
Prises, that Qualities are as easily distinguished by them; and since our dead
Friends were to be dressed in our native Wool, we thought it most seemly to
imitate them by wearing the same at their Funerals, hence it came to pass that
our Mourning Attire was made of White Crape, a Garb not only Decent and
Profitable, but Honorable to the Nation, as it both showed our esteem for our
Woollen Manufactures, and also how soon those employed therein could turn their
Hands to any sort of Work. 2. Let us consider what farther Improvements may be
made on the Manufactures of this Kingdom to answer the Ends of Indian Silks and
Calicoes, and the means to bring them about; here let us see what Progresses
have already been made, step after step by our Manufactures, to imitate, and in
many things to exceed all they have seen from abroad, witness those noble rich
Silks, wherein they have attained to so great a height; Our brave noble Arras
or Tapestry of all Prises, not to be outdone by those very Nations from whom
we at first learned the Art; and this is allowed by all, that the English
Workmen in great things outdo their Patterns; and no doubt they may soon turn
their Hands to a slight Manufacture, which People do now chiefly desire, and I
take to be as profitable to the Nation; how are we come from a strong and
stubborn to a slight thin broad Cloth; from thence to Stuffs, Perpets, Says,
Rashes, Shalloones, Gauzes, and lately to Antherines, which last look as
handsome as Indian Silks, and serve as well in Linings for our Clothes; also
Crapes of such different sorts both of Silk and Wool, that not only Clothes for
Men and Women are made thereof, but also Hatbands, Cuffs, Neckcloths, Hoods,
Head-Dresses, etc. Now was there a Law to encourage, or would the Nobility and
Gentry of this Kingdom by their Examples promote the wearing our own
Manufactures, no doubt they might be soon brought to answer all the ends of
Indian Silks and Calicoes, and I cannot see what reason may be given against a
total Prohibition of their being worn in England, which will be the quickest
way to have them disused. 3. The third is to enquire why the People of England
are so much against their native Manufactures, as to be more in love with
Calicoes and Indian Silks? The chief Reason is Fashion and Imitation of one
another, though many others are alleged, as the Ruffness and ill Color of
Woollen, which keeps it from answering the ends of Calicoes, its Weight and
Thickness, which renders it improper for the ends of slight Silks in Linings;
These are not substantial but pretended Reasons, and would as well serve
against Calicoes and Indian Silks were we more used to our Native Manufactures,
and they now to be introduced; for as to the Ruffness of Woolen, may not that
be helped by its fineness? and are not course Calicoes altogether as Ruff? A
fine Flannen-Shirt feels soft and pleasant to him that both been used to wear
it, so strange Impressions do Custom and Fashion make on us; and as for Color,
it is only Fancy, when Yellow is in Fashion it looks as decent as White, and as
much Art is needful to strike it well as there is Curiosity about the other,
witness when Women wore Yellow Hoods, both Men and Women Yellow Vestments,
besides, no doubt ways might be found out to add to the Native Whiteness of our
Woollen Manufactures, which do not therein fall shorter of Calicoes than they
do of Hollands and Cambricks; and as to the ends of Silks Thinness and
Likeness, I think our Workmen have given very great Instances in their Crapes,
Gauzes, and Antherines, what they could do had they Encouragement.
But if a Manufacture of Wool will not please, why may not one of Cotton, the
Primum of which Calicoes are made, whereof we have great quantities imported
every Year from our own Plantations in America, and no doubt we might in a
short time attain to an excellency therein, not only to supply our selves, but
also Foreign Markets; He that considers how far we have gone in this already
will have no cause to doubt a Progress, and if Encouragements were proposed to
that Person who should spin the finest Thread either in Cotton or Wool, to be
adjudged and paid in each County, 'twould excite Industry and Ingenuity, and no
doubt, we might in time make Calicoes equal in their sorts with those imported
from India, and afford them as cheap as that Company now sells them, enough not
only for our home Expense, but also for Exportation.

We will next see what Employment this Trade gives to Ships, as it is now
managed in a Company, and how far it promotes Navigation by making Saylors; the
number of the first is but small, and I think far from making Seamen, long
Voyages being usually their Bane, those Ships seldom bringing home so many
Saylors as they carried forth, whereas shorter Voyages do more, made out of
Landmen, both the Imployers and the Employed being desirous to make their first
Trials on such Voyages; besides, longer require better Saylors to provide for
the Casualties which attend them, and may be said rather to use Seamen than to
make them; and this is one great Reason why the Dutch raise them so easily,
most of their Employments being a home Trade.

If then it appears this Trade is no more profitable to the Nation in general,
we will next see how it is to that Company in particular; I do not say to the
particular Members thereof, who by ill Practices have raised their private
Fortunes, many of which have been lately laid open, but to the Company as such,
and here we find that a former failed; the last is thought to have gotten
little, considering the long time they have been a Monopoly; and what Advantage
the new Fund will make time must show, the Tricks used to engage Men therein
causes me to doubt whether it will answer the Expectations of the Subscribers.

On the whole let us consider what Arguments can be offered to the Wisdom of
the Nation to limit this Trade to an exclusive Company as was desired, or (as
in Truth it is) to turn it into a Monopoly by Law, a thing very contrary to the
Genius of the People of England, and seems to bar the Freedom and Liberty of
the Subject.

Were Monopolies to be allowed it must certainly be in one of these three
Respects.

1. That we might put off our own Commodities to other Nations in Barter for
those we received from them. 2. That we might keep down the Prices of their
Commodities, whilst we advanced our own. 3. That as the Consequence of these
two we might encourage our Manufactures at home, and furnish Foreign
Commodities cheap.
But when a Monopoly shall cause quite different Effects, it is not to be
allowed on any Terms.

As for the first; the East India Company takes off little of our Manufactures,
nor do I think the Trade will admit it, for I cannot see how that Nation can be
supplied with Manufactures hence fit for their Wearing, answerable in Price to
their own, except they were a Luxurious People, who cared not what they gave to
please their Fancies, which I do not take them to be, but generally very
Provident; for if we consider that when the East India Company has brought
their Calicoes and Silks hither with great Charges, an sold them at an
extraordinary advance, they find vent by their cheapness, how can we believe
that any of our Manufactures can afford them a profit in India, where they must
be sold suitable in price to the others first cost; and therefore 'twould not
be amiss if the Government were put on making a narrow Inquiry whither the
Company do bona fide export so much of the Product and Manufactures of this
Kingdom and land them in India as they are obliged to do by their Charter, else
many ways may be found out to evade it, and the Nation be deprived of the only
Advantage expected from that Monopoly.

The Dutch and we deal not thither on the same Terms, their Manufactures are
small, and so no Matter what the Trade on, besides, their Settlements in the
East Indies are so great, that what they bring thence may almost be called
their own Product, whereof by monopolizing that Trade they make greater Prices
in Europe, which being chiefly spent either in Foreign Markets or by Temporary
Residents, brings them more Profit; They have also great Advantages above us in
their East India Trade, being possessed of the whole Traffic to Japan, whither
they carry Cloth, Lead, and other Commodities from Holland, Calicoes, Spices,
etc. from India, which they sell for Gold and Silver, increasing thereby their
Bullion as we diminish ours: Besides, their East India Company is not settled
on such a narrow Foundation as ours, which being limited to one City, exclusive
of all others, sells their Commodities for greater Advance than any other
Traders, whither we consider their Risque, or the time they are out of their
Money, which should be the standing Rules in Trade; Nor can it be otherwise
whilst they remain a Company, the Charges both abroad and at home being much
more than when managed by private Stocks, besides the affected Grandeur in all,
which must be paid by the Nation, whereon I take that Monopoly to be a Tax, so
far as it might be supplied with them on cheaper Terms if the Trade were laid
more open by a Regulation: I know there is much talked by the Company about
Forts, Castles, and Soldiers, to defend their Interests in India, but I cannot
see the use of them, for either they are thereby defended against the Natives
or the Dutch their Competitors; the former have no reason to quarrel with them,
for bringing them a Trade so highly their Advantage, as the purchasing their
Product and Manufactures with Money, especially if they pay for what they buy:
And as for their Competitors the Dutch, if they were not better defended
against them by our Fleets at home, and the Protection of the Princes they
Trade with, than by all the Force they have there, the Trade had been
ill-secured, and must have sunk long ago; Only those great Words serve to hold
us amused, whilst their Guineas in the two last Reigns were the Support of
their Charter.

One thing which I aim at in this Discourse, is to persuade the Gentry of
England to be more in Love with our own Manufactures, and to encourage the
wearing them by their Examples, and not of Choice to give Employment to the
Poor of another Nation whilst ours starve at home.

FINIS.

