SIXTEEN REASONS Drawn from the Law of God, THE Law of England, AND Right
Reason, TO SHOW Why diverse true Christians (called QVAKERS) refuse to Swear at
All: For the satisfaction of all the Upright in Heart, that the Innocent may
not be Condemned with the Wicked.

By John Crook.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Black-spread-Eagle and Windmill in
Martins Le Grand.

I.

BEcause Christ Jesus the KING and LAWGIVER to his people has said, Swear not
at all, Mat. 5. And it is left upon record for our practice, and is so sure
that no averment lies good against it; which doctrine was practiced before the
Apostasy, and promoted by the Apostles in their day, as may be seen, James the
5. which may serve for an answer (in this case) unto them that plead for
swearing, as Christ said upon another occasion, which was permitted in the old
time of the law, but was not so from the beginning; so Christ the Truth redeems
his children out of the fall, and all that have come in by it unto himself, who
has commanded his followers not to swear at all.

II. Because in the Old time, when swearing was used according to God's
command, expressed in the Law of Moses, and also instanced by the Apostle Paul,
who was a Jew, and wrote unto the Jews, unto whom he signified in his Epistle,
both the end and use of swearing in those times and cases wherein it was used;
who knew very well what was Ceremonial and Tipicall, and what was Moral and
Perpetual, and therefore mentions an Oath in his Epistle aforesaid by way of
figure and similitude, which he instanceth in the particular practice of it at
that time, saying, An Oath for confirmation is to them the end of all strife:
and so Christ, Gods Oath and Covenant, (the substance of all shadows and
figures) puts an end to all strife and variance between God and that man, which
takes hold of Christ, and receives him into the heart by the living says,
whereby he has strong consolation according to the saying of the Apostle,
whose end in mentioning swearing in that 6. of Heb. is only by way of allusion
and similitude, and proves no more a necessity of the lawfulness or continuance
of swearing (because he mentions the word Oath) then men's living in strife
proves the lawfulness or necessity of the continuance of strife, because in the
same place he mentions the word strife also; the which, if it should be
concluded from his words, would make the Apostle a Transgressor, and guilty of
building again the thing that he destroyed in his Epistle, elsewhere, who
concluded the Corinthians as Carnal, and that not only because they walked as
men, (which he blames them for) but also because they lived in strife and
envyings, etc. So that all which the forementioned place Heb. 6. proves, is,
only this, that when an Oath was used in old time amongst the Jews, according
to Gods appointment, it was in those cases which would put an end to strife;
and so is of authority sufficient to condemn all Oaths now, that are either
used where there is no strife at all, or else in those cases wherein Oaths are
taken, and the strife not ended, which if observed, the Oath of Obedience
cannot justly be required.

III. Because when swearing was in use as aforesaid, we never read in holy
writ, that any of the Kings of Israel were either made by an oath, or required
an oath of those people that were to be subject to them; neither was it
required (upon such a penalty as now it is) either by the Common Statute Law of
England, until KING James his time, upon occasion of the Gunpowder Plot;
which OATH was made by the PARLIAMENT, as the likeliest expedient (in that
juncture of time) to prevent like designs, and also to find out the POPES
Alliances and Emissaries in these Kingdoms; as may be seen both by the
Preambles to the Statutes, and also by the substance and contents of the said
Oath; and not at all intending those that are True Protestants, who were not
tainted with that cursed Popish Principle of breaking faith with an Heretic,
and deposing excommunicated PRINCES, as may be seen by the Statute aforesaid,
much less those who could not swear at all in conscience to an Oath, because
Christ has forbid it.

IV. Because God commands Subj^ction and Obedience to Magistracy, and all his
commands are equally to be observed; for the breach of one renders a man guilty
of all: and how a Magistrate can (in justice and righteousness) swear men to
the observance of one command, more than to all the rest (without partiallity)
does not to good conscience and right reason appear, except the honor and
safety of Rulers, should be preferred before the glory of God.

V. Because the Ruler-professing Christianity, and his Subjects also professing
the same, it ought not to be supposed that that God (whom the true Christians
worship) who has by an instinct in nature obliged relations so firmly, that he
has never required any other security for the performance thereof, than that
bond which he himself has made; And would it not be accounted preposterous and
absurd for to swear a Child to his Father, or a Wife (upon marriage) to her
husband; and is it any whit less absurd and needless to swear a true Christian
subject to a Christian King? seeing the Command of God no less requires
Obedience to him, then to the other relations; and does not this promise as
much, or more belong to him that rules for God, as to any particular Christian,
viz. Who shall harm you, if you follow that which is good? And will not God
punish Rebellion as the sin of witchcraft, which is security sufficient for a
Christian Prince? and therefore ought not to impose an Oath upon them, who
cannot swear for conscience sake.

VI. Because an oath, in this case, has been found by experience to be
insufficient, as to answer the end for which it is given; and therefore, for
the refusing of it (by true Christians as aforesaid, or those that cannot swear
at all) ought not to make them liable to the penalty of the Statute; and to
prove that it is not able to answer the end aforesaid: witness all those at any
time, who have been found in rebellion against the King, who have they been but
the Swearers, and Liars, and Covenant breakers? so that their Oaths have been
of no more use to them, than to beget a persuasion in themselves, that now
their Prince is satisfied concerning their Loyalty, and they may plot with
less suspicion; and so with Judas will cry, Hail Master, and kiss Him, that
they may get their Rewards, and bring their Designs to pass.

VII. Because he that swears, is either a True man, or a false; if a True man,
his Honesty without an Oath, engages him to performance; but if a false man,
he will swear, rather than forfeit his Liberty and Estate; and so his Oath does
but save himself, but is no security to the King; and it may easily be
supposed, that he that will swear for his own advantage, only, will not refuse
to plot, when he may do it, as he thinks, for his own preferment, especially
considering, he that swears Allegiance, and yet proves a Traitor, is no more
punished, then he that commits Treason, and swears not at all; and therefore
seeing SWEARING cannot bind a Knave, and GOODNESS will bind an honest man,
what sound reason then can be given, why the good man should be so severely
punished, only, because he cannot swear at all?

VIII. Because the OATH of Judges and Justices, which is to do equal Law and
Execution of right to all the Kings loving Subjects; which Oath is not
observed, except the Judge distinguish, and put a difference between them, who
only refuse to swear, because all Oaths are forbidden, and those who refuse to
swear because Allegiance is required; for the one likes not the thing sworn to,
and the others owns the thing, but denies the Oath; and to punish him that
denies to swear in the one sense, equally with him, who refuses to swear in
the other sense, is neither execution of equal law, nor right, and so not
according to their Oaths aforesaid,.

IX. Because that the Kings safety depends, not upon swearing, but upon
performing the thing to which the Oath is required, and if that be given, or
yielded, the end is answered, though there be no swearing at all; and therefore
the penalty for not taking the Oath, ought not to be imposed upon them, who
refuse to swear in conscience to an Oath, especially considering the Law has
provided another penalty for them, as in cases of high Treason, if guilty
thereof; and to require two securities for one debt, seems to be unreasonable,
and is no less absurd, than for a man, who has a just debt owing unto him
upon a bond, which debt is proffered to be paid according to the contents of
the bond, but will not be received (by the Creditor) except the person will
first SWEAR to perform the same.

X. Because to punish so severely, as to the loss of Liberty and Estate for the
refusal of a Ceremony (as it is called by the imposers thereof) and that
denied out of conscience to Christ's command, is contrary both to the nature and
end of the law, which is to punish for offenses; and therefore to stand upon
the Letter or Ceremony, when the Truth and Substance thereof is answered, is to
make the Law become cruel, to kill and destroy, and not merciful to save;
which is all one, as if a man should say, the Sun was only to scorch and burn,
and not to warm nor give light; and as if the earth should be said only to
bury, and not to bring forth increase.

XI. Because it has been observed, by Statutes, as in the Stat. of the first
of Queen Mary, that love and honesty binds stronger to Kings and Governors,
than the severity of Laws, made with extreme pains and rigorous punishments,
for not obeying their Sovereign, Ruler and Governor, etc. And therefore the
Oath of Obedience, which was made by the PARLIAMENT (as in anger and have)
against the Papists, being provoked thereunto by the Gunpowder Plot, the
occasion of making that Statute, etc. And therefore ought not (in the cool of
the day) to be stood upon according to the formalities of it, the substance
being kept to: Besides, in the third part of COOK'S Institutes, cap. 74. he
says, That there were certain poor Christians That had spoken against the
worshipping of Images, In Justification of Gods Command (as many do now against
swearing at all, because Christ has forbid it) yet notwithstanding, then as
now, those poor Christians were by the Bishops of that time, sworn to worship
Images; which OATH, says Cook, was against the express Command of God, (and
therefore ought not to have been imposed) And the Law of the Nation, because
they had no warrant to minister the same. And if this was condemned in that
day, and that by the Chief Justice of ENGLAND (who also is called the Oracle of
the Law) it may well be hoped, that the like evil practice will not be
justified in this time of greater light; although some plead for swearing NOW
against Christ's c^mmand, as some did THEN for the worshipping of Images against
Gods Command.

XII. Because, to take away men's Liberties and Estates, because they cannot
swear at all, cannot be drawn into example for others, except to teach them to
swear, which they are apt enough to do without example; for the Rule of the Law
is, Paena ad paucos ut motus ad omnes perveniat; The punishment is to a few,
that all may fear; which is not observed in this case, because the punishment
for refusing to swear at all, cannot become an example to deter men from
committing of Treason; and therefore the penalty aforesaid, ought not to be
inflicted, as in the case of Cook's 3d part of Institutes, where he mentions a
man committing Treason, if ^he prove not Sanae Memoriae, he shall not be called
to answer; or if after judgment he becomes so, he shall not be executed: and
the reason given by COOK, is, because it cannot be an example to others; which
reason is much more true in the case in hand.

XIII. Because it was a Brand upon Jeroboam, the Son of Nebat, that he caused
Israel to sin, which he did, by causing them to worship the Calves, at Dan, and
Bethel, which he had set up, though under a plausible pretense (as may be seen
by the story) yet notwithstanding their obeying his command, this thing was
their sin: So in like manner would it be sin now in them, who cannot swear at
all, because Christ has commanded so, if they should take the Oath of
Allegiance, or any other Oath which he has forbidden.

XIV. Because the proceedings of the Ministers of the Law, are, and have been
more Irregular in their apprehending and securing of those persons unto whom
they tender the Oaths, than their denial to take the Oaths may be deemed to be;
because the former is against the very fundamental Laws of Magna Charta, and
the Petition of Right, with several other Laws, that are expressly against the
searching of men's houses, and securing of their persons by Soldiers or Armed
men, in the times of peace; as also is signified by the Kings late
Proclamation, where he says, That for the future, such things shall not be
practiced; and if any do, they shall incur his displeasure, and be proceeded
against according to Law; which is such an implication as amounts to an
affirmation, that what has been done hitherto in that kind, is contrary to
Law; besides an error in the Foundation, is of more danger then in any other
part of the building: but the latter (which are those that deny to take the
Oath) is only against a law made in have or anger, as aforesaid, and but
against the Ceremony or forma verbalis, and not against forma legalis or
substance of the said Law; and therefore by lex talionis, may by many degrees
be better dispensed withal than the former.

XV. Because of the many differing judgments about Christ's words, (swear not
at all) which Ministers a strong ground of suspicion, that there is a
confederacy among, and between those, who agree like Herod and Pilate, to
destroy Christ's words from being a command to forbid all swearing; and yet fall
out about their opinions, when they come to get fairly rid of his words; for
one says, that Christ's Words (not at all) are meant not swearing in ordinary
communication, and so only extend to forbid profane and common swearing; which
cannot be Christ's intention, because that was forbidded in old time, as
appears both by two instances, he names himself, as neither to forswear
themselves, nor to swear, and not perform; and also when it was said, Thou
shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: But Christ's words forbid
that that was not forbidden in old time, as may be seen by the Anallegy of the
place, (but I say unto you, etc.)

Others they find fault with the Greek word (...), and say it may rather
signify commonly, frequently, altogether, etc. And so do not only blemish the
Disciples of Christ, to whom he spoke those words, as if they should be common
or frequent swearers, but also cast dirt upon Christ himself, as if he would
allow his disciples, or connive at their swearing sometimes in their
communication, so they do it but seldom, or now and than, and not altogether,
or commonly, and frequently: And so would rather expose Christ to be censured
for his conniving at his disciples swearing sometimes in their Communication,
if they do it not commonly, etc. then let the word (not at all) stand, though
it better answers the Objectors sense, then any of his forced meanings; but
then all swearing must be forbidden, which is a doctrine hard to be practiced
in suffering times, by those who love their ease, more than Christ; or else
such might have known, that a mean Grecian may know that the word is translated
right enough, and has been so adjudged (by them who love swearing as well as
this Objector) and better saves the Anallegy of the Text, then any of the other
senses; and it will be hard for the Objector to find a Greek Word that so
properly signifies, not at all, as the word in the Text: and therefore, Christ's
words, not at all, may better stand than theirs, who have a mind to swear.

Others say by his words, not at all, are meant not swearing at all, by any
creature, as the hair of the Head, or Temple, etc. But it is no more true than
the former, because that Oath also was condemned in the old time, for they were
to swear only by the living God: besides, He that swears by the Temple, swears
by him that dwells therein, as says Christ elsewhere; but if this meaning were
true, the Oath they plead for would be made void, which is by or upon a book,
which is made of creatures, as paper, and ink, and leather, etc. and by or upon
the Evangelists, (according to their Oath) who were men and creatures: and so
according to this interpretation, such make themselves transgressors, by
building again by their pract^se what they destroyed by their Opinions.

Others say, by not Swearing, at All, is meant only in the Church; but we may
swear, when called to it by Rulers of the world, etc. and this is also as false
as the rest, and these cannot clear themselves from a consederacy with them, to
destroy Christ's Doctrine; because that which is an offense in the Church, or
in a corner, is aggravated, by being committed in the world, as upon the house,
top.

Others say, by not swearing at all, is meant, only ^^ncerning Christ's
condemning the false glosses, and sayings of the Pharisees, and not intended by
him to straiten swearing from what it was in the old time: But this
interpretation will not excuse these from a consederacy, withal the former, to
destroy the simplicity of Christ's doctrine; for it is evident by the context,
that them of old time were the true Prophets and Servants of the Lord, as may
be seen, Mat. 5. ver. 21. where it is said by them of old time, the Greek is,
to them of old time, as may be seen upon the Margent of the Bibles, and so
plainly intends those, to whom God spoke, which was Moses and the true
Prophets, not the false, as these confederates would make them: besides all
these following instances which Christ mentions, being Gods commands given by
Moses, as, Thou shall not kill, one of Gods commands, but now is straitued by
Christ, who says, He that is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be
in danger of the judgment. And Verse 27. where another Command says, Thou
shall not commit Adultery; which is also straightened by Christ in these words,
But I say unto you, whosoever looks upon a Woman, to lust after her, etc.
which other instances he gives, no more Pharisaical than these: by all which we
may see the several exceptions named by Christ, and not left to man's will, viz.
where the exception to be angry, is, without a cause; and the exception to the
looking upon a woman, is, to lust after her; and the exception concerning
Divorce, is, saving for the cause of fornication. And therefore seeing in all
these cases the particular Exceptions are named, it may not be supposed, that
he would have omitted it in the case of Swearing, if he had intended any at
all. And therefore these Confederates thus differing in their Judgments, it
may be easily concluded by a wise man, That there is more cause than bare
suspicion, that these are agreed, and resolved, to frustrate Christ's Command,
whatsoever the consequences be: And therefore it is neither Reason nor Equity,
that the Innocent should suffer by reason of the Confederates aforesaid; or
have their Liberties and Estates taken away from them, because they are bold to
assert Christ's Doctrine, and dare not break his Commands, nor follow a
multitude to do evil.

XVI. Because although Swearing were lawful in some cases that are just, yet
it does not follow, that a man may lawfully Swear to every thing that a
Magistrate requires an Oath; for that were to give him a liberty not only to
call that just, which to him seems so; but also to affix an Oath unto it,
which both lays a snare before the Magistrate, of his being Arbitrary, and
also of the Subjects being in danger of slavery: and therefore it is both equal
and just, that those who plead for, and require Swearing, (upon great
penalties) should be limited unto those presidents and cases in the Scriptures,
which they themselves bring to prove the same, or else to cease the imposing
thereof, lest they thereby become guilty of Christ's Charge, by not only
breaking his Command themselves, but forcing others so to do. And therefore if
an Oath be required in those cases, for which we have neither President nor
Example, (from that LAWGIVER which is only able to save, and to destroy) the
Refusers thereof, ought not to be compelled by Pains and Penalties, lest those
be grieved, for whom Christ died, and the Magistrate take upon him to make that
Just and Good, by his Command, which is not so in it self:

J. C.

The End.

