THE CYNOSURA, Or a SAVING STAR That leads to ETERNITY. Discovered amidst the
Celestial Orbs of DAVID'S PSALMS By way of Paraphrase upon the MISERERE.

Humanum est errare;
Divinum quid emendare.
To do amiss is incident to humane Nature;
To repair our failings something Divine.
Si non traheris, ora ut traharis.

If you be not moved to repentance, pray you may be moved,

St. Aug. LONDON, Printed by I. Redmayne for Thomas Rooks, at the Lamb and
Ink-bottle, at the Entrance into Gresham College, next Bishops-gate-street.
1670.

To the Right Honorable and Illustrious Lady ANNE Countess of SHREWSBURY.
MADAM,
IT is the great Voice of the Church taught by her Heavenly Espouse, that
according to the ordinary course set down by his Providence, none arrived to
the knowledge of good and evil, can reach their Beatitude; but by the wings of
Penance. It Is a Decree passed immediately after our First Parents
transgression, that he should not eat his Bread, but at the rate of sweaty
Brows: And though God seems to dispense in this severe Sentence in the old
Law, promising to the exact observers of it, long life, abundance of wealth, a
plentiful posterity, and the like: Yet this was done (as he will leave no
virtue unrewarded) in regard that Heavens Gates were then shut up: But when
Christ had cleared their passage unto Eternal felicity, and clapped the Thorns
(which were the fruit of our sins) upon his own Head, then they recovered so
high a Being, and grew to that value, as the heavier God lays his Hand upon
us, the more his love appears: So that now the mark of our happiness is the Son
of God not glorified, but scourged, spit upon, crowned with Thorns, torn with
Whipps, and nailed to the Cross.

Hence it is we find our sweet Redeemer born in Tears, bred up in obscurity,
and concluding the upshot of his life with all the circumstances of infamy and
pain; at the opening of his grand commission to preach unto the World, his
first Exordium was an exhortation unto penance, as if it were the sole
Loadstone to draw Heaven toward us: And St. Paul his great Disciple declares
it; nay he makes no exception, that all those who would be happy must crucify
their flesh with their vices.

Thus you see, Madam, that every Hand, whether innocent or guilty, whether
noble or vulgar, ought to be stretched forth to sow the bitter Seed of
penance: If we have sucked in virtue even with our Milk, and thrived with a
daily increase in the sequel of our life, yet we ought not (says St. Austin)
descend into the Tomb but by the way of penance: Again if we have complied
with the Frailties of our corrupt nature, and trespassed against the duty we
owe to our good God, penance likewise must be our Sanctuary: So that penance
is furnished with two Wings to bear us up to Heaven; the one is fashioned out
by love, which prompts us to become by a course of severity, a true Copy of our
suffering Original; the other is framed by strokes of Justice, and exacts
worthy fruits; that is, such as may in some proportion be answerable to our
failings; and though this other have not a motive altogether so Heroic, yet it
speaks a great virtue, because it puts us upon a task the most knotty that can
be imagined, as to appease the face of an angry God. Besides, it renders that
Action just and equitable, in that it aims to repair the injury and contempt
thrown by sin upon his greatness: Wherefore we ought not to blush upon either
of these accounts to wear the Liveries of penance: If on the former we mortify
our senses upon Earth, and vest our selves with the habit of Christ shaped out
to the Image of his Death, it is a perfect Metamorphosy wrought by the power of
love, and for which Figure the very Angels (were they capable of sensible
impressions) would be glad to exchange with us: If on the latter; that is, the
score of satisfaction, it Cancels all our Bonds of guilt, it raises us from an
Abyss of misery, to the high dignity of Grace, by which we are adopted Sons and
Heirs to Heaven. So that a penitential life cannot but find veneration amongst
all wise Men, and be highly acceptable in the sight of God; since by our
humiliations we labor to contribute to his honor and greatness.

But Madam, you may perhaps upon this discourse wonder to behold in the Courts
of Christian Princes so much of glory, pomp, and magnificence which suit so ill
with the Characters of the Cross. I confess at the First glance it might
startle any one, were it not that a multitude of persons, both Illustrious in
Blood, and eminent in Sanctity, have taught by their Example, that the
glittering of the World, and a penitential Heart are not things incompatible:
It were to groap in the Sunbeams to play the Ignorant in this Truth, that is,
not to acknowledge that in all ages since Christ's visible appearance upon
Earth, Princes and Ladies of no less extraction have been found, who under a
Cloth of Tyssue, and the richest Ornaments have covered their tender Bodies
with Hair-cloths: Who amidst the delicacies of the Court, have macerated
themselves with fasting, and seasoned their repasts with bitter ingredients:
Who have more valued one hours entertainment between God and their happy
Souls, than all the Balls and Masks to which external compliance the
greatness of their condition in some sort obliged them. For the essential part
of penance consists in the interior disposition of the Mind; that is, in the
operation of the understanding and will. The understanding first represents
unto us a God disobeyed, and scorned; and his Justice (by this indignity
stirred up to vindicate his honor) threatening nothing but ruin and desolation
in this distress, the understanding further suggests that we have no refuge but
to the throne of mercy, whereupon the will falls to work, laments what is
passed, protests against any future compliance with bad inclinations, and
seized with a holy sorrow and affliction, submits to any compensation shall be
required: These are the preparatories to justification, and when once they are
completed by a ray of Faith, strengthened with hope, and animated with
charity, this virtue of penance grows up to that efficacy, as to obtain, in
consideration of the excellency of its acts, and fervency of the Agent a full
remission of all sin: Whence it is evident this grand work of penance may be
wrought within the precincts of our interior, and consequently the vain
appearance of precious attire, and ceremonies of greatness may possibly reach
only to the film or outside, whilst within they possess humility, purity,
temperance and other Christian virtues.

To give a further elucidation of this point, you will please Madam to know,
that Christ our Lord in his copious Redemption had two main designs: The one to
gain the Hearts of Men to the obedience of his Laws, which were so frozen and
marble like as he foresaw a slight wound received upon their score would have
little effect; wherefore he used all the endearing motives imaginable to work
them to their duty, and what greater than to receive upon his Back the stripes
due to another transgression. It is related of St. Gregory the great, that he
never beheld the pourtraiture of Abraham with his Arm lifted up to Sacrifice
Isaac, but it drew Tears from him; and for us to behold the Eternal Father
abandoning his own and only Son to all the outrages which accursed miscreants
could inflict upon him, without any resentment of our obligations, especially
since they were directed to lead us into the enjoyment of eternal felicity, is
certainly a wonder beyond all the prodigies he ever wrought, we see that very
Tigers are won by the unresistable power of good turns; wherefore Christ our
Lord hoped by this Engine to make a breach into us, and if once he made an Entry
into our Hearts, he knew we would presently Capitulate, and surrender at least
with colors flying; that is, conform our selves to his commands though upon
the large Articles of enjoying many sensual pleasures, which his indulgent
Rules allow to the more Earthy part of Mankind.

Besides this rational design of working us to a Compliance with his precepts,
he had yet another more sublime in his superabundant satisfaction, which was to
teach us the Law of love; now this is an Enemy to mercenary aims, and carries
us beyond the Crude principles of doing no more than what is precisely
commanded. St. Peter tells us his drift in this so rigorous a discharge of our
debts, that (says he) we might follow and trace his steps. For he knew this
afflictive way so necessary to us, as things now stand after our corruption in
sin, that albeit one groan of his had been sufficient through the dignity of
his infinite person to have redeemed a million of Worlds, yet he was content to
load himself with all the injuries that Man can endure, believing his commands
would prove less efficacious than the model and pattern of an immense love,
represented lively unto us in his own actions.

It is storied of a King amongst the Grecians, that he had a person very
deformed, as it could not but create in the sense of the beholders a great
distaste: However his goodness and wisdom so wrought upon his Subjects, that all
the irregular Lines of nature in their Sovereign, they looked upon as strokes
of perfection.

If then opinion had so much power as to work Men into a belief, that very
Monsters of nature are quaint perfections, why should not the authority and
ever adorable example of our Lord Jesus Christ, find so much credit amongst
Men, as to effect, That poverty, chastity, contempt, patience, persecutions,
and the like; which till then the World had entertained with horror, might
afterward be had in as much veneration; since he had daigned to honor them by
his sufferings, raise them by his greatness, fix them by his authority, and
fortify them by his admirable example: He had reason to persuade himself that
Men would no more spartle at fasting, hair-cloths, watching in prayer,
unwearied labors, and austerities of all kind, since he himself their Lord and
Master had followed the same track; all the Documents he has chaulked out to
us from the Crib through the whole course of his mortal life even unto the
Cross, had no other aim than to draw us from the love of fading objects, and to
divert us from placing any felicity in them.

Nor truly Madam has this design proved unsuccessful; for his example has put
millions of generous hearts upon the task of sufferings, and justly possessed
them, that the greatest honor is to be humble, the greatest victory to be
patient and forgive, the greatest abundance to be poor, the greatest delicacies
to fast, the greatest pleasures to macerate their Bodies, the greatest
happiness to enjoy nothing of what the World calls happy: And all this because
their Heavenly Master had read this Lesson to them in his own actions, and
though they could not by all their crucifying inventions in contemning the
World and themselves for his sake reach to a complete return, at least they
hoped by them to express their gratitude, and manifest how truly they were the
spoils of his amorous conquests.

This little Treatise Madam, is grounded upon a famous President to publish to
the world what penance can do: It sets before our Eyes a King who had great
failings, but by penitential acts he so redeemed them, as I question whether
succeeding ages gained not more by his misfortunes, than if he had never lost
his innocence; and as it is said of the incredulous Apostle, that his slow
belief cleared to us all mists of doubt, so the miscarriages of our great
Penitent warn us both of our own weakness, not to trust to our selves in
dangerous occasions, as also of God's enclining mercy so to shield us from
despair.

Next, we are taught by this Royal Penitent, that being drawn from the mire of
sin; God confines not his mercy to a bare pardon, but afterward gives us means
to arrive at a high pitch of perfection.

I confess Madam, I have a holy ambition to see you great in this noble
warfare, since the most eminent Saints and most innocent Souls that ever were
upon Earth, have made it their glory to fight under these colors, and this
passion in me springs not only from a common zeal of Christianity to promote
others in Gods favor, but out of a particular respect to your person, having
had the happiness to be employed and serve many of your relations in affairs of
no small importance: Wherefore fear not to take up the arms of penance, they
will not blemish your fair hand, but prove to your advantage in what posture
soever you stand with your dear Creator; for in these Christian conflicts
simply to obey, secures you from being overcome, and every virtuous sally
beyond what is commanded will purchase fresh Laurels to you; the greatness of
your birth prompts ^ou not to be ungrateful, and the temper of your Sex is not
usually of Adamant against the impressions of love, especially when wrought
upon by an accomplished perfection, and by all the endearing obligations
imaginable, and albeit before this address you may have happily rendered your
self a Captive to the sacred charms of your suffering Redeemer, yet if the
perusal of these poor descants may add but one Spark to those your holy
enkindled flames, I shall think my labor in this Subject well spent, by which
I hope will be evidenced how much your eternal good is valued by

MADAM Your truly devoted Servant Nicolas Cross.

ERRATA.
Read Page 9. Line 14. conservation. p. 16. l. 26. God-man. p. 26. l. 19.
resolved. p. 37. l. 12. unto. p. 38. l. 11. He who knew no sin. p. 64. l. 15.
bestialized. p. 64. l. 12. incompatible p. 79. l. 14. wry. p. 92. l. 27.
submission. p. 94. l. 24. extended. p. 100. l. 14. a habit. p. 104. l. 7. nor
well. p. 106. l. 12. a little after. p. 111. l. 3. his future. p. 136. l. 23.
injure. p. 151. l. 12. palms. p. 158. l. 6. communicates. p. 160. l. 20.
object. p. 161. l. 1. for that. p. 162. l. 16. Deity. p. 163. l. 3. most love.
p. 165. l. 6. heeld. p. 183. l. 7. preceding. p. 184. l. 16. decides. p. 186.
l. 21. punishment. p. 189. l. 15. account soever. p. 202. l. 5. it is only our
heart. p. 203. l. 5. she seemed. and ^ 25. interior. p. 221. l. 21. in his
mind. p. 225. l. at a more. p. 231. l. 25 entertains. p. 236. l. 25. possible.
and l. 27. abstruse. p. 237. l. 17. should. p. 248. l. 12. incentives. p. 263.
l. 8. blot out degree and in the place read will. p. 278. l. 16. believe in
thee p. 280. l. 2. in these. p. 284. l. 29. affect. p. 297. l. 26. blot out his
and read all material. p. 324. l. 25. beating. p. 325. l. 21. obstructed. p.
343. l. 25. Quires. p. 355. l. 2. appartment. p. 363. l. 9. premises. p. 366.
l. 19. after love add, to. p. 369. l. 8. danger. and. l. 15. this instruction.
p. 370 l. 1. of his heart. p. 403. l. 1. word. p. 365. l. 5. since as I said it
is engraven.

CHAP. I.
Miserere mei DEUS,

Have mercy on me, O GOD.


AT the first entrance our Kingly Prophet prefers his Petition; and without any
circumlocution expresses in direct terms what he would have, Miserere mei Deus,
have mercy on me, O God; and he does it with such confidence as if he had a
right to be forgiven: which minds me of a rare sentence of S. Gregory Nissen;
that Man cannot more willingly ask pardon, than God is ready to give it: The
Divine Majesty expects (if it may be so expressed) with passion the conversion
of a sinner, and no sooner a repenting motion animates his heart, but the whole
Court of heaven is alarmed with joy, and this joy is followed with showers of
mercy: No wonder then if our Petitioner make his address with so little
Ceremony, since he speaks to a Judge resolved to mercy upon his submission; to
a Father who is transported with joy at the sight of his long lost Son: to a
Creator who has framed every particle of his being, and perfectly knows how
frail, weak, and prone to innumerable failings he is (if left to himself)
wherefore he cries Miserere mei Deus, have mercy on me, O God. He shelters this
guilty (me) t'wixt God that made him, and Mercy that must save him; on these
two he anchors all his hopes, which being let down by a vigorous faith renders
him secure amidst all the storms, that hell and earth can raise; so that now
like a rock he stands braving all his enemies assaults, who not long before was
handed like a ball from one pleasure to another, as if he had been made up of
sensuality, passion, and a neglect of God.

Next in this exordium our Petitioner would insinuate a great truth, that the
first grace is a free gift of God, and man a vessel of mercy, not of merit;
hence he cries Miserere mei Deus, that is to say, let him pine away in sorrow,
and repentance, let him produce acts of ardent affection, by which he prizes
God above all things imaginable, yet when all this is done, he is a Child of
perdition, and clouded with the guilt of Sin, unless an act of Grace be made
him from his Sovereign: Wherefore we must know that Grace expelling Sin by
access unto the Soul, finds there no merit, nothing that can pretend to a
justification; neither Faith nor any other Virtue strikes the stroke, since
Grace is the basis, or groundwork of all merit, whence its being is derived no
less than a beauteous Flower from the Plant that gives it birth: This piece of
Divinity lay not hid to our penitent, hence he acknowledges his imbecility in
meriting any favor, only he strives by holy acts of love, and grief to dispose
himself for, mercy: Nay though he should comfort himself with Nathan's words
that he was already possessed of the first Grace, yet to persevere in it, so as
not to fall again, he knew must be the work of the same merciful hand; for it
is no less out of our reach to become just, than to remain so, without a
constant supply of many actual Graces, which must issue gratis from Heaven:
This kept him still in humility, as never to presume of his own strength,
always in fear, without any security of happiness in this life: So that having
thoroughly scanned the Condition of Man in this present State, he concludes, the
best lesson suitable to our continual wants here, is incessantly to repeat, and
entreat under this effectual form, Miserere mei Deus, have mercy on me, O God.

Whilst he thus lays all his hopes at the feet of mercy, he cannot but bless
the sweet proceedings of Heaven, in requiring of us to compass our happiness,
that which is so conformable both to our Reason and Nature: For can there be
any thing more rational, and delightful to Man, than to love a Sovereign Good,
to congratulate the Divine Essence, Divine Subsistences, Divine Attributes, and
unchangeable perfections essentially seated in God; Can there be any thing more
just, than to desire this greatness and goodness should have his Divine Laws
fulfilled, the Universe conserved for the Increase and Accomplishment of his
Service, and that all praise and Benediction be poured forth before him by all
Creatures both in Heaven and Earth: Can there be any action more commendable
than to conceive an extreme detestation of Sin, because injurious to His
Supreme Majesty, and obstructive to his glory; and yet in doing this, we so
attemper our selves for the reception of his favors, that as in the Order of
Natural things, upon the Organization, and fitted Dispositions of a Body, he
has obliged himself to infuse a Soul, so he has no less engaged to vest that
Mind with supernatural Grace, which by acts of love and repentance shall be
prepared for it.

But alas! Amidst these pleasing reflections, when he looks into himself he
finds a check, seeing he cannot even dispose himself for this happiness without
a supernatural aid; for though it is true humane Nature by its own strength
knows that God is worthy of all love, yet our knowledge in morality is much
more capable of comprehension than practice: It Is not enough to have Wings to
fly, if they be so hampered as they cannot be displayed; so this natural
faculty in Man of loving God above all things is so weakened by original Sin,
and a million of Obstacles, that we find the inclination of doing it far more
ineffectual, than the dictamens of our reason to have it done. And no wonder
when St. Thomas affirms, our Will by original Sin, is much more damnified than
our understanding, whence self love grows powerful in us, and if it has not a
counterpoise of supernatural succors, we are violently hurried into the
pursuit of Fading, and sensible objects. This consideration makes our penitent
deplore the miseries of humane Nature, so wounded and made impotent unto good,
as of her self she cannot pay what she owes to the most lawful object of all
hearts, for his just homages are not only Sighs, Groans, and Enthusiastic
throws, but effective services; as the exact observance of his commands, an
aversion from what may put a separation 'twixt God and our Soul, such are
sensual pleasures, greatness in the World and honors in excess, victory over
Temptations, and in many encounters this love exacts a perpession of all the
Calamities to which Man is incident, even to the privation of life, that he may
not fall into transgressions opposite unto it: And these difficulties do so far
exceed humane imbecility, that at last he makes this result, he must stick
close to his praeliminary address, miserere mei Deus, have mercy on me O God;

Again, when he reflects on the distance of these Terms Deus and mei, God and
me, methinks it should startle the greatest Assurance, to consider the
sublimity of him that is offended, and the despicability of the offendour; the
one is immense and fills all places, the other is contracted into the
dimensions of a small Body; the one is immutable, and still the same, the other
is corruptible, and mouldring away every Moment toward that nothing from
whence it came; the one is eternal, the other subject to time; the one is the
object of Beatitude, the other of Misery: It Is true our penitent in relation to
earthly greatness was qualified with the highest Title the World can give, as
being Sovereign Monarch, and sole Ruler of a chosen Nation, a vast and numerous
Body of People; yet if compared to God, he is not so much as an Atome in
respect of the Sun: And for this me, this nothing to rise up in rebellion
against such a Sovereign, it must needs work a strange Confusion and
Disturbance within him how to make his submission; on the one side dejected by
his own unworthiness, on the other, dazzled and confounded by the glory of the
incensed. Yet at last he breaks through all obstacles, and implores mercy, he
had rather perish in hoping too much, than to commit a Sacrilege in
distrusting the goodness of him who invites all without distinction unto him:
Nay I believe, had the object against which he trespassed, been any thing less
than God, he would never have opened his Lips in Order to a Remission: For he
knew well that he only to whom Goodness and Mercy is essential, would or could
obliterate his guilt. It Is true his power and greatness strike a terror, yet
they are so contempered with a merciful sweetness, that the Blackest Soul may
there find wherewith to rinse her stains, and exchange them for a pure Dye of
innocence, if she can with a David's Heart and Tongue but issue forth Miserere
mei Deus, have mercy on me O God,

I observe moreover that Almighty God permits a Soul though very dear unto him,
to be often here exposed in troubled waters, where she seems to be wholly lost,
and abandoned; that Heaven appears to have no light for her, and the Earth
nothing but malice to work her ruin: How many terrors, and anxieties of Mind
have Saints endured, and been left without any glimps of Comfort, even for some
whole year: And why all these rude trials in the conduct of the most innocent
Soul, but that God seems to be delighted when his creatures tune forth;
Miserere mei Deus, have mercy on me O God: Whence you may see, that God will
exempt no condition from this supplicating style, he will be sued to by the
innocent, as well as nocent, and where the Formality of malice is wanting, he
often gives the apprehension, to the end, that flying to this powerful miserere,
they might draw at least from his Goodnss the benefits of Conversation,
increase of Grace, addition of Virtue, and other innumerable Mercies which he
has in store for those who trust in him. So that there is no time, nor place
unseasonable for any person to prefer this Petition; Miserere mei Deus, have
mercy on me O God.

The Application.
By this Petition we are taught not to presume on the value of our own actions:
For God is the Sovereign Lord of the whole World, and particularly of the just,
all whose good works convey unto him a pleasing odor; yet can they not arrive
to that pitch as to have any Empire over him, or force him to let them share
with him in the participation of his Heavenly Kingdom. Let the just perform all
the good imaginable, in return he may justly say, I accept these services in
discharge of your past debts, and what you owe me for your Creation,
Conservation, and the Grace I have given you to act: So that we may truly say
with St. Paul, when we have done all we can, we are useless Servants: For
whereas we were pure Negatives, it was his Sole Mercy that extracted us from
nothing; it was this same Mercy which added to our natural Being, a Being of
Grace. Lastly, the accomplishment of this Mercy is to bring us into the
possession of eternal Glory, wherefore if we attire our actions in the colors
of Mercy, and always beat upon this string, we may justly hope one day to sing
the praises of this incomparable Mercy with our holy penitent, throughout the
vast spaces of Eternity.

Amen.
CHAP. II.
Secundum magnam Misericordiam tuam,

According to thy great Mercy.


OUr Holy Penitent having set a foot his Petition, we have all reason to
believe since it is in a matter of so great weight, and from a person so
accomplished, that it is framed and ajusted to the exactest rules of an
effectual address; wherefore let us examine what Arguments he uses to move for
a grant.

I observe in the first place he alleges not the innocent and harmless life he
led whilst he kept his Fathers Flock: Nor his zeal for the honor of God's
people in his Combat with Goliath: He mentions not his constant sufferings
wrought by the malice of Saul: Nor his transport of joy, and reverence when he
danced before the Ark: In a word he declines the memory of any action in his
life past which might make him recommendable; wisely considering as did Job
that admirable pattern of patience: Should he expostulate with God, He would
not be able to answer one word for a thousand: Therefore he casts himself
wholly upon the Favor of his judge, saying, Secundum magnam misericordiam
tuam, according to thy great mercy: He silences all the other Divine
Attributes, and conjures his Creator by that which seems most appropriated to
his condition.

Nor is he content to challenge his mercy without the specification of great
mercy, as if the Enormity of his Crimes were such as required more than an
Ordinary Condonation.

Indeed his Mercy may well be styled great, for it has all the dimensions of
greatness, it reaches from Heaven to Earth, even to the Gates of Hell: It is
extended from one pole to another, nay it is immense as God himself,
participating of his Divine nature; it searches the abstrusest corners of our
Heart, and if the least Crany be put open to his light, and grace, it is
presently replenished by this great mercy. Ah! did we but know what mists of
terrene affections, the beams of his mercy have dispersed within us; what a
change they have made in our bad inclinations, what dangers they have met and
diverted from us: We should even repine at Nature that has not furnished us
with more Hearts, and Tongues to love and praise this great mercy.

He adds likewise secundum, that is according to the custom of thy great
mercy, which uses not to boggle at the remission of any sin, nor to look so
precisely upon the degree of the offenders past malice, as upon his present
repentance, whence he grounds the Communication of his Grace; by which we may
discern the Sense our Holy King had of his transgressions, which made him
willing to huddle up his score, and without giving in any particular to desire
they might ^ther in a cluster be cast, and drowned in the Ocean of his Mercy.

We are taught by this two things, First not to presume upon the value of our
own actions, so far as from them to justify our selves; for in this kind none
could plead more for himself than our holy petitioner; he had with a Piety and
fortitude unequalled run through many difficult, and glorious enterprises,
wherein God was pleased to appear for him, and own him his champion: Yet he
thinks good to hush up all this, well knowing that praise is due alone to him
under whose guidance and protection he had begun, and set a fortunate period to
them.

Next we are taught that (reflecting upon our sins past) we should never
despair; for as our good deeds we owe to God alone, by whose inspiration moving
us we do them; so we must submit our bad deeds (whereof we our selves are the
sole Authors) to his Mercy: Whence we may see, though he cannot concur with us
in doing ill, his unspotted Nature being incapable of any obliquity; yet it
being done, he will share with us in the undoing, or repairing of our
misfortunes: And which is more, no sooner has this M^rciful Hand dragged us
out of the mire of Sin, but it is stretched forth to be joined to ours in a
happy nuptial bond, promising by his Prophet to espouse us unto himself for
ever in misericordia, in the inseparable Union of his Mercy. It is this great
Mercy without end, or beginning, which has decreed from all eternity to bring
us off clear from all misery, and place us glorious in his light inaccessible;
from the time that God was, and loved himself, he disposed us for his love, and
mercy; have we not therefore reason to spend every moment of our Life in
loving, praising, and glorifying this great mercy: It is in all kinds infinite,
no excess of malice obstructs it, no frequency of Commission or reiterated
guilt renders it inexorable, no time excludes it, no not a desperate delay to
the last moment, O God thy judgments may be well said to be unfathomed Abysses,
wherein are lost our most Enormous crimes, and from that loss we find our
selves transferred unto the enjoyance of thee, irradiated with the comfortable
beams of thy mercy.

But above all, this mercy never appears so great as in the admirable Mystery
of the Incarnation, where we behold the eternal Father giving up his only Son
in behalf of Mankind vitiated, and defiled with Sin, rebellious, and insolent
against His Sovereign, a Worm, and poor scantling of putrefaction, a prey for
the Flames of Hell: That, I say, a God most perfect in himself, who has no
want, should love so vile a Creature, at such a distance from him, and who
could stand him in no stead: and yet this eternal God full of greatness has
cherished Man in such a manner, as to bestow upon him the dear production of
himself, coeternal, consubstantial, and equal to him in Greatness and Majesty,
and for what end? To save him from ruin, to enrich him with eternal Life; this
is that great mercy our Penitent now implores, and he claims it by virtue of a
promise made to Abraham; that since he had not grudged him his only Son, all
Nations should be blessed in his Seed, that the Eternal Death of him who is
temporal, should be redeemed by the temporal Death of him who is eternal: How
many Miracles found birth in the execution of this act of love and mercy:
First, Nature was stopped as to the result of a humane subsistence, in whose
place was intimately applied the personality of the Divine word; and this
infinite subsistence, was adorned with graces, virtues, and privileges
supereminent; a Mother enjoyed a fruitful Virginity, and a delivery without
pain; in the fruit was found at the same instant the blood consolidated,
organized, animated, and deifyed: So that the Second Person of the blessed
Trinity assuming a new Being newly produced, that is, the essence of a holy
humanity, attyred himself with it, becomes a good man, and a master piece of
love, and mercy: A remedy so necessary, that without it all the purity of
Angels, and Holy Souls, all the inflamed desires of the Patriarchs could never
have merited with condignity this incarnate mystery: For were all the groans
put together, all the tears, sufferings, and exquisite torments which Saints
have endured for the love of God, and on the other side but one single tear
thrown in of Jesus Christ shed either at his birth, or any time of his life,
this tear issuing from the flaming Furnace of his Heart, Sacred, and united to
the Divine Word, would exceed in value all you can think, or imagine in the
meritorious actions of Creatures: So that this adorable mystery is not a
mystery of just retribution springing from any humane, or Angelical merit; but,
it is a mystery of goodness and supereminent mercy, and in consideration of that
prodigious design of love, he is animated in his suit, and believes he cannot
receive a repulse, because he acts it Secundum magnam misericordiam tuam, in
the name of the Messiah in whom all the Divine mercies from the beginning of
the World issued forth unto mankind are comprised, and consequently may be
styled a great, and the greatest of mercies.

The Application.
Our Holy penitent having in the clear prospect of his prophetic View, beheld
this great work of mercy, brake forth into this happy expression, and couches a
clause of all others the most efficacious to obtain the end he sues for; we may
learn from hence that our Mediator Jesus Christ is the best Sanctuary in all
our distresses, whether in regard of our past offenses, or of our impotency to
repair our failings: Methinks I hear our Petitioner to say, O God what shall I
return thee in requital; when I would praise thee, an Abyss of Majesty exhausts
in a moment all Encomiums, and my Adorations appear nothing before thy Divine
Essence; could I unmake my self in deference to thee the Fountain of all
Beings, it were a poor homage to thy ineffable greatness: Nay could I
annihilate the whole World for thy glory, yet would it nothing equal what thy
immensity might justly exact: But whilst I thus labor with my own poverty,
finding nothing created worthy thy acceptance, behold the perfect oblation of
thy Son, a prodigious effect of mercy; this I offer to thee, he can best speak
our gratitude, who can only satisfy thy Justice; since by this gift the very
treasury of Heaven will be exhausted, and the Earth enriched with a pure
Sacrifice, whose odor draws upon mankind a continued flood of mercies. It is
this eternal offering meant by our Petitioner when he mentions thy great mercy,
whose very thought and foresight at the distance of many ages replenished his
heart with joy: And if the expectation of him to come so transported, what
dilation of spiritual joy ought to invade us, who now possess, what they had
only in hope, who now reap a plentiful harvest of Salvation, when before the
World was blasted with sterility and doomed to darkness, until the bowels of
this great mercy were opened, to store us with his light and grace. Let us join
our Petitions with Holy David, and adore the wonders of this great mercy, in
which we behold humane flesh hypostasiated in a Divine nature, a Creator
linked to his Creature, Death unto Life, Glory unto Confusion, and Iniquity
stamped with Innocence: And whilst we contemplate these admirable contrivances
of the Divine Wisdom, can they do less than ascertain us (if we place in the
Frontispiece of our supplications this compositum, made up of so many
contrarieties) that our desires will take effect, that under this Sanctuary we
shall strike off all the scores of guilt, and render a satisfaction as great as
God can expect or require: Hence you see how confidently every sinner may
repeat with David: Have mercy on me, O God, according to thy great mercy.

CHAP. III.
Et secundum multitudinem miserationum tuarum,

And according to the multitude of thy mercies.


OUr Holy Petitioner having expressed his relyance in general on Gods mercy,
next fixes upon its effects in particular, and makes a series, or list of all
his mercies: Wherein methinks I behold him just like one in desolation of
Shipwreck fastening on a plank, and though the storm continue, darkness surround
him, and nothing but the Face of Death appears before his Eyes, yet he
remembers that many have been saved in his condition; how some have been cast
upon the shore, others upon a Rock, some by a passing Boat gathered up: In fine
he calls to mind a thousand ways of preservation to consolate himself in this
distress, and every thought of hope makes him grasp with new fervor his
floating support: Even so I may say of our distressed Penitent, his goodly
Vessel of innocence was wrecked, dashed against the powerful charms of a
Woman, from thence he was thrown into an Ocean of Sins, where on all sides he
beheld the menaces of eternal destruction; in these perplexities he runs with
his thought over all the passages of God's mercy from the World's beginning by
the consideration of them, a little to keep up his sinking Spirits. He fails
not to remember the mild proceeding of God with Adam in not punishing him
irrecoverably, as he had done the reprobate Angels, but was contented to Exile
him from the delicious place of his Creation, and to expose him here to the
Whirl-winds of passions, in which contest if he proved faithful; his reward was
to be the same as first designed for him: From thence he passes to the
conflagration of Sodom and Gomorrah, where though God's justice fell heavy upon
those miscreants, yet he lays it on their impenitency, and admires his
goodness that would notwithstanding have kept in his shafts of vengeance for
the sake of ten just persons; if that small number were but found in those
populous Cities; he goes on to the Ninivites, and pleases himself to see them
under the Lee born thitherby repentance, even when the storm of God's wrath was
ready to plunge them in an Abyss of ruin: He insists much upon the prayer of
Moses, which still diverted the rigorous designs of God upon his people; he
fancies that every Groan and Sigh of his contributes something toward the
making up of a brazen Serpent, by whose Sovereign aspect his cauterized Soul
might be unvenomed and made whole. It was no small Consolation when he reflects
on God's people in the Land of Egypt, whose Oppression (which their own Sins
had drawn upon them) was yet relieved at the rate of miracles, and wonders, and
such as Israel had not seen: And why all this? But to make good his promise to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that he would never abandon a Truly-repenting Heart.

Thus he goes on enumerating a thousand other passages of God's mercy from the
Worlds Creation, until his time; nor is he content with this, but advances
further, displaying in his prophetic knowledge, innumerable other effects of
God's compassion to Mankind, and at last begins to make this Application,
though he could not deserve to partake of his great mercy, that is, not only to
have his guilt remitted, but also to become the object of his choicest favors,
yet at least he hoped he might be hudled in amidst the multitude of his mercies.

How sweetly did those Attributes Divine resound in his Ears, where God is
styled rich in mercies, where his Mercy transcends all his other works, and
where his Goodness and Mercy are proclaimed inexhausted Sources: He leaves not
a Crany in the World unransacked, and after the severest scrutiny finds, and
confesses there is no place destitute of his mercy, no Creature that is not
cheered, and enlivened by the effects of his mercy; this made him cry: Lord
when thou do open thy hand, all Creatures are filled with blessings; and he
tells us that every Being looks upwards depending on his Creator, and expects
from him a seasonable supply of all wants: Nay he excludes not Hell, nor Souls
doomed to eternal flames from this mercy, for he considers that God is bonus
universis, good to all, and though his Justice have plunged them in that
Calamitous State of misery, yet that their torments are not more intense, and
in many circumstances aggravated, they owe it to his mercy, which still has
something to do, even in the punishment of the highest offenders.

Having then surveyed Angels, Man, and sensible Creatures, the Heavens, Earth,
and Hell, and found no Being that could in the least repine for want of mercy;
upon these reflections with just reason our Petitioner entitles them a
multitude of mercies, for on all sides they flow as from a natural Source. Nor
wonder that we have more Presidents of his mercy than Justice, for the one
consists in a communicative virtue of what is good, and as God is essentially
good, so he can always breath forth these emanations of his goodness upon us:
Now Justice, though it be equally essential to the Divine Essence with mercy,
and other Attributes, yet in its operations ad extra or exterior effects, it
depends upon the obliquity of our actions, without which it has no matter or
Subject to work on: So that mercy he can always shower down upon us, but
Justice only when we offend: he would not forget how the greater number of
Angels stood the brunt of temptations, when Lucifer perished with his proud
adherents, it was this mercy held them up at the instant of their Trial; and
though our afflicted penitent found not this innocence preserving mercy, yet he
hopes to lay hold on that part where he is styled a purifying mercy: Let his
Subjects fall from their obedience, and throw curses at him, let his Children
prove unnatural, and labor to dethrone him, let a pestilential Disease
depopulate his Country; in fine let the Joy of his Life Absalom be sacrificed
by the Hand of his own Soldier, with smiles he will pass through all these
Tests, so they proceed from the hand of this all purifying mercy: He values not
the mediums, but the end he tends to, and when he thinks o^ this, he begins
afresh to admire this mercy in the reward of the elect; he knows not whether it
exceeds more in the expectancy and furtherance of a sinners conversion, or in
those immense felicities he communicates by his presence: For here he beholds a
God courting his Creatures, insensible as it were of injuries, and dishonours
from them, and seconding their least good intents, with the powerful succors
of grace. There he contemplates a God remunerating our small inconsiderable
Acts of Virtue with the same Felicity, wherewith he himself is blessed and made
happy: For his Beatitude is to enjoy himself and contemplate his own beauty and
perfections, and this same Beatitude he imparts to us poor worms through the
excess of his Mercy. But whether our holy penitent more extolls the effects of
his mercies in Heaven or Earth I know not; yet of this I am sure, he is
reconciled to make it whilst he has life, the Theme of his Pen, Heart, and
Tongue; he will celebrate the praises of his innumerable mercies for all
Eternity, he has scarce a Psalm which speaks not his zeal for this subject, as
if his quill had been dipped in this Fountain of mercies.

Another branch which grows up amidst the multitude of his mercies, is, that
he distributes his blessings not so much in the measure of his wisdom, as love;
and after his innumerable favors done to his Vineyard, he defies the whole
Mass of Creatures to tax him of any want on his part: For should he reward us
according to our actions which he in his praescience and eternal essence
foresees will come to pass, who of us should be left alive, or who of us should
be born? Only the innocent should then be favored, and rather than it should
be so, he was willing to put it upon the Trial, how or what we might prove
hereafter. He foreknew that Lucifer should fall, that Adam would sin, Saul
become disobedient, and Judas betray him, yet he forbear not (for all this) to
throw his favors upon them; to show his mercy is ever in competition with
Man's malice, and like a good Physician if one Medicine work no good, he
applies another like a g^od Husbandman if his Land yield him no Crop one year,
he cultivates and labors it again the Second, and Third, by which it often
happens that one fruitful season repaires the sterility of diverse years past:
Just so God still goes on, and though he sees no hope to stop our malice, yet
he stops not his mercy; this proceeding made St. Austin cry, Praise and Glory O
Lord be to thee O Fountain of mercies, the worser I grew, and more perverse, so
much the nearer thou wast unto me. It is said a small proportion of
chastisement suffices a Father in order to his Son; so God (as a kind and
loving Father) thinks a little punishment enough for his Children: St.
Chrysostom says that after the Master of the Vineyard had his Servants beaten,
and slain by the Husbandmen, he sent his Son, and for all these their outrages
required no other satisfaction than to see them abashed and ashamed of their
Cruelties and Ingratitude: They will (says he) reverence my Son; so that it is
evident, their blushing not their bleeding he desired: Whence St. Hierom makes
a result of this Parable, that in God's Clemency there was no Weight, no
Number, no Measure; nor likewise in the others Malice. So that our holy
penitent beholding in every transaction of God with Man this fullness of Mercy,
might with reason expostulate, and entreat his pardon: Secundum multitudinem
miserationum tuarum, according to the multitude of thy mercies.

The Application.
Let every one examine his life from the time he had the use of reason, and I
am confident he will find many ties of obligation to this great mercy; nay
amongst the mass of Christians, I believe there is none but ranks himself a
favorite in order to his largesses of mercy: For his love is constant, and
knows no change, this great and good God has persisted for an infinity of
time in the perpetual resolution of gratifying us with his gifts, his enflamed
heart has entertained a continual solicitude without any truce for our good.
Witness the Prophet Jeremy who says that God has loved us with an everlasting
Charity: His love is eternal, having always decreed to enrich us with his
favors; St. Paul proclaims it, that he has loved us before the World was
framed. It is disinteressed, without any advantage to himself or hope of return
on our parts: No other motive than the superabundance of his goodness; like a
fountain which runs over, his natural goodness throws blessings on all
Creatures. Plutarch speaking of love, says, it takes any occasion be it never
so slight, to oblige the beloved; he wants no baits, nor snares, carrying about
him the matter of his own bondage: So God's love never takes leave of a Sinner;
nay where Man's impiety extorts as it were from him the darts of his Justice,
he seems presently to relent, and promises (as he did after the Deluge) to do
so no more; so that his love being eternal, unchangeable, and divested of all
self ends, what can we ask of God that issues not from his mercy, wherefore let
us with holy David cry have mercy on us O God, according to the multitude of
thy mercies.

Amen.
CHAP. IV.
Dele iniquitatem meam,

Wipe away my iniquity.


OUr poor Criminal having thus prepared his Judge, the next care is to lay open
his condition, and show he implores God's purifying Mercy, by whose virtue the
Chains of our sins are loosened and dissolved: Nor did it a little raise his
confidence, that his Judge was not tied up to Laws, as the Groundwork of
proceedings with offenders; but his power is absolute to do all he pleases,
and his will such as to render what ever he does good, and Just: So that the
least propension of this Will; in order to a remission, is sufficient to wipe
away all the iniquities of the Earth.

Besides, he considers that when God chastises, he does a thing extraneous to
him, and (as Esaias says) a work that is not his: But to be merciful he owns it
as a propriety annexed to his Godhead, not to extenuate his Justice, but to
insinuate the love he bears to Man.

He embroyls not his Fancy with the niceties in Schools; which dispute how Sin
is remitted, whether by the expulsion of any positive form, and the
introduction of another opposite to it: Whether it be by the mere infusion of
Grace, or else only by taking away the obligation of a Sinner to eternal
punishment; he omits all these curious questions, and attends only to the sweet
effect, to wit, that he may be freed from his iniquity, often repeating in his
Heart, he had rather be a good Disciple, than a great Master in the exact
knowledge of his own misery.

When he looks back into his life past, and remembers with what satisfaction,
and spiritual joy he had performed many acts of virtue, he begins to be enfired
with new flames of urging for a grant of his Petition: Since he knows that
whilst he lies under this attaindour of Treason, he is capable of no right nor
privilege, in the Charter given us by Heaven, that should he do actions which
in another condition might be praemiated, would now be looked upon as a Jewel
counterfeit and of no value: He compares himself to a Plant in a Region far
remote from the Sun, whose Fruit never comes to maturity, so his iniquity sets
him at a great distance with God, the light and life of Souls, and consequently
nothing can be expected from him which savours not of a Soil accursed, and
doomed to sterility; so that as a misfortune seldom walks solitary, he finds
besides the unhappiness to have offended God, this addition, to be unable to do
any thing acceptable unto him.

Then he goes on ruminating upon the sad consequences of his Sin, which makes
him fluctuate in his thoughts, wholly unresolved how to comport himself:
Sometimes he appears like a Statue without motion, and would eternally remain
so, since by no endeavors he can please his Creator: Then again I behold him
bent upon the execution of all the good imaginable, at least within the extent
of his natural Force or Power; that he may omit no Homage and Duty he owes to
the Author of his Being: But after all his restless solicitudes, he observes
the main Hinge of his happiness depends upon this Dele iniquitatem, the
cancelling of this Bond by which he is liable to eternal punishment, e're he
can hope for admittance unto his wonted ravishing entertainments with his
Divine Master.

He descants upon the proceeding of Almighty God with Sinners, and would feign
search into the secrets of his Providence, why some are drawn from the depth of
wickedness; even when they seemed to be lost to the World and Heaven, whilst
others less guilty in the Eyes of men sadly perish without source, or redress.
The preservation of the one he attributes to the immense goodness of God, which
sometimes dispenses (as justly he may) in his own laws, as to afford unto an
unworthy sinner such powerful calls that they are never resisted; such melting
affections, as if they had been trained up in the School of Divine love, not in
the Forge of iniquity: It is fit (he confesses) the Divine Will which frames
all Creatures, should so dispose of what he has made, that when he pleases to
raise any one out of corruption, and render them instrumental to his Glory,
none ought, or can justly repine at it: He sustains this Argument with much
heat, himself being a party interessed, still expecting to be the object of his
choice mercy: He dilates and expands his Soul under this inexhausted source,
like the Earth without Water thirsting for one drop of that Celestial stream
which might allay the anguish of his Mind, and deface all the foul Characters
of his iniquity; his groans, and unwearied sighs are fair Harbingers of that
Noble Guest he once entertained, with unspeakable delight, and if he ever gain
the repossession, he protests that neither Angels, Men, Devils, nor all the
charms in Creatures shall ever brand him with a new stamp of iniquity: his
Eyes by which his Soul received her first wound are become two floods of tears,
and if they prevail not to cleanse his stains, at least they will testify to
the World, he repented what he had done: He casts not one glance toward Heaven
which is not accompanied with hopes of meeting this mercy, and this confidence
is so grounded in him, that were it decreed God would save but one Soul, he
has courage enough to hope that his might be that one; nay he builds so much
upon these hopes, that transporting himself to the consideration of many
Sinners, abandoned in their impieties, it does not at all deject him; for he
considers that God has given us a free will, which he will never violence to
our prejudice, and though we cannot elevate this will to an act so perfect as
naturally to merit the first Grace; yet it may in such sort dispose us for
grace by love, and sorrow; that God will doubtless gratify us so prepared:
Whence it is clear, that as we fall not but by our own default, so by virtue of
a promise, and contract made by Heaven, we cannot finally perish but by an
obstinate reluctance of our own Hearts: If he sees a Phararh sink into ruin
irrecoverably, he beholds likewise a Nebuchodonozer for the same crime struck
down, to rise again: They were both Kings, the sin of either alike, detaining
God's people in captivity, yet the Fates of both very unequal: Because the one
retracts his misdeeds, and raises a detestation of them, the other persists in
his Enormities without any truce or suspension.

At last he makes a Corollary of this discourse, and concludes, since some are
preserved in Innocence by continued showers of Grace, others by a sweet
violence drawn from an Abyss of Sin to the upshot of happiness, and none so
entangled, whom a true repentance will not set free; he will never cease to
importune Heaven till his iniquity be rased out: let his Throat grow hoarse
with clamours, his Eyes droop and wax dim, his Heart rend asunder with grief,
he will spare no Particle of his whole Body, nay glory in its ruin, if by that
means he can but unclog his Soul from the weight of Sin: He judged it very
reasonable, that the Body having contributed to his Sin, should share in the
punishment, as it had done in the crime, and as it had concurred unto his
misery, so likewise it might unto his happiness: For doubtless the Combats
which a virtuous Man sustains amidst so many Headstrong passions which abound
in this mortal frame of ours, are no small advancements to eternal Glory, nor
mean Engines to work our Freedom from the slavery of Sin: Hence he takes up
arms, proclaims War against himself, and abjures any future compliance with
his unbridled appetite: He will make his Body a Sacrifice into penance, which
before had been a lump of ordures, and sensuality: His will shall become a
Tyrant, and check every the least inclination to Evil, which till then was
agitated and born away with every breath of Vanity, and foul delights; and if
withal these rigours he can break the stamp of his iniquity, he will prize
that Action, beyond all his former Victories, and raise more Trophies in Memory
of this deliverance than ever were consecrated to the most Heroic enterprise
of any person in the World.

The monstrous shape of his iniquity so confounded him, that 'till it was
defaced, he could not ask any blessing; for it is the greatest of evils, and
wherein all misfortunes are Centered. When Rheuben importuned his Father Jacob
that Benjamin his darling might go into Egypt, he offered his two Sons as
pledges for his return, and adds for a further engagement, ero peccati reus, he
would be guilty of sin, that is, exposed to all the miseries imaginable, if he
falsified his word. St. Paul expressing how severely God fell upon his only
Son, says he, who knew no sin, was made sin for us; that is, he discharged
upon him the Tempest of his wrath, rendering him the most despicable of Men, as
a Testimony of sins deformity, and the deplorable State of him that lies under
the guilt of a mortal transgression: Whence a great Doctor allowing the truth
of St. Austin's assertion that one drop of the water of Paradise will be
sufficient to quench the flames of Hell, yet will it not suffice (says he) to
wash away the foulness of sin: Our Holy Penitent knew well that Death concludes
all our merit, and demerit; that though the Just after this life shall perform
many glorious actions, yet these will not purchase to them any new Crowns, no
more than the reprobate shall not become more criminal by their abominations
acted in Hell; Wherefore during the time of this transitory life, wherein we
are to fix our choice of an eternity good or bad; our penitent resolves to play
the industrious Merchant; whilst he lives, his extinguished light of Grace may
be enkindled, and the hideous Character of his iniquity worn out, but if Death
surprise him in the obscurity of sin, he must eternally remain in darkness,
deformed with the ugly stamp of his iniquity: Wherefore having a clear view,
both of his present state, and danger of delay, he will both importunely, and
opportunely redouble his Note, Dele iniquitatem meam, blot out my iniquity:

The Application.
We may learn by the example of our penitent, to work whilst the day of this
life endures, for the Night of Death approaching our lot is cast: As the Tree
falls, so it will lie; no skipping from vice to virtue, nor from virtue to
vice, after Death, if here you claw not off the stamp of your iniquity it will
be fixed as an eternal reproach unto you; and it is but just where there is a
capacity of perfection, that a place, time, and state should be allotted for
its acquisition. The Angels who excel Men compassed their Felicity by one sole
Motion, by one simple operation: But Man who is more gross, and set at a
greater distance from Beatitude must usually speaking gain it by several
reiterated operations; for the period of our merit, or demerit, takes its
beginning where we surcease in the use of our senses, for as in flattering
their inclinations we offend, so in curbing and wisely ruling them for the love
of God, we perform acts of Piety and Virtue, so that in Death the matter of
Vice and Virtue expiring with the loss of our senses; Man remains confirmed in
that State he is then found, be it of good, or evil; Wherefore let us imitate
our penitent, and whilst our Petition may be heard, cry out with Holy David,
Dele iniquitatem meam, blot out my iniquity,

Amen.
CHAP. V.
Amplius lava me ab iniquitate mea,

Wash me more from my iniquity.


OUr distressed Penitent rowses up his Spirits believing he has already a
grant of part of his Petition; but he fears lest some relics may yet remain of
his sin, that is, bad inclinations, and proneness unto wickedness, contracted
by many reiterated peccaminous Acts, and therefore he thinks good to stick
close unto the same subject till he complete his design: Wash me more from my
iniquity. It is natural to Vegetables simply to covet a Being, to sensitive
Animals, to seek a well Being, and to reasonable Creatures to thirst and long
after a Sovereign Being, which only can satisfy their God-thirsting Souls: So
that we see our Petitioner by an impulse of nature is carried on to his first
demand, but when with this tendency in nature are joined the seeds and
beginnings of Divine love, the least stain supervenes not without a sequel of a
strange horror and trembling, arising as well from an apprehension of losing
the rich Donative of Grace, as from a restless ambition of improving it every
moment to God's Glory: He knows our life is here as it were between privation
and existence, between light and darkness; by how much we recede from one
Extreme, we approach nearer to the other; and to make a hault or stop in this
mean, is to slide back into that part we would avoid; this made our Petitioner
not satisfied with a bare remission, and to press for a further exemption from
his iniquity; Amplius lava me, wash me more.

He beholds the Sun to cheer the World with his light, not by one continued
constant ray, but by a perpetual emission of Spirits from his luminous Body:
Even so he wishes that splendour of the eternal Father, which has already
visited with comfortable beams his happy Soul, might incessantly oblige him
with new influences, that if the least exhalation of Sin arise, it may in an
instant fly and disperse it self before this purifying Globe; amplius lava me,
wash me more.

His anxiety continues, but with this difference, before he feared to dye an
enemy to God; now he dreads to dye not his friend: Before his care was to clear
himself of sin, now it is, how to preserve and purchase an increase of grace:
He begins to wonder that this spiritual resurrection allayes not all his
desires; but forthwith he checks himself with the reflection of Man's condition
in this life, where he is always to seek and never to find, because he
proposes to himself the Idea of an Entity beyond his reach, and has only this
support to hold up his hope, that he seeks a thing incomprehensible, an Object
on Earth designed for our love, and inquisition; in Heaven reserved for our
fruition: And which will be communicated more or less in proportion to the Zeal
and Purity of Hearts we have here in seeking: It is then in order to this happy
enjoyment that our Penitent sues again and again to be more freed from his
iniquity.

Besides Virtues have in them an admirable Sympathy, which makes they never
jarr, but mutually conspire to unite themselves and the Subjects they inhabit
to the most perfect Object; and since this Union is only found in glory, it is
consequent we must needs here be in perpetual motion, sometimes rooting out
this imperfection, otherwhiles acquiring that perfection, until we arrive at
him, who is the beginning, and end of all our agitations.

He remembered with what wariness God gave his command to Adam, advising even
not to touch the Fruit he must not taste off, well knowing the consequences
which attend occasions of sin: Hence he gathers this lesson, if we must not
play with danger, much less harbor the lest atome of sin within us; for it is
of such a malignity, as the Ocean upon the breach of a bank rushes not in with
more violence than sin does, and over-flowes that Soul where once it finds
admittance: Who will grant nothing, must receive no Petitions; it was not
without reason the Jews forbad the eating of Fat, that they might not be
allured to devour what was offered in their Sacrifice.

Our Holy Petitioner implores then a preservative, as well as pardon; this more
implies not only a fuller deletion of his iniquity, but also a stalling of
dangerous occasions; he now suspects every motion of his enemy he has seen
from his own too dear experience that a spark has grown up to a masterless
incendium, and this now happily extinguished, should he again dally but with
the least resemblance or shadow of sin, would in him appear monstrous after
the taste of so signal a mercy. This made him cry, wash me Lord not only from
sin, but more, even from all danger, and occasions of sin: For in the midst of
imminent occasions of sin, not to decline from Virtue, and noble resolutions,
is a possibility more speculative, than reducible to practice: Nor was our
penitent so transported with his change, as not to have a solicitude for
prevention of the like disaster: His repentance was not by halves, this made
him stand always upon his guard; always in fear, and still panting after more
purity, and more relaxation from his chains of iniquity.

Wash me more, that is, more than others, this clause of his Petition he judged
not unnecessary; for he believed the stains of his guilt were drunk in more
deeply, and were more fixed, than in the Soul of any other the greatest
offendour, and consequently his cure required the application of a more
Sovereign remedy. If the Leprous Condition of Naaman Cyrus found not a complete
redress until his seventh Lotion in Jordan; what streams must he seek out,
whose infirmity speaks a contempt of God: What multiplicity of reiterated
bathings will suffice to cleanse that Crimson Dye, whose reeking smoke ascends
to Heaven to purchase thence a consuming fire: Whose numberless offenses he
himself compares to the sands of the Sea, and confesses he cannot entertain a
thought of them without horror. He reckons up many signal Favors he had
received from the liberal hand of God, how he was picked out from amidst his
Fathers flocks, being the youngest and least considerable of all his children,
to be made Author of liberty unto Israel: how God had sheltred him as it were,
under his Wings from all his Enemies, and so ordained that their greatest
malice proved matter of his greatest glory; how God had entrusted into his
hands the Rule and guidance of his elect people, and given him wisdom, and
courage to acquit himself of that weighty charge with immortal honor: How God
had promised not to confine his munificence unto his person, but that he would
settle the succession of his Regal Dignity to his posterity for ever: And above
all, how from his line, and seed should issue forth an abstract of all his
liberalities to Mankind; the Savior of the World: When he had registered all
these Obligations, and passed on to survey what return he had made, he found so
high ingratitude, so much of disloyalty, that to rank himself with other
sinners, were to add presumption to his heap of sins: He supplicates therefore
that to the Enormity of his Crimes may be proportioned the Measure of his
pardon, that as the deformity of his sin was unparalleled, so likewise might
the stroke of that pencil exceed, which was to correct all his imperfections,
and beautify him with a touch of perfection; wash me more from my iniquity.

When he had thus framed his Petition, implying in this word more; first a
necessity of greater helps than others, proportionably to the greatness of his
transgressions; next a desire to be free from the least venial sin, and lastly
to be secured even from occasions of sin: He ventures yet a little further, and
following the Dictamens of flesh and blood, makes instance for a relaxation of
the temporal punishment due to his Sin; wash me more, that is, not only in
taking away his doom to eternal torments, but also the temporary satisfactions
he must here make: His sensitive part shrinks at the foresight of
contradictions he was to wade through, and would feign obtain this additional
remission; Man's natural affection to the Body, from a strict Union it has
with the Soul, raised in our Petitioner a great tenderness of it, insomuch as
not to plead for it, were to violate (he thought) the Articles of Friendship
made by nature between them: Yet he had always such an Eye to the Decrees of
Heaven, that after all his supplications he totally submits: He will not repine
at any pressure, but with an entire resignation drink in the bitterest draughts
of temporal afflictions, if his Divine Justice so require: He values ('it is
true) his Body in it self, God and nature having imprinted this love in him,
but when its depression may conduce to the purifying of his Soul, upon whose
happiness it mainly depends, reason teaches we must then let it sink; and
though it be drowned in an Ocean of torments, our Penitent has this
consolation that his Petition is granted as to the effect, for he shall see it
rise again wholly distained in the waters of tribulation, he shall find his
past sorrows grown up into Jubileys, and Exultations, and his heart more
sensible of that mercy which gave him constancy in his sufferings, than if by a
pure act of grace he had been released from sin without any satisfaction in his
own person: If then he be purified either according to his own wish, by an
exemption from sufferings which his frail Nature suggests, or else by an
inundation of afflictions which he has merited by his crimes. He has still
this comfort that he sues not in vain, since both will contribute to the drift
of his Petition, which is to appear every minute with a greater purity in the
Eyes of his Creator. Amplius lava me, wash me more from my iniquity.

The Application.
St. Bernard observes that if at any time God deprives us of what is good, it
is but to gratify us with something that is better; upon this reflection he
reckons it a happiness in St. Paul that he was struck blind, for immediately
upon that stroke he was raised to the third Heavens, and admitted unto secrets
unfit to unfold to Man; and afterward receiving the sight of his Body, with
that restitution was superadded the clear Eyesight of his Soul. God sent
Jeremy to the Potters shop, that he might see how the broken Vessel was to be
new molded; and come out better than before, if then the Clay frequently
recieves a better form and fashion than at first, let us in imitation and with
the same confidence of our holy penitent after our failings cry, Lord, wash me
more, Let our past harms warn us not to presume of our own strength; this
humble opinion will separate much of the dross of our actions, and teach us to
rely more upon God than our selves: Let us often lay before us the Seal of God's
pardon, this cannot but inflame our love, and enfire our Hearts in the zeal of
his service; nay Christ seems to set it down as a rule that we proportion our
love to our Obligations. He little loves to whom little is forgiven; that where
a large score is struck off by his Mercy, there must needs succeed an ambition
to a more supereminent perfection; wash me more from my iniquity: In fine, this
quadrates with Habakkuk's prophecy: If heretofore thou made one step in the
way of Death, thou shall now tread for it ten in the way of life. So that every
sinner is encouraged not only to recover his innocence, but to improve it
throughout the remainder of his life, never ceasing to repeat: Amplius lava me
ab iniquitate, wash me more from my iniquity.

Amen.
CHAP. VI.
Et a peccato meo munda me,

And cleanse me from my sin.


IN the Series of Acts inordinate and deficient from that rectitude required to
give them a denomination of good: We find some which relate immediately to God,
as when with contempt we strike at things directly ordained to his glory and
service, these pass under the name of impiety: Others there are whose first
tendency levells at our Neighbor, as when we traverse the light of Nature, in
doing to another what we would not have done unto our selves, and these are
styled by the appellation of iniquity: Lastly there are certain treasons
whereof we make our Bodies instrumental, and by which we are corrupted,
depraved, and wrought into strange habitual Frailties; these are properly
expressed by the term of sin, because by them we act against our selves. Our
Holy Penitent draws the exordium of his Petition from a sense of his impiety,
when in this first verse he said, have mercy on me, O God, for there he owns
his Frailties as a Creature in respect of his Creator, and beggs his Gracious
pardon: In the next verse he confesses his iniquity, whose full discussion as
to injustice toward his Neighbor I reserve for another place: In this third
verse he surveys his own person, beholds the Havocks, and corruption made there
by sin; and now would feign apply a Salutary Medicament, to which end he
inserts this clause in his Petition: A peccato meo munda me, cleanse me from my
sin; that is, from the filth, and ordure which accompany sins of the flesh.
Amongst all the irregular motions whereof Man is capable, there is none which
leads unto Labyrinths so inextricable, into precipices so disastrous, as this
unhappy sin of carnality: In the first place it draws a Cloud over the
understanding, and so depresses the faculties of the Soul, as she becomes in a
manner terrestrial, that is, unable to elevate her self beyond the objects of
sense; for the operations of the Soul are more perfect, as they are more
abstracted from materiality: Now this sin wholly drowns, and takes us up in the
pursuit of sensible things, and consequently must needs debilitate, and weaken
the Mind in her natural functions. In other passions, as Anger, Fear, Joy, and
the like there are still extant some Seeds of reason; this destroys all that
is Man in us, and makes Man by a thousand homages, and venerations subject to
that Sex, which God and Nature have designed Man's inferior; as if it aimed not
only at Man's destruction, but to resolve the World into another Chaos: For what
shafts of Gods vengeance have fallen heavy upon Mankind, that were not directed
to the chastisement of this sin: It was an inordinate appetite to mix with the
Daughters of Gentiles that first gave birth to Monsters, and Giants; and from
their accursed offspring the Earth became such a sink of abominations, as no
less than an universal inundation was able to wash away the stanch and
infection of their impieties. It was this foul pleasure which ministered Fuel to
the consuming flames of Sodom, and Gomorrah; this blind passion led Israel
ensnared by Madian Women in Idolatry, a foundation to all the Calamities and
derelictions by God which befell that chosen Nation: At one time twenty four
thousand Hebrews were punished with Death for Adultery, and what a slaughter of
sixty thousand persons did our sad Penitent behold, and this in revenge of his
own libidinous Acts, as if the stains they had left behind, could not be drawn
out by a Sea of blood.

When his affrighted thoughts had laid before him all these dismal passages,
he trembles, expecting every moment to be shivered and dispersed into Ashes by
the decrees of a just avenger; he approves the fancy of those who compose Venus
of the Froth of the Sea, brackish, perfidious, and the Seat of hazzards, and
disquiets; the pleasure he has had, appears to him now but like a Froth, or
bubble, which if not born away (as easily it is) by every blast, will certainly
of it self soon dissolve, and work its own ruin; and however the substance be
fleeting, it leaves notwithstanding a remembrance behind, so bitter and
distastful, and so hardly clawed off, as one would think that alone were a
sufficient punishment for a trespass of so little satisfaction; and for the
storms, and wastes it often makes in Kingdoms, and private Families, scarce any
age has not furnished many sad examples: I am sure our Holy Penitent felt the
smart of this bitter Truth in the desolation of his house, in the dishonor and
death of his Children, in the rebellion of his Subjects, and above all in the
forfeiture of those large promises made by Heaven to him and his posterity, all
which found not their Tomb but in the corruption of this unhappy sin. So that
in this request to be cleansed from his sin, he first declares the foulness of
it, evident in the horrid Disease Nature gives to those who use it in excess;
next, he hints the relics, and dreggs it leaves behind, that if God's grace,
joined with a great resolution happen to dislodge this petulent Guest, yet
still some footsteps or impressions remain, apt to reenter, and claim an
interest: Wherefore he could promise to himself no security, unless an
inundation of mercy fall upon him to purify, and carry away all the remainder
of bad inclinations grown into a habit, and become as it were a second Nature
in him. Cleanse me from my sin, and as it was not a slight stain he had
contracted, but all circumstances weighed the most indelible that springs from
inordinate acts in carnal pleasures: For Laws Divine, Natural, and Humane seem
to be violated in Adultery: Divine, in that two persons by marriage are made
one flesh, and both pass into the incommunicable Nature of individuality;
becoming the essential part of each other whence violation cannot happen to one
without destroying the life of the other, and breaking that bond which God has
knit together. Natural Law is likewise by an adulterous act infringed, because
Marriage consists not in the sole possession of the Body, but also, nay
principally in the affections of a reasonable Soul: For the bonds of Marriage
are not wrought by copulation, but mutual consent, and under a sacred Vow never
to be retracted; who then infringes these engagements must needs contract a
note of infidelity, and consequently strike at the main Hinge of humane Society
to preserve which Nature chiefly tends in all her principles, and essential
motions. Lastly, a breach is made in humane Law by Adultery, in that Marriage
is not a private but domestic good, which concerns not one, but infinite
Families, strengthened by the Laws of the Church, and public Faith of Nations:
From hence Nature finds those who carefully cultivate her plants; hence
Commonwealths are enriched with Citizens, the Church with Children. By this we
may see the malice of Adultery, that draws along with it the violation of so
many Laws. Christ enjoins us a love of our Enemies; and that the Sun should not
set in our anger. Yet in the treachery of Marriage Bed permits a separation
between Man and Wife, how strictly soever united by indissoluble ties, as if
such crimes surpassed the limits of pardon; as if an evil so destructive, that
remedies could find no place, and that this individual life once dissolved,
could no more be recalled than habit from privation.

Many Tyrants have subdued to therage of their cruelties the wealth, liberty,
and lives of their Subjects, who looking upon this power as given from Heaven
over them, patiently sustained all those depredations; but if once they touched
upon their wives, and would involve them in the Mass of their impurities, this
rowsed up their fallen spirits, cast them into rebellion, nay pushed them to
that extremity as never to desist until they had deprived those of life, who
had ravished from them what was more dear than life; until they had reduced
unto ashes the Authors of their infamy, and taught them for the example of
posterity this violence of all others will not be left unrevenged in this World.

There has scarce been any Nation though Pagan or Infidel which has not
punished Adultery with Death or exquisite Torments: Some by fire, others by
wild Horses; some by the Halter, others in pulling out their Eyes, cutting off
their Noses; some by stones as in Moses Law: Whence it is clear that even the
light of Nature taught, there ought for the good of humane Society that a stop
be made to this disorder.

Our Penitent having in his thoughts laid open all those Enormities of an
Adulterous Act, is surprised to see himself plunged in so many abominations, to
have heaped up to himself so much ignominy and infection, as the reproach of
them would last as long as time. How sparingly do good Men treat of carnal
subjects, either in Writing or in the Pulpit, lest the very articulate sound or
Characters in this matter might offend chaste Ears, or cause worse effects in
Hearts already tainted: If then this poison carry with it so much of malignity
in the very name or lightest thought, what corruption, and noysomness must the
sin it self produce. Oh! how strong did this scent breathe in the Nostrils of
our Penitent when once his understanding was awake, and beheld with an Eye free
from passion his Body dissolved into so many contaminations; no wonder than if
he so often repeat in this Psalm the cleansing from his sin: Every glimps of his
past foul delights casts him into a blush, beholding no other consequence of
them than shame, confusion, and the threats of eternal destruction,
notwithstanding all this he sues for a Vesture of innocence, and he does it to
him who with a fiat or blast from his Mouth drew out of a dark Chaos that
glorious Body of the Sun which so revives us: To him who has promised to let
fall all the darts of his anger upon the true repentance of a sinner; on this
basis he fixes his Petition, and doubts not but at last to find a happy issue,
to be drawn out of the mire of his sensualities, and his leprous condition
changed into the consistence of restored grace; after this he sighs and groans,
nor is capable of any consolation until that happy moment arrive which shall
put a period to this longing demand; Et a peccato meo munda me, cleanse me from
my sin.

The Application.
We must consider that God is purity it self, who has nothing more in
abomination than an impure Soul: That Heaven inhabited by Angels is a place of
honor, where nothing defiled can have access: Wherefore we ought to apprehend
any stain of lubricity; because most obstructive to our final Beatitude. First,
in that it is according to St. Thomas, peccatum maximae inhaerentiae, a Sin
that clings like Bird-lime to our Souls, and of all others most hard to be
clawed off; it resembles a Phoenix, who renews her self with the fire enkindled
by the motion of her own Wings; so a person inured to that vice, even when he
would give it over, and bury it withal occasion of incentives, does often find
the Coals to be blown afresh by the wings of thoughts, so that whilst we live,
we ought never to be secure; since it is a combat of all others the most
hazzardous, and where the victory is most rare next, it is a sin of impudency,
and when a Soul is devoid of shame, what hopes can there be to reclaim her; St.
Hierom advises to a private admonition of our neighbor, and gives this reason,
lest he break the curb of shame, and dwell in his sin for ever. By baptism we
are made members of Jesus Christ, and the chiefest homage we can pay to him as
our Head, is to preserve it unspotted from any smut of impurity: A virginal
integrity is so acceptable unto God, that the Angels (were they permitted)
would translate them Body and Soul into Heaven, that Death might not prey on a
treasure that deserves to be immortal, wherefore let us never cease to cry with
our holy Penitent; a peccato meo munda me, cleanse me from my sin.

Amen.
CHAP. VII.
Quoniam iniquitatem meam ego cognosco,

Because I know my iniquity.


AFter all these supplications our Petitioner now comes to give a reason, why
so confidently he requires an Act of Grace. At the first view, it seems a
strange one, and to imply his greater guilt: It is this, because he knows his
iniquity. Ignorance (where the fact is palpable) makes a great plea in
offenders; our criminal on the contrary acknowledges his trespass, declares he
knows what he has done, and from thence claims and pretends a rationality in
his petition; had he in lieu of this, inserted a Repentance of his misdeeds, a
detestation of his past failings, this might have carried some weight, in order
to a remission.

But we must reflect, injuries done to God and Man are things very disparate,
and quite of another nature: For I may consider many disobligations I have
thrown upon my Neighbor, and yet not retract in my will those ill Offices;
because I may have received the like from him, and many humane Laws have
allowed this retaliation; so that to retain a memory of the harms I have done
to Man, may signify nothing of virtue, or pious amendment. But when I look
upon any miscarriage in my Duty toward God, this glance must needs reproach me
of ingratitude; there can be no pretense, or shadow of excuse to justify any
failing toward the Divine Majesty: Since we are overwhelmed on all sides with
his favors, and benedictions; whence the Sequel of such a consideration
inevitably will humble, confound, and cast us upon the storms of Repentance.

Our Petitioner therefore knowing his iniquity, virtually declares by it, he
disowns what he has done, or rather owns it to be exorbitant, and from this
confession lays claim to his Justice, which upon the conversion of a sinner,
engages to abolish and raise out of his memory all past iniquities.

Because I know my iniquity: This knowledge evidences the return of Grace to
his Soul. In the 35. Psalm he describes his own condition in the state of sin:
My iniquities surrounded me, and I could see nothing: St. Austin exclaims
against that day, wherein he committed sin, and questions whether he may call
it day; since he was involved in a profound obscurity, and then he goes on,
saying, he will rise, and disperse the mists of his iniquities, that he may see
the fountain of all goodness.

Our Petitioner again in the 48. Psalm gives Man (when enslaved by sin) the
title of Beast, nay with something of aggravation, assimilating him to a
Foolish Beast: He remembered how Adam after his fall, was clothed with Skins of
Beasts; which attire was but a Symbol of his Mind bestiatized, and made Savage
by transgressions.

St. Thomas speaking of those Clouds of darkness, wherein poor sinners lie
grovelling; says, it proceeds from a propension bent upon evil, aversed from
God and deprived of grace: The opposite beams then, which fill our Souls with
light and serenity, must needs draw their source from a love of what is good,
an adhaesion to God, and a sweet repossession of grace, and in these splendours
our Petitioner finds himself: First, they raise his Soul to an Object
infinitely good, and amiable, and after vehement affections enkindled toward
this Sovereign felicity, his Eyes are unsealed, and beholds the Ghastly shape
of his sins, which cast him into exclamations against his own unworthiness,
upon reiterated addresses for mercy and pardon, and at last admitted into
favor; he learns by that inestimable gift (under whose Dominion he now lives)
what it is to offend God, how monstrous a thing sin is, and therefore will not
conceal his new acquired notions, but proclaim. Quoniam etc. because I know my
iniquity.

It was not an abstract knowledge of his iniquity he alleges, for this may
consist with the most innocent and spotless Soul, and was found in Adam before
his fall: But it is what he had learnt by dear experience; he had tasted that
Tree which imports knowledge of good and evil, but alas, far different from
those pure Idaeas, which reside in Souls that were never involved in the shades
of sin; for such survey with an intellect as it were Angelical, the commands of
God and in obedience to his Law make use of their knowledge, but to avoid the
prevarication: But our Petitioner looks upon the deformity of sin in all its
circumstances of the Abyss of ruin it draws upon us, and having with the
Cananean cried for mercy, then he confesses his nakedness, then he lays open
his failings, and blushes not at the knowledge of his iniquity, because they
are now washed in a Crystal stream, and their past horrors serve but to raise
in him a detestation of them, and to invite him at the same time to admire the
Wisdom of God, that thus by his penitential acts will manifest his Justice; and
lastly to praise his mercy that has given him a perfect knowledge of his
iniquity, as a certain Landmark to preserve him from future Shipwreck; because
I know my iniquity.

I remember the Prodigal Son, when languishing in misery, and perishing for
hunger, pitched only upon this remedy, that he would tell his Father he had
sined against Heaven and him: In like manner our Petitioner lays aside the
thought of any good he may have done, offers to the view of his eternal Father
all the wounds of his cauterized Soul, and that he might engage himself to a
complete discovery, confesses he is not ignorant, but knows all the Windings,
and extravagant progressions of his iniquity; how they had led him from
Adultery to Homicide, thence to Pride, Vanity, and Sole reliance on his own
greatness and power, and when he had summed up all his ingratitudes, he gives
this account, Domine opus tuum vivica illud, Lord I know my Sin. So likewise I
know the temper of the delinquent, how he is composed of frailties, unable of
himself to set his hand to any good work, to any supernatural motion:
Wherefore he hopes this consideration may something take off, and render his
deviations less irregular.

Yet on the other side he will not flatter himself into a blameless condition,
he knows a support of Grace ever attended him amidst his predominant passions,
and smartest trials, by whose means he might have been victorious: This brings
him on his Knees, and draws from him an humble confession. Because I know my
iniquity.

It was this knowledge fixing him on the basis of humility which prepared him
for those sublime, and supernatural communications he afterward received from
his dear Creator: What are his Psalms but a Series of raptures, and celestial
ravishments, a Tabernacle of sacred mysteries with which his understanding
was fed; that we may see to what pitch Man is capable of arising from this
knowledge of our Sins. How confidently did St. Peter persist in his denial of
Christ, and cried as naturally, I know not the Man; as if he had been nursed up
in infidelity: It was only the reflection upon his perfidious Crime, and a
clear view of it, that brought him to himself, and sprung in him such floods of
tears. What cast St. Mary Magdalen into such rigours which seem incomparable
with humane Nature but a sense, and knowledge of her transgressions. What
opened Heavens-Gate to the expiring Thief but this: Nos quidem digna factis
recipimus; We truly receive a punishment which our crimes deserve. In a word,
you shall find no remarkable change in the life of any person from Vice to
Virtue, which took not its first rice from a serious consideration of their
former ingratitude; and this is confirmed in the example of our Holy
Petitioner; who first cries out he has sinned, and presently hears Nathan,
who proclaims a pardon, after which assurance, he sits not still, nor returns
to his Vomit, but will for the future offer up as many holocausts, as before he
has had unlawful delights, he will convert the number of his sins into a
greater number of virtues; and whatsoever in him has contributed to the
contempt of God his Creator, shall be employed in his service by penitential
acts, that as now he sadly acknowledges his errors, he may one day be
transported in the praise of the Divine goodne^, divulge his satisfactions, the
first step to which ascent he will ever owe to this lesson: Because I know my
iniquity.

The Application.
St. Austin prescribing a remedy to siners, gives them this short Recipe, tu
inde non avertas, withdraw not thy sight from thy sins: For if thou fix thy
Eyes upon them, God will turn his away; but in case you throw them behind your
back, then he will take a full view of them, and punish them severely in thee;
the Sun setting upon a dark Cloud makes it become bright and radiant; so
Almighty God laying open unto our holy penitent, the foulness of his iniquity,
he cooperates with his merciful rays, surveys them, and by a true sense of his
ingratitude, attracts the splendor of his pardon upon him. Let us then in
imitation of our Holy Penitent not become a stranger to our own misdeeds, that
so our great Judge may examine no other witnesses; an humble confession will
prove our best plea, which we cannot exactly do, unless we know them, nor know
them in all their colors of deformity without a high detestation of them; so
that if we make a careful inquisition after our guiltiness in this life, we may
hope to be warranted from a severe sentence in the next: Learn therefore to
allege this powerful Topic here: Quoniam iniquitatem meam ego cognosco,
because I know my iniquity.

Amen.
CHAP. VIII.
Et peccatum meum contra me est semper,

And my sin is always before me.


AFter this declaration of our Petitioner how knowing he is in his own
misfortunes, next he lays open his condition, hoping it may draw some beams of
mercy and pity upon him, at least serve to warn others by his harms. My sin
(says he) is always before me, sometimes as an Accuser, deposing with much
vehemence every crime he has committed, and omitting no circumstance that may
render it more odious; sometimes as a Judge delivering exactly every statute he
has prevaricated, either of Heaven, Nature, or Reason, showing the punishment
ordained for his misdeeds. And lastly, pronouncing a Sentence against which he
has no plea, nor evasion: Whence St. Chrysostom says, what pleasure alas can
there be in sin, when the necessary consequences of it are, accusation,
reproach, scandals and condemnations; all other afflictions have a remedy, this
allows no truce nor respit in other tribulations (whilst our conscience is
unstained) we have a Sanctuary within us, whether we may retreat, and find God,
and in him all consolation; but this once forfeited by sin, what can we do? If
in the Country, or City, abroad, or at home still this remorse attends us, and
having fled from all the World, we find our Enemy and Executioner in our own
selves, which we always dragg after us wheresoever we go.

What dreads and horrors besieged the Heart of Cain, every shadow he beheld
seemed to threaten Death and destruction to him, so that his thoughts were
always lodged in a Sepulcher; the memory of his crimes still rising up as
witness against him, with how just reason then did St. Austin cry: Lord thou
have commanded, and it is fulfilled, that a vicious Soul proves to her self her
own tormentour.

Plato says, God has given to the faculties of the Soul a certain Harmony,
which infinitely delights, and recreates that spiritual substance, now when by
inordinate actions she dissolves this unity, there must needs spring from this
dissolution a great grief or anguish, though the cause be not known, as when
any vital part is offended, a smart pain is dispersed through the whole Body,
albeit we know not from whence it proceeds. If then this great Philosopher
gives affliction as a natural effect of sin, what must he endure who has the
addition of a supernatural precept, when he looks upon it infringed, and made
the Subject of his contempt; when he weighs the loss he has made of Grace, the
Abyss of misery, wherein he is plunged; certainly this must create within us a
torment far beyond any impression of cruelty, or malice from abroad.

This is the state of our Penitent; let him go where he will, he finds a
Tribunal erected within him, where his Case is scanned to the full, and all his
Exorbitances laid home to him; whilst he in the mean like poor Job not able to
return one word for a thousand, looks about, at lest to fee some Council, but
alas, every one withdraws, nay his own Conscience rises up against him.

Paschasius upon that place of St. Matthew, where two possessed persons issuing
forth from Monuments encountered; our blessed Savior wonders why the Devils
should rather inhabit corrupted Vaults, than pleasant Fields, Gardens, or
stately Mansions, and at last satisfies himself with this reason, that it is a
just return for those who would not relish Heavenly delights, they should be
fed with Carcasses, nourished with Ordure and Putrefaction, to the End their
punishment may be suitable to their offense; this stroke of Justice our
Penitent acknowledges his senses take in nothing, but the species of foul and
cruel acts committed by him, and every glance adds a new fuel to his consuming
flames; the Memory of them is so Ghastly, that were it to be his sole penalty
he should think the reiteration of his crimes purchased at too dear a rate: My
sin is always before me.

We need seek no other Topics to prove the terror which remorse brings to a
Conscience, then our Penitent's own words in the 54. Psalm, where he says,
Discedunt in Infernum viventes, they descend alive into Hell. He thought no
allusion, but to the state of the damned could reach this misfortune, so that
whosoever is upon the rack of a tortured Conscience seems to anticipate his sad
doom, and to find a Hell even upon Earth, and no wonder when Mercurius
Trismegistus asserts, that the Body by habitual sin becomes brutish, and the
Mind turns to be a Devil, which chastises and afflicts the offendour with the
stripes of his own sin.

Our sad Penitent little foresaw this Enemy within him at the beginning, his
whole Solicitude was only to dazzle the Eyes of the World, by that means to
stifle the dishonor might arise from his crimes. He sends for Vriah to Court,
there caresses him, and all his Stratagems failing at last commands him to be
exposed to certain ruin, and the drift of all this was to conceal his sin,
believing could that be effected he should do well enough for the rest; but
what was the event, hear the tidings Nathan brings him, thou have done this
offense covertly, and in secret; but God will publish it at noonday, and make
known thy ingratitude. Behold all his policy blown up in an instant, and
besides he has this slow Executioner of his own Conscience, which like a
shadow inseparably attends him, and makes him groan forth: My sin is always
before me.

Epicure was of Opinion, exorbitant actions ought to be declined upon the sole
motive of fear which always invades the Minds of Criminals; this shows that
nature is disordered by Evil (for this Philosopher had no other ray than that
of reason) and the disturbance we find to spring from transgressions, is but an
effect of nature in order to its own preservation: For who would conceive (did
not sad experience render it manifest) that Man could support the constant
reproaches and sharp sentences of his condemning Conscience, for the enjoyment
of some slight pleasure of Carnality, Revenge, and the like: Which as a flash
of lightning instead of glory and delight, leaves us to moulder away in the
ashes of dishonor, and to be surrounded with torments, even before we had at a
full pause tasted the cause and subject of our chastisements.

Hence methinks Plato happily compares a person enslaved to his sensualities
unto one who hatches, and nurses up a Chymaera consisting of many exact
lineaments, and after a thousand complacent thoughts of this fantastic
beauty, it is found at last to be a mere effect of the imagination. Our sad
Penitent looking back into his life, acknowledges the truth of this allusion,
he awakes as from a dream, all his past delights appear to him under no other
form; only he finds the smart of his punishment to be real, and confesses his
unpittying Conscience like another Caligula destroys him, not at once by a
stroke of fury, but wracks him by degrees, that he might (as that Tyrant was
wont to say) feel he was dying, and this in the most horrid manner to perish as
it were by his own hands: Other indispositions admit some intervalls, this
allows no respit, the very sleep of guilty persons is filled with specter,
and frightful Ideas; witness that reproach of Mankind Nero, who confessed even
when he slept the Ghost of his Mother failed not to torment him. Witness
likewise our Penitent, who cries out my sin is always before me. Ah! let us
then make his misfortune our instruction, to live well is the securest Bulwark
against frights and terrors; a spotless Mind joy always attends, as Sorrow
and Anguish are the Mates of guiltiness: And though these at present are the
Companions of our Penitent, he has yet this consolation, that the dismal shape
of his sin carries him on to repentance, not to obdurateness, nor despair, and
his hope is, that after they have agitated and raised the storms of sad
remembrances within him, a gracious calm of pardon will follow, as well to
settle peace and security in his Soul, as to banish for ever from his sight the
hideous spectacle of his sins; which is now the sad subject of his complaint,
and bitter remorse; my sin is always before me.

The Application.
St. Austin sets down the method his dear Creator held to reduce him to his
duty: Retorquebat me ad meipsum ut viderem quam ulcerosus essem; He threw me
upon my self, that I might in my self, as in a Glass behold how I was ulcerated
and full of Sores: For this spectacle gave him at once a full view, both of his
own misery and God's mercy, and both strike a terror into him; in the one, he
reads the characters of his banisment, and forfeiture of his heavenly right,
since nothing defiled can enter heaven, in the other, a Shole of God's mercies
appear before him, which meeting with his ingratitude make a strange Combat
within him, and strike a terror not to be expressed, expecting every moment a
just vengeance to fall upon his guilty head; this is the effect of sin, these
are the lmps of that hideous Monster which surround a poor sinner, and keep him
still awake with continual Alarms. Whence, I wonder not if Solomon proclaims
non est pax impiis, that there is no peace for the wicked, because the ugly
face of sin is always in their Eyes, all the rigours of Disciplines,
Hair-cloths, fastings and other austerities of a true Christian Dissciple, are
but toys if compared to the tortures of a wounded conscience; but to one
grimace, or wory look of sin, the hissings of a Snake, stinging of an Adder,
and croaking of a Toad, offend not the senses like to the dire aspect and
frightful voice of sin: It was sin made Hell, Devils, and all that is terrible
in nature; wherefore let us beg to be freed from this dreadful Object, and that
we may never make it the subject of our misfortune, as to have the reproach of
mortal sins before us.

Amen.
CHAP. IX.
Tibi soli peccavi and malum coram te feci;

I have sinned only against thee, and done evil.


IT would amaze one at the first glance to see this clause of the petition
inserted, that he who had highly injured Vriah, scandalized, and drawn by his
sin the heavy hand of God upon his people, should disclaim of wrong done to his
neighbor, and assert with confidence that he had offended against God alone.
Nathan's Covert insinuation of the poor Man's whole and little stock wrested
from him by a merciless depredation, speaks the prevarication of a precept in
the second Table, which concerns our neighbor; the curses of Semei stiling him
a Man of blood import a charge of injuries done to Man: again, he knew the
petitioned is a searcher of hearts, to whom nothing can lie hid, so as to
extenuate his transgressions in the least tittle were absurd: Besides St.
Thomas, says God, showers down his blessings upon Princes for the Subjects
sake, so that if they abuse these gifts, they are ungrateful to God the Author
of them, and injurious to the people; for whose good they are to be managed and
directed. All this put together seems to reflect on the sincerity of our
Penitent's proceedings, and that he would disguise, if not wholly suppress a
main part of his offenses, yet let us examine e're we censure, and I believe
his confession will not be found to want the due circumstances of a true
repentance. I have sinned (says he) against God alone. He considers first he
is a criminal, next he beholds no power on Earth, which has right to take
cognizance of his trespass, and to carry on a complete process against him; the
Holy Ghost had taught him, the anointed of God are sacred things not to be
violated by any hand, wherefore since no humane Law could reach him, for that
power is not supreme which is linked to any dependency: To whom can he
acknowledge himself an offendour, but to him who is King of Kings, and from
whom all Dominion both in Heaven and Earth is derived? He alone is his Judge,
he alone can punish or save, and to his sole will he submits himself, and the
correction of his misdeeds.

This specification of his Royal dignity which exempts him from all Earthly
Jurisdiction, renders him not more innocent, but rather is a circumstance of
aggravation; for the perfection of the person offending, is a note of higher
ingratitude proportionably to the excellency of his nature; and therefore
Divines conclude the sin of Lucifer to be the most Enormous that ever was
committed: First because of the excellency of his nature; next in that he
directly struck at the source of his perfections, for which he ought to have
been more grateful than other Creatures, having tasted more liberally than any
other of his divine Favors. Lastly from the causality or consequence of his
sin, which gave a rise, and was the foundation of all the evil that has
happened in the World, and in Heaven before it was created, overwhelming both
Angels, and Men by his temptations; as in Tobit Chap. 4. From the Pride of the
Devil all ruin and perdition is derived, and took its beginning.

If we look upon the dignity of our Penitent, we shall find none above him upon
Earth; if on the favors showred upon him from Heaven, he appears the Object of
Gods choicest liberalities; if on the disastrous sequel of his sin, what
divisions in his Kingdom, what streams of Blood have issued from it. Hence I
wonder not if St. Austin says, it is hard for Princes to commit a small
offense: For the eminency of their place obliges them to so much integrity,
that the least blemish in them grows up into a monstrous deformity; they are as
it were the Primum Mobile, upon which all the other Orbs depend in their
motion; Nay Cassidorus says it were more credible that Nature could err, than
for a Prince to frame a Commonwealth different from the constitution of his own
life: For he is not only a glass wherein the people contemplate the Idea or
platform of what they ought to do, but a glass enflaming, and issuing forth
incentives to imitation: Have we not seen a Rome warlick under Romulus,
religious under Numa, continent under Fabritius, dissolute under Lucullus and
Anthony, Idolatrous under Julian, and drenched in Arrianism under Valens, to
show the people are always molded into the temper of their Prince; nay think
it a crime not to follow his example, and believe every leading action in him,
may authorize and make good any wickedness in them. It was for this cause the
Poets feigned their gods to have been vicious, that from thence they might
claim a title, and right to do the like; and Terentius excuses a young man
taken in adultery, because he had seen the pourtraiture of Jupiter representing
such a posture of obscenity.

The prophet Hoseah in his Fifth Chapter threatens judgment and ruin to Kings,
who have become a Snare instead of a Sanctuary to their subjects; and St.
Austin styles bad Kings the worst of homicides, in destroying the Souls of
their Subjects.

Our sad Penitent was not a stranger to his own condition, he knew well his
duty to God, and how many obligations of virtue were annexed to a Crown; he
therefore now alleges his regal power, not to diminish, but rather to give a
full view of his transgression; by this he confesses, that he has broke his
Faith with multitudes of Men, deceiving the public opinion they had of his
virtue, upon which presumption, their Lives, Fortunes, and what most dear to
them, were shrouded under his guidance, and protection: By this he declares the
Throne is to edify, not destroy the lookers on; for a King mediates 'twixt God
and Man: Now that a Vacuum might not happen, but a happy concatenation
preserved, it is as necessary a King should adhere to God, as he would have the
People constantly faithful to him; a Christian Prince ought to make God, not
Policy the ultimate Object of his sway; so that he must first consecrate
himself, next his Kingdom, to the service of his Creator: And if he do it not,
he seems to overwhelm and confound both divine, and humane Laws. By this he
ackowledges his own misery, as St. Austin says, Kings are not to be esteemed
happy from their conquests and success of Arms, but by using their power in the
advancement of God's honor and service; if they love, fear, and reverence him,
if they make their own greatness stoop and lie prostrate before his Divine
Majesty; lastly, if they more value the sweet reign of virtue within them, than
all the dazzling glories of their Earthly ^ingdoms, this only makes them happy.

Mistake not then our Penitent, he boasts not in these words (I have sinned
against thee alone) his exemption from any terrene Judicature, but rather would
publish by his greatness, the enormity of his crimes, how every glittering
flash of his Crown, makes a new flaw in his unhappy trespass. He remembered in
Leviticus it was decreed, the same proportion of Sacrifices for the Priest, as
for the Universal people; and what satisfactions might then justly be required
of him, into whose hands are entrusted the guidance of that chosen Nation; and
to fail in so important an affair, must needs involve a greater blame. For
where the Prerogative is more sublime, there the miscarriage carries with it
more of deformity; as St Hierom cries: Let us rejoice whilst we ascend, but
likewise beware a fall, because there is not so much contentment in the
purchase of honor and greatness, as there is grief and confusion to be torn
from the prossession of them. Besides such shall not only render an account of
their own defaults, but also be responsible for the deviations of all those to
whom they owe the duty of direction and good example.

O ye great ones, whose Birth or Fortune have made eminent in the World, take
heed you be not the Subject of Jeremy's complaint; who having surveyed the
Valleys, found therein a mere vacuity; from thence passing to the Heavens, he
there met with a profound darkness; returning back upon the Mountains, he
beheld them all in disorder. If you be Sovereign Princes meant by the Heavens,
examine what Splendor has issued from your Actions, by which your Subjects
might steer the course of their lives, and be guided (free from Shipwreck) to
the Haven of eternal rest: For if they lose themselves on the Sands of
misbelief, or dashed upon the Rock of Vanity, unlawful pleasures, and the like;
for want of your directing beams, their ruin will be laid to your charge; and
were it permitted you to hear the sad complaints, and dire invectives those
perished Souls do vomit forth against their Leaders, who have deceived, and
tilled them on into misery, it would certainly have influence upon you, and
oblige you to a greater circumspection in your ways and manner of life.

If you own Nobility and Honor, which the Mountains personate, remember you
are the Object of many inferior eyes; you are looked upon with respect, and
indeed as the Glass which should convey unto them the true representation of
their Prince: For he being but one, and consequently not so communicable, it is
your parts who are dispersed through Kingdoms, to supply what he cannot do, to
show by your Justice, Piety, Devotion, Charity, and other Christian virtues,
that the practice of them can only maintain your greatness, and is the
Foundation of all your hopes in another life, which Principles lively set forth
in your actions, cannot but fix your dependants in a strange passion toward
goodness, and ground them in a Belief, that it ought to be the ultimate scope
of all their endeavors, and enterprises in this world.

Nor are those of the meaner rank (hinted at by the Valleys) exempt from all
obligation in this kind: There is not a Master of a family, but is as it were a
Sovereign to those who depend on him: He ought to be the first at every pious
duty, to see his little flock fed with all necessary instructions in order to
what Christianity obliges them to know, and believe, to carry a watchful Eye
over them, that he may know their faults to correct, their virtues to reward,
and encourage; if they fail in this, they may say with David, I have sinned
against thee alone: Though there be none under their roof can be a competent
Judge, yet this will not render them innocent; and this our holy Penitent
confesses, who in this expression acknowledges the excellency and multitude of
God's favors in being a King, and consequently the highest ingratitude on his
part toward the Author of them.

The Application.
By this clause we are further taught that if at any time we fail in our duty,
the principal motive of that ressentment must be in that it is displeasing to
God, whose only frown we apprehend: For when we trespass against our
Neighbor, the evil is in reference to God who forbids it; whence every sinner
may justly say I have sinned against thee alone: So that we ought not to regard
our temporal, but eternal Penalties due to sin; for that concerns our Soul,
which alone is the source of all our transgressions: Wherefore our chief
solicitude ought to be for its preservation: Wherein we are to imitate St. Mary
Magdalen, who pressed in her spiritual necessity, had a personal recourse to
her dear Savior, but when concerned in the loss of her Brothers life she
contented her self to dispatch away a letter by a servant, insinuating by this
the distinction she made between a soul and Body. I wish we might all in this
follow her Example, that is, espouse the Souls interest as the main concern:
Since in relation only to that we are to pronounce, tibi soli peccavi, I have
sinned against thee alone.

CHAP. X.
Vt justificiens in Sermonibus tuis, and vincas cum judicaris;

That thou may be justified in thy words, and overcome when thou art judged.


OUr holy penitent tells us in this clause why he brought his guiltiness as
King upon the Stage, because by it the petitioned will be justified in his
words, which are these, that he will never reject a truly repenting heart, and
he thinks they were never put more home to the Test than in his Person, for who
can despair after his admission into favor, who had broken all the chains, and
ties of duty, wherein a Creature is linked, and obliged by a most loving and
liberal Creator. Besides the pardon of his ingratitude will serve as a fence
against the rash judgments of the impious, who are apt to lay severity to
God's charge upon the reprobation of a sinner; this makes our penitent to add,
that thou may overcome when thou and judged; that is, when his case shall be
alleged, it will stop and silence any blasphemous Tongue.

I believe also he reflected on the promise made by God, that out of his line^
should issue forth the hope of Israel, the Redeemer of mankind; and lest his
sin might divert the streams of God's mercy, and frustrate his succeeding
stemms of that glorious offspring; he minds him first of his promise to
receive with open arms the most enormous, if repenting Soul; nextt, his
Foundation laid, he would insinuate, since by an act of mercy, he was again
planted in the Region of grace, his hopes now are that the promises made by
Heaven to him and his posterity might stand good; that their accomplishment
would be a confirmation to him of a plenary indulgence, and a pledge that his
punishment should not reach to so heavy a Confiscation, in order to his
temporal satisfaction.

But you must know when he says, that thou may be justified, etc. This
particle (that) imports not the efficient cause of the precedent verse; to wit,
he had sinned against God alone, to the end God may be justified; as if the
motive of God's justification gave rise to his sin: No, no, it means only this,
that the eminency of his condition rendered him guilty of the highest
ingratitude, and since the torrent of God's mercy had born this clear away, the
publication of this pardon must needs exalt the divine goodness, and testify to
the World there is no iniquity so monstrous, which may not (if we will) be
overcome by his mercy; whence he is justified in his words, never to be a
stranger to those who return with Repentance unto him.

How many times has God been irritated by Man's ingratitude, nay so touched to
the quick as to declare he repented to have made him; that is if God were
capable of defect or change, this exorbitancy in man might well deserve such a
repentance: have we not seen a Pharaoh prodigiously unmoved, insensible as a
statue at the sight of miracles, which confounded all his inchanters, and false
Gods; yet had not this unbelieving Prince hardened his own heart, God had
reserved one greater wonder to work in his behalf, that is upon his sumission
to receive him unto mercy: what can be thought of more indulgent than his
amarous care and conduct of his people through the desert; and yet even when he
was prescribing a Law, and Rule for the observance of their Duties, they frame
Idols, and plunge themselves in transgressions of the highest nature. However
he did not here forget his promise, but at the prayer of Moses reassumed them
into his Sovereign Protection; the same Night which was blessed with the
institution of the sacred Synaxis or Eucharist, was also conscious of the
horrid Treason of Judas, and yet this Monster of ingratitude according to all
Divines might have sheltred himself from God's wrath by a true Repentance.

Thus all along we see God justified in his Clemency toward sinners, so that
victory must needs remain to him when questioned by blasphemous Tongues, for
creating those who were to perish: A Nabuchodonozer speaks for him, a Thief
upon the Cross, a St. Paul, a Magdalen, and a Million of others that have
redeemed by a few hours repentance, what had been contracted in many years
impieties and wickedness.

Our holy Penitent will also come in for a witness: First he cries what return
shall I make to my God for all he has done to me; he praises, blesses his holy
name, and then lays open his enormous crimes, believing it is but reasonable
to do him all right, that has dealt to him so much of mercy; and though every
thought of his sins afflicts him, yet he glories that his Creatour's goodness
will appear resplendent through his deformity; he is content to become nothing
that he might add the least tittle to God's Honor and greatness: He values not
his own confusion, so God may be justified, and this sweet experienced truth
made good, that the Divine will is that all shall be saved; and to this end,
proportions sufficient means to all; so that none can perish but through their
own Impenitency and Perseverance in sin.

The Church would not style Adam's sin a happy sin, if our Redemption and the
merits of Christ's sacred passion were not extenedd to all, even the highest
offendour. St. Paul says, as Death found its entrance by the default of one,
so life was restored by one; whence it is clear, the remedy brought to us by
Christ reached as far as the Disease. St. John entitles him a Sun, which
enlightens every one that comes into this World; there is none wrapped up in so
black a Cloud of sins, who may not (if they will) take in the Rays of his
Mercy, and by their Deliverance justify God's Promises to Man.

In the production of every the least Creature (says St. Thomas) the power,
wisdom, and goodness of God are made manifest; how much more then are they
exalted in the Transmutation of a Soul from the Privation of Justice to the
Possession of a Supernatural Gift of Righteousness; whence St. Paul says, God
does predestinate us according to the council of his will, that we may praise
and diffuse abroad his glory.

Ah then, let us give unto God what is his due as near as we can; by despair we
condemn our selves, in rendering our Judge Inexorable and deaf to Mercy: By Hope
animated with Repentance, we quit our scores of guiltiness, and justify the
hand that wipes them off. To our justification by his grace he does not only
invite us to dispose our selves for it, promising to refresh such as are
oppressed, etc. But declares, he is at the door of our hearts, knocks,
solicits, and expects but our consent to enter in, at last defies the World to
object the least failing on his side, having done to his Vineyard what ever
could be required to make it thrive; To conclude, God will be still justified,
that sinner who does finally perish is the Author of his ruin by his own
impenitency, rejecting graces abundantly sufficient offered to him: So that in
the height of his misery when it is too late, he will be forced to acknowledge;
crying, O Lord, thou art just, and thy judgments equitable: That sinner again
who has imitated our Penitent, in having had timely recourse to the throne of
mercy, will not blush to unfold his wickedness, since he now breaths a new life
of grace, which obliges him to proclaim, how just God is in his promises, and
glorious in his Mercies. That thou may be justified in thy words, and
overcome when thou art judged.

The Application.
In this clause, we read the clear view our Holy Penitent had of the
unquestionable proceedings of God with Man; for beholding in his all-displaying
Eye the ingratitude of Millions of Souls who would abuse his favors, yet did
not this restrain his munificence to them; he first gave them a Being, added to
this Being the exhibition of his Graces, all sufficient, nay in a greater
proportion than to many of the elect; and to the acquisition of these benefits
he made his only Son instrumental, by whose blood is conveyed to them a
capacity of Salvation: Now if afterward they come to perish, it is through
their own malice in misusing his gracious endearments, and proving refractary
to his commands, for since he had conducted them indiscriminately with the
predestinate by a supernatural Providence, with which all along he obliged
them, what wisdom, prudence, or justice were it to gratify Traitors (obstinate
even unto death in rebellion) with his Glory: So that the motive of their
reprobation is a foresight of their final perseverance in Sin; their guiltiness
gives matter of God's hatred, and eternal damnation, the effect of their
impenitency. It Is true it was not in their power to be born, or not be born;
but to fight generously, or be vanquished by the Devil this depends on us: It
seems unreasonable that a King opening a Tournament, and proposing a reward to
the Conqueror, should admit only that person into the list whom he feresaw
would be victorious: So God in Creating an infinity of persons whereof the
greater part would become reprobate is not to be blamed, no more than that
Prince who lets all run at the ring though it cannot be gained but by one, for
if we be foyld it is by our own Cowardice and remissness. Thus the goodness of
God appears in the Creation of Reprobates, and no less his justice in pouring
vengeance upon them, so that he would be justified in his words, and silence
any blasphemous Tongue; nay, though these unfortunate wretches miss of their
particular end that is paradise to which they are created, yet the general
design of their Creation, to wit the promotion of his Glory, will take effect:
for after his patience has been strained (if it may be so expressed) in
supporting their insolences, he will give luster to his Saints Glory by the
opposition of their misery; just as a Moor sets off a great beauty. Wherefore
let us keep consort with our Holy Penitent, avowing his just providence, and
submitting to all his Decrees, as most equitable and worthy our Adorations,

Amen.
CHAP. XI.
Ecce enim in iniquitatibus conceptus sum,

For behold I am conceived in iniquity.


OUr Penitent here appeals to the World whether he has not reason being
reinvested with the rich ornament of Grace to stand up, and maintain Gods
proceedings with his Creatures; to this intent he knows no better medium, than
the publication of Man's corrupted Nature, brought to that imbecility, as of
himself unable to give life, and birth to one good thought behold (says he) I
am conceived in iniquities; that from the first instant of his conception, he
is seized on by sin, and though that lineal stain be cleared by circumcision in
the old Law, and now by Baptism, yet there still remains a propensity to sin,
which grows up with us, gaining strength through the whole course of our
Adolescence: For many years of our age are spent e're we come to distinguish
between good and evil; in all which time it is clear we follow without any stop,
or haesitation the Dictamens of sense; so that at the opening of our
understanding we discover a Law Anathemathematizing our former practices, the
which by many reiterated, and continued Acts are so wrought into habit; that to
break them, we must (as it were) mould our selves into another nature. This
considered, together with the dreggs, and relics of corruption which original
sin leaves behind, I wonder not if our Penitent deplore his misfortune, and
hints in his Petition this memorandum; that he was conceived in iniquities.

This Fomes or scattered seed of original sin has a double effect, one an
inclination to evil, the other a drawing back, or declining from what is good:
This made St. Paul confess, he found a Law in his Body contradicting that of
his reason; and St. Bernard says, the sin ('it is true) may be taken away by
Baptism, but to work a complete cure, that we feel no spice, nor itching of the
infection, is in a manner impossible; at least it requires a long course of
remedies by a constant exercise and Trial in virtuous actions: For it is an
inordinate, and habitual concupiscence in the sensitive part, so radicated,
that it becomes (as it were) a portion of nature: Whence Seneca affirms,
virtues are rarely acquired without a Master, but we quickly become expert in
vice without the help of any Teacher, which shows the pernicious consequence of
original sin.

Our Penitent had found the bitterness of it by dear experience, and this
pushed him on to the reflection of a main cause of his misery; because he was
conceived in iniquities.

Yet our Penitent repines not at God's Justice herein, but submits to this
smart doom, acknowledging a just retaliation; that since the Soul had been
disobedient to her Creator, the Body in requital should rise up in rebellion
against her, and punish her by the same Engines she had made use off in her
prevarication; he does not scan the motives why God should punish so severely
many millions of innocent Souls, for the miscarriage of one Man, and though he
could satisfy himself, that since original Justice had been purchased to all
Adam's descendents by his obedience, it is not unreasonable to share by his
fall in the pain due to his transgression: Our Penitent I say waves all
argumentation, looks upon the sentence pronounced, and executed, and being a
Decree from God, it must be just: His sole hope is, that this disordered, and
depraved constitution in humane nature, will draw a more powerful aid, and
greater compassion toward a sinner when he fails, and still the burden of his
Song is, because he was conceived in iniquities.

St. Bernard seems unresolved, and full of perplexity, when he considers Man in
this tottering condition, it makes him confess, he knows not by what strange
bewitching means our will impared by sin is hampered in a kind of necessity,
and in such a manner, as neither the necessity because voluntary, can plead
excuse for our consent; nor the will being allured, can scarce break through
the necessity; for this necessity is in some sort voluntary, it is a kind of
amorous violence working by flattery, and flattering by force: Whence the Will
having once consented to sin, can hardly disengage her self, nor yet finds
reason enough to excuse what she has done.

Upon this score I wonder not to hear the plaining note of Job. Lord I suffer
violence, it is only you who impose the necessity can answer for me. And a
little after he cries, O thou Ruler of men, why have thou set me against thee;
all which shows the sad State of man wrought by original sin, if left to
himself: for he was conceived in iniquities.

Philo the Jew speaking of Sin gives it a Term of infinity, that being once set
a flame can never be extinguished: he calls it an immortal evil, by no death,
or desolation to be destroyed. The truth of this Philosophy who finds not in
himself, that albeit Baptism has cleared the channel, so as the streams of
grace may run, yet there are certain exhalations which issued from that
corruption always ready to fall, and embody with the current; so that if there
be not a continual care and sifting, it will be morally impossible to preserve
our Souls pure, and unstained.

Seneca says, there are certain vices which are obvious to every Eye, and to
which we may be led as it were by the hand; others there are that lie lurking,
and are hardly discerned, till fastened upon us; and these are the most
pernicious, because against them we can have nither open war, nor a secure
peace: And this truly is the genuine State of our natures from the corruption
wrought in us by sin, that we are not said to be clearly sick, or well; and
this fluctuancy (if rightly considered) must needs be a torment, because though
we happen not to fall, yet danger still threatens, so that if we tender our
happiness, we must stand upon our guard at all times, and places, because
neither Heaven, Paradise, Religious Cloister, or remote Hermitage is a secure
fence against sin; and a main reason to us the Children of Adam is, because in
iniquitatibus conceptus sum, we are conceived and born in iniquities.

Whilst we are environed and beset with such adversaries as our bad
inclinations, who watch (as I may say) but an advantage to undo us, surely we
ought to work out our Salvation with fear and trembling; St. Bernard was not
ignorant of Man's inconstancy when he gave this caution; Oh (says he) did we
but know, how small a portion of virtue we have, and how soon it vanishes, upon
how ticklish a foundation it rests, unless the giver by a continued flux of
Grace secure it to us, we would not so easily imbark our selves into dangerous
occasions, for to indulge our senses, and to arm our Enemies, is the same, but
a strange policy. How many who have thought themselves like Cedars elevated to
a high pitch of virtue, by a presumption of their own strength through
ignorance of humane frailty, and a Supine negligence, rashly engaging
themselves in hazardous Trials, have been ignominiously blasted, and reduced to
the condition of a contemptible shrub.

Lucifer enamoured of his own perfections, and aspiring to a parity with God,
became the most abject of Creatures. St. Peter promising wonders of his
constant Fidelity, sufficiently testified by his shameful denial; what Man is
in his own nature without the support of Grace.

Our Penitent comes in also for a sad example, and hopes it will serve at least
for a monument to Posterity, that they may reflect what Man is from the instant
of his conception, and however he may be raised and enobled by God's favors,
yet in his 103. Psalm, he tells what he must trust to when left to himself.
Auferes spiritum eorum and deficient, and in pulverem suum revertentur; upon
the subtraction of thy Spirit, O Lord we sink; and resolve into the dust from
whence we came, all covered, and besmeared with the stains of sin.

St. Austin says, because Man did not what he could and might have done, now
he has a desire to that he cannot perform; losing by a will of malice the
power of doing good. Hence St. Paul become as it were a captive cries, the evil
I would not now I do, truly it is an expression which might terrify, were it
not that a little he confesses, there is a power of grace which contradicts
this predominancy of nature, and therefore in the Sixth Chapter to the Romans,
he warns us not to let sin reign in our mortal Bodies; intimating hereby, the
seeds of tumults and seditions be sowed within us, yet we have also arms, and
strength sufficient (if we adhere to God) to crush, and frustrate all their
insolences: So true it is that Man cannot be injured but by himself, to whom
alone he owns his ruin if he perish.

Thus the life of Man is become a warfare upon Earth, the Seat of many a
contest, and strife; the sensitive part haling him one way, reason another, and
this by a just Decree of Heaven, that since he would not have peace with God,
he should have war brought to his own doors, and feel it within himself. Now
to come off clear, and safe amidst so many hurley burleys, requires no small
dexterity and courage: It minds me of Agesilaus answer to his friend who
importuned him not to remove his Camp, though necessity urged it; because he
was sick, and could not without much pain endure any motion; whereat Agesilaus
all perplexed what to do cries, O how hard a thing is it to be wise, and yet
compassionate. So our sensitive part made treacherous by sin, still makes its
moan, fawns, solicits with importunity; and if the Will never so little
condescend, Man is presently lost in sensual pleasures.

Our Penitent had felt the smart of this Shipwreck, how soon he was overthrown
by a little dalliance; and therefore exposes to the view of his Judge the
source from whence he springs, and hopes since he knows his brittle substance,
it may plead some inducement unto mercy, at least to a mitigation of his
penalty; upon this score he proclaims, behold I am conceived in iniquities.

The Application.
In imitation of our holy Penitent we ought seriously to reflect upon the sad
plight of humane nature wounded by original sin; so depressed and made feeble,
as most Divines affirm, we cannot in any vehement temptation prove victorious
without a special assistance from Heaven: For you must know, though the Will
have an absolute command over the sensitive part, yet if the object be present
and very delightful or afflictive, it is not in the Will's power to suppress
the contentment, or anguish derived from thence to the imagination: Wherefore
spiritual Men give these Rules, that we remove what we can the Object beloved,
or hated from our sight, senses, imagination and thoughts; next, that we
consider the little of pleasure, and multiplicity of defects which usually
attend the objects of a sensual love; all which shows there is no reliance upon
our own temper, and after we have practiced all evasions to decline an
engagement; the success (if put to the Test) must be expected from that all
powerful hand which never fails to shield the humble in the most hazzardous and
dangerous attempts. It is humility then must crown us with Laurels;

Amen.
CHAP. XII.
Et in peccatis concepit me Matter mea,

And my Mother has conceived me in Sin.


OUr Penitent thinks it not enough to display his own misery, unless he relate
also the condition of his Mother at the instant of his conception, and he
expresses it so as if she yet groaned under the burden of original sin, when
she conceived of him; and my Mother (says he) conceived me in sin: That is,
had the same stains which defiled me at the First instant of my Being.

As to this you must know in the old Law was instituted a remedy against
original sin for Women as well as Men. For from the Creation of the World to
Abraham's time (when First circumcision was commanded) which was above Two
thousand years, we find nothing set down for the expiation of this hereditary
guilt, yet doubtless as that lineal contagion was never interrupted, no more
was there ever wanting a means ordained by Heaven to disengage us from it; so
that it is probable after the precept of circumcision, the same remedy was
continued on for women, and it is thought it consisted in some particular
Sacrifice, though the specifical nature of the Sacrifice, or ceremony be not
laid open to us: Hence it is beyond dispute, all were cleansed from this
contamination, and therefore our Penitent means not by this word (sin) Original
sin, but the penalty, and unhappy consequences of that sin, which are hunger,
thirst, sickness, and all other afflictions annexed to a mortal life all which
took not their rise but from Adam's transgression: He therefore casts this
glance upon his Mothers condition to quiet himself, that if the plant from
whence he springs be beset with thorns, he must not think to be decked with
roses; and if it be decreed she must breed, and deliver him amidst the horrid
throws of her labor, he must not think to pass the rest of his life without a
sweaty brow, and a heart seasoned with cares.

Man no sooner peeps into the World, than he speaks his own misery, and
prophecies by his weeping notes this future condition; being grown up he finds
himself engaged in a perpetual conflict between hope and fear: For if he be so
happy as to live well, yet it must be in the midst of temptations, which oblige
him still to have his arms in hand, and dangers threatening from all sides
exclude security, or rest; so that in all events, Labor and Apprehensions are
his inseparable mates.

St. Paul exhorting us to wisdom, tells us the means to purchase it, by
redeeming our time; and gives this reason, because the days are evil: He
reflects sure upon those delicious hours we might have spent in Paradise, and
which are not to be regained but by actions quite opposite to the cause of our
Exile from thence: Our First Parent valued more the satisfaction of his sensual
appetite, or a complacent humor toward his Wife, than he did all the pure
delights; without any mixture of grief, or repentance, he might have enjoyed
for many years: To recover then in some sort those years and lasting joys, we
must here denounce war against our senses, denying them the least contentment;
we must drag our Bodies after us, as a slave would do his Chain, that by this
subjection we may preserve our obedience untouched to our Creator; and let our
Soul which naturally covets Eternity, deliciate her self in ravishments proper
to her spiritual substance; by this means we may strike off all the arrears of
Time, which the Apostle so seriously recommends unto us.

Now for the reason why he puts us upon this task of good Husbandry to repair
our losses; because the days are evil: St. Austin tells us, there are two
things (says he) which give birth to these our unfortunate days; One, the
common misery of Mankind derived from Adam's sin: For cast your thoughts on the
Mass of things created, and you will find none so indigent, so unsatisfyed, and
reduced to such straights as Man; other Creatures are no sooner brought into
the World, but nature gives them a capacity of helping themselves; Man after he
is born for many years has his understanding so tied up, that he resembles a
mere Brute only surpassed by them in an industry to preserve natural life;
other Creatures find here those objects which quiet all their motions; the
elementary Bodies meet with their Centers which settle them in a full repose;
the natural appetite of Beasts encounters that which satiates and gluts all
their avidities; plants grow to a certain greatness proper to their species:
Man only is the unsatisfyed Being upon Earth, for his understanding elevates
his thoughts above the Heavens, and all the powers of nature; his will frames
infinitely more desires than the World has perfections; so that there being
found no Object upon Earth adequately proportioned to the vast capacity of his
Soul, it is necessary he still languish here in a State of dissatisfaction.

This casts him upon so many shelves of misery, and makes him restless, hoping
still to find something to allay his desires: Sometimes he fancies riches would
do it, but finding them ordained to the purchase of other things, it cannot be
a sovereign good; thence he flies to honor, and observing that also to depend
upon the breath and will of another; he fastens on beauty, this likewise he
perceives to fade, and perish by a thousand accidents; this invites him to the
acquisition of knowledge, and after many a toilsome hour he finds only this
proficiency, how little we are capable of, that the least plant of the Earth
will puzzle and confront all his acquired Notions to render the true virtues of
it: Thus he passes on from the Essay of one delight to another, still as
unwearied, as unsatisfyed; and why all this? But because my Mother has
conceived me in sin: For my Mother conceiving me in sin, received by
inheritance the doom of Death, and of miseries consequent to a mortal Life, and
so cannot but convey the like direful effects to her posterity.

Timon an Orator of Athens was wont to deliver so pathetically the miseries of
Man in this Life, that after his Oration which he held forth in public, it was
usual for many of his Audience to hasten their passage unto Death by a course
of violence, some by precipices, others by water, some by poison, others by a
poniard, or halter: In fine, they regarded not much the means, so it might but
have the effect; that is, to rid them from the Calamities to be sustained in
this life. In a word, his Eloquence wrought so many Tragedies, that the Senate
was feign to make a recluse of him, that by sequestring him from humane Society
they might prevent the destruction of Mankind.

This person was an Infidel who considered only Man's corporal necessities,
together with his failings in order to moral virtues, and if from this Ground
he could draw such efficacious persuasions, what would he have done with the
addition of our Penitent's Faith, which teaches that eternal felicity, or
misery depend upon our actions here; that we lie under the Obligation of many
positive precepts, against whose observance are laid continual Ambuscado's,
both from the malice of Hell, deceit of the World, and our own bad
inclinations; that in the midst of these imminent dangers we steer our Course
to an Eternity of Joys, or Pain: What Energy I say, would this consideration
add to the draught of our misery, when we not only suffer here, but suffer with
so much hazard of incurring the doom of Torments without end.

Ah blame not then our Penitent, if he set before his Eyes, and is willing also
the petitioned should glance upon his condition in this state of mortality; his
own reflections will serve to keep him in a wary humility checked with the
frailties and inconstancy of his own nature; the notice also his dear Creator
may take of what mould he is made, will stand (he hopes) in good stead, for he
knows him so inclinable to pardon, that (if it may be said with reverence) he
lies at catch for an opportunity to save us, and if the least hold be given, he
presently fastens upon it, and hastens away (like a Soldier laden with a rich
booty, of which he fears the reprisal) till he brings us to a place of
security, where we shall have no more reason to fear the irregular motions of
corrupt nature, no more to vent in sadness; And my Mother has conceived me in
sin.

Holy Job that prodigy of humane Constancy amidst the smartest Trials was yet
so sensible of Man's misery in this life, as to fall with bitterness upon the
very day wherein he was brought forth, wishing it might perish, and never be
reckoned amongst days in the course of the Zodiac; Nay he goes so far that
he involves in his Anathema's every circumstance which concurred to his
Conception, or Nativity. Expositors of Scripture excuse these maledictions in
Job, and free them from sin upon this score, that he weighing the disproportion
of Man's desires, unto the objects he encounters in this life, which hold him
in a continued disquiet; how naturally he sets his heart on riches, honor,
beauty and other perishable goods, with what difficulty they are attained, with
more preserved, and with little satisfaction possessed: Amidst these pensive
Meditations beholding himself in the extremity of affliction, his sensitive
part crushed even to nothing, brake forth into this seeming rage, as to fly at
every thing that had a hand in leading him to so much misery: If this pattern
of virtue might be allowed such Salleys that speak so much heat, without any
derogation from his innocence, upon the mere consideration of that high pitch
of distresses wherein he was plunged. Our Penitent having been made a prey to
sin and frailty may doubtless with all submissiveness (as he does) expose his
Nakedness, as cast into the World without arms, beset with Enemies bent upon
his destruction both at home and abroad* and in this plight all he can say for
himself is; my Mother has conceived me in sin.

The Application.
We are here to deplore with our Penitent the sad consequences or penalties of
original sin: First, it is from thence that Men become Enemies to one another;
without this sin, we had known no Tyrants, Robbers by Sea or Land, no
corruption in Officers, no oppression nor injury from any person: From hence it
is, that the Beasts of the Earth, and Fowl of the Air, as if absolved from
their Fidelity, are in a manner no more awed by the Majesty of Man's Face. The
Elements, malignant Planets, and other insensible Creatures, as if let loose to
our destruction, occasion an infinity of disasters unto us: It is from hence we
are stupid in our own concerns, that being in a condition even beyond
imagination dangerous, we yet sport, and vainly pursue our pleasures, as if all
things were according to our wish. It is from hence we are filled with
self-love, pusillanimous in struggling with vice, inordinate in our pursuit of
fading objects, never satisfied with our state; and always seeking a change:
Our senses distract us from the meditation of heavenly things, our fancy taken
up with illusions, disturb our sleep; and after a thousand other
discommodities, and infirmities which usher Death, at last it comes to resolve
us into corruption, worms, dust, and as it were to nothing; and all this,
because my Mother has conceived me in sin: Ah let us therefore submit our
selves under the powerful hand of God, who alone is able to conclude all our
misery in Beatitude;

Amen.
CHAP. XIII.
Ecce enim veritatem dilexisti,

For behold thou have loved Truth.


OUr Penitent having dissected the Anatomy of Man, and left no Cranny,
whereinto misery might creep, undisplaid: Now seems to Apologize for his
discovery, and pleads for excuse God's love to truth: And in this point he
believes he has discharged his duty; nor does it a little satisfy him to have
done it, since it is the only thing he can now perform to repair the failing in
his duty.

First he has made an ingenuous confession, ripping up every thought that
could any ways entrench upon God's holy Law, and having thus emptied his
unhappy store, without the concealment of the least corrupted grain, hear what
he expects in return of this his faithful Narrative, or rather what a Sequel
depends upon it. Dixi confitebar injustitiam meam Domino, and tu remisisti
impietatem peccati mei; no sooner, says he, had I pronounced that I would lay
open my iniquities, but I found my shackles unloosned, and the impiety of my
sin wholly rased out; whence we may see how the mere intention of doing well
never falls to the ground unrewarded: Which imports, God presumes we will not
trifle with him, and therefore at the least overture of rendering a just account
of our misdeeds, he makes us no more impious; that is, takes away all the
obstacles to Remission, as impenitency, obduration, habitual impression of
evil, and the like; So that if we keep touch in our promise, he will be
faithful in completing his act of grace; because dilexisti veritatem, thou
have loved truth.

Hugo Cardinal prescribes unto us verity under three considerations; that is, a
verity of life, a verity of Doctrine, and a verity of Justice.

Verity of life consists in a conformity with those Laws which God and Nature
have set down for the Rule of our actions, this our blessed Savior
sufficiently asserts, when he gives the lie to him who pretends to love God,
and yet not observes his commands.

St. Thomas says, there is a law eternal residing in the Divine intellect, by
which the World is governed, and that humane laws are more or less just, as
they participate of this eternal rule: Hence our life if not squared out by
this directive original, must needs wander, fall into error, nor can be called
a life of verity; nay I know not whether we may call it a life, since
Lactantius affirms, that whosoever strayes out of this line, flies from
himself, despises humane nature, and consequently will suffer the torture of an
erroneous conscience (which is not small) though other punishments escape him.

The First Principle then of a life of Truth, is to steer our Course in order
to this universal guiding spirit imprinted in us by the light of nature; next,
we are to look upon positive Laws, dictated by the Holy Ghost, and the
adorable example of our Lord Jesus whose life and actions were all directed to
our instruction: So that any structure erected upon this foundation, cannot
prove Sandy, nor fail the builders expectation.

We find in holy Scripture frequently eternal felicity promised as a reward to
good works; this the penny agreed on with those who wrought in the Vineyard
insinuates, no less does the Crown prepared for those who faithfully combat in
this life; the Triumph also of Resurrection speaks as much, assured to the
real, not ideal supporters of Christ's Cross: Nor is the name of Christian
given us as bare lookers on, but because actually made a spectacle to God;
Angels, and Men. By acts therefore of Temperance, Patience, Humility,
Resignation, and other Christian virtues, we shake off (as it were) our old
Natures, and become a new production created in Justice and Truth, and so
become the object of God's Love; because Veritatem dilexisti, he has ever
loved Truth.

If we look upon the unwearied labors of Men in pursuit of what may render
them happy in this life, we shall find Truth to be the main scope of their aims.

First, it is a privilege of Man's Nature, there being no Creature in the
World but Man capable of truth; so that whilst we toil in the inquisition, we
comply with an appetite, or desire engrafted in us, which eggs us on toward
the thing that can only make us happy: For Beatitude is defined a joy in the
possession of truth unveiled, and clearly discovered to us.

Secondly, the delight we derive from the knowledge of Truths far surpasses any
other satisfaction we can have in this World, because depending merely upon the
intellect; it is depurated from the dreggs of sense, and so more intimately
affects, and transports the Soul: When by study we have attained to a
Demonstration, how quiet is the understanding, freed from all mists of doubts,
and uncertainty, and securely rests in the acquisition of the said truth.

Thirdly, if I covet a Friend, I propose in this design an object of truth, and
fidelity; and if I find a breast sealed with this sacred stamp, how pleasing a
Sanctuary is it, where in all distresses I fly as to an Oracle, unfolding the
secrets of my heart, resolving in that consistory between us two what to act,
and how to steer the course of my affairs: If the tie of marriage, leagues
between Nations, and Friendships are held sacred from the obligation they
impose upon us of sincerity, and truth; how much ought verity it self to be
valued, which gives life, and influence to this Union; since common reason
teaches the stream is not to be regarded with equal esteem to the Source from
whence it flows.

Lastly, what is the final End of all Arts and Sciences, whether they ransack
the bowels of the Earth, or survey the immense bodies of the Heavens, whether
they examine things past or present, but truth: it sets all Men on work, and
can alone render them satisfied, so that it may well be defined, the source of
motion and rest.

Our Penitent having thus run over the vast extent of truth, and observed how
it animates the actions of Men, takes occasion from thence to adore God's holy
Providence; that since he has obliged us to a precept of confessing, and
acknowledging our failings with all integrity, and fixed it as the sole means
to expiate our faults, he has advantaged us with so powerful an inclination
unto truth: For if we be born so impetuously toward the acquisition, the
exhibition of it must needs flow as it were naturally from us; and it is this
motive which invites him to so frequent a repetition of his offenses, lest he
should disguise any the lest tittle, for he knows as an exact particular of our
Sins, accompanied with a perfect sorrow, is very acceptable unto God, so it is
beneficial unto Man; the return of such an account being always an evenning of
all ^cores, an abolition of past Errors, and a complete act of grace. Upon
this consideration he is not affrighted, that his Sin shall be evidenced like
the Sun rays to the World, and of this harsh sentence to Nature, he himself
will be the Executioner, he he will pr^mulgate his enormities, and every
exhalation of infamy that shall arise from thence upon him, he will receive as
a blast of Zephir, because he speaks a truth animated with Repentance, a truth
which speaks What he has been, and what now he is, to wit, an imp of
perdition, and now is become a subject of mercy, because it is a Truth God will
ever own in a truly repenting heart: for veritatem dilexisti, it is essential
to one who has an Eternal love of Truth.

But it is not enough to trace the steps of of our Lord Jesus as far as he is
imitable by Man, unless we lay the Foundation of a life of verity, which is
done by embracing with a firm belief the Doctrine and Faith he taught and
delivered to us, for it is certain there is but one God and one truth.

First, we cannot deny this unchangeable quality of Faith to spring from God
the Primary Truth, since we owe him the Author of Civil and natural Laws, both
which are united, and receive efficacy from the bond of Religion, f^r all
things are created to the service of Man, and he to God's service; so that by
an act of Religious worship, the homage of all other Creatures are involved in
that of Man, and consequently Religion seems of created things the final End,
and ultimate disposition unto God.

Now the means to attain to this Truth cannot be by the strength of natural
reason, for the matter of credibility is above Nature, and Man by consenting to
an act of Faith is raised above himself, therefore it must be God moving us by
his Grace which draws the motions of our Will to submit to his revealed Truths.

The Centurion proclaims he believes, yet withal adds, help O Lord my
incredulity, which shows though he had done all that lay in his power, yet
something was wanting.

It remains then we render our selves fit subjects for the reception of so
noble a Guest, so rich a Donative as that of Faith, the way to this preparation
is, first, to practice a life of Truth that is moral virtues; next, to lay
aside all prejudice, that your understanding may work with out biass, or
restraint: thirdly, to examine the opinions of those whom the World has
unanimously reverenced for their knowledge, sanctity, and wisdom: fourthly, to
receive the Decrees of the Church as things sacred, since she is styled in Holy
Scripture, a pillar of truth, a spouse all immaculate, without any stain of
error; remembering also from what authority her infallible placits flow,
witness the Apostles in their first Synod at Jerusalem, who began with this
Form to publish their resolves; It is judged expedient by the Holy Ghost and by
us: Where you see that Divine Spirit still swayes and gives life to all
Articles of Faith; and indeed it was the closing farewell of our blessed Master
Christ Jesus, who promised to dispatch unto them his Disciples a Spirit of
Truth, to reside with and animate his Church to the Worlds end.

A verity of Justice is comprehended in that of integrity of life; it being the
very Nerves, and Sinews of humane Society, without which we should be like wild
Beasts in deserts, no leagues twixt Nations, no amities contracted amongst Men,
no traffic or commerce; so that in this sole lovely quality is seated the very
life and Soul of humane conversation: For behold thou have loved truth.

The Application.
We are further taught in this clause, that God has a true Being; that is, all
qualities suitable to a Divine Nature, as to be Spiritual, Independent,
Immortal, Omnipotent, all good, wise, merciful, Soveraignly happy, and a
thousand other attributes; so that he alone has the verity of a Divine Being.
Whatsoever is imaginable and worthy of God, this is in him in a Sovereign
degree of perfection; Nay whatever his infinite understanding can conceive,
this he enjoys without any diminution or reserve: So that when our Petitioner
points unto us how God loves truth, he means that he loves himself, and if
herein we play the apt Scholar, placing our affections on that inexhausted
source of Beauty, we shall then move according to the verity of humane Nature;
For our Being is to be reasonable, and what can more decipher the Truth of our
reason, than by a disdain of this World, to aspire unto him who is the final
end in which we are to rest, and for which we had our Being. May our hearts
then be ever fixed on this eternal verity;

Amen.
CHAP. XIV.
Incerta and occulta sapientiae tuae manifestasti mihi,

The uncertain, and hidden things of thy Wisdom thou have made known unto me.


WHilst our Penitent with delight descants upon God's love to truth, it were
(he thinks) impious in him to stifle this great truth, that he has called him
to his Council, unbreasted to him secret and hidden things, and enriched him
with the high Prerogative of Prophecy.

Ah what a change in this Holy King; not long before when Nathan laid before
him his offense under the shadow of a poor Man violenced in the depredation of
his only sheep, he is dull, unfolds not the mystery, and little dreams (though
it were plain enough) himself is pointed at, by which we may see what a mist of
ignorance, as well as other mischiefs sin draws along with it. But now he
transcends the limits of natural knowledge, owns an irradiation of supernatural
lights, and a capacity of discerning not only what is past, or present, but
what is to come, and this in the secret, and uncertain things of God's Wisdom.

It is true there is required in that person, who is made a repository of
Prophetic Truths, that he shine with integrity of life, have an absolute
command over his passions, and possess a Mind elevated and fitted to
contemplation. Yet God is not tied up to previous dispositions by degrees, but
can in a moment both prepare, and render perfect that party he designs for such
a dignity; as he has done in the person of King David, and so, as to make him
one of the most accomplished Prophets that ever was: For there is a great
disparity in prophetic irradiations, some are imperfect lights, and improperly
called Prophetic, as what may proceed from an evil spirit, or from nature, as
that of Pharaoh when he saw oxen, and Ears of Corn, not knowing from whence
that vision might come, or whether he was sleeping, waking, and the like.

Another degree more elevated is, when a ray is infused by which I certainly
comprehend that which I see only by a species imaginary, such is Joseph's case,
who had an assured knowledge of what he saw, that is, the signification of
them, whence he is more justly called a Prophet than Pharaoh, who only saw, and
knew not what they signified.

A Third degree more perfect is, when there are both an impression of species,
and sensible representations, as also an infused light, by which I can judge of
the verity of the thing displayed before me; as Daniel could tell the King his
Dream, and what it signified; for the Corporeal forms were fixed in his
Spirit, and the meaning of the^ revealed in Daniels Mind.

The last and noblest degree is, when a Truth is represented to us by species
intelligible, and a light infused Superadded, which enables me infallibly to
judge of what is represented by them, without any external medium of word,
fact, or imaginary Vision; and this last irradiation Cassiodorus ascribes to
David, whence he entitles him the most eminent amongst all the Prophets.

But it will more recreate us to know what are those uncertain, and hidden
things laid open to him, than the manner how it was done: Some opinionate it
was the Creation of the World, where the wisdom of God appears glorious in
the admirable reduction of a confused Chaos to light and order: In the
contrivance of the Heavens, that such vast, and numerous Bodies should keep
constant, and uninterrupted motion, without any jarring, or hindrance to one
another in their Rapid Course. In their Sovereign influences conveyed
incessantly to inferior things: In the prodigious fixation of the Earth,
poysed, and sustained by its own Center. In the rare virtue of its plants, in
the variety of Creatures in the Air, Earth, and Water. And above all in Man
the Epitome of the Universe, to see him sway as Sovereign, and by his reason to
quell the fury, strength, and cunning of the most savage beasts. To behold the
revolutions of Cities, Kingdoms, and Empires, the strange vicissitude of
humane things; to day a City swelling in pomp, and magnificence, not long after
become a fallow Field; an Emperor weeping in that there is no more Worlds to
conquer, has been seen to perish howling, dispatched away by a few dropps of
poison; on the other side, another is beheld drawn from a dunghill, set on a
throne, and to Reign vvrth that felicity as if Heaven and Earth were held in
fee to make him happy. Here a person drenched in a life of Sin, and impiety
upon a sudden becomes a Saint there, another endued with grace, and virtue,
whom the World Eyes not but with a kind of veneration, by a little presumption
of his own strength and merits, falls to nothing, and proves an Imp of
darkness. To contemplate I say all these works in Nature, all the strange
events of humane actions, and all managed by the Divine wisdom, so as to make a
Harmony to God's glory, and out of the clashing and thwarting malice of Men, to
draw good; who would not be ravished at such a prospect? And confess with
transports, they are truly secret and hidden effects (as to man) of an
all-seeing, inscrutable and increated wisdom. So that with unspeakable delight
our holy Penitent repeated often this Verse, the uncertain, and hidden things of
thy wisdom thou have revealed unto me.

Others (and more happily I believe) say, those communications were the
Incarnation, Nativity, Passion, and all the other mysteries which relate unto
the humanity of Christ; and doubtless the contemplation of those mysteries
clearly objected to him, could not but strangely regale his mind, to consider
an infinite Being from all Eternity Soveraignly happy, in the perfect enjoyment
of his blessed self, to be Hypostasiated in humane Nature, and that this
compositum of so many perfections should be born of a Virgin, have no other
palace then a poor stable, no other Courtiers then simple beasts, from whose
Breath he must borrow a little warmth to preserve him from the rigours of the
season, that a bloody design is hatched against him, to avoid which he must fly
by Night into Egypt, through Cold and other dangers, attended only by his
apprehensive Mother, and her faithful Coadjutour St. Joseph, amidst these
discomfortable reflections; surely our Holy Penitent failed not to remember the
homages done to him, by the Angels, and Kings, that he might see he still
intermixed the Splendor of his Divinity, with the Ecclipses wrought, and cast
on his Humanity.

From thence he carries on his thoughts to Christ's Sacred Passion, where he
lanches himself into an Ocean of misery; not a drop trickles down of his bloody
sweat, but it makes him sink; he distinctly ponders every blow lanced at him,
every scorn, and every Calumny: He numbers his weary steps, whilst he is haled
from one Tribunal to another, he foresees the shameful flight of his Apostles,
and how he is abandoned in distress by his nearest, and dearest Friends.

Thus he sifts every particular passage of that Sacred Tragedy, and were it not
he is sustained by the consideration of its immense Fruit, to wit, the
redemption of the perished World, he would have showed by his compassionating
Death, too much was revealed unto him, to be at once the Subject both of his
knowledge, and life.

Now that this expression of our Penitent does quadrate with these mysteries;
you must observe, that the second person of the blessed Trinity is styled the
Wisdom of the Father, because produced by an act of his understanding, and
though his Incarnation were certain as decreed from all eternity, and foretold
by many Prophets, yet it was uncertain as to the precise time, and secret as to
the manner of his coming, and particular occurrences of his life; it is true,
both were couched in some prophecy or other, but so obscurely that the most
learned could not dive into them, until he came himself to unread them by his
painful accomplishment, and fulfilling of them.

Again by the uncertain things of his wisdom imparted to him, he insinuates a
further knowledge as to this; that it is not known to any in this life, whether
they are worthy of love or hatred: Almighty God (by a special providence no
doubt) having kept this shut up from us, that whilst we lie under an awefull
fear, it might abate our pride, and presumption. Now the Clouds of this
uncertainty were dispersed as to him, assurance being given that his sin was
removed, and the Anathema annexed to it taken off, and what greater evidence
that he is readmitted into favor, than the entrusting secrets to him, than his
exemption from the Common Laws, set down by Providence for the conduct and
guidance of Mankind. These Reflections make him cherish with unspeakable
satisfaction his privileged notions, nor do they carry him to vanity, but to
bless the source from whence they flow, since gratitude exacts that tribute
from him, to whom thou have laid open the uncertain, and hidden things of thy
wisdom.

The Application.
Here we may observe, in what awe and terror our Holy Penitent remained after
his transgression; that though the Seal was set to his pardon, yet he thought
this gave him no right to his former prerogative, whose restitution he dares
not ask, he only presumed to repeat them to his dear Creator, that he might
read therein his ingratitude, who enriched with supernatural gifts, reserved
for his choice favorites, and by means of which endowments he might have
proved a saving Star to guide others to Heaven; yet he has not made use of
them but to inure the Author of them, and there wrought his Ruin, where he
might have erected to himself Trophies of glory; Next he made this Repetition,
that he might ruminate upon the sad consequences of sin; which so alters a Man
that God himself knows him not: This is manifest in the Gospel, where God said
to the foolish Virgins, and to those who had wrought miracles in his name;
Nescio vos, I know you not: Again, Adam after his sin seemed to be lost to God
who made enquiry after him; Adam where art thou? which imports, I placed thee
in prosperity, and content, but find thee now in wretchedness and misery. So
our Holy Penitent minds his dear God of the blessings he had once showred down
upon him, and being so signal, as few besides since the Worlds Creation could
boast of the like; he hopes, being now again admitted to his presence, he may
not only be revived in his memory, but restored to his former endearments, to
which he disposes himself by this bashful expression; thou have O Lord made me
happpy by the Communication of the secret and hidden things of thy wisdom.

CHAP. XV.
Asperges me Hyssopo, and mundabor,

Thou shall sprinkle me with Hysop, and I shall be cleansed.


OUr Holy Penitent replenished with a Prophetic Spirit, seems how to breath
nothing but Divine Truths, nothing which issues not from such inspired lights:
Behold wherefore he speaks at present in person of the Church, and forespeaks
the Economy God will practice in the guidance of her. Thou will sprinkle me
(says he) with Hysop; that is, pressures will fall upon me from all sides, for
it is proper to Hysop to be of a small growth, to take root in Stony and Rocky
places, and its virtue is Sovereign against tumors, and swellings.

First then, Christ beset his Church with Hysop, when he planted her in himself
the fruitful Womb of all her productions; hear his Lesson, Learn of me that am
meek, and humble of heart; from such a stock what can be expected but lowly
shrubs Hysop like; he instructs his Apostles to bear the innocence of Lambs
amidst ravenous Wolves, the simplicity of Doves amidst wilely Serpents; he
bids them overcome Tyrants by sufferings, opprobries, and contumelies by a
patient silence, the glory of great ones by humility, and the wealth of the
World by Poverty.

With these arms the wisdom, power and greatness of the World have been laid
prostrate, and the humble Cross of Christ erected in Triumph, Maugre the malice
of Hell and Idolators: After Nero, Decius, Seperus, Maximian, Diocletian had
raged, and breathed from their Nostrils, death and destruction to the harmless
little ones of Christ, affrighting them with fire, Wheels, Gridirons, Gibbets,
Lions, Vipers and innumerable other tortures, what was the event? Julian the
last and greatest persecutour, confesses he has lost the day, and that the
Contemptible Nazarean I remained Victorious.

St. Paul gives but a touch, yet a dexterous one, and represents to the life
the posture wherein God has founded his Church. God (says he) seems to have
marked our us Apostles unto Death, for we are made a spectacle to God, Angels,
and Men; we suffer hunger and thirst, we are reviled, and buffeted, we are
tossed up and down, hurried from one Tribunal to another, we are laden with
maledictions, and in requital distribute blessings, we are plied with
persecution, but sustain; we have blasphemies thrown at us, yet we pray, and
petition in behalf of the Authors; in fine, we are looked upon as the soum of
Mankind, and become as the mockery of the World.

Behold the Epitome of a life Apostolical, and the maxims to which the
Primitive Christians conformed themselves, by which you may judge how pat the
allusion of Hysop is applied to the Church; for what is more abject, and
despicable than the institute of Christianity, nay it was the usual argument of
Infidels, toward any person of eminency embracing Christian Religion, to
reproach them with the baseness and contemptibility of it.

The Rocky foundation also which gives life to the Hysops Root, is no less
suitable, if you reflect upon the promises made to St. Paul when first he
listed himself under Christ's banner: Ananias was to be the bearer of his
letters Pattents, the substance of them was, that he should see what sufferings
he must wade through for his Name, and how punctual God was in the
accomplishment of his word, his own Epistles sufficiently declare; that from
the time of his conversion, he had constant supplies of tribulations, from his
unwearied preaching of the Gospel, unto the Snares and malice of false
accusations; from thence to Prisons, then to Chains, Opprobries, and lastly, to
a public Death in the Capital City of the World.

Now that he alone was not doomed to these sad Catastropheys, he tells us into
what confusion poor Christians were universally in all places cast; some
lurking in Dens, others flying into deserts, some groaning under want, others
exposed to scorn, and contempt; of whom the World (says he) was not worthy;
then he enumerates a multiplicity of horrid tortures which ushered their
ignominious deaths: And these outrages were not confined to any one Province,
or City, but executed throughout the whole habitable World; and to that height,
as one day was witness of a hundred thousand who were Sacrificed by the rage of
Tyrants; nay they fancied their work so completely finished, that Trophies were
erected with this Inscription, To the August Caesar Diocletian, by whom
Christian Religion is abolished, and the worship of the God's improved.

These were the flinty soyls which gave life, and growth to Christian Religion;
amidst these stony trials the Church has still kept herself firmly rooted, in
despite of all the storms, tempests, and whirlwinds of persecution.

The third property of Hysop (that it is medicinal) may justly be consigned to
the furious assaults framed and put in Execution against the Church, as St.
Austin says, Tyrants could never by obsequiousness and favor have so much
contributed to the good of Martyrs, as they did by their bloud-thirsting
cruelties: St. Paul glories in his tribulations, and makes of them a ladder to
lead him as it were by degrees unto Christian perfection; whither he is no
sooner arrived, but his thoughts are filled with the expectation of a reward:
Nay he terms it a Crown of Justice as if every stroke of Persecution had
contributed to the making up of his Crown, unto which he had a right, and just
claim, since hammered and completed by his patient sufferings. This same
Apostle bids the Hebrews look back upon those past days wherein they had
sustained immense Combats for the name of Christ, as if those pleasing
remembrances had been able to charm the most bitter afflictions: Nay he thinks
it a happiness when no burden was laid upon themselves, if they did but
converse, and hold Society with the oppressed, as if from them must needs issue
forth some communication of what is good.

When our blessed Savior had foretold to his Disciples the scandals of his
passion, and how the World would allot the same measure to them, he gives the
reason why these sharp decrees are made, because (says he) you should fly to
me for Sanctuary, and only within my arms seek consolation, and security: St.
Austin conformably to this Doctrine confesses Job to have lost all that God had
given him, yet he retained him from whom he had all; to wit, God our Lord
(says he) has given, our Lord has taken away, the name of our Lord be
praised. Afterward St. Austin rapt as it were into admiration cries; behold a
Man with a Body mangled, yet entire, full of corruption, yet comely, wounded,
yet without a sore, sprawling on a dunghill, yet powerful in heaven: Hence you
may gather the exuberant Fruit of this sprinkled Hysop, not a drop of it falls,
which carries not along with it a virtue, that transcends the malignity of
persecution, and the rage of Tyrants.

Who would then repine at adversity, since Heaven has laid it as the
foundation, at least medium to eternal felicity. You that are poor tell me what
you do want if you have God; and the rich what possess they without God. St.
Paul relates how the Hebrews with joy sustained the rapine of their goods,
because they knew there is a more lasting, and incomparably better inheritance
prepared for them.

You that bewail the loss of a Friend, remember he was not born to live always
here, and perhaps was taken away lest malice might have seized him: Besides, if
you truly love God, you cannot be afflicted at your Friends Death; since you
know, if he perish not to God, he cannot perish to you; and he alone can never
be deprived of what is dear to him who makes God the Center of his happiness,
and places all that is precious in him, since he is not lost unless we will.

If you groan under an infirm constitution know, you should not desire to enjoy
life, but according to the tenor of its grant; we breath under constellations
which by their several influences create different humors, and distempers, and
this is convenient to the good of the Universe, unto which particular and
private interests must give place. Besides, we learn by experience, that since
we can break and thwart our inclinations upon the score of health; we may
likewise do it from the motive of virtue and piety, we hold it an act of
Religion to wean our selves from sensual delights for the love of God; let then
resignation make that voluntary, which accident, or some providential decree
has reduced to a necessity: you ought not therefore to calumniate this or that
cause of your sickness, but take it as a present from a most merciful and
benign Parent, ordained either for chastisement of your sins, or trial of your
virtue; this flatters not the unhappy humor of Avarice, Ambition, Lubricity,
and the like; every access of a Fever or other smart pain, sets before us the
lively Image of mortality, and gives assurance we must one day quit all our
Wordly interests.

It were not amiss also, whilst our indisposition renders us unfit for humane
Society, that we fancy our selves as dead, and consider what will be done in
the World without us; it subsisted before we were, so will it remain when we
are gone: Who now seem so united in friendship, that the thought of separation
is horrid as Death, will when a few days are slipped over after your Funeral,
seek other alliances, and if by chance your memory be revived by any Casual
discourse, they will afford you a sigh perhaps, and say you were good, or wise,
or valiant, or fair, or some such Epethite you might deserve; and is this worth
all the labors and hazzards we run amidst a Million of designs in this
uncertain life? how blessed then is that sickness whose pains lead to
Salvation, and how fortunate that war which ends in eternal peace!

If the walls of a Prison affright, propose to your self those immense spaces
above the Heavens designed as a praemium of your restraint; it is true for the
present you are deprived of a little fresh Air, and of some other contentments
depending on Liberty, but he that trafficks for so great a purchase as eternal
felicity, may well venture something on the score of persecution: How many
disasters and Ambuscado's of Enemies have been avoided by Captivity, what a
change has it wrought in many, who by a necessity of Recollection, have become
supereminent Contemplatives, and enlarged their Minds by Spiritual
entertainments, more than they could forfeit by the denial of their Bodies
liberty: You are there free from Envy, or detraction, it being rare to find
malice, or cruelty to rage upon the prostrate: A life in such a place is
seldom attended on by scandals, because adversity is the Companion; a Mistress
excelling in the ways, and maxims of goodness: Nay could we fancy the World
(as really it is) but a Prison, we should rather think we have made an escape
from Thraldom, than lost our liberties.

Thus we see the sprinklings of Hysop, that is, the Seeds of Humility, Patience
and Constancy in the profession of Christ, have furnished the Church Universal
with Champions, and every her particular Soldier in all encounters with Rules,
which if exactly observed cannot but end in Glory: So that our Penitent hopes,
if once bathed in these purifying streams, he shall be cleansed, and become an
Object pleasing to the all-pure-Eye of his Creator: Wherefore with Reason he
inserts this clause, sprinkle me with Hysop and I shall be cleansed.

The Application.
In imitation of our Holy Penitent. we are to covet the bitter draughts of
contradictions in this life, denying our Will what sensuality prompts us to,
that we may have a full swinge of our desires in the vast course of Eternity;
tribulation is the securest clue to be directed by, in ease and pleasure,
virtue must needs run a great risque; Fire in its own Sphere conserves it self
without any fuel to maintain it, so virtue would have done in Paradise, where
the Goods of the Body concurred with those of the Soul, but this Concord was
dissolved by sin. St. Ambrose likewise says of Job, that he had showed himself
a valiant commander in peace, but not a conqueror in War, and that his
troubles and afflictions purchased unto him the Palms of a complete Victory:
For Earthly Crowns are made of Gold, but Heavenly Diadems of the Thorns of
tribulation. Ah then let us aspire after these.

Amen.
CHAP. XVI.
Lavabis me, and super nivem dealbabor,

Thou will wash me, and I shall be whiter than Snow.


OUr Holy Prophet thus purified, and calcined in the Furnace of adversity will
not rest there, but is ambitious of a further sublimation, he beholds himself
much refined, the dross of many frailties separated from him by temporal
chastisements, and in this harsh School he has learnt a profitable Lesson;
which is, not to advance in a spiritual Course is to loose ground; wherefore
these sprinkling dews of Grace do not satisfy, he must be washed over and
all-bathed in streams of Martyrdom; this will give him a tincture outvying the
purity of Snow; this will consummate all his labors, and set on him the last
and highest stroke of perfection. Thou will wash me, and I shall be whiter than
Snow.

It is pleasant to read Seneca, and other Philosophers in this point of
Sacrificing life for a public interest, or on the score of friendship; they
always place this action amongst the most Heroic, whereof Man is capable in
this life. The Romans had several solemnities to eternize the memory of such as
lost their lives in the service of the Republic. The Graecians employed all
their Eloquence in setting out the Glory of those who dyed for their Country,
believing that Souls separated from the Body upon such a score, were depurated
and free from the mixture of any inordinate desires, or affections; and
consequently are disposed to receive the highest beatitude that a created
substance can attain unto. Xamolxis of Greece for his Wisdom was by the
Egyptians ranked amongst the gods, whose memory to the Graecians was so Sacred,
that yearly they sent one of their most learned Doctors to be Sacrificed
before his Shrine, and at his departure toward Egypt, the other Collegiate
Philosophers were all oppressed with grief, each one repining he was not worthy
to be chosen for so glorious a design. The reason why this Opinion grew so
prevalent amongst them was, that love and respect is best expressed by an act
of homage and Sacrifice, now by the oblation of life, we at once give up all
our interests of honor, pleasure, or what ever we can pretend to in this
World, and witness in that action, we more value the cause for which we suffer,
than our own Being, and in a manner do declare the person for whom we dye, to
have a perfect Dominion over us, and destroying our selves would insinuate that
we are nothing, at least willing to become nothing; so we may but pay to the
Object of our loves the tribute of glory and greatness.

The generous Heart of our Petitioner had trampled under his Feet the Enemies
of God's people, he had purchased many Laurels by his active fortitude; and
passing from thence to the passive part, he had manifested by his patience, and
perseverance, he wanted not this more noble branch of fortitude; and that he
might crown all his victories, he now contracts all the circumstances of a
complete magnanimity in this Petition, that he might give up his life, and make
a public satisfaction for the injury done by his Exorbitancies to his dear
Creator. Thou will wash me, and I shall be whiter than Snow.

He knew well this supereminent degree of fortitude, which gives a check to
Audacity, nor permits its Salleys beyond the limits of a just moderation, and
which charms likewise the retiring spirits of fear, and makes them return to
their first stations, there to stand upon the defensive, is a virtue too
sublime for Man, if considered within the verge of his natural force, and
abilities: For martyrdom implies a profession of the true Faith which none
without a divine Aid can perform: It being necessary to an Act of Salvation,
that it be accompanied with the power and means of Grace, wherefore he places
the Energy of this Action in the Author of Grace, and cries; O God, if you will
wash me, that is, if you will shower down the dew of your Grace, I will dispose
my Soul for the reception, and so manage the gift; as every reproach, every
stroke of the Executioner, every drop of Blood drawn from my Veins, shall have
its effect of expiation, to cleanse my stains, to purify my Soul, and give it a
whiteness which will surpass that of Snow.

Again though the Psalms of this victory be never so precious; yet unless a
storm of Tyranny convey them to him, he can only languish in desire: For the
infliction of Death must come from another hand, his part in this combat must
be only to accept, and suffer: It Is true the Holy Ghost proclaims, that
violence must bear away the wreath of this immortality, but it is understood a
violence not so much active as passive: We must stoop to oppression, become a
play-game, and mockery of the World; we must tune forth the praises of our
Creator, more by expiring than speaking, and from these black mixtures of
cruelty, will result, as from the Phoenix ashes, a production far beyond what
we could even hope for in recompense. You shall wash me, and I shall be whiter
than Snow.

We must not doubt but the Soul of our Petitioner ambitious of perfection, had
all the internal affections which move to this end, as charity, obedience,
religion, faith, hope, and an heroic fortitude. The first to wit charity
raises him to acts of love, by which God is more prizable to him, than his own
life, or any other thing imaginable: Next, this amorous contemplation was
accompanied with a perfect submission to the decrees of Heaven whilst Semei
threw stones, and curses at him, he kept close to this principle, forbidding
any punishment to the Actour, lest (says he) God may have ordained it for his
trial or chastisement of his Sins; and what he Wills is just, and ought to be
the Rule of our obedience without any dispute, or haesitation. The third
ingredient to this dye of purity, is Religion; by which we are taught to pay
the tribute of excellency and respect unto God, as the Sovereign Author, and
Primogenial Source of all Beings; other Creatures who cannot comprehend the
infinite perfections essentially seated in God, have a right that their wants
be supplied by our Piety; so that we have a duty of acknowledgement not only
for our selves, but in behalf of every thing created to our Service; by an act
then of Religion we return our own Being, and all other Beings likewise of the
whole World into his Hands from whence they came, to be disposed off as he
pleases, that as we hold it from him, so we would not enjoy it but for him, and
this from two considerations; the one, of God's immense greatness and Majesty,
the other of our own smalness, or rather nothing; as to the one, our Penitent
defies any Being to compare with God, he confesses the Earth, Seas, and Heavens
lie at his beck; that his Enemies he disperses, as the Sun does the Shades of
Night, and having thus exalted his unmeasured greatness, he then religiously
exposes himself before him, acknowledges he is a worm, and not a man; and if a
man, the very outcast, and opprobry of Mankind: He presumes to question God
what man is, that he should daign him a glance of his careful Eye; and declares
his opinion that he is but a piece of vanity, an empty outside, a heap of
dust, and therefore it is but just in him to honor the Majesty of God by a
profusion of what he enjoyes, and that his Being can never be put to a better
use than by annihilating it self (if possibly) to witness by that submission
the immense perfections of his Creator.

His fortitude in attempting great things needs no dilucidation, the Sunbeams
are not more conspicuous; what Nation has not received the History of his
deeds together with the tidings of Christianity, where also is set forth his
patience in adversity, in many rebellions unnatural stratagems, and implacable
hatred of Saul against him.

For his Faith in Christ, amongst all the Prophecies of a Messiah his Psalms
excel in delineating, and issuing a lively Character of all the passages of
his passion: So that all these virtues could not spring but from a hope of
enjoying one day that Sovereign good, for whose acquisition he was ready to
Seal all these actions with his blood and life.

I confess this tincture of Snow to arise from a bloody stream might seem a
wrested interpretation, were it not that a passage in the Apocalips does clear
it, where it is said; they whitened their stoles in the blood of the Lamb; that
is, the effect of this ablution gives innocence, wipes off like Baptism all
the spots of Guilt, or Pain, so that once dipped in this Lavatory, he may
justly promise to himself a lovely Grain far surpassing that of Snow.

Wonder not then if our Petitioner touched with a sense of his transgressions,
and frighted with the memory of that condition wherein he had been plunged,
should aim at the glorious Palms of martyrdom both to secure his pardon,
purchase a complete abolition of his Faults, and make himself a perpetual
Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving to his dear Creator. Lord thou will wash
me, and I shall be whiter than Snow.

The Application.
Let us by the example of our Penitent thirst after these purifying streams,
one boisterous billow of Persecution carried home to the struggling Patient,
will have more virtue than all the waters of Jordan; St. Gregory says, that
the departing of the Body from the Soul is but a shadow, but the departing of a
Soul from God is a sad Truth: And as a shadow is refreshing in Summer, so is
Death to the Righteous, especially if voluntarily accepted, and inflicted upon
the account of a pious cause. But since this Crown is out of our reach, and
depends upon another severity, we must be thus severe to our selves, as to put
on an undaunted look against any difficulty which may obstruct our Salvation,
or advancement to p^fection, and resolve to suffer or overcome them, either of
which we may, by the aid of Grace never wanting at a pinch. Next, we must
rejoice when harassed with adversities, it is St Luke's declaration of the
Apostles, that they returned from Tribunal seats with joy, having been made
worthy to be there reviled and scorned for the name of Christ; and truly Saints
have seemed to measure their hopes of glory, according to the proportion of
their sufferings: Lastly, we are to expose our selves to hard and painful
things for the spiritual good of our Neighbor; if we strengthen our selves
with these arms of fortitude, we shall be fitted for that last and most
glorious proof of valor, at least secure an immense reward to our selves.

Amen.
CHAP. XVII.
Auditui meo dabis gaudium and laetitiam.

Thou will give unto my hearing joy and gladness.


WHen the Church proclaims the sin of Adam happy, in that it merited to have
such, and so great a Redeemer; Methinks it has some resemblance with this
clause of our Petitioner, where he promises to himself joy, and gladness; as if
they were a necessary consequence to repentance. In the precedent verse he
minds his Creator of the Rules he has set down to purchase innocence; to wit,
by temporal adversity, here he opens the secret of God's working with a
justified Soul, which is to fill her with jubilies, and consolation.

For when Almighty God enlightens our understanding to consider his greatness,
providence, goodness, and his other perfections; and when he gives a touch to
our Wills, imprinting in them holy impulses of fear, hope, love, and the like;
by which we are excited and enabled to frame and execute holy and pious
resolutions, he does not this by a way of violence, as a stone is taken up from
its Center, but by a way of sweetness, he governs and changes our inclinations,
if we do not prove too stubborn: So that the first step to our justification is
not made without the concurrence of our Wills; and questionless it is no small
subject of joy to reflect that we our selves have been Actours in this great
work of our justification; which exceeds the Creation of Heaven, Earth, and all
that is comprised in Nature; for though we owe to God all that we have, yet
that his liberality may take its desired effect, this he will have depend upon
us; to the end by working our Salvation, it might prove an honor and
satisfaction, in that we our selves have contributed something to it by the
consent of our free will, by which we can claim the actions we do to be our own.

The next branch of joy and gladness in a justified Soul, is the access of
grace, a supernatural form infused by God, by which we are raised to a
supernatural Being; that is to say, a new Being, more prizable than an
intellectula, or reasonable, than Angelical or Seraphical considered precisely
in the order of Nature: Because Grace gives a new birth to the Soul, and
communicates unto her a new Being which is called Divine; in that the Soul
receives from it a resemblance unto God after a manner extraordinary, whose
more perfect knowledge is reserved for the light of glory, which will make the
discovery unto us: All we can now say is, that no sooner this divine gift
inhabits our Souls, but we are designed to eternal beatitude: Almighty God
beholds us with an Eye of satisfaction, as his Children received into his
Family, as Solomon says, by grace we contract an eternal alliance with God.

St. Thomas styles Grace a participation of the Divine Nature; for what the
Divine Nature does in God, the same Grace by imitation does in a Soul; as the
Divine Nature is in God the cause of his most transcending actions; to wit,
love and union: So Grace in a Soul is the spring of glory, beatitude,
supernatural knowledge and heavenly affections, by which she regulates all her
works, according to integrity and holiness: Nay God obliges himself to give a
Soul that can plead the title of Grace, the Kingdom of Heaven, and possession
of eternal bliss.

No wonder then if after the sprinklings of Hysop, that is penitential tears,
our Petitioner, expects a Harmony of joy and gladness, since the divine quality
of Grace purchased by repentance is attended on by so many advantages: What
matter of joy to be spiritually regenerated, the Son of God, the Brother, and
Coheir with Jesus Christ! wherefore St. Leo says, this gift of being the Son
of God, to be authorized to call God Father, exceeds all his other
liberalities; for by generation a Father communicates his Nature to his Son,
producing him in species alike: So by Adoption, he that adopts gives unto a
stranger in desire and affection, what he is in himself, attributing unto him
the prerogative of a Son, entitling him to all his inheritance, the same as if
he were his Son by Nature; now what Man does to another out of affection, God
does in effect: For imprinting Grace in a Soul, he gives himself, and is really
in her; insomuch that were it possible, God could be not immense, Grace would
render him afresh present to and in the Soul.

Certainly if ever that saying was verified, where guilt has reigned, there
grace did yet more powerfully sway, it was in the person of our holy Petitioner
his raptures, and Enthusiastic throws, his prophetic notions; Nay God's own
Testimony of him, that Repentance had molded him even conformably to his own
Heart, sufficiently proved his Soul to float in floods of Grace, and
consequently must needs swell with a great portion of joy; therefore with just
reason he proclaims, thou will give unto my hearing joy and gladness.

Again this possession of Grace is accompanied with the expectation of a
Sovereign good: For the understanding enlightened by Faith, knows that Mans's
Beatitude is in God, that this Beatitude is promised him as his final end, and
the means to attain unto this End is by Grace, and acts of virtue; So that he
enjoyes it not but upon the terms of being one day eternally happy; this
certain expectation of Beatitude, St. Bonaventure calls the Anchor and basis of
Man in this life: It keeps him from dejection, placing still before his
thoughts an infinite good, and which is infallibly to be the abject of his
future acquisition; it choaks presumption, casting him upon the mediums
ordained to lead him to this end; it draws his affections from terrene things,
and raises them to God as the supreme object alone worthy to be loved, and
served.

What joy then to have our Wills carried on by this gift of hope, which
sweetly entertains us in the contemplation of Eternity, and this not as a thing
doubtful (for what would Cloud the severity of our comfort) but as a reward to
which we are entitled by grace, and of which by this virtue of hope we have an
earnest and pledge. St. Paul to the Hebrews prescribes hope as a means to
compass whatsoever we would have. Let us approach with confidence to the Throne
of Grace; as if we needed only a firm hope, to be able to scale the Throne of
God, and bear thence what so e're we desire.

St. Gregory observes, there is no pleasure in this World, which is not greater
in the expectation than fruition; by which we see what a strange Operation the
very hope of some temporal object has in us; what ravishments then must needs
proceed from a hope that is fixed on the source of perfections; and to have
this addition, that after our imaginations have proposed all the delights that
humane wit can frame, yet they fall infinitely short of those joys the Object
of a supernatural hope will discover unto us.

Blame not then our Petitioner if he give himself the assurance of joy and
gladness, when once his Soul shall be enriched with Grace, and divine hope
inspired into him; since their presence brings the highest satisfactions we are
capable off in this World.

I observe after Christ had declared the remission of St. Mary Magdalens
misdeeds, he bids her go in peace, to show she is no more impious: For as they
are strangers to repose, so rest and satisfaction are the natural effects of a
good conscience.

When the Thief on the Cross had obtained mercy, immediately follow the glad
tidings he should exchange that very day his Gibbet into a Paradise; St. Austin
had no sooner stepped into the Paths of penance, but he found himself
overwhelmed with joy which he thus describes. On a sudden (says he) it grew
delightful to me to be weaned from trifling pleasures, and what before I feared
to loose, now with joy I dismiss; for thou, O supreme Diety did tear them
from me, and supplyedst them by thy own presence who art in all honor, beauty
and pleasure excelling. You see what he got in exchanging a few Worldly joys
for a life of penance, in quitting a Creature he came to the enjoyment of his
Creator; in abandoning that we must needs once lose, and which we still
apprehend will be ravished from us, he arrived to an inestimable, and never
perishing good.

Nay reason may tell us, as happy experience has informed Saints, that if his
mercy be so great, and transforms it self into so many Shapes of virtues in
reward to sinners; it must needs be much more admirable in order to the just:
For it is but equitable, that those who must love and honor him, should have a
more ample share in the Treasures of his mercies, than such who injure and
daily offend him: If when we are Enemies he fails not to give Testimonies of
his love, being reconciled, and readmitted to his favor what will he not do?
If he bestow a kiss upon a treacherous Judas, with what overflowing sweetness
will he visit a loyal heart, which breaths forth nothing but love and a
conformity to his will; if a sound of his voice as Man was so charming, that
many of the Apostles at his first call abandoned all their VVorldly interests
and engagements to follow him, what transports do the sweet whispers of his
Divine Spirit occasion unto his dear Servants, what internal consolations, what
tranquillity of mind: St. Austin terms them certain previous relishes or
Antipasts of Heaven, which far transcend all the contentment and satisfactions
of this world.

In a word, that Seraphim of love St. Austin gives us the perfect Character of
a spiritual joy by his own experience. Saying, O Lord, sometimes thou do lead
me into unknown delights, which (were they completed in me) I know not what
they would be, but certain I am it would not be this life; that is, such a
Dilatation of Spirits he found to attend those spiritual comforts, that he saw,
were they accomplished, a ruin of his mortal Being must needs ensue.

This is the joy and gladness our Holy Petitioner expects, and that he was not
deceived in his expectation, scarce a Psalm of his that proclaims not the
sweetness, and superabundant satisfactions issuing from the love, fear, and
service of God, and therefore when he had petitioned for persecution,
adversity, and the Crown of Martyrdom, he might justly solace himself with the
sequel and fruits of sufferings, which are joy and gladness. To my hearing thou will give joy and gladness.

The Application.
Ah who would not then protest against the vain joys of this world, to taste
the sweetness of spiritual entertainments: St. Gregory puts this difference
'twixt Corporal and Spiritual delights, that the former whilst in expectation,
are coveted with much vehemence, but when once enjoyed, they presently become
nauseous, and distastful; the other we pursue but coldly, and with little heat
of desire, yet when once we have a relish of them, we still languish after the
increase: This made St. Francis that blessed despiser of the World, to make a
Covenant with his senses never to fasten with the least Contentment on any
sensual object; and truly he was so exact in the performance, as he went up and
down like the mere shadow of a Man, that had nothing humane in him but his
shape; his better part ever dwelling in the Mansion of the Blessed. These are
joys that will not be held by Repentance, may we then still languish after
them;

Amen.
CHAP. XVIII.
Et exultabunt Ossa humiliata,

And humbled Bones shall rejoice.


THis encouragement which our Petitioner allows himself, corresponds with the
second part of the former verse, where he was willing to Sacrifice his life:
For he does not only cheer himself, in reflecting upon the reward which
repentance will bring to his Soul, but likewise upon the future condition of
his Earthly mould, which he beholds as matter of great consolation; and
therefore upon the same score he prosecutes the Subject of his hope, saying,
that his humbled Bones shall rejoice.

Amongst all the comforts Christian Religion affords, there is none has so
much influence upon Man, as the expectation of a future resurrection, the
motive of this consolation springs from the belief we have of God's
Omnipotency: For as we believe he has created us of nothing, so we must
acknowledge his power to restore us, and raise our ashes to a better, and more
happy condition: Nay if we observe the course of Holy Scripture, we shall find
the expiration of Saints has a particular expression given it: For they are
not said to dye, but to fall into a sleep, as if their Bodies after separation
retained a certain virtue, which had resemblance with their glorified Souls.

In the Fourth Book of Kings Chap. 13. We read that a Carcass being thrown into
the Sepulcher of Elizeus, was by a touch of his Bones restored to life.

St. Hierom relates how Constantine the Great conveyed with much Solemnity the
relics of St Andrew and St. Luke unto Constantinople.

Areadius likewise the Emperor translated the relics of Samuel the Prophet
from Judaea into Thrasia, where they were received with great veneration, and
joy of the people: All which shows, our Forefathers looked upon the remainder
of Saints Bodies, not as liveless fragments, but as the Fountains of life, and
health; as certain pieces God would make instrumental to miracles, and to works
above the power of nature. Therefore the Bones of Holy Persons endued with such
virtue may justly be qualifyed with joy, and consequently it is not improper to
say, That humbled Bones shall rejoice.

Again St. John Damascene has a fine conception; saying, those who imitate the
virtues of Saints, may be more truly said their relics, or impressions, than
the lump and mass of Earth they leave behind. He who has the zeal and ardours
of a St. Paul in the Conversion of Souls, may be styled his lively Image: Who
can claim the fortitude of a St. Stephen in accepting the stroke of Death for
Justice sake; will infallibly bear the stamp of that Protomartyr: Who can
perform the humble and spiritual life of a St. Francis, will prove a better
pattern of him, than his own Body, which at this day remains entire at
Assisium, as a Testimony of that Glory his Soul enjoyes in Heaven; so that when
we cast our selves into the mould of their virtues, we become their animated
statues, and make them rejoice in our imitation, as the Angels do at a sinners
Conversion: it is not unlikely our Holy Prophet alluded to such living relics,
when he said humbled bones shall rejoice. Since good Men are here for the most
part crushed in the Worlds esteem, that values nothing but what is great in
vanity: Yet amidst these Clouds of oppression, and scorns thrown at them, they
find within themselves a satisfaction in performing their duty to God, for the
fruit of the spirit (says St. Paul) is joy, peace, and a thousand other
contentments which attend a state of innocence; so that it is an ingenious
Expression of our Penitent, that humbled bones shall rejoice.

I have many times wondered, why Almighty God should give unto the Ashes of
Saints, what he had denied them whilst they were alive, and made not use of any
limb, or vital motion but for his sake; that is, many miracles have been
wrought, by touching the mouldred dust of Saints, who living were never
favored with the power of any Miracle: but as the lives of Saints are
admirable, so the proceedings of Almighty God with them seem very mysterious,
yet I have proposed some reasons of this to my sell.

First, Almighty God will show by this how dear his Servants are unto him, and
if he give so much virtue to their Ashes, what may we expect he does to their
Immortal Souls.

Next, it argues how grateful a thing humility is in the sight of God, that
those who have Crucified their flesh, and daily Sacrificed their Bodies for his
name, should have the very Ashes of that Mortified Body, cure Diseases, restore
sight to the blind, and raise the dead to life.

Thirdly, Almighty God will manifest the difference between a pampered Body,
and one mangled by acts of penance, the one by all manner of delicacies sought
to preserve a beauty, and make it proof against time: Yet once grown old, or
cut off by Death it is cast into oblivion; the other kept in Chains, and
threatened daily with ruin, yet at the last proves matter of veneration even
unto those who before perhaps contemned it.

You see then, how to live in the Memory of Men, what Art is to be used to
raise a stately structure of our selves, the materials of this must be acts of
Charity toward our. Neighbor, and acts of severity toward our selves; the
Cement must be Patience, Constancy, Resignation to God's holy will, and the
like; with these Saints have purchased glory to themselves before God, and
veneration amongst Men, that even Kings have crouched with bended knees before
their Ashes, who whilst here poor Pilgrims upon Earth were looked upon as
Idiots, and made as it were the mockery of the World; so that humbled bones at
last shall Triumph, and erect their Trophies, where they had been made the
spoils of Death.

St. Gregory Nazianzen affirms the Ashes of St. Cyprian were so powerful, as no
Disease wanted there its remedy, and this Testimony he received from those very
persons, who had been the Subject of his miraculous Cures.

St. Ambrose relates of one Severus who being blind, by touching only the
Casket wherein were enchased the relics of the Holy Martyrs St. Gervasius and
Protasius, he recovered his sight.

St. Austin recounts many miracles wrought by the relics of St. Stephen, and
adds: The benefits obtained at his shrine were so great and numerous, as whole
Volumes might be filled with the relation.

In fine, there is not a Doctor of the Church, whose writings speak not the
wonders Heaven has owned, (even in their time) upon the score of supplications
made in the presence and honor of Saints Bodies.

Nor did this religious Worship of relics spring up originally with the
Ghospel, for St. Epiphanius brings evidence how the Sepulchers of Esaias,
Ezekiel, and Jeremy were had in great veneration among the Jews, and this from
the extraordinary succors God conserred on distressed People at the Tombs of
those Holy Prophets.

We find likewise Exodus 13. that before Moses conducted the Israelites out of
Egypt, he ordained the Bones of Joseph to be taken up, and born away with
Ceremony into the Land of promise.

Now why all this? But to verify our Holy Prophets assertion that humbled bones
shall rejoice; that Death may cause a separation twixt Soul and Body, and so
seem to Triumph over this mortal clay of ours, cannot be denied: Yet if our
members have served in purity (as St. Paul terms it) and merited in life to be
the Temple of the Holy Ghost, such as these (though exanimated) may still
retain a virtue by which they give life and joy to other Beings. Whence justly
our Petitioner fore-declares, and humbled bones shall rejoice.

Truly it is but rational to conceive there should be a Providence to preserve
from common corruption, those Bodies who had been instrumental to many acts of
virtue, and made a daily victime by penance: For since mortality is the effect
of sin, there ought at least be something that has the resemblance of
immortality to attend that Body, which has much contributed to the Souls
happiness.

Besides, we believe our Bodies shall one day be glorified and vested with
immortal dotes; it is fit then such who have here led a life as it were
Angelical, without any contamination of sensual pleasures, should anticipate in
some kind their future glorified condition, and how can this better appear,
than by imprinting a Sovereign virtue in their extinguished Ashes, since it is
decreed a complete glorification cannot (unless particularly dispensed with) be
conferred till the universal Resurrection.

This admirable operation given to their Earthly and liveless substance, as it
is a Testimony of their Souls felicity, so is it no less to us a pledge the
most dear we could have, by which we are assured of their watchful and
compassionate care over us. In fine, how powerfully are we wrought into the
imitation of their lives, when at their shrines we behold both Death and Nature
vanquished, and the prodigious effects of humbled, prostrate Limbs lowdly
declare, how precious the Death of Saints is in the sight of God.

Thus our Holy Petitioner has laid open unto us; First, the Jubileys of mind
which fill a Soul united unto God by love and repentance: Next, to complete the
Harmony, he tells us our very bones shall not want their portion of joy; that
if they here be made bare, disjoynted, or broken, Almighty God never fails to
sweeten those rigours, by internal whispers and consolations, which carry them
on to perseverance in their pressures and debasements, and when Saints have
once paid this debt to nature, then he gives to the one part the immediate
fruition of his Glory, and to the other he often communicates such Sovereign
virtues, that they are as it were certain previous dispositions to immortality.

It Is true, the relick of a Saint appears but a lump of Earth liveless,
inanimate, and so is not capable of joy, yet God making it the instrument of
miraculous effects, is thereby glorified, and what ever relates to his honor
is matter of exultation. Again, St. Paul says, that every Creature groans;
that is, feels throws, and longing desires after their Maker: If then these
resentments be allowed to every Being, much more ought we grant it to the
Sacred pledge of a Saints Body, in which the Omnipotency, and other Divine
attributes of God do so gloriously shine; and humbled bones shall rejoice.

The Application.
Let us then so manage our senses in this life, enslaving them to the Laws of
reason, that after the short course of their servitude here, we may arrive to
that joy mentioned by our Holy Petitioner.

Amen.
CHAP. XIX.
Averte faciem tuam a peccatis meis,

Turn away thy Face from my sins.


WHen I cast my Eye upon this clause of the Petition, I cannot but reflect on
that passage of Esaias where he says, it is a bitter thing to have once
abandoned God; for after a sin is committed, though it be secret, unseen, and
none reprehend us for it, yet we fear every shadow, suspect every look and
syllable, nor can we ever think our selves secure and out of danger.

St. Austin says, as iniquity is always accompanied with a neglect of God,
and consequently is a kind of Pride, by which we value our own satisfaction
beyond his honor; so sin by a just punishment throws us down below our
selves; it first induces us to actions unworthy our reason, and after that
engagement, what Tyranny like to this usurper: For having shaken off the fear
of God, (who alone ought to be the Object of that passion) we sink into the
fear of every thing capable to be the Term of Sense; if a sound, it is a loud
promulgation of our Crime, if a Shadow it is some Ambuscado to surprise us; if
the World be civil, they are acts of flattery to beguile us, if otherwise they
are open hostilities raised by Heaven to begin that vengeance which will be
continued to eternity.

Nay though the cause of these terrors be taken away by the reinfusion of
grace, yet there is a kind of unsettledness within us which remains ever after,
and is ready to break forth upon every representation of past offenses. Witness
our Holy Penitent whom but a little before we have seen elevated with the
assurance of joy and prosperity, which was to attend both his spiritual and
corporal substance, but now glancing upon his misdeeds, they appear so ugly to
him, that he believes it is impossible that the unspotted Eye of a Divinity can
endure such abominations; wherefore lest he might again be involved in the same
Abyss of misery, he petitions the Face of God may be averted from his sins; as
if the just Judge of Mankind could not make a review of his actions, without
laying abroad and reviving the Ashes of his former condition.

Again our Penitent discreetly weighed that God has a Countenance of Justice
as well as mercy, to dispense unto his Creatures; that should the former be
cast upon him, he were lost: For who can stand the Face of his Anger which is a
consuming fire; he knows God is just, holy, nay purity and sanctity it self,
it is not then credible he can have any complacence to injustice, for sure he
must be of a depraved, and sordid nature, that has not a disdain of what is
evil, hence after a sin is committed, Almighty God suspends no longer the
action of his Will, but passes judgment upon it in himself, and prosecutes with
hatred where he finds it, and truly sin deserves his vengeance.

First, it destroys Man who is his lively Image, and the most noble
Masterpiece he has framed in this World, and as a rare Artist cannot but be
incensed against him who spoils his work. So God frowns at Sin, and it appears
in his sight more horrid and execrable than is the plague, Thunder, or the most
venomous beast unto the sense of Man.

But his indignation stops not at the Sin, he passes on to the Sinner, who
commits and admits it within himself, him he abominates as one infected with
the poison of Sin, as one disfigured, and grown up in to a Monster, as one who
has scorned the Empire of his Sovereign, entertained his Enemy, transgressed,
and rebelled against his holy Laws.

This truth; says Lactantius, is the Sovereign basis of Religion, and Piety,
for who would serve God if he loved not his faithful Servants, and chastized
not those that scorn him; and in nothing render that homage and respect which
is due to his greatness.

Do but imagine (says a holy person) with what impetuosity a rapid stream, that
has for a while been barricado'd up, does at last finding a little passage
break through and make its way: or a thunderbolt which for a time had been
hemmed in a cloud, with what a dreadful force it issues forth, destroying what
ever happens near unto it: just so the anger of God, when not restrained by his
mercy and patience, seises upon unfortunate Souls, and inflicts immortal and
endless vengeance upon them: this anger in the next life will be implacable
never to be moderated in the vast extent of Eternity; for as their Souls will
be Eternally contaminated with Sin, so will they be Eternally odious in the
sight of God.

From these considerations our holy penitent grounds his Suit, and supplicates
that his face of justice may be averted from him; for to be struck with a
million of thunderbolts would appear but like a honey dew, if compared to the
terror, which the angry looks of our great and good God will strike into a
Sinner.

Turn away thy face, that is, examine not thy book of accounts kept in the
archive of Eternity, where the debts of all Men are enrolled; if you will not
connive, and pass over our sins, but retain them in your sight, and design
their discussion before your just tribunal; alas, who will be able to plead his
cause; if the just Man shall with difficulty be saved, where can the impious
shroud his Head: St. Austin pronounces woe, and desolation to that person, whose
life however pure and holy shall come to be laid open and brought to the Test
without the Mercy of God.

Whilst our Petitioner thus contemplates the disproportion of Man's justice
with God's prerogative, he finds himself as it were in a Labyrinth, and after
many a pensive thought, how to divert the Eye of his displeasure two Expedients
occur. The one by calling home his affection to earthly things, and by
disowning all those contentments which before he had valued beyond the Honor
and Glory of his God; by suppressing all inordinate passions, that they break
not forth and wander upon unlawful objects: and when he shall have no act of
inordination, to reproach him, but enjoy a quiet of Mind, which knows no
disturbance unless what arises from the storms of repentance: In this posture
he hopes, the peaceful Eye of God will be taken up in beholding the change,
wrought in him, and that his virtues may serve as a veil cast over his sins;
only he begs further that when he shall design design him a glance, that he
would not for all this play the curious, and pry too narrowly, but rather the
dissembler, as if he saw no farther than his penitential groans and tears.

St. Bernard warrants this design of our Penitent by his own experience;
saying, O my God I transgressed, and thou did feign not to be offended, I
forbear not my crimes, yet thou did forbear thy chastisements, I prolonged,
and persevered in my iniquity, and thou O Lord in thy pity.

His next stratagem is to interpose the amiable person of Jesus Christ; for if
charity cover a multitude of iniquities, what a preservative must this sacred
pledge of Heaven needs prove; that propitiatory Sacrifice prepared by so many
sufferings, is a shield of protection, a Sanctuary which the Justice of God it
self cannot force; hence our Penitent exclaimed; respice in faciem Christi tui,
that if the Head of Christ all Crowned with Thorns were interposed 'twixt God
and a Sinner, it would obscure and Cloud his guiltiness, that his all-seeing
Eye clogged with benignity could not pierce the traverse, nor come to a survey
of his iniquities. Turn away thy face from my sins.

This assurance Nathan the Prophet gave him, that his Sin was transferred, and
charged upon the Shoulders of that all-immaculate Lamb, who was to bear away
the sins of the World; it is then under this infinite oblation, and universal
expiation he shrowds his failings from the face of God.

St. Austin observes, in God not to take notice, imports the same thing as to
pardon, nor does the frequent prosperity of wicked people shake this Truth, for
every their least deviation is registered and reserved till the last bitter
account they are to make, however they here run on without any stop, as if the
Sage ruler of all things took no cognizance of their actions, and which is done
parhaps from a foresight they will persevere to the end in wickedness, and
having performed acts of moral virtues, God allows them a little calm in this
life.

But in our sense, when God passes over as undiscerned our faults, he remits
them without punishment, and so seems to have been a stranger to our misdeeds;
but yet he never, does this; that is; never turns away his Face from our sins,
unless we first turn our Face upon them, placing them before our Eyes, and
touched with a horror at their deformity, abjure, and protest against them;
having done this, we must then expose that abstract of wonders Christ Jesus
before the Eternal Father, that his wounded body may serve as a bulwark to
defend us, and appease his angry looks, which implies the aversion of his Face,
or fury from us.

Our penitent having in this manner made his way, he hopes the effect will
follow, that God averting his Face, in that act will give him an abolition of
his crimes, that so he may reap the fruit of a Holy penitential fear. We kow
St. Peter fared not the worse, when prompted by a low esteem of himself, he
requested his Lord to withdraw from him because a sinner: No more did the good
Centurion lose any thing, in acknowledging his little of merit to have his
house blessed, and made happy by Christ's presence: So our Penitent's awful
respect in declining the Face of his Creator, springing from a sense of his
own unworthiness; and believing his sins an object unfit for an Eye so pure and
unstained, may perhaps draw benedictions upon him, and contribute in a large
measure to his happiness. Wherefore he goes on still repeating, turn away thy
face from my sins.

The Application.
From this discourse we may learn the agitations of a Soul which has once been
defiled with sin, sometimes he Figures God unto him as an angry judge, and is
affrighted to appear before him, then again as a purity so complete and
Essential, that though he should be conscious of no guilt, as having been
cleansed, and washed as white as Snow, he dares not yet stand to the examen:
Nay, on the contrary it makes him petition to have that face (which is the joy
of Angels) to be diverted from him: we must then in imitation of our penitent
fix only to this comfort, that humility, repentance, and reverential thoughts,
though they keep us here depressed and under hatches, will at last render that
face (we would now decline through the terror of our Sins) amiable and
pleasing into our possession, whereon we may gaze, and feed our glorified
Senses for all Eternity.

Amen.
CHAP. XX.
Et omnes iniquitates meas dele,

And wipe away all my iniquities.


ST. Cyril of Alexandria says, in the j^stification of a sinner are required
certain previous dispositions, amongst which he reckons up faith, hope,
repentance, and fear: Whence I conceive the apprehension of our Holy Penitent,
lest God should fasten his regards upon his iniquities mentioned in the
preceding verse, was initiative, and preliminary to his present address. That
his iniquities may be wiped away.

St. Austin holds it a thing most rare, that any should embrace Christian
Religion, who have not first received within them an impression of the fear of
God.

That the Ninivites became Penitent, and shrouded themselves under a veil of
Sackcloth, and Ashes: The only cause was a fear of vengeance threatened them by
the preaching of Jonas.

St. Hierom upon the First Chapter of Malachy says, behold O Lord how the fear
of punishment diverts us from evil, and that the privilege of being your
Children arises from a servile apprehension.

Our Penitent was not ignorant of this, when after a dread conceived of God's
judgments, he immediately proceeds (as if prepared by that terror) to demand
an abolition of his crimes. Wipe away my iniquities.

Besides he here explicates himself more fully, that in case he do procure the
Face of God to be averted, then he is confident, the sequel will be an
expulsion of sin by grace. For it were absurd that faith, love, and other
qualities inherent, should be necessary to dispose us for pardon, and yet the
formal effect to be extrinsecal, and a justice not ours, but imputed to us. St.
Paul desides this in his Epistle to the Colossians. Christ has freed us from
the power of darkness and transferred us into the Kingdom of the love of his
Son. Where you see the infusion of justice (by which a Man becomes pious)
succeeds to the Remission of sin, by which we cease to be impious, and just as
the Air by the same ray of the Sun, has not only its darkness expelled, but
also is filled with light; so that true Son of Justice communicating unto Man
his divine grace, does at once by this gift disperse the Clouds of sin, and
replenish him with the splendor of inherent Justice.

The same Apostl^ Romans 5. takes away all doubt in this point; saying, that the
grace of God is diffused into our hearts by the Holy Ghost, who is given unto
us; and that no mistake in this Text may happen, St. Austin explicates it in
this Sense. The charity of God is said to fill our hearts; not with that love
by which he loves us, but by ^he^by which we love him. It is then in this
fountain of love, which springs within us, whose overflowing streams arise
from Christ's donation; in these we are washed, we are sanctified, and made
just; by this regeneration we are said to become a new Creature, and from an
Enemy purchase the title of being the Son of God, all which powerfully import a
mutation and real change within us.

St. John in his First Epistle says, he that does justice is just: Abel was
just in that he sacrificed unto God with all the circumstances of homage due
unto a supreme Being: Noah just in that he gave credit unto God, feared his
judgments, and obeyed his commands. St. Luke affirms Zachary and Elizabeth to
be just from their compliance, and obedience to Divine precepts; so that it is
clear the Principle of their justification was inherent, and that nothing
extrinsick or imputative can be the formal cause of our actions, for if not
issuing from something within us, we cannot own them to be ours.

Our Holy Penitent filled with supernatural illustrations, was not a stranger
to Divine Laws established in order to Man's conversion: Wherefore he knew
well his Petition, to have his iniquities struck off, involved the gift of
grace by whose power alone they were to be destroyed.

Nay, even Natural Reason will lead us to this Truth, for justification is a
motion from sin to justice, whence its name is derived, as calefaction from
heat: Now it is evident to expel cold, will not be thought calefaction, unless
the quality of heat be introduced: So the bare remission of sin, cannot amount
to an act of justification, without the consecution of Justice; which is the
End, we tend to in this motion.

Besides, justification is not bestowed on us by God merely to avoid punisment,
it is designed as well to fit us for Heavenly rewards, this St. Paul testifyes
ad Romans 8. That God glorifyes whom he has justified; of which glory a simple
absolution cannot be the Subject, since no person by a judicial sentence
clearing him from guilt, is thought by that to merit a reward, but to exchange
the condition of an enemy for that of a friend, of a domestic, nay of a
child, this must needs be wrought by something more than a bare condition.

In this Petition then he implores virtually the infusion of justifying grace,
a divine quality inherent it the Soul, which like a bright ray of the Sun
disperses all the Clouds of sin, before whose presence without a miracle it
cannot subsist one sole moment: It likewise enclines the Soul to Christian
duties, and from that source do flow all the v^rtuous, and pious action we
perform: For as sin expells justice, being opposite to habitual grace; not only
by way of privation, but contrariety: So a supreme act of love opposes habitual
sin, and by a contrary working, as an efficient cause destroys it. Whence
infusion of grace, and deletion of sin do as infallibly succeed to such an act
of love, as the infusion of a rational soul into a Body after humane
generation. Thus our Petitioner like a quaint Penman, so couches his demands,
as to comprize in them much more than the letter seems to express: Wipe away
all my iniquities. This word all is emphatick, and expresses with some energy a
desire not only to have those sins which appear before him, and reproach his
ingratitude, to be remitted: But also what ever are set upon his score in that
eternal Book of accounts, and contracted by him, either through ignorance,
inadvertence, or oblivion, in not discharging what he owes for their expiation.

Our Petitioner had reason to add this Particle, and frame his Petition full,
if we reflect upon what Solomon says Ecclesiast. chapter 8. That all things
concerning another life shall here be wrapped up in doubts and uncertainties. No
security of our state whether marked out to punishment, or reward: For were
there any means to this discovery, the benefits of God would lay it open; yet
we find these indiscriminately dispensed to the just and impious; to preserve
some in humility, he loads them with afflictions, lest others should despair,
he fills them with abundant consolations; some he draws by the Lure of temporal
blessings, so to buoy them up from despair, or in reward of some moral virtue;
others he steeps in the bitterness of wants and disgraces, to stop the Carreer
of pride, and excess; and by a paternal correction he presents an opportunity
by which they are either deterred from sin, or may satisfy in this life for
their transgressions. Sometimes again the doom of punishment begins here which
is to last for eternity; so that neither adversity, nor prosperity give us any
light into the state of Men's consciences, whence our Penitent, fearing lest
any unknown guilt may stain his Soul, petitions that all his iniquities may be
taken away.

St. Paul confesses after a severe inquisition of himself though he found no
matter of accusation, yet he durst not trust to his own justification; knowing
well, the judgments of God and Men are very different, and if we groap so much
in our own concerns, what madness upon every slight conjecture, and surmise, to
pass sentence of condemnation upon our Neighbor: This savours not the Spirit
of an Apostle who would have no other Vmpire than Christ the true searcher of
hearts; and the same maxim was fixed in our Holy Penitent, who not daring to
secure himself from all imputations, cries out; wipe away all my iniquities
that no sin, upon what account contracted, may escape the Seal of God's pardon.

How many have been seen who beheld themselves with an Eye of satisfaction as
patterns of innocence, as possessing within themselves the treasure of grace,
to a great proportion; and yet brought to the Test were found empty Vessels,
and poor Objects of frailty and malice. St. Peter told his blessed Master he
was ready to attend him unto Prisons, nay, even to Death it self; but the event
proved he had not the Groundwork of such a fortitude within him. St. Paul
whilst he played the fierce Lion, preying upon the Blood of Christians,
believed all his flames were enkindled by a just zeal of God's Holy Laws, and
how do we know but many actions of ours may proceed from a gross ignorance,
which will not render us inexcusable at the latter day; what greater Evidence
of integrity than to Sacrifice life in any cause, and yet this we have seen
done on either side of two opinions diametrically opposite to each other: Both
these propose unto themselves Almighty God above all things amiable as the
motive of their sufferings, yet without dispute one of the two must needs be
involved in errors, and in the total privation of grace: Hhw justly then does
our Penitent (suspending all judgment of his condition) beg that all his
iniquities may be taken away; that if he have not perfect Charity he may obtain
it, if he go astray he may be reduced into the right path, if in darkness he
may be filled with light; and since we are ignorant of our own state, and that
God has reserved the knowledge of this Truth to himself, he is resolved in his
petition never to omit this clause; Et omnes iniquitates mea^ dele, and wipe
away all my iniquities.

The Application.
In pursuance of this design we are in regard of our own infirmity, and
indisposition never to Lull our selves in security, since God's promises in
order to the remission of sins require on our part, that we be worthily
disposed for the reception of the Sacraments: Now to have an infallible
assurance of this fitted disposition, or that we are not guilty of some secret
pride, some mortal sin undiscovered, some inordinate cleaving to the World, and
the like, is by God's Providence locked up in his own Breast, so to keep us
humble, wary, and in fear of his judgments: Wherefore all we have to do, is to
hope in the mercy of God, in the merits of Christ's passion, and efficacy of
the Sacraments, and then conclude with the same Prayer of our Penitent, that
all our defects and transgressions whether known or concealed to us may be
blotted out.

Amen.
CHAP. XXI.
Cor mundum cre^ in me Deus,

Create in me O God a clean heart.


OUr Holy Penitent in the Ten precedent Verses, working like an expert Carver
by way of defalcation had still desired he might be brought into shape, by
cutting off all those Excrescencies, which made him monstrous in God's Eye: Now
he petitions (believing his whole frame vitiated, and unfit for his design)
that a new model might be drawn up of him, and new materials inserted in the
whole structure. In order to this, he first moves to have a clean heart created
in him; this shows him a wise, and bold beggar, that will not be content with
scrapps, but asks a treasure which may enrich, and enable him to give to his
Benefactour: For this address implies a reformation of all the faculties of
his Soul, the Scripture expressing frequently by the name of Heart both the
understanding, Will, and Memory: So that all these once purifyed, and adorned
with innocence, he will be able to produce Heroic acts of faith and hope; and
the daily influence of divine favors still rising in his imagination, must
needs enkindle flames of Charity within him.

St. Hierom compares sanctifying grace with the essence of the Soul, for as the
powers, and natural faculties (which are the instrument of action) flow from
the essence: So from grace are distilled into the powers of the Soul all those
virtues by which they are moved and carried on to what they act. Grace then is
like a new Being which elevates Man above his natural condition, and puts him
into a capacity of possessing God who is his supernatural end; and by
consequence it ought like a noble Queen be attended with a train of infused
habits of Virtues. The Theological furnish us with wings to fly in a straight
Line unto God; the Cardinal set us in a just comportment of holiness toward
our Neighbor, and our selves: Nay, when Sanctifying Grace shall no more be
clogged with the Mass of the Body, and relics of sin, her last operation will
be to produce unto us the clear vision of God, accompanied with beatifick love;
for the essential part of grace is the same thing with Glory, and only
distinguished like to what is perfect, from that which is less perfect, or as a
thing begun from what is finished and complete.

This Sanctifying Grace then is the fountain our Penitent thirsts after, for
the purifying his Heart, and if once washed in this stream he may justly call
it a clean heart, witness the Prophet Ezekiel Chap. 6. I will shower down upon
you a pure water, and it will cleanse you from all your iniquities. If this
stain consist in a perverse action unretracted, Sanctifying grace recalls this
perverse action by an habitual conversion unto God, and submission to his Holy
Will. If it speak an offense to God, grace repairs this injury, and makes that
injurious Action no more voluntary: If his ugliness spring from an enmity with
God, grace appeases all his anger, and changes it into a love of complacence as
a necessary effect; not that to love us he has any need, but because a Soul
enriched with Grace is just, and righteous, and whilst it is in such a
condition, God cannot but delight himself in an object so worthy and deserving.
If his deformity involves an obligation to eternal punishment, grace clears all
that score, raising a Soul to that degree as she is worthy of Heaven: Now it is
impossible that being in a state capable of enjoying him, she can be liable to
such a debt, wherefore there is nothing so hideous, and abominable in a sinner,
which grace does not destroy. Thus you see what an expedient our Holy Penitent
has pitched upon to arrive by it to his designed purity, and if he obtain his
demand, he knows his work is done; that is, the operation of grace is so
infallible, as the effect is not to be hindered: For it is not possible that a
Soul at the same time can be innocent, and guilty, holy, and impious; have a
Right to Heaven and liable to eternal death: So that being once drowned in this
purifying Ocean, he receives a pledge of all the felicity that either the
nature of Angels or Men is capable off.

But it may be objected, that our Petitioner may fall short of his expectation
even though he obtain his demand: For we see many holy habits introduced with
grace, to lie as dead within us; no ways disposing us sensibly to supernatural
actions; Nay on the contrary, that persons so enriched are often disturbed, and
harassed with the insolences of perverse inclinations: Now the reason of this
is, that the effects of Grace are spiritual, and without the Sphere of sense,
so that these supernatural virtues being of a quite different rank from the
vicious propensions of our corrupt nature, they do not by their presence
necessarily destroy them. This position our Penitent admits, knowing that God
obliges not himself to communicate unto every Soul all kind of supernatural
virtues as a necessary dependence on Sanctifying grace; but that he distributes
to some more to others less, in reference either to their want, their
disposition, or the Series of his Holy Providence, which deals the measure of
his favors according to his will.

Having weighed all this, he recollects his thoughts as to his own particular,
and remembers how before he defiled himself with sin. God had witnessed a
satisfaction in the choice of him, making him the object of his most obliging
liberalities; next, he considers that when God is pleased to sign his pardon
and letters of grace unto a sinner, he does not only free him from eternal
punishment for what is past, but restores all the treasure he had hoarded up in
the sunshine of his favor, nay more, conferres an addition of grace in that
very penitential act by which he concurs with his merciful call: So that he
has reason to hope if he purchase a clean heart; that is, if it be sprinkled
with the dew of sanctifying grace, his understanding now stupefied in the mists
of sin, will receive its wonted irradiations, his will born down with the
weight of earthly affections, will breath forth again amorous languishments
after eternal delights; his memory which now records the ugly species of
sensual pleasures, will be taken up in the holy entertainments of a spiritual
life; and in sequel of this, he thinks it not presumption to believe, he shall
find himself in the same, if not better condition than before his fall; and in
possession of all those precious titles the Divine Oracle had once pronounced
of him. This meditation puts him upon great resolves how to preserve, and
improve the purity he sues for, that it may more strictly unite him to God who
is his final end, his hope, and beatitude; wherefore every moment he redoubles
his petition. Create in me O God a clean heart.

Another motive of this his Petition is, in that the heart is the source of all
evil: It Is from thence that Homicide, Adultery, Theft, and other sins arise,
which gave occasion unto many great wits to assert, that internal
transgressions alone were punished by God, and if at any time the scourge of
his anger seems to fall heavy upon external acts, it was merely upon the score
of bad example, whose consequences are for the most part very pernicious to
Mankind. Besides, as the heart is the fountain of all evil, so is it no less of
all good: For the goodness and malice of every action consists in its
conformity with reason, which rule cannot be squared out by external acts,
because the power that sets them on work, cannot discern whether the object be
suitable to reason or no. This alone belongs to the understanding, and in sequel
to the Will, by whose direction it is led: It is evident then that on the
motion of the heart (which expression comprizes the three faculties of the Soul
as I said in the beginning) depends the blame, and praise of whatsoever we do:
For that an action may be said to be of Man; the understanding must first give
its approbation, by which he does it knowingly; next, the will is to make its
election, and in that owns its liberty: Lastly, the memory is for the most part
filled with various Images of Terrestrial Objects, by which it solicits the
will to vain and bad desires, so that, if these three be reformed, he questions
not but to deface all the fantomes and representations of this World which have
led him so astray, and by a total diversion from all that is Earth, to repose
quietly in God: That then his understanding may receive the irradiations of a
holy light, his will be consumed in the flames of a pure love, his memory
stripped of all the species of vain objects, he incessantly repeats: Create in me
O God a clean heart.

St Gregory says that Abel's Sacrifice was so highly acceptable unto God in
that he had first offered up the same in his heart; so that it was not the best
of his flocks, but the devotion of his heart, which set a value upon that
action. Again, the gloss says, it is not the loudness of the voice, but the
lovingness of the heart which sounds sweetly in God's Ear; so that if you
strike not upon this string, and according to those notes which our great
Musician has set down, you will but ^arr, and make a dissonancy ungrateful to
your Creator. This our Blessed Savior sufficiently hinted in St. Matthew,
when he says, They honor me with their lips, but their heart is far from me:
Which imports, that though our Lips, Eyes, Hands, and every other part speak
Sanctity and Holiness; yet if our Heart that great Wheel give not motion to the
rest, the End will be nothing but disorder and confusion.

It is storied of St. Catharine of Sienna, that reading this verset of David,
she petitioned for a new heart, believing her own to be defiled with Sin; for
her love represented to her every the least defect as a monstrous deformity:
The issue of this her Address was, that Christ our Lord appeared to her, opened
her breast, took out her heart, and thus left her heartless, but not hopeless;
in this plight she continued somedays, when her amorous maker returns, and
fills the void place he had left with his own heart: O happy exchange, so that
for ever after this blessed Saint was wont to conjure our Savior, that he
should have care of his own heart: if then St. Catharine prosecuting the form
of another petition met with so good success, have we not reason to conclude
the like amorous enterchange befell our holy prophet, especially if we reflect
upon what God says of him, that he had found a Man according to his own heart,
that is, who in all things follow the motion and impulse of that heart I gave
him: But I conceive this Exchange in the Legend of St. Catharine is not
understood to be Physical and real, the moral is, when God destroys in a
sinners heart the foul Characters he there had forged, he takes his pencil,
marks it for his own, drawing upon it his divine gifts and favors; whence St.
Ambrose says, at the latter day the reproach of a sinner will be to have
blotted out the fair Images of innocence and simplicity of heart; delineated by
the Hand of God, and in the Room to have set up his own Idol of shame and
vanity; lest then any of those hideous specter may appear at that dreadful
Tribunal he now implores, that the Table of his heart, as yet capable of other
impressions, may be run over with the strokes of his mercy: To this end he
cries; Create in me O God a clean heart.

When the Machabees had regained the Temple of Sion, their resolution to
destroy the Altar profaned by Antiochus was commended, because all their
Ceremonies of Purification, whilst the Altar stood, could never have washed
away the opprobry of that contamination.

Our holy penitent was fixed on the same principle, for beholding his soul
contaminated by his transgressions, his whole contrivance is, that there may be
no witness extant, nor any Monument remain of his infidelity, wherefore he begs
a recreation, or rather such a production of habits opposite to what he had
contracted, as it might not appear the same thing: He would not have it created
anew, (for he knew it to be incorruptible, and immortal) but that God would
daign so to renew it, as it might seem a new Creation; for to restore it to its
former condition of innocen^, was all one as to create it; that whereas before
his heart was like a World without a Sun, excluded both from light and heat,
now upon this transmutation it might become more pure than Snow, whiter than
Milk, and more beautiful than the polished Saphir. That whereas before it was
like a City burnt, sacked, and rased to the ground; for the future it might
prove a fortress impregnable against all the Worlds allurements. That whereas
before it was like a habitation deserted and made a refuge only for Toads,
Spiders, and Snakes; hereafter it might serve as a Temple for the Holy Ghost,
attended on with a retinue of supernatural and moral virtues. That whereas
before he had not Eyes but to prye into the faults of others, for the time to
come he might be quick-sighted only to discern his own misdeeds. Lastly,
whereas he had left God to follow sin, and at the same time became as it were a
stranger to himself, now he sues for a clean heart that he may recover himself,
and so return to his God, hoping like the Prodigal Son to find some little
Corner of retreat in his Fathers house; though it be but in the nature of a
hireling. These are his aims, and which he awaits as the effects of his
Metamorphosed heart, he knows on its temper depends the consistence of all
virtues, and if that foundation be well laid, it will be the more secure for
him to reenter his forms possession. He is not likewise ignorant, that of all
the gifts wherewith God has ennobled Man, it is not only our heart he exacts
in requital; hence it is that the Enemy of Mankind lays all his batteries
particularly against it, insomuch that St. Chrysostom affirms there is not any
Nation, City, or Person in the whole World, against whom so many designs are
set on Foot both by open force and treachery, as are machinated against a poor
distressed heart; and which is yet more deplorable, that most of its Enemies
are hatched, and trained up within its own Breast, who like the Viper tears
asunder the womb that bare them. Besides, they are all armed completely against
it, whilst this defendant to preserve it self against so many Harpyes and
ravenous Wolves, has nothing but a poor will, and this weakened extremely
enfeebled by original sin; so that many times it is so overpowred, what by the
charms of objects presented to her, what by their importunity, and near
approach, that unable to make any offensive; nay, or so much as defensive play,
all she can do, is to disown and disavow any compliance, protesting against the
violence of all her mutinous passions. In these distresses our Penitent knew
well it was necessary to have a clean heart, that is, a heart st^d in that
perfection, as might dimini^ the effects of ^iginal sin; for a Soul arrived
once at perfection, performs acts of virtues with such facility as if he seemed
not to have forfeited (...) ^usti^es, and though usually this happiness is not
purchased but by a long tract of unwearied practice, yet God can supply all
this by a superabundant Collation of his Grace, and with these hopes, he
confidently and incessantly tunes forth, create in me O God a clean heart.

The Application.
Here we are taught that in all our actions we must attend to the sincerity of
our intentions for it is not the material thing we do, that gives a value to
them, but the source from whence they spring; and if that be qualifyed with a
pure designment to aim only at God's glory, then it is evident they proceed
from a heart fashioned by the hand of God, and directed by his all-moving
Spirit, St. Austin says, we shall be rewarded, or punished, according to the
will by which we have acted. Abraham lost not his Son, nor likewise did he lose
his merit, because it is the same moral goodness which resides in the inferior
and exterior act, and if the one be obstructed, this takes not off the esteem
due to the other; just as the Sun is still luminous, though a Cloud sometimes
hinders the effect of his beams: Let us bless therefore our good God who
contents himself with the heart, and let us dispose that always ready for his
service.

Amen.
CHAP. XXII.
Et Spiritum rectum innova in visceribus meis,

And renew in my Bowels a right spirit.


OUr Holy Penitent in this clause keeps the method of a wise Petitioner, having
an Eye not only to his present succor, but also how to settle a constant
supply: For to have implored a dean heart would avail him little without a
sentinel and guard to protect this fountain from impure hands: He was not
ignorant that the will is a blind faculty that must be directed, wherefore he
petitions here in behalf of his understanding, that it may receive those lights
which are necessary for his conduct in all the occurrences of this life. Renew
in my Bowels a right spirit.

This spiritual rectitude consists in two heads, to wit, faith and morality:
The first teaches what we owe to God, the other what is due to our Neighbor
and our selves; the first discovers unto us the perfections, and attributes of
God, and of these gives us a most certain knowledge not liable to any error,
because it is grounded on the Testimony of God, which is more infallible than
our reason, senses, or apparitions of the dead.

Now that this certitude in matter of Faith ought to be of all things most
unquestionable, is evident: For Man is obliged to prefer God before all created
things, to set a value upon the works of his service beyond any proper interest
of riches, honor, nay of life, which is frankly to be exposed in defiance of
all the cruelties that can be inflicted, rather than to fail in the least
tittle of what Faith prescribes as due to our Creator: It were then very
severe we should be tied to forfeit what is most precious to us in this World,
and to sustain that which we most abhor, and all this for a thing that is
dubious, uncertain, and liable to error. Wherefore in all reason the knowledge
we have by Faith ought to be the most depurated from dross of doubt, or
vacillation: Now what can be more secure and satisfactory than to be taught by
God himself, instructed by his word and revelation, who is a supreme verity and
cannot reveal a falsehood, and which is conveyed unto us by the Church, who is
the immediate receptacle of Divine truths; so that it is inconceivable how any
expedient could be found more efficacious to quiet the minds of Men in
religious duties than this of Revelation.

In other virtues God seems to treat with us familiarly, and as equals, laying
down reason to move us to embrace them; but in matter of Faith he plays the
Sovereign, he commands, forbids, threatens, promises, and delivers things which
surpass all imagination, and this without any evidence, or reason of their
existence; now though at the first glance this proceeding seems harsh, yet
seriously weighed it will be found a stroke of his goodness; for whilst we
believe amidst these Clouds and obscurity, it speaks more loud an act of our
free will which is the spring of merit, presupposing the existence of grace:
For if where we most contradict our selves, there is a Subject of greater
merit, certainly in nothing Man does more divest himself of his inclinations
than in acts of Faith, for he renounces his natural way of knowledge by reason,
and sense; he Sacrifices his understanding to God's simple word, and believes
all the greatnesses and wonders of the Divine Being, and mysterious works,
merely because he has said it.

Our Holy Penitent desirous to be irradiated with these unerring notions,
petitions that a right Spirit may be resetled in him, for supposing Man's End
or Beatitude, which is to know, serve, love, and glorify God in all Eternity;
we must in order to this end raise our understanding and affections to objects
which outstrip the power of sense, and exceed the reach of our natural reason;
the acts of Religion by which we pay our duty to God, being supernatural, and
justly proportioned to Beatitude to which they tend; now Man of himself without
some light from above, cannot frame any supernatural act; of himself he knows
not what homage and service is due to his Sovereign Monarch, nor with what
Sacrifices he ought to appease his anger, and pay the tribute of thanks, and
adoration, wherefore he begs, that he himself would teach him and be his
Master, that he may not like the Gentiles follow the vain dictamens of sense,
but serve him as he would be served, and in that manner as might be most
agreeable to his divine will, which he shall infallibly perform if he daign to
fill him with his right Spirit; and renew in my bowels a right Spirit.

But whilst he sues that this Spirit all guiding of Truth may be infused into
his bowels, that is diffused through the whole Man, in such sort that every
particle of him may feel its operation, he is not I say so transported as not
to consider what he asks, and in that the great condescendency of God, who
disdains not to converse with Men; he deals not with them as he does with
Angels, where the superior intelligences instruct the inferior, but by
himself an increated wisdom, he conveys unto our happy Ears the mysterious
wonders of our Faith: It is by him we are taught that all sin is forbidden,
even to the least thought or desire; that God is to be loved above all things,
and sin to be abominated in the highest degree, so that the exact observer of
his Laws must be holy and enriched with all virtues; there is nothing in our
Faith that speaks not the greatness of God, nothing that is not sublime,
transcending, and what becomes not an infinite Majesty; he lays down nothing
of eternal things that sounds the least imperfection: So that the complete
knowledge of them must needs involve a joy eternal, since even in the
transitory passage of this life we experience the most solid contentment and
satisfaction we have to consist in the sweet Meditation of those Mysteries: For
alas, without those hopes which Faith gives us, what Captive more wretched than
Man; we are as banished into a Land of misery, enslaved by sin, where we
truckle under the insolency of unruly passions, which hurries into many
disasters and calamities; at last, we finish a deplorable life by death, in
whose Face is seated nothing but dread and horror: After this corruption,
stanch, and infection are the last farewell and monument of us, so that without
Faith we are centered within these myseries, unable to carry our sight beyond
the low condition of a brute, and unreasonable Creature. On the contrary, faith
teaches we are created to a supernatural and blessed end, which we are to
purchase by acts of Religion: That our Souls are immortal, by which (resembling
the Angels) we are excluded from putrefaction, and approach the nearer to God:
That he has created all things of nothing in which belief we acknowledge his
Omnipotency, and cherish our own hopes, that if he could extract us out of
nothing, with more facility can he after death rejoyn our disunited parts.

Our Holy Penitent figures to himself all these comforts resulting from divine
faith, and in sequel implores with instance that a right spirit may be renewed
within him.

But I conceive our Holy Penitent looked not upon himself as wholly deprived of
habitual faith, for though every mortal sin disposes afar off unto its total
ruin, and truly merits it should be taken from us; yet God is so merciful as
to leave that foundation unalterable by sin, unless directly undermined by an
opposite act of infidelity. In this petition then for a right spirit he
pretends to the operation of habitual faith; that is, an actual and firm belief
of Objects proposed by Faith: His reason is, that the lights and irradiations
of Faith have a certain blessing from God, to stir up and carry the will to
what is good; so that after an act of Faith produced in the understanding, he
knew his clean heart would no longer lie a sleep, but grow up into a spark
which would both enlighten and inflame, as the Prophet Habakkuk says, Chap. 1.
The just Man lives by Faith; that is, Faith actuated, and enlivened both
preserves the Soul's life by grace, and by merit opens a passage to eternal
glory.

Run over the World's History from the Creation, and you will find habitual
faith lying dead and frozen within us to have been the source of all our
misery. The reprobate Angels upon what score did they forfeit that precious
title of being the Sons of God? was it not in that they preferred a motion of
self love, before the motives of faith, which would have rendered them stable
and secure? What a frivolous plea made Adam for his trespass, lest his Wife
upon his denial might have grown sad, as if a fear to offend God, and ruin his
whole posterity ought not to have prevailed in this temptation? Had Cain
considered the greatness of God, his obligation to observe his Law in loving
his Brother, a petty suggestion of avarice, or sting of envy, could never have
animated him to an action so horrid; the Massacre of so many Infants by Herod's
command wherein he thought to have involved the person of Jesus Christ was
merely upon the account of ambition, the Jewish Oracles foretelling his reign
and Empire, which Herod understood to be of this World; nor did the Jews put
our Savior to death, but in order to the preservation of their City, and
themselves in the good Opinion of the Romans; so that Men have been pushed on
in all their crimes by humane reasons and interests; whilst they laid aside
those disswasives which Faith held forth to them, and which had (if duly
weighed) rendered them victorious, witness St. John Chap. 5. The power of faith
has made a conquest of the World, which is meant not of the habit, but act of
faith.

Our Holy Penitent applies all this to himself, having seen the shipwreck that
befell him through a sluggishness in not giving life and activity to his faith:
For when he was tempted to impurity and other his transgressions that sprang
from thence, had he considered what faith teaches concerning mortal sin, that
it deprives a Soul of eternal glory, adjudges her to the endless torments of
Hell, that it throws a scorn and contempt upon a God whose greatness and
Majesty is infinite, and who merits from all Creatures a respect and love
ineffable; had he fixed himself on these sublime and supernatural reasons of
Faith the Childish baits of flesh and blood could never have taken hold upon
his unfortunate senses; wherefore to prevent at least for the future, he
solicits a right spirit may be infused into him, a spirit that may not be
overgrown with rust like a sword in a scabberd for want of use; but that it may
prove active even to his very bowels, which is to say, that this noble quality
of faith producing frequently acts, by the consideration of its proper objects,
may gain his will, memory, sensitive and moving faculties, and so happily
conduct him to his designed Beatitude; renew in my Bowels a right spirit.

After Faith thus enlivened as a necessary dependent, comes in a troop of moral
virtues, which compleats the rectitude of his spirit, he so much desires: For
virtue is a habit that enclines the Soul to perform actions suitable to a
reasonable nature; and though the Soul be sufficient of herself by her natural
faculties to frame several acts of virtue, yet it is with hardship and
difficulty, whereas this quality of virtue contributes a facility by which the
good thence issuing is done with promptitude, and delight. It consists in a
mediocrity between two extremes, that is, too little, or too much: For example;
Charity is between a coldness or indevotion, and an indiscreet Zeal: Fortitude
between rashness and cowardice; so of the rest: Wherefore the art is, so to
steer your course as to keep at an equal distance from them both, yet always
mindful, that if one be more dangerous than the other, you are most to decline
that; as if I would embrace the virtue of hope, which is beset with presumption
and despair, and my complexion cold and melancholy draws me on the extremity
of despair, this certainly most threatens my ruin, and therefore I am to look
upon every spark of that with more apprehension, than a fire which issues from
presumption.

Our Holy Penitent knew that whilst he sailed in the Ocean of this World, he
must needs be flanked with two dangerous Rocks, that is two opposite vices to
any virtue he would embrace, so that if he keep not a steady hand to the helm,
by the least diversion he is cast upon a shelf which will destroy him:
Wherefore it behooves him to fit himself with a right spirit, a Spirit of
virtue, which leaning upon the Principles of reason, might preserve him in that
degree of honor wherein he is ranked amidst created Beings. For as knowledge
makes one knowing, so virtue gives us the title of good, and as the good of any
thing consists in the just measure and proportion unto it; he concludes this
right spirit of virtue to be a purchase worthy his ambition; since doubtless
nothing to Man as Man is more suitable and agreeing, than such actions as are
produced conformable to a reasonable nature; he anticipates his Son's
Declaration, and thinks nothing profitable, pleasant, or great, which is not
made so by virtue: This right spirit will shower down spiritual comforts,
settle him in peace with God, Angels, and Men; shelter him under the wings of
God's Providence, which never fails to cherish those who live according to the
rules of virtue; and after a life attempered with the Harmony of delightful
actions, it changes into swee^ss, the grim face of Death, making it a secure
passage unto eternal Beatitude, He is resolved to put in execution the practice
both of intellectual and moral virtues, and that they may prove meritorious, he
begs they may be infused into him, that when he considers the infinity of God's
Being, and the immensity of his perfections, he may forthwith pay him the just
tribute of glory, respect, and submission; all worship, praise, and possible
endeavors of Piety: That his omnipotency may never pass his thoughts without
an entire obedience to his will, that his inexhausted and unerring wisdom may
draw him to acts of faith, and firm assent to his divine word. That the
fidelity of his never failing promises may fix a reliance, and assured hope in
him: That his unwearied goodness may ravish him into a charity and love never
to be extinguished. That his incomparable greatness may work him into the
annihilation of himself before him, and give him a true feeling of his own
vileness. That a terror of his judgments may throw him into a course of rigid
penance for his misdeeds, and his unspeakable favors be met with all the
Testimonies of gratitude, which a poor Creature can give: He knows that had he
a Million of hearts lodged within his own person, yet could they never reach
that love his goodness merits, and should he stoop even unto Hell; nay lower
were it possible, it would still be short of that submission due to his
greatness: Wherefore though he be hopeless to pay what he owes, he will show at
least he has a will to be just, nor does he blush at his impotency, since it
springs from the excellency of his Creditour, from whom likewise he expects to
be enabled toward the discharge of his arrears, and he conceives no treasure
can be more effectual than that of a right spirit, and therefore he incessantly
repeats; renew in my bowels a right spirit.

The Application.
God will be adored in spirit and truth, wherefore man is to serve and honor
him, by a certain knowledge suitable to his intellectual nature; now in the
essence of God are contained wonders not to be comprehended by the natural
force of our understanding: Whence we are with our Holy Penitent to Petition
for a right spirit, that is the excellent light of faith, by which we are
raised to a more eminent knowledge of the Divinity, than all the activity and
vigor of our reason could ever reach. In this knowledge consists eternal life,
in the ignorance of this eternal death: For with what Face shall he one day ask
Heaven of the adorable Trinity, who has never known that mystery? Or claim a
share in the fruit of our redemption, who has been ignorant of Jesus Christ?
Let us then beg for this heavenly wisdom, by which we are taken off from the
low affection to Creatures, to fix our Eyes upon the greatness of our Creator,
the wonders of his works, and amidst a Million of ravishing objects which this
right spirit presents to our meditation, let us insist with a particular gust
on this, that our Souls are created for eternal bliss;

Amen.
CHAP. XXIII.
Ne projicias me a facie tua,

Cast me not away from thy face.


OUr Holy Penitent seems here to question the success of his precedent
petition, by which he had sued for a right understanding; this argues how
unsettled the mind of a sinner is, that no sooner he had aimed at this
irradiation, but immediately he is struck with a terror of his demerits, and
fancies his doom is to be eternally banished from the Face of God, wherefore he
cries, cast me not away from thy Face.

St. Hierom conceives this clause levels only at the communication of his
Divinity in order to the Hypostatick union, which he apprehends in punishment
of his sin might be concealed from him; and therefore he says, cast me not
away from thy face; that is, deprive me not of the knowledge of thy divine
nature as it relates to Man in the great Sacrament of the incarnation: It is
this mystery he fears to be ravished off, which brings along with it a fullness
of time, and wherein all the groans and labors of many longing Souls will
cease and be at rest.

But the more vogued opinion lays this expression upon his anxiety touching
his eternal reprobation: He knew he was unworthy of eternal life through the
forfeiture of grace he had made, and whether being now a Vessel of dishonor,
the divine Artist will not leave him eternally in this reproachful mould is the
just motive of his fear. He remembers a passage in Exodus, where our Lord
threatens to obdurate the heart of Pharaoh, and it is no less affrighting what
St. Paul declares, that God is merciful on whom he will have mercy; and in the
Fourth Chapter to the Corinthians, God has cast an obcaecation on the Minds of
unbelievers. Yet our Petitioner is too good a Divine as (entertaining these
reflections) to make God the efficient cause of Man's obdurateness, he knows
that God is only permissive, and accidentally concurring unto final
impenitency; that is, in not imparting his grace dissolving Hearts unto such as
will not receive it; for since they obstinately cleave unto sin, he is not
obliged to violence the liberty of Man's freewill which he has in his Creation
decreed unto him: Nor prodigally throw away his precious grace upon those who
contemn it; Wherefore the penal substraction of his grace springs not from the
slow current of mercy to a sinner: For it is always ready to flow where the
Channel is cut out, and prepared to receive it; but from the malice of Man by
which he is totally averted from God, opposite and refractory to his holy
inspirations.

When therefore he begs not to be sequestered from his face, far be it from his
thoughts to impeach God as Author of obdurateness; it would only speak he is
cause of the punishment not the fault: That if by the prevarication of our
first Parent we were reduced to such a condition, as God might justly leave us
to our selves, much more by actual sin do we deserve it; and in this
dereliction we can never rise, nor frame a supernatural act, without which it
is not possible to attain unto Salvation: So that if God will use his own
right, and divert his face, that is the effects of his goodness and mercy from
him, he gives himself for lost, and so justly lost as not to have the least
matter of complaint against his Judge: Nay on the contrary he joins issue with
the Prophet Esaias; saying, Lord, if all the Nations thou have made should
perish, who can blame thee. If God has drawn some out of the gulf of perdition
to issue forth the Marks of his goodness, even in the height and fury of their
malice, this is no warrant to our Petitioner that for his sake he will break
the ordinary rule of his providence: he rather apprehends he may be made an
Example of his Justice, and be abandoned to his corrupt inclinations, wherefore
he petitions that he would daign to cast a benign Eye upon him, nor throw him
away from his blessed face.

Another dismal thought occurs which eggs him on to this demand, and it ought
certainly to be very dreadful to a sinner; that is, there is a certain period
set to every Man's transgressions, which is called the measure of his
iniquities, and if this be once completed, such a Cloud of obstinacy and
perseverance in evil involves him, as he never will be cheered with the
Sunshine of God's mercy: This proceeding has been evident in the downfall of
several Nations and Cities, whose excess of wickedness has drawn upon them the
exterminating hand of God. Our Holy Penitent first places before his Eyes the
universal deluge, where it is declared that the World had accomplished their
malice, and by it so prepared the divine Justice, as there wanted nothing but
his avenging Rod to fall heavy upon them. Again, as to the Land of promise
designed to the Seed of Abraham, God told him he could not yet perform it, and
his patience awaited the space of four hundred years until the Amorites, and
Canaanites had summed up their iniquities, after which they were made a prey to
the Children of Israel. In sequel of this our Holy Penitent concludes, that
though these examples in a vast multitude were remarkable, and terrifying, yet
God's judgments hold the same method in the concern of every particular Soul.
Besides, his fears increase when he considers that God's patience is spun out
longer with some than others; and whether his last sin might not be the upshot
and close of all God's special favors to him, he knows not: Wherefore in this
suspense, and just subject of apprehension, he petitions not to be thrown away
from his face.

Our Holy Penitent finds notwithstanding some glimmerings of comfort, when he
revolves in hes Mind the marks of this helpless desolation. First he remembers
when the Sodomites were consumed in the flames of his anger, the Harbinger of
their destruction was their notorious and public commission of their crimes,
and this joined with such impudence as to vaunt and boast of their impieties.
Our sad Penitent found himself not guilty of this, for what contrivances had he
nol framed to conceal his sin, and when reproved by Nathan presently with shame
and confusion he owned his miscarriage.

The next presage of Reprobation is obstinacy which was laid before him in the
person of Pharaoh, whose hardened heart not all the importunities of Moses, nor
the prodigious wonders he wrought, could in the least mollify, nor, work him to
the dismission of God's people: When therefore you behold a person so bent upon
his wicked ways, as no remonstrance, entreaty, promise nor threat can prevail,
you have reason to believe (as St. Paul says) they are given up to a reprobate
sense, which insensibly and unawares will bring them to endless ruin.

Our Petitioner cannot likewise accuse himself of this prelude to perdition;
this present Psalm (which he composed immediately after the Prophet from the
part of God had denounced unto him his ingratitude) sufficiently evinces, he
was not deaf to the workings of God's inspirations, nor impenetrable against
the power of exciting grace.

Another cause of God's dereliction is an habitual application to a certain
sin, to which one is so fastened, as his ordinary grace has no effect to draw
him from it; and God is pleased not to gratify him with any thing extraordinary
in punishment of his transgressions, having so often abused his mercy: This
habitual malice was evident in the Jews, who from age to age had persecuted the
Prophets, sent to mind them of their duties, insomuch as St. Stephen laid it to
their charge, and defied them to name any one who had escaped their fury; and
this they continued, until at last they laid their hands on the Saint of
Saints Christ Jesus; after which Sacrilegious act, arrived at the utmost pitch
of their demerits, they were given up to the Tyranny of the Romans, who totally
subverted their City and Nation.

Our Penitent had reason to hope his deviation was an effect of frailty rather
than malice, having not continued any space without repentance, when once his
sin was represented to him by the Minister of God's word, yet knowing the web
of Man's Salvation to be wrapped up in the secret of the Divine Providence, that
though he had revealed to many of his Servants the glad tidings of their
predestination, yet never had he to any communicated the doom of reprobation,
lest it might cast them into despair; therefore he thinks it the wisest course
to sail between hope and fear, and in all events to implore, that he may not be
excluded from his sight.

Some again weighing the subsequent verse, where our Penitent petitions God not
to take away from him his holy spirit, are of Opinion that this demand imports
not a dread of reprobation (for he seems to thinks himself in the possession of
grace) but argues rather a fear to have stopped the sacred stream of God's
extraordinary favors toward him: For he was so well versed in the ways of
perfection, as he knew the foundation of a life of Sanctity consists in the
good management of divine inspirations, and that the greatest Saints have from
thence derived their happy success in a spiritual life. We see no King nor
Commonwealth, if they find any person unfaithful in a slight Office, that will
entrust to him a more weighty charge; and why should we think that God will be
less prudent in the Government of Souls. St. Prosper says that God imparts his
graces in order, and by degrees: First distilling into them some little dropps
of his grace, and then a greater quantity, in case those first be carefully
improved; it being a good earnest, that he who acquits himself with fidelity in
ordinary things, will in matters of greater perfection come off with no less
honor. Whereas on the contrary, the first step to the misfortune of a sinner,
is made by the neglect of God's early inspirations in the beginning: For there
is not any Pagan, misbeliever, or Christian, whom he stirs not up to the common
practice of virtue, as obsequiousness to our Parents, the avoiding Theft,
Luxury, and the like; and if they comply with these, he fails not to inflame
them with desires, and gives them abilities to arrive at more sublime
perfection.

Wherefore our Penitent fears he may have demerited in this Nature, and begs
not to be excluded from his face; that is, not to be deprived of those
endearments wherewith he is wont to overwhelm such Souls as correspond with his
inspirations; and if hitherto he has played the Coy one, and scorned his
dalliances; for the future he will change his humor, and cherish every the
least motion of his dear Creator: He will aim at a perfect resemblance of his
beloved; in imitation of his wisdom he will discern good from evil, and
distinguish 'twixt the less and greater good always embracing that which is
best. In order to his purity as much as is consistent with frail nature,
supported by grace he hopes to preserve himself from all stain and
imperfection. That some sparks of his charity may shine in him, he will love
that which God loves, and love nothing but what he loves, and upon the same
motives whereon his love is grounded In a word, he will unite all his faculties
with God in as strict an alliance as this present condition of mortality will
bear, provided he be not exiled from his Face, nor the floodgates of gracious
communications shut up in punishment of his past offenses.

Whilst the person offended admits the offendour to his presence, it argues
there is not an utter breach between them, wherefore till a sentence of
banishment be passed, he still retains some hope; his aim then in this petition
is, to put a bar to this extremity of rigor; He confesses it is a bitter
thing to leave God, but yet a far greater to be left by him; and a main
appearance of this is, when he leaves us to the desires of our own heart; like
a Physician who permits his patient in a desperate condition to eat and drink
what he please: He knows the anger of God is great when he is not angry with a
sinner, and that it is a stroke of his goodness, when his temporal chastisement
immediately follows the offense; so that if he please to afflict him, and like
a Jealous God issue forth his indignation upon the place for every
misdemeanour, He is ready to embrace with open arms what ever affliction he
shall send, and is willing to expose his breast to the direst shafts of his
fury; so it may but divert this great subject of his fears, as to be ternally
cast out from his presence. Neprojicias me, etc.

The Application.
We behold by this clause, how all along in this petition our Penitent has
been terrifyed with the ugly shape of sin; and now he begins to apprehend the
effects of sin which is Death: For Death and sin considered apart are very
frightful, but once joined together, that is to dye in sin, there is nothing
more dreadful: and this dismal stroke he fears, when he says cast me not away
from thy face. St. John Damascene observes two derelictions of God; the one
seeming, when he permits the just to fall into sin, that by experiment of their
frailty, they might rise more humble, and more watchfully attend to their
Salvation. This happened to our Penitent St. Peter, and diverse others. The
other is absolute, and a final cashier for ever, and this happens when after
all remedies applied, a Soul remains stupid, and incurable (even to the last)
by his obstinate perseverance in wickedness: so that God foreseeing this
obdurateness withholds his special grace, and so lets him end in his
impenitency; we are here therefore to join with our Petitioner, and beg we may
not come to this period, or consummation of our iniquities, but timely lay hold
on the shield of his mercy:

Amen.
CHAP. XXIV.
Et spiritum Sanctum tuum ne auferas a me,

And take not from me thy holy Spirit.


THe workings of God's Holy Spirit in our Souls are great secrets, and if to
our selves unknown, no wonder that to others they lie hid, and though he be in
us after a quite different manner, than he is said to be ubiquitary by his
essence, presence, and power; yet his approach, or recess is so insensible, as
the best persons during this life are left in suspense, ignorant whether they
be in a condition of love, or hatred with their Creator: Of this blessed Job
seemed to complain, saying Chap. 19. If he come I shall not see him, and when
he retires I am in the same Cloud. Notwithstanding God is pleased sometimes
though rarely to dispense with his ordinary proceeding, as to give such marks
of his grace and friendship to a Soul, that it is apparent even to the Eye of
the Body. Of this we have an example in the Feast of Pentecost, when the Holy
Ghost descended upon the Apostles in form of fiery tongues, so replenishing
their Minds with knowledge, and enflaming their Hearts with charity, as the
whole World was in a short time laid prostrate to the power of their doctrine
and miracles.

In this clause of the petition we have likewise reason to pass the same
Opinion of our Holy Penitent, that he had been gratified with the like visible
communication of this divine gift: The past transactions 'twixt God and his
once happy Soul were fresh in his memory, and how he had designed to reveal
unto him many secrets of his Providence: Nay, had given him so many proofs of
inhabiting grace, as one must be strangely stupid not to acknowledge it. Now
here he seems to cheer himself with a confidence, that after his petition for a
clean heart, and right understanding, he is again in the enjoyment of his
blessed presence by grace and charity; wherefore he begs he might always dwell
with him, and that he may never more taste the bitter absence of his Holy
Spirit: Et spiritum sanctum tuum, etc.

Spiritual Men who have employed their thoughts on the subject of the mission
of the divine persons unto Creatures, discover advantages by this Embassy unto
humane nature which seem to surpass all the wonders of our faith; at least they
are conveyed unto us with more sensible delight.

First, they say when a Soul is privileged with a visit from that divine
spirit, she does not only receive inherent and accidental grace, not only
splendours which irradiate, and ardour^ which inflame, but even the substantial
Principium the Holy Ghost from whence they flow. Witness St. Paul 2. ad Romans
The charity of God is diffused through our hearts by the Holy Ghost who is
given to us. The Philosopher says, that two Lovers if possibly would become
but one, because this identity would destroy all fear of separation, and since
they cannot arrive to this, at least by conversation, discourse, and mutual
presence they give themselves to one another. Now the love of God is
all-powerful, no obstacle can hinder the perfect union to which it tends;
wherefore this love enclining the divine person to unite and surrender up
himself unto a Soul, she finds herself immediately fastened to him by other
chains than those of his immensity; it is by grace and charity she is enslaved,
and their efficacy is to prodigious, that were not that divine spirit already
at the door, they would draw him thither and court him to a most intimate
alliance.

Our Holy Penitent well knew the truth of this Divinity by the amorous
operations he had once felt within him; for this great gift of God was no
stranger to him, whence I wonder not if he court its preservation, since in it
is contained the whole treasure of his immense love: If then he shall please to
secure this present to him, he will in return consecrate to his honor all the
fruit of his understanding and will; his thoughts shall ever dwell in him, and
from this meditation he hopes to enkindle such a flame within him as all the
waves of adversity, or allurements of the World shall never be able to quench;
his constant Prayer therefore shall be, withdraw not from me thy holy spirit.

After he had thus considered the dignity of the person communicated to a
devout Soul, he then descends to the particulars of his negotiation.

The first point is, that this divine spirit is the Prin^ipium or great wheel
which gives motion to all her supernatural and meritorious actions, by which
the Soul exceeds her own strength, and gets above all her natural faculties,
and without this spirit Man is feeble, impotent, and can act nothing generous
in a spiritual life.

The second advantage of this Treaty is, that this divine person becomes the
object of our understanding and will, so that he is a known object in a knowing
will, and a beloved object in a loving will; then it is that the Soul has God
within her, who alone entertains, and employes her thoughts and affections; it
is toward him she raises acts of faith and love, setting a value upon him
beyond all the World, as the most excellent Being to whom she can consecrate
herself.

Another benefit of this mission is, that this divine spirit communicates
himself unto a Soul as her sole treasure, and appropriated sovereign good, and
in such a manner, as she will not only find God within her, but likewise that
he belongs to her as her proper right, the serious thought of which happy
possession must doubtless much assuage all the bitterness of this life.

In sequel of these irradiations our Holy Penitent is at a stand, comparing the
liberalities of his good God with his own ingratitude: For God had given
himself up to him, to be the instrument of all his supernatural operations, to
be the object of his thoughts, and repository of his affections; in requital
our unfortunate Penitent rejecting this divine legate, has taken up the arms
of sensualities against him, filled his memory with Earthly species, and
consulted with brutish passions! O bad exchange? When he had thus reproached
himself of his disloyalty, he then converts his Eye to the shipwreck he had
made, for by one mortal sin he has lost God, as he is God of grace and glory;
though not as he is God of nature, for as such a one he still remains to cast
thunderbolts of vengeance upon his guilty head; but he is resolved, if the
divine goodness shall please to restore and continue to him himself, in whom is
found the source of so many precious treasures, he will for the future manage
them to his honor, he will glorify him in all eternity, and manifest to the
world, that through his grace he is made worthy not to have his holy spirit
taken from him.

In temporal afflictions we lose (it is true) the gift, but the giver is yet
secured to us; by sin we lose both. So that there is no desolation can happen
equal to what is thrown upon us by sin: For whilst we lie under the guilt of
mortal sin, God is no more the Principium of our meritorious operations, no
more the object of our amorous powers, nor to be claimed as our proper good,
and treasure; and though his infinite beauties and perfections render him
always a source of all good imaginable, yet to a Soul defiled with sin, he is
a spring that diverts his stream in another Channel; he is a treasure locked
up, whose Key is taken away, and all-right of entrance decreed against him:
These are the miserable circumstances which attend the loss of God's holy
spirit, of which our Holy Penitent being very conscious incessantly repeats;
Lord, withdraw not from me thy holy spirit.

Theodoret says, that St. Peter having heard from Christ's own Mouth; Thou
shall thrice deny me; would feign have fled many Leagues from that occasion,
but his love was so great as he held it less evil to follow, and deny him; than
to fly away and confess him: He took so much pleasure in his presence, that he
chose rather to hazard his Soul, than the loss of his blessed sight; deeming
it less unhappiness to renounce him, than not to be in the Eye of him whom he
loved so dearly: If then his corporal presence so ravished this Apostle, what a
charm must it be to possess within us a divine spirit, what solicitude to
preserve this treasure in whose participation consists all the happiness we are
any ways capable of in the condition of this our mortality. Ah blame not then
our Petitioner, if again and again he sues under this form; Lord, take not thy
holy spirit from me.

Many Nations have made their gods Prisoners, chaining them fast in their
Temples, the Lacedaemonians hampered their god Mars with Cords of Silk; Hercules
with Fetters of Gold, fancying to themselves, that if they could enjoy their
Company though by violence, they should not want their protection.

Our Holy Penitent thought the best stratagem to fasten his God unto him, was
an humble acknowledgment of his fault; joined with a fervent prayer. In the
First part of his petition he had copiously set forth his own guiltiness, and
now he supplicates in a Subject the most grateful that can be to his Creator;
for his delight is to be with the Sons of Men; It was to draw the World unto
him that he exalted himself upon the Cross; his extended arms there
sufficiently expressed, with what dear embraces he would receive those that fly
unto him with an humble and contrite heart: His thirst there was not so much
the effect of his torments, as an excessive zeal for Man's Salvation: How often
has he justified himself in his proceedings with Man; insomuch as all his
wisdom and love could not contrive more inducements than he has set on foot to
gain us to him, and if he be continually rapping at our door, can we think he
will shut up the treasures of his holy spirit in despite of our importunity:
No, no, great Penitent fear not, prefer your memorial, it is only expected you
ask, and the grant is ready; that his holy spirit shall not be taken from you.

A holy writer observes, that God always gives more than is asked of him: Anna
prayed for a Son, God gave her one that was a Saint, a Prophet, and his chief
favorite: Solomon sued for wisdom to govern his People, he received it not
only to Rule, but he was universally knowing; besides, an infinite store of
wealth was bestowed upon him. The Servant endebted ten thousand Talents
demanded only a little forbearance, and the whole debt was remitted to him;
wherefore our Penitent demanding only to keep what he already enjoyes, by this
providential act he not only secures his possession, but gives earnest for a
new supply. Nay, his goodness always prevents the prayer of the afflicted,
giving them ease of their griefs, before they ask his help; resembling that
fountain which calls and invites the thirsty to drink, or like that Tree which
bending its bows, offers its fruits unto gathering hands, when ripe; so that
God's love needs no baits to allure his favors from him; an affectionate heart
does more with him then all the charms in nature: It is true St. Austin
distinguishes between a willing a thing, and a willing it stoutly and entirely:
But we have all reason to judge the velleity of our Penitent was fervent, and
efficacious, when he has so much confidence as to call God to witness of it:
Tu scis Domine, omne desiderium meum ante te; that he had exposed before him
all the motions of his heart, and left him to be judge whether any circumstance
was wanting that might hinder the effect of his petition; as not to be deprived
of his holy spirit.

St. Austin says, were it impossible for a sinner to hide himself from God, he
would advise him to get into some abstruce retreat, and there lie close till
the Cloud of his anger be blown over, but since this cannot be done, his best
way to escape God's hands, is to put himself into his hands, and prostrate
himself at his feet. Our Penitent then is not ill advised, that being already
enrolled in the list of his retinue to endeavor to prevent his dismission by a
non auferes a me: For he has many advantages whilst he is in, which will be
lost if once cashiered: Now he has the Ear of his Sovereign, can discourse his
case with him, and purchase a good word from many powerful friends, but if once
discarded like a desolate Orphan he will find no refuge. Besides, though God
beheld in his all-seeing prospect the treachery of Judas and ingratitude of the
Jews, yet (to cut off all matter of excuse) he obliged them with all the
endearings imaginable; why shoul not then our Penitent hope to dwell in the
lasting enjoyment of this divine spirit, since he is resolved for the future to
be led by his holy dictamens; he will seek his Salvation with ineffable groans;
it is St. Paul's expression of such as are guided by the Holy Ghost; he will
with the Prophet Jeremy cry out for a fountain of tears, that he may bewail (as
he ought) his own and his peoples sins, and since this divine spirit
communicates himself in so many different ways unto Creatures, he begs he may
return himself a gift and oblation to God, by every thing that is capable of
Action; that by a constant, and unwearied motion in his service, this seed of
glory he now possesses may at last conduct him to the beatifick vision, where
he shall no more apprehend what is now the subject of his Fear: To have his
holy spirit taken from him.

The Application.
St. Ambrose says, that no man in this life can be long secure from falling
into sin, for whom the Devil cannot lay prostrate at the first attack, he
presses with redoubled assaults, and leaves no stratagem unessayed to work his
end. In this warfare our Holy Penitent was not a Novice, he knew there was no
place in Man impregnable, unless fortified by God's Holy Spirit: This he
expresses in another Psalm, If you withdraw (says he) your spirit, we shall
presently resolve into dust; that is, corruption from whence we came. For grace
is a motion in the understanding and will; to wit a certain action in both
these powers, which soon passes away unless fixed by a continued influence of
his favors: Wherefore we must take the admonition of St. Paul and be wary,
that the grace of God prove not a liberality in vain bestowed upon us: But that
we make the right use of it, which is the remission of our sins and a passage
unto eternal life.

CHAP. XXV.
Reddite mihi laetitiam salutaris tui,

Restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation.


IT is not (methinks) easy to determine, whether Man be more unfortunate in not
having a discerning faculty of misery, or through the mistakes he falls into
about the object of his felicity: How many have been seen to languish and pine
away under an accident which they looked upon as their ruin, and yet it proved
their making; whilst others again have triumphed, and made jubilyes for
seeming blessings, that in the end became fatal to them; who would not have
looked upon the Patriarch Joseph when sold to the Madianites but as a slave,
and an abortive of fortune, and yet without this cruelty of his Brethren in all
likelihood he had never handled the Scepter of Egypt. Again, who would not have
envyed the success of our Penitent against Goliath, and yet this glorious
victory occasioned unto him a life full of disturbance for many years how to
preserve himself: This uncertainty in the event of things is managed no doubt
by a special providence, to teach us we ought to bear a temper unalterable
amidst the various occurrences of this life, not to be too much transported
with joy, nor cast down with sadness upon any rencontre, since the effects do
often prove far different from what they promise, and this by the unresistable
ordinations of Heaven, which can draw riches out of poverty, make us great by
humility, give us honor by contempts: In fine, who needs no previous
dispositions in Creatures to frame his productions.

Now to lead us in this labyrinth, that we may not err, Divines distinguish a
twofold joy: The one is temporal which has for its Object riches, honor,
sensual pleasures and the like: So that when our joy reaches but to the petty
interests of this World, this is poor, and argues a baseness of Spirit, which
is angustiated within the limits of flesh and blood, and hopes or fears only
what may prove distastful or pleasant to their present state of Being. The
other branch of joy is eternal, taking its specification from the object which
is God, without end or beginning; it only looks upon him, and it is he alone
that gives the rise to all its motions. One part of this joy is proper for us
here whilst we are in via (as Divines term it) or pilgrims upon earth: the
completion of the other we must expect in patria, when we shall attain to the
mansion of the blessed; it is this joy St. Bernard meant when he says, O good
Jesu if it be so sweet a thing to weep for thee, what will it be to rejoice
with and in thee. So that we are here by a compunctive sorrow to crucify our
selves daily, and by this means dispose our selves for that joy which is
necessarily consequent to such acts.

Our Holy Penitent follows this method in his petition, he knows the effects
of a heart pierced with a virtuous sorrow and repentance, is peace, joy, and
the like: So that though we labor here to steep our selves in bitterness and
anguish, there results out of these agonies a certain contentment in performing
our duties to God, and this so great, as it surpasses all the delights of this
World.

Many Heathen Philosophers have been of Opinion, that virtue it self was a
sufficient reward unto such as embraced it; that is, there springs from good
actions such a satisfaction in conformity to the dictamens of reason, as they
have preferred it before riches, honor, or any sensual pleasure; we have seen
them endure torments of all kind, the hardship of want, the rough trial of
disgraces; and all this with smileing looks, and merely from this Principle,
they took their cause to be good, and that virtue commanded it; believing her
Laws to be more suitable to a reasonable Soul than all the glory and plenty of
the World attended on by injustice and impiety.

Our Ho^y Penitent by his own experience had learnt that in works of Piety,
there is found something which sensibly affects the agent with delight, and be
they never so knotty, yet they are still sweetened with this; that reason is
their guide, that the whole intellectual part applauds the action, which
concurrence of the Souls faculties cannot but be followed with an universal
dilatation of the spirits, and what is this but the height of joy: If then
moral actions, looked upon as apparallel'd in their simple natural colors;
that is, merely confined to the limits of what is good and just by the light of
reason, prove such an Antidote against adversity, as to make them receive the
most embittered Arrows of fortune with cheerful looks: What may we expect when
these are directed to a supernatural end, when they are enriched with the
merits of Jesus Christ, after which our Holy Petitioner languished, and whose
efficacy had influence upon his repentance at the distance of so many
preceding ages, as now it has on ours after so many subsequent revolutions.

It is then for the joy of this Salvation he makes instance, and what a value
must this addition set upon his smallest sufferings? Whence I wonder not to
contemplate much of serenity in the Foreheads of afflicted persons crushed for
virtues sake, for the tempest wherein they are agitated does only bluster about
them, within they enjoy a Harmony and full peace of Mind, even tasting a kind
of Antipast or forenotion of Paradise.

I observe in the Gospel of St. Luke, how Christ our Lord gave a check to his
Disciples, when returning from the exercise of their Apostolic Commissions
they seemed to glory in their power of casting out Devils; and when he had
terrified them with a Memorandum of the Angel's fall, he prescribes rules how
they should lay the foundation of their joy, and satisfaction amidst their
transcending employments, saying, Rejoice in this that your Names are written
in Heaven: First he disallowes not of their joy, but rather animates them to
it; only he dislikes the motive, or more properly to say, sets down what they
ought to lay hold on as the basis of their exultations: Rejoice because your
Names are written in Heaven. That they were zealous in God's service,
charitable, had the gift of tongues, of working miracles, casting out Devils,
and the like; these must not be the groundwork of their contentments; but that
they are by the efficacious Will of God transmitted to a supernatural end, upon
which foundation are built all the spiritual benefits of God toward them, as
their vocation, justification, and glorification: From this Root springs their
calling to be a Christian, to be a member of Christ's true Church, by means of
which they obtain grace, and by the right use of Grace eternal glorification:
This must give birth and life to their joy, and no less to ours; as it did to
our Holy Penitent before his fall, and now restored (as he hopes) to the wonted
caresses of his Creator, he begins to breath after the assurance of his
predestination, which had often occasioned unto him abundant joy: Wherefore he
cries, restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation.

Yet whilst he petitioned for this solid contentment, he was not ignorant that
his Election must proceed from the merciful hand of God, and the Collation of
glory from the interest of his own merits: God first puts us in an infallible
condition to be happy, and then so tempers the circumstances, as we our selves
may be a partial cause of our happiness; he offers the occasions of merit, this
done, he seconds our endeavors so powerfully as the effect; to wit, eternal
glory cannot but follow: So that the joy he sues for, is an assurance to be in
the state of grace and eternally predestinate; that be his combats and assaults
in this life never so furious, he shall overcome: Be his temptations never so
vehement, the issue will be glorious, having his Eyes still fixed upon the Palms
of Beatitude, the assured guerdon of his conflicts, in case, I say, he be in
the number of the Predestinate.

But as to the infallible decrce of predestination, our Holy Penitent knows it
is a secret shut up in the Cabinet of his great Councels; the joy therefore he
aims at here is, that which arises from the mediums consequent to our eternal
Election: For God first designs our Beatitude, and after this the means to
arrive unto it, as to have true faith, to observe the Commandments, to avoid
sin, to practice works of mercy, to have a sincere repentance, a perfect
charity toward God, and our Neighbor, to bear adversity with patience, and
finally to persevere in grace; these actions he knows are the proper
instruments to cause joy within him; in order to this he resolves upon the
punctual accomplishment of his commands, and this vigorously like a Giant both
with firm footing, and with large and nimble paces; nor will he discharge this
Obligation in a cold manner simply to pay what he owes, but with a serious
application of his Mind offering them up to God, and directing them to his
glory with a most holy and pious zeal: Next, he resolves always to do that
which is most acceptable to God, knowing that we cannot give him too much
honor, and that our fidelity engages us not to omit any occasion of doing
good: Lastly, he will be assiduous in framing interior and exterior acts of
virtues, especially such as more immediately lead unto him, he will conspire
with heart and affection to all the services, to all the acts of love, praise
and glorification, that the most perfect Creatures ever have, or shall give
unto him.

His next design in pursuance of this joy is to have an Eye to himself, whom he
beholds like a plat of ground, which must be cultivated, and emboweld ere it be
fruitful: He undertakes this melioration with the tools of fortitude,
temperance, and other virtues; nor is he set on work by the comeliness of
virtue, or turpitude of vice; his final end is the object of all his motion, it
is merely to please God, and glorify him in his Salvation. He knows the
condition of this life is always beset with dangers, and hazzards (alas his
own experience had too freshly taught him this Truth) and that we are in the
midst of sworn mortal Enemies, wherefore he is resolved to bear a strict band,
and purchase victory by a perfect abnegation of himself, of his senses both
interior and exterior, of his memory, understanding, and will, knowing it is
a Nice and Ticklish Combat to overcome by Love.

His third contrivance to joy is, not to fail in what he owes to his Neighbor:
He considers Man issuing from the hands of God, and in a capacity (if faithful
to his Graces) to return unto the same fountain: Wherefore he fears to hate
that person whom God may have designed to love for eternity, and as he loves
God not as a particular, but universal good, so he will cherish, love, and
honor all Souls, as being in a possibility of enjoying him.

This is the foundation our Holy Penitent lays for the superstructure of his
joy; remitting the rest to the disposal of that all comprehending Architect,
whose lines are drawn severally according to the rule of his providence: For
when a Soul whom he has gratified with endearments of spiritual relishes, and
ineffable delights happens to forfeit by some default the subtraction of his
grace, sometimes upon her repentance he not only admits her again to his
favor, but also to her wonted ravishments, nay to that degree as even she
seems to have gained by her loss: Sometimes again he is pleased barely to Seal
his pardon, without any further communication of those Enthusiastic throws,
she used to feel in her amorous transports. Now I find our Penitent in this his
petition is desirous to regain all, and this appears in diverse others of his
Psalms, where he suffers strange convulsions in his desires to be united unto
God, and now born up with a restless longing, he sighs forth, restore me the
joy of thy Salvation.

St. Gregory puts this distinction 'twixt corporal and spiritual pleasures,
that the former not had, push us on to vehement desires for the acquisition,
but when enjoyed they presently cloy, and beget a nauceousness; the other give
very little insentives when absent, yet being once possessed they are still
coveted, because still creating new delights, and though to be kept in desire
and hope be a kind of torment in Earthly enjoyments, yet it is not so when they
relate to Heavenly treasures; the reason is, God has deputed Earth for our
hopes, and Heaven for our bliss: If here we are mindful of Celestial glory, and
make it the subject of our thoughts, and desires, every the least glimmering
hope of that blessed state will produce ineffable joy within us. There is
nothing says St: Basil which ought so much to ravish Man, as to reflect that
he is designed to so noble an end, as to enjoy God's immense perfections for
all eternity: Whence he inferrs the sole way to anticipate our happiness, is to
think continually on him, to consider that our Souls shall be translated and as
it were dissolved into his divine essence: Wherefore he exhorts us to the
imitation of Painters, who aiming at the performance of a rare piece, have
their Eyes always fixed upon the Original: But if we pervert this order, and
make the Earth our Heaven, enjoy that we should but use, what must be the
issue; for after a long enquest, passing from one delight to another, our
thirst is never satisfied: Whence the pleasures of this life are resembled to
brackish waters, which still the more you drink, the more you increase your
thirst; nay they have this additional circumstance of woe, that their drowth
shall never be quenched in this life, nor in the next; not in this, for Christ
our Lord positively declared it to the Samaritan, that those who swill
themselves with the puddle of Earthly pleasures shall be always thirsty and
panting after new refreshments: Not in the next life, for the whole extent of
Hell could not afford the unfortunate rich man one drop of water, a little to
allay the vehemence of his enraging heat. I remember Philo the Jew treating of
Earthly delights calls them furta Coeli the plunder of Heaven: So that who
enjoyes them steals them from thence; now as a thief retains what he has got
by rapine with a continual fear and jealousy, which still moderates and allayes
the contentment of his acquests, so doubtless there is nothing transitory can
give a true satisfaction to the owner.

Our Holy Penitent was very sensible of this Truth, and grown weary of the
World's prosperity, confesses in another Psalm, that his Soul could find no
comfort but in the meditation of everlasting joy; as in this the whole scope of
his petition is, that as Abraham was ready at God's command to sacrifice Isaac
his sole joy and contentment in this life, so he is ready to renounce his
lovely Absalom, or any thing most dear to him in this World, that by this
dispropriation he may make a passage to that lasting joy which attends his
Salvation. Wherefore he will never cease to implore, restore unto me the joy of
thy Salvation.

The Application.
Our Penitent insinuates the high contentment he once received, when a darling
to Heaven he had promises made him, that out of his Line should issue forth the
Worlds Savior; and as the perpetuity, of his blood to continue in the Throne
was fastened to his posterity, upon a condition that they observed his Laws,
which promise was evacuated (he fears) by his transgressions: Wherefore now
readmitted into favor, he hopes to be restored to all his former privileges
and amongst all, he most covets an assurance touching the coming of the
Messiah. This is the joy of Salvation after which he languishes. In imitation
we must rejoice, in that the Incarnate word is come, and redouble our joy in
the reflection of his glorious qualities: First, that this sacred humanity is
distained from all the corruptions of our nature; and though it be of the same
species with ours, yet it far surpasses all created things, even in the first
rank of Angels. Next, his flesh miraculously framed by the operation of the
Holy Ghost, of the blood of a Virgin all immaculate, was so pure as no ray of
the Sun could be equalled to it. Lastly, into this unspotted flesh was infused
a Soul of a beauty ineffable, adorned with grace, knowledge, and all
supernatural habits, as God himself judged it not unworthy of his personal
union. Let then this accomplished wonder of all perfection be the subject of
our prayer, that we may possess the joy of thy Salvation.

Amen.
CHAP. XXVI.
Et spiritu principali confirma me,

And confirm me with a principal Spirit.


MEthinks our Penitent by this clause seems to have shaken off his Chains, and
fortifyed with the Seal of his pardon begins to fly at all. He had laid claim
to the Holy Ghost; next, he expostulates for the restitution of his primary
effect which is joy. Now he would have a principal Spirit which might lead him
to perfection, and by that means put him into the best posture of security from
a relaps, as our present condition can bear; saying, confirm me with a
principal spirit.

This perfection or principal spirit so called, because it leads to generous
and noble exploits, consists in a concourse of virtuous habits disposing the
Soul to actions most holy and meritorious. Our Penitent aims by it to endear
himself to God, and to prove just and obliging to his Neighbor: As to the
first, this noble spirit settles the Soul in a perfect repose; and as the
Needle always points toward the North Pole, so all her affections guided by
this spirit tend, and rest quiet in God: She looks upon herself in the
condition of his spouse, a quality the most sublime she can be capable off, by
which she is enabled to lead a life answerable to that title: She has no
remorse of conscience, as being at a great distance from sin, she is enriched
with peace, sheltered under God's special Providence, and has power to bend
his will by her prayer to any thing she desires, because she desires nothing
but what is good: Her thoughts are all celestial, her affections all pure, and
her life no less admirable than it is rare. No wonder then if our Penitent
after a grant of Jubilyes, always cheerful, always ravished with pledges of
Salvation should petition for this spirit of perfection, which might secure all
these advantages to him; confirm me with a principal spirit.

It is this wisdom our Penitent aims at which irradiates, enflames, and gives
to the Soul a relish of Heavenly comforts; this is the Evangelical Pearl for
whose purchase the wise Merchant sold all he had, and it is a good bargain; for
St. Paul says, a Soul adorned with perfection is of such a value as the Earth
deserves not to bear her, and Solomon preferrs one single person fearing God
before a thousand impious Sons; nay God is pleased to own a special protection
of his perfect Servants, styling himself particularly the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob: So that I doubt not, one Soul endued with Perfection does
alone more glorify God, than an infinity of others that languish and consume
their lives in coldness and indevotion: Our Penitent therefore becomes now
ambitious of promoting God's honor, supplicates for a spirit of perfection,
and though he knows usually it is not attained to but by a long practice of
virtues, yet Almighty God is pleased sometimes to dispense in this proceeding,
and in a moment raises to a high degree such as he has designed for his
choicest favors; and truly he had so far experienced God's liberal hand
toward himself, that he might reasonably hope to obtain whatsoever he made the
subject of his request, as here with all fervor and zeal he petitions; comfirm
me with a principal spirit.

Many Divines are of Opinion, that Christ our Lord suffered more in the rude
combat of his passion for the most perfect Souls, than for others: For though
he offered up his blood for the redemption of all Mankind, yet all did not
equally share in the fruit of his passion: Some only have conveyed to them by
it sufficient means of their Salvation without any other effect; others also
receive from thence the true remission of their sins; but perfect Souls are
raised by this oblation to a strange pitch in a spiritual life; and in
consequence to that, to a degree of most eminent glory: Wherefore the passion
of Christ is to them effectively more beneficial. This position they prove out
of the Canticles, where Christ speaking to a beloved Soul says, vulnerasti Cor
meum; that is to say, there is not a hair of her head, dart of her Eye, least
motion of her heart, or limb, which cost him not a wound; because they all
import acts of obedience, humility, and love, toward him; and therefore it was
a pleasing wound, since it was to be to them matter of all their spiritual
benedictions: Whence you may see that Christ our Lord does not like Creatures
who love the less those persons that have caused unto them the greater
sufferings, for one act of gratitude on our part is of a virtue so sovereign,
as it heals and closes up all his wounds.

If then his passion however bitter in it self was made delightful to him in
regard of the just whom he foresaw would make good use of it; how ought it to
affect those who reap the benefit; it is this satisfaction after which our
Penitent aspires, for in this a double contentment arrives to perfect Souls:
First, in that his love made him suffer so liberally for them: Next, in that
they have contributed to allay the acerbities of his passion, by the
foreknowledge he had of their compliance with his grace. O what solid matter of
joy? Now you must know that our Penitent looked upon himself as much concerned
in the fruit and participation of Christ's merits, as those who were to live
after his coming and visible appearance upon Earth. Our Petitioner in the
preceding verse expresses himself in the Terms of thy salvation, that is,
purchased by the merits of Christ Godman. The Church calls it a happy fault in
that it merited so great a Redeemer, in the same sense our Penitent
contemplating the cause of his redemption, admires his happy deliverance, and
urges for this spirit of perfection, that as the just was to be the motive of a
more copious effusion of his blood, so he becoming perfect might assuage his
torments; to which end he cries, confirm me with a principal spirit.

Again, our Penitent is animated to this his petition upon the consideration,
that when a perfect Soul whom God has designed to salvation falls into any
notable default (as she may, not being impeccable) he lets her not lie mired in
the filth of sin without any feeling of her condition, but presently solicits
her with his exciting graces, and this with such importunity as he told St.
Paul, it was hard for him to play the obstinate against so many darts of his
love, and if ever that parable was fulfilled, where out Savior having found
the lost sheep, witnesses more joy for the recovery of that one, than of the
Ninety nine he had left in the desert, it is certainly in the resettlement of a
Soul in his favor, whom he has marked out to be his: It Is true, sometimes
Almighty God withdraws his sustaining hand, and permits them to dash upon the
Rock of offense, so to humble them; that sin might effect what his Grace could
not, yet the conclusion is always to their greater good; and if he makes use
of so many stratagems to bring them to their former state of happiness, being
once re^urned, with what profusions of his bounty, with what inundations of his
grace does he overflow them? It is then a Soul makes a new oblation of herself
to God, renewing her vows and promises, and soon regains her former luster;
nay becomes more accomplished improving still her light and virtue, and with
these penitential ornaments she invites her Espouse to a visit, who declares in
the Canticles, that he is descended into the Garden of Filberts, and amidst the
Apples of the Valleys. Intimating by these words, that his satisfaction is to
behold a Soul (freed from the sink of sin) to spring anew, and bud forth in the
practice of eminent virtues, to see her like fire always in motion, acting
generous things for his service: To hear her amidst the baits of this world to
send forth amorous Sighs after him, passionately coveting to be discharged from
the mass of the body, so to arrive at the fruition of him, and he is so good as
to answer every motion of this converted Soul: She never looks on him, but he
amorously casts an Eye upon her; she never thinks on him, but he requites the
kindness with a thought on her; she never gives herself unto him, but he as
liberally bestows himself upon her: These are the entertainments our Holy
Penitent does promise to himself by means of this spirit of perfection; he
confesses he has been humbled by his sin: Next, he hopes he is raised by his
Grace, and now he expects the consequence of his merciful reconciliation;
imploring, confirm me with a principal spirit.

When I read this clause, it minds me of what St. Paul says, that where sin
has abounded, there Grace does many times superabound: For doubtless nothing
adds wings to the fervor of a true Penitent, like to the remembrance of their
past failings, whence I gather our Petitioner, upon these seeds of his
restoration, will add a superstructure of mystic Divinity, and raise himself
to as high a pitch of Union with God, as in this life Man is capable of. But in
this enterprise he is ignorant what method to follow, because no certain rule
is set down by God for its acquisition, it being a pure gift of his, like Grace
gratis given; that we might know we have a Master in Heaven, who instructs
immediately by himself his Disciples in the maxims of true wisdom: Wherefore
our Penitent trusts not to his own industry or virtue, but supplicates for
divine immissions, as a thing independent of any other means than his own free
Donation; confirm me with a principal spirit.

This Science of mystic Divinity is defined an experimental knowledge of God,
arising from a most elevated union of the will with him: For the will is the
Organ of a spiritual relish, by which Man tastes the sweetness of God, and by
this experience teaches the understanding what God is: Now this savor, taste,
or spiritual feeling may be said to be a kind of knowing; because love it self
according to St. Austin is a knowledge; but a knowledge so secret as
unintelligible to any but the person in whom it is; as it is commonly said of a
smart pain, none can so justly conceive it as he that suffers. Now our Penitent
thirsts after this banquet, he knows it fortifies and confirms a Soul in the
practice of devotion, and at a pinch sustains her in the rude combats of
temptations: For being united unto God, she is above all the attractives, and
violence of Creatures: So that enjoying this delicious guest by an experimental
knowledge, there is doubtless nothing in this World of force to separate her
from God: This Job seems to insinuate Chap. 1. Place me near to thee, and I
fear not the attempt of any: And St. Paul likewise apprehending himself in this
secure state sets the whole World at defiance, who (says he) shall separate me
from the love of Jesus Christ.

As this security must needs give birth to continual acts of joy: No less are
the ravishments which overwhelm a Soul in the practice of this devotion; for it
is a certain lively experiment of God's intimate presence, of his essence, of
his perfections and divine operations; and this with an experimental affection
or strong assurance that we love God, that we make his glory our interest, that
by complacence and friendship we share in what he has, it being the Nature of
true love to make all things common.

The first effect is to work a complete Metamorphosie in us; for to transform a
thing, is to separate it from its natural form, and communicate another not
only interior but exterior: Now when a Soul is arrived to a holy complacence
in God, and to a strict amity with him, she is divested of the form of sin, and
vicious affections, which was her natural inclination, and receives within the
Center of her heart, new affections, desires wholly Divine, and motions quite
different from what Nature prompts her to: This made St. Paul cry I live now,
not I, but Christ does live in me; and this same motive gave life to our
Petitioners present address, that gaining this spirit of perfection he might
loose himself, and by that enterchange come to know what God is: That he is a
source of goodness, eminency and beauty; that he merits all honor, glory,
reverence, and praise: Then comparing himself to God, he beholds how vile
captive, and contemptible a Creature he is: Lastly, comparing God to himself,
he admires the greatness of his clemency and sweetness that designs to lodge in
so despicable a place as his conscience, the inestimable treasures of his
wisdom, hence enfired with a glowing flame of love, he can think on nothing but
him, study no satisfaction that relates not to him, and abhorrs all sensual
pleasure whatsoever: In sequel of this arises a delight and sweetness, which
surpasses all that is Earth; Nay even the capacity of Man in this life, as many
Saints have witnessed the same, crying out, O Deus contine undas gratiae. That
such a torrent of delights overwhelmed them as if they were not moderated, they
must needs have opened a passage unto Death; O! Who would not be overcome by
such a conquering spirit; confirm me with a principal spirit.

Another effect of this spirit is to settle the Soul in a great quiet and
repose, free from all joy, grief or the like; for every thing is at rest when
in its proper place and center: Now God is our Souls final end, nor can she be
more intimately united unto him in this life than by the power of this
Celestial Philosophy, wherefore the storms of passions very little molest a
Soul enriched with this spirit; all things pass in peace and tranquillity, and
though it be true that we must still labor in a certain languishment and
desire, until we reach our Center, yet this is so attempered by the goodness of
God, as it is no ways Irksome.

A holy person expresses this very pathetically; saying, My Lord and God, who
art the support and strength of those who faithfully seek you, at the entrance
of your Paradise I behold you, and beholding I cannot yet say what Object I
have bofere me, because I see nothing that is visible; there is only one thing
I dare own to know, that I am both ignorant of what I see, nor shall I be ever
able to know it: For raising my Soul to the highest pitch I find you infinite,
and incomprehensible beyond the access of my imagination, and whilst my
thoughts would go on, and make a further inquisition, a mist of ignorance
surrounds me: But Oh my God, what is this ignorance but a learned ignorance!
Nox illuminatio mea in deliciis meis; this obscure Night is a splendor
overspread with delights, the sum of my joy and consolation in this life; is to
consider that you are infinity it self, incomprehensible and an inexhausted
Treasure. What felicity one day to possess in glory a good without end, and
which exceeds what the understanding can imagine, the heart desire, or tongue
can express, and that these Clouds which now involve us shall break forth into
a Day of eternal Sunshine. By which you may see, that holy persons in these
admirable transactions, though they are left in darkness, and meet not with a
complete allay of all their desires, yet it breeds no disquiet, and all the
rest is supplied by a perfect submission to the will of God, not desiring even
Heaven it self but according to the measure of his degree.

Our Holy Penitent having received the fruit of one part of this meditation by
his gracious deliverance from the servitude of sin, he now covets to be
sheltered under the secure Bastion of this principal spirit; Confirm me, etc.

Some expositours understand by this principal spirit the first person of the
blessed Trinity, unto whom power is peculiarly attributed: Whence they infer
in this petition he pretends to a gift of Rule and Government, that by his
prudent orders circumstanced with Religion, he might induce his Subjects to pay
what they owe to God, himself, and to one another: By which that chosen Nation
committed to his guidance might flourish, and he himself make some reparation
for the sufferings thrown upon them in punishment of his transgressions.

Others conceive, that by this clause he aims at the Spirit of Prophecy,
because in the subsequent verse he undertakes to play the Master, and teach the
wicked, Principles of Heaven, to which nothing would more conduce than a
prophetic faculty.

Notwithstanding these Opinions, I adhere to my first conception, that the
spirit of perfection is the scope of his desires, because it includes the
others; for perfection is styled by Masters of spirituality a spirit of wisdom,
and by consequence proper for a Governor; and as to Revelation it is most
certain that contemplatives are illuminated, and receive irradiations which
naturally they could not attain to; they are often so surcharged with
supernatural lights, and knowledge, a prospect of the World's Scene being laid
open to them, as even ravished with admiration they seem to suffer with an
excess of communications, which made our Holy Penitent in some such like
transport cry out. Anima mea cognoscit nimis; that the divine operations within
his Soul exceed the limits of her capacity. Wherefore we conclude, that
perfection is an abreviate of Gods Universal favors to Man, and that our Holy
Penitent in this his petition comprehends what soever he can ask; confirm me
with a principal spirit.

The Application.
We are taught in this clause to aspire unto perfection which consists in these
degrees. The first is to obtain grace and charity; this perfection is requisite
to all Christians, and is so essential to a spiritual life that without it we
cannot make one step toward Heaven. The second perfection is of council, and
consists in a certain disposition of the Soul, to perform readily and without
difficulty on her part, not only what is commanded, but also works of
supererogation; and this in a manner more pure, and more spiritual than usually
is done; to this Christ our Lord exhorts us in the fifth of St. Matthew; Be ye
perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect. The third perfection consists in
eternal felicity, where we shall be united to a sovereign good, by a clear
vision and fervent love. This is called our final perfection, because there is
none greater. The other two branches are but the means to arrive at this. The
subject then of our petition must be to attain to our Beatitude, and this is
truly to be confirmed with a principal spirit.

Amen.
CHAP. XXVII.
Docebo iniquos vias tuas,

I will teach the wicked thy ways.


OUr Holy Penitent like a Soldier completely armed (who expects but the Signal
to fall on) believes himself now fittted for great designs: His first
undertaking is to chaulk out the wicked the Paths of Salvation, an enterprise
worthy so great a Prince, and so great a Penitent; and which Christ our Lord an
increated wisdom made the sole motive of his becoming Man. This he declares in
express terms, asserting that he came not to call the just but sinners: Upon
this foundation I conceive he imposed upon us an obligation of loving our
Neighbor, as our selves: By virtue of which command we are to expose our
corporal life and fortune for the preservation of our Neighbors spiritual
good; if Christ sets so high a value on a drop of water, or scrap of bread
given in his Name to relieve the want of a distressed person, as that he will
own it as done to himself; what may we expect in return when we prevent the
eternal misery of our Neighbor, which is the necessary consequence of sin not
defaced by repentance. These reflections so transported, St. Gregory the great
as to make him say, The very Angels do envy Man in the conversion of a sinner:
Nay, they would be content to quit even the beatifick Vision for a while, that
they might render to God the service of gaining one Soul; and could they repine
at any thing, it should be in not having Tongues sensibly to express themselves
in order to this end. Wherefore you may see by this clause our Penitent is
grateful, he will not like the sluggish steward bury his Talent in the Ground,
but improve it, and this by the noblest way of Traffic increasing the number
of the blessed: I will teach the wicked thy ways.

There is nothing certainly holds in subjection, and strikes an awe and respect
into us more than the impressions of knowledge we receive from any person,
those who are most famed for wisdom in the world, have always acknowledged a
greater Obligation to their Masters than Parents, because the one made them
simply to live, the others to live well: It was from this principle that God
designing to give a precept of charity to his reasonable Creatures, to
facilitate the Execution of this his command, ordained a dependency of one
another in the conveyance of intellectual notions; that the first rank of
Seraphims should enlighten the next immediate order, and so to the lowest
Hierarchy; for from this ordinate transmission of scientifical species arises a
Harmony of love and respect, love in those that communicate, respect in those
that receive; nor does it end in the giver, and receiver, but is returned with
the advantage of praise and glory unto the supreme Fountain whence all true
wisdom flows. Now Princes are Earthly Seraphims, unto whom it belongs (as
mortal Quires) to enrich their Nobility, they their immediate subordinate
ranks, and so to the lowest Peasant, with Documents of Justice, temperance, and
Piety: First, by good example: Next, by a vigilance to put in Execution pious,
and equitable Laws.

Our Holy Penitent happily ambitious to lay the Foundation of a Commonwealth,
which unanimously conspiring to God's honor might imitate that of the blessed,
is resolved to play his part; he will not barely instruct, but teach by his
actions what his subjects owe to God; Nay he will have a particular Eye unto
the wicked, and show his zeal in their reduction, a task beyond the victory
over Lions and Giants. I will teach the wicked thy ways.

I will teach the wicked thy ways, that is, thy commandments, and from thence
confound them in their disobedience: for God having created the world of
nothing, an absolute dominion over all Creatures is from thence most justly due
unto him, and if the potter of the same Mass of Clay, composes Vessels of
honor, and others to baser uses, and this without any blame, though many
causes concur with him in this action: With much more reason God having had no
partner in the production of Creatures ought to have an entire disposal of
them; this sovereignty by the title of Creation is the most noble and
accomplished that can be imagined, because he derives the privilege from none,
but holds it from himself, so that it is natural to him.

Having laid this foundation, our penitential Master unfolds unto the wicked a
Law eternal, which is nothing else but certain decrees and maxims he framed in
his infinite understanding from all eternity, by which he resolved to govern
the World, when he should think fit to give it a Being. Amongst a multitude of
these Maxims, One is, to concur to the motions and actions of all Creatures
conformably to their Natures which he would not destroy. Another is, to permit
Man to act according to his strength and liberty whatsoever the issue be. The
third is, not to admit him into Heaven, unless he render himself in some sort
capable of it; and after the Collation of his grace, and imposition of his
commands, never to violence his liberty so to obstruct sin, but yet he resolved
to draw good out of evil, and at the latter day pass a severe sentence upon
voluntary bad actions.

This is then the first lesson our Convert will read unto the wicked, that the
decrees of God touching the worlds Government as they are eternal, so are they
immutable. If some be frozen through want of light and heat, others again do
melt with the excess of both, yet will he not for all this alter the Sun's
course; if some do abuse free will, and by it work their own destruction, this
inconveniency will not make him change what he has done, nor abrogate that
noble privilege. Though heaven should become a desert, yet will he not people
it but with such as merit it by a good life; I mean in persons grown up to the
use of reason, however foolish intoxicated brains may quarrel his conduct (as
they do) in many of these particulars.

The next Lecture our Convert will hold forth unto the wicked, and mark out to
them the track of heaven, is, that this supreme Lord has imprinted in every
man a law of reason; by which if he square not his actions, his own reason will
rise up against him, play the judge, and condemn him: This light tells us we
must fly what is evil in it self, and embrace that good which is so intrinsic
to our natures, as its contrary is absolutely evil: As for example, to adore
God is a thing so corresponds with Man's reason, as were there no superior
command to do it, yet our own judgment could not but allow it as proper and
fitting to be done; both in consideration of Man's infirmity and vileness, as
also in relation to the greatness and infinity of God. This light is so
universally spread, that scarce any can be found so savage, who knows and
performs not good in some kind or other: St. Paul confirms this doctrine ad
Romans 1. The Gentiles ignorant both of the Law of Moses and the gospel do
naturally discharge some part of the Law, that is, of nature; whence St. Austin
cries out, O God your Law is written in our hearts, which no iniquity can raze
out. Hence springs a remorse of conscience even in the most barbarous persons,
after the perpretation of any crime opposite to the law of nature, and which
sooner or later never fails to seize them with apprehensions of the divine
justice, but especially when grace (of which no man is altogether and always
destitute) awakens their drowzy and extinguished conscience: this I say ever
gives them some light spark of knowledge, by which their first inconsiderate
act is rendered less excusable. Thus our brave combatant beats the wicked with
their own weapons, and evidently demonstrates (referring all to their own
conscience) that when they prevaricate by injustice, falsehood, irreverence to
God, impenitency and the like; they act against a Lawgiver which is God
himself; and against a Law that took birth with their Creation, and is the
Model and Rule of humane Laws, which (without conformity to this Law) are not
Laws, but injustice and tyranny: I will teach the wicked thy ways.

The third remonstrance of our enflamed Doctor is, to inform the wicked that
positive Divine Laws are necessary, not only to rectify their wandering steps,
but also to preserve the just in their righteous paths. The reason is, Man is
designed to a supernatural end, to arrive at which his natural faculties are
deficient, wherefore it was requisite he should have supernatural precepts and
rules proportioned to the sublime condition of his end: Besides, after he had
exchanged a state of innocence for that of sin, and corruption; he stood in
need of a Master who might instruct him how disastrous a thing sin is, how
necessary to have a redeemer, all which Divine Laws do open unto him. Again,
to observe even the Laws of Nature would have been a hard task; if he aspired
not after something more sublime; for the efforts of his Soul are so clogged by
the violence of his passions, and his nature so weakened by sin, that unless
divine positive laws had engaged man unto heavenly pursuits, scarce would he
ever have been able to reach the perfect observance of the Law of nature.
Lastly, it was necessary he should have always before his Eyes his dependency
and subjection unto God, so to be stirred up to the performance of his duty,
and by giving testimony of his faithful obedience merit something at his hands;
wherefore his Creation was no sooner finished, but God laid a command upon him,
that he might know even in Paradise he had a Master. Next, he consecrated the
Seventh day to works of his service, obliging the first inhabitants of the
Earth to its observance: Moreover, those first Men of the World were obliged to
the supernatural virtues of Faith, Hope, and Charity, without which acts they
could not be saved; now those decrees were positive Laws, and superadded to
those of nature; so that in all times Men were never left purely to the Law of
nature, but it was intermixed with several positive ordinations, that might
help them on more advantagiously in the way of their Salvation.

Our Holy Penitent having thus exposed before the wicked the endearing
providence of God over mankind, who never abandoned them to the sole instinct
of nature, and conduct of their own Reason, but like a careful Master teaching
them his will by himself, and giveing them particular directions to lead them
in the way of virtue; he would not stop there, but proceed to a further
elucidation of God's benefits toward them; that at last overcome by his
goodness, they might lay down their arms, and think it no dishonor to lie
prostrate at the feet of so noble a Conqueror; which if our penitent can
effect, he will repeat with much joy, I will te^ch the wicked thy ways.

Our zealous convert plyes the Iron whilst it is hot, hoping to render the
wicked more malleable, wherefore he produces the Mosaic law given by God to
sanctify the Children of Abraham, and dispose the World for the knowledge,
belief, and honorable reception of Jesus Christ: The Law consisted in precepts
moral, ceremonial, and judicial: The first contained the Ten Commandments, and
diverse others relating to them; and though the Law of nature led to their
observance, yet many errors were committed in reference to them, which were
cleared, and better regulated by positive Laws. The Ceremonial were ordained
in order to the worship of God, regulating what belongs to the Sacraments,
Temple, institution of fasts, and bloody Sacrifice of Beasts; wherein God
manifested his justice, declaring that sin deserved Death, and likewise his
Mercy, in that he would exchange the death of a sinner for that of a poor
animal. The third are judicial which conspire to the establishment of a rare
Government amongst the Jews, that by an admirable policy being kept in peace,
Religion might flourish, the number of their Laws amount to above six hundred,
an Argument of God's indulgence toward them: For the Jews being stupid, and of
a gross apprehension, incapable of being led by general rules, as not knowing
how to apply them in particular emergencies, he was pleased in every point to
satisfy and instruct them: Nay his particular providence here in appears, that
delivering so many Articles for their observance, he seems to take upon him the
whole care of providing for their temporals as well as spirituals, as if he
would keep a watch over every step and motion of theirs, to the end all things
might be exact, and settled in the highest order. He designed them likewise to
be a pattern of Holiness and Sanctity to the Gentiles, that by their example
they might be drawn from the corruption of Idolatry, to the real sentiments of
virtue and religion, wherefore he planted them in the midst of the habitable
world.

Lastly, it was just that Nation should be the most Religious and Pious, from
whence Jesus Christ was to issue forth, that they might prefigure, publish, and
engrave him in the hearts and minds of Men by their holy Ceremonies and legal
observances, which were all to represent him, and the wonders of his life and
death: for this cause, the kingdom of the Jews was prophetic, and their
religious actions a figure of the qualities, condition, and mysteries of Jesus
Christ: Nay, all the worship and service which God required of that Nation, and
all the Exercise of their Religion was merely to foretell, announce, expect and
receive the Messiah; wherefore St. Paul calls it a holy Law abounding in
Ceremonies, and all tending to this effect.

I cannot doubt but our great Doctor and Prophet did with much Energy insist
upon the designed End of the Mosaic Law which is Jesus Christ; representing to
the wicked that the sole way to Salvation was by repentance and belief in the
Messiah; exhorting them to join with him in the practice of Heroic acts of
virtues, so to expedite his coming, and repeat after him this his daily Prayer;
who will give us from Sion the Savior of Israel. He told them there was not a
sigh or languishment, any prayer, or good work, directed for the accelleration
of this mystery which had not its effect; that Abraham advanced it much by his
prodigious act of obedience in offering to Sacrifice his Son, and after he had
run over all the Gests of Saints till his time, he conclude all these motives
would have been little efficacious without the charity, mercy, and love of God
to lost Man. St. John attributes the glory of this Action to love alone, and if
some have compared the vigor of love to equal that of death, I dare give it a
higher Encomium, and will say it was so generous as to transport it self up to
Heaven, and assault the Divinity in his Throne, drawing from thence the eternal
Son of God. O who can be so wicked to behold the lines of this merciful
proceeding drawn forth, and not presently join issue with our holy preacher to
abandon the pernicious ways of sin, and become a Disciple in the Rudiments of
virtue: To behold a Redeemer living in the Hearts of Men, before he came to
live upon Earth, to see all the Sanctity of the World addressed to him, to
speak of nothing but him, and all conspire to his glory. If before he came, he
had so many tongues and voices to set him forth; and that the Law and service
of God had no other aim than to engrave the Messiah in the Hearts of Men, what
expressions ought to inflame our zeal after his birth, life, cross, and
triumphant glory.

These are the ways our Graduate will distill into the Minds of the wicked,
and certainly he did it with an excess of fervor and delight helped on by the
consideration, that out of his seed the Savior of Israel was to be born: And
it is clear he kept close to this Theme even to the last, making it his
Testament, and the subject of his expiring words to his Son Solomon, That he
should be sure to walk in the ways of the Lord, that in the exact observance
of his judgments and Commandment written in the Law of Moses were fastened the
succession of his Crown, saying; This done thou shall not want one of thy
posterity to sit upon the throne of Israel. These are the ways if happily
taken will preserve the wicked from ruin, give them eternal life; secure them
from Hell, and open a passage to all the delights of Heaven, as St. John says;
To the end that all who believe in the should possess eternal bliss. Wherefore
our Penitent egged on by so many powerful motives to the discharge of his task,
will never fail in what he has promised, to teach the wicked the ways of God.

The Application.
Our Penitent instructs us here by his example, that there is no employment so
acceptable unto God, as to disperse in our Neighbor the clouds of Ignorance,
and imbue him with principles of wisdom. His Son Solomon was perhaps taught by
this clause to address so happily his petition. And Joel the prophet makes it
the great subject of good tidings he foredeclared to the Church: Be glad yea
Sons of Sion, and rejoice in the Lord your God, who has given you a teacher of
righteousness. Aristotle being asked why Commonwealths did not assign pensions
for Masters that taught and instructed others, as they did to other offices of
the State, made this reply, because there could be no reward answerable to
their desert: if he thought certain notions in natural knowledge to be so
valuable, what a price would he have set on such as convey the sublime
mysteries of heaven unto us: Let us then instruct our Neighbor, by good
example, by doing charity to the distressed, and by wholesome Documents, every
one according to his Talent and Ability: And in doing this, we follow the steps
of a great Saint who believed he could in nothing better express his gratitude
and zeal for God's honor, than in the Reduction of Souls to the way of
Salvation;

Amen.
CHAP. XXVIII.
Et impii ad te convertentur,

And the impious shall be converted to thee.


BY this clause our Penitent destroys the Opinion of some in those modern
times, who assert, that Christ died not for all Men, but only for the elect;
for if the impious be not excluded from the participation of his precious
Blood, surely there is none that are; impiety being a crime that directly
strikes against the honor of God, and is a complaet rebellion against his
Divinity. Now if our Divine by his preaching was confident to reduce such
offenders, whom can we imagine shall be excepted? nor can they say we are put
into a worse condition by the Evangelical Law, in which a plenitude of
benedictions are showred down upon us, and which as far exceeds the Mosaic, as
a thing real, the type and figure that represents it. St. John Chap. 1.2.
says, Christ is a propitiation for our sins, and not only for ours but for the
sins of the whole World. First, Christ satisfied for Adam's disobedience and
original sin, witness St. Paul, ad Romans Chap. 2. As death entered by the
default of one, so life by the justice and obedience of one. Again St. John
says, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World, that is,
original sin, for the Greek version puts it in the Singular Number, so Bid,
Theophilact, and St. Thomas understand it. The Angelical Doctor adds, that the
Son of God was incarnate rather for original sin, which was an universal evil,
whose venom infected all Mankind, than for the actual and personal sins of the
World; but as no sin is irremissible to an infinite mercy by consequence after
original sin, he made satisfaction for all actions and transgressions which
were mortal: The reason is, that mortal sins not only deprive the Soul of the
vision of God for all eternity, but likewise exposes it to the everlasting
torments of Hell; the Son of God then, whose nature is all goodness considered
the misery of these sins, and offered up his life and death for their expiation.

For without sanctifying grace our works are not meritorious; nor can they
satisfy for any venial sin: Wherefore deprived of grace by original sin, we
could not by our selves (no not by the assistance of the blessed Angels)
satisfy for the least venial sin: Because, though they be endued with grace,
yet no pure Creature can merit condign grace: Wherefore it was necessary that
Jesus Christ should make satisfaction for our least failing, as St. Austin
says excellently well, that to save an infinity of Worlds we ought not to
cast one glance of the Eye contrary to the will of God, Whence it is clear no
Creature can satisfy for the least sin, since to do it, we must offer up
something more valuable than the whole World.

If then we could not free our selves from the least deviation without the
interposition of his merits, much less were we in a capacity to relieve our
selves from the guilt of Enormous Crimes, and if as to these the fruit of his
passion was not applied unto all, it must be either from the inefficacy of
satisfaction, or a defect of commiseration and goodness toward his Creatures.
It cannot be the first, for his merits are infinite by reason of the divine
person from whence they proceed, for actions belong to the person according to
Philosophy: It was likewise infinite in regard of his humanity, because it was
sanctified and deifyed by the divinity, which was like a certain sanctifying
and deifying form unto that sacred humanity, now as the greatness of merit is
not only measured by the quality of the work, but also by many circumstances,
and especially in consideration of the dignity of the person that merits. Hence
it is that Jesus Christ being infinite in consideration of his person, and his
humanity being infinitely holy, his actions are of an infinite value, and merit.

If it be said his goodness is deficient in this ransom, and that he contracted
it only to some few; St. John confounds them for speaking of the incarnation,
he seems transported with wonder, and expresses it with a sic, that is, God so
loved the World as he gave unto it his only Son: Can we imagine then he loved
it so little as to select a certain small number; no no, he loved it so much as
he died for all. There is no good person upon Earth who desires not out of
charity all Men's Salvation, and shall Jesus Christ the Saint of Saints be
limited in this his charity? St. Bridget in her Revelations recounts how Christ
our Lord said once unto her, I am much offended with those who say my Laws are
hard, that I give not sufficient Grace to their observance, and that my passion
is to some no ways beneficial, by which they would ravish my goodness from me,
but at the latter day I will justify my self before the Angels and Saints, and
make it clear as the Sun, there was no want on my part; that there is not one
Soul for whom I would not have endured as much as I have done for all, and that
the sole fault consists in the obliquity of their wills, always rebellious,
and contrary to mine.

St. Peter in his second Epistle, Chap. 2. speaking of certain Reprobate
Heretics says: They deny him by which they are redeemed; and St. Paul 1 Cor.
c. 8. Thus thy Brother will perish for whom our Lord and Savior dyed. Whence
it follows a person may be damned for whom Christ offered up his death, by
consequence he dyed for the Reprobate. The council of Trent Sess. 6. c. 3.
Christ dyed for all, though as to the benefit of his death those only receive
it unto whom his passion is applied. The price of his blood was given then for
all Men, though the success be different, some more, some less partaking the
fruit of his passion: He is a Savior then to all in some degree of redemption,
even to those he shall judge and condemn; as St. Austin on the 53. Psalm. He
shall judge all the World who has paid the ransom for all the World: In
which appears his magnificence and copious redemption, that would dye for Souls
whom he foreknew would resist the charms of his grace to the last, and as much
as lies in them, render his passion fruitless: nay he gloryes in that he came
for the greatest sinners, promising cure to the most desperate diseases, nay to
the impious in case they will comply with his prescriptions.

To bring this a little more home, St. Thomas says the passion of Jesus Christ
is like to a ray of the Sun, which though it be created for the benefit of the
whole World, yet all reap not advantage by it, there being some of a melancholy
reserved humor who effect darkness, and shut up their doors and windows
against his beams; so the passion and death of our Savior, is offered up for
the universal good of all Men; but many loving the darkness of sin, keep
themselves barricadoed from his benign influence, resisting the light of Faith,
and other attractives of his love.

Thus you see all have power to save themselves, though such only are
effectually saved, unto whom the passion of Jesus Christ (by our happy
concurrence with his sufficient Grace) is communicated and applied as in the
Fifth Chapter to the Hebrews; he is cause of Salvation unto all those who obey
him.

Our Learned Doctor upon these grounds has reason to hope, that when he shall
have deciphered unto the wicked the ways of God; how full of mercy, and
obliging sweetness they are, they will lend their cooperation and consent to
the movings of his grace, bear part with their Savior's passion, that they may
likewise share in his glory, acknowledging with faith and love all that is
done, or to be done by them, the effects of his grace, and so apply to
themselves Christ's merits and satisfaction: And the impious shall be converted
to thee.

Impiety in the strict acceptance imports Atheism and a shaking off all
acknowledgement of a Deity; its usual mates are profaneness and impurity, by
which all things sacred are contemned, and Man degenerates into a brute. What a
task is it then to reduce an impious person? Whom neither the fear of a
divinity does awe, nor the charms of holy things allure, nor finally the shame
of a base action can move. St. Austin treating of such as are enslaved to this
vice says, they resemble in nature to a Feverish Distemper which still
creates a thirst, though you throw in an Ocean of liquor; so where the flames
of impiety have once taken hold, to stop the wastes of its fury passes the art
of reason, or eloquence; for the impious have neither Eye, nor Ear, nor any
sense which is not depraved, and turns all into the malignity of its own
humor. I remember St. Chrysostom makes a query, why Herod fell so barbarously
upon the massacre of so many Infants, for (says he) he either believed the
Prophecy or believed it not, if he gave no credit to it, it was sottish in him
to embrue his hands in so much blood, any spark of judgment would have
dictated he ought to have contemned and slighted it: Again, if he believed it
was a real prophecy issuing from the decree of Heaven, it must needs be
inviolable, and could not want its effect: At last, he solves the question, and
throws it upon this, that a Soul drenched in impiety, is above all things the
most infatuated, she is so unhappy as, where there is no impulse from abroad,
to precipitate herself into inevitable ruin, nay fruitlesly to attempt odious,
and impossible things.

It is of these impious, holy Job speaks, when he gives a relation of their
Maxims. They say unto God retire from us, we scorn the knowledge of your ways,
what is the Omnipotent that we must serve him, and what benefit arises if we
pray unto him?

These are the familiar blasphemies which the impious belch forth; the presence
of God they decline, shutting up all the Avenues of Faith and Charity, by which
he may enter unto them: The knowledge of his ways, and Commandments they
abhor, because they are contrary to their works; to his power they submit not,
faigning to believe he is not omnipotent, because he is merciful: Finally, they
offer not up their supplications unto him, because they would ask what is not
fit for his supreme wisdom and goodness to accord.

Our great Minister in despite of all these exorbitancies, promises yet to
himself the reduction of these Monsters, and hopes to shape them to the
resemblance in which they were created; in which undertaking we need not doubt
but he used all the Topics of authority and reason apt to convince and
persuade: First, offering to their consideration how much it comforts Man to
believe there is a God, for in doing this, we contemplate a Being infinite, and
sovereign, that presides and rules in the World, so that the World possesses in
him a sovereign good; Is it not then better, the World should enjoy such a
Being which derives from himself alone his essence, and existence, than to be
deprived of it. For in believing there is a God, we consecrate our love unto
him, we pay him the homage of obedience, than which nothing is more delightful.
For to serve an Object of so much excellency is the height of glory, we raise
our selves finally one day to enjoy this accomplished Being, as the ultimate
end to which we are designed, and every glance of this hope creates in us a new
contentment. Now if we have not the belief of a God, what follows? We convert
our selves to a Creature inferior to us, on this we rely, to this we submit,
in this we hope, who being filled with misery and want, can contribute little
or nothing to make us great, or happy, so we must needs languish without any
hopes of a full satisfaction.

Besides, suppose there were no such thing as a God, we are yet in as good a
condition as impious Atheists; for then we shall taste no punishment after
Death, no more than they; but if there be a God, they have lost all, in having
not acknowledged the Worlds Sovereign, nor performed any duty to him; so that
in all Events it is better to believe than disbelieve a Deity: For besides the
joys our hopes afford us in this life of eternal felicity, we run no hazard
of ruin, as poor unfortunate, impious Atheists do.

Next, he lays before the impious, that he who believes not a providence,
resembles an Orphan bereft of his Parents, and has none to take care of him;
is like a person at Sea in the midst of Tempests, who fancies to be without a
Pilot, and exposed to the mercy of the Waves; Whereas the contrary opinion
settles us in peace and tranquillity; and in all the disasters of this life, we
have this consolation that his wise and indulgent Providence, will make all our
seeming misfortunes to end in happiness, if with patience we expect but the
Issue.

Again, he would have the wicked represent unto themselves what a comfort it is
to place God in our thoughts, enriched with all kind of perfections, that he is
an unfathomed Abyss of excellency, that he is most happy, most wise, most
powerful, most good, and merciful. So that our dependence on such a Sovereign
cannot but add much to our contentment; to think he has abundance to supply
all our indigency, and goodness to confer it upon us, if we prove faithful to
his service.

When he had thus ravished them with a discourse of God's amiable perfections;
he tells them, they were created of nothing: and so distills into them a
conception and belief of his Omnipotency, and by that stirrs up their hope. For
if he drew them out of nothing, with more facility can he restore life, and
raise them from their Ashes: This belief gives us a knowledge of our
extraction, and shows it is noble, in that we belong to God, we are subjects to
a Lord all powerful, who can reward, and punish according as we deserve: Next,
he minds them that being composed of Soul and Body, the one is immortal, by
which he is elevated above all other Creatures, and resembles the glorious
Angelical spirits: Now had they not this assurance by faith, what desolation
and despair would seize them at the approach of Death, when like Beasts they
must come to lose all, and perish for ever in corruption; whereas the belief of
a Resurrection renders Death unto us but like a sound sleep, in the space of
which we remove from one habitation to a better: So that the belief of the
Soul's immortality is accompanied with the greatest consolation that can be.

His next overture is that they are designed to eternal beatitude, from which
article proceeds a most ravishing harmony: for it is the sole charm by which
all the traverses and afflictions of this life are made supportable, and the
only ingredient which sweetens the bitterness of misfortunes here: It is just
like a person in distress, and born to a great inheritance, who still animates
himself with the expectation of his Estate, which will be the more welcome to
him, as his hardship has been the greater; no less do our pretensions to
Paradise plant in us hope, charity, humility and constancy in all events.

Our Holy Penitent notwithstanding all this is not so arrogant as to persuade
himself, the force of his Arguments will infallibly prevail upon the impious:
For though the advantages of Faith prescribe an Antidote against any Poison of
misfortune either in this life, or the next; though it contain nothing that is
not holy and pure, nothing that is not worthy the Majesty of God; yet he knows
that Man by the strength of nature cannot purchase a complete beatitude; that
neither by the succor of any natural Agent can he arrive to his perfect
happiness, because it is above, and exceeds any created virtue; so that it is
necessary God should there act immediately himself, as in the raising a dead
person to life, or restoring sight to the blind, whence St. Austin says, None
can give eternal life, but the Author of Eternity: And therefore our wise
Penitent says not, he will convert the impious, but that they shall be
converted, which is to say, the power of God's grace must strike the stroke.

Lastly, he acquaints them, that though they are to be illuminated, inspired,
and introduced into their happiness by God himself, yet the sole way to dispose
themselves for this, must be by their own good works and actions: Not but that
the Omnipotency of God might give them beatitude without exacting any thing at
their hands, but the order of his Providence would have it so, that Man should
exercise himself in virtue, and labor for the purchase of his final
perfection: To which end God assists him with his grace, and gives supernatural
helps, which proportion his good works to the greatness of beatitude, unto
which he may raise himself by degrees, by many labors and pious exercises; so
to purify, and the better to dispose himself for so sublime and transcending an
end.

In conclusion, our great Doctor bids them gather from this his discourse upon
what foundation they stand, that if they will have a Crown they must fight for
it; they must desert their ways of impiety, change their gluttony into a sober
repast, their softness and delicacies into austerity, their vain joys into
Tears of Repentance, their libidinous desires, into languishments of love and
affection toward God. If then the most impious will submit to this doom, and
follow these rules his Holy Providence has set down, he will not blush to
assert with confidence that even the most enormous sinner shall be converted:
And the impious shall be converted.

The Application.
By this clause our Penitent would fortify us against despair, and show there
is no sin so enormous which can resist the efficacy of a true repentance, for
God has engaged his word not to be inexorable, and protests it is far from his
thoughts, to will the death of a sinner, and he excepts none; no not the
impious, but upon submission he will receive them with open arms, raze from his
memory their iniquities, and transport them from a state of perdition to the
rich title of being his Children. St. Bernard says, he that assents to what
God affirms, expresses his Faith, and gives belief to God; he that acknowledges
his Existence and Being, is said to believe God: Lastly, he that places all his
hope in God, is properly said to believe in him. Let us then remember when we
say our creed, that at the same time we cast all our hope and confidence in
God, relying on his goodness and power, which is infinite and exceeds by
consequence all the malice of sin. Let us repeat with St. Austin, if Paul a
persecutour and great sinner is become a Vessel of election, why should I
despair; and why should not I with our Holy Penitent entertain a firm hope,
when the impious shall be converted;

Amen.
CHAP. XXIX.
Libera me de sanguinibus Deus, Deus salutis meae,

Free me from blood O God, God of my Salvation.


OUr Holy Penitent makes a stop in the carreer of his zeal at the voice of
blood from Heaven which beats his affrighted Ears: He remembers how Cain
wandered like a restless motion, beholding always in his imagination Specter,
Monstres, Fears, and dreads the usual mates of a Conscience wounded with
homicide. And shall he then sit quiet in his Throne, whilst Vriah his Veins are
opened, and emptyed by his command; the reeking Vapor which arises from that
injured Body seems so to condense the Air, that it even stifles him; wherefore
he begs a little respiration, that he may recover a new life; and which he
shall ever owe to the God of his Salvation; Free me from blood, etc.

St. Gregory the great, rendering a reason why God will inflict an eternal
punishment for a momentary transgression, lays the weight of his argument upon
the practice of Men, who dispatch away into another World by Sentence of Death
Murderers, and other Criminals of several less degrees; by which (as much as in
them lies) they inflict a punishment for eternity, depriving them of life which
they can never restore.

Our Holy Penitent fears the force of this ratiocination, for since he has
decreed this doom to his innocent neighbor, what remains for him to expect,
but a torment without end, which shall last as long as the injury, and this he
can never repair. All his plea then is to repent, to disown his malice, to
throw himself at the Feet of him in whose Hands are grasped all the Laws of
life and death; that he having the supreme Legislative power, to him alone it
belongs to dispense, acquit, or chastise according to the measure of his will.
Wherefore he sues to this God of Salvation, that he may be freed from that
heavy doom due to his transgressions; Free me from blood, etc.

St. Matthew says whosoever shall take up a Sword in order to the effusion of
humane blood shall perish by the Sword; the same measure shall be returned to
him which he has dealt to others, and by the same means he wrought another
destruction, his own shall be contrived, and in Genesis 9. the reason is given;
because Man is created to the resemblance of God. We find that upon the score
of the excellency of humane nature, Man is taken off from the perpetration of
several sins as too low for the dignity of his Creation. The consideration that
he is endued with reason, gives unto wise persons an aversion from carnal
pleasures, lest they should by them degenerate into the condition of a brute;
The consideration that his Soul is immortal, makes him fly Avarice, it being
sottish for a substance which is to exist for ever, to dote upon any thing that
is liable to ruin and corruption. The consideration that his Soul is
invisible, gives a check to Pride and Vanity, since her glories cannot appear
sensibly and with splendor before the Eye of the World. Lastly, the
consideration that she animates and enlivens every particle of the Body, how
minute, or vile so ere it be, warns her from offering any damage or injury to
our Neighbor. If I say these thoughts work many to decline several particular
sins, in regard they are misbeseeming the excellent qualities of the Soul;
doubtless the meditation, that she is the fair Image of God, ought to make us
abominate all sin without reserve, fearing by any vicious act to deface the
lively Image of a Divinity: Wherefore the respect we owe to his resemblance,
ought to strike in us a terror of laying violent hands on our Neighbor, much
less by any force to dissolve that lovely union of Soul and Body, in which
consists the accomplishment of God's work in framing Man: Wherefore St. Cyprian
says, the honor of humane nature is to treat well the pourtraiture of God,
and from thence discharge our awful reverence toward the Original.

But when any one is led on by fury and revenge, or will usurp in a private
person the execution of Justice, this is to dash in pieces the Image of God,
which perhaps he would preserve, or at least have it stand, until by
instruments of his own he is pleased to undo it.

Our Holy Penitent confesses he has committed this outrage, he is guilty of
this irregular proceeding, and has destroyed God's fair handy work in the
Death of Vriah, which he was bound to keep decently in repair, it being the
Office of a King to protect, and not destroy his Subjects. How many brave
designs has he had to erect a Temple in God's honor, and now hurried on by an
unruly passion, he has demolished a structure more valuable in the sight of
God, than all his material edifices the Hands of Man can raise.

If incendiaries by all Nations are punished with most rigorous Laws, what
animadversions of severity will be practiced upon such as destroy not only
habitations but inhabitants, who ruin a mansion wherein God has lodged a Soul
immortal, and which he has designed to be the matter of her great merit in
this life; and an instrument of his praise in the next. And if St. Paul says,
the blood of Souls will be required at the Hands of Pastors, who starve and
famish their flock for want of due instruction, and good Example; what account
shall he have to make, who has not only by omission frustrated his Subjects of
good Documents, issuing from an exemplar life, but more, has effectively
concurred to the destruction of them, and hurried them to a dreadful Tribunal,
at a time when perhaps they were little prepared for that grand ballancing of
all their good and bad deeds; and by this means who knows whether he has not
only disjoined, and torn the Soul from the Body, but even from God for all
eternity. These dismal thoughts prompt him to fly for Sanctuary, and it is no
where to be found but at the Throne of God's mercy which he implores; Free me
from blood, etc.

Again, he considers with what a severe Eye God looks upon the sin of homicide,
commanding in Moses Law, that blood alone should be the price and satisfaction
for blood; nay he extends it even to irrational Creatures, that if any happen
to be the cause of Man's death, the Beast (what ever it be) should lose its
life. It was to prevent this unnatural violence, that he prohibited the eating
of blood, so to cut off any practice which might diminish the horror of it.
Besides, the remorse and tortures of conscience which always attend this sin,
sufficiently evidences, that though in other Crimes his patient Justice seems
for a while to lie asleep, yet this he always revenges upon the place: For if
the Thunderbolts of his anger do not immediately fall upon their heads as to
the public view; at least he begins the execution from the first moment of the
Fact committed, disturbing their sleep with frightful Phantomes, and filling
their awakened hearts with dreads and terrors that their life is even a burden
and Irksome to them; of this are extant innumerable examples, both in sacred
and profane Histories, too long here to recite.

It is not unworthy our observation, that a murdered Body should bleed afresh
(as it has been often experimented) at the presence of the murderer. It is
true many give natural reasons of the thing, attributing it to the vital
spirits not yet extinguished in the remnants of the blood retreated into
several Cranies of the Body, which by an Antipathy at the approach of their
adversary fall into a Commotion, and by this disturbance occasions the blood
again to flow. Others say it may proceed from a simpathy, supposing the
murderer to have upon his weapon wherewith he gave the wound, or in some other
part about him, certain dropps of blood of the deceased, by which Sympathetick
virtue it receives motion in order to its reunion. But my design not being to
insist on Philosophical disputes, I will not labor to weaken the force of
their Arguments, and only assert my Opinion, which is, that it speaks simply
the extraordinary way of God, which he holds sometimes in one kind, sometimes
in another, to manifest and publish offenders of this nature,

Our Holy Penitent may be brought in for an instance, unto whom it was declared
by God's own command, that notwithstanding all his Artifices in contriving
Vriah his Death, it should be exposed in the view of the whole World; that
future ages might see he whom he had chosen as the delight of his heart, should
have no privilege in this particular, and though he would abate something of
his wonted rigor, in not exacting his life for a satisfaction; yet he would
bring it near to his door by the rebellion of his Children, with the Enmity and
Machinations of many Conspiratours against him; and that the Law of retaliation
was not executed against him, perhaps he owes it to this clause of the
petition, which he seems with more than usual fervor to have preferred,
repeating; O God, God of my Salvation.

We may here reflect, how pernicious a thing passion is, when once it has got
the Mastery, and how soon it gets strength with the aid of dangerous occasions.
Our Penitent knew well, that the Divine precept; Non occides, thou shall not
kill; did not only forbid the taking away of our Neighbors life, but likewise
all rancour or malice toward him, all injury by word or deed, which may touch
upon his honor or person; all disputes, contest, or impetuosity of Choler,
these are the seeds of that monstrous fruit homicide, as St. John says, who
hates his Brother is a homicide: For by nourishing within you a little spark of
animosity, this from the heart appears in the Eyes which are the glass of the
inward temper; thence it breaks into words, and at last sadly ends in his
destruction. Behold our Kingly Prophet, and now an humble petitioner in his own
behalf, he is said to have been the meekest of Men; and in consideration of his
lenity, and mildness in Government, God spun out his reign to the Term of Forty
years, which was granted to few or none of the Jewish Kings; with what patience
did he sustain the reproaches and maledictions of Semei, with what an admirable
temper the long and restless persecution of Saul, how tenderly issued he forth
his orders touching Absalom, that though he were actually in arms against him,
and thirsted after nothing but his life and Throne, yet he commanded a hair of
his Head should not be touched. Notwithstanding all this, upon a sudden seized
with a passion of love, both his sweet temperament and all his former habits of
virtue proved of little use unto him: The Crystal of his understanding was
blemished with gross vapors arising from brutish pleasures, the purling stream
of his inclinations, which was wont to flow softly without noise, and from the
source of virtue; is now grown into a storm of fury; it is so deprived of
reason, as to imagine his own good and safety to depend upon the ruin of his
Neighbor; and therefore hastens to take vengeance upon him, who never gave him
the least shadow of real offense. O what a Tyranny is the Rule of passion, to
make us love what is not amiable, and hate what is not odious, to push us on to
desire what we should abhor, and fly from what we ought most to covet. Our
holy penitent has served under this oppression, and now petitions a release:
Free me from blood, etc.

Now the Latins not using the word blood in the plural Number, though the
Greeks do, hence it is, that some infer and with reason, that our Penitent aims
at the remission of Adultery likewise, because all carnal acts unlawful carry
along with them a corruption both of flesh and blood, this appears in Deuteronomy.
Chap. 21. Where it is said, that rotteness and worms shall be the inheritance
of a luxurious person, and as the one (that is homicide) destroys the species
of Man, so adultery subverts those rules which are set down for his education,
a design which nature intends, and drives at as well as Generation. The one
injures his Neighbor in his person, the other in his honor, and this not only
of himself, but casts an infamy upon his posterity.

It is storied of Ulysses that he met in his Travails with Circes the
Enchantress, who promised, to make him immortal in case he would be naught
with her; and though he believed she was able to make good her promise; yet he
refused her, less valuing immortality than fidelity to his Wife; Susanna far
less esteemed of Death, than she did the dishonor to herself and Family.
Solomon says a Thief may have some excuse, in that extremity of hunger urged
him to his villainy, at least in rendering sevenfold he makes satisfaction: But
an Adulterer has no plea, nor can the Indies balance the wrong done by him.

Our Holy Penitent revolving all these truths in his Mind, has reason to join
in his petition the crimes of homicide and adultery together, since both are
Coincident in his malice, both injurious to our Neighbor, both destructive to
the very Laws of nature, and both exemplarly punished in all ages by Divine
Justice: Wherefore he may justly insert; Free me from blood, etc.

When I read a passage in St. Paul, 2 Cor. Chap. 7. it appears terrible the
resentment God entertains of Adultery: He there says, if the Husband be in the
number of the faithful, and the Wife of the unfaithful, he shall not dismiss
her: But if she be unfaithful to his bed, then he may lawfully forsake her; so
that God seems to be more offended, in that she keeps not her says with her
Husband, than in being disloyal to him, insinuating by this that he will give
no quarter to an adulterous act.

How odious this Crime is to humane Society appears, in that the Civil Law
permits the Father or Husband of the Adulteress (if taken in the fact) to offer
violent hands, and immediately destroy both the offenders; and though the
Cannons seem to disallaw of this Law as unjust, because it precipitates the
guilty into an evident hazard of their eternal Salvation: Yet still it
concludes, how monstrous an exorbitancy Adultery is in the judgments of Men,
when to punish it they allow parlies interessed to be both Accusers, and
Judges, which in no other circumstance has ever been permitted.

Adultery is a commerce between persons who are not linked together in a
conjugal tie, and from thence it is clothed with the turpitude of fornication,
and is a sin against charity: Next, it is a violation of a bond indissoluble,
by which the Author of Nature has united one to another, and superadded to
fortify this Chain the blessing, and virtues of a Sacrament. I remember the
Council of Trent in favor of this Sacrament teaches, that God by it bestows a
particular grace; that as in Baptism we purchase as it were a new Being,
regenerated and born to a spiritual life; as in confirmation we receive a Grace
strengthening us in our Faith; as in the Eucharist an increase of heavenly
blessings is showred down upon us the like in the rest of the Sacraments. So in
that of marriage a grace is communicated which perfits, and refines the natural
love they bare to one another before they married: Insomuch as that love which
before was perhaps seated in some corporeal charm or grace, afterward becomes
wholly sacred, and no attractive appears, which carries not along with it a
pious allurement, and which makes them (whilst they tread the paths of virtue)
to have a horror of any thing that may alter or diminish it. Now this holy
effect is evacuated by Adultery, so that it may be called a kind of Sacrilege,
dissolving the sacred union of hearts which is made by marriage; and therefore
I wonder not if St. Cyprian terms it Summum delictum, the highest crime that
Man can be guilty of.

Our sad Penitent alarmed with the outcryes of blood on the one side, and
Adultery on the other, for which as an Enemy to God and Nature he deserves to
be exterminated, has no refuge but to the God of his Salvation, and he repeats
it again and again that he would daign to save him from the doom of both,
protesting a true repentance of both, and that for the future like a Lamb in
the shearers hands, he will be silent, endure all the opprob^ios his Subjects
shall cast upon him, and make a return of all the good he can: Lastly, he will
extinguish for ever within him all the Fires of concupiscence and unlawful
desires, so he may be sheltered from these crying sins under the beams of his
mercy: Free me from blood O God, God of my Salvation.

The Application.
The way to preserve our selves from this torturing guilt is to be well versed
in the precept of charity: For by this same virtue by which I love God, I am
likewise carried on to love my Neighbor: So that whenever I injure him, I
violate the Law of love toward God, which obliges not only to love him, but
all that belongs to him: Now as Man is the most excellent Creature in this
inferior World, and most capable to render him honor and glory, there can be
no violence offered to him, which reflects not upon the Sovereign Lord he
serves, for whose respect we ought to cherish what he would have cherished. I
must not then love my Neighbor because he is rich, beautiful, well fashioned,
or to me particularly obliging, but I must love him, because I love God, to
whose Family he belongs, and in a place of Eminency by the privilege of his
Being: I must love him in that (...) the glory of God, to which he may
contribute much by the Conversion of his own and other Souls to his Service:
why should I then plot mischief against him, for whom Jesus Christ has a
value? why should I aim at his Death, to whom God imparted life, for whom our
redeemer suffered Death, and would if needful do it again? What need I care if
they be malicious to me, since I love them nor for what they are in themselves,
not for what they are to me, but merely for the love I bear to my dear Sigi^r?
Let us stick close to this Principle, and pray, Free me from blood, etc.

Amen.
CHAP. XXX.
Et exultabit Lingua mea justitiam tuam,

And my Tongue shall exalt thy Justice.


AT the first glance, one might Censure our Petitioner as not placing aright
his acts of gratitude, ascribing to God's Justice rather than mercy his
deliverance from sin; but you must know, it is far from him; nay contrary to
the Doctrine he delivered in the preceding Chapter, to think he could merit
any thing de condigno, or by the value of his own works without sanctifying
grace, which is the sole effect of God's mercy. His meaning therefore is, that
supposing he be enriched with the Donative of Grace, he may then lay claim to
his Justice for a reward. St. Paul Tim. 4. says, A Crown of Justice is
reserved and will be justly given to him. First, he calls Heaven a Crown of
Justice; because it is given by way of Justice, in consideration of the worth
of merit: Next, that God will give it as a thing to which he has a right; and
Lastly, he styles God a just Judge, in Testimony he does it by virtue of his
Office, that is, to observe the Rules of Justice.

The Arausican Council chap. 28. declares that a recompense is due to good
works, but grace (which is not due) must go before and give life to them; and
truly it is rational, that since God threatens punishment to the wicked deeds
of Men, he should likewise propose a recompense to virtuous actions; otherwise
he might be said to be more inclined to severity than sweetness, which is much
repugnant to his nature.

Again, sanctifying grace is a quality so sublime, that it dignifies and exalts
the works of that subject it informs above all the Worlds greatness: Now there
being nothing but eternal glory which surpasses grace, a meritorious action
animated by grace, cannot be recompensed to the worth but by glory, whence it
follows that grace by a title of right and condignity merits eternal glory.

Lastly, sanctifying Grace is communicated by God unto a Soul with the
circumstance of an affectionate Amity, by which in the first place he loves
her, and this love of friendship moves him to pardon all her offenses, to
receive her into his favor, and adorn her with the incomparable Ornament of
this Celestial quality. This done, Man becomes a Friend of God in his first
justification, is raised to a pitch of greatness so transcending, as his works
are worthy of Heaven as performed by a friend of God, who has an affection for
her, and by that will render her completely happy.

Upon these motives, and supposition of a grant to the preceding clause of his
petition, he will blazon forth the Justice of God not in the remission of his
sin, for this he acknowledges to his pure mercy, but upon the score of a
recompense which his goodness has promised. This consideration awakens him
from sluggishness, and as the Labourer endures patiently the fatigues of his
task, in hopes of his salary at Night, so will our Petitioner unweariedly
sustain the traverses of this life, and amidst his tribulations, every thought
of Paradise shall move his Tongue to exalt, O Lord, thy Justice.

Merit is defined a service which obliges to a retribution or a good work done
freely, and which God accepts of as the price of eternal life: Now albeit good
actions arising from grace (by which they are supernaturallized) are in a
certain manner rendered worthy of eternal life, even without the promise of
God; yet they can no ways oblige God to give it, unless he first engage his
word to this effect. For he is the Sovereign Lord of the World, and most
particularly of just Men, and their good deeds; yet can they not so much sway
with him, as to put a constraint on his will to let them share with him in his
Heavenly Kingdom. For when all the just had consecrated to his honor all the
good works imaginable, he might justly say, I accept of these in discharge of
your past debts, and obligations due to me for your Creation, conservation,
grace and power I have given you to act: So that when any one makes an oblation
of his person, fortune, or any other his goods unto God, he must not present it
in way of a gift, but with humility as in satisfaction of a debt; nor yet as if
he would clear all scores, but as a small parcel of that great Sum which he
owes. Wherefore that Man may have an unquestionable right to Heaven by the
value of his good works (being so engaged to God as he is) it was necessary a
contract or stipulation should pass, by which God should please to declare he
would give him Heaven in recompense, and upon this ground he should have a
title to demand and obtain it.

In this proceeding his Mercy and Justice meet, his mercy in that he accepts
the works of the just, for more than the bare discharge of their obligations:
His Justice in that he is pleased to give the rate of Heaven in return of their
good works; by this means Saints are humbled in the excellency and value of
their merits, for by it they know that Heaven is so bestowed by way of Justice,
as they are notwithstanding unspeakably obliged to the Divine mercy, which
passing over the debts, accepts of their works for Heaven; this certainly will
give them immortal resentments of gratitude, for which they will power forth an
infinity of praises, and benedictions throughout the vast spaces of eternity,
to a Benefactour, who treats them so nobly, with such signal favors, as to
become a Debtor even to his own debtors. St. Austin admiring this Mystery
says, God has made himself a Debtor to us, not by receiving any thing from
us, but by promising what he pleased unto us. For all things are depending on
him, nor can they oblige him but as far as he will oblige himself, by his
incomparable Charity and inviolable Fidelity.

Our great Penitent ravished in the contemplation of these truths cannot but
unloose his Tongue to celebrate the praises of the Divine Justice, which so
attempers the circumstances of our Salvation, that we may claim it as our due:
He hires us into his Vineyard, and if we prove faithful to our task, he will
not fail in his promise to give us a salary; he often reflects what a comfort
it will be to a beatifyed Soul to have contributed something to her own
happiness. In this liberty and free will which God has given us, he beholds
the perfection, and greatness of the Soul, that neither the most charming
beauties, the most ravishing delights, the most glorious dignities, the most
amiable virtues in spiritual entertainments, nay, nor the most eminent hopes of
glory, can work any impression or impose any necessity upon her actions, but
according to the mtasure of her will. Again, she has a vigor impregnable
(fortifyed with God's grace) against all sin and misfortunes, that neither the
allurements of what is lovely, nor the horrid face of what is frightful, can
make any entrance by force; for the Soul is above all the machinations of Men,
can resist them, and merely because it pleases her so to do. Let them speak
fair, let them bribe, threaten, weep, attack, thunder, lighten, muster the
Elements into storms and fury, nothing finds admittance, but at her disposal.
So that these words in the Apocalips may justly be applied to her. I have been
dead and am living: She was dead by Original sin, and is revived by the Grace
of Jesus Christ, she has put into her Hands the Keys of life and death, that
is free will, which may open to her either Paradise or Hell.

After this survey of Man's liberty in this life, by which he is free either to
the acting of what is good or bad; he makes a pause upon the apprehension that
Man would have been more perfect, were he limited to virtue, and incapable of
any vicious action, as God himself is, and all the blessed by a clear vision.
But he solves this objection, considering that God alone by nature is
impeccable, it is a privilege wherein none can share with him, as being
infinitely perfect, and can admit of no imperfection. St. Ambrose says, that
only the substance of the Divinity is a Being that cannot dye, to wit, by the
death of sin: All other reasonable Creatures in this sense are mortal, and if
the blessed in heaven be impeccable, it is not by their nature, but by the
power of glory communicated, in which they were invested by God after they had
given proof of their virtues whilst they were Viatours, and under their Trial.

Now as to Man the experience of his frailty helps him on to discern more
clearly (as the obscurity of the Night renders a fair Day the more resplendent)
and reverence this excellency in God. Next, he ought not to repine that he is
not here glorious; for this life is his place of Combat, and the Crown is not
given till the Victory be gained, wherefore as long as he lives he enjoyes a
liberty, by which he may sin and be overcome, and by which he may vanquish.

Lastly, God decreed this liberty to Man, and gave him a faculty by which he
might with a full swinge of his Will be take himself to good or evil, to the
end he might be capable of merit or demerit; for if he acted by the impulse of
necessity, he could merit no recompense for his virtue, nor punishment for his
sin, no more than a tree which bears good or bad fruit, and by this means the
divine Justice could not be discerned either in the condemnation of the wicked,
or in the reward of the just.

Our great Penitent in the issue of this meditation has reason to set his
Tongue a work, and spend it self in exalting this powerful and remunerating
Justice of God, which happily converts to our advantage what at the first
glance appears the Subject of our ruin; and resign himself to those dangers
wherein the perfection of his free will may involve him; since by his grace
(which he implores) he may embrace, and practice what is pleasing to him: And
if to the end he carry on this noble resolution, he has an assurance to bless
his Justice for all Eternity. And my Tongue shall exalt thy Justice.

St. Austin upon this place is of Opinion that our Penitent means the Messiah
whose Justice he will extol, in that by his merit both Men and Angels are
rescued from the slavery of sin. To which I agree, nor do the premises any
ways derogate from this interpretation; for the merits of Jesus Christ are the
source and cause of Sanctifying grace, which grace dignifyes the works of the
just, and raises them to the degree of merit: Now that which is cause of the
cause, is likewise cause of the effect, and consequently the merits of Jesus
Christ, are cause of the merits of Saints, as St. Paul to the Galatians Chap.
1. He has blessed us with all spiritual benediction in Jesus Christ.

Next, the merits of Jesus Christ contribute to the merits of Saints, in that
he has obtained by his actions, and sufferings a promise from God to accept
the merits of Men in order to Heaven, for it was in consideration of him, and
upon the score of his torments, that this promise was made unto us: It is this
St. Peter in his Second Epistle Chap. 3. hints at, when speaking of Christ he
says, by him he has made us great and precious promises, to the end we might
by them be made partakers of the Divine Nature. Now as Grace is the Fountain of
the merits of Saints, and God's promise the accomplishment; both the one, and
the other proceeding from the merits of Jesus Christ; it follows that the
merits of Saints subsist not but by those of Christ. Nor have they a dependency
only by way of simple condition, or necessary circumstance, but they flow from
them as from the root, fountain, and principal cause, without which they would
have no Being.

Our Holy Doctor therefore will praise and set forth the divine Justice under
several Notions. First, as he is the Principium or Offspring, whence all
remission of sin, and collation of grace is derived; and without which all
Mankind had been eternally wrapped up in the darkness of sin, so that the just
and superabundant ransom he has paid for us; merits the Adorations and praises
of all hearts and tongues.

Next, he will extol him under the title of a remunerating Justice, in that
after he has taught us how to fight, put arms into our hands, and has stood
by us to confirm our courage, exacting only a firm will to overcome; does yet
dispense his Crowns with applause, as if we had done all our selves: O who can
then asperse, and lay a charge upon this Opinion as if it injured Christ's
merits? does the fullness of a stream dishonor the source from whence it
flows; or the excellency of any fruit injure the Root that gives birth to it;
so the merits of the just, being only the rivulets, and fruit of Christ's
superabundant satisfaction, cannot certainly in the least derogate from his;
they only serve in an inferior degree to extol and do homage to the infinity
of Christ's merit. Wherefore Our Penitent will incessantly tune forth: And my
Tongue shall exalt thy Justice.

The Justice of God beholds Creatures in three several relations: First, it is
distributive, by which he allots unto every Creature faculties proportionable
to carry them on to the End for which they were created. To the Soul which he
has designed to contemplate and love him, he has given an understanding and
will; the Body doomed to labor he has framed with Arms, and Hands: The Sun
whose Office is to enlighten the World, he has vested with a lasting
brightness, which never fails to perform its task; in fine, every animal, Tree,
Plant, or what ever is existent in the World has a virtue proper to the
designment of its Creation. Whence St. Dennis says, that God is communicable
in his Justice, distributing to every one according to the dignity of its
nature, and bounding within limits most equitable, the manner, beauty, order,
Ornament; the inequalities and proportions of all Creatures, accommodating
every thing with that which is proper to it.

Our Penitent will not be silent in order to this his distributive Justice, he
will admire the works of God, give his approbation without the least Censure,
and confess that this wise Architect has balanced all things with equity and
justice; and if he may be so happy as to manage his individual Being
conformably to those proprieties and qualities he has received from his
Creator, he will with confidence proclaim, that his tongue shall exalt his
justice.

In the second consideration his punitive justice has place, by which he
inflicts a punishment on sinners, the reason of this is, that a sinner living
contrary to the will of God, and disobedient to his order, settling his
contentment on things forbidden by his Sovereign, does by these his ways throw
a contempt upon him: Wherefore it is most just reparation should be made; and
since he has rebelled in breaking the Commands of his Creator, it is fit he
should be afflicted with torments, and enslaved by that will he has so much
scorned, and set at naught. Lactantius says, the Law is just which imposes on
Criminalls a punishment they merit; and that Judge is upright and good who
spares not offenders; because the chastisement of the wicked, is a
preservation of the good. So God is not blamable if he fall heavy upon the
wicked, that they may no longer oppress and injure the innocent, for it would
not be a virtue in God to behold his Servants in this great World tread his
Laws under foot, blaspheme his Holy Name, thwart in every thing his Sacred
will, commit exorbitancies of all kind, and amidst all these disorders, remain
as stupid and incensible: No, no, God has a virtue dreadful to the impious,
which is his avenging Justice.

Our Penitent finds here likewise matter enough for his Tongue, that God having
had so much reason to execute his Justice, upon his criminal Head, has yet
been pleased to hold in his Thunderbolts, as that they have not (as he
deserved) reduced him to ashes. Wherefore he will amend his life so to avoid
the terrors of this dreadful power, and if he be not for the future led by the
charms of his sweetness unto the observance of his laws, then he will submit
to this his punitive right, it being just he should not forfeit it upon his
score, or that of any unrepenting sinner: So that in all events, his Tongue
shall exalt thy Justice.

The third reflection of God's Justice toward his Creatures is styled
remunerative, by which he fills with ineffable and endless joy, such as have
served him faithfully in this life; for as it becomes not his Majesty to let
the infringers of his Laws to the last go unpunished, no less is it suitable to
his goodness, not to reward the obedient services of his Friends. They have
studied here to please him, to confirm themselves to his desires, and promote
his Glory as much as lay in them: Nay, were it possible to make any addition to
his treasure and perfections, they would have done it. Wherefore their good God
being invincible, and not to be overcome by the good will or affection of any
Creature, thinks himself engaged to confer by way of recompense eternal honor,
riches, and joys unto those Souls who have her served, and gloryfied him by
their virtuous actions.

Our penitent lays hold on this justice, and and it is the great Theme on
which he promises here to dilate himself: but whilst he is busied in this his
duty, he is confounded to consider, that all he can possibly give to God, is a
bare and simple good will, the plenitude of his perfections admitting no
increase; but on the other side, he receives effective and solid blessings: God
draws no profit out of our good works, yet he sets such a value on them, as to
think Heaven it self not too great a price for them: We can only glorify him
in the film, or outside, by witnessing an esteem we have for his service, but
he glorifies us intimately, and to the lowest Center of our Soul, which he will
replenish with splendor, delight, and glory; and all these great things he
will not do gratis, as a favor at discretion, but by virtue of an engagement,
and under a title of Justice, that we might more firmly hope for our felicity,
and possess it in the most noble manner of enjoyment! O what a stroke of
goodness even in this his Justice? Therefore our Penitent will never cease: And
my Tongue shall exalt thy Justice.

The Application.
Christ our Lord declared those blessed who hungered, and thirsted after
Justice. Now this Justice consists in the aggregation of all virtues; to be
humble, chaste, or patient suffices not to qualify any person with the title of
just: For if we are guilty of any one inordinate act, we forfeit our whole
right to Justice: Our Penitent therefore in the precedent clause sued to be
freed from the crimes of homicide and adultery, hoping as to the rest he was
innocent, and nothing of an enormous Nature could be laid to his charge;
supposing then to be cleared from these, he raises his hopes after that
promised recompense; to wit, He himself would be our too great reward; and
whosoever should glorify him, should be glorified by him. Let us then exalt
this Justice which seems wholly to lay aside his own interest, that he may
stand engaged to those who owe him all; what demonstration of his goodness is
this even in his Justice, as to be himself our happy portion for all eternity;

Amen.
CHAP. XXXI.
Domine labia mea aperies.

Lord thou shall open my Lips.


OUr Holy Penitent conscious of the sublimity of the Subject he has
undertaken, warily considers his inabilities, and that the Tongues of Angels do
but stammer when they would set forth his Perfections; yet willing to express
his gratitude, he cannot be silent, holding it a less fault to praise him
unworthily than not to praise him at all, and his deficiency has at least this
plea of comfort, that it springs from the excellency of the Being he would
extol.

But since his duty binds him to say something, like a sage Orator he would
fortify himself with all the helps imaginable: His first contrivance is to
dispose his Lips, which is a main Instrument of Speech, and the best way to fit
them to a right temper, is to put them into the hands of him that made them:
whence he desires, that he who shapes the tongues of infants into eloquence
would open and frame his lips, that they may tune forth his praises, and ravish
men with the love of him; upon this design, he cries; Lord thou will open my
Lips.

It is couched in Genesis that after God had framed Man out of a mass of Clay,
he breathed into him a spirit of life. Our Petitioner like a Clod of dull Earth
lies exanimated, and as it were dead in sin, and though some life of grace be
put into him, yet he is as in a trance and it is necessary his Lips and Teeth
be wrenched open that he may speak, and to speak to the purpose, it was also
necessary words should be put into his Mouth, and such words as are enlivened
with a Spirit of Wisdom, which he alone could give, who is an increated source
of knowledge; and if once thus prepared he will do wonders, his Lips shall no
more be employed in the vain Art of Arithmetic to cast up the number of his
People, so to rely more on the strength of a Multitude, than on the divine
assistance. No more shall his Lips give out unlawful orders for the death of
the Innocent: No more taken up in the luxurious courtships of women: So that if
the divine goodness shall please to lift up these floudgates, he doubts not but
to convay a stream, which bacting upon the stones of his repenting breast will
make up a fine harmony in the ears of his Creator; wherefore he begs, Lord
thou will open my Lips.

It is storied of Creesus King of Lydia, that seeing a City wherein he was
besieged, attacked, and forcibly entered by Cyrus King of the Medes, he
resolved rather than become a scornful prisoner to dye on the places, upon
which design he cast himself into the midst of his Enemies, preferring an
honorable death before an opprobrious life: His Son beholding his imminent
danger, though to that instant at the Age of twenty years he had been always
dumb; cried out, spare my Father, spare my Father, it is the King: Whereupon
the Enemy seized his person, and preserved his life, some attribute this to a
natural cause, alleging the love this Prince had for his Father, put all his
vital spirits into combustion, and by that violent motion broke the obstacle of
his speech.

However methinks this passage may in some sense be applied to our great
Penitent, who was morally dumb, the Organs of his Soul structed by the
malignity of sin; insomuch as he could not utter one syllable, which might have
force to reach the Ears of his Creator; until he came to have a prospect of
his eternal ruin, and no sooner these Terrors appeared before him, but all
the faculties of his Soul were stirred up, removed all Obstacles, and made him
Petition for the opening his Lips, the first motion to his happiness. Lord thou will open my Lips; For this imports not a local division of the Lips, but an
inflammation of the heart, by virtue of which heat, all the parts of his Body
will be disposed to discharge those functions for which they were created.

St Paul to show how little Man can do if left to himself, says, 1 Cor. 4.
What do we possess which we have not received, and if so, why glory we in it as
if our own. Again, he powerfully asserts it in the Eighth Chapter to the
Romans, It is not he who wills, or runs, but he on whom God will have mercy. As
if he would say, as Esau in vain pursued his Chase, thinking from thence to
derive to himself his Fathers blessing: So Man after sin loses but his time,
and endeavor, if he think by the strength of his natural faculties to be able
to observe the Commandments of God, or perform what is requisite to the
purchase of Heaven; So that it must chiefly spring from the mercy of God's
assisting grace.

Nay, which is more, we cannot so much as desire to serve God according to our
obligations, unless he first by his divine grace move our hearts, and dispose
our will unto it; as the same St. Paul says, God works in us both the will and
the execution; without God assisting, we cannot have a desire neither to
believe what is proposed as the object of Faith, nor perform what we should in
order to virtuous actions; and therefore St. Austin says, the prodigal Son had
never resolved to return home to his Father, if the mercy of God had not
inspired him to it.

To manifest this truth we need go no further than to cast our thoughts upon
the Grecian and Roman learning, which produced the greatest wits in the World;
yet in all their inquisition after a sovereign good, they were so lost as even
to become ridiculous; acting things concerning a Deity, and Man's supreme
felicity, as if they were destitute of reason. St. Paul takes notice in
particular, how coming to Athens he found an Altar dedicated to an unknown God:
For they had been visited with a great pestilence, and ignorant for what
offense a chastisement so severe was inflicted; at last, fancied it was for
want of homage to be rendered to some Deity not yet discovered; than this what
could be more absurd, to show in what darkness and errors, Man does grope when
left to himself.

So that if at any time a person blushes at his vanities and past
extravagancies, and does confess that what before he behold as light, and life,
to be nothing else than obscurity and death; this Conversion (says St. Austin)
comes not from himself, but from the powerful, and hidden grace of God which
dissipates the Clouds of Earthly opinions, and enflames his heart with a desire
of knowing the truth.

Now this change God works in Souls several ways, in some more gently, in
others more forcibly: Solomon insinuates that he particularly gives his call by
the outward preaching of his word; this Esai. confirms Chap. 40. God has sent
Doctors of his Faith into the World, who should reduce their Brethren like the
blind into the way; that is, unto Jesus Christ the Messiah, who is styled the
way, truth, and life. In this manner Surius recounts Barlaam was sent to
Josaphat Son to a King in the Indies, that by his conversion the whole Kingdom
might embrace the Law of Christ. St. Paul was sent to Athens, who converted the
great St. Dennis a famous Doctor of the Areopagites. St. Philip to the Eunuch
of the Ethiopian Queen, who by expounding unto him a Prophecy of Christ in
Esai. immediately received Baptism at his hands.

In the History of Japonia it is related of a certain Indian who had lived well
according to the light of nature, how he was restless in his Mind, believing
his religion to be false: he went to the Turks thinking to follow theirs, but
finding there no satisfaction, then he applied himself to the Jews, but still
remained in perplexity, so that with much fervor he was wont to cry out; O
God, let me know who thou art, and that I may serve thee according to thy will,
otherwise do not charge me with blame for my error. At last it happened St.
Francis Xavierus came into the Town where he was, and no sooner did he hear him
unfold the points, and sacred mysteries of Christian Religion, but he
proclaimed, that Man preaches the God I must serve, and forth with was baptized.

By this expedient he likewise made a conquest of our Holy Penitent, in which
action Nathan the Prophet was instrumental, who laying before him his
obligations to God and his ingratitude, occasioned that without delay he had
recourse to the Sanctuary of this present petition or Miserere.

The second manner of his call is by the inward operation of his Spirit, and
this he communicates to all, witness St. Paul, 1 Cor. 4. God who drew light
from darkness by a word from his mouth, has filled our hearts with the
splendor of his knowledge: For without this light of Faith, Man knows not God
who made him, he knows not whither he tends; he knows not eternal felicity,
for which he was created; nay he knows not himself; for without Faith, we know
not that we are born Imps of wrath, and liable to eternal death: We know not
the wounds of our nature, our inability to good, the necessity of being
regenerated by grace. Lastly, without this interior light, we know not Christ
our Mediator, by whose precious blood we are Redeemed from eternal damnation,
and restored to a life of Grace and Glory.

But you will say if God imparts this light of faith to all, how comes it so
many remain in darkness, and infidelity; of this the reason is, that it is
required to the end the light of Faith may have its effect, a cooperation in
our wills, otherwise this ray (how glorious so e're it be) is rendered useless,
and as it were under a Cloud: Therefore St. Paul ad Romans 10. says, Faith
which justifies must come from the heart; and in Luke 22. Christ reprehends the
Disciples going to Emaus, that notwithstanding he had filled them with the
beams of his light, yet their hearts were slow in admitting a belief; Job
likewise confirms this Chap. 24. saying; they were obdurate, and rejected the
light presented to them.

Our Learned Graduate and Petitioner more happy, rejected not the internal call
of God by his secret inspirations, but corresponded with them by a pious
affection in his will; and having a merciful invitation to a feast of grace, he
would not like those guests mentioned in the 22. of St. Matthew, Let the
consideration of a poor Farm, or a little musty vvare gain more upon him than
the hope of this treasure, more precious than the whole World: He would not
prefer darkness before light, nor choose to vvallow in dirt and mire, rather
than beautify his Soul with a gift which will one day render him immortal in
glory. He had already obtained a desire to do well, and this desire he would
improve by action, and since God had daigned to give him the velle, or will to
serve him, he begs he would open his Lips, that he might redeem his miscarriage
in setting forth the Enormity of sin, the Characters of the divine goodness,
and the greatness of his Justice; Lord thou will open my Lips.

St. Austin reflecting upon the goodness of God, in that he not only bids us
ask, but even gives us more than we demand; says, That our slothfulness ought
to blush in that God is more ready to give than we are to receive.

Abraham petitioned for a Son, and received a promise that his Seed should be
multiplied like Stars of Heaven, or Sands of the Sea, and that Christ should
issue forth from his Loins.

Jacob's request was extended only to Bread, and a Garment, and he was honored
with Angels to be his Companions, was partaker of many heavenly visions, and
abundance of riches powered as it were into his Lap.

The Thief on the Cross sued but for a remembrance, and Christ gave him a
promise of Paradise.

So our Penitent seems to be very modest in his petition knowing well the wont
of God's bounty, that does not succor us in one kind, and leave us miserable
in another, but relieves completely: Wherefore he sues only to have his Lips
unsealed; for the rest he referrs it to his incomparable munificence, being
fixed in this Principle, that according to the measure of his donation, he will
exhort, allure, threaten; nay put himself into any shape, that may most
effectually purchase Souls unto God.

Nor is it a bad presage of his future success, that he is so confident to have
his Lips laid open; Lord (says he) thou will open my Lips, as if he had the
Key of grace at his command. For I observe when God would dispose a Soul for
the reception of his favor, the first Seed he casts into her is that of hope,
this lesson he read to the Paralytick, Matt. 9. Son be confident and hope well.

Cassianus says, it is a sign we shall obtain what we demand, when we find a
strong faith and confidence in our selves whilst we offer our petition: For
Almighty God uses to inspire this virtue into us as an earnest or pledge of his
future grant; this made the Apostle St. Paul prescribe it as a means to compass
our desires, Heb. 2.16. Let us approach with confidence the Throne of grace. As
if we needed only a firm hope to be able to scale the throne of grace and bear
thence what ever we desire.

Hope is defined a virtue residing in the will, which raises it to the
expectation of a sovereign good, and consequently to all necessary means in
order to that; as grace, remission of sin, and the like: For the understanding
enlightened by Faith, knows that the beatitude of Man is in God, that this
beatitude is promised him as his final end; whence the will sets itself a work
after this sovereign good, and being unable of it self to reach so high, this
virtue of hope is infused to strengthen the imbecility of our nature.

Now the motives of hope are; First, God's mercy, which is no less prompt to
free his Creatures from misery, than the fire is to burn, or the Sun to give
light,

The next motive is his Providence, which allots unto every Being what is
necessary to lead them to their final end.

The third motive is his divine power, against which no machination or force
can be of any effect to ruin a Soul he means to save: For all the power of
Hell before him is but like an^ atome before the Sun, nay he can with more
facility draw a Soul from an Abyss of sin, and adorn her with an Angelick
purity, I say with more ease, than we can utter a Syllable, or make the
twinkling of an Eye. Besides, he is generous, and seeing his Enemy at his Feet,
imploring his mercy, he loves to raise them by his pardon, and cannot endure
that any in vain should hope in him.

In sequel of this meditation our Petitioner assures himself that God will not
reject him; nay, that he will give him more than even he dares to hope for:
That since he has designed him to a supernatural end, his providential care
will enrich him with an interior illustration of his Mind, and a holy impulse
in his will, that he may comprehend those Truths which he has hid from the
wise, and discovered to his little ones. He knew the Messiah would not shed his
precious blood to make us great Orators, Physicians, Astrologers or the like;
because Man by the strength of his own capacity may reach and acquire them in
some perfection; but to enable us to supernatural principles: And though by the
contemplation of created things, Man may make many deductions and inferences,
and so come to the knowledge of several perfections in God: Yet knowledge thus
acquired is very imperfect; and therefore St. Thomas observes, that the wisest
Men have fallen into many sottish errors, until a supernatural Divinity came
to rectify, what Man's Wit could not penetrate and discern.

Our Penitent now feeling himself to swell like a Fountain to the brim, with
these irradiations and sacred transports, longs to discharge himself, and
besprinkle the Arid Souls of languishing sinners: Wherefore he begs his Lips
may be laid open, that like a torrent he may bear all down before him, destroy
all the Barricado's of impiety, and teach the World in his Example, that
notwithstanding we forfeit by sin all supernatural aids; yet repentance is of
power to redeem them, and restore us to a capacity of regaining our eternal
Beatitude: Wherefore he exhorts all Men to join issue with him, and with a firm
hope cry; Lord thou shall open my Lips.

The Application.
We are taught here when we begin to pray, that we look upon our selves as
infirm, indigent, and ulcerated Beggars; who expect from the merciful hand of
God to find some relief in our necessities; and we must further reflect upon
this great addition to our misery, that

as that the time was not tedious to him, to whom the Saint replied, that the
whole world was a great Volume expanded, in which he read as it were in great
Characters, the wonders of its Creator, to which also alludes the Sentence of
St. Chrysostom: There is not any particle of a Creature, be it of worth or not,
which issues not forth a voice more loud than a Trumpet, and speaks the praises
of God.

But above all, it belongs to Man by many Titles of obligation to contribute to
the praise and glory of God.

First, his natural perfections more lively represent the Divine perfections,
as being created to his Image, and enriched with an understanding able to
comprehend supernatural things, so that he alone in this Earthly Sphere can
acknowledge, and make a return of gratitude, for all the visible productions we
here behold. Whence it is evident, that Man is obliged to pay the tribute of
praise and thanksgiving in the behalf of all Creatures: it was upon this score
the high Priest among the Jews was wont to have wrought in his Garment a
draught of the World, to insinuate, that it was his part to discharge the duty
of Adoration, and acknowledgment unto God in the name of the universe.

Next, Man may be aiding to the glory of God, employing those gifts of grace he
receives in acts of Religion, obeying his Commandments, embracing his Councels
referring all his actions to his honor, and evidencing by a holy life, that
all his endeavors are in order to him, and his service. For from hence is
reflected a certain external glory upon God; not only in that he is known,
loved, and respected by such a life of Sanctity; but also in that he has such
holy and generous Creatures, just as it is the glory of a Father to have a Son
virtuous and wise, and who by his valor and sage conduct, draws the Eyes of
the World with a kind of admiration upon him.

But the greatest glory Man can give unto God, is in a state of Beatitude, for
when once there arrived, he shall see him face to face without any interposed
Veil, he shall know the wonders of his essence, cast his sweetness
inconceivable, and have his heart ravished with eternal affections: He shall
there praise him in a full consort for all Eternity: This is the highest, pitch
of glory Man can give unto God, in which he is partner with the Angels, it is
the final end of our Creation, we are not put into this World upon any other
design, than by a constant progress in virtue to advance our selves daily to
this end.

Here you may discern the general Heads of praise in which our Penitent will
engage his mouth. First, he will praise him in the infinite variety of
Creatures he has framed in this inferior World for Man's use, and in his
behalf he will powerforth his thanks, and acts of gratitude, resolving never to
abuse them, or design them contrary to that end for which they were made.

Next, he will submit all his actions, to be led and conducted according to the
impulse and dictamens of those Graces he shall please to bestow upon him;
making his Body a holy, chaste, and ma^rated victime to his Laws, and by this
means he will dispose himself for that last and highest service he is to render
him in a complete Beatitude, where his Mouth shall never cease to celebrate his
praise: And my Mouth shall declare thy praise.

Whilst our Penitent thus in his thoughts runns over all these motives which
might justly afford matter of praise to his grateful Tongue, there occurs one
more which must not be omitted, since it exceeds all others, and exalts the
glory of God beyond all the submission of Men and Angels; it is the mystery of
the Incarnation in which Christ Jesus God-Man has contributed the most to
God's glory: For he has saved the World by the effusion of his precious blood,
and nothing is more glorious to God than the Salvation of Mankind; for good and
holy persons will praise, love, admire, contemplate, enjoy, and adore his
perfections in the vast spaces of Eternity: Now had he not dyed for Man, no
Paradise, no felicity could have been for them; so that God had remained under
the privation of that glory, he does and is to receive from blessed Spirits for
all Eternity.

Nay more, not only Men do glorify God by Jesus Christ, but the Angels
likewise, in whose concern the Church declares the Angels praise your Majesty,
the Archangels bow before you, the Powers tremble with respect, the virtues of
Heaven, and blessed Seraphims with like joy and love do glorify you: So that
all the external glory consecrated to God either in Heaven or Earth is in
consideration of the divine person as it supports the sacred humanity of Christ.

Lastly, Jesus Christ in Heaven does praise and magnify the Divinity with an
Air incomparable; he does it more copiously, with more variety, with a note
more lively and ravishing than all the Choires of Angels and Saints put
together: The reason is, that the most perfect knowledge, and most ardent
affection are the ^ources of the most sublime and magnificent Panegyricks: Now
the Soul of our Redeemer enjoyed without dispute a more clear and penetrating
wisdom and knowledge of the Divinity, is enflamed in that Abyss of essence to a
higher degree: than any other whatsoever, and consequently his most pure Soul
breaks forth into praises, which outstrip and surpass by far all the Harmony
both of Angels and the blessed spirits in Heaven.

I doubt not but our Penitent with much satisfaction let his Tongue strike upon
this Theme; for if the very thought of the Messiah replenished his Mind with
abundant joy, what consolation to consider that by him alone God would derive
to himself more glory, than from the whole mass of Creatures, that he was to
share with him in this task of praise, that he would procure, increase, and
magnify the honor of God to his utmost; and since Angels and Men were to pay
their homage of praise and benediction by and in the person of the Messiah, our
Penitent would not be exempted from that privilege of bearing a part in the
confort, and bless the divine goodness in that by the bloody Sacrifice of the
Messiah, God's honor should be repaired, and as many voices gained to promote
his greatness, as there were to be glorious spirits in Heaven, that by his
sacred Mouth the praises of his God, his sovereign good, and object of his love
were to be ecch^d forth in the midst of Paradise; with what ^y would he put a
helping hand, and conspire in this design, and second the generous intentions
of the Messiah, by a million of toyl^e Labors, might he but live to see the
Daybreak of his coming, however he is resolved by him to offer up all his
stock of praise and benediction. And my Mouth shall announce, thy praise.

Cassianus admires the goodness of God, that possessing within himself an
inexhausted Treasure of all good, in whom cannot be found the least want of any
thing desirable, is yet pleased to play the Merchant with poor Creatures,
entrusting into their hands not only the visible stock of this inferior World,
but also the dispensation of heavenly graces, and this whilst he can expect no
return, this our Petitioner himself confesses in the last Chapter of the first
of the Chronicles; where He and the Princes of the people had made a large
Offering of many Talents of Gold, Silver, and other Metals: For reflecting then
upon the state of Accounts 'twixt God and his Creatures; he said, Who am I, and
what is my people to offer any thing unto thee, for all things come from thee,
and of thine own we have given. So that none can offer unto God but what they
have received from him: Nay, he is so indulgent, as though we can return him
nothing but what is his own, yet let them be stamped with the mark of
gratitude, he will put them upon account as satisfactory. In a word we can
exchange nothing in return of all his benefit, but the oblation of praise, and
is it not strange we should r^fuse^ him this? Nay, to encourage us though we
give him but a trifle, not worth the regarding, yet if it be done with a real
intent of serving him, he blenches not at it, but by his acceptance makes it
valuable, and of a price not to be esteemed. I must needs then say, our great
Penitent has pitched upon a right way of traffic, and which is most suitable
to the state of his affairs. Wherefore I wonder not if in diverse other Psalms,
he protests he will live no longer than he shall be able to remit unto his
obliging Creditour, the just tribute of praise, and that he will be punctual in
this commerce whilst he has a Being, which resolution he again here confirms:
And my Mouth shall send forth thy praise.

St. Bonaventure forbids two things in those that would praise the name of God;
to wit, Pride and fear: For, if proud, though he take up the Subject of
another praise, and descants upon it with much seeming zeal, yet he always so
manages the Encomiums as to involve himself as a Party, which spoils all; for
God will have no Ri^al, he communicates (it is true) unto his Creatures the
participation of his divide essence, I but in matter of glory he will be
singular, and protests that none shall bear a share with him; in this he
proclaims himself to be a Jo^lo^ God.

Next, if the Praiser be timorous, he can never be faithful, for this unmanly
passion like an Apoplexy seizes upon all the vital spirits, Whinders the
speech, nay even be rayles any interest at the Face of danger. So that you
never see any thing great or generous to issue from a Coward; wherefore our
blessed Savior declares he will not own him at the Latter day, who has here
blished, and not dared to acknowledge him.

Our great Doctor was far exempt from these irregular motions: As to the first,
he was the meekest of Men, the Character he gives of himself shows he was not
elevated with an Any conceit of his own worth, when he pronounces in his Psalm;
That he is a Worm, and not a Man; the opprobry of Men, and scorn of the people.
So that the brain blast of Pride did not stifle, or any ways obstruct those
just Attributes he promises here to give unto his Maker.

As to the other branch of fear, his Heroic exploits are abundantly set forth
in the sacred History, so that to go about to clear him from (apprehension) of
terror, when God's ^use ^ay (...) ^e, were the same as to use Arguments in a
glorious day, to persuade the Sun shines: Let us then conclude he was
completely qualifyed in border to the performance of his task, and that his
Mouth was admirably fitted to Sing forth the praises of his God: And my Mouth
shall announce thy praise.

Whilst our Penitent goes on in his design to make an Elogy of his Creatours
praises, he is startled at an opinion, that God is glorified in the damnation
of a Soul, as much it in her Salvation. But he soon recovered himself upon the
principles he has laid; for as a rare and accomplished piece of work speaks
more the art and perfection of the workman, than one that is imperfect and be
set with many faults; so a blessed Soul adorned with many perfections, and
being lively image of her Maker, does more express the power, wisdom, and
other Attributes of God than a lost Soul all stained with a horrid guilt of sin.

Again, it would be indifferent to the most zealous in the love of God, whether
a soul perished or not; because they desiring nothing but the glory of God, and
if that were equally concerned in the loss, or Salvation of a Soul, certainly
either would be a like to them, but it is most evident they practice the
contrary, entertaining passionate desires for the gaining of a Soul, and much
resenting, nay with great desolation, the ruin of any; which evidences that
God derives to himself more glory from a Soul enlivened by his grace, than from
another wallowing in the filth of sin. Wherefore he concludes the task of God's
praise cannot be carried on but by a life of Sanctity, which he looks upon as a
happy necessity, that the glory of our Creator is annexed to our greatest
happiness; For he has produced all things to be finally referred to himself,
and if in this, Creatures find likewise their interest and full delight, how
great an obligation is it? That he has linked his glory to our happy
condition, and utmost perfection; that is, whilst we procure unto God the
greatest glory, in the same action we purchase to our selves our greatest
felicity: So that our Penitent will never cease: And my Mouth shall send forth
thy praise.

The Application.
Here we are instructed that our Being is conferred upon us to no other end
than to love, praise, and glorify God, and to procure (as much as in us lies)
that others likewise discharge this designment of their Creation. If then we
direct our actions to our own praise, sucking in the Air of humane applause, we
commit an act of injustice against God, and pervert the noble employment
allotted to our nature: We play the Thief, and plunder the lawful propriety of
our Creator: The utmost perfection of a stream is to be reunited to its source;
and that of Man to praise and glorify God, in loving, serving, and manifesting
his perfections; and since all other Creatures conspire according to their
capacity to render him glory, Let us who are endued with reason consecrate all
our thoughts and words, all our desires and affections to exalt his praise and
glory.

Amen.
CHAP. XXXIII.
Quoniam si voluisses Sacrificium, dedissem utique,

Because if thou would have had a Sacrifice, I should verily have done it.


IN this Clause our Petitioner hints a remarkable consideration; which is, that
he will not play the Heady devote, nor follow his own will; and what his weak
brain may suggest unto him in order to God's service, but wisely commit himself
unto God, who must be his Master in this particular: For Man's blindness is so
great, the Clouds over his understanding so black, that of himself he cannot
discern what homage is due to his Sovereign Monarch, nor with what Sacrifice he
ought to adore, thank, and appease him: He knew well our important affair in
this life, is to serve God as he would be served, and in that way which might
be most pleasing to him; by consequence the orders he is to observe must be
revealed to him by God, that conformably to his pleasure he is ready to obey,
to Sacrifice not only a beast, but his fortune, honor, crown, person, and all.

There are many Opinions about this Quere; why those legal Sacrifices
instituted by God's own appointment, as a testimony of our acknowledgment of
his supreme Dominion over us, and being their sole refuge to shelter themselves
from the darts of his anger, should in the case of our Petitioner be censured
as useless, and no ways to be countenanced by the approbation of Heaven.

Some say our Penitent means by this the bare external act of Sacrifice, which
as an accustomary thing without the intention, which gives life to the action,
is not required of God, nor receives from him any support, and that in this
sense he truly does not authenticate any Sacrifice so offered.

But questionless this exposition is far from our Penitents thoughts, for no
oblation unless vested with a form of sincere respect, and reverence to the
Divinity, can find any propitious effect; and since that depends on the will of
him that offers sacrifice, if this circumstance be wanting, neither will his
immolation be acceptable, nor he himself blameless; if he desist upon that
title from discharging his duty by those Ceremonies which the Law then required.

I will wave the sentiments of diverse others so to avoid prolixity, and give
you that of St. Gregory, who seems to have hit upon the genuine sense of this
clause. For he reputes it to be a prophetic inspiration in our Penitent, that
the legal Sacrifices being a Type only and Figure of that eternal Sacrifice to
be offered up in the person of Christ, in whom they were all to end. Therefore
in consideration of his vigorous Faith, and ardent zeal for his coming, by
which he merited the effect of what they represented, he was dispensed within
these legal Sacrifices as to himself, they being in these circumstances little
beneficial, and as it were unnecessary.

But let us examine the nature of a Sacrifice which will give us light the
better to discern the verity of this clause: First, it exacts that he who
offers Sacrifice be a Priest; for since it is a worship of all others the most
eminent, by which the World conspires in one to acknowledge a Divinity, it is
requisite this external Ceremony, should not be committed to the Execution of
everyone, but that certain selected Persons be constituted, who in the name of
the Commonwealth should pay their homage to the divine Majesty; and in that
action of Sacrifice, acknowledge both his supreme power, and their subjection;
and this person ought to be a Priest because it is his proper office; witness
St. Paul in the Fifth to the Hebrews, Every Priest chosen out amongst Men are
appointed for the service of Men, in those things which relate unto God in the
oblation of gifts and Sacrifices.

Now as to the Law of nature where mention is made of Sacrifices, and not of
Priests; St. Hierom cites a tradition of the Hebrews which testifies that the
First born Male, or Eldest Son were Priests, and enjoyed both a regal, and
pontificial authority in their Line, and Family. Whence Job Chap. 2. Sacrificed
in behalf of his Children, whom likewise he blessed and sanctified.

Next, it is required in a Sacrifice, that it be some external sensible thing,
either living or inanimate; for whatsoever by the esteem of Nations, or
authority of holy Scripture has been reputed a real and true Sacrifice, it
ever consisted in some such visible and external thing.

The third condition of a Sacrifice is, that the thing offered up be killed, or
some alteration made in it; for all the Sacrifices of the natural and Mosaic
Law were not performed by a simple oblation or elevation of the thing, but by
its destruction, and this directed to God's honor. Living Creatures were
slaughtered, and things inanimate, some burnt, as Flower, Salt, Incense: Others
poured out or spilt, as Blood, Oil, and Water. The reason why a Sacrifice ought
to be destroyed is, that by the destruction it serves no more to the use of
Men, and so more completely seems all applied to God's honor, as importing his
supreme Dominion, and a dependency of all things on him.

Fourthly, a Sacrifice is to be offered up implicitly, or explicitly to the
honor of God; if for any other end it loses the nature and quality of a
Sacrifice: For a Sacrifice is in the number of those signs by which we express
our inward value of another excellency, and a desire in our selves to become
his slave, now if this esteem or desire be wanting, the sign is false, and has
no effect; so that a Sacrifice proceeding from flattery or fear is impious, and
puts a scorn upon the Deity they seem to adore.

Lastly, the place wherein a Sacrifice is performed, ought to be consecrated to
that end, and this we call an Altar, for doubtless the dignity of that action
may justly exact a particular department separated from profane uses, as the
custom of all Nations declares.

From these premises we see what a Sacrifice is taken in the strictest sense;
to wit, an external oblation of some sensible thing offered unto God, by which
we acknowledge his supreme power over us, and all things: that he may dispose
of them and us at his pleasure. Now that God should not require at the hands of
our Petitioner such an expression of his duty seems intricate, because though
by the tie of nature we are obliged to worship God by acts of virtue; and good
works issuing from such a principle, may quadrate with the end of a Sacrifice,
which is to honor God: Yet they produce no external sign, and so properly
cannot be said to be an act of Religion, nor consequently a Sacrifice, which
comprehends the most perfect worship that can be given by a Creature.

Besides, it is most certain that the Law of Moses obliged the Jews very
strictly, and this appears in God's promises to the punctual observers of it;
as that rain should fall in due season, their Lands become fertile, their Trees
be laden with fruit, abundance in their Vineyards, that they should be
preserved from wild Beasts, enjoy a full peace, overcome their Enemies, and
plant themselves in the midst of them; Nay more, that these temporal blessings
were to be Crowned with eternal life, of which promise made to the first
inhabitants of the Earth, they had a Tradition, though their Law made no
mention of it. So that not only for their temporal prosperity, but likewise in
order to spiritual and eternal treasures, they were bound to obey their legal
precepts, and this in conscience under the penalty of a mortal or venial guilt,
according to the matter wherein they transgressed. Now this obligation was
extended not only to their moral, and Ceremonial precepts, but likewise to
their Judicial and Politic; for why should not civil and temporal Laws bind
in Conscience, since we are tied by a certain external Justice in morality to
contribute to the peace and quiet order of the Commonwealth.

Lastly, they are commanded by God as well as the others, and pronounced with
the like benedictions, and maledictions; and therefore obligatory after the
same manner. It was upon this ground they set more by one precept of the Law,
than by their lives, or whatsoever else most precious to them: For example
Eleazer, and the Mother of the Machabees with her Sons, chose rather to dye,
than to eat Swines flesh forbidden by the Law; it was in pursuance of this
their zeal, that when the Romans first took Jerusalem under Pompey, and
forcibly entering the Temple, mowed down all before them; neither the terror
of death, nor outcryes of the dying Multitude round about them, could divert
them from their divine service, oblations, and Sacrifices; but on the contrary
were resolved to lie at the mercy of the victorious, and suffer what they
pleased, rather then abandon their Altars, on quit any part of their duty, in
observing what was commanded by their Law, and forefathers.

Now since these legal Sacrifices were so much valued by the Jews, and observed
with so much zeal, as instituted by God's own appointment, in Testimony of our
acknowledgment, of his supreme power, and our subjection, and being they were
their sole refuge to shelter themselves from the darts of his anger, how comes
it to pass that in the case of our Petitioner they are censured useless, and no
ways to be countenanced from Heaven: For as here he expressly declares, that
God would not have him pay this tribute or homage of Sacrifice, so we have
reason to believe he did it not; for it is no where read, that he offered up
any Sacrifice for Vriah's murder, or his adultery with Berfabee; though usually
all offenders in that nature did it, nor were to be admitted into humane
Society until they had purifyed themselves by a Sacrifice of expiation.

Some there are who fancy that our Petitioner understands here, that legal
Sacrifices were most of them appointed for sins committed through ignorance,
and negligence: Now he not finding himself guilty in this kind, presumes that
God would not exact a Sacrifice of him upon that score.

But this cannot hold Water, for certain it is, that many of those Sacrifices
were instituted for the expiation of several trespasses of commission; and
namely those which gave birth to this his penitential Psalm: Besides, he seems
to be much devoted to that kind of Sacrifice, which was ordained for sins of
ignorance, often supplicating the Divine mercy in behalf of his secret, and
hidden sins, which must needs import his faults into which through ignorance he
may have fallen; and therefore upon that score he would never desist from the
offering up of a Sacrifice.

Others again interpret this clause of our Petitioner, as if he would say, Lord
should I offer up those Sacrifices commanded in the Law they will not please,
nor appease thee? They are but figures and representations of that true
Sacrifice thou will one day give us, and from the efficacy of which future
Sacrifice the weak virtue of these are derived, at whose approach all these are
to be evacuated, and cease: Were it not then better that I present you with
one, that will never be refused, that is, a heart pierced with sorrow, and
bowed with repentance; this is a Sacrifice I am sure you require, and if I give
you this, you will not think I grudge you the other: Upon these Terms the three
Young Men in Babylon petitioned: That God would receive a contrite heart and
spirit of humility, in lieu of Ramms, Bulls, and a thousand fat Lambs offered
up in Holocaust.

But with submission I conceive our Petitioner in this clause appeals to his
great God, and insinuates it, is his revealed will he should desist from these
Sacrifices; as being all satisfied with his internal acts of repentance, which
more perfectly contribute to the effect of a Sacrifice (though not to the
formality of it) than any external oblation; For this expression if you would
have had one (supposing the command of God in general to the Jewish Nation,
that in all their distresses they were to make their way to him by the means of
Sacrifice) imports a knowledge he had to the contrary, otherwise he would never
have put in an if, nor made a Quere whether he should do it, had he not been
first warranted in the forbearance.

Now, if you ask me why God should proceed so particularly with him, it seems
to me probable, that it was in consideration of his vigorous Faith, and ardent
zeal for the coming of the Messiah, by which he merited the effect of what the
legal Sacrifices did represent; and so was dispensed with, in order to all
those Sacrifices, as to him with these circumstances little beneficial.

For we see in several Emergencies, that God would not tie himself to the
strict rules he had set down for the guidance of his people; he had ordained
that Priests only were to be the lawful Ministers of Sacrifice, and the
prevarication of this Law he punished severely in the persons of Ozias and
Saul: Yet at another time by a particular Ordination, he enjoined Abel,
Abraham, Isaac, and others; though they were not Priests to offer Sacrifice:
For by virtue of this Command they were consecrated Priests, and had the power
of Sacrificing committed to them. In like manner our Petitioner living in the
time of the Law, a Law of bondage; where many harsh impositions were laid upon
them, might be exempted from the burden of Sacrifices, upon the score of his
Heroic Love, Repentance, and ceaseless groans for a Redeemer: For doubtless
amongst all the Patriarchs of the old Testament, none ever interessed
themselves so much in that particular as he, and it is believed he much obliged
the World by those his longing desires, in hastening the coming of the Messiah.

For all this at the first glance, one would think our Penitent were liable to
censure: That knowing he addressed himself to one who is the searcher of
hearts, and before whom the most secret motions are displayed; he should
nevertheless make this superfluous expression of his promptitude to perform
what ever he would exact of him.

But we ought to justify our Penitent, and believe that in this he aims at the
Worlds satisfaction; to the end after ages might read, he declined not the use
of those remedies the Law prescribed, out of any defect of submission to the
Law, but merely upon the score of God's dispensation, who was pleased to accept
of the interior Acts of his repentance, and in that acceptance, would inform
Mankind, the heart is the thing he most considers.

The Application.
From hence we may learn this instruction, that when we see our Neighbor
deficient in what he owes to the eternal Law, we must not immediately pass
Sentence of Condemnation upon him; the Judgments of God being far different
from those of Men, but referr all to that great day which will lay open all
Truths; especially in matters of omission, where the causes are so inevident,
and where in we so often make the Innocent guilty. If seriously we insist upon
this principle, then with confidence we may keep time with Holy David, and cry;
If thou would have had a Sacrifiice, I had verily done it.

Amen.
CHAP. XXXIV.
Holocaustis non delectaberis,

Thou will not be delighted with Holocausts.


HAd our Petitioner couched this Clause in the present Tense, and said, Thou
art not dedelighted with Holocausts; it would have cleared the sense of the
precedent disease, and proved a satisfactory alligation for his omission of
Sacrifice: But being in the future, it renders the expression dubious, and may
import, that upon the establishment of a new Law, all these Figurative
oblations will cease, and then the Incense of those appeasing Sacrifices would
no more smell sweet in his Nostrils.

But however upon a more serious inspection it may bear this construction, that
an immediate, and present effect would follow; to wit, whenever he should
offer Sacrifice, it will be no ways acceptable to him, because as I said in
the promises, the lively Faith he had of the Law of grace, put him in the same
condition through a particular dispensation of Heaven, as if he had not been
under the Mosaic Yoke, and therefore since he contributed on his part, what
was requisite to the perfection of an Evangelical Sacrifice, God would supply
the rest, so that truly, as to his particular, he might say; Thou art not
delighted with Holocausts, etc.

Upon these grounds our Petitioners argument carries weight, and inferrs that
if Holocausts be not countenanced by Heaven, it were in vain to think of any
other oblation, for amongst all the legal Sacrifices, that of Holocausts, or
Burnt-offerings, was the most perfect, and the most completely expresses the
supremacy of God's power over us, and the fullness of our subjection to him; for
in some Sacrifices part of them were burnt, the rest applied to the use of the
Minister, but in Holocausts all was consumed, and by the total destruction of
that offering was employed a dependency of Fortune, Life, and Being on his
orders, and commands from whence they were derived.

I observe likewise in the sacred Text, that if Sacrifices were not performed
with a pure conscience, and detestation of sin, they were odious in the sight
of God, this appears in the First Chapter of Esaias; by whose Pen God declares,
that Incense was abominable to him, and that he abhorred their Solemnities.
Again, in the Prove. The Sacrifice offered up by an impious hand is abomination
in his sight. For the end of a Sacrifice is either in order to a reconciliation
with God, a return of thanks for benefits received, or for the impetration of
some new favor: Now to pretend to any of these, and not renounce all affection
to Sin were rather to provoke, than any ways appease his anger: But our
Petitioner delivers not the thing with that horror, he touches not upon any
abomination, or severity on God's part, but expresses it in the Negative of any
satisfaction he will take in it, which concludes his Sacrificing action would
not be rejected upon the score of any real-guilt, but as a thing unnecessary to
him, who was privileged with the conditions of a more efficacious oblation,
and therefore justly he might cry, thou art not delighted with Holocausts.

Again, our Holy Penitent in his 30. Psalm, explicates himself more clearly
about this point, his words are these. Thou have not required a burnt-offering
for sin, wherefore I will plant your Law in the midst of my heart; since I said
engraven in the Frontispiece of the Book that is my conscience, I should in
this manner perform your will: What can be more evident to demonstrate, he had
orders to desist from any other Sacrifice, then what were hatched and conveyed
unto God, from an unspotted Heart; for by this Book is meant the secret of Gods
proceedings with Man, as appears in the Apocalips, where is expressed that the
Lamb alone was found worthy to open, and unclasp the Book of God's secrets, and
this Book was unfolded to him, by which he is taught. That he is not delighted
with Holocausts, Holocausts, etc.

Besides, though the Law of Moses were abrogated as to their Ceremonial and
judicial precepts: Yet what depended on the Doctrine of Faith, and morality was
not cashierd, but refined, amplifyed, and made more perfect: Whence our Holy
Petitioner by way of Amplification instructed in the more ample Elucidation of
Faith to be unfolded in the Law Evangelical, and enriched with a right Spirit,
not only to discern what is good, from bad; but likewise to embrace, and pursue
the ways of virtue, not only to know the wounds of humane nature, but also the
sovereign remedies for their cure; presumed he might lay claim to a Law, not of
fear but love, laid open to him in his prophetic Spirit. A Law not only given
by a Legislator, but by him who was both a Lawgiver, and Redeemer; a Law not
written in stone, and which breathed forth anger, but one that should be
imprinted in the hearts of Men, whose effects are Grace and Truth, and by
which he should be related to them as their God, and they to him as his
people: A Law not given to one single Nation, but directed to the whole World,
in which repentance, and remission of sins should be enacted, and held forth; A
Law not consisting of shadows, but substance, by the infusion of Faith and
Charity, and by the impletion of all figurative Sacrifices; a Law not of
slavery, but freedom, and love, which with the Precepts would be
communicated a spirit of Charity, to enable them to the performance of what
was imposed, and where the Lords spirit is, there liberty is found. Hence
though our Petitioner was still under the Law, yet it was not as a bondman,
performing his acts by constraint; but as a Child born to his duties by
affection and respect, and therefore exempt from the terrors of the Law, he
says, thou art not delighted, etc.

Christ our Lord abrogated the bill of divorce practiced amongst the Jews,
declaring that whosoever dismissed his wife, and took another, played the
Adulterer: Now it is most certain that it was always unlawful, though in the
Law (upon the score of the Jews proness, and obstinacy in evil) no punishment
were ordained for the fame, as there were for other crimes; so that it was
an evil permitted, not approved off. And this not as to the guilt, but defect
of chastisement. If then the Law practiced a kind of connivancy in forbearing
the use of its coercive power to prevent a greater inconveniency, that might
ensue; Why may we not infer with more reason, that where the most perfect
conditions, as to the effect of a Sacrifice are found, others of less moment
may be omitted: The legal Sacrifices not having power to conferr Grace, nor
without the internal worship of virtues, as Charity, Repentance, and the like
were grateful, no more than our external good works at present are, even in the
highest, and more perfect oblation, if a disposition in the Mind be wanting;
wherefore our Petitioner enriched with all essential requisites of a lively
faith, love, sorrow, etc. And being a person according to Gods own Heart, I see
not but with these circumstances he might rest fixed in his Oblation in Spirit;
and cry, thou art not delighted with Holocausts.

This Clause has set a work many great wits, and pushed them on so far, as to
assert that Sacrifices were not commanded in the old Law, but only permitted as
a lesser Evil, as to make them decline Idolatry; which that gross people were
so apt to slide into, and to show this was the end of that Institution, they
observe those Beasts were appointed, and marked out for their Sacrifices, which
were the Deities adored by the Egyptians; as a Sheep, a Goat, a Kid, an Ox, a
Calf, a Dove, a Sparrow, a Turtle; that whilst they mangled, and destroyed
those Animals they might reflect upon that one supreme God, before whom all
other powers must lie prostrate, and by their destruction acknowledge his
Sovereign Dominion.

Now I confess, as to the Universal tie of the Law, I go not along with this
Opinion in matter of Sacrifice, for before the written Law, it is clear in the
Sacrifice of Abel, Noah, and Abraham, that they were Obligatory, and likewise
acceptable to God, and this the Church confirms supplicating that this unbloody
Sacrifice might find acceptance at his Hands, as those of Melchizedeck, and
other just Patriarchs had done: Nay, in Exodus the 12. God makes an accurate,
and distinct settlement of the Ceremonies, inflicting punishments on the
infringers, which speaks more than bare permission: Nay, he owns the perfume
arising from a Sacrifice, to be most Odoriferous, and pleasing to him.

You must know then that one motive in the Institution of Sacrifices was to
divert the Jews from dangers of Idolatry, just as now one of the intentions in
marriage may be to avoid fornication.

Another motive was to prefigure that bloody Sacrifice of the Cross, to be
offered up in the new Law; for the end of the Law was to know love, and obey
Christ, so that all their Sacrifices tended to his instruction: They were as a
kind of bond, or engagement by which the new Law was promised to them.

So that if they addressed them under that Form, and attired with these
circumstances, they were questionless holy, and grateful in the sight of God,
and in this sense the Law obliged all in general unto Sacrifice; yet this
hinders not, but our Petitioner prevented with extraordinary Graces, may be
taught another method of Sacrifice, and truly he insinuates as much in his 39.
Psalm, where he owns to have received a command to perform the will of God,
and adds he had done it; and this in planting his Law, that is Sacrifice in the
midst of his Earth; wherefore as to himself he might say: Thou art not
delighted with Holocausts, etc.

I am not Ignorant there are many who lay the force of this expression upon the
sole inefficacy of the Law, whose Sacrifices, and Sacraments did not Physically
and really conferr Grace, but only after a moral way, prefigured and shadowed
it forth; depending more upon the disposition of him that offered, than on any
innate virtue contained in themselves; and upon this ground our Petitioner
might allege that burnt-offerings would not serene his angry looks, since they
did but discover the Ulcer not heal it.

Yet the difficulty still remains, that however inefficacious they were, they
had no other remedies; so that they were duties, to which they were obliged,
and the sole expedient to relieve them in distress.

Some were propitiatory to divert, and shelter them from the storms of Gods
vengeance, and this was a victime for sin, others were in thanksgiving for
blessings received, and for the continuation of them, and was styled a pacifick
oblation, part of this Animal was burnt, the rest eaten by the Priests, and
those that offered the same Sacrifice likewise if not consumed the same day,
but reserved till the next; was directed to the impetration of new benefits;
whence you may see, that upon every turn, and in all their Exigencies they were
necessitated to fly unto the help of Sacrifices, and how liberal and unwearied
they were in that devotion, appears by a just account, (as Josephus relates)
given into the President of Syria, who was desirous to acquaint Nero by this
with the greatness of their Commonwealth, it was there found, and exactly set
down, that they did Sacrifice at every one of their Solemn Sabbaths, two
hundred fifty six thousand five hundred Lambs: So that you see their fervor
was not slack, and tepid in matter of Sacrifices, and though they were a Nation
of all others most addicted to avarice: Yet in this they jumped not with the
Opinion of Socrates, who judged things of the least value most fit to be
offered up to the Gods, because as they stand not in need of our gifts, so do
they more value our affection, then what we give; but they on the contrary,
thought nothing better spent, than what was laid out in Sacrifices, a clear
Evidence, that the main part of their Religion consisted in these external
rules.

Nay, they were so bent upon them, as St. Chrysostom by way of similitude
says, as a Physician to cut off all opportunity from his Fevorish Patient,
that he might not ruin himself by intemperate draughts of cold water, in a
kind of passion throws away that liquor, and breaks the Vessel in which it was
brought, just so (says he) Christ the original, and accomplishment of all
their Figures, appearing amongst them, who came to make a perfect cure, and
free them from all their distempers, saw he could not wean them from their
habitual practices of the Law at that time, not only unnecessary, but even
obnoxious to them, without proceeding like a resolute Physician by way of
severity: Wherefore where he saw reason, sweetness, and all the Wonders he had
wrought could effect nothing with those obdurate, and unbelieving spirits; he
was forced to a course adverse to his meekness, and to the love he bare that
chosen Nation, designing the total subversion of their City, and place of
Sacrifice, and their utter dispersion through the habitable World, and this he
foretold them all bathed in Tears, to show his resentment for what he needs
must do, there being no other expedient to draw them from that strange dotage
on victimes and immolation of Beasts.

From these premises we may conclude that whilst the Law was in its vigor,
Sacrifices as to the universality of the people, were the only rules set down
for the reparation of their failings, and till our Penitent had a particular
Patent for his exemption, none was ever more magnificent in his exhibitions in
this kind: Nay, he made it the Theme of his exhortations to others, that they
should consecrate their Vows, and discharge by way of Sacrifice what they owe
unto the Lord God.

But when God was pleased to reach unto him, the fair draught of the mystery of
the incarnation; wherein he read the Laws evacuation, the darkness of its
Figures, to break forth into the splendor of a Crucified oblation, from whence
arises a perfume, whose odor would lay open Heavens Gates, that to this Law of
terror would succeed one of love, and which like to its Priesthood was to be
eternal; his desires heightened by these prophetic notions were certainly
inflamed to a great pitch of charity, and strengthened with a vigorous and
lively Faith, pushed him on to vehement longings to become a Member of that
Kingdom of Grace, then to flourish in the Hearts of Men. In this manner
prepared by internal acts of virtue, of repentance for his misdeeds, submission
to his will, patience under the weight of his Chastisements; no wonder if the
Eye of Heaven pleased to behold an Object so worthy of his special favor,
should take him out of the Common track of the Mosaic way, and conduct him by
the Beams of an Evangelical light; So that supported with Grace by a firm hope
in the merits of the Messiah to come, he might now (void of any blame) as to
himself say, thou art not delighted with Holocausts, etc.

The Application.
This Clause seems but a confirmation of the precedent Verse, wherein our Holy
Penitent does specify in the Example of a Holocaust, how little valuable our
actions are, if they be not circumstanced with the approbation of Heaven: For
amongst all the Religious ordinations of the Jews, there was none that
expressed their entire submission, and dependence upon God, like to that of a
Holocaust; and yet our Holy Petitioner declares, God is not delighted with it;
that is, if performed in his person, whom he had instructed in the oblations of
a more perfect Sacrifice, not so gross and carnal as that of Beasts; but which
has a resemblance with what the Angels and blessed do incessantly offer up
from their flaming Breasts. Let us then in imitation ascend from virtue to
virtue, and proportionably to the communication of his Graces, aspire to a life
more perfect, remembering we are to improve our stock according to the Sum we
have to negotiate. God grant then we may give a just account.

Amen.
CHAP. XXXV.
Sacrificium Deo spiritus contribulatus,

A Sacrifice to God is a troubled Spirit.


AFter our Penitents Declaration, that God required not at his Hands the
external right of Sacrifice, he comes now to specify what homage he is to pay,
saying a Sacrifice to God is a troubled spirit. Now if you look upon the
principles of spiritual Masters, this oblation seems very opposite to what they
design; for the main intent of all their prescriptions drive at this, as to
make us insensible of any Earthly Objects, which might turmoil the Spirit, and
to hinder a quiet repose in the Soul, without which no fruit can be reaped in
contemplation. Nay, indeed its necessary in order to the meritorious
performance of any good work; this appears in Aaron, who reprehended by Moses,
that upon the loss of his Beloved Daughter, he forbear to eat of the
Sacrifices, made this answer, how can I please God by eating, or any other
Ceremony, whilst I possess a sad and troubled Mind. But you must know there is
a twofold sorrow, one that springs from God, the other from the World, this
gives life, that Death: St. Hierom calls a Soul crushed with austerity and
fasting, a Sacrifice, so that by this oblation of a troubled spirit, our
Penitent means the combat of a virtuous Man, in subduing his passions; and this
St. Gregory terms a continual martyrdom, in which is daily offered up a living
victime, Holy, pure, and acceptable to God, by which a Man may be resembled to
one that flying his Enemy kills himself.

In Leviticus 12. A command is laid upon the Jews, that they should celebrate
with great solemnity the Feast of expiation, and the manner how it was to be
done is set down, that they should afflict their Souls: Now this seems very
incongruous to the nature of a Feast, but since our felicity consists in
suffering here, we must be merry to see ourselves piously sad; green wood cast
on the Fire both weeps, and burns, our breast may be sad in one part, and
cheerful in the other. The Prophet Baruc says, the Soul that bewails her Sins
gives Glory unto God, for as there is nothing more sad than sin, so doubtless
nothing more delightful as worthily to deplore it: Wherefore this troubled
spirit imports not a tortured conscience but a Lancet in the Hand of a
dexterous Artist, who making a passage for corruption, the sooner cures the
wound; so likewise groans, tears, wringings of Hands, outcryes, and such like
Testimonies of a disturbed Mind, are the several compositions of a Sacrifice
pleasing to God; A Sacrifice to God is a troubled spirit.

St. Austin says, Man comes into the World wrapped up in such a Cloud of
Ignorance in order to truth, and replenished with such a swarm of desires, that
were he left to his own inclination, there is no evil he would not commit. This
is evident in the Comportment of Men before Cities were built, and policy of
Laws established, which restrain the impetuosity of their passions; for it is
storied, they killed, and devoured one another, falsifying all equity, and
justice: So that to deserve the name of Man, we ought to bridle, and check the
insolency of our sensual appetites, but to become a Sacrifice pleasing to God
under the Character of a troubled spirit, not only the Body must be macerated,
and brought under, but the spirit likewise must be enslaved, and captivated to
the Faith of Christ.

In the composition of this Sacrifice, I find spiritual directors are divided,
some think the most powerful ingredient is to chastise the Body, waste it with
abstinence, and hair-cloths, and spend it with labor; by which harsh usage, it
is weakened, and the Soul gets the Mastery to do what she pleases, as with an
Enemy overcome, disarmed, and at our Feet: This Opinion has given birth to so
many austerities in several orders, to so many Crucifying inventions, that the
Soul might become more powerful by extenuating the Body, and so render it less
rebellions to the decrees of reason: This way has the approbation of St. Paul,
who in his Fifth Chapter to the Galathians says; that those who are servants to
Christ, have crucified their flesh with their vices, and concupiscencies.
Others again say, it is not enough to quel, and reform your spirit by the Body,
but that your Body is likewise to be reduced to order by the Mind; because in
the commission of sin, the Body is not always the offendour, and deserves not
to be harassed with rude strokes like an Ass: wherefore they judge it more
expedient that the superior portion of Man, to wit, his reason should
interpose; and taking into consideration what is prejudicious, or conducing to
Salvation, frame resolutions accordingly both to avoid such actions as are
pernicious, and embrace such as are to her interest: And if this be put in
Execution with a virtue Heroic, it will infallibly oblige the sensitive part
to quit her pursuits, and follow the dictamens of the Soul: For example,
suppose I am transported with a passion of Anger for some disgrace thrown upon
me, my part is to reproach my self with the Vanity of being concerned in the
trifling affairs of the World, to that degree as to forfeit my quiet which is
more precious, and if I generously pardon my Neighbor, this injury will at
last conclude in my honor; by this means all will succeed in peace, and
tranquillity; I shall be fortified against all Events and so rationally govern
my passions, especially if guided with a moderate severity to my Body.

Our Holy Penitent having undertaken to instruct the wicked, and settled in the
possession of a principal spirit, that is a spirit of perfection, was not blind
in the conduct of himself; wherefore we may believe he squared out this
Sacrifice, according to the rules of a good, and prudent Artist, he expresses
in the first of his penitential Psalms, that his Soul was troubled, and in
another place it was like wax melted before the Fire, and that his Enemies near
him; to wit, his passions assaulted him with strange violence, insomuch as he
confesses his sole refuge (as if reason were then useless to him) was to play
the deaf, and dumb; and by that passive comportment, avoiding contests, he
Sacrificed his troubled spirit to his Creator. A Sacrifice to God, etc.

St. Gregory Nyssen descants upon God's proceeding with the Israelites in
commanding them to set up a brazen Serpent, at the sight of which those that
should be bit with those venomous Beasts, might immediately find their cure,
and why (says he) did not God take a shorter cut by destroying all those
Serpents, which had given an end to that Plague he had sent amongst them; at
last, he satisfies himself with this reason, that whilst the Hebrews beheld
that Sovereign Medicament, in casting up their Eyes to Heaven, they might have
occasion to consider from whence they received their deliverance, which
otherwise that gross ungrateful people would soon have forgot: So that to draw
them to pay what they owe to his goodness, he was faign to lengthen out their
afflictions.

Job likewise whilst he was scraping his Soars upon the Dunghill, said, Lord
when I was in prosperity I heard thee, but now in my affliction I see thee:
Which shows nothing gives a more intimate knowledge of God, than to be
surrounded with tribulation, the Soul in prosperity grows proud, deaf, and
careless; so that she must smart in the sense to be made sensible: With how
many charming Courtships does the espouse in the Canticles woe his Darling to
open the door, but all in vain, she is not to be wrought upon, but inter
angustias, when afflicted, and in misery: Jonas in the Whales Belly, the
Prodigal in the Pig-sty, the Sick in his Fever, thinks and calls upon God, but
when in sports, and pastimes sailing in a Sea of plenty and delights, all our
senses are shut up, and no passage open to his merciful call.

But to be pinched in the last of any temporal misfortune, as it awakens a Soul
to stretch out for succor, so does it no less bow God's powerful Arm toward
us: This he declares to Moses out of a bush, which he made the Throne of his
Glory, to show that the affliction of his people made him run after that
Prophet, and retrive him in the Thickest part of the desert, and from thence
commission him in order to their deliverance: St. Gregory says, that God
appeared to Job in a Whirlwind; because having hurried him into a boisterous
storm of afflictions, he would himself enjoy no calmer Weather, but let him
know he was there to secure him. Of Joseph it is said he went down with him
into the Pit, nor left him in his Bonds, and Esaias 12. speaking in the person of
God, says, my people is gone down into Egypt: Assure has afflicted them
without cause, and now what do I here? My people captive, and I at liberty,
What do I here? My people trod under Foot, and I enjoy the smoke of Incense,
and Sacrifice, what do I here? No, no, there is no Sacrifice acceptable to God,
like to a troubled spirit, and this our Holy Penitent had wrought out even to
perfection: For he declares how all his Bones were in disorder, his Loins
filled with illusions and specter, at the ghastly memory of his Sins; his
groans were like the roarings of a Lion, and the burden of his Folly so
weighty, as it bowed him even to the ground; if his Flesh appeared before the
Face of God's anger, it dissolved into corruption, and had not one sound part,
if before the frightful aspect of his transgression it gave a trembling, and
disquiet to all his Bones; the night he spent in bathing his Couch with Tears,
and in the day he confessed that the hand of God was heavy upon him; so that if
ever the Sacrifice of a troubled spirit, that is, of a person discomposed by
the resentment of his ingratitude was offered up to God, it was certainly in
our Holy Penitent, who amidst all his afflictions had this comfort; A Sacrifice
to God is a troubled spirit.

Spiritual directors lay down as the ground work of a life of Sanctity, an
interior abnegation of our selves, by which we give a repulse to our selves:
For when once we come to divest our selves of love, then the terrors of
mortifications, torments, and adversity will find no effect, then generous, and
Heroic Acts will be the productions of such a Soul; for solid virtue, like a
Rose amidst Thorns seldom springs forth but in the soil of crosses,
austerities, and repentance. Those that are seized with this holy aversion
against themselves, mind not the hardships they are to wade through in making
good their fidelity to God, they throw themselves upon the points of Halberts,
and other instruments of severity; without the least whining or flinching at
their sharpness: they take in as it were with the same relish the Gall of
misfortunes, and desolations, and the Honey of prosperities and comforts: No
stormy season hinders their Journey, and that which disturbs soft and
effeminate Spirits is to them matter of joy, and repose; because they possess
what they desire, to wit, affliction; so that all things which pass under the
name of Adversity, are not so, but to the wicked who make ill use of them in
prizing the Creature, more than the Creator: Hence it is that the general
spirit of Saints have carried them on to be ambitious of suffering, and to
reckon it amongst one of the choice favors of Heaven; for they had learnt by
experience, that if God with one Hand reaches unto them the Cup of his passion,
it is but by snatches and as it were a sup, whilst with the other he gives them
large draughts of consolation.

It is noted in the sacred Text, that God laid open the person of Job to all
the assaults of Satan, but with this reserve, that he touch not upon his life;
and this not in regard that death would have ecclipsed the glory of that great
Champion, but because he would not be deprived of such a Combatant to whose
conflict he, and his blessed Angels were intent with much satisfaction, and so
would not lose the pleasure of seeing this stout skirmish, fought out to the
last 'twixt him, and his Enemy. And as the Heathen Emperors took great delight
to see a Christian enter into the list with a wild Beast; so the King of Heaven
is solaced with the sight of one of his Saints, when he maintains a Fight
against those fierce Beasts of Hell.

Seneca out of the principles of humane wisdom, drew this excellent saying,
that no object was more worthy in the Eyes of the gods, than to behold a stout
Man with a settled countenance unmoved to struggle with adverse Fortune: and
truly the delay our blessed Savior made, in sending succor to his Disciples
endangered by a storm at Sea, sufficiently hints unto us, the pleasure God
takes to see the Just row against the stream, tugg and wrestle with all the
might they can against the stream, and afflictions of this World.

Thus you see how happy our Holy Penitent has ajusted his Sacrifice to the
lines of God's will, and that he never spoke more emphatically than when he
said, A Sacrifice to God is a troubled spirit.

St. Bonaventure says, that honor is due to God in four several respects, and
in like manner we ought in as many ways render it unto him: First, in
consideration of many blessings, and this is to be returned by our gratitude,
and acts of thanksgiving: Next, we owe him honor in that he has laid his
commands upon us, and this we perform by our obedience, and submission to his
Laws: Thirdly, his greatness and sovereignity exact it at our hands, and this
is paid by the virtue of Latria, and adoration: Lastly, honor is due unto him
in that he has been offended, and injuriously treated by sin: Now the honor
due to him in this point is restored by Penitential acts, and by a troubled
spirit.

Because, in regard of his displeasure, and to make reparation for the
contempts thrown upon his Majesty, he is ready to humble himself, and apply all
his endeavor to works of piety, so far as even to afflict himself, that he
might honor the Divine Justice, which requires that sin should never go
unpunished.

Wherefore God is delighted in these painful satisfactory acquittances, which
we often give him written in our sweat, and blood: And Jesus Christ makes of
them a present to his Father with his own, from whence the value of ours is
derived, and there they find acceptance, not upon the score of any contentment
it is to God that we are tormented either in Soul or Body, but merely in that
by them his Justice is honored and exalted, and the Palms of our victory more
resplendent.

This anxiety of spirit supported with a patient resignation, and strengthened
with a fervent prayer, purchased to the distressed Anna, and to the Jewish
Nation, that great Prophet Samuel. This same disturbance of Spirit, carried on
by a generous submissive resolution against all the Machinations of Saul, put
into the Hands of our Penitent the Scepter of Juda; in a word, it seems to be a
principle settled in Heaven, that without this Sacrifice of a troubled spirit,
he will not part with his blessings.

It may be objected that God knows the Hearts of Men, and what they will do,
and therefore he need not this external Testimony: Next, that Christ's merits
being of an infinite value, ours appear altogether superfluous; to which I
answer: First, that his external glory consisting in the visible homages paid
to him by his Creatures, this would be wanting should he give them no occasion
to make it manifest, and show unto the World, he has dependants who value no
suffering in proportion to the duty they owe him: Besides the satisfaction we
shall take in Heaven to have done something to merit our Beatitude, will
certainly be a great addition to our Contentment.

As to the other, though I confess the merits of Christ all sufficient, yet
this will not excuse us from offering what we can in satisfaction, for the
Honor and glory of all our actions belong to God; now it being an Act of
injustice to defraud any one of his revenue, no less is it against equity to
deprive God of the glory due unto him: Wherefore a life that contributes not to
his glory is perverse and wicked. Again he that owns a Tree, has likewise
right to the fruit it bears, if the Land be mine, the Crop also is at my
disposal; the labor and service of a Horse is due to his Master: In like
manner all that we are, all the good we do, or shall do, is the work of God,
and a present with which he enriches us, that we might be able to give
something to him: Wherefore as all is his, our duty binds us to consecrate all
our interior, and exterior actions to promote his honor and glory: And since
it is reasonable sin should be punished, our Holy Penitent submits to the
decree, exposes himself to be wracked and tortured by what punishment the
Divine Majesty shall think good either in Mind or Body, nor can he ever repine
whilst he reflects: That a Sacrifice to God is a troubled spirit.

The Application.
Here we are taught, there is no Sacrifice conveyes an odor so pleasing unto
Heaven, as that of a Soul angustiated upon the score of God's cause. The
oblation of a Holocaust imports the reduction of it to Ashes, that of a
troubled spirit is a transmutation into the Holy Ghost who promises to be the
intellect, to be the Tongue; nay all unto him that suffers for his name. It is
a Sacrifice of what is most dear unto us, that is the Friendship of Men: For
Christ foretold his Servants that they should be hated of the whole World, so
that by this immolation we forfeit what is natural, and of all things most
delightful to us. But whilst we are in this consuming task, we must remember
that the Husbandman expects not the fruit of his labors until the seed he
casts into the ground be corrupted, and thence a plentiful Generation spring
forth: So we must continue perishing to the last, that so we may rise under a
new form, never more to be crushed by the Flail, or Mill of grinding
persecutors, but to flourish in eternal quiet, as the just recompense of a
troubled spirit.

Amen.
CHAP. XXXVI.
Cor contritum and humiliatum Deus non despicies,

A contrite and humble Heart O God thou will not despise.


ST. Chrysostom says, no fond Lover dotes so much upon his Mistress, as God
does on a Soul truly Penitent; and then making an Apostrophe unto Tears, he
cries, O happy streams, all principalities and powers strike Sail to you: The
countenance of a Judge affrights you not, your accusing adversaries are struck
dumb, before you: It is you alone that finds admittance, and are entertained by
your Sovereign, you only can overcome the invincible, and tie up the Omnipotent.

When I read these words of this great Saint upon the efficacy of Tears, I am
startled at the slender Character our Petitioner gives in this clause: A
contrite heart (says he) O God thou will not despise: An expression which
falls much short of a Lovers passion; for to have no other return of a present,
than barely not to have it rejected, argues the gift very little prized by the
receiver, and is in the next door to a contempt. But yet the addition our
Penitent makes of humble, speaks very much and helps out the sentence: For it
imports, that humility teaches him the excellency of God, and at the same time
his own nothing; so that not to find a repulse in the exhibition of any homage
rendered to a Being infinitely perfect, is an endearing beyond what a poor
Creature could any ways in Justice expect; and therefore in these lowly
thoughts it seems to him he sets out God's mercy in saying; A contrite and
humble heart thou will not despise.

Wherefore it is evident our Petitioner relyes upon sure principles, and speaks
he is well read in Divinity; for if satisfactory and penal works be a Sacrifice
pleasing to God (as is demonstrated in the precedent clause) much more a
contrite heart must needs be highly acceptable, which is a total destruction of
all love to sin, a detestation and dislike against it; which involves a passion
of sorrow consequent to this hatred, and a firm purpose to avoid all future
relapses.

But the motive of this sorrow must be in that we have offended the Majesty of
God, who merits all love, honor, and obedience from us; and therefore merely in
that sin is displeasing to him, we are to retract and abominate our past
misdeeds.

Our Holy Penitent, the more effectually to create within him this lively
compunction, considers that by sin we deny unto God the just tribute of
ohedience, as if in a manner we would wrest his Scepter from his Hand, and in
sequel reduce him to nothing; for God cannot be God, nor subsist, without a
sovereign Empire over all things, it being an attribute immediately resulting
from his Divine and Infinite Majesty.

Next, he weighs how God hates sin even to death; witness his Commandments
imposed under such heavy penalties on the transgressors. The rebellious Angels,
our first parent Adam, the universal Deluge, conflagration of Sodom, etc. are
frightful examples. After he had run over all these punishments, it was easy
for him to judge of sin's horror, and how much it is abominated by God; nay he
yet stooped lower, and beheld many eternally doomed to the flames of hell, and
this perhaps but for one only mortal sin.

After these dreadful presidents he proceeds further, and in his prophetic
view contemplates the Son of God innocent, undefiled, and set at a great
distance from any sin, to pass through the highest rigours of Justice, and this
merely because he had taken upon him our iniquities. Hence he concludes, if the
eternal Father be so severe to the dear production of himself in chastising the
prevarications of another, he will certainly redouble his stripes on Man for
his own proper defaults: Conformably to this meditation St. Austin says, If a
Redeemer be so roughly handled upon the score of another transgression, what
may a sinner expect in revenge of his own miscarriage.

Lastly, our Penitent lays down how by sin we are declared Enemies to God,
enslaved to Satan, odious in the sight of Angels, and doomed to suffer in Hell
without end; which infinitely exceeds all the disasters of this life. Besides,
we lose the grace and love of God, a treasure above all other imaginable, and
whose forfeiture we ought more to deplore, than all other misfortunes joined
together: Wherefore one mortal sin is more to be lamented, than all the
disgraces and hardships which possibly may befall us in this World.

Our Petitioner having by these remonstrances alarmed all the faculties of his
Soul, and so disposed them for action, just like Soldiers commanded to Arms;
he then instructs them how to redeem all their damages they have sustained by
sin.

First, they must abhor their past misdeeds, that is, have such an aversion as
heartily to wish they had never been committed, and since the birth and essence
of sin springs from the will, it must be ruined by the same power, retracting,
disowning, and as much as in us lies, breaking the force of sin in becoming
unvoluntary.

This done, he reads unto them the efficacy of contrition, by which our Souls
are sanctified, and all the Characters of sin defaced: So that from Children of
perdition, in an instant we are declared heirs to eternal felicity; the reason
of this is, that contrition comprizes a love of God above all things, and the
nature of charity is to make an absolute destruction of all vice, which other
virtues do not, as having a repugnance only to the opposite sins: So that there
is no medium 'twixt charity and sin; Man has the one or the other, but cannot
enjoy them both together. This is confirmed by the Prophet Ezechiel Chap. 53.
The impiety of the impious shall not do him harm, whenever he shall be
converted: For love, says St. Gregory, is nothing else but a flame, and sin
may be compared to rust: So that when Christ said, Many sins are forgiven her,
because she loved much; it imports her Soul enkindled with a fire of divine
love, had worn away all the rust of her sins.

But what need we seek for authorities to strengthen this Doctrine, when our
Penitent had this happy Truth wrought in himself; for no sooner he had cried
peccavi, and repented what he had done, when the Prophet Nathan published his
deliverance, and that his sin was taken from him, so that he had all reason to
assert; a contrite and humble heart O God thou will not despise.

St. Ambrose says, that penance is as necessary to a sinner, as any Balsom,
or Medicament can be to a dangerous wound: For where parts by any hurt are
disunited, and by separation break off a necessary communication with the
blood, or vital spirits, nature cannot of herself repair those breaches,
without the supply of remedies ordained in such extremities: So likewise in any
spiritual distemper, which threatens the Souls ruin; if the sovereign medicine
of contrition (whose principal ingredient is gathered in Heaven) be not
applied; she must needs run a hazard of destruction: Wherefore since penance
is the sole remedy of sin after Baptism, this great Doctor exhorts us to make
it our Refuge; he bids us not to shrink at the face of sufferings, but on the
contrary fill our Soul with bitterness, endure the storms of compunction,
remember the heart is to be contrite, not crooked or broken, but shivered into
pieces by disgraces, confusions, tears, sighs, and acts of humility; and when
you shall be in these Agonies upon the account of virtue, then may you join
issue with our Holy Petitioner and say; a contrite and humble heart O God thou will not despise.

But our Penitent adds the particle of humble, to show that a heart completely
disposed for God's favorable aspect must have a stroke of humility, because
this virtue speaks obedience, for Eccles. Chap. 10. says, as the beginning of
Pride is the Seed of Apostasy from God, so humility is a reduction to our duty.
St. Austin makes no distinction between pride and disobedience, nor between
humility and obedience, but takes them in a manner for the same thing: In his
Fourth Book of the City of God he declares, It is good to keep our hearts
aloft, not toward our selves, for that is pride; but unto God which is
obedience, and a virtue not to be found but in the humble. Again on the Eighth
Chapter of Genesis our proper will cannot but sink under a great weight of ruin,
if it prove rebellious to the will of a superior power; this the First Man
contemning Gods command found too true, and by this he learnt to distinguish
between good and evil; that is, between the good of obedience, and the evil of
disobedience: So that we see the transgression of our first parent sprung from
a secret Root of disobedience; for puffed up with pride he would be his own
Master, and scorn to be subordinate to the Laws of God, this made him seize on
the forbidden fruit, and by that act of disobedience we are all made guilty.

So that to repair our innocence and begin a new life, we must destroy the old
man, that is, pride and self love: And as by those unhappy instruments we fell
from our righteousness, it is by humility, and a love to God above all things
we must return to Justice; and if our Hearts be vested with these noble
qualities, we shall always have a stock to fashion out to our Creator, a
Sacrifice that will not be despised.

It is feigned by the Poets that the Son of the Earth wrestling with Hercules,
still as he touched the ground, he received a fresh vigor; just so the humble
minded Man, who esteems himself to be but an Imp of the Earth, the offspring
of Dust and Ashes, in proportion as he bows himself in acts of lowliness, he
will be raised, and approach nearer to Heaven. St. Austin speaking of the
Centurions humility, who judged himself unworthy to receive such a guest as our
Savior under his roof, says; that by confessing himself unworthy, he rendered
himself more worthy, for there is no disposition so fit for the reception of
God, as to acknowledge, and avow our own unworthiness.

But you must know there is a humility of the understanding, another of the
will; this gives us a true knowledge of our nothing that brings us readily to
submit: Now to be humbled by the will, and force honor and greatness to stoop,
this is Heroic, and worthy a Prince; but to be brought down by adverse
fortune, this humility carries with it little of wonder, there being no great
virtue for one that is humbled to become humble.

This virtue then, to render it meritorious, and accomplished in all points, as
to make our Heart a pleasing Sacrifice to God, requires that we seriously
consider our own faults and imperfections, the wants and necessities incident
to humane nature, and which every one (how charming soever in the outside they
appear) carry about them. This will sufficiently evidence that instead of
praise and veneration, we ought to expect nothing but scorn and confusion from
the sense of our own defects, and conclude that honor and excellency belong
not to us. Thus you see the will is carried on by humility to decline all
things which raise our hope or appetite above our deserts.

It is proper then to this virtue to check all excessive attempts in Man, after
the purchase of greatness and Earthly advantages: Nor is it notwithstanding
opposite to hope as a Theological virtue, nor unto magnanimity as a Christian
virtue: For these stir up to the pursuit of what is great in order to God, and
humility obstructs not this, waving only that greatness which sides with the
inordinate interests of the World. St. Thomas says, There is none but may
believe, and declare himself without a falsehood to be the most vile Creature in
the World, according to the hidden defects he knows in himself, and the gifts
of God unknown to him which are or may be in his Neighbor. In fine, Christ our
Lord declared it to be the sole clew leading to Heaven; it is the first and
last step to bliss: For in this life where all is storm and tempest, torment,
war, and temptation; where nothing is secure and certain, humility alone amidst
these perils and dangers like so many rocks, and shelves, can bring us safe
off, and conduct us to the Haven of happiness. Elias in that furious whirlwind,
terrible Earthquake, and dismal Fire, wrapped himself up like a bottom of Yarn,
and lay close to the Earth. Job in that general destruction of all his goods,
rent his garments, shaved his Head, fell flat to the ground, and worshipping,
said, Naked I came into the World, and naked I shall return: The Lord has
given, the Lord has taken away, blessed be his name: The tempest afterward
increasing upon him, as boiles, botches, leprosy, worms, and a wife, he fled to
a Dunghill with a piece of potsheard in his Hand, making choice of the humblest
and safest place. Our Holy Penitent likewise in that his persecution by Saul,
cried out, I was humbled, and he delivered me: So that he spoke not at random,
but had experience, how acceptable unto God is a contrite and humble heart.

The Scripture attributes two Names unto Christ; the one Espouse, the other
Lord; in the one he shows his love, in the other the fear which is due unto
him; in the one the security with which we may come unto him, and offer our
petitions; in the other, the respect and reverence we owe to so great a
Majesty: As our Espouse he has contracted with us a holy alliance by grace,
which we have forfeited through our infidelity; and therefore to redeem this
adulterate action, nothing but a pure act of sorrow arising from the source of
Charity will suffice to a reconciliation.

But as he is our Lord, we ought (were it possible) to dissolve into nothing
before him in acknowledgement of our guiltiness, and satisfaction to his
offended greatness: So that this Sacrifice of a contrite and humble heart seems
to be appropriated to these titles of Espouse, and Lord ascribed in sacred writ
unto him: For love rooted in repentance is the most proper compensation for an
injured and abused lover, and fear joined with humility is the best allay to an
irritated Sovereign.

St. Gregory says a repenting sinner, for the most part beginning his
conversion, is seized with a terror and fear, which the memory of his treason
does work within him; this makes him for a time consume in the sad apprehension
of deserved punishment for his crimes; and whilst he remains in this plight he
heholds God under the notion of a severe Judge; but by degrees the bitterness
of these terrors wearing off by some glimmering hopes of pardon obtained, he
still continues his penitential acts, yet with this disparity; that whereas at
first he wept lest he should be brought to Execution, now enflamed with a love
of spiritual-delights, he melts away in Tears, lamenting that he is with held
from his felicity: So that love and fear are still the materials of this
Sacrifice which God will not reject.

This same Doctor observes the several agitations of a Soul in this oblation of
love and fear: First, she calls to mind in the glass of her sins where she was;
to wit, on the brink of Hell: Next, weighing and affrighted at the Abyss of
God's judgments, considers where she may be; then casting her Eye upon the
miseries of this present life sadly reflects where she is: Lastly, she
contemplates the joys of eternity, and filled with sighs, and groans, laments
she is not there.

Thus you see how a Soul is distracted, that has ever tasted the bitterness of
sin: If she look back she is affrighted at the ghastly sight of her misdeeds,
and has only this comfort which God declared to Ezechias upon his repentance,
that he had thrown all his sins behind him, never to take a further view of
them. If she look upon what may befall her, the judgments of God are
unfathomed Abysses into which she cannot dive; and the sole buckler she has to
rely on, that he will not reject an humble and contrite heart. If she fix her
Eye upon the present state of things, she beholds herself surrounded with
dangers from abroad, and her own frailties at home, against which her only
fence is humility and resignation to his blessed will. If she raise her
thoughts to the end for which she is created, she can but languish after it;
and frame ardent desires for the possession. In these distresses our Holy
Penitent marches between love and fear, his love cimented with fear keeps him
from sinking into despair; and his humility, fortifyed with a true sorrow
resolves him to a future constant obedience to God's Laws. Thus armed, thus
guarded with a train of hope and confidence, trusting in God, and always
distrustful of himself, he concludes; A contrite and humble heart O God thou will not despise.

The Application.
We are here instructed how to prevent any repulse in our addresses to Heaven,
for a heart qualifyed with love and humility, God will not reject; this is
declared in the person of St. Mary Magdalen that her love had purchased a
complete abolition of all her iniquities, and Christ has engaged that he who
humbles himself shall be exalted. St. Thomas says, as there is no attribute
wherein God more glories than in his mercy, so above all, he most delights in
the humble, it being a virtue which renders Men still capable of his favors;
and upon the same score he hates the proud, because they have not recourse to
his mercy, as believing they want it not. Let us then stick close to our
Penitents doctrine, and seek no other way to be great, than what was practiced
by our redeemer; he stooped even to the death of the Cross, and so entered into
his glory; we likewise must either take up our own Cross, or else with love and
humility bear that which God shall please to lay upon our shoulders, and if we
thus sustain our load, we need not fear that scornful World, I know you not;
but on the contrary, a happy invitation, Come ye blessed into the Kingdom
prepared as a recompense of your contrition and humility from the Worlds
beginning.

Amen.
CHAP. XXXVII.
Benign fac Domine in bona voluntate tua Sion,

Deal favorably O Lord in thy good will with Sion.


THe order of Charity prescribes that in the first place we love God; next, our
selves, and then our Neighbor: As to God, he is the primary, and chief object
which gives motion unto Charity; because a goodness infinite (which is the
groundwork of our love) is found essentially and most perfectly in him. He
being then the sovereign good of all things, there is no goodness in Creatures
which is not derived from him as the source, and without whom they could not
one moment subsist. Insomuch as God is to me a greater good than I am to my
self: For though God be a thing distinct from me, yet he is the good on whom
both my self, and all others depend; wherefore I ought absolutely to wish and
choose rather that God should be, than that my self should be; because it is
better, and more suitable to the inclinations of nature: For Man is not carried
by any natural propension to love himself more than God, such an inclination
were perverse and wicked: Nay, forbidden by the Law of nature, that a Being
created and imperfect should be preferred before one infinite and increated:
God therefore whose productions are all good, never gave unto Man such a
tendency: The conclusion then is, that we are carried on by the impulse of
nature to love God above all things, even above our selves, however this
inclination be strangely thwarted by our passions, and the corruption wrought
in us by sin.

After God we are to love our selves in our spiritual wants and necessities,
beyond all our Neighbors in the most strict alliance either of blood or
friendship: Because the aim of Charity is to unite the Subject it informs with
God; and therefore St. Bernardin of Sienna says, Whosoever defiles himself
with sin under the Cloak of Charity, this Charity is impious; for that cannot
be Charity which destroys our own Charity within us, since all Charity in Man
begins at home, and in order to himself.

Our Holy Penitent had steered his actions according to the Rules of Charity:
First, he had consecrated his love to God his sovereign good, and in view of
this he beheld all other things as a fair nothing: When he had paid him these
first fruits of his inclinations, he fell upon his own concerns in his
spiritual necessities, and having exposed them all before the beams of God's
mercy, which never fails to enliven and cherish a contrite and humble heart; he
presumes now to intercede for his Neighbor, and petition in behalf of the
inhabitants of Sion, a Hill dedicated to God's service, and for the holy City
of Jerusalem, that these places might be preserved to the increase of the
peoples devotion, and not be laid open to destruction upon the score of his
transgressions, wherefore he cries, Be favorable O Lord in thy good will with
Sion.

When I read a passage in Jeremy, Chap. 7. I admire the power and force of
prayer; for there God speaking to this Prophet says, do not pray for this
people, lest I divert my anger; and again he bids Moses forbear his
importunity, that his fury might break forth; which shows that the
supplications of the just bind up Gods Hands, and stand like a bulwork between
his rage and our guiltiness. Now if the efficacy of prayer be such, as to
appease his avenging Face, when all enflamed against offenders, it has
doubtless no less virtue to obtain what ever we demand for our own or our
Neighbors good. St. Austin says, that whilst God leaves us a Heart and Tongue
disposed for prayer, we need not fear the substraction of his graces; for he is
faithful in his promise, nor will ever give a repulse to just petitions: The
Head of this Truth springs from the order of his Providence, which has
eternally resolved, that many things shall be done in the World by the means of
prayer: For there are two kinds of decrees, the one absolute, by which he
determined the Creation of the Heavens, Angels, and Elements, and these things
he determined to create without any entermingled condition: His other decrees
are conditional, as that of Beatifying the Angels, and communicating unto Men
eternal glory, upon supposition that by their virtuous actions they rendered
themselves worthy of Beatitude. Such also is that decree by which he designs a
grant of several benefits in case he be petitioned for them, and with humility
demanded at his Hands as the Author of all good: Wherefore prayer works no
change in Gods determinations, but brings them to Execution sutably to his
orders; whence prayer has the power of impetration, and obtains of God's mercy
what he has graciously promised, but this must be understood in things that
are conducing to Salvation. Whereupon St. Bernard delivers these excellent
words: The Care of God over thee is so tender and prudent, that when ignorantly
thou do petition for what is useless, or perhaps prejudicious to thee: he is
deaf to thee in this particular, yet will exchange it into some gift or other
more to thy advantage. For example, suppose you ask to be freed from some
affliction that seems very heavy to you, if God grant you patience, it is a
blessing beyond the deliverance you seek after: Again, you would be exempted
from this or that temptation; as St. Paul made it his earnest suit, but if God
give you grace and courage to repress it, in such sort as to receive no injury,
but an increase of merit, you have no reason to repine: So that God is always
faithful in his promises, and never breaks his word with his Creatures, but
gives the effect of prayer either in the specifical thing demanded, or in that
which is more valuable; if I say it be asked with faith, hope, perseverance,
and concerning necessaries to Salvation.

St. Austin says, the Soul has power assisted by grace to cultivate herself,
and by a pious industry purchase and get into the possession of all virtues; by
which she may be delivered from the difficulties of concupiscence which
torments her; and of ignorance that blinds her. Nay, in the height of
temptation or ignorance, God never takes from her a free will, by which she may
demand, seek, and play the courageous, even before she assent to those that
ask, discover to those that enquire, or give admittance to such as
importunately press upon her; how comes it then to pass (says he) that she is
sometimes ignorant what to do, it is because she has not yet received that
Grace, but infallibly she will receive it, if good use be made of what she has
already received, that is, a grace to seek piously and with diligence. Hence he
lays the ruin of many Souls upon this default in not praying against the
difficulties of concupiscence and ignorance: Nay on the contrary, we covet for
the most part to be glutted with some Earthly satisfaction, on which our
sensitive part is fastened, for which our prayers and instances are made out of
self love not the glory of God: Now because they are pernicious to us, he
plays the deaf; and thinks it misbecomes his love to Man to set a seal to his
undoing, which made St. Austin say; It is a stroke of Gods mercy sometimes to
withdraw his mercy.

Our Petitioner knew that the gift of prayer is the first grace God bestows on
Man, which serves as a Ladder, that by it he may ascend to other Graces
necessary to Salvation; he has made it the Subject of his Song, and beat upon
no other string in the whole tract of this his petition, than to obtain pardon
for his sins, and to be restored to the inestimable treasure of Sanctifying
grace; after this task of his own concern, he undertook to instruct the wicked,
and labor in the conversion of the impious, and that these principles
wherewith he had imbued them might take the deeper root by a constant practice,
he now supplicates the Divine Majesty in behalf of the City of Jerusalem, and
the holy mountain of Sion, to the end it might be settled in peace, and be a
secure refuge not only to the numerous inhabitants, but also to that infinite
resort of Pilgrims, who from all parts came thither to pay their religious
duties to God; and he hopes for a good effect of his prayer, since it is in
order to the establishment of God's Church; in which action the divine zeal
has more visibly appeared (both in gratifying such as have advanced the
structure, and in punishing any sacrilegious violence) than in any other
external actions of Men.

Ezekiel, painting forth the abominations of the Temple says, there came six
Angels, and every one had in his hands Vessels of slaughter; upon which
Theodoret observes in the destruction of Zenacharib's Army, one only Angel
appeared, but against the prophaners of his Temple six are deputed, that no day
of the Week should pass over their Heads without a fresh Executioner to torment
them.

Jeremy weighs the wrongs Nebuchodonozer had done to Jerusalem by dishonouring
Matrons, deflowring Virgins, killing little Children, tormenting the aged,
burning houses, their robberies and spoils, and yet all these he passes over in
silence (though he took it much to heart) and presses only the profanation of
the Temple, having made of it a stable for his Horses.

When the Angel appeared to Joshuah with a drawn sword, and commanded him to
put off his Shoes, as before he had done to Moses in the flaming bush,
enjoining him the like; many grave Doctors assert the this Angel was the Son of
God, wherein he would insinuate two things: First, the reverence they ought to
bear to that place, where in a manner so particular he was pleased to manifest
himself: Next, that against those who should lose this respect, he had Fire and
Sword ready to vindicate his honor: For the Majesty of a King or regal power
upon Earth is respected throughout the whole jurisdiction of his Crown, but yet
much more where he has his Throne, and Chair of state: So God as he is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords over all the Nations of the World, ought in all places
to have homages of submission and obedience paid unto him, but especially in
places dedicated to religious acts; in Heaven at the right hand of his Father
is the supreme throne of his greatness; in the Synagogue he had the
propitiatory, and in the Temple his Sacrarium; and as to a Temple or Church
wherein God is to be honored. Nilus says a Christian should bear no less
respect to this his Holy Tabernacle than if he were in Heaven: Because, the
glory of God is more apparent in the adorable Sacrament of the Altar; and from
thence a greater reverence may justly be required, than from all the Temples
that were in past ages dedicated to God's honor: For in this dread Sacrifice
God is adored, honored, appeased, loved and served by his Son Jesus Christ in
all the Corners of the World; where this mystery is celebrated all the
adorations, and homages of other Creatures, contribute nothing to his Glory, if
compared to what he receives here by his Son; because he is an object infinite,
and as a King receives more honor from the submission of a Prince, than of an
ordinary vulgar person; in like manner the adorations rendered to God by Jesus
Christ do glorify him more, than those of all Men and Angels, together by the
Mouth of Malachy the Prophet; God says, my name is great among the Gentiles,
because in all places a pure oblation is offered up unto me, which Theodoret
explicates an unspotted Lamb taking away the sins of the World, and which is
Sacrificed unto him in this mystery.

The Master of the Family Matthew. 20. having had his Servants ill treated by the
laborers in his Vineyard, sent his Son to reduce them to obedience; saying,
they will respect him: So God the Father would render his Son present in this
mystery, to induce all Christians to pay their duties to his greatness.

Who would not then Combat in the presence of their King? We may reasonably
expect to live with Angels, and with them contemplate the divine essence, since
now we live with Jesus Christ himself who is the Food of our Souls; he who
gives himself to be eaten here, will not deny us to see and behold him in
eternity.

Now our Holy Penitent in his prophetic view beheld this Hill of Sion, as a
place marked out for the admirable structure of the Evangelical Temple, whereof
the Messiah was to be the Corner stone, and therefore he calls it holy, wherein
Sacraments conferring grace by their proper virtue were to be administered; upon
this score he preferrs the Gates of Sion, before all the tabernacles of Jacob:
He forespeaks the building of this Sion, and that God will there be seen in his
glory, as much as the Cloudy Scene in this World can represent him; and as on
mount Sinai the written Law, a carnal and Earthly Law was given; so on Mount
Sion should be enacted a Law Evangelical, holy, spiritual, and heavenly. These
fore-notions imprinted in our Petitioner a reverence to this model of
perfection, and stirrs him to implore his mercy in her behalf; that since it is
to be a Law of love, all powerful to conduct Souls unto a great pitch of
sanctity in this life, and glory in the next, he will hope his prayer may
contribute something to draw from his liberality a confirmation of his gracious
promises unto her; in this confidence with much fervor and zeal he repeats;
Deal favorably O Lord in thy good will with Sion.

The Application.
We have a Lesson here of Charity which shows us inexcusable, if we fail to
endeavor the succor of our Neighbor: For there is none so impotent but may
lend the assistance of his prayers, and how powerful that is to avert danger,
appears in that God seems willing to prevent the Prophet Jeremies mediation,
commanding he should not resist him; that is, he should not stand between him,
and the destruction of his people; as if it were in the power of this Prophet
by means of his prayer, to hold God's Hand, and force him to a merciful
composition. Besides we are much encouraged to relieve the distressed in this
supplicating way by the form of prayer which Christ prescribes, in that we
should conjure him under the title of Father; nay more our Father which speaks
I have a right to ask not only as I am your Child, but likewise to intercede
for him who has the same relation unto you, and by that an alliance toward
me, which naturally exacts my help; if then as a Maker you can destroy; as a
Father nature will prompt you to save: In fine, God plays not the stately like
the great Princes of this World, but gives audience upon the place; whether in
behalf of your self or Neighbor: Nay, he excludes not his greatest Enemies,
but does treat with them of peace upon the least overture they make: Ah! let us
then daily present our supplications before his throne of grace, in behalf of
all persons capable of eternal Salvation.

Amen.
CHAP. XXXVIII.
Vt edificentur muri Jerusalem.

And let the Walls of Jerusalem be built.


BY the Walls of this Sion or Jerusalem (for they are usually taken for the
same thing) is meant the Prelates, and Pastors of this happy Congregation,
within whose circumference or direction we are all piously to walk, and to
whose care and protection all Mankind is committed: Our Penitent beholds the
Messiah as the foundation and prop of this eternal structure; for the Office of
a Priest consists in the power of administering sacred things, and to offer
prayers, gifts, and Sacrifices unto God for the remission of sins, and this in
the name of the universal Church: Now Jesus Christ was constituted by God over
all Souls, with a plenary authority to reconcile them to him, and for this end
he offered up a true and real Sacrifice, in which the immolated victime
suffered a real mutation, both in that Christian oblation without effusion of
blood, which he celebrated the night before his death, as also in the bloody
Sacrifice of himself, which he might have hindered but would not; he is then a
true Priest.

Again, his power not being confined to Sacraments, nor to certain words and
ceremonies, as that of Men, who are Priests after him; and not depending upon
the impression of any Character (since he was settled in it sufficiently by his
Hypostatick union) he enjoyes a degree of Priesthood with eminency above all
other Men, invested with this sublime dignity.

Wherefore doubtless this his Priesthood, above all other things was most
acceptable to God; because by this title and quality he has wrought the Worlds
Salvation, has reconciled Souls unto God, and put them into a condition of
rendering him glory in all Eternity: So that among all the sublime qualities of
Jesus Christ, that of his Priesthood has been the most beneficial to the
World; for by it he has made up all the breaches of sin, both in Heaven and
Earth, appeased God's anger by his Sacrifice, and restored us to his lost grace
and favor.

Next, he is not only Priest but sovereign Bishop, empowred to institute,
ordain, and govern at his pleasure in all spiritual things, which relate unto
God and the Salvation of Souls; wherefore St. Peter Ep. 1. C. 2. Styles him the
Bishop and Pastor of Souls. St. Paul likewise to the Hebrews Chap. 7. says,
It was fit we should have a Bishop holy, innocent, unpolluted, and separated
from sinners, who has no necessity of offering Sacrifice daily for his own
sins. So that Christ is not reduced to that extremity as to offer Sacrifice for
the expiation of his own faults, he has no need to purify himself, since he
has a Sanctity which outvyes that of Angels; his only task is to enlighten,
purify, and improve others, that he might transmit them from the perfection and
spiritual treasures of this life; to the perfection and eternal treasures of
the next. At this his sovereign Chair does aim; that is, the acquisition of
immortal felicity, he has laid down for our safe passage and firm footing two
planks; to wit, the Cross and penance, he is mediator between God and Man, an
intercessour for us, he assists at our right Hand that we might not be
overthrown, and amidst the storm of Stones which fell upon St. Stephen, he is
awake and upon his Legs, ready to run to his succor; so that he has all the
conditions of a powerful and careful Prelat.

The Prophet Joel had in his prospect this Prince of Ecclesiastics, when in
his 2. Chapter he exhorts the Daughters of Sion to skip for joy, and fly to the
Lord their God, because he had given unto them a Doctor of Justice; to teach
them a spiritual life, how to separate their Souls from affection to Creatures,
and unite themselves to God. This he did in commanding us to renounce our
selves, and follow him; to carry with him our Cross, to be perseverant in
prayer, to practice virtues, to love God above all things; and our Neighbor as
our selves: In fine, his Doctrine permits no vice, cherishes all virtues,
raises Man above himself, and his nature, and besides his Commandments he
gives admirable Councels of chastity, poverty, and obedience, and other
precepts leading to perfection; which if exactly weighed would evidence as
clear as the Sun beams, that he is the greatest Master and Doctor of a
spiritual life.

He is then Head of the Church because the Founder, from whence she has
received her Life and Being; by the seeds of his grace, by the preaching of his
Apostles, by all the good works and stratagems he has set on foot to draw
Souls unto Faith and Baptism: From whom she has received her subsistence and
nourishment in the provision of the Sacraments, and of a multitude of gifts and
graces in order to the propagation and defense of the Church. He has likewise
settled here an Ecclesiastical Hierarchy resembling that of Angels; and lastly,
he overwhelms her with the load of his favors, transmitting daily her Members
to his Church Triumphant, where he invests them with glory, nor will cease
until he has made of the Souls issuing from the militant here beneath a
Church glorious, and without the least stain or wrinkle.

This Saint of Saints, this Prince of Ecclesiastics, this Doctor of Justice is
the Corner stone on which our Penitent had fixed his Eye, and petitioned to be
the Basis of Jerusalem's fair Walls; so that having such a foundation, what
noble superstructure might he not expect; and truly this edifice was squared
out to the highest Ideas of perfection. First, we see an addition of the three
Theological virtues, that is so polished and refined as it gives them quite
another luster; as to Faith the mysteries of the blessed Trinity, the
Incarnation, and the holy Eucharist are in the Evangelical Law drawn as it were
out of a Cloud into the Sunbeams, and therefore St. Paul styles the written
Law a Schoolmaster which taught the Jews only the first Rudiments of Religion,
whereas Christian Faith proposes ravishing objects, and discovers the wonders
of the said mysteries distinctly, which begets reverence and devotion in the
Hearts of Men.

As to hope, which enflames our courage to the Execution of generous
undertakings, the Jews had very obscure revelations of eternal beatitude, nor
could they hope for it till the coming of the Messiah and Redeemer who was to
open Heaven's Gates, and have the honor to be the first Man that entered there;
in the interim they were fed with promises of Earthly rewards which rendered
Souls Mercenary, and their intentions more gross, whilst the Evangelical Law
unfolds the wonders of Heaven, the glory of a Resurrection, and engages for our
immediate reception into that place of immortal felicity after this life,
supposing we are distained from all guilt of sin.

As to Charity the Soul of virtues and devotion, it must needs receive from the
Evangelical Law many degrees of heat and fervor; since it renders our faith
and hope more perfect: For where the knowledge is greater of things more worthy
of love, and where our hopes are heightened to a more valuable expectation,
there doubtless will be found the production of a more ardent desire and
affection.

After this rare piece which much embellished the structure, are disposed the
Sacraments which like a great water about the circumvallation, serve both to
secure the inhabitants from the assaults of their Enemies, and to strengthen
them in the noble exploits of virtues: So that by this succor and powerful aid
they are obliged in honor and conscience to a more eminent degree of Sanctity.
We see that Arts and Sciences are improved by success of time, and those
Masters which come after are more expert than the former: Now this proceeding
we behold in divine precepts, not out of any deficiency in the Lawgiver, but
because after Adam's sin humane nature was rendered unworthy of God's grace, so
that if at any time he communicated his blessings, it was by way of advance,
and upon credit in consideration of the merits of his incarnate Son. Wherefore
being once come, he gave precepts of higher perfection, so that doubtless
nothing can be better, more just, and more suitable to Man than the Evangelical
Law: Nothing more agreeable to the good Government of the Universe, and all
Creatures; nor which contains in its decrees more equity and holiness: Insomuch
as its perfection alone seems ground enough to pass a judgment, that it cannot
issue but from the deep Councels of a Divinity.

Lastly, as to good manners, or natural precepts, this great Architect has
made of them a more clear and ample explication, by which the will is
rectifyed, and carried on to the pursuit of greater things than were proposed
in the Mosaic Law.

What just reason then had our Petitioner to make this edifice of Jerusalem's
Wall the object of his most fervent prayer, and that all his subjects should
subscribe to the petition, and offer up their Vows for the dispatch of this
great work, in which their heavy Yoke so little beneficial to them would be
taken off, and in exchange they were to be ranked under the discipline and law
of grace and love; wherefore let us join issue and cry; Let the Walls of
Jerusalem be built up.

The next composition of this structure is foretold by the Prophet Esaias; I will
lay in the foundation of Sion a stone that has endured the touch, a corner and
precious stone founded in the foundation: This is Peter and his successors,
that rock on whom Christ has built his Church, and which has been tried by
all the assaults of Earth and Hell: Nor has this stone proved only of right
temper, in which no engine of malice could work a flaw, but it is shaped into a
corner stone, by which the two walls of Jews and Gentiles are united together,
and make one Christian Church: It is also precious in copiously distributing
her Spiritual Treasures throughout the World; as the clear explication of her
Doctrine by universal consent, the rights of Sacraments, which delivered with a
Harmony and unity in faith, is the bond of peace, the Life and Soul of
Religion. Lastly, it is grounded in the foundation which shows it to be a
secondary foundation: The first St. Paul declares; no Man can lay any other
foundation (that is primary and Basis of all) than what is already laid; to
wit, Jesus Christ.

But after him the next groundwork is St. Peter, by whom alone, and his
successors we are to arrive at Christ, and what can be to God more glorious
than to make use of the feeble to confound the strong, and by faith and
humility to lead Men unto wisdom and glory.

This piece of Workmanship in the Fabric of Jerusalem is like a Citadel which
commands all, and holds its awful title not by Law of Nations, but divine
right: It governs men in order to their Souls, and rather under the notion of
being Christians, than Men; it looks not upon their temporal ease and security,
but has an Eye to a life and felicity immortal: It is fortifyed with divine
Laws, and maintains a perpetual skirmish not only with a few visible
adversaries, but with an infinity of invisible Enemies.

After this Rock solidly disposed and fited, the Bishops like Watch-towers and
strong Bastions are erected; whose office is to superintend over the Guards and
Sentinels, and to protect the weaker part of the Walls from the Enemies
assaults; this contrivance is set down by St. Athanasius, where he says, O
Peter upon thy Foundation the Bishops as pillars of the Church are settled and
confirmed.

Then Priests, Deacons, and other officers are assigned to render this
structure in all points complete; some of these materials are for the beauty
and ornament of the Church in her great solemnities; others as Priests for the
necessary discharge of our duty to God; for religion teaching us to pay that
honor and esteem we owe to God, is the perfection and accomplishment of the
World, nor can we upon any score be dispensed with in the acknowledgment of
these fealties: Whence no Nation has ever been found so ignorant or barbarous
as not to own, and in some manner or other to pay this Tribute, either by way
of adoration, praise, prayer, sacrifice, festival solemnity or by some external
Ceremony: Now that these actions might be duly acquitted, there appears an
absolute necessity that some selected person should be set apart, and
sanctified to this end.

But above all it was most requisite in the Evangelical Law, where a Priest
has power to offer up a victime and Sacrifice by which in a moment he renders
to God more glory and service than all the Angels and Men can do in the vast
durance of Eternity: Where he is daily to represent to the eternal Father
Christ's holy passion, and by that moving object render him propitious unto
Souls, where he is to disengage Men from the slavery of sin, and jaws of Hell
by the administration of holy Sacraments: So that all the splendor and beauty
of the Church consists in the Ministry of Priests, that as the Sun diffuses
his beams on all sides, no less does this sacred Character enrich those Souls
with a perfume of Sanctity, who make themselves worthy by a due cooperation
with its virtue; so that we ought to esteem it one of the greatest blessings of
God to the World, in that he has given us Ecclesiastical persons to dispense
his Heavenly treasures, and spiritual graces to enlighten the World, purify
Souls from sin, and lead them as it were by the Hand unto a sovereign good. Ah!
what ingratitude then to throw a contempt upon those without whom Mankind would
be but a Firebrand for Hell in all Eternity.

The last materials for this Fabric are lay and secular persons of all sorts;
so that of these and Ecclesiastics are composed two different and great
Nations under the Jurisdiction of Christ; the Office of the one is to give, the
other to receive; the one communicates by oblation of Sacrifice, and
administration of Sacraments, spiritual goods, without which Men would be like
a Body destitute of a Soul, having little tendency or elevation unto God; the
others passively make up the Hierarchy, as being framed, instructed, purifyed,
and by Ecclesiastics united unto God.

Thus you see our holy Prophet was solicitous in a matter of no small concern,
for within the limits of this sanctuary are bounded all the hopes of Man's
Salvation. Christ was made (says St. Paul) cause of eternal Salvation unto all
those who obey him: Now his Commandments relate to Faith, good manners, and
the Sacraments, which are not rightly performed but within the bosom of his
Church. Let us then join our hands and hearts to this noble structure, and cry,
that the walls of Jerusalem be built up.

The Application.
If our Holy Penitent was so zealous for the erecting this magnificent
structure of the Church, as by his ardent prayer to dispose the divine
Architect unto this admirable work; what a reproach will it be to us, who find
the Fabric done to our Hands, and who are our selves so happy as to be part of
the materials, if we do not so much as keep it in repair, nor preserve it
against any rebellious or violent effort. To this performance is required a due
obedience to the supreme Pastor, who as it were the form and Soul of this
edifice: Next, a reverence and submission unto Bishops, who are the pillars,
and great supports of it: Lastly, a respect to Priests, who are a main
ornament, and useful to this glorious Fabric. Whereas then our Holy Penitent
poured forth his prayers, with so much fervor for the raising of these
Evangelical walls, it is our part now to make addresses unto Heaven, that
according to his promise it may continue pure, unstained, and invincible
against all the malice of Earth and Hell.

Amen.
CHAP. XXXIX.
Tunc acceptabis Sacrificium, Justitiae oblationes, and Holocausta.

Then thou will receive Sacrifice, oblations of Justice, and whole
Burnt-offerings.


OUr Holy Penitent had entertained in his thoughts not only the Materials and
Architecture of this Building, but he went further and reached in his
prophetic view the Sacrifices which were there to be offered up.

The first object displayed in this Temple is the Messiah God-man, who was a
true Sacrifice, oblation of Justice and Holocaust. A Sacrifice, in that he
appeased God's anger, frankly offered, and with the purest intention that could
be imagined; this is expressed in John 14. That the World may know I love my
Father, and perform his commands, arise (says Christ to his Apostles) and let
us to the Cross. For God having committed to him the affair of Man's Salvation
lost by sin, he was enflamed with a zeal of rendering all possible
satisfaction; and considering that if he should make himself a victime, and
present that Sacrifice to God, it would be of an infinite value, in regard of
the infinity of his person; and such a Sacrifice infinite, would
counter-ballance the infinite malice of sin, and prove a satisfaction
answerable to Man's offense: Wherefore that God might have reparation of honor,
he designed an actual bloody Sacrifice of himself unto God for the sin of Adam,
and all Mankind: And to this end likewise that God being appeased and satisfied
by the dignity of this Sacrifice, might depose all animosity against Man, and
restore him to those expedients by which he may work his Salvation.

Amongst all the contrivances that can enter our thoughts, none appear more
excellent and noble, both to ajust God's honor and Man's Salvation together,
than this immolation of himself upon the Altar of the Cross. First, it is very
powerful to appease God's wrath, for nothing more than death can be endured for
God's honor, nor can any Creature more absolutely avow himself unto him, than
in dying for his sake: Wherefore St. Paul says of Christ ad Ephesians. 5. He gave
himself up an oblation and host unto God in the perfume of sweetness. Next, it
is very proper to cure Man's infirmity, who by his disobedience and pride had
forfeited his right to Paradise; wherefore Christ submitting himself to the
Cross, and so accomplishing the will of his Father, repaired those breaches we
had made by our Rebellion.

Lastly, it is very efficacious to purchase our love without infringing the
liberty of our free will: For what can more charm us to love, than to behold a
person for my sole interest sustain the torments of a Cross, which was the most
infamous of all kind of punishments; yet so great was the affection our Savior
Christ bare us, that he deposited in the infamy, and reproach of the Cross, all
that honor which his miracles, his Doctrine, and innocent life had purchased to
him; leaving them all hanging on it as a Trophey of his love: The Cross then is
the North Star of our comfort, and hope; for what can he deny us, nay what will
he not grant us, who on the Cross has made such large expressions of his
kindness. God is said to be the searcher of hearts; that is, he only knows the
sincerity of them; whence some have taken occasion to murmur at the Maker; in
that he placed not a window before the Breast of every one: But though we may
be jealous of all the rest, yet sure we cannot be of Christ upon the Cross, nor
of his love, since he there even lays open his Bowels unto us; upon this
consideration Christ might justly promise to himself, That when he shall be
lifted up from the Earth (that is upon the Cross) he would draw the affections
of all Mankind unto him.

How different is the proceeding of this our eternal Priest from the usual
ways of Men, who upon a mean and trivial interest fall upon the destruction of
their Neighbor; whilst his design is to Sacrifice himself upon our score, and
by that means gain our love as a just Tribute to his eternal Father; he might
well assure himself this Sacrifice would be accepted, he knew that God could
not behold the Face of his Christ under this bloody posture for the redemption
of guilty Souls, and not be touched with the worth of this Sacrifice; wherefore
our Penitent may confidently repeat tunc acceptabis, then, that is, at this
plenitude of time a Sacrifice will appear which shall convey to Heaven an odor
grateful unto God, and serve as a balm to cure all the wounds of humane nature.

This Sacrifice was likewise an oblation of Justice, for supposing that God
would have sin punished, because it is a decree of his eternal Law, which
cannot err nor want its effect. Again, since Man was impotent to any complete
satisfaction for sin, wherewith he was defiled and contaminated, it was
necessary some person exempt from all sin should interpose, and take upon him
out of love and goodness, the discharge of our transgressions. Now Christ was
this happy Redeemer, who replenished with mercy spared not his sacred humanity
for our deliverance.

First, he dragged us out of the misery wherein we lay after Adam's sin, that
by no action of ours we could recover grace, or any ways reach our
justification; this impotency Christ took away, and purchased to all Mankind
means of Salvation in case they make right use of it.

Next, he freed us from the misery of sin, and by his passion obtained a
perfect enlargement for all those who faithfully cooperate with his grace.

Lastly, he merited for the Soul and Body an exemption from the Calamities they
sustain and endure in this life; and afterward the glory of Heaven, if so be
they persevere in sanctifying grace; and all this upon the design of rendering
a full satisfaction for all the sins of the World in rigor of Justice: And
since God was irritated by Man's contempt which sin involves, Christ knowing
that God could not receive more honor than what was paid him by the way of
Sacrifice; and that by how much the victime excelled, his glory went in the
like proportion: He presented his sacred humanity personally united to the Word
by way of Justice on the Tree of the Cross, as a just compensation of all
indignities thrown upon him by the World; and for this end he exposed his Body
to all the highest severities of Justice. Thus God accepting this oblation of
Justice punished in his Son all the sins of Mankind.

Wherefore as a disobedience to God's Law, a Pride in thwarting his greatness,
and a pleasure in our conversion to a Creature are found in sin; all these were
confronted in Christ's passion, by a prodigious obedience, an incomparable
humility, and a perpession of the most exquisite torments that could be
inflicted; so that there was not the least punctilio of equity wanting in this
oblation of Justice.

Our Holy Penitent weighing this terrible account could not but tremble: It is
true God was contented with Abraham's good intention, and stopped the Execution
of Isaac; but when his eternal Law to punish sin was in question (which he will
have inviolable) he spares not his only Son, and if on him the darts of his
anger fall so heavy, and this for another transgression, what may not a
miserable sinner justly expect for his own sins in his own person: If this be
done on the green branches, what havoc will be made of those that are
withered: if the Innocent have this measure, what will become of the Guilty,
but however these dismal reflections may affright our penitent, yet he is still
boyd up with hope and confidence in this oblation of Justice.

Lastly, this Sacrifice is a perfect Holocaust, the excellency of which
consists in the total destruction of the thing offered. In confirmation of this
St. Paul asserts, that Christ annihilated himself in becoming obedient to the
Death of the Cross. Look on his passion; and you will see him reduced to a
moral nothing. First, at his last Supper, he throws himself at the Feet of his
Apostles, he washes, dryes, and kisses even those of a perfidious Judas: in the
garden of Olivet he not only prays with bended knees, but is prostrate on the
ground, bedewed with a bloody sweat, the most prodigious effect of terror that
ever happened in nature: In the sequel of his passion he is branded with false
accusations, and ignominious reproaches, derisions and scorns: He receives the
highest indignities from the vilest of persons, as to be buffeted, spit on,
crowned with Thorns, fastened on the Cross between two Thieves as the ring
leaders, and this at their Paschal solemnity in the populous City of Jerusalem,
where he forfeited all that reputation, which the wonders of his power, and
sublime communications of his wisdom had purchased to him; so that many who had
been his spectators, and of his audience, in whose opinion he had passed for a
signal person, a great Prophet, a Man incomparable in virtue and sanctity, nay
who looked upon him as the promised Messiah, and Son of God, gave him then the
Character of an Hypocrit, and condemned all his miracles, as mere illusions,
and the effects of Art magic, and his Sermons as dreams of fantastic
babbling. Nay, the Prophet Esaias styles him the last and outcast of Men,
disfigured, misshapen, and laden with infirmities, insomuch that he was esteemed
as one Leperstrook, and the object of God's vengeance. O what a Holocaust was
this? He that is Lord and Creator of the World, King of Heaven, and Sovereign
Judge over the living and the dead; is destroyed in his honor and reputation,
his Eyes wax dimm and dark, his Face pale and wan, his Tongue furred and swollen,
his Lips black and blew, and his whole Body mangled in such sort as they
numbered all his Bones; so that it was as it were but one wound; and all these
outrages are completed in his Execution upon the Cross, which kind of death
was so abominable as Tostatus says; it is an injury done to God himself that a
Creature created after his Image should dye on the Cross. Cicero says, it is
an act very heinous to bind a Citizen of Rome, a Villainy to scourge him, and in
a manner a Parricide to kill him, but what then will it be to put him on a
Cross.

Heretofore God made himself known by destroying Pharaoh and all his Host, but
now he will get himself a Name and Fame by playing the Holocaust, and dying
upon the Cross.

Thus you see how justly our Petitioner might assert this Sacrifice to be an
oblation of Justice, and a Holocaust or whole burnt offering which would be
accepted off: For certainly God was never more honored than by Christ offered
up on the Cross, because the glory there given him, outvyes all the injuries
and affronts that had been or ever shall issue from the ugly Face of sin.

But the Fire of his love stopped not here: his sacred humanity would further yet
honor God by a Sacrifice, which should not be confined to a short space of
three hours, to a little (...) Nation of the Jews, nor to the narrow hill of
Mount Calvary: wherefore by a generous design he instituted the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, where this same humanity without effusion of blood might honor
God by a Sacrifice that would last to the worlds end, and be every day
reiterated, not upon one single mountain, but in millions of places throughout
all kingdoms where there is any Priest to offer up this Sacrifice to God's
honor, and as a tribute to his infinite greatness.

Our great God beholding this admirable contrivance of his incarnate word, and
of a Soul most pure, and holy, allied to his Son by a personal union; and
relishing this honor he should receive from this Sacrifice begun at a great
distance to nose the sweet odor it would evaporate even up to Heaven; this
gave him a distaste (as it were) of the Mosaical Sacrifices; which revealing to
our Holy Penitent made him cry, thou art not delighted with Holocausts. But
this is more clearly expressed by the Prophet Malachy, where God requires the
Temple Gate to be shut; the Fire of his Altar for the destruction of victimes
no more to be kept in; and confesses he is cloyed with them, upon the prevision
of that excellent Sacrifice to be made to him in the Evangelical Law.

Again, as a Sacrifice is directed not only to express God's supreme Dominion
over us, but likewise to acknowledge our thanks for his divine favors; now the
sacred humanity of Jesus Christ accomplished in virtue would not be ungrateful:
For God had given himself unto it by a personal union, in a manner the most
obliging, and most sublime, that is any way consistent with a Creature; in
return of this he would consecrate himself unto him with all the circumstances
of perfection, by which a Creature can be made his: And which cannot be more
than by a Sacrifice wherein he himself is destroyed, and as much as may be
reduced to nothing, that his immense greatness might appear by his opposite
subjection: Now having done this once by the bloody Sacrifice of the Cross, he
would perpetuate the same in the Sacrifice of the Altar: that whilst the
fabric of this new Jerusalem should stand, he might always render acts of
thanksgiving for the graces conferred on his humanity, and on the members of
his Church. By this Sacrifice we are enabled to pay our debt of thanks to God
for the rich present of his only Son, which we return unto him as a due and
equal acknowledgment; and if it be proportioned to what we owe for a gift so
precious, much more will it serve to discharge our duties of gratitude for
other benefits; as when he is pleased to make us victorious over temptations
and all the Enemies of our Salvation.

Lastly, his Sacrifice on the Cross was to allay God's anger against the sins
of Mankind; and this same design is carried on in the Sacrifice of the Altar,
and aims chiefly to render God propitious to our transgressions. In the works
of St. James, St. Basil, and St. Chrysostom speaking of this Sacrifice is found
this expression. Lord accept of this Sacrifice as a propitiation for the sins
and ignorance of the people, by which you may see this Sacrifice does not only
appease God's anger, discharge our large score of gratitude, but also is
effectual to purchase a supply for all our wants. So that our Petitioner in the
prospect of this bloody and unbloody victime might confidently usurp this
pleasing air: Then he will with a satisfied Eye behold a Sacrifice, oblation of
Justice, and a whole burnt-offering.

The Application.
Our Holy Penitent in another Psalm expresses the resentment of the Children of
Israel, when in captivity they sat weeping upon the Banks of the River of
Babylon at the remembrance of Sion, and of those Religious acts they were wont
to perform in that holy place. I am confident our zealous Petitioner felt no
less the bitter throws of affliction and langutshments after the Evangelical
Temple, wherein would be offered up a Sacrifice so full, as the Justice of God
could exact nothing more; with what satisfaction did he reflect on this then,
to wit, that time we now possess, wherein we can daily adore Jesus Christ in
his sacred throne of the Eucharist, as Children paying the duty we owe to so
indulgent a Father, as Subjects to a lawful Prince, as Criminals to a most
equitable Judge as slaves to a Redeemer, and as Creatures to a Sovereign
Creator. Let us beg that since he has daigned to expose himself a daily
victime upon the Altar for all Mankind, that there may be no Soul who shall
deny him the just tribute of love, praise, and Adoration.

Amen.
CHAP. XL.
Tunc imponent super altar tuum vitulos,

Then they will lay Calves upon thy Altar.


OUr holy Penitent having decipherd this bloody, and unbloody Sacrifice, as
Jerusalem's greatest Glory, and the Ornament of Sion, that is, the Church of
Christ; he carries on in his prophetic view his thoughts to other inferior
offerings, as the offspring and result of this supreamly great one: Such are
the oblation of persons, who raised above the charms of flesh and blood embrace
the Councels, and Rules of highest perfection given by our Savior, and
quitting all Earthly interests consecrate themselves totally to God.

These our Petitioner shadows under the name of Calves (according to
Enthymius) because having never tasted the Yoke, but let loose to their full
swinge and liberty, do yet of their own accord make themselves a daily
Sacrifice unto God: For he that embraces such a state of perfection forsakes
all; first, he forsakes himself, renouncing in some sort all right over
himself, and to become a slave to God in the person of another, who in the name
of God, and in his stead accepts the donation and surrender of himself; and it
is upon these terms, that he may be conducted to perfection; so that the Final
motive of this Sacrifice is the exact and universal practice of all kind of
virtues.

Riches, honor, and pleasure are the three main Enemies to perfection; all
which are clearly subdued in the essential obligations of this perfect State.
Poverty choaks the desire after temporal goods; Chastity allays the
concupiscence of pleasure, and obedience stifles all appetite to Worldly
greatness: But besides all this, we are to give to God our actions, our time,
and employments; and this gift consists in the punctual observance of certain
Rules which allot to every one how to spend the Year, the Month, the Week, the
Day; nay every Hour: So that persons who devote themselves to such a state need
not be solicitous for directions leading to perfection; the Commandments of
God, and zealous performance of such prescripts as are given by spiritual
masters, afford abundant matter for this noble design.

What a comfort must it be to those who are settled in this state to think, that
there is nothing more excellent in a Creature, than to belong in a particular
manner to God their Creator; who has power to glorify and enrich them with
all good? What can be more desirable than to grow every Day, and hour in
perfection, and this in spirituality, which is beyond all others a treasure of
highest value? We see all Beings strive to their utmost in this ambition;
Plants spring up, and bear the fairest Flowers that possibly they can: Trees
afford liberally their best fruit; Bodies issue forth all their strength and
vigor to become more powerful in which their virtue consists: And what
invention is not hammered out by Women to add the least stroke to their natural
beauty; shall the Soul then be alone insensible in this propriety of nature?
No, no, our new Lawgiver has planted in Man a holy ambition after perfection,
and this seed has been so fruitful, and so efficacious, that one might judge
the abstracted lives which so many have led in all ages, since his visible
appearance upon Earth, were the effects of a severe command, rather than a
Paternal Council, and that such a Sacrifice of Calves; that is, a religious
simplicity and total abnegation of Earthy interest, could not spring from a
frank choice of the will, but from an absolute necessity: Wherefore our Holy
Penitent all ravished with admiration points out that time wherein these
wonders shall be wrought; Then will they put Calves upon thy Altar.

The great Wheels which give motion to all our actions in this life are what is
beneficial, pleasant, and glorious: As to the first, those who addict
themselves to a state of perfection find good rules, good example, spiritual
documents, knowing directours, several exciting graces, and all things that
lead to the accomplishment of virtue, and increase of merit. Besides, he is
secured from innumerable miseries of the World, which is nothing else but a
Chaos of trouble and confusion, a Theatour of envy, ambition, luxury,
tyrannical oppressions, a place of error, and darkness, overspread with nets
of temptations, and cluttered with impediments of Salvation heaped one upon
another: So that to be warranted against so many dangers, and at the same time
put into possession of a real good by the constant practice of virtues, is an
advantage to a humane Creature designed for Eternity beyond all other in the
World.

As to the other motive which agitates us here; to wit, things delightful, none
are to be compared to those ravishments enclosed within the precincts of a holy
retirement: For they are satisfactions of the Mind, which being more pure and
solid than those of the Body, do consequently much outstrip them in worth and
excellency; the first ground of this contentment is a perfect tranquillity of
Mind, which knows no gnawing nor remorse of conscience. The Soul (says
Solomon) that rests in this assurance is a continual banquet, after this quiet
succeeds a great love to God, which yields a sweet relish to the most
embittered accidents of this life: Then a vigorous subduing of immortifyed
passions, which like an Executioner tortures the greatest part of Worldlings,
and makes them spin out this miserable life in an infinity of anxieties, and
affliction. In a word, it is the property of virtue to affect with delight that
person which puts himself upon the performance of any Heroic action. Wherefore
a state of perfection which teaches the practice of all virtues, in the most
generous and disinteressed way, must needs be attended with a great joy and
consolation; what pleasure then must it be to be settled in a condition of life
which is a holy resemblance of Heaven, surrounded with the precious ornaments
of all virtues, wherewith it is decked and set forth no less than is the
Firmament embellished with Stars.

O what pleasure to be received into the Household and Family of God, to be
cherished with an amiable aspect from that grand Master, and owned by him as a
Domestic; where a multitude of graces and divine favors are showred down;
where at every turn are offered occasions of doing well, and arriving at an
admirable pitch of Sanctity, and lastly, where particular aids of grace are
communicated to carry us to our final end and ete^al felicity!

As to the third Engine which gives life to our actions, that is honor; what
greater can there be than for a Soul to be God's spouse, his favorite, and
friend! Now this state of perfection ennobles a person with all these titles of
greatness; for virtue is the source of honor, and by how much that excells in
any one, so much is his honor really advanced, this state then being a nursery
of virtues, wherein the most excellent are practiced, and in the most excellent
manner, as squared out to the Evangelical Councels, it follows that such are
truly noble who are enlisted under the sublime Standard of so perfect and
Christian a warfare.

First, they practice the method of getting honor; that is, by flying it; for
honor resembles a shadow that flies the pursuer, and pursues the fugitive.

Next, they profess humility, and the Son of God has protested, that those who
humble themselves shall be exalted.

Thirdly, they incessantly praise and glorify God both by their deeds and
words; now Christ says, those that glorify him shall be glorified by him.
Wherefore this state cannot be but truly glorious and honorable, in which are
comprised in its perfection all that is either to our profit, pleasure or honor.

Some who would diminish the worth of this Sacrifice object, that many languish
under the Yoke of their vocation, and lead a life more embittered than others
in a worldly conversation.

To which I answer, that those defects spring not from the State, but from the
immortifyedness, pride, indevotion, and other evil qualities in particular
persons, who were they such as their state requires, would trip with joy in
their tribulation, acknowledge themselves singularly countenanced by Heaven,
that when they were in the midst of a depraved and corrupted world, he drew
them off clear from all its hazzards and miseries; to plant them in a Land
flowing with Milk and Honey: That having rescued them from a party, that would
have betrayed and given them up to death, he admitted them inhabitants of God's
City upon Earth; who will be to them a loving and indulgent Mother, and
transmit them rich laden with merit into the Land of the living; in case they
acquit themselves faithfully of their duty: This I say would be their Harmony
were they not ungrateful, and by their Chagrin and Malecontented humor,
distastful to God and themselves, and so unworthy of the dignity of their state.

But whilst I thus exalt this Sacrifice, which is the purchase of that eternal
victime offered up on the Cross, yet I am not so transported with its
excellency, as not to know it has its proper Crosses, nor do I blush to
confess it, since every difficulty finds there likewise its Consolation.

First, the indigent life there led is many times but a simple dispropriation;
where we find more necessaries for a subsistence than an infinity of persons in
the World enjoy, who by constraint is feign to continue poor: Besides, this
poverty will be recompensed with a hundredfold in eternal treasures, and to
this performance the Son of God has engaged himself.

Chastity there observed is a life Angelical, and an imitation of that eternal,
wherein no marriage will be admitted, it frees them from a million of cares,
sufferings and perplexities which married persons experiment at a dear rate,
and thence frankly confess their state to be much less happy.

Obedience is a life without curiosity, a secure navigation, and an excuse of
weight with God: It is a journey performed sleeping; for whilst you obey, you
repose quietly in the conduct of another, and by that, avoid a thousand dangers
and difficulties incident to those, who live at the Helm of their own will and
liberty.

If they are startled at the necessity of cohabiting with some who may be of a
strange peevish and cross humor, and with these they must continue even to
death; this I confess may happen sometimes, yet not always; but as to this
likewise there is often a mistake, the froward humor being rather in
themselves than in their companion, so that possessing a spirit like that of
the Jaundice, all they behold appears yellow to them: But admit they are really
so, that is, thwarting and contradictory, perhaps God has given them to you,
that they may be converted and saved by your mildness and patience, at least to
be unto you occasion of merit: Christ our Lord disdained not to cohabit with
Judas, and if they discharge not their duty to you, at least do yours to them,
and so you will hammer out a Crown at their cost, and by means of their
unpleasing strokes.

In a word, if you have a love for God, and a serious thought of Eternity, be
it of Heaven or Hell; if you consider the torments and death of Jesus Christ,
nothing will seem harsh or tedious to you in this life: If you consider the
immense obligations you owe to your Redeemer, you will lament in that you have
but one life to Sacrifice for him, that has lost his own so worthy upon the
Altar of the Cross for your sake: You will repine that nature allows you but a
term of sixty years or thereabouts in this world to spin out in his service;
since he has surrendered up his life for you, of which one moment is more to
be valued than all the duration and existence of Men and Angels.

This is the Sacrifice of Calves, which our Penitent had in his prophetic
view, and it leaves a sweet relish in his Mind, with which he concludes his
petition. It was doubtless matter of great joy to our Penitent, to consider the
powerful operation of Christ's Spirit, that would draw Men from sensual
pleasures, and baits of this World, induce them to contemn riches, honors, and
Earthly glory, and exchange these for hair-cloths, fasting, disciplines, and
other mortifications of the flesh; and this to be acted by persons great in
dignity, swimming in a full plenty of wealth, and endued with intellectual
parts even to admiration: Millions of these have shrouded themselves within the
Walls of a poor habitation, where clothed with a course habit they have led a
life wholly Angelical, and made themselves a daily Sacrifice, unto God
beautifyed with a religious simplicity, which surpasses all the wisdom of the
World, and so fulfilled the prophecy of our happy Penitent; Then (that is in
the Church to be established and founded by the Messiah) they will lay Calves
on thy Altar.

The Application.
Our Holy Penitent here entertains himself with the grateful returns which
Christians were to make in consideration of Christ's eternal Sacrifice, and
certainly there is no state speaks so much a generous love to God, as that of a
contemplative life, where we behold Men divested of all self love, to become
perfect slaves to the divine will; freed from all adhesion to created things,
that in charity they might be united to God, avoiding the World's conversation,
the better to enjoy God's presence, that since they cannot live without him, at
least they might live with him as much as the condition of this mortal life
will bear. To contemplate so many thousand Families, where Creatures anticipate
their felicity by praising God incessantly, and who seem not to subsist but by
the dew of a Holy Love, like the Seraphims in Heaven. Ah let us then conclude
with our Holy Penitent, and bless the divine Providence, who has in the
revolution of so many ages received the perfume of prayers and thanksgivings,
from an infinity of pure innocent Souls, consecrated in a peculiar manner to
his glory and service.

Amen.
FINIS.
A TABLE Of the principal matter of this BOOK.
A.
Affliction. WHy God conducts Souls by way of affliction. Page 8 Adversity
foundation to eternal happiness. p. 143 Why God lengthens out our afflictions.
p. 380, 381 Affliction of David. p. 282
Anger. Means how to avert God's anger. p. 178
Adultery. All Laws violated by adultery. p. 56, 57 Punished by death and
great torments by all Nations. p. 58 It subverts the rules set down for our
education. p. 303 It is a vvrong not to be repaired. Ib. A passage of St. Paul
terrible concerning adultery. p. 304 The civil law permits parties interessed
to be Judges. Ibid. It is a kind of Sacrilege. p. 305, 306

B.
Body. It is fit the Body should share in the punishment of sin. p. 36 Saints
Bodies alvvayes had in veneration both in the old and new Law. p. 170 Diverse
examples of this subject. ib. Why God favors Saints Bodies with the working of
miracles. p. 168 What David means by humbled bones. p. 167
Beatitude. To anticipate our Beatitude is here to think always of it. p. 248,
249 Why we cannot be happy here. p. 249 How sweet the thoughts of Beatitude. p.
290 Good works the means to Beatitude. ibid.

C.
Carnal Sins. Carnal sins destroy both Body and Soul, p. 52, 53 Punishments of
Heaven for carnal sins. p. 53, 54 Why carnal sins are most dangerous and most
abominated by God. ibid.
Church. A pillar of truth, etc. p. 127 Upon what terms God founded his Church.
p. 138 and seq. God punishes such as violate Temples, or Churches. p. 409, 410
The sublime institution of the Church. p. 422, and seq.
Christ. Christ's presence how amiable. p. 234 Christ loves to be with men. p.
235 Christ dyed for all. p. 280, and seq. Christ's Revelation to St. Bridget.
p. 283 Christ the source of all merit. p. 316 Christ supreme pastor of Souls.
p. 415 Christ Sovereign Bishop of the Church. p. 416 Christ a true Holocaust.
p. 433, 434 Christ a true oblation of Justice. p. 431
Charity. Order of charity. p. 403, 404
Conversion. Of an Indian in Japonia. p. 328 Sometimes wrought by outward
preaching. ibid. Sometimes by the inward operation of his spirit. p. 329

D.
Mystic Divinity. Its definition and several operations from p. 259. unto 263
David. Why David begged to be freed from temporal punishment. p. 48, 49 David
the most accomplished Prophet p. 131 The world's creation revealed to David. p.
131, 132 The Incarnation, Nativity, and Passion revealed to David. p. 133, 134,
135 The state of his conscience in order to God was revealed to him. p. 135
David desired to be a Martyr. p. 150 What means he by the joy of his Salvation.
p. 251 He was very meek and humble. p. 3^7
Death. Death concludes all our merit. p. 38, 39, 40
Desire. Why our desires are never satiated in this life. p. 43, 44
Despair. Why we should never despair. p. 293

E.
Men of all conditions are bound to give good example. 86, 87, and seq.

F.
Fear. Difference of fear in the good and bad. p. 43
Friend. Loss of a friend not to be lamented. p. 143, 144
Faith. Springs from God. p. 126, and 216 Moral virtues etc, the way to faith.
p. 127 Faith teaches what we owe to God and our Neighbor. p. 205 Faith of all
things ought to be the most unquestionable. ibid. God proceeds like a Sovereign
in matter of faith. ibid. This his proceeding a stroke of his goodness. ibid.
Christ our Master in matters of faith. p. 207, 208 The mysteries of faith our
greatest comfort. p. 208, 209 What habitual faith is, and its effects. p. 210,
211

G.
God. If God deprives us of one good, it is but to give us a better. p. 49 and
50 God never rejects a truly repenting heart. p. 90, 91, and seq. God will be
justified in his proceedings with man. p. 97 God a primary and essential truth.
p. 128 God is not the efficient cause of obdurateness. p. 218, 219 What sign of
God's leaving us. p. 226 Two derelictions of God. p. 227 How God is lost by
sin. p. 232 God still gives more than we ask. p. 231, 235 How to escape God's
anger. p. 236, 237 How comfortable the belief of God. p. 288
Grace. Definition of grace and its effects. p. 158, 159 Grace raises our hope
to the expectation of a sovereign good. p. 160 How sin is expulsed by grace. p.
184, 185, 186, and seq. Grace compared to the essence of the Soul. p. 192 How
grace cleanses the Soul from all iniquity. p. 193, 194 Why grace does not quiet
all motions of sensuality. p. 195 Grace purifyes all the powers of the Soul. p.
196 God imparts his graces by degrees. p. 224 The power of sanctifying grace.
p. 309
God. God is the final end of all his works. p. 337 God has an essential glory
and what it is. ibid. He has likewise an external accidental glory. ibid. God
is more glorified by a good than bad Soul. p. 338, 348 Every being glorifyes
God. p. 339 Why man above all in this world ought most to glorify God. 340, 341
Why God is delighted with our sufferings. p. 385
Good works. How do they merit a recompense. p. 309, 310

H
Heart. The heart the source of all evil, and good. p. 196 How St. Katharine of
Sienna lost her heart. p. 199 Character of a heart defiled with sin. p. 201 God
exacts only our hearts. p. 202 The misery of a humane heart. ibid.
Honor. Sacrificed by Christ on the Cross. p. 429
Hope. The comforts which hope brings to a Soul. p. 160, 161 The first sign of
God's favor is to give us hope p. 332 The definition of hope. p. 333 The
motives of hope. ibid.
Holy Ghost. His operations in a Soul. p. 229, 230, and seq.
Humility. Praise of this virtue. p. 395 Not to be humble is to be disobedient.
ibid. Two kinds of humility. p. 397 The effects of humility. ibid. How pleasing
to God. p. 402
Homicide. Terrors of mind which attend homicide. p. 294 An injury not to be
repaired. p. 295 It destroys God's image. ibid. To prevent this he forbad in
the old law the eating of blood. p. 299 It is never left unrevenged. ibid. Why
a murdered body bleeds at the presence of the murderer. p. 299 300

I.
Incarnation. The wonders of this mystery set forth. p. 16 No creature could
satisfye for sin, so that it was a mystery of love. p. 17
Ingratitude. The ingratitude of David. p 232
Injury. All injuries done are against God. p. 89, 307
Job. Job excused from sin in cursing the day of his birth. p. 116, 117 Why God
would not permit Satan to touch upon Job's life. p. 384
Impiety. Definition of it. p. 285, and seq.
Justice. God's justice is distributive, punitive and remunerative. p. 318,
319, and seq. To be just implies an aggregation of all virtues. p. 322
Justification. The first step is not made without the concurrence of our
wills. p. 157 A justified Soul is filled with joy p. 156, and seq.
Intention. We shall be rewarded and punished according to our intention. p.
204
Inspiration. It highly imports not to reject the least good inspiration. p.
224
Infirmity. An infirm constitution and sickness not to be repined at p. 144,
145
Instruction. To teach others the way of salvation the highest employment. p.
277, 278, 279 It is an employment envyed by the Angels. ibid. Why Masters have
not pensions assigned them by commonwealths. p. 279
Joy. Joy the effects of grace. p. 56, and seq. Many blessings accompany a
spiritual joy. p. 162, 163 Two kinds of joy. p. 240, 241 What ought to be the
motive of our joy. p. 243 The means to arrive at this joy. p. 246, 247

K.
Knowledge. Why it is good to know our iniquity. p. 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, and
seq.
King. In what sense Kings offend against God alone. p. 81 The greater the
person is that offends the greater is his offense. 82 Why Kings are obliged to
give good example. p. 83, 84, 85

L.
Love. The properties of God's love. p. 29 St. Peter's love to Christ. p. 233
Love assaults the Divinity in his throne. p. 277 Why we should love our
Neighbor. p. 307 God's love in playing the merchant with poor man. p 345 To
overcome self-love the shortest way to perfection. p. 382 Christ's love to man
on the Cross. p. 429, 430 Christ's love to man in the institution of the
Eucharist. p. 436, and seq.
Law. What is law eternal. p. 269 What is the law of reason. p. 270 Positive
divine laws. p. 272 The Mosaic law. p. 274, 275 The end of the Mosaic law,
perfection of the Evangelical law. p. 419, 420, 421

Man. Man is a vessel of mercy not merit. p. 2 Man cannot persevere in grace
without a special aid. p. 3. Man is diverted from many sins as misbelieving his
nature. p. 290 How little man can do if left to himself. p. 326, 327, and seq.
Man is created to praise God. p. 349
Mercy. It is God's mercy not the value of our actions by which we are saved. p
9 His mercy is immense and exceeds all our demeries. p. 12 His mercy is a
Bulwark against despair. p. 14 By Gods great mercy is meant the mystery of the
incarnation. p. 18 A series of Gods mercies. p. 21 No Creature is destitute of
Gods mercy. p. 23 Why we have more Presidents of his mercy than justice. p. 24.
His mercy appears in reward of the elect. p. 25 He distributes his mercies more
in the measure of his love than wisdom. p. 27, 28
Martyrdom. A description of what is requisite to be a martyr. p. 150, 151, 152
Masters. We owe more to our Masters than Parents. p. 267 Why there is a
dependency of one another in the conveyance of intellectual notions. p. 267,
268
Misery. Miseries of this life set forth. p. 114, 115 No misery like to that of
sin. p. 174
Merit. Definition of merit. p. 310 We merit by virtue of grace but the effect
of it comes from Gods promise. p. 310, 311

O
Occasions of sin to be avoided. p. 44, 45
Omnipotency. The belief of it raises our hope. p. 290

P.
Prophet. Conditions requisite to a true Prophet. p. 130 Several degrees of
prophetic lights. p. 130, 131
Praise. General heads of praise that man is to give to God. p. 342, 343 Pride
and fear forbidden in those that would praise God. p. 346
Prison. Restraint occasion of much good. p. 146
Providence. How comfortable the belief of it. p. 289
Persecution. How beneficial. p. 155
Passion. How dangerous it is. p. 301, 302 Several benefits of Christ's passion.
p. 431
Predestination. No security of our state in this life. p. 188, 189. How we are
predestined. p. 244, 245 The effects of our eternal election. Ibid.
Perfection. Praise of a state of perfection. p. 440 What it is. p. 252, 440
The effects of perfection and its praise. ibid. Perfect Souls if they fall do
soon rise again. p. 256, 257 Three degrees of perfection. p. 265
Pleasure. Difference 'twixt corporal and spiritual pleasures. p. 161, 248
Penance. To penance succeeds many glad tidings. p. 162, 164, and seq.
Necessity of penance. p. 394
Prayer. How we are to dispose our selves to prayer, and what we are to ask. p.
335, 336 The power of prayer. p. 405 Prayer works no change in Gods decrees. p.
406 Prayer the first gift of God. p. 408 How we ought to value it. p. 413, and
seq.

R.
Remorse. Remorse of conscience always attends sin. p. 71, and seq.
Resurrection. Belief of the resurrection very comfortable. p. 166

S.
Sin. The agitations of a soul defiled with sin. p. 182. There is a period set
to every man's sins which is called the measure of their iniquityes. p. 220,
221 The marks of this period. p. 221, 222 No less equal to what we lose by sin.
p. 233 Whilst in sin we are capable of no right to heaven. p. 32 Why some are
drawn from sin others not. p. 33 Sin the greatest of evils. p. 38 Greater sins
require a greater mercy. p. 45 46, 47 The terrors of sin. p. 76 and seq. p.
174, 175 Man's imbecility caused by original sin. p. 99 and seq. What remedy in
the old Law for original sin in women. p. 110 The penalty and consequencies of
original sin. p. 110. and seq. The benefit of confessing our sins. 126, 125 It
becomes God to punish sin. p. 176
Sacrifice. Why God required not of David a sacrifice. p. 351 Who the minister
of a sacrifice p. 352, 357. and seq. In the law of nature the first born male
were Priests. Ibid. That some sensible thing be offered is required in a
sacrifice. p. 353 Definition of a sacrifice. p. 355 Other conditions of a
sacrifice. p. 354 Holocausts the most perfect sacrifice. p. 363 Why sacrifices
commanded. p. 368, 369 Diverse sorts of sacrifices. p. 370 The jews zeal in
matter of sacrifice. Ibid. Sacrifice of the new law most perfect. p. 424, 428.
Sorrow. There is a twofold sorrow. p. 370 How pleasing a pious sorrow is to
God. Ib. What is a troubled spirit. p. 377 Whether the soul or body most
conducing to a sacrifice of a troubled spirit. p. 377 Motives of a true sorrow
p. 390. and seq.
Security. No security from sin in this life. Ibid.
Speech. How Croesus son came to his speech. Ibid. How one is morally dumb, and
how cured. Ibid.
Seneca. His opinion concerning such as lost their lives upon the score of
friendship, or a public interest. p. 148, 249

T.
Truth. Three kinds of truth. p. 121 Knowledge of truth most delightful. p.
123, 124
Trangressions. Internal trangressions only punished by God. p. 197, 198 A
certain period is set to every man's transgression. p. 220, 221 Signs of this
helpless desolation. p. 221, 222, 223
Tribulation. Tribulation the securest way to heaven. p. 147 Senecas opinion of
tribulation manfully sustained. p. 348
Temptation. The difficulty to resist temptation. p. 202

V.
Virtue. Moral virtues contribute a facility in doing well, and wherein they
consist. p. 213 Virtue it self a reward to the actours. p. 241 Delight of
virtuous actions. p. 242, 243
Uncertainty. All things uncertain as to the issue in this life. p. 239

W.
Will. The will is more prejudiced by original sin than the understanding. p.
6. God does never violence our will to our prejudice. p. 35 The greatness of
the soul by free will. p. 313 Whether it had not been better to have done well
by necessity. 314, 315

FINIS.

