England's GLORY Revived, Demonstrated in several PROPOSITIONS.

SHOWING An easy and speedy Method for fully Maning the Royal Navy with
Sailors; without Charge, or Obstruction to Trade.

AS LIKEWISE Reasons proving from whence all our Losses have happened, with
proper Remedies for the better securing of Trade for the future; by making due
Provision for all Sailors that shall be wounded (or the Widows and Children of
such of them as shall be Slain) in the Public Service, or in Defense of our
Ships of Trade, and the Building of Hospitals in all the Ports of the Kingdom:
All which may be done without any Charge to the Government.

As likewise Propositions for an Act of Tonnage.

By ROBERT CROSFEILD.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCXCIII.

To the King and Queen's most Excellent Majesty's.
MAny Endeavors have been used whereby to take off that Heavy Burden that
has lain upon Trade during the whole Course of this War, and to secure it from
the Violence of the Enemy, though most have hitherto proved ineffectual: But I
have (I humbly conceive) found out an Expedient that will remove those
Mischiefs, and the Trade of the Nation thereby be protected and preserved, and
likewise your Majesty's Royal Navy may in little time be fully Manned, without
giving any obstruction to Trade.

Which with all Humility I do lay at your Royal Feet, in hopes that you will
graciously Accept, and Countenance these my Undertakings: Not doubting, but to
see England Flourish, and Re-gain its Ancient Glory under the happy Influence
of your Majesty's most Auspicious Reign; and by your Royal Endeavors in few
years, see Europe in perfect Peace and Tranquillity.

And that God may Bless and Prosper your Majesty's and the Confederates Arms,
is the daily Prayer of

Your Majesty's Most Faithful and Loyal Subject and Most Dutiful and Devoted
Servant Robert Crosfeild.

To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in
Parliament Assembled.
Whoever with an Impartial Eye, shall behold the Constitution of the English
Monarchy, must acknowledge it the best Established Government in the World; and
whose Parliaments are, (and have been) the Glory of their Prince, the Bulwark
of the People, and the Terror of their Enemies; and whenever there was that
happy Union between King and Parliament which we have now the Blessing to
Enjoy, it has begot an Excellent Harmony; and Great and Glorious Actions have
been performed by our Ancestors, to their Immortal Fame; who have often made
the Gallick Shore to Tremble: And I apprehend there has nothing been wanting
in the Subject, that the same things have not been again effected; but the
Defect has been in those Measures that have been taken.

Therefore I do humbly present these ensuing Propositions (in the same Form
they were delivered to the Lords of the Admiralty) in which may be seen (as in
a Glass) the Source from whence our Evils have sprung: And with all due
submission do humbly conceive, that the whole matter carries so much of Reason
along with it, that I think its unanswerable. Not that I have any Opinion I
have managed the Argument so well; but there are some Truths that may be easily
evidenced, and which require not those exquisite Parts which are necessary in
more abstruse Matters, and may be performed by a Man of but indifferent
Education.

Trade is altogether of as great Consequence and Importance to this Nation, as
the Nerves and Sinews are to the Body of Man; which being Cut, is debilitated
and weakened: So if our Trade be ruined we shall be Impoverished, and become a
Prey to our Enemies. But I fear my Zeal will transport me beyond my Bounds; for
I plainly see, that the Happiness of Europe, and the very Existence and
Well-being of the Protestant Religion, and Welfare of these Kingdoms, depend
upon the Success of this War.

And God has given us Strength and Ability, whereby we may be able to Cope
with our Enemies, and Reduce them to Reason.

But hitherto we have not taken such proper Measures in our Naval Preparations
as we ought, which (I humbly conceive) has been the Genuine Cause and
Foundation of all our Misfortunes and Losses at Sea during this War; and which
has greatly impaired their Majesty's Revenue, and the Trade of the Nation.

There can no Revolution happen in any Kingdom, be it never so Just, but there
will be some Malcontents; and the nearer Ruin their Cause is, so much the more
will they struggle in it, (being like the Convulsions of a dying Man) and use
all Arts, and turn themselves into all shapes, so they may but possibly
disorder the public Proceedings of the Kingdom.

And now are the Eyes of this Nation, and all Europe, upon this August
Assembly, waiting the Issue of the Debates thereof, which being Vigorous and
Early (Money being the Sinews of War) will beget the like Vigor and Resolution
in the Allies, and prevent the French King from making any separate Peace,
which (by his Emissaries) he has with so much Industry endeavored, as knowing
he must sink under the wait of the Confederate Arms.

But it astonishes me, when I consider that two Nations, who are so Potent at
Sea as we and the Dutch are, should not make a more advantageous use of that
strength which God has given us: The being strongest at Sea, was ever an
unspeakable advantage; which is apparent to the whole World that we are,
notwithstanding those Losses we have had.

And we may plainly see that the Providence of God generally works and brings
things to pass by Natural Causes and Effects, as may evidently be seen by the
late Revolution in this Kingdom; for it was by the Evil Administration of
Government, under various Circumstances of Affairs, that contributed to it, and
which gave just ground and occasion for it; and was that which turned the
Hearts of the People, and thereby begat a Union of Parties, and was the great
outward Cause of our present Settlement.

Therefore in vain will it be for us to cry unto God for Help, and to give a
Blessing to our Endeavors, when we take not apt and proper Measures.

And it seems highly unreasonable his Majesty should be so much exposed to the
Violence of the Enemy, to the great hazard of his Royal Person; upon whose
Safety depends not only the happiness of these Kingdoms, but all Europe; and he
has hitherto been obliged to attend the Motions of the Enemy, and to take his
Measures according as they move; which brought his Person into Imminent danger.

Therefore with all due Submission I humbly conceive, that notwithstanding all
the utmost Efforts that can be made, its morally impossible of making any
Impression upon the French in Flanders, they being so strong on that side, but
by making a Descent upon their Maritime Coast, if not to Conquer, yet to commit
the same Depredations they have done upon our Neighboring Nations; that they
may Drink, and have their share of the Cup of Affliction, and feel the dismal
Effects of War: Nothing can possibly wound the Enemy like it, if it be carried
on by a Conjunction of some of the Forces of the Confederates, and backed by a
strong Fleet.

Then would it soon alter the Scene, and distract the Councils, and break the
Measures of the Enemy; as not knowing where the Storm will fall; which will
consequently oblige them to make a Defensive War in all Parts; and would
England but Exert its Strength, I doubt not but it would soon pull down the
Pride and Haughty Look of that Aspiring Monarch, whose Insatiable Ambition is
such, that he has made Europe a Golgotha, a Field of Blood.

And there is nothing like pushing on the War with Vigor; a Lingering
Consumption being worse than Death. least, rendered all Attempts of this Nature
more difficult.

And it was ever the Genius and Temper of the English, (as do witness their
Wars both Foreign and Domestic) to push on a War, and come to Action, leaving
the Event to Providence.

And whereas the Number of Loose and Vagrant Persons are exceedingly increased
in the Kingdom through the Laws not being duly put in Execution, and the King
having ever had a Power of taking these up by Warrants from the Justices of the
Peace to be sent on Board the Royal Navy.

Therefore I humbly conceive, it would much Contribute to the Public Service,
that his Majesty may have the same Liberty (by Act of Parliament) of taking
them up by the same Methods, and Employ them as he shall think fit, either in
mixing them with the Regular Troops, or otherwise; which would be the Raising
of several Thousands of stout and able Men, fit for Service, who are now but
Drones, and as it were the Vermin of the Land; but by these means may be made
Serviceable to the Public; and a great Kindness it will be to all Parts of the
Kingdom. I am

My Lords and Gentlemen, Your Honors most Faithful and Obedient Servant Robert
Crosfeild.

TO THE READER.
I Here present to your View some Propositions, which I hope may be of use to
the Public and Posterity, for which they were intended: But as I have handled
the matter but weakly (though to the best of my Skill) so it is evident through
the whole Book, that it may be much improved.

But having observed with much Regret, under what unhappy Circumstances things
lay in reference to Sea-Affairs, and matters growing daily worse and worse, by
our Merchants being so long detained in Port, to the great damage of their
Majesty's, and the whole Kingdom; I conceived there must be some Natural
Obstruction that occasioned it, or that there must be some great defect in
those Measures that were taken; and by long ruminating upon the matter, my
thoughts suggested to me, that I had discovered from whence those Evils did
proceed, which after having drawn into some Form, I then presumed to Address my
self to the Government; and now have ventured to expose my self to the Censure
of the World: And its not any vain desire of Applause that has induced me thus
to appear in Print, but a due Sense of that Duty which I owe to their Majesty's
and my Native Country; for I was under much and great Reluctance, before I
could bring my self to a Resolution of doing it; and not without just Cause:
For I was not bred a Scholar, nor ever was concerned either in Shipping or
Custom-house Affairs. So that if these things prove successful (as I have no
great reason to doubt) then must I wholly attribute it to the Hand of
Providence.

It Is the Opinion of a great many, and those Good Men too, that we have been
betrayed, and a general Outcry there is of it through the Town and Kingdom,
and prosecuted with much Heat; and I believe it as much as they: But it is the
sins of the Nation which have betrayed us, (this is no imposing at all, or any
desire I have of being Advocate for any) But setting them aside, and calmly
waying and considering things, it will be found, that otherwise the Original of
all our Misfortunes arise from those Methods that are taken for the supplying
the Royal Navy with Sailors; and this being but the Effects of Natural Causes,
I hope no Man will be Offended, if I do in a great measure make it so appear,
if he will seriously and impartially peruse the ensuing Discourse before he
gives Judgment; for so long as these Methods continue in use, we can humanely
expect no better success.

War was always an Enemy to Trade, and Losses will come whenever its on foot,
notwithstanding all the Industry that can be used; but its seldom a Nation does
obstruct and annoy its own Trade; but that has been our misfortune. For, for
near half the year all Ports have in them those that are Enemies both to King
and Kingdom, though not in Person or Affection, yet being armed with Power do
obstruct Trade, and prevent the Merchants from making their several Voyages,
who would carry off the Product of the Country: By which means the King loses
vast Sums of Money, and the Trade of the Nation's greatly impaired. Its the
Press Ketches which are guilty of all this; and its by reason of their slowness
and difficulty they meet with in getting Men for their Majesty's Service, which
is the grand Cause why our Merchants have been so long detained in Port; and
they and the Coasters have been so much exposed to the Violence of the Enemy.

Therefore those Methods we have hitherto taken, (being the same that were in
use an Hundred Years ago) will not do in this Age.

So its from our being wanting to our selves in our Maritime Affairs, and not
making due Provision for the Sailers, which has been the Fountain from whence
our Evils have sprung, and not from any great Force of the Enemy.

Notwithstanding all this, the Sailers are as Zealous for the Public Service
as any Men in the Kingdom; but Interest and Self-preservation is that which
governs the Actions of Men; and there is now a great Incongruity between the
Sailers Interest (as shall be made appear) and that of the Public; and so long
as that remains, it must always be expected they will decline the Public
Service. But if the Government will be pleased to put the first of these
Propositions in execution, and pass the second into an Act, then will they be
Consentaneous.

For by them the Sailers Wages will be reduced, and as there will be little
odds between the King's Pay, and that of Merchantmen; so they will have no
cause to shun the Service, neither indeed can they; and their Encouragement to
it will be great, for they will have the benefit of enjoying two Charities,
whereas those on Board Ships of Trade can enjoy but one.

I cannot without Amazement, call to mind his most Gracious Majesty's great
Courage, Bravery and Conduct in the late Battle at Landen, which was to the
Astonishment of his Enemies: But at the same time tremble, to think to what
Dangers he exposed his Royal Person for our Safeties; for should he have
fallen, our Candlestick would have been removed, and our Church and Nation have
become a Prey to our Enemies; but God of his wonderful Providence has
protected him, and reserved him for greater Actions, and no doubt will make him
the Blessed Instrument of restoring Peace to Europe.

It must be acknowledged things lie heavy (but no ways to be compared to that
Deplorable Condition unto which France is reduced) yet we have the least reason
to complain of any Nation in Europe that is engaged in this War; for we have
sat down in the midst of Peace, while our Neighboring Nations (and
Countrymen) have been shedding their Blood abroad; and they have had their
Countries exposed to the Ravage of the Enemy, and Violence of Armies, and have
willingly undergone all this, that they may obtain a durable and lasting Peace.

Therefore let us not repine, but cheerfully assist his Majesty in prosecuting
so Just and Honorable a War; and doubt not but the same Hand of Providence
which so wonderfully delivered us, will still protect us, and Bless our Arms,
that we may bring it to a happy Period, and every Man sit down in Peace under
his own Vine.

At the first blooming of the Gospel, in the very Apostles times, we may see
that there were Disputes in the Church, and Men had different Conceptions of
things; but yet we find, they were still guided by a Spirit of Meekness and
Charity to each other, according to the dictates of that holy Religion they
professed; but this Age in which we live is much deviated, and fallen from that
Love and Union which was so Conspicuous in the Primitive Christians, and which
the Word of God so positively Commands and Directs: But the Excess and
Vitiousness of Men's Lives are now such, that more are destroyed by it, than
devoured by the Sword.

And so long as we continue these uncharitable and unchristian Feuds, and
practice these Immoralities, we can have little reason to expect the Divine
Goodness should shower down Blessings upon us, but rather have a fearful
Expectation of Judgment for our Impieties, Sin being always the forerunner
thereof.

Therefore let us seriously consider these things, and repent before it be too
late, then may we with Comfort look up: For God does not willingly afflict the
Children of Men, or any People or Nation, but for the Sins of the Inhabitants
thereof; For like as a Father pitieth his Children, so is the Lord merciful
unto them that fear him: For he knows the Frame of Man that he is but Dust.

But the generality of People among us seem much unconcerned as to public
Affairs, otherwise than in hearing and telling of News: But let every
individual person be well assured, that a great Duty and Obligation lies upon
him in reference to the obtaining National Mercies and Blessings; and it cannot
be conceived that a bare Observation of a Monthly Fast (during the time of
Action) can obtain them; for we can never expect them, unless we daily and
fervently beg them of God.

Therefore let us with all Humility wrestle and contend with him for a Blessing
upon this Land; but first let us do all Acts of Mercy and Compassion, then may
we with the greater Assurance approach the Throne of Grace.

(...) King be engaged in a War, the Government must be first served; and the
private give way to the Public Interest.

But yet notwithstanding, there is an absolute necessity of preserving our
Coasting Trade, for the supplying London and other Parts with Coals, Corn, etc.

There Is no Arguments I can offer will bear any thing like unto matter of Fact;
and if your Lordships will be pleased to look back to the preceding years, you
will find, That after their Majesty's Fleet has been fully Manned, and at Sea,
there has bin notwithstanding no want of Sailers to carry on the Coasting
Trade, as it has evidently appeared; and when it has met with Obstructions,
it has been occasioned by having so many Privateers on the Coast, and the want
of necessary Convoys: So that its apparent that there is a sufficient Body of
Sailers whereby to answer the Ends of the Government, and the Necessities of
Trade, as will be farther demonstrated in this ensuing Discourse, with the
Cause why the Public is not more timely served; and the Reasons of it seem to
be plain: For there are a very great number of Sailers that abscond and hide,
till such time the Fleet is out; and if they can afterward use the Coasting
Trade, or make some Voyage for five or six Months time, they will get more Money
than the Kings Pay will amount to in the whole year, and have their Pay so soon
as their Voyage is over; whereas the Public is always in Arrears, and its but
Natural for every Man to pursue his own Interest: And withal, these Men are
not unsensible that if they lose their Limbs, or are Maimed, that the Fate of
them generally is, that they become Vagabonds, notwithstanding they receive the
Kings Pay during Life; it not being a sufficient Maintenance. The Sailers thus
using all the Industry they can to avoid the public Service, and the ways
taken to bring them in being so Dilatory. Indeed, the want of due Convoys is
the Grand Occasion of the Exorbitant Wages now given in the Coasting Trade.

As to the Outward-bound Shipping, who carry off the Product of the Country, it
must must be acknowledged on all Hands, that they ought to have the Preference
above all others, so far as is Consistent with Government: For its the Foreign
Trade that makes this Nation Potent and Happy, and not that within our selves:
It Is from thence all our Riches flow; it is that which brings the Bullion and
Coin into the Kingdom. Besides, our Plantations abroad cannot subsist without
frequent Supplies from us; and of what great Consequence they are I need not
say. And it is our Outward Trade which is a Support to a great part of the Body
of the People of this Kingdom; and if that be long obstructed, they must
Languish. Therefore if any hardship must lie upon Shipping, it may, with
submission, I think be rather thrown upon the Coasting Trade, as being the
least Evil, and the soonest Remitted.

For suppose Coals are now at Thrity Shillings a Chaldron, and by reason that
the Government Press so many of the Colliers Men, that few Ships pass between
Newcastle and London; for which reason they run up to Fifty Shillings a
Chaldron; it would not be long before this might be Remitted, (if there be but
due Convoys, and some Frigates constantly to Cruise on the Northern Coast) for
the People that live upon the Coast will be drawn into the Service by reason of
the great. Wages given; And there is Shipping frequently coming in, which would
supply the Colliers. In September the great Ships are usually laid up, and
those Men may be dismissed; and then there could be no want: However, it was
never yet known that we suffered in our Coasting Trade through the want of Men.
But the fear that Men have bin in of being Pressed, or having many Privateers
on the Coast, and not having necessary Convoys: These have bin the only and
true Causes of it when it has happened. We see in this our Age almost all Arts
and Sciences greatly improved, and why not things of this Nature; and I humbly
conceive, that if those Propositions I have made were put in execution, it
would not only much expedite our Public Affairs, but also encourage and
enliven Trade during this War. I am, etc.

Some Time after the Delivery of this, I did wait on their Lordships, destring
to know the Result of the Matter; and they were pleased to give me a very
obliging Answer; which was this: That the Fleet was out; and they could not now
put my Propositions in Execution; when they did, I should hear from them.

The 18th of August last I delivered in this ensuing Paper.

Right Honorable,
IN my Propositions which lie before your Lordships, I say, That when the Great
Ships are laid up, those Sailers on Board may be discharged: and the Season of
the Year now coming on for so doing, I conceive my self obliged to give my
Reasons for it, in regard it will greatly promote their Majesty's and the
Public Interest; and humbly conceive, that when these Men are dismissed, the
Government will have no Occasion for them till Spring following: and if it be
but calculated what the Charge will be in keeping them in Pay till that Time,
it will be found to be an immense Sum. No Objection can be made whereby to
hinder or retard the doing it, but the Exigents the Government may afterward
be driven to for want of these Men. But Arguments have and shall be given, to
prove that cannot possibly happen. Therefore whatever Hardship or Pressures may
other ways lie, some Expedient must be found for Raising Money to pay these
Men, so as they go off satisfied. This will not only be saving the King and
Kingdom great Sums of Money, but there will naturally arise from it, that which
will be of Public Advantage: for many of them will fall to the Coasting Trade;
by which means Coals and other Goods will be kept or brought down to moderate
Rates. Some may take to Privateering; which, if duly encouraged, will increase
the Number, and be of great Use to the Nation; for they willnot only annoy the
Enemy, but be a Protection to our Merchants and Coasting Trade: Others will
make Voyages abroad; as, to Spain, Portugal, etc. and return before the
Government will have Occasion for them: and a Nation depending so much upon
Trade as we do, the uttermost Diligence and Industry must be used to preserve
it: and I humbly conceive, that it has now more fully appeared, that there is
a sufficient Number of Sailers to answer the Ends of Government and Trade; as
has been apparently evident this Summer, as well as the preceding Years; for
when the Royal Navy was fully Manned and at Sea, there was a very great Fleet
of Outward-bound Ships that then Sailed; and at the same Time above 600 Sail of
Colliers moving that use the New Castle Trade, (besides other Coasters) as
appears by the Gazettes of the 8th and 12th of June last. Moreover, we had
several Fleets came in from abroad the same Month; and at the same time had
Shipping in almost all Parts of the World: and no sooner was the Grand Fleet
out, but the Wages in the New Castle Trade sunk 30 s. a Voyage, and in all
Probability had fallen much lower, had it not been for the many Privateers
which all along infested the Coast. All which gives undeniable Evidence that
there is no Want of Men; and that when the Season of the Year comes, those
Propositions I have made may be put in Execution, without any possibility of
Damage to Trade: It Is so far from that, that a great deal of Good will flow
from it. And I conceive I can no ways better make it appear, than in first
laying open the Ill that attends the making Use of the Press-Ketches, which
will we found to be of very ill Consequence to the Government, and pernicious
to Trade. These may seem to be very harsh Terms; but doubt not but your
Lordships will find I shall make good the Charge; for when they have received
their Warrants for Impressing of Men, and sail to some Port (they no sooner
appear but the Sailers abscond for Reasons before given) where they continue
for some time; when they sail away, in some small time others come into Port;
sometimes two or three; so for the most part it continues thus the Winter
Season. The Spring coming on, and the Government finding a want of Sailers for
Manning the Royal Navy, lay an Embargo to such a Time, (in the Interim these
Ketches are employed to get them); that being expired, yet still they want;
upon which the Embargo's renewed to a longer time; and that being expired, yet
they have not their Complement of Men: So that the Embargo's renewed from Time
to Time; (or if it be one continued Embargo without Limitation it is the same).
All this arises from the Dilatoriness of the Press-Ketches; for the Government
can do no less than lay an Embargo when there is a Want of Men (our Fleet,
under God, being the greatest Security we have). But by these Means the
Merchants are exceedingly discouraged, and prevented in making their several
Voyages; which they might do, and return before the Government had Occasion for
the Men. Likewise their Majesty's Revenues are greatly impaired, by not having
those Duties paid (both Inward and Outward) which otherwise would be: and the
Nation suffers exceedingly, in not having that Vend for their native
Commodities that otherwise they might. All which must consequently impoverish
the People.

We are happy in our Situation, in not being liable to the Incursions of the
Enemy; and exposed to that Ravage our neighboring Nations have felt and
undergone, from the Hands of a barbarous and cruel Foe. But we shall have no
Cause to fear them, if we take but such Measures, whereby to protect our Trade
from their Privateers, which greatly afflict all the Coast (which they always
pour out upon us after they have laid up their great Ships; and by their late
Attempt upon the Streights Fleet, it is visible they more aim to ruin our Trade
than to Fight us). Then would Money circulate well at home, the Subject be made
easy, and Trade flourish. And did we consider the Large Seacoasts of this
Kingdom, with the many Ports and Harbors therein, with the numerous Body of
Seafaring People thereof; we might rationally conclude, that there is no Nation
in Europe able to equip such a Fleet to Sea as we are, if we take but proper
Methods; and their Majesty's may be as absolute Sovereigns of the British Seas
as ever their Predecessors were when the Laws of Oleron were made.

In all that I have said, I have no Design of Reflecting upon any Persons, by
thus exposing those Methods that are taken; for they are the same that our
Forefathers used, and from them we received 'em; so none to be blamed: But if
it appear better may be taken, that will prove more useful, it cannot but be
thought reasonable to lay them aside.

But by so doing its not improbable, but that it may ruin the Interest of some
well-deserving persons; however, theirs must not stand in Competition, being
Incompatible with that of the Public, and the Government may other ways make
them Compensation. I will humbly suppose now, that were the time and season
proper to put those Propositions in Execution, and it were accordingly done, it
would be found, that there would be more Men taken than the King would have
occasion for; so that many of them might be discharged.

The Consequence of this would be, that all Embargo's would Cease that are
occasioned by the King's want of Men; then all Shipping will be free, and Trade
laid open; and the Merchant and Coaster will soon be supplied with Men, as has
appeared. And when these Men are in Custody, Shipping may be taken up in each
Port, to Convoy them to those where their Majesty's Ships Ride; and be Convoyed
by some Frigates appointed for that purpose: Then those Vessels may be
Discharged. By these means a vast Charge will be cut off which attended the
Press-Ketches, (Calculated by Cap. St. Lo at 60000 l. per an.) and that heavy
Burden that lay upon Trade, occasioned by the use of them, will be thrown off,
and the Merchants left to pursue their several Voyages.

I have no desire to appear in Print, being only Ambitious to serve their
Majesty's, whose Innate Goodness is such, that I have no Reason to doubt, but
that they will be pleased to extend their most gracious Favor toward me.

PROPOSALS HOW Their Majesty's May be Supplied with a sufficient Body of
Sailors, FOR Manning the Royal NAVY in a few Days space, and with little or no
Charge.
Proposition I.
THAT the Lords of the Admiralty be pleased to Issue out Press-Warrants to the
Surveyors, and other Officers, of all the Ports of the Kingdom, that they Press
all Seamen that are in their Respective Ports, that are not already in their
Majesty's Service; it being well known that there are many in all Ports that
will not enter themselves into their Majesty's Services; not out of Prejudice;
but because they Love not Danger; and are more afraid of losing their Limbs
than their Lives; and its but natural to all Men to seek self preservation.

Prop. II.
The Officers of the Custom-House are actually in their Majesty's Service
during their good behavior, and no longer; and have their present subsistence
from the Government, and their future livelihood depends upon the same; and
living upon the Place must have a better knowledge of the Sailors, than others;
so that they will be careful to execute such Orders as they shall receive from
above from time to time.

Prop. III.
The Officers of the Custom-house being thus empowered, may with much ease take
up most of the Sailors of the Kingdom (then on Shore) at one and the same time,
by reason of the circular Letters, as in the first Proposition. It Is quite
otherways in the case of the Press-Ketches; for they no sooner arrive in Port,
but the Sailors fly up into the Country, or otherwise abscond, and appear not
so long as the Press-Ketch remains there. This is a plain truth to all Men; so
that the King is at a vast charge, and little good insues upon it.

Prop. IV.
The Surveyor of each Port bords every Ship at or before she comes to an
Anchor; so that he may command what Men they have: It may be done with much
ease, only by taking into custody the Ships Boat, so that all means of making
their escape will be cut off: But great care must be taken of the Ship, that
the Merchant suffer not. These inward bound Ships would constantly supply the
Fleet during the Summers season.

Prop. V.
That the Surveyor of each Port give Advice to the Lords of the Admiralty, what
Men he has in Custody, that timely care may be taken that they be sent to
those Ports, where Their Majesty's Ships Ride, and that the Collector of each
Port pay the charge of the Impressed Men during their being in Custody.

Objections may be Raised, more than I am capable to discover: One will be,
That it will obstruct the King's Business, and bring an Inconveniency upon the
Merchant. I conceive it will do neither; for the Officers of the Custom House
are obliged, by Act of Parliament, to give their Attendance but at such and
such Hours, and there is a great part of the Day wherein they may do the King's
Business in this Affair; and it will be much easier for them to do it, than any
other Persons.

And with all due Submission, I cannot see any occasion of making use of the
Press-Ketches for the future; for in effect, every Surveyor in each Port acts
the same thing, so that it may be said, That there is a Press-Ketch in every
Port of the Kingdom, besides the Officers on shore. If these Methods are taken,
then there will be no occasion of taking up Loose and Laboring People in
London, as is practiced every Year, who not being Inured to the Sea, in a
little time, serve to no other end, than to fill the Hospitals, and breed
Distempers on Shipboard. And this may be executed with as much ease, as laying
an Imbargo; for the Sailors cannot possibly avoid being taken; for they may
very well be compared to Amphbious Creatures, who, as they cannot long live out
of the water; no more can they long subsist out of some Port: This will give
the Government an opportunity of being at Sea, so soon as they shall think fit;
from whence much good will ensue to the Public, and to Trade, by having our
Merchants Protected.

PROPOSITIONS Humbly Offered For the Support and Maintenance Of all such
SAILORS That shall be Wounded or Maimed In the Public Service, (Including all
Privateers) Or in defense of our Ships of Trade.
Done by Robert Crosfeild.
BY all the observations I can make from that little reading which I have had,
I apprehend the Roman's to have been the Noblest and the most generous People
that have been in any Age; and who took great care, and made provision for
those who were wounded in their service, by planting them in Colonies, and
giving them a competent Maintenance, which was no doubt a great encouragement
to their Soldiery, and one grand cause of the enlargement of their Territories,
which in the time of Julius Caesar was grown to a great extent.

And that Governmenr that will expect to arrive to any Potency, must give all
due encouragement and rewards, to such as are instruments of promoting the
same. And the Grandeur and Power of the Crown of England and welfare of the
People depending so much upon Trade, all imaginable encouragement should be
given to Shipping and Sailors who bring the Riches into the Kingdom.

And, I conceive, we have been much wanting to our selves, in not making due
provision for the Sailors; therefore judge it a thing highly necessary to be
looked into, being that which will greatly promote Navigation, and increase
their Numbers.

And as the Romans were sedulous in taking care to provide for their Soldiery,
so much the more ought we to study the interest of the Sailors upon whom the
welfare of these Kingdoms does very much depend. The matter that I have to
propose on their hebalf is, that such of them as shall lose their Limbs or be
maimed in the public Service, or in defense of our Ships of Trade (and so made
incapable of getting their Livelihood) may have due Provision made for them
during Life, and to be punctually paid quarterly; which will not only be an
inducement to Men to be bold and brave on board the Royal Navy, but it will
likewise make them resolute in Defense of our Merchantmen; as knowing if they
have the misfortune to be Maimed or lose their Limbs, they shall have a
competent Provision made for them; and I would humbly propose to extend this so
far, that if any Man be slain, and leave a Wife and two or three Children
behind him (as it may be the Case of many) they shall receive the same Pension
for seven years as if he were living; and all this may be done without any
Charge to the Government.

And those who are concerned will have no just cause of complaint: So that this
would plainly be an inducement to many thousands of People to take to the Sea,
who are now afraid of it, for fear of losing their Limbs, and becoming
Vagabonds, whereas, on Shore, they live free from any such danger; but if such
Provision were made, that Obstacle would be Removed.

And I not only conceive it to be the Interest of the Nation, but an Action
humane and Christian; to make Provision for such, as are not capable of doing
it themselves.

And I do apprehend there will much good and many advantages arise from this
Charity, much more than is to be discerned at first sight, and will have a
great influence many ways.

By it many Merchant men will be prevented falling into the Enemies Hands.

For as things now stand the Sailors can have little Courage to fight and
oppose the Enemy, knowing if they are Maimed they are utterly ruined,
notwithstanding they do beat off the Enemy; for if the Owners do but pay them
their Wages, its as much as they are obliged to.

And certainly there can be no greater hardship in the World than these poor
Men's case is, who by their courage and bravery often preserve the Merchants
effects, and bring great Riches into the Kingdom, and at the same time it is
there unhappy fate to lose their Limbs, and by it are ever after made
Miserable: This is too much Matter of Fact and Truth.

And no doubt it is the apprehension of these things that makes many Ships
resign to the Enemy, as knowing the greatest loss is their Wages, and they will
not venture their Limbs for other Men.

There Is just reason to believe this, for we have many instances of some of our
shipping who have defended themselves from the Algerines, and other Pirates to
admiration, and bravely acquitted themselves from them to their great Honor,
and advantage of their Merchants and Owners; but it was not so much love to
them as kindness to themselves, that made them so resolute, being sensible what
misery they should undergo, if they should be taken. So we see the apprehension
of misery will make Men stout, and Rewards will have the same effect; but if
they are in danger of being taken by our Enemies Privateers, they have now no
such fear upon them, and their loss not great, so that they will not venture
their lives to that degree, they might and ought for the good of the public
only, for want of that due encouragement that Men should have; and if there
were such provision made for them, no Men under the Copes of Heaven would be
more bold and brave; and it is but for Bread that these poor Men Plow the Seas,
and if they have a reasonable prospect of enjoying that, they will fear nothing.

And we cannot grutch them that which Principally proceeds from their own
labors.

And things being thus established upon these Foundations will be an
extraordinary encouragement for Men to take to the Seas, as seeing a fairer
prospect of raising themselves that way, than by any labor or service by Land.

Having this assurance, that if they should be Maimed yet they should not want.

Which is that which Men generally fear more than Death.

And one great advantage may be made to the public, by this being past into an
Act, viz. that by these means, that all Sailors whatever that have Pay due to
them from the Government, shall relinquish one moiety; and this can no ways
appear any hardship upon them: For what Man is there under their circumstances
that would not willingly withgo a greater debt, that by so doing shall be
assured of a maintenance for Life, in case he grow into years and past labor,
or happen to be maimed, and so made uncapapable of getting his Livelihood; they
can lay no claim to it, so can pretend no Title to it; therefore it is but
reasonable they should make an acknowledgment to the Government, for passing
such an Act in their favor.

This would soon reduce the extravagant ways that Sailors now have, and in
little time they would fall to the old rate, notwithstanding it be time of War,
which would be a great benefit to all Coasters, Merchants and Owners, as
likewise an ease to the People in General. We may in great measure judge the
benefit that may be reaped by this being past into an Act, by taking notice of
the several Offices erected in this Town for the Insurance of Houses from Fire,
particularly that which is called the Friendly Society, where so many Persons
have mutually subscribed to each other upon such conditions, as its looked upon
to be a very good Security; for many persons may help one or two with little
detriment to themselves, which otherwise would be ruined: But this is a matter
more extensive, as being National, and of much greater consequence than they
are; but differs not much in nature, being an Insurance as well as they, and so
properly enough may be called Insurance Money.

And it is past all dispute or controversy, that all due encouragement should be
given to Sailors so far as is consistent with their Circumstances and the rules
of Government.

If an Abstract be but taken of all Entries made in all Ports of the Kingdom
for one year, then a true estimate may be made, and all errors removed; as
likewise what this following Act of Tunnage may amount to.

Prop. I.
That all Shipping using the Coasting Trade, that exceed not one hundred Tun
burden, do pay to the Collector of the Port one Shilling each Voyage. But all
those that are above one hundred Tun, do pay two Shillings; the Sailors to pay
one half of this when they receive their Wages, proportionable to their share,
according to the Number of Hands on Board; the other part to be charged to the
Bottom.

Prop. II.
That all outward and inward bound Ships that are not above one hundred Tun, do
pay four Shillings: All Vessels that are upwards of one hundred Tun, do pay
eight Shillings. But all Vessels to or from Turkey, or the East Indies, do pay
sixteen Shillings; one half of these to be paid by the Sailors when they
receive their Wages, according to the Number of Hands on Board, the other part
to be charged upon the Bottom. This may seem a hardship, but will be found
none; neither Owners nor Sailors will feel it; and no more, but what they will
both earnestly desire may be done.

Prop. III.
That all Vessels whatever, that use the Herring Fishing, shall pay eight
Shillings for the Season; one moiety to be paid by the Men, the other to be
charged to the Bottom. That all Fisher-Boats whatever pay four Shillings a
year: That the Western Barges, and all other Barges whatever, all Lighters,
Smacks Hoys, New Castle and Sunderland Keels, etc. do pay Four Shillings a
Year; all these to be Registered in the several Ports; and that all these
persons do bring in and pay the Money to the Collector by such a time, and upon
default thereof to pay such a Mulct as by Parliament shall be thought fit; one
part of these to be paid by the Men, the other to be charged to the Bottom.

This is so small and inconsiderable a charge that no Man can complain; and
although there are some of these that use not the Sea, but having their
dependence upon Trade, its highly reasonable they should contribute toward the
support thereof.

Prop. IV.
That the Collector in each Port receive and keep this Money from Quarter to
Quarter, and give security for the same; but be liable to give an account, and
pay it to the Trustees in each Port, who shall be ordered to dispose of the
same; and some one of those Trustees shall give security to the Overseers,
because there may be growing Money in his Hands which otherwise may be
imbeziled; and that these Trustees shall always be liable to give an account to
the said Overseers, when and so often as they shall think fit. By these means
all abuses and corruptions may be prevented.

That the Collector of each Port give to the Master of every respective Vessel,
a Receipt for this Money without Fee; and that he carry this to the Jerker for
him to enter upon it the said Master and Sailors Names, with the Name of the
Ship on which they are on Board, this to be done without Fee, and to be filed
and Registered. Now this will be a great help to the Sayler, in his proving on
what Vessel he was on Boar'd, and likewise be a means to prevent their imposing
upon the Trustees: But it shall be lawful for each Collector to deduct three
pence in the Pound out of all Moneys passing through his Hands, to be disposed
of, as shall be thought fit for his and the Jerkers trouble in this affair.

It being a matter designed for the good of the Sayler, and not to the
advantage of any Port where the Money is paid (further than for the use of the
Sailors allotted to them by Act of Parliament) so that if there be any overplus
of Money in New Castle or any other Port without exception; it shall be lawful
for the Overseers to take it, to supply the Wants of others: The intention of
the thing being to relieve the want of the Sailors in general; but if there be
any overplus of Money beyond this, it shall farther be in the said Overseers
power to build Hospitals in the several Ports, for the use of the wounded
Sailors, or the Widows and Children of such as are slain, or such of them as
are ancient and past their labor; but then they shall be built in those Ports
where the Money was raised.

That twenty Overseers or more be nominated, and they to be Persons of Honor,
to overlook and inspect into the actions of the Trustees; and if it appear to
them that they have abused their trust, then it shall be in their power, or any
ten of them (without any suit at Law) to nominate others, however they shall
live in or near the Port; that a Clark be assigned to the Over seers, who shall
keep in a Book fairly written, an account of all the Ports in the Kingdom, and
the several Collectors thereof shall transmit to him every Quarter, an account
of what Moneys they have paid to the Trustees, and they likewise quarterly to
give him an account of the Names of the several persons that they have paid the
Charity to; and this shall be laid before the Over seers twice in a year at
least; and that three pence in the Pound be allowed in each Port out of all
Moneys received, to be for a Sallary to the said Clark.

Whereas Sailors often shift Ships, and are sometimes upon one Voyage,
sometimes another, great care must be taken, that by this means they do not
receive the Charity in more Ports than one: The like care that they be not put
to too great trouble of proving their being wounded on boar'd such a Ship
before they can be admitted; it may be a great hardship, to a Man that is
maimed, Poor and Friendless: The same care must be taken in reference to those
that shall be slain; that the Trustees have not Women and Children imposed upon
them.

If a Sayler have lost a Limb, or is otherways Maimed, (so as to be rendered
incapable of Service) then the Trustees to pay him, or them, according to the
Fund they have; but yet not to exceed Twelve Pounds per Annum, that being a
competent Maintenance for a poor Man.

And those that are Maimed in the Public Service shall reap the advantage of
this, he, or they, being to be reckoned to that Port out of which he was taken,
when he entered into Their Majesty's Service, a Register being kept in each
Port for that purpose; this will soon take off the Sailors Aversion to the
Public Service, and greatly promote Their Majesty's Interest, these Men
enjoying Two Charities, for the Government will never withdraw their usual
Bounty they have all along given to Sailors, and it will be an infallible means
of keeping them from taking Foreign Service; he that is first Wounded to take
place before all others; this Method to be observed in all Ports.

And in little time there might be very good Hospitals built in all the
considerable Ports of the Kingdom, to the great Relief of the Poor, and to the
Interest and Honor of the Nation.

The Sailors on Board all outward-bound Ships, and Coasters, shall be adjudg'd
to that Port where they took their last Clearing, and paid their Charity-Mony:
All inward bound Ships shall be charged to those Ports to which they are bound;
and if by misfortune some of them fall into the Enemies Hands, and their Men
Maimed, yet notwithstanding those Men shall have a Right to the Charity, and
receive it in that Port to which that Vessel was bound.

I have now done with my Propositions, and shall only bring an Example, or Two,
that it may appear how easy the thing will be; we may suppose, that all
Vessels from New Castle to London, that are above One Hundred Tun, will have
one with another Eight Sailors; so here is Twelve Pence to be paid by each
Person, which is but One Penny Half Penny a Man each Voyage; and it is possible,
they may make Eight in a Year, which is but Twelve Pence a Man for the whole
Year.

Likewise all outward and inward bound Ships, that are upwards of One Hundred
Tun, one with another, will have Twelve Sailors on board, and Four Shillings to
be paid by them, which is Four Pence a Man each Voyage, which they would
cheerfully and readily pay.

And all Owners of Shipping would willingly pay what is charged upon the
Bottom; for by this Act their Men will be made Resolute in defense of their
Vessels, and it will be a very great Inducement and Encouragement to them, to
set them out to Sea better Armed and Manned then now they do.

This would make a great Revenue, and which would be a vast help to all the
Ports in the Kingdom, and the whole Nation would soon feel the happy effects of
it.

But that which would be the Crowning of the Work, is, That God would then give
a Blessing to our Public Undertakings, and send us a durable and lasting Peace.

A Supplement To the Foregoing PROPOSITIONS.
IT may be expected I should make an Estimate what Fund may Annually arise
toward Building of Hospitals: It is a hard Task to perform, and without some
helps from the Government, do conceive, that neither I, or any one else, can
make a true Estimate; but according to my Apprehension, it cannot amount to
less than Thirty Thousand Pounds a Year.

And great things may be done by reason of this Fund, which will continue as
well in Peace as War, and great Improvements may be made beyond what I have
done, which in some measure you may discern, but I want time to Explain.

As that there may and ought Provision to be made for Commanders of the King's
Ships, or Masters of Vessels, (that are fallen to decay, that have behaved
themselves Honorably, and deserved well of the State,) suitable to their
Merits; and such Persons to be Governors of the several Hospitals.

And others that have behaved themselves well, and in defense of their Ships,
and done something that is Great, and deserves Praise and Imitation, and wants
not this Charity, these to be Presented with a Gold Chain and Medal, with some
Motto suitable to the Action; and this shall be put on in the presence of the
Overseers; and after this he shall ever have the power to Act as a Trustee in
all the Ports of the Kingdom, and for One Year shall have the Honor to be
admitted to act as an Over seer, and have an equal Vote.

And likewise it will be necessary to put out the Children of such Commanders
or Masters of Ships that are either slain or Maimed; but this Power must be
lodged in the Overseers, otherways there will be great Corruption and abuses
in this Affair.

And when its fixed and settled by Act of Parliament, then will it by
consequence greatly improve the Trade of the Nation and the Revenue of the
Crown; and increase the number of Shipping and Sailors.

Then will not the Gentry and middle sort of People be so greatly averse to the
bringing up their Children Sailors, as now they are; but it is through a wrong
notion they have of things, that makes them have such mean thoughts of
Sea-Imployments; neither are they so terrible and frightful as some apprehend.

We see the generality of People that give their Children Competent Fortunes,
put them out to Shopkeeping, Trades or Handicrafts; by which means they are
made so numerous, that Trade cannot support all; and Men thereby fall to decay;
and Seeing Ruin hanging over their Heads, run into excess, and so hasten their
downfall; and it may be in a few years return to their Friends to be kept, and
bring a Wife and two or three Children to boot (there are multitudes of
Instances of the Truth of this) which must certainly be a great affliction to
the Parent, and a continual Eyesore and Vexation to him: and the Poor ruined
Man receives the Scorn and Frowns of his Friends, which he is forced to digest
pierce although it his very Reins; so he lingers out a miserable ignominous
Life.

And he may be said to Die Daily; for there are many Afflictions more Bitter
and Sharp than Death it self.

Therefore if Gentlemen would but bring up their younger Sons to learn
Navigation, and afterward put them for two or three years to a Captain of one
of the King's Men of War, or to some Eminent Master of a Ship, that he may
understand the Duty of a Sayler; then would his Coat sit never the worse upon
his Back, but the better, when he is grown Man; and then will he be qualified
for his Princes service, or at least, need not fear having a good Ship, and of
raising his Fortune.

But if he should happen to fall either in the Public Service, or in Defense
of our Ships of Trade, he certainly dies Brave, and brings not a blemish upon
his Family, but is an Ornament to the same; and if he should not have got an
Estate, or have lost one, there will be decent Provision made for his Wife and
Children, and it can be no dishonor for any to receive it, it being adjudg'd
by the Law to be a just Merit: Therefore, had I much rather my Child should die
in the Bed of Honor, or in a Storm, than live and linger out a miserable
Ignominious Life.

PROPOSITIONS Humbly Offered for An Act of Parliament To be Made, For Laying a
Duty of Tunnage UPON SHIPPING.
WHen the Kingdom is engaged in War, its not only requisite but equitable that
all Persons, according to their several Degrees and Qualities should contribute
to the Immergencies of the State; all due Regard being first had to Husbandry
and Trade; and wherein things do not obstruct or Impeed either, its but
reasonable.

And, indeed there are many whose Estates and Effects lie in Shipping, who have
no ways yet contributed any thing to the Public, during the whole Course of
this War; and who are under good circumstances, and capable of paying Taxes
proportionable to the Rest of the King's Subjects, and no Injury thereby done.

They may, its true, plead they are at great Charge to the Light-houses, and by
Convoy money, which is no hardship upon them, it being brought in upon the
Merchant as Averidg.

Unless it fall upon Colliers, and it is well known they get a great deal of
Money, notwithstanding all the Charge they are at, and the great Wages they give.

And it may further be object'd by them, That they are liable to great Dangers,
and many of them taken by the Enemy.

All which is no more than what the Merchants are exposed to; whose Effects are
generally of much greater Consequence than their Shipping, yet are no ways
exempt'd from paying greater Duties both inward and outward; notwithstanding
any great Losses they have had, or may hereafter meet withal.

Therefore, it seems altogether unreasonable, that these Persons should be
exempted from being Taxed, when there may thereby be so much Money Raised as
will be of great Importance to the Government.

But that things may be done with all due Moderation, that no good Subject
shall have any just Cause of Complaint, and not one Taxed more than another; it
would be requisite, I humbly conceive, to have an Act of Parliament made to lay
it as a Tunnage, with due regard being had to the Burden and Voyage of each
Ship, and to make a Distinction between Coasters and Vessels outward bound,
according to these ensuing Propositions.

Proposition, I.
That all Coasters whatever (except Collyers) pay six pence per Tun to the
Collector of each Port where he takes his lading, according as the Ship shall
measure; but if he shall not have his full lading, then a Deduction to be made
according to what he wants; or if he shall afterward have the Misfortune to
fall into the Hands of the Enemies, then he shall have the liberty to draw back
what Tunnage he paid that Voyage, and be paid upon demand, or be allowed it by
Debenter, and have twelve Months time so to do, after the loss of the said
Ship: But all Colliers shall pay this Tunnage in that Port they break Bulk and
Unload: unless it be such of them as are outward bound. As to Holland, Ireland,
etc. they shall pay it as the Coasters do, in that Port in which they take
their Loading; but be liable to pay no greater Tunnage than they do.

Proposit. II.
That all outward bound Ships, except Colliers, bound either for Holland,
Flanders, Portugal, Denmark, Ireland, etc. pay twelve Pence per Tun; according
as each Ship shall measure; and in case any of them shall happen to be taken by
the Enemy, before they have performed their intended Voyage, then they shall
draw back this Tunnage, and be paid by the Collector upon demand, or be allowed
it by Debenter.

And all inward bound Ships from the above said Countries, either English or
Foreign, shall pay two Shillings per Tun; and in case they shall not have their
full Lading, deduction shall be made for the same.

Proposit. III.
That all outward bound Ships that shall be bound either to the East or West
Indies, Streights, East Country, Coast of Africa, etc. shall pay two Shillings
per Tun; but in case they shall fall into the Enemies Hands, and not perform
their Voyage, then they shall draw back the said Tunnage, and be paid upon
demand or by Debenter. And all inward bound Ships, from the foresaid Countries,
shall pay four Shilling per Tun, and not be cleared till the said Moneys Paid.

Proposit. IV.
That all Western Barges, and all other Barges whatever; all Fish-Smacks, Hoys,
Lighters (except such who constantly carry Dung or Soil) shall pay twenty
Shillings per quarter, and pay the Money every quarter to the Collector of each
Respective Port, within six Weeks after it becomes due; and upon default
thereof to pay double: And that they come and make Entry of them, with the
Names of the Owners at the Custom-House of that Port or Harbor they use (but
this shall be done without Fee) with in six Weeks after the Act takes place.

This will Create them no great Trouble, and will be an Ease to the Government;
neither can it be any Hardship to them to pay this Money; the least of them
having been at far greater Charge the Preceding Years, then they will be the
Ensuing; and then their Trade and Business was greatly obstructed, but now they
will be no way molested.

That the Collector of each Port shall keep this Tunnage-Accompt a part (as
likewise the Charity-Mony) and it shall be wholly a ppropriated to the use of
the Navy: This Money being thus received, by the Collectors, will prevent the
great and usual Charge that attends the Gathering in of Taxes, and will be the
saving of the Government many Thousands of Pounds.

According to my weak Capacity, This seems, to me, to be a very facile and easy
way of raising very great Sums of Money, and be no manner of Oppression of any
Man; and shall bring an Instance or two which, in some measure will prove it.

A Vessel from Barbados (whose Tunnage is great) of two hundred Tun; will
bring one hundred Tun of Goods, or Upwards, the Freight of which will amount to
about two thousand Pounds. And considering all their Ware and Tare, and the
great Wages they give, it is evident they may very well pay the Government forty
Pounds when the Merchant at the same time has run the same Risque, and pays
far greater Sums, and probably gets not so much by the Voyage as the Owners.

And for the New Castle and other Coasting Trade, it can be no hardship for a
Ship of two hundred Tun to pay five Pound, two Shillings (including the Charity
Money) in a Voyage; for in little time the Sailors Wages will sink much lower
than now they are, and they will be nothing at the Charge they now are at;
neither will Coals, or other Goods, be any way advanced by it, but reduced to a
lower Rate, so the Charity Act be but past, and the Government be not wanting
in granting them constant due and necessary Convoys; and if that be but
Effectually done, there are no Owners of Shipping will be concerned at all for
this Charge put upon them, but will willingly contribute to the Necessities of
the Government, that the Trade of the Nation may be protected and preserved.

FINIS.

