AN EPISTLE To all that is Young in the Truth, And LATELY CONVINCED; Who walk
with, and assemble amongst the People of God called Quakers; that they may
escape the Wiles of Satan, and continue and walk in the Way of Righteousness.
WE calling to Remembrance the Labors, Hardships, and Inward Traveling Pangs
and Throws of the true Gospel Ministers in the days of old, and we knowing the
same in our day, in our measures, which the Apostle compared to a Traveling
Woman, in bringing forth her Child into the World, saying, Of whom I Travel in
Birth again, till Christ be formed in you.

And blessed be the Lord, there are many Witnesses in this our day, not only of
Instructers, but of such as through deep Travel have begotten many to God: and
these Fathers being once Children themselves, retain in their Fatherly Bowels
the sense of the Childish Estate of those who are come inwardly to feel some
Renewings in the Spirit of their Minds, by the Gospel-Power, in order to the
Overturning of all their old Buildings, that now like to Jerusalem of old, for
their Despising and Rejecting the true Prophets, there was not to be one Stone
left upon another.

The Old Serpent perceiving his kingdom to be Shaken by the Operation of that
Divine Light, Grace and Power of God (which will admit of no terms any longer
to be made with him, or any Subjection or Compliance in the least to be yielded
to him, or to any of his works) Every Plant now being to be plucked up, that the
Heavenly Father has not planted; yea, the Fig Tree that bears no Fruit,
whereby the Hungry may be relieved, must Wither by the Curse of his Displeasure.

Then this Crooked Serpent, that is more Subtle then all the Beasts of the
Field, twists and turns himself every way, if possible, to entangle again those
that are turning from his thick Darkness, to Christ's Mavelous Light, that
has showed them where they have been, with whom they have been conversing, and
what they have been doing in the Dark, and what Path they must walk in, if they
will arrive at the Land of Rest.

And thus we found Judgment to begin at the House of God, in order to the
overthrowing and purging out of all that had defiled, that our Bodies might
become the Temples of the holy Spirit.

Oh, the many Devices that the Enemy uses, that True Judgment might not take
place! And when it did take place, how did he transform himself, to make us
believe his Suggestions, viz. That now we had lain long enough in the Furnace,
and the Tin and the Dross was all gone, and nothing now was left but pure Gold.
But when we at any time lent an Ear to these his Delusions, we found by
Experience, that which he suggested to be Gold, was but Tin and Counterfeit
Mettle, and that he lied unto us, when he said, We had been long enough in the
Refining Fire: Although the Fleshly Part was glad of this Tidings, hoping
thereby its Life would have been spared, and that a Birth of its Womb would
serve for a Sacrifice; for we found it was not the Male of the Flock, but an
Ishmael instead of Isaac, in which the Lord took no Delight.

So that we saw, we must into the Furnance again, and there continue all the
appointed time of the Father, till indeed we were changed into the state of the
precious Sons of Sion, truly comparable to fine Gold.

And this was the Way in which we waited, under the Great Tribulations and Sore
Judgments; that we might not only be Convinced, and take up a Rest there, in
that we believed the words of Truth, and could Dispute for it; but that we
might be Converted, and in the Spirit of our Minds thoroughly Renewed; that we
might be as Saviors upon Mount Sion, and as Workers together in the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus, to help and strengthen the Weak Brethren and Sisters, and speak
a Word in Due Season to the Weary Soul: which Work was not at all Wearisom to
us, though our Hazards and Hardships were great sometimes to get a Hand to the
Helpless Ones; yet when once we got but a little hold, and we felt them coming
nearer to Truth and us, then our Hearts Rejoiced, and our Souls were right Glad.

And they whose Beauty was hid as with Bullrushes, and smeered as with Mire,
then they appeared to be goodly Children: These were Sweet Encouragements unto
us, greatly refreshing our Bowels, to behold these Prisoners thus showing
themselves forth, which made us (with many more Faithful Brethren) not to love
our lives unto the death; but even for the truly Good Man, dare to dye, when
called thereunto.

The Spirit of that blessed Man began so to stir in our Bosoms, that we could
even (in a Sense) a wished our selves Accursed for our Kindred, Acquaintance,
and Countrymen, that they also might feel what we felt; knowing upon what
Ground they stood, and what Zeal they (as well as we, many of them) had: but
the true Knowledge of the Truth, as it is in Jesus, was wanting; the Vail of
Observations and Carnal Apprehensions being yet over the Heart, which nothing
can remove but Christ; who is the Life and Light of Men, and Glory of his
People Israel.

There are many Witnesses yet alive, who can testify to these things, and much
more then we intend at this time to mention; only some few particulars we may
hint at, to the end, That no Travelers toward Zion may turn aside from the
Footsteps of the Flocks of the Companions, nor Err from the Right Way, as it
was received and walked in at the Beginning.

O! what Fear and Holy Dread was upon our Spirits, lest we should think our own
Thoughts, or give way in the least to the fleshly Motions of our own minds, or
admit any of the Cares for the things of this Life, or give way to any
inordinate Affection to the nearest and dearest Relations, lest thereby we
should be hindered in the day of our Espousals from being Chaste Virgins unto
Christ.

Likewise, What Carefulness of our Words! What Watchfulness to our Ways! What
Heedfulness of our Company! that we might keep our Consciences clear, that our
Lives and Conversations might show unto all men, that we are under the
Government of Jesus, that we might be manifest to God's Witness in every man's
Bosom: and in these things the Lord Blessed us.

Again, How Careful were we, that we might not lose one tittle of our
Testimony, by the keeping to the plain Language, that we migkt not lift up the
Proud spirit in any, by mincing in that particular.

And also, How did our Moderation appear unto all men in our Meats, and Drinks,
and Apparel, etc?

And, How Inwardly Retired did we Walk, fearing to draw out the Minds of any
into Unprofitable Discourses; having a principal regard unto the Inward
Exercise of our minds, lest we should lose our own Conditions; which made us
prize Retired Meetings, in which we were sensible of the Teachings of the True
Prophet from the False, in our selves, and others? Then we were sensible of the
Living Word to take deep root downward, that from thence we might bring forth
Fruit upward, to the Praise of God: Desiring ye may walk in these steps.

Time would fail to tell of the Poverty of Spirit, Humility of Heart, Lowliness
of Mind, Brokenness of Soul, Contempt of the World, not only of its Glory and
Riches, but of all its Wisdom and Knowledge, counting it Dross and Dung in
comparison of the Excellent Knowledge now manifested in us through the
Revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ.

We cannot pass by that Godly Fear, which at that day was in our Hearts, lest
by Discoursing or Reading many Books, we should awaken again the Old Wisdom and
Understanding, and again get the Notion of things in the Carnal Comprehension,
and thereby lose our Experimental Knowledge of the Inward Work of God in our
own particulars: From which Experience we are careful to speak about the things
of God; finding it our Safety and Preservation, to keep to our own Measures;
and not to deck our selves with the words only, or other men's Gifts, nor yet to
pride our selves with our former Experiences and Knowledge, though God's
Jewels, according to the Prophets words.

These things being witnessed in the Beginning, we desire, exhort and advise
all, especially those that are Young in the Truth, and newly convinced of the
Everlasting Way, and make profession of the same, that they be careful to avoid
all those things which the Godly Fear caused us to avoid at the Beginning; and
so much the more, because our Enemies and Opposers are waiting for all
Occasions to asperse the Holy Truth, and the true Professors of it: In which
practice they follow the steps of the Enemies of God in former times, who not
only watched for Mischief, to make Offenders for a word, but were ready to fall
upon the Hindermost and Weakest amongst them, and that when they were but newly
Circumcised or Convinced of the Truth, even while they were yet sore, or in the
deep Exercise of their Minds.

Then if they could draw them out to dispute of any thing beyond their own
Measure, they will Boast of that, and charge any Advantage (that they have
gotten from the Weak, or Newly Convinced) upon the whole Body; and put us,
either to deny the unlearned words that were spoken, or them that spoke them
(though their Intention were right) these men being willingly ignorant of, as
well as envious against the Truth, and them that walk therein.

Therefore cast not your Pearls before Swine, lest they turn again, and rent
you: So out of our Love to, and Care for the Truth, we desire all such Friends,
and Convinced People, To keep to their own Measures, trusting more in and unto
the Simplicity of Christ manifest in themselves, then to any Wisdom, Parts, or
Arguments of their own, in the Earthly or Natural Comprehension.

For we have found by many years Experience, That the true Simplicity, and
inward Poverty of Spirit, God has always had regard unto, beyond all
flourishing Expressions and gilded Speeches, that may charm, and take the
outward Ear, but never deliver the Prisoner out of the Pit.

Neither has the Work of God thus far prosper'd by such Weapons of War, or
words of Man's Wisdom; but by a secret Virtue, that always attended the truly
Poor in Spirit, that did appear what they were only by Grace, and its Edge upon
the Conscience; and to this day do all the true Laborers work with the same
Tool or Instrument.

And if you that are Newly Convinced would be kept lively in your Conditions to
Godward, your growth must be only, in walking in the Light, and keeping in the
Grace of God; and then for words, and knowledge they will come fast enough upon
you, as God has Service for you: and then, by so doing, you will both save
your selves, and them that hear you; and also, frustrate them that wait for
Evil.

From which Grace of God these things are written, and in the same commended to
your Consciences; desiring heartily, that in your own Measures of the same you
may be preserved amongst the Faithful Witnesses of Jesus, till your Days
determined come to be accomplished, and you finish your Course with Joy.

This from us (who Labor and Travel in the Work of the Gospel, for the
Advancing of the Name of the Lord) your Friends in God's Truth, John Crook.
Thomas Green.

London, the 15th of the 11th Month, 1672.
THE END.

