Truth brought to Light: OR, THE Corrupt Practices OF SOME PERSONS at COURT
Laid Open. Whereby Their MAJESTY'S, and the Kingdom, have been prejudiced near
One hundred and fifty Thousand Pounds this Year; besides other Evils that have
and do attend it.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXCIV.

TO THE Right Honorable THE LORDS Spiritual and Temporal, AND COMMONS In
Parliament Assembled.
THE Happiness and Well-being of Man does no ways consist in being possessed of
much Wealth, but in a Mediocrity; and in the Enjoyment of the Purity of the
Gospel, and of good and wholesome Laws: And of all Governments now extant in
the World, the English Monarchy is the Noblest, and comes nearest to that
Native Liberty which Man first enjoyed; and God and Nature have laid an
indispensable Duty upon every Man to endeavor the Preservation of the
Municipal Laws of his Country. But notwithstanding, Humane Frailty is such,
that we have many Instances of Persons (otherways prudent and wise) either
through Pride, Ambition, or Covetousness, that have had almost overthrown this
Noble Fabric: but it was never in such eminent Peril as before the late
Revolution; when our Religion, Laws and Liberty, were near being swallowed up;
and then God was pleased to make his Majesty the happy Instrument of our
Deliverance. But notwithstanding, the Danger's not over-past; for we have ever
since been engaged in a great and dangerous War, upon the Success whereof
(under God) depends our future Happiness: therefore Men would think that all
Persons in Public Trust, should with great Zeal and Affection pursue such Ways
and Methods as tend to the putting a Period to the same, and no ways obstruct
their Majesty's and the Public Interest; but scorn and slight all those little
mean Thoughts of enriching themselves, at a time the Safety and Honor of their
Native Country lies at stake. But through Covetousness the Understandings of
Men are darkened, and so see not the Evils they draw upon themselves and others:
And those who are in the highest Orb, many times discern not (having sublimer
Thoughts) those things others do, who act in a lower Sphere. And as all
Governments are incident and liable to Corruptions, so it cannot seem strange
if they have crept in among us: But ours will be found to be (like some
Distempers) hard to be removed; for there are so many linked together by
Interest, that they will not fail to support each other, and crush (if not
ruin) him that opposes them. So it is not for any single Person whatever, to
engage with them; and therefore for that Reason, I have here collected such of
them as have come to my Knowledge: Which, with all Humility, I lay before this
most August Assembly; whose peculiar Care has always been to root out
Corruptions, when they have appeared formidable and inconsistent with the
Safety of the Government: and that not the Greatness or Power of any that have
abused their Prince's Favor, have been able to protect them from the just
Resentments of the Nation. And it is that which has continued this Government
so long upon its Basis.

There has been a Notion industriously spread abroad by some through the
Kingdom, (and which the Nation has too long imbibed) which is, That to make
Attempts upon the Maritime Coast of France were altogether impracticable: Which
seems strange, it being directly contrary to the received Opinion of the rest
of Mankind, and the Practice of all Ages; for the Romans, Carthaginians, and
many other Nations, that have been strong at Sea, and even the Venetians at
this day, have shipped potent Armies both Horse and Foot, and made Descents upon
their Enemies; which have been attended with good Success. And although the
Circumstance of Affairs may alter and change, yet the Nature of things never
will: But if Men shall land in the midst of Smoke and Fire, and where their
Enemies lie entrenched, it is no Wonder if they are beaten off; even at that
rate may the best-laid Designs be frustrated.

And France has so strong a Barrier on every Side, that notwithstanding the
utmost Endeavors of the Allies for several Years past, yet we see they have
not been able to break into it; and therefore with all due Submission, I humbly
conceive (Humanely speaking) it is impossible of making any Impression on the
Enemy, otherways than by making a Descent upon their Maritime Coast with a
Royal Army. Certainly there is nothing can embarrass them like it: the Vicinity
of their Country makes it so much the more practicable; and England has been
the Balance of Europe, and may yet, if not wanting to it self. My Design is
not to embroil, but further their Majesty's Affairs, and that all things may
work together for the Public Good; which has been the only Scope and End of
this my Undertaking. So doubt not but I shall meet with a favorable
Construction: and if a Public and National Interest be preferable before all
others, then I cannot be much out in what I have done; only must acknowledge to
have handled the Matter but weakly: Yet the Sincerity of my Intentions will
plead for me, and excuse the many Defects therein; and so hope I shall not only
find Protection, but a Reward of my Labors, and Danger I undergo, for the
Honor and Safety of my Country.

I am, My Lords and Gentlemen, Your Honors most humble, faithful, and obedient
Servant, ROBERT CROSFEILD.

Truth brought to Light, etc.
It Is recorded in Holy Writ, that the Children of Israel served the Lord all
the Days of Joshua, and of those Elders that survived him, having a thankful
Remembrance of his Mercy and Goodness, in giving them Victory, and delivering
them from the Hands of their Enemies. And we the People of this Kingdom have
received as eminent and great Mercies from the Hand of God as ever did the
Jews, and such as are hardly to be paralleled in any Age; for we were brought
to the very brink of Ruin, and even ready to be devoured by our Enemies, and
had no Prospect or Hope of Deliverance. Then did God raise up a Prince
(unthought or unforeseen by us) to rescue and deliver us; and gave our Enemies
a Spirit of Fear and Trembling, and they fled when no Man pursued. These things
have we seen with our Eyes, and to the Astonishment of the World, were
delivered without Bloodshed. But we are an unthankful Nation and People, and
so it is no wonder that the Hand of God has lain heavy upon us, in afflicting
us with a long and tedious War: Therefore let us repent then, and not till then
may we expect a Blessing and a perfect Deliverance; for whatever some Persons
may think, there yet hangs a dark Cloud over our Heads: Do we not see plotting
against the Government, (and that by no mean Persons)? and how far that
Poison's spread, we know not, being backed by a Potent and Great Monarch: And
not only so, but it will appear that some of our Brethren, who probably in some
Cases may have been serviceable to their Majesty's, do (making the most modest
Construction of their Actions) sacrifice the Public Interest to their own
Private Lucre. This, by the Blessing of God, I doubt not but evidently to make
appear: And I am no ways unsensible of the Danger I undergo by this my
Undertaking; and that I run a greater Hazard than he that engages in Battle:
but I know not why I should be afraid, having Truth and Justice on my Side: And
in former Ages (however this may be degenerated) it was ever accounted an
Honor for a Man to venture his Life for the Public Good.

At the first opening of the last Session of Parliament, I published a Book
entitled, England's Glory Revived; which I dedicated to their Majesty's, and
both Houses of Parliament; but it was never presented to the Parliament,
occasioned (I being ill) by the Timorousness of the Bookseller, who was obliged
so to have done. There are several things therein proposed, which are now put
in practice, as shall be made appear in the ensuing Discourse: And that the not
rewarding Persons that do things which contribute to the Public Service, is a
real Injury to the Kingdom; but at present I shall wave that, and fall upon
other Matters.

I had observed, that the Collecting the Land Taxes, was a great Charge to the
Crown; the greatest part of which I conceived might be saved, and the
Receiver-Generals wholly laid aside; so all that Poundage they were allowed,
might accrue to the Government. Upon which having made a Proposal, presented it
to the Right Honorable the Lords of the Treasury, in the Month of December
last: And at the same time I delivered it, did acquaint their Lordships by
Letter, that I did then wait their Commands, and desired to be heard: But they
took no notice thereof, which I attributed to their multiplicity of Business;
so conceived my self obliged to give farther Attendance, which I did, and
humbly desired I might be heard upon those Proposals: This I did for many Days,
and pressed (as much as in Modesty was fit to do) that I might be heard, but all
to no purpose; for I found it was not grateful to them, and that they were no
ways inclined to hear me: Then conceived I had no other way, but to petition
his Majesty in Council; which I accordingly did, and delivered it to Mr.
Bridgman in Secretary Trenchard's Office, (with the Proposal annexed) that so
my Proposal might be read, and referred to the Lords of the Treasury, which was
the Prayer of my Petition: and when Council-Day came, I was with him again, and
he told me it was transferred to the Council-Office, where I found it; and the
Gentleman to whom I applied my self, promised me it should be carried to the
Council Chamger. And when the Council was actually sitting, I went to him; and
he informed me, my Petition and Proposal were before the Council. And being
afterward to examine, whether I had a Reference granted, found my Petition had
not been read: Upon which I asked the foresaid Person, what was the meaning
that a Matter of so great Moment to the King, should be so little taken notice
of? His Answer was, he knew not, and said, he had faithfully carried it to the
Council, (it being all was required of him) and that he should not fail to do
the same next Council-Day. After this manner was I served several Council-Days,
and never could obtain my Petition to be read, and found all I did was but
Labor in vain; and conceived I had just reason to believe, that some Persons
endeavored to stifle it. Upon which I addressed my self to the Earl of --,a
Privy-Counsellor, to whom I presented a Copy of my Proposal, and sometime after
was to wait on him; and his Lordship's Answer was, The thing he liked well,
there could nothing be objected against it, but said, he durst not meddle in
it, it would create him so many Enemies: But notwithstanding all this, I was
resolved further to prosecute the Matter; and being acquainted with the Duke of
-- his Chaplain, by his means presented his Grace with a Copy of it: Whose
Answer to it was, that were he a Privy-Counsellor, he would prosecute the
Matter, but as he was not, he durst not meddle with it, it would create him so
many Enemies.

From all which I may conclude and say, it is too evident, that there is a
Corrupt Party at Court (which yet shall be more fully made out) that carry on a
separate Interest from that of their Majesty's and the Public; and are grown
to that height, that Persons of great Honor, and known Loyalty, dare not
encounter, as knowing they will not leave them till they have thrown them out
of all Employments, and so for the future incapacitate them to serve their
Majesty's. And however I may be censured by some for what I do, yet I have the
Satisfaction in my own Breast, that I have done nothing but what my Duty
obliges me to; and doubt not but I shall have the Concurrence of all true
Englishmen. The Proposal is as follows.

A Proposal humbly offered for laying aside all the Receiver-Generals.
It Is undeniably their Majesty's and the Kingdom's Interest (which are
inseparable) that what Money is given for Public Uses, should be applied to
that End; and to have all unnecessary Officers laid aside; and none are so
useless as the Receiver-Generals, there being no manner of occasion for them:
for the Collector of the Excise in each County is every way capable of acting
the same thing, and with greater Ease to the County; and more Satisfaction it
would be to the Subject to see the Money employed to Public Uses, to which it
was primarily intended: And I shall be as brief in the Matter as possibly I
can, and so shall bring but one Instance, which I humbly conceive will fully
demonstrate what I assert; Viz.

The Receiver-General for the County of Hertford goes to four Places (as
Hertford, etc.) and no more; and by his Circular-Letters to the High-Constables
of the several Hundreds, the Collectors of the Tax meet him at the Day
prefixed, and pay in the Money: which creates much Trouble to some of them, who
bring it a great Way (although it be a small County) which they need not
undergo; which I shall evidently make appear: for the Collector of the Excise
for the said County is obliged to go to all Market Towns through the whole
Shire, and there are eighteen in the County: and it may with much Facility and
Ease be so ordered, that at the same time he may receive the Quarterly-payment
for the Land Tax, according to the Districts of the said Towns, as they are now
settled in the Excise: But if it be found that Method will not do, they can
then but take the same Measures the Receiver-Generals now do, which they will
be both willing and able to perform. There can no Objection be made against
this being put into practice, other than that it is a great Trust; and the
Collectors have not given sufficient Security for the same: but it is probable
they are capable of so doing; if not, there is never a Receiver-General but what
will willingly embrace the Opportunity of having the Employ, and give good
Security, if his Majesty shall be pleased to augment the Salary fifty Pounds a
Year during the War; and when all is done, it will be found his Majesty will be
a Saver above Forty thousand Pounds per Annum. The Receiver-General for the
County of Hertford received in the Year 1692, Sixty odd Pounds for Traveling,
and other contingent Charges: which Money I humbly conceive would fully satisfy
the Collector of the Excise, were it given him, over and above the traveling
Charge he is usually allowed.

I have calculated what the Poundage does amount to that the Receiver-Generals
are allowed; (which any Man may easily do, supposing the Land Tax and Poll-bill
to be Three Millions of Money, as I cannot conjecture it to be less) and it
will be found to be Thirty seven thousand five hundred Pounds. And I did design
to have offered some thing more, which was this: It has always been the Custom
to allow the Collectors of the Tax three Pence in the Pound for Collecting; and
with Submission, I conceive if they were allowed but two Pence in the Pound, it
would be a full Compensation for the Trouble they undergo. It Is no Argument to
say, three Pence has always been allowed: the Kingdom's in danger; and the
Money was given to public Uses; and as they receive no Detriment by what they
do, it is but reasonable they should put forth their Helping-hand, and I think
no good Englishman would grumble at it. And by the same Rule, this Penny a
Pound will be found to amount to Twelve thousand five hundred Pounds. So that
if the Lords of the Treasury had been pleased to have given me a Hearing, their
Majesty's had saved Fifty thousand Pounds this Year.

For the Money that the Receiver-Generals are allowed for Traveling and other
contingent Charges, would fully satisfy the Collectors of the Excise, as may be
seen by the Accounts in the Exchequer. But supposing it had not been in their
Lordships Power to have made the Collectors of the Excise Receiver-Generals;
yet with Submission, it was their Duty to have proposed it to the Parliament,
(who would readily have received it) that an Act might have past.

And one thing I observe to be of most dangerous Consequence to the Government,
(considering the Nature of the Quarrel we are engaged in); that is, the Selling
of Employments. It Is too well known it has always been practiced; so it can be
no Scandal to relate it: but there are many Evils attend it; we have no
Shibboleth whereby to distinguish Men, whether Friends or Foes: and there being
now a Competitor for the Crown, and a dangerous Faction among us, no question
but it is an Inlet to our Adversaries to all sorts of Employments; and by this
Means I conceive it may not be difficult for them to get into the Admiralty, or
Navy-Office, Custom-House, etc. and so may be capable of doing much Mischief,
as thus: Suppose we look back to the Time the Turky-Fleet went out, when we
received that Loss by the French in the Straits: and when the Lords of the
Admiralty issue out Orders for the Fleet to sail such a time, it is not
difficult for any corrupt Person planted in that Office, to get a Sight of it,
(or it is not improbable but it may pass through his Hands): upon which he gives
his Correspondents at Plymouth, Falmouth, etc. notice of it; and any of them
may easily corrupt a poor Fisherman, who sails any where without suspicion: So
our Enemies from time to time soon have Intelligence of all our Proceedings;
and no doubt we owe our Losses at that time to such like Practices as these.
And therefore with Submission, I conceive there ought to be great Inspection
made into all that are in Public Imploys, and to throw out such as are found
to be disaffected: but then they ought to be Persons of great Integrity that
are entrusted in such an Affair, otherwise it may be made use of only as an
Artifice to get Money; and many an honest Man turned out that has it not, or
is not willing to part with it.

I shall now proceed to give some Relation of a Matter which has been offered
to the Government by one Mr. George Everett, (which he published the last
Session of Parliament); wherein he proposes to save their Majesty's an Hundred
thousand Pounds a Year, in the Building and Repairing the Royal-Navy: and it
has been before the Right Honorable the Lords of the Admiralty (who are the
proper Judges of it) a Year and a half; yet all this while they cannot (or will
not) apprehend it, there being nothing effectually done in it; nay, the Author
has been brow-beaten by those whose Duty it was to have encouraged him. It Is
certainly a most ingenuous Thing, and not to be confuted; and were it put in
practice, would fully answer what he has proposed. What is writ, is not to
cast Aspersions on the Lords of the Admiralty, but that the Nation may have
Justice done: For there is no Man that reads that Book, (unless biased by
Prejudice or Interest) but what will be of the Opinion, that the Obstruction of
that Matter has been greatly to the Detriment of their Majesty's and the
Kingdom. It has been long since highly approved on by many Persons of Honor
and Quality: the Names of some of which take as follows;

His Grace the Duke of Leeds Lord President, Admiral Russel, Lord Lucas, Lord
Cornwallis, Sir John Lowther of Lowther, Sir Cloudsly Shovel, Sir Henry
Goodrick, Sir Richard Onsloe, Sir Samuel Dashwood, Sir James Houblon, etc.

But this is not all, for there are several other Honorable and Eminent
Persons (that they might further so good a Work) have been pleased to subscribe
their Names to several Certificates; and which are as follows:

We the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, whose Names are
here-under subscribed, do approve, and conceive that the Methods in this Book
for the more speedy and effectual Building and Repairing their Majesty's Royal
Navy, will be very advantageous to their Majesty's and the Government, (if the
same be put in practice): And we do recommend Mr. George Everett (the Proposer
hereof) as a fit Person to be aiding and assisting in the same.

William Ashhurst Mayor, John Moor, Robert Jefferies, Thomas Lane, Edward
Clark, Humphrey Edwin, Richard Levet, Thomas Abney, William Hedges, William
Pritchard.

We whose Names are here-under subscribed, do approve and conceive the Methods
in this Book, etc.

R. Delaval, Berkley, Danby, Thomas Vernon, William Williams, William Warren,
William Sconing, Robert Davis, Joseph Ashton.

We the Master and Assistants of the Company of Free Shipwrights, whose Names
are here-under subscribed, do approve and conceive the Methods in this Book,
etc.

Robert Parsons, Charles Pain, James Cutler, Richard Lucas, Jacob Crispin,
Richard Wooden, John Plummer, Richard Russel, Robert Barnwell, James Haydon,
Henry Farrant, John Finch, John Crow, Francis Preston.

Now all these things being summed up, which I have here related, there is no
considerate Man can blame me, if I appear in some Heat: Has not the Kingdom
stood up and vindicated it self; and by God's Blessing preserved its Religion
and Property? And are they now less valuable than they were six Years ago? No
sure, they are as much to be prized as ever: But Men are too apt to prefer
their own Interest before the Public; and Corruptions naturally grow, and no
Place is so liable as the Courts of Princes, or of so dangerous consequence.
And as it is our Case at this day; yet it can be no Reflection on his Majesty's
Prudence, (who has sufficiently manifested to the World the great Care he has
of our Welfare, by the many Dangers he has undergone for our Sakes;) for all
he can do is but to make choice of such Persons as are well qualified for
Business: And if they shall afterward (forgetting their Duty and Obligations
they lie under) prefer their own Interest before the Public Good, it is not in
his Majesty's Power to discover it.

O the Mischief and Evils that attend Covetousness! By it many Families, nay
Kingdoms, have been ruined; and therefore well might St. Paul call it the Root
of all Evil: And David renders such Persons no better than Cannibals; They eat
up my People as they eat Bread. And he that is not wilfully blind, may see the
Kingdom (and indeed almost all Europe) in a Languishing Condition: and have Men
no bowels of Compassion or Regard to the Honor and Safety of their Country?
Certainly a covetous Person (whom God abhors) can be a Friend to none: for he
will sacrifice all to his own Lust; and you may as well think to wash a
Blackamore white, as ever to reclaim such Men; for they are as insatiable as
Death or the Grave.

And I conceive no Man will so much as doubt, but that those very Persons that
have thus obstructed their Majesty's and the Public Interest, have not been
(nor never will be) wanting to use all Artifices whereby to prolong the War
(Salamander like), that they may make a plentiful Harvest, while the Nation is
spending its Blood and Treasure. This can be no unjust Censure, but an
Inference naturally following such Actions. And without all question, such Men
are much more dangerous than an open Foe: and if the War continue, and these
things are not inspected into and redressed, we are like to be an unhappy
People. Queen Elizabeth was happy, being all her Time served with much
Faithfulness; and carried on great Wars, and was generally successful in her
Undertakings: And Secretary Walsingham has left such an Example behind him,
which I judge there is few will take as a Precedent for them to walk by. However,
this Nation is not so far corrupted and degenerated, but that there may be
found Persons of Honor and Worth capable of serving their Majesty's in the
highest Station, and who will discharge their Duty with Faithfulness and
Loyalty.

I shall now proceed to give some account of those things I proposed in the
Book I published the last Session of Parliament; but shall only refer to such
of them as are now put in practice: I had observed what little use we had made
of our Shipping, tho being so much superior to the Enemy in our Strength at
Sea, especially the two preceding Years; one of which we could not find them
out, the other they had gotten up into the Straits, when and where they
destroyed so much of our Shipping: and yet both we lay idle (as I may say) upon
the Coast, and made no Attempt upon their Maritime Towns; but suffered them to
draw their whole Strength into Flanders, to the great Dishonor of the Nation:
Which I conceived to be no ways parallel to the Actions of our Forefathers;
the Apprehension of which, made me presume to write that bold Dedication I did
to the Parliament; where you may see these following Words:

It astonishes me, when I consider that two Nations, who are so potent at Sea
as We and the Dutch are, should not make a more advantageous use of that
Strength which God has given us: The being strongest at Sea, was ever an
unspeakable Advantage; which is apparent to the whole World that we are,
notwithstanding those Losses we have had.

And we may plainly see that the Providence of God generally works and brings
Things to pass by Natural Causes and Effects, as may evidently be seen by the
late Revolution in this Kingdom: for it was by the Evil Administration of
Government, under various Circumstances of Affairs, that contributed to it, and
which gave just Ground and Occasion for it; and was that which turned the
Hearts of the People, and thereby begat a Union of Parties, and was the great
outward Cause of our present Settlement.

Therefore in vain will it be for us to cry unto God for Help, and to give a
Blessing to our Endeavors, when we take not apt and proper Measures.

And this Year we have seen quite different Measures taken, from what has been
the whole Course of this War, greatly to the Honor and Interest of the
Kingdom: And the going of Admiral Russel into the Straits, is certainly much to
the Glory of this Nation, and echoes into all Parts of the World; and has not
only saved an Ally from Ruin, but has, as it were, clapped a Hook in the Nose
of our great Adversary, which makes him plunge like the Great Leviathan; and if
the Blow be followed, it will humble him, and make him know he is but Man, and
that all his Flatterers are but so many false Prophets. And whoever will but
consider the strange Alteration there has been in the Public Affairs, in
reference to the Prosecution of the War against France, and read but the last
recited Dedication, will be apt to conclude, I was instrumental in it; not that
I am so vain as to think, it has been done upon the Account of my writing, but
am of the Opinion, that there are many worthy Ministers of State, who had long
endeavored to have had such Measures taken, but were not able to prevail. But
Matters being laid open to the view of the World, it may no doubt, in some
degree, have furthered their good Intentions.

I presented to the Right Honorable the Lords of the Admiralty, Proposals for
laying aside the Press-Ketches, and for taking up the Sailers (in the several
Ports) by the Custom-house Officers, it being seen by Experience, that they
generally fly up into the Country, or otherway abscond, so soon as the
Press-Ketches arrive in Port; which puts their Majesty's to a great and
unnecessary Charge: And there are many judicious Persons (who well understand
these Affairs) have thought this might be put in practice in most of the
out-Ports of the Kingdom, and thereby prevent that great Obstruction to Trade,
which is occasioned by a continual Press. And upon the Result of the Matter,
their Lordships Answer to me was, That the Fleet was out, and they could not
then put my Proposition in execution; so I took it for granted, they did
approve of what I had done, (having answered all Objections); but their
Lordships have not since thought fit to put it in practice: Therefore I could
heartily wish the Matter were inspected into as to the Validity of it, by those
who have a Power so to do. My Zeal for the Public, has made me transgress and
break Promise, in giving a Relation of this Matter that is not put in practice;
but the Importance of it being considered, I conceive I cannot be blamed for so
doing. And observing what an Injury the Nation received from the great
Imbargoes that were every Year laid upon Shipping, I did (at the same time I
made the Proposals) what in me lay to remove so great an Evil, and therein
proved to be successful; and so shall give some Account of the Matter, as it
was offered to their Lordships, in a Copy of a Letter to the Lords of the
Admiralty, which you may see just after the Preface to the Reader.

Upon the delivery of this Letter, I was called in before their Lordships:
where it was read; and they told me it was an easy matter to say a Thing, and
asked me if I could give Reasons to prove what I did assert? So they put me
upon answering this, If any Hardship must lie upon Shipping, it should rather
be thrown upon the Coasting Trade. Which I did deliver, and endeavored to
prove by another Letter to the Lords of the Admiralty, immediately following
the foregoing Letter.

And besides these Letters, I further fully demonstrated, (as appears in the
Book I published, to which I refer the Reader) that there was no manner of
Occasion for laying any Imbargo, there being a sufficient Body of Sailers, to
answer the End of Government, and the Necessities of Trade: And this Year we
see there has been none laid, notwithstanding the King has taken several
Thousands of Sailers more into his Service, than at any time during this War.
And their Lordships are now so far from laying an Imbargo, that they have put
forth strict Orders, that no Press-Masters presume to meddle with any Sailers
on board Outward-bound Shipping.

By all which I have here related, I doubt not but it appears to any impartial
Man, that the Arguments I used was the Cause of laying aside the Imbargo; if
not, why was it not done before, when there was less occasion for an Imbargo
than there is now? But Solomon tells us, A poor Man saved a City, and no body
remembered that poor Man: So it is no wonder at all that I go unrewarded, in an
Age and Nation where Corruption so much abounds.

I likewise humbly proposed an Act of Tunnage, for laying six Pence per Tun
upon all Coasters, etc. which may be seen p. 21, etc. of my printed Book: And
seeing the Act now in force extends not to Barges, etc. I think it not amiss to
repeat what I then proposed.

PROPOSALS FOR AN Act of Tunnage.
WHEN the Kingdom is engaged in War, it is not only requisite, but equitable,
that all Persons, according to their several Degrees and Qualities, should
contribute to the Emergencies of the State; all due Regard being first had to
Husbandry and Trade: and wherein things do not obstruct or impede either, it is
but reasonable.

And indeed there are many whose Estates and Effects lie in Shipping, who have
no ways yet contributed any thing to the Public, during the whole Course of
this War; and who are under good Circumstances, and capable of paying Taxes
proportionable to the rest of the King's Subjects, and no Injury thereby done
to Trade.

They may, it is true, plead they are at great Charge to the Light-houses, and
by Convoy-Money; which is no Hardship upon them, it being brought in upon the
Merchants as Average.

Unless it fall upon Colliers; and it is well known they get a great deal of
Money, notwithstanding all the Charge they are at, and the great Wages they
give.

And it may further be objected by them, That they are liable to great Dangers,
and many of them taken by the Enemy.

All which is no more than what the Merchants are exposed to; whose Effects are
generally of much greater Consequence than their Shipping, yet are no ways
exempted from paying greater Duties, both Inward and Outward; notwithstanding
any great Losses they have had, or may hereafter meet withal.

Therefore, it seems altogether unreasonable, that these Persons should be
exempted from being Taxed, when there may thereby be so much Money raised, as
will be of great Importance to the Government.

But that things may be done in all due Moderation, that no good Subject shall
have any just Cause of Complaint, and not one Taxed more than another; it would
be requisite, I humbly conceive, to have an Act of Parliament made to lay it as
a Tunnage, with due r^gard being had to the Burden and Voyage of each Ship, and
to make a Distinction between Coasters and Vessels outward bound, according to
these ensuing Propositions.

Proposition I.
That all Coasters whatever, (except Colliers) pay six Pence per Tun to the
Collector of each Port where he takes his Lading, according as the Ship shall
measure: but if he shall not have his full Lading, then a Deduction to be made
according to what he wants; or if he shall afterward have the Misfortune to
fall into the Hands of the Enemies, then he shall have the liberty to draw back
what Tunnage he paid that Voyage, and be paid upon demand, or be allowed it by
Debenter, and have twelve Months time so to do, after the loss of the said
Ship: But all Colliers shall pay their Tunnage in that Port they break Bulk and
Unload; unless it be such of them as are outward bound. As to Holland, Ireland,
etc. they shall pay it as the Coasters do, in that Port in which they take
their Lading; but be liable to pay no greater Tunnage than they do.

Proposition II.
That all outward-bound Ships, except Colliers, bound either for Holland,
Flanders, Portugal, Denmark, Ireland, etc. pay twelve Pence per Tun, according
as each Ship shall measure; and in case any of them shall happen to be taken by
the Enemy, before they have performed their intended Voyage, then they shall
draw back this Tunnage, and be paid by the Collector upon demand, or be allowed
it by Debenter.

And all inward-bound Ships, from the abovesaid Countries, either English or
Foreign, shall pay two Shillings per Tun; and in case they shall not have their
full L^ding, Deduction shall be made for the same.

Proposition III.
That all outward-bound Ships that shall be bound either to the East or
West Indies, Straits, East-Country, Coast of Africa, etc. shall pay two
Shillings per Tun; but in case they shall fall into the Enemies Hands, and not
perform their Voyage, then they shall draw back the said Tunnage, and be paid
upon demand, or by Debenter.

And all inward-bound Ships, from the foresaid Countries, shall pay four
Shillings per Tun, and not be cleared till the said Moneys paid.

Proposition IV.
That all Western Barges, and all other Barges whatever; all Fish-Smacks, Hoys,
Lighters, (except such who constantly carry Dung or Soil) shall pay twenty
Shillings per Quarter, and pay the Money every Quarter to the Collector of each
respective Port, within six Weeks after it becomes due; and upon default
thereof, to pay double: And that they come and make Entry of them, with the
Names of the Owners, at the Custom-House of that Port or Harbor they use, (but
this shall be done without Fee) within six Weeks after the Act takes place.

This foregoing Matter I did present to several Ministers of State, a Month
before it was published; and they were pleased to acknowledge it the first of
that Nature that had been offered to the Government. And Shipping before was
ever looked upon to be as Sacred as Church Lands. It Is not to be denied, but
that it is greatly improved, beyond what I proposed; I always thought it might
be so, and am very glad to see it brought to that Perfection it is. There is a
worthy Gentleman, who upon the Exchange was pleased to say, he was the first
Man that proposed the Tunnage Act to the King. And not unlike, (but he cannot
forget that I presented him with a Book, wherein it was proposed four Months
before ever it was moved); and his Majesty has no ways been wanting to him, but
has put him into an Honorable Station. And indeed his Goodness is such, that
he never fails to recompense those that do him Service, if the Matter comes to
his Knowledge: And if others would but imitate his Virtue, and follow his
Example, his Majesty would be better served. And whoever those Worthy Gentlemen
are, that first moved and occasioned the Royal Bank, ought to have their
Statues set in Brass, to perpetuate their Memory to future Ages: for it will
appear every Day more and more, to be of great Importance to the Kingdom,
(besides the Advantage that accrues to them who are concerned in it) it being
that which this Nation has long wanted; and no Foreign Bank whatever can
compare with it, or appear to be built upon so solid a Foundation. And the
Tunnage is the most insensibly felt of any Tax that has yet been levied; for
although the Merchants and Owners of Shipping disburse the Money, yet it cannot be
said to be any thing out of their Pockets; for it does consequently advance the
Goods, proportionable to what is paid, it being general; so it does, as it were,
diffuse it self into all parts of the Kingdom: And by what has been before
related, certainly there is no Man but will grant that I laid the first
Foundation of the Tunnage Act, (or that I had the Gift of Prophecy, having
proposed it six Months before it was past into an Act); but the Matter's too
plain to be questioned, and there are some Persons at Court (by the Station
they are in) who are obliged in Honor and Justice to give Encouragement to Men
that do any thing that contributes to the Public Service; who notwithstanding,
make but Tools of them, to the Prejudice of their Majesty's and the Kingdom,
and Dishonor of the Nation.

For Rewards and Punishment are the Support and Axis upon which all Governments
move.

Therefore these things are not writ (as St. Paul says in another Case) for his
sake that did the Wrong, or his that received the Wrong; but that the Nation
may see. --

What is it the French King at this day owes all his vast Improvements by Sea,
and Conquest by Land too, but the Faithfulness of his Ministers, and the great
Rewards he never fails to give them that do him Service? (Honos alit Arts.)
It Is that which makes Men bold and daring, and even out-brave Death it self,
and knits the Minds of Men fast to a Prince. For all Men naturally are well
pleased to see Persons rewarded for Service done: it is that which begets a
steady Loyalty, and puts Hope in every Man; and it is no other than what has
ever been the Practice of all the civilized Nations and Ages in the World.

And our Forefathers were always careful to see it executed: and it is the
Method that even God himself takes with sinful Man, that so he may wean his
Affections from these transient Things below, and have an Eye unto the
Recompense of Reward.

And so thus while we neglect our Duty, we tempt Providence.

Therefore until better Measures are taken, I cannot see with what Confidence
we can think to prosper: for Miracles are ceased, and God expects we use such
Methods as conduce and have a Tendency to Peace and Happiness; otherwise, if we
miscarry, it may truly be said, we have been the Authors of our own Ruin. But
it is the Parliament, and only they, that are able to cope with, and engage this
Hydra (this many-headed Monster); for they are the great Council and Physicians
of the Nation, and have never been wanting to redress National Grievances. I
shall conclude with that excellent Form of Prayer, composed by our Church:

Most gracious God, We humbly beseech thee, as for this Kingdom in general; so
especially for the High Court of Parliament under our most religious and
gracious King and Queen at this time assembled: That thou would be pleased
to direct and prosper all their Consultations to the advancement of thy Glory,
the good of thy Church, the safety, honor, and welfare of their Majesty's and
their Kingdoms; that all things may be so ordered and settled by their
Endeavors upon the best and surest Foundations, that Peace and Happiness,
Truth and Justice, Religion and Piety, may be established among us for all
Generations. These and all other Necessaries for them, for us and thy whole
Church, we humbly beg in the Name and Mediation of Jesus Christ our most
blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

FINIS.

