JUSTICE THE Best Support TO GOVERNMENT: OR, A brief Account of some Public
Transactions During the Late WAR.

LONDON: Printed for, and sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster,
and at the Cock-Pit-house in Clerkenwell-Close. 1697.

TO THE Lords Spiritual and Temporal AND Commons in Parliament Assembled.
THat we have been harras'd and almost beggered by a tedious and Expensive War,
needs no Proof; but how this War came to be drawn out to this Length, and to
drein the inexhaustible Well dry (as the Popes use to style this Island) is not
possible for me to discover. However I have here laid down some Remarkable
Instances how Evil minded Men have Clandestinely Crept into Places of the
greatest Trust; whether merely to enrich themselves, or more barbarously only
to wreck their Causeless Malice upon their Native Country; have extremely
contributed to the Discouraging, enslaving and even totally ruining her. It
has been no small or useless stratagem in this Age, to discountenance all
manner of Information, and that all sorts of Villainy might Reign Rampant, the
Name of an informer has been reputed Monstrous. By which means some Honest
Persons, who have by accident come to the Knowledge of Transactions, both
unwarrantable and of dangerous Consequence to the Nation, have connived at all,
and stifled that affection they had, and so fair an opportunity to demonstrate
to their Country, upon the Fear and Terror of being reputed Madmen or
Informers, and whereas some have broke this Bar, and have discharged their
Consciences, yet the little good they thereby did, or therefore received, has
been a great Discouragement; Yet notwithstanding the Author of these following
sheets, knowing how much his King and Country have suffered, by such Base and
Treacherous Practices as are here Recited; Values not what some may censure, so
that he may acquaint those who have Power to inspect and reward according to
what has been done.

To give your Honors no farther trouble, tho the wicked Practices of Men have
furnished me with plenty of matter; I shall only add that Articles setting
forth these matters, have been by me preferred against the Lords of the
Admiralty, the Commissioners of the Navy, and the Commissioners for the sick
and wounded Seamen. Yet so great have been their interest, and so difficult to
find a Zealous Patron of Truth, that all Labor and Travel in this matter has
been unsuckcessful.

It Is probable the time of War was not so opportune, and seeing I was not
permitted to prove those Articles, it is now nevertheless hoped by all Good Men,
this Blessed Peace, as it affords Liberty, so it will give occasion to this
great and most August Assembly to look into these Affairs: In regard His
Majesty (of his innate Goodness) in His Late most Gracious Speech to both House
of Parliament, Has been pleased to express his willingness, and desire to
rectify all such Corruptions and Abuses as may have crept into any part of the
Administration during the War.

Which upon Examination will be found to be such as are destructive to all
Human Society, and tend to the Final overthrow of the Government. I am, my
Lords and Gentlemen, with all profound Respect.

Your Honors, Most Obedient Servant, ROBERT CROSFEILD.

ALL Men of Sense and Integrity must subscribe that the Late Revolution wrought
the great Deliverance of these Nations (a Mercy not to be forgotten by this nor
succeeding Ages); and notwithstanding after so prosperous a Settlement, we have
been afflicted with so tedious a War, yet cannot our dissatisfied Persons
justly charge this War (as some presumptuously do) upon the score of the
Revolution; for it is manifest to all inquisitive persons, that France would
never have attempted a War with us, had they not been encouraged by our
Divisions, so I doubt not but to make it Evident, that she could never have
protracted the War to this time, had not the Perfidiousness, Cowardice, and
most unworthy dealings among us encouraged and supported her.

He knows not the Constitution of England, who is ignorant that our Shipping
are our Walls: therefore in order to what I promised, I shall first show what
Artifices were used to weaken them, by discouraging and beggaring some, by
plain Murdering others, and forcing not a few of our Saylors to desert their
Native Country (though in the greatest necessity) and serve under Foreign
States for maintenance, which was not to be obtained at home. In the year 1695.
a small piece was presented to the World, under the Title of Justice perverted,
wherein it was manifested that by the methods of Queries and Runs (a thing
practicable in the Navy) some subtle Sophisters did much abuse the Nation by
wronging the Saylors; for whereas it fortuned that diverse Seamen being taken
with sickness, some were set on shore at the Neighboring Ports: others were
sent up to London-Hospitals for cure; it could not be thought but some among
such a multitude were past recovery and died: However, these poor wretches,
though they had served a considerable time, yet upon their dying were for the
most part pricked Run; and such as Death did pity and spare, the Officers, more
cruel, would not; for if they were not recovered, and on board within 30 days,
they were generally pricked Run; and which is more monstrous, it is well known,
tho several as soon as Recovered (the Ship to which they belonged being sailed)
yet were they pricked Run from the first Ship where they were entered; and
whereas it has been customary in many Cases to remove Seamen from ship to
ship; as when a ship is commanded to Cruise, and is not sufficiently manned for
that purpose, some men are sent into her out of other ships; by which means it
may come to pass that some particular persons for the Opinion of their Valor,
Skill and Integrity, may at times have been removed to serve on board four or
five several ships, yet if they happen to be pricked Run in the last ship they
served in, both they and their Families generally utterly lose all the benefit
and Wages accruing by their former Services; and to complete all this barbarity
upon the poor Seamen, all things have been acted with that secrecy and mystery,
that though they found themselves and Families ruined, yet could never learn
the Cause, or find the Villain that did it. These and such like unworthy doings
were represented to the Public in the foresaid Paper, and also confirmed by
the additional Testimony of Mr. Hodges, and I may freely say it did appear by
the fatal consequence, viz. the Paucity of Seamen to be found upon occasion,
and the backwardness of such as were found to enter the service; a thing so
strange as was never heard of in England before these Tricks; and one would
think all Honor and Honesty had deserted our Coasts, when these things could
be so openly acted, yet so little regarded by the Navy-Board, whose place it
was, and care it should heve been, to have protected and encouraged our Seamen.
But it is no wonder the Commissioners should be so averse to protect and do
justice to the Seamen, when they suffered so great injustice to the King in
false Contracts, and in embezling his Naval Stores, as was fully proved (by
many Depositions) they did at Portsmouth; which Notorious Crimes being brought
by Mr. Trevor, Mr. Graham and others before the Lords of the Admiralty, the
Commissioners became Advocates of the Villains, and not Prosecutors, and did so
far manifest their Resentment against the Discoverers, that they immediately
suspended Mr. Graham, Clerk of the Checqne of Portsmouth-Yard, and Mr. Trevor,
Clerk of the Rope-Yard and others, and not satisfied therewith, eudeavoured
their utter rnin. Notwithstanding so great discouragement, yet these Gentlemen,
Mr. Trevor, Mr. Graham, and the rest, proceeded in their discovery, and made
the Crimes so fully appear, that Three of the Commissioners of the Navy being
present, did in the name of the whole Board, acknowledge to their Lordships
that there were base and adominable Practices in Portsmouth-Yard, and so put as
good a Face as possible they could upon so bad a Matter. They recommended Mr.
Trevor to their Lordships, as a person deserving Encouragement for this honest
discovery. Their Lordships embraced the motion, and ordered Mr. Trevor to
manage the Prosecution against the Offenders, who accordingly brought the
business to Winchester-Sizes following, where it was expected that the Mayor of
Portsmouth, who had bound over the accused persons, should have returned the
Recognizance, but to the wonder of the Court had not; whereupon the Judge
thought fit to fine him 200l. However, the Commissioner of Portsmouth-Yard
procured an Attorney to post after the Judge to Salisbury, who by subtle, but
false pretensions, did so work upon the Goodness of the Judge, that the Fine
was taken off. And that the said Commissioner of Portsmouth was thus engaged in
saving those Rogues that had wronged the King, from Justice, is easily to be
collected from the Note of Charges, in relation to that Journey, being drawn
upon him from the aforesaid Attorney; which Note is now to be seen in the
Admiralty Office. Information of the same Matter was afterward brought to the
King's-Bench-Bar; some time before which, by cunning Intrigues, it was brought
about that Mr. Trevor should be no farther concerned in the Prosecution; but
another person was found out fit for that place, who was both wholly ignorant
of the Facts, and easy to be wrought upon; and then when the Trial came on,
the Commissioners of the Navy appeared in a Body on behalf of the Criminals;
where it was mostimpudently asserted, that the Goods that had been embezled,
were but Loans out of His Majesty's Stores; whenas the persons in whose hands
those Goods were found, were private Traders, and no ways concerned in
shipping. At this time it fortuned, but how is not yet known, that diverse
Gentlemen, who were subpena'd, in order to prove the Facts, were forgot, and
never called; and having this advantage the Commissioners made their most on it,
and prevailed with the Jury to acquit the Actors, though themselves had
formerly owned the Crimes before the Lords of the Admiralty. There being such
apparent Juggling in matters so foul, what wonder was it that persons of
untainted Honor and Loyalty, withdrew themselves from serving longer at the
Admiralty-Board, where they were in danger of seeing their own Reputation
shipwreckt by the Injustice of some in the same Commission! Or what wonder was
it that subordinate Officers grew fearful of complaining and informing, when
their Superiors did so openly Encourage, Uphold and Protect Villains, and with
such earnestness and violence Persecute the Discoverers; nor was it any wonder
that Rogues and Villains took heart, believing this their proper time to
prosper and be secure in.

A farther Instance how well his Majesty has been served, and the Interest of
the Nation promoted, during these Wars, we may find in the Case of Everett the
Shipwright: This man having detected many Frauds and Embezzlements in the
King's Yards, Voluntarily made a Proposal to the Lords of the Admiralty,
whereby to save His Majesty 100000 l. per annum, in mattters relating to
Building and Repairing the Royal Navy. The Proposal was afterward published,
and Dedicated to His Majesty and both Houses of Parliament; and was highly
approved by many Noble Persons, particularly his Grace the Duke of Leeds, as
also by the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, by Sir Ralph Delaval, the Lord
Barkley, and the then Lord Danby, etc. Likewise the Master and Assistance of
the Company of Free Shipwrights did approve the same Proposal. Nay, the Lords
of the Admiralty, though not at first discerning the advantage of the said
Proposal, did strenuously oppose it; yet in conclusion signified their
approbation thereof; but before they complied they did occasion Everett to wait
near Three Years. For albeit Everet gave in his Proposal to their Honouts March
1692/3. yet he was not permitted an Hearing till the 8th of February following;
at which time the Commissioners of the Navy being present, did so stiffly
oppose the said Proposal, that the Lords of the Admiralty thought fit to throw
it out. Being thus disappointed, Everett knowing his Intentions to be Honest,
and being unwilling to be hindered from serving his King and Country, humbly
presented his said Proposal to His Majesty in Council; and His Majesty was
pleased, by Order of Council, bearing date the 22d of March 169^/^. to refer
the same Proposal to the Lords of the Admiralty; and that said Order of
Council, with the Proposal of Everett, was laid before the Lords of the
Admiralty, the 26th ditto. After that Mr. Everett paid his attendance on, and
made several Motions to their onours to be heard upon his Proposal, he was,
April 24* 1694. referred to the Commissionors of the Navy; upon whom waiting,
was told his Proposal was Nonsense; and was likewise threatened with an Action
of Defamation, if he did not speedily depart from it. Moreover, attending the
Navy-Board the 27th of April 1694. upon the Reference from the Lords of the
Admiralty, they began, as he thought, to banter and baffle him; and ordered him
to give them in writing a Demonstration of several Heads laid before them: with
which Order Everett complied, and the 30th ditto did Present them with such a
Demonstration. Then they ordered him to attend them again May 2d. at which time
he attending, was told, the Surveyor was out of Town, and therefore they must
respite his business till his return: which happening to be on the 8th of the
same Month, and the said Everett having no Summons to pay his attendance,
waited till the 14th, and then Presented the Navy Board with a Scrowle of near
Fifty Names, by which Persons he could prove the several Crimes by him
mentioned to be committed in his Majesty's Yards; at which time the answer
given him was, The Controuler was gone down to the Fleet, and that a matter of
that consequenceas Mr. Everett 's was, could not be dispatched as it ought
without a full Board; and that he need not be so precise in his attendance; for
they could and would consider of his matter without his appearing.

June 11th 1694. Mr. Everett having as yet heard nothing of his matter, went to
the Navy-Office, where observing no great business stirring, he took the
opportunity to move the Board twice or thrice, but was unsuccessful in all; and
after many Hours waiting, went home unsatisfied. The following day he indeed
received a Letter from the Board, intimating that they now had his Proposal
under consideration, and would proceed to make a Report thereof: and that he
need not give himself any further trouble about it. He therefore waited till
the 19th, but finding then all was no more than Words, he applied himself to
the Lords of the Admiralty, and Presented their Lordships with a Narrative of
his Proceedings with the Commissioners of the Navy: whereupon the day following
Everett did receive a fresh Letter from the Navy-Board; dated June the 20th,
whereby he was ordered to attend their Board the 23d of the same month, with
Evidence to prove the Abuses complained of by him. Accordingly in time, and at
the place appointed he did attend, and Twelve Master Shipwrights with him, Two
of which Masters were called in, and before the Board did assert and prove
several of the Abuses and Base Practices committed in the King's Yards.
However, while these Masters were giving in their Evidence on behalf of their
Sovereign Lord the King, the Commissioners were so impudent and insolent as
both to Discourage and Terrify them in a scoffing manner, saying, How could it
he possible to save His Majesty 100000 l. per annum, in Building and Repairing
the Royal Navy, when the whole Charge did not amount to so much; and that
Worthy Captain Wilshaw did aver, That the Charge of the whole did not amount to
25000 l. and so they brake up abruptly, leaving Mr. Everett and his Evidence in
the Board-Room, without the least Order for withdrawing or further attending.

June 27th. the Commissioners of the Navy did make their Report to the Lords of
the Admiralty concerning Everett's Proposal; in which Report they inserted
diverse false Reflections upon Mr. Everett and his Proceedings; of which whole
matter the Reader may be fully satisfied if he have recourse to the Book before
mentioned, Viz. Justice Perverted, p. 12. 13.

July the 6th, Mr. Everett again attended the Lords of the Admiralty, having
before given a Narrative of his proceedings at the Navy Boards and prayed to be
heard thereupon, as also that he might be favored with a Copy of the Navy
Boards Report, but could not prevail. The 7th and 9th of the same Month he
attended again, and was informed by Mr. Southern, then Secretary to the
Admiralty, that their Lordships Report was drawn up and would be delivered the
next Council Day, Viz. The 12th following, but was not, wherefore Everett
attended their Lordships the Day following, Viz. The 13th and laid Eight Heads
before them relating to his Proposal, and humbly craved their Honors would
take it into consideration and exspedite their Report, but all to no purpose;
So likewise August the 14th Day, but had no Answer. So the 17th he gave in a
fresh Memorial, but without effect, the 21st he again Petitioned their
Lordships, humbly reminding them of the great charge and damage he had
sustained. And was then ordered to attend Friday the 24th, when they would
consider his case, so as to make a full Report thereof. At which time he gladly
and in great hopes attended the Admiralty Board, but was informed by the
Secretary, that Sir Robert Rich was out of Town, and that therefore their
Lordships had referred his matter till his Honors Return.

September the 5th Everett again attended their Lordships, when the Secretary
informed him that Sir John Lowther was out of Town, but when he returned, the
Admiralty would proceed to a final determination of his matter.

September the 18th, he again attended and was then told Admiral Rook was out
of Town, but that the next Board of six, would without farther delay determine
his matter: He was then directed to attend at Four in the Afternoon, the 20th
following, which he did; and then part of his Proposal being Read, the
Commissioners of the Navy's Report was read also, in order to confute Everett;
but he still insisting, that he was able to make good every particular whereof
he had given information, with much ado their Lordships were pleased to give
him leave that he might produce his Witnesses. The 30th of October following
Everett father moved their Lordships for a Copy of the Report from the
Navy-Board, as also for Summons for his Witnesses; The latter, with some
Reluctance, they granted; but by no means would condescend to the former.

Nov. 2d. Mr. Everett according to order, attended the Admiralty-Board at Ten
in the Morning with Eleaven Witnesses, and about Eleven was called in, where he
found only Mr. Priestman, who told Everett that he believed the rest of the
Members had forgotten his business, and therefore he must have patience to
another day: Everett thereupon entreated his Lordship, to consider the great
charge and trouble he had been at in getting his Witnesses together, and to
order that they might now being together be examined upon Oath, he having
breviates of their Depositions ready drawn. Sir George Rook then coming in, Mr.
Everett was ordered to attend with his Witnesses at Four in the Afternoon,
which he did; they were called in about Six, and being severally and strictly
examined, did plainly prove the matters alleged by Everett -- About Ten at
Night their Lordships order one of their Clarks to examine them over again; and
to take their Subscriptions to the aforesaid breviates, but the said Clark,
whether so directed or no is not known, did Browbeat and Banter the said
evidence, and would not suffer them to Subscribe their Breviates. The 27th of
the same month, Mr. Everett delivered to their Lordships the Depositions of
Seventeen Witnesses who were Sworn before a Justice of Peace. Whereby the
Frauds and Embezzlements alleged to be Committed in His Majesty's Yards were
sufficiently proved, he then Solicited for a Report from their Lordships, but
could obtain none till the 29th of January, 1694/5. In all which time, he could
no ways obtain a Copy of the Navy-Boards Report.

In the Lords of the Admiralties Report, they were pleased to allow of that
part of Everetts Proposal, relating to the saving of so great expenses. And
express themselves as very desirous, that the present Circumstance of the State
could Comport therewith, but there is not the least Notice taken of the many
Crimes proved before them, to have been Committed in His Majesty's Yards.
However this Report being given in at the Council Board; the matter was
referred to such of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
as belonged to the Committee of Trade and Plantations, who forthwith granted
Mr. Everett a Copy of the Navy*Boards Report.

February following, Viz. 25th 1695 Mr. Everett presented their Lordships with
a Memorial, in Answer to the Report of the Navy-Board.

March 27th 1695. Mr. Everett proved before their Lordships, by the Oaths of
Diverse Credible Witnesses, many great Crimes to be committed by several
Officers and others in His Majesty's Yards, at which time the Commissioners of
the Navy did, notwithstanding so great and plain evidence, insinuate to their
Lordships that their Officers were Just and Innocent, hoping, as was thought,
that Everett had nothing but Generals, and was not sufficient to prove any
Crime upon any particular Person, April, 1695. Mr. Everett upon a full hearing
(before the Lords aforesaid) face to face with the Commissioners of the Navy,
did prove the Report of the Navy-Board to be false and scandalous, which was
also by their Lordships acknowledged to be so; again, April the 6th, Mr.
Everett did present to their Lordships two Papers, recounting the Various
Frauds and Abuses committed in His Majesty's Yards of Portsmouth, Chattam, and
Deptford, which their Lordships inspecting, told Mr. Everett, that they were
too well satisfied of such practices to doubt them; However, Everett persisted
for Freedom, to prove his Allegations; upon which he was told by their
Lordships, they would refer the matter to the Lords of the Admiralty;
submitting, to this reference, Mr. Everett did on the 13th, 16th, 19th, 27th,
29th of April, and on the 6th and 7th of May ensuing, by near Forty Witnesses
prove before their Lordships the matters of Fact, charged upon the Officers and
others belonging to His Majesty's Yards aforesaid, and their Lordships were
satisfied in the Proof, at which time Mr. Everett concluded his Testimony in
this Case; Yet could by no entreaties procure a Report to be made till
September following, by which Report His Majesty being made acquainted with the
Faithful Services of Mr. Everett, was graciously pleased to order the Lords of
the Admiralty to put him into some employ in the Navy, or other ways to bestow
upon him a Reward suitable to his Merits. Hereupon their Lordships directed the
Commissioners of the Navy to pay unto the said Everett 100 l. and they
accordingly issued out their Order Morch 7th, 1695/6. In which Order they were
pleased to take notice, This Benevolence of His Majesty's was for the Faithful
Services of Mr. Everett. But yet there was no news of Punishing the Offenders.
Mr. Everett, willing to satisfy the World, he served his Majesty purely out of
a Principle of Loyalty, after this 100l. received, which not to mention his
Deserts, did nothing nigh countervail the Charge he had been at, did solicit
the Earl of Rumny for a Commission enabling him to seize Embezled Stores; his
Honor being very zealous and forward to encourage so good a Work, the
Commissioners of the Navy could not well oppose, but complied, and granted Mr.
Everett a Commission, in pursuance of which Commission Mr. Everett in a little
time made One Hundred and Thirty Seizures, as of Anchors, Cables, Cordage,
Timber and Amwunition; and of Ordinance Four, each containing Nine Hundred
Weight, which he delivered into the King's Stores; but instead of being
encouraged in such his Faithful Service, he has been slandered, abused and ill
treated both by Navy-Board, and the Commissioners of the Victualling-Office
while, in the mean time, such as he detected in their Base Actions, were
cherished and rescued from Justice; an Instance whereof follows: Mr. Everett
having seized on Board Ship Three Puncheons of Salt, value 6l. the
Commissioners of the Victualling Office refused to pay him his Proportion,
which, according to the King's allowance, ought to be the Third Part; but
instead thereof would have fobb'd him off with Ten shillings. It is true they
promised him an Hearing at their Board, concerning the seizure; where they
engaged the Commander of the Ship should be present; but he neither heard a
word more of them, nor received any Reward for this Service. Again, near an
Hundred Empty Casks being Embezled, were carried by Mr: Euerett and returned
into the Stores; but the foresaid Commissioners refused to take any Cognizance
of this Matter; also alleging, that Pursers, and others, entrusted therewith*
are obliged to discount for what they do not return, after the rate of 12s. per
Tunn. And well they may, when they themselves own they stand the King in 34s.
per Tunn. When Mr. Everett entered upon this last Design of seizing all the
Embezled Stores he could meet with, the Commissioners of the Navy appeared so
forward in his Encouragement, that they ordered him the Third of all such
Purchase: but after a while, hearing the Discoveries he daily made, they
themselves did declare at the Board, That they believed all the Merchants Ships
were furnished out of the King's Stores. And at this rate they made but a Jest
of the King's Expense, and the Nation's Loss. Soon after, minded to pick a
Quarrel with Mr. Everett, they refused to pay the Third Part till such time as
the Offenders were convicted.

In the beginning of August 1695. the Commissioners of the Navy hired a Vessel
for the said Everett to proceed in his Design of seizing Embezled Stores; and
he having seized several Parcels of Naval Stores at Harwich, particularly a
Parcel of Cordage, value 60l. the Mayor of the Town opposed him with great
Violence; so also did Justice Smith, Mr. Wyldbore, Collector of His Majesty's
Customs, and other Officers. And notwithstanding Everet produced, and read
before them the Kings Proclamation, the Earl of Rumnys and Navy-Boards warrant
for his Authority. Yet all was slighted by these Persons, and consequently the
Cordage taken was rescued by open force; Nay, the Vessel of Mr. Everett was
seized by Mr. Wyldbores order.

A complaint of these evil doings being laid before the Commissioners of the
Navy, the 12th of August 1695. they refused to take Cognizance thereof,
pretending the Persons herein accused, were not under their Jurisdiction. Nay,
they refused their Warrant, tho often desired, for the Release of the Vessel;
nor would they take any Course that the Cordage before spoken of should be
receized, though it was several times desired. Nay in September following, viz.
the 30th, though Everett laid before the Lords of the Admiralty Nine
Depositions relating to this Matter, and fully proved the Cordage before spoken
of to be His Majesty's Stores. Nay, so proved it, that the Solicitor of the
Navy did acknowledge it so to be. Yet, though many Petitions have been
preferred, no inspection can as yet be obtained into this Matter.

The Commissioners of the Navy designing to defraud the King, did order about
Two Hundred and Forty Tunn of Good Hemp; that is, Bands and Ribbs, to be
brought from Chattam, Sixteen Tun, and Twelve Hundred Weight whereof they sold
at Thirty Shillings per Tunn, under the Name of Rakings and Flyings: But they
were so kind, as fearing their Chapman had had a bad Bargain, to deliver him
for that sixteen Tunn and Twelve Hundred Weight, between Seventy and Eighty
Tunn. A certain Gentleman happening to see the Hemp, did bid the Commissioners
Fifteen Pound a Tunn for it. But they fearing the Matter might come to light,
refused his Offer, and with all Secrefie and Dispatch imaginable, hushed up the
Matter; by which means the King was cheated about Three Thousand Pound. The
Public had some account of this Transaction, March the 17th, 169^/^ by which
means one Mr. Culliford making his Observation thereon, sent to me to inquire
by what means I could make Proof hereof. I then nominated to him a certain
Eminent Citizen that could prove it. He desired me to introduce him into the
acquaintance of that Person: which not long after I did, at which our Meeting
Mr. Culliford took down in writing from the Gentleman's own mouth, the full
Narration This worthy Person, out of a Generous Principle, and Love to Justice.
expended above 50l. in detecting this Villainy; there was Seven person made Oath
of it; upon which the Commissioners of the Navy immediately took every one of
them into the Kings Service.
; promising to lay it before the House of Commons; but as far as I could yet
Learn, he knew how to serve himself better then so. For he soon gave the
Commissioners of the Navy such intimation of what he knew in this matter, they
to stop his mouth agreed to buy the Sail-Cloath of him for the Navy, which
before they had refused to do; and so Industrious were they to make him whom
they knew to be Privy, to their Fraud, their Friend. That in a little time
after, he was Complemented by the Lords of the Treasury, with a very
considerable place being made Surveyor General of His Majesty's Customs; and to
make all sure; the Lords of the Admiralty with the Commissioners of the Navy,
condescended to make this Gentleman a visit, upon pretense to see his Ingenuity
in the Sail Cloth Trade, which they did, and upon their return gave large
Encomiums, what a profitable design this was like to prove to the Public, and
^o there was an end of the Hemp. Not long after the Lords of the Admiralty and
the Commissioners of the Navy, to express their fidelity to the Nation, did
Publish in the Gazzet (as they have often done before and since) their
Readiness to receive any Information of any Frauds or Deceits used in the Nav^
and their Resolution to encourage the Informers. But for ought that can be
understood, they must mean such Informers as Mr. Culliford.

Nor are we beholding to the Commissioners of the Navy, only for discouraging
the Public cause, and weakening its interest, but the Lords of the Admiralty
have been fully out as kind, for it has been a usual practice of them (for the
first five Years) during this unhappy Wars (which I may well so call since they
have so much help to make them so) to delay and detain Ships by Embargo (as is
presumed partly upon the Account of the profit, accruing by Protections and
Permits) till many of them have been damaged in their Ladings, and consequently
ruined in their Voyage to the unspeakable injury of the whole Nation. And
moreover, the many Ships reputed by them to be sent out a Cruzing to Guard the
Seas: Yet lost we above One Hundred Ships of War, and some Thousands of
Merchants Ships, it was well looked after the mean while: But in Truth it could
not well be expected to be other ways, for not a Journal of these pretended
Guard-ships (or any that went as Convoy) were ever examined when it was the
only means whereby to know, whether they performed their Duty or no, so that if
their Lordships did not know they were otherways employed, than was pretended.
Yet hereby they gave them as secure an opportunity as they could desire, of
lying in Port, Trading, or Roving up and down at Pleasure: All which can hardly
admit of any other Construction, then that they extended thereby to beggar the
People and Ruin the Trade of the Nation.

As for the Barbarous u^^ge of our Seamen when sick in Hospitals, or the
Enemies when taken in War, that I speak nothing to a point that would afford so.

Copious matter is, because the Reader may find it very fully set out in a Book
Entitled, Bastons Case; however I cannot pass over this Tragical History
without this Remark. Tho it was made appear before the Commissioners of
Accounts, that one Leigh an Apothecary then living in Watling-street, had
delivered into the Elabaratory in the Savoy, for the use of the sick and
wounded, a great quantity of dammaged Rubarb which he had bought at between
Nine and ^^n Pence a Pound: Yet was he not called in Question there for The
Ancient Romans when engaged in War, were so careful and tender of the Lives of
their People, that they order^d he that saved the Life of a Citizen of Rome,
should be Crowned with Law^el and Publicly Honored; but so far are we from so
doing* that we even murder men as it were by whole sale, and the Actors
therein pass among us for right honest men.


But Mr. Baston who discovered this and other base Practices (as cheating the
King, etc) Notwithstanding, he was by His Majesty Recommended to the Care of
the Lords of the Admiralty, who had themselves not long before promised to do
him all possible Service. Yet when His Majesty was gone for Flanders, was
shamefully ^lited by them and left to the mercy of his Enemies, The
Commissioners for the sick and wounded Seamen.

Before I brought my Articles against the Lords of the Admiralty, etc. Mr.
Blackhall sent me an Account of all this Affair, with the Names of the
Witnesses that could prove the Facts, and very much pressed me to bring the
matter into my Articles, but for several Good Reasons I refused so to do.


tho he had twice before proved their Crimes by the Kings own immediate order.

And that our Ruin might be completed, the Commissioners of the Post Office
became as expeditious as any of the other in Acting their Part: For it has been
made appear to the Lord Justices by Mr. Blackhall, in 1696. Tho not any of the
particulars thereof were ever till now offered to the Public, that the
Officers of the Post House did every Post in and out, usually break open the
Letters of Honorable Persons, which as it was against Law and Good manners, so
certainly can never be supposed to have been done to any good intent; moreover
it was proved, that they were conversant even to a scandal, with professed
Papist. And others too much averse to the present Government, nor can they ever
persuade the World that the ground of their great Familiarity with these
Persons was the Wit, or the Liberality, or good humor they found in them and
their Company when it does appear, it was to serve some great, tho secret end
as witnesses, these Persons having their Letters every Post delivered to them
two hours before the King had his: Which was of dangerous consequence in those
times. For if they received intelligence, their design was under any Likelihood
of discovery, they had time to escape the hands of Justice, or if any thing was
to be attempted against the Kings Life or Government, they had the opportunity
to surprise him before his intelligence could prevent. Moreover it was fully
proved, that after His Majesty's Letters came into the Post Office in order to
be carried out. It was Customary to stop the Mails for an hour or more, of
which no tolerable Account can be given. But it gives occasion to some to
think, they took that opportunity to inspect the Kings secrets. And the Reason
for this suspicion is, they ever wrote their Letters to their Correspondents
beyond Sea, after they had received His Majesty's into their Office, as if they
wanted what to write before, farther it was proved, that the said Officers did
send every Post great quantities of Gazzets, etc. As also great Numbers of
Letters Frank, and at the close of the hearing, Mr. Blackhall gave in to the
Lord Justices an Account how the Kings Revenue in that Office has been sunk, or
impar'd 30000 per Annum, and so far were men of this temper from being
satisfied herewith, that according to Mr. Samsons Proof, they purloyn'd near
one half of the Penny Post Office income: And that none may question this, the
turning out the Controuler and Receiver of that Office, upon that Proof is a
sufficient Testimony, and that which must certainly make these Crimes the more
Notorious, is, that for Diverse year successively, complaint had been made from
time to time to the Commissioners of the Post Office of these matters, and by
whom they were done (as when inquired into themselves could not deny before the
Lords Justices.) Yet they made no Reformation, but were so resolute, that when
the foulest matters of this Nature were proved upon Mr. Leason, the Controuler
of the Foreign Post Office. Yet he was continued till the Third Letter from
His Majesty, with much a due got him removed. But on the other hand, they let
slip no opportunity to turn out such of their Members as they found had been
Instrumental in making this necessary discovery, as they did one of good Parts,
and good Principles; and almost beggered another (by evil and indirect means)
that discovered the wicked Practices of Leason and the Penny Post Office.

I had thought of stopping my Pen here, but a Transaction so desperately
mischievous to the King and Nations interest occuring to any mind, I can in no
wise excuse my self from the Relation, which is as follows, Mr. Woodgate Late
Post Master of Canterbury, did by Eighteen or Nineteen Depositions given in
upon Oath, make it appear unto the Mayor and other Magistrates of the City of
Canterbury, that for Diverse years together during the Late War with France.
Some Hundreds of Horse were privately placed upon the Road, between London,
Canterbury, Dover, etc. For carrying on an underhand Correspondence with
France, and by which means not only Papers, but Persons were conveyed to and
from France. Of this matter the Commissioners of the Post Office were Diverse
time informed by the said Woodgate. Yet were they so far from putting a stop to
such a dangerous design, that it appears by a Letter under one of the
Commissioners hand, it was abetted and encouraged by them; the Depositions
before mentioned (as likewise the said Original Letter) relating to this
affair, did for some considerable time lie in the hands of Mr. Blackhall in
order to a Prosecution. But his Zeal was soon cooled by being made Receiver of
the Penny Post*Office, he had then no heart farther to Prosecute the Evil
Actions of the Post Office.

Now, whoever impartially weighs the preceding matter, and duly considers what
foul Crimes have been proved against the Officers of the Mint, etc. Can do no
other ways then conclude all other Offices, have taken the same measures (for
by Hercules's Foot we may know the Proposition of his Body) in regard it so
plainly appears, all Men in Public Employment have been let loose to their own
Appetite, to Act and do as they please without having any regard to the Law:
The Consequence of which has been not only the destruction of a Multitude of
Saylors, and the Impoverishing and Ruining of many Thousands Honest, Loyal,
Industrious Families (who have not been so much as apprehensive how all this
ruin has been brought upon them) but the cause of all the Public Debts and
Distress that has fallen upon the Nation in General: And the Reason its Credit
is so much Impared both at home and abroad; which can never be restored
otherways then by a due Administration of Justice: So great a misery it is, a
Nation should be so unhappy as not to be sensible of the benefit of order, till
disorder show it.

In all difficult and unusual Cases it is Customary to have recourse to records,
to search for Examples and Presidents, which has ever been Judged to be of
great Use, and of all our Kings since the Norman Conquest, I conceive the Reign
of Henry the Third to be the most Remarkable; and seems to come nearest to our
present Case, who having been driven into great straits and his People into
great distress; even then he happily and unexpectedly restored the Nation again
to Peace: Upon which he began to look back, and search the Ground of his former
misery; And my truly worthy Author Sir* Robert Cotton, who writ the Life of
that Prince (which he presented to King James the First) says in p. 24. Here he
finds his wasteful hand had been to quick, both over the Fortunes and Blessings
of his People; The Griping avarice of his Civil Ministers, In our Age the
wicked practice of buying and selling Employments, as it were by Inch of Candle
who b^ds most, has been of fatal Consequence to the whole body of the Nation,
and the only Reason why public Crimes have not been looked into: All generally
speaking pertaking of the spoil, for it is Notorious to the world, that as
Employments have advanced in value the misery of the People has increased. But
if my Lord Mayor, etc. Be obliged to keep Port and Grandeur, it is fit it
should be by some public allowance, or on his own demaines; and not live upon
the Blood and Tears of the People. Vide, Englands Calamities discovered. Sold
by Joseph Fox in Westminster Hall, and Robert Clavel at the Peacock in
Fleet Street.
etc. And referring all to base greedy and unworthy The Multitude of Petitions
that now lie in the Council-Office (which are kept from His Majesty's
Knowledge) and have not been Read, gives a sufficient demonstration of the
Inhumanity, of some Persons at this time in the Government.
Ministers (whose Councels were ever more subtle than substantial) he had
thrown down those Pillars of Sovereignty and Safety, Reputation abroad and
reverence at home. Thus at last he Learned, that reward and reprehension justly
laid do Balance Government; and that it much Imports a Prince, the Hand to
be equal that holds the Scale.

Page 26. His Court, wherein at this time the Faults of great Men, did not only
by Approbation, but Imitation receive true Comfort and Authority, for their
Crimes now became Examples and Customs; he Purged very Judiciously and
Severely; since from thence proceeds either the Regular, or the Irregular
condition of the Common State.

Page 27. And to discover now his own Capacity, and what part he means to
bear hereafter in all deliberate Expeditions, he siteth himself in Council
daily, and disposes affairs of most weight in his own Person; for Counselors
be they never so wise or worthy, are but Accessaries not Principals, in
Sustentation of the State.

This wonderful Change to the General State (so hopeless lately to recover her
former Liberty, they sought now for nothing but the mildest Servitude) brought
them home again with admiration to his Devotion and their own Duty.

He that will lay (we see) the Foundation of Greatness upon Popular Love, must
give them Ease and Justice; for they measure the Bond of their obedience, by
the Good always that they receive.

This Peace attended ever after his Age and Hearse, etc.

So that all the Actions of his future Reign, were exact Grounds of Discipline
and Policy, for HIS BEST SVCCESSOR TO RVLE BY AFTER.

To conclude, the Heathen Romans by their Virtue and Moral Justice, raised
themselves to a great pitch of Glory, yet afterward by their Wickedness and
Corruption were Ruined; and became a Prey to Diverse Barbarous Nations; So
unless this Nation has Virtue enough within it self to conquer and overcome
all these horrible Corruptions, we shall now at last unavoidably split (after
all our great expense of Blood and Treasure) as it were upon a Rock, and fall
unpitied into the Hands of our Enemies; out of which (like the Rich Man in the
Gospel) we shall find no Redemption.

FINIS.

